 In January 2009 , The Most Hated Family in America was released as part of a DVD boxed set in PAL region 2 format , along with African Hunting Holiday , Under The Knife , Behind Bars , and Gambling In Las Vegas . Titled , Louis Theroux : The Strange and The Dangerous , the DVD set received a four @-@ out @-@ of @-@ four @-@ star recommendation from The Daily Record . In February 2009 , The Independent placed the DVD release as number eight among its list of " The 50 Best DVD boxsets " , and characterised The Most Hated Family in America as the " strangest episode of the set , and by far the most disturbing " . The documentary aired in Ireland on 10 February 2010 on 3e and was given a four @-@ out @-@ of @-@ four star recommendation by The Mail on Sunday . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Writing for The Times , journalist David Chater highlighted The Most Hated Family in America among selections for " Chater 's Choice " . Chater commented , " Louis Theroux undertakes his ugliest assignment to date . " Chater concluded , " Theroux deploys all his logic and charm to find the humanity beneath the rhetoric , but ultimately fails . It is difficult to reason with people who think that holding up a placard proclaiming ' Jews worship the rectum ' is ' a courteous and loving ' thing to do . " The film was highlighted in the Liverpool Echo as " Sunday 's : Pick of the day " . Peter Grant of the Liverpool Echo commented , " Louis Theroux took a trip to Kansas for his documentary , The Most Hated Family in America . His profile of Westboro Baptist Church , the home of America 's most fanatical Christian fundamentalists , was astonishing . " Karl French of Financial Times selected the film as his " Critic 's Choice " . French wrote positively of the documentary , " After painting himself into an <unk> documentary corner a few years back , Theroux wisely took a long break , and he 's come back refreshed , as confirmed by this film . In the way it reveals the comic horror inherent in all forms of zealotry , it is every bit as compelling as Theroux 's recent Vegas documentary . " The Mail on Sunday critic Tom Cox rated the documentary as four out of four stars . Cox wrote of Theroux , " His attempts to challenge the beliefs of the Phelps clan – a 71 @-@ strong congregation who picket military funerals with ' America Is Doomed ' signs – and <unk> them with good nature and erudition were impressive , but ultimately as futile as an attempt to teach a cat algebra . " 
 Writing for The Scotsman , Andrea Mullaney articulated , " Theroux really had found the ultimate in weirdness for his latest documentary – they 're so beyond the point of reason , into a self @-@ perpetuating psychosis , that no matter how he tried , he couldn 't challenge their <unk> @-@ delivered pronouncements , or trip them up . But he did manage to show them as human beings ( more than the courtesy they extend to us sinners ) . " Hilary Fannin of The Irish Times commented that the airing of the documentary , " saw Louis Theroux , in The Most Hated Family in America , shatter another redneck American target , the Westboro Baptist Church " . In a review of the documentary for The Sunday Times , Roland White discussed Theroux 's stylistic technique , " Theroux 's usual technique – the friendly ingenue – made absolutely no impact on these people . It was like watching a youngster from a village cricket team trying to bowl out Geoff Boycott , and I began to wonder what Theroux was hoping to achieve . It is impossible to out – argue the religious bigot . They have impeccable logic on their side : the word of God is the righteous truth ; only they understand the true word of the Lord ; therefore , they are right and everybody else is wrong . " Liverpool Daily Post recommended the film in its column , " Sunday : What to Watch " . Writing for the Birmingham Mail , Graham Young observed , " The Most Hated Family in America is the best documentary from Louis since long before his Michael Jackson fiasco . " John Dugdale of The Sunday Times highlighted the film as his " Pick of the day " . Dugdale wrote favorably of the film , " There are echoes of Theroux 's film about a woman raising her daughters as neo @-@ Nazis as he watches Phelps ' daughter , Shirley , handing out placards to kids as young as seven . While tangling with her and her dad is pointless , the family 's younger women are less inflexible , and his encounters with them are more rewarding . " A review in the Leicester Mercury noted of Theroux 's interview techniques , " His subtle interviewing style was perfect for showing off the crazy views of the members . " 
 Writing in The Independent , Cathy Pryor declared , " Louis Theroux is out @-@ <unk> this week by the subject of his latest documentary ... <unk> , Theroux makes you feel some sympathy for them and the price they pay for being the way they are . " Thomas Sutcliffe of The Independent posited that viewers were " ... [ left ] wondering , after an hour , whether the Phelps hadn 't got a bit more out of it than Louis . They aren 't representative of anything but themselves , after all , and they rejoice in the world 's detestation . So they had nothing to lose by being held up to ridicule , and gained exactly what they want – a bigger audience for their insane rantings . " Writing for The Daily Record , Paul English wrote favorably , " The journalist in me marvels at yet more great work from Theroux . But the human in me mourns that we gave this appalling family exactly what they want . The shiny badge of notoriety ... " A review in the Irish Independent was critical of giving any coverage to the group , " Theroux tried to get the teenage daughters to deviate from the standard family line but they weren 't budging an inch . The end result was that a group of loathsome people who spend every second of their lives trying to attract free publicity for themselves got a whole hour of it courtesy of the BBC . Ah , the joys of public service television . " Writing for The Observer , Kathryn Flett was critical of the choice of title for the documentary , commenting , " The Most Hated Family in America ? Says who ? Louis Theroux ? BBC2 ? Ooh , I don 't like a sweeping statement of a documentary title . Not that the family who comprise the majority of the 71 congregants of the Westboro Baptist Church of Topeka , Kansas , aren 't appalling , but the title definitely infers that they are the family most hated by most Americans , when I doubt most Americans have the faintest idea who they are . " Mike Bradley of The Observer commented about the film , " A shock doc , but an easy target for Theroux . " 
 In a review for the Melbourne , Australia newspaper , The Age , Larry Schwartz selected the documentary as " Critic 's Choice " . Schwartz was critical of Theroux 's lack of detachment from his subject matter , " He repeatedly distances himself from the church , expressing his disapproval of their views . But so concerned is he , he seems almost evangelical in his determination to show them the error of their ways . " The documentary was highlighted in The Sydney Morning Herald among " The week 's best " , and critic Greg Hassall characterised it as , " Disturbing , perplexing and very entertaining . " The Australia newspaper MX highlighted the documentary favorably , in its column , " Best in show " . Cameron Adams of the Herald Sun selected The Most Hated Family in America as his " Top Choice " recommendation . Adams wrote , " A truly disturbing , disgusting and sad documentary . The repellent Shirley Phelps is the outspoken <unk> who got publicity by calling Heath Ledger a ' fag enabler ' after his death . This jaw @-@ dropping <unk> infiltrates Phelps ' only @-@ in @-@ America church where her 11 spooky kids regularly picket funerals of US soldiers killed in Iraq – they believe God killed them to show his hatred of how ' depraved ' America now is . " 
 = = Follow @-@ up = = 
 Theroux returned to Westboro Baptist Church for a follow @-@ up documentary four years after making The Most Hated Family in America , to investigate the departure of several members of the Phelps family since his last visit . The film , America 's Most Hated Family in Crisis , was first broadcast on BBC Two on 3 April 2011 . Theroux 's return was prompted by an email he received from a young member of the church he had interviewed previously , who had since left and been <unk> . The US Supreme Court case of Snyder v. Phelps , heard following the suing of Westboro Baptist Church for distress caused by the picketing of the funeral of a US Marine killed in Iraq , formed the background to the new film . Theroux was interested in the ambivalent attitude of church members towards his first film , and stated that " the new documentary feels quite different than the original – though still funny , a little darker and stranger " . 
 = 2014 FA Community Shield = 
 The 2014 FA Community Shield was the 92nd FA Community Shield , an annual English football match played between the winners of the previous season 's Premier League and FA Cup . The game was played between Arsenal , who beat Hull City in the final of the 2013 – 14 FA Cup , and Manchester City , champions of the 2013 – 14 Premier League . Watched by a crowd of 71 @,@ 523 at Wembley Stadium in London , Arsenal won the match 3 – 0 . 
 This was Arsenal 's 20th Community Shield appearance and Manchester City 's 10th . The only time the two teams previously met in the Shield was in 1934 , when Arsenal won 4 – 0 . The 2014 staging of the event was the first to use vanishing spray , following its success at the 2014 FIFA World Cup . In the lead up to the match Manchester City manager Manuel Pellegrini defended his club 's transfer recruitment , after it was questioned by the Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger . 
 Alexis Sánchez was one of three players who made their competitive debuts for Arsenal in the match ; for Manchester City , goalkeeper Willy Caballero was selected ahead of Joe Hart . Arsenal began the game more strongly and took the lead when Santi Cazorla scored in the 22nd minute . Their lead was extended two minutes before half time , as Aaron Ramsey finished off a counter @-@ attacking move . Arsenal scored their third of the match soon after the hour mark ; Olivier Giroud 's shot from outside the penalty box dipped over Caballero and into his goal . 
 Arsenal 's victory was the biggest in the Community Shield in 16 years . Wenger was pleased with his team 's performance and felt the win would provide a confidence boost for the coming season . Pellegrini 's reaction was indifferent ; he believed the absence of several first team players was linked to their poor show . 
 = = Background = = 
 Founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield , the FA Community Shield began as a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , although in 1913 it was played between an Amateurs XI and a Professionals XI . In 1921 , it was played by the league champions of the top division and FA Cup winners for the first time . As part of a sponsorship deal between The Football Association and American restaurant chain McDonald 's , the match was officially referred to as " The FA Community Shield supported by McDonald 's " . 
 Manchester City qualified for the 2014 FA Community Shield as winners of the 2013 – 14 Premier League . The club saw off competition from Liverpool and won their second league title in three years with victory against West Ham United on the last day . The other Community Shield place went to Arsenal , who defeated Hull City in extra time to win the final of the 2013 – 14 FA Cup . It ended a run of nine years without a trophy for the club . 
 Manchester City made their 10th Community Shield appearance ; prior to this , they won four ( 1937 , 1968 , 1972 , 2012 ) and lost five – one of which against Arsenal in 1934 . By contrast , Arsenal made their 20th Community Shield appearance , a record bettered only by Manchester United ( 29 ) and Liverpool ( 21 ) . Arsenal had won 12 times , 11 of which were won outright , most recently in 2004 . 
 The match was televised live in the United Kingdom on BT Sport ; the network obtained rights to the Community Shield in July 2013 as part of a four @-@ year deal with the BBC to air live FA Cup football . 
 = = Build @-@ up = = 
 Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger used his press conference before the match to look ahead to the new season . He wanted his team to build on their FA Cup success and said that the Community Shield " ... will be the best way to prepare for the start of the League season next week . " Wenger was surprised his opponents Manchester City had taken midfielder Frank Lampard from their own franchise club New York City FC on loan ; he questioned whether this was a way to bypass UEFA 's Financial Fair Play rules . Of Bacary Sagna 's move from Arsenal to Manchester City in the summer , Wenger told reporters : " I made him a proposal to stay for three years , but he chose them . Had he chosen a long time ago ? Maybe – it looks to me like he agreed it a long time before . " Wenger also revealed Arsenal had received offers for defender Thomas Vermaelen ; on the day of the Community Shield match the player transferred to Barcelona . 
 Manuel Pellegrini , the manager of Manchester City , said before the game that winning the Shield " would be the ideal start to the campaign . " He was conscious of his team 's poor start to the previous season and wanted them to do better , particularly away from home . Pellegrini did not see the game against Arsenal as a " friendly " , and expected his opponents to provide a good test for Manchester City in the Shield match and thereafter in the league season . He was satisfied overall with the club 's transfer activity during the summer , in particular praising goalkeeper Willy Caballero . When asked about Wenger 's comments about Manchester City , he retorted : " As a manager we have enough problems with our own teams to be talking about other teams . " Pellegrini expressed his belief that Lampard 's transfer was not done by underhand tactics – " we didn ’ t spend any money in bringing him from New York City to Manchester City , " and added the player was not offered a contract to remain at Chelsea . 
 Aaron Ramsey , who scored Arsenal 's winning goal in the FA Cup final , was adamant their recent success would make his teammates determined to win more . He aimed for victory in the Community Shield , as it would provide a platform for what he described as " a tough opening couple of games in the Premier League . " Samir Nasri , who left Arsenal to join Manchester City in 2011 , in the lead @-@ up to the match described the abuse he received from Arsenal supporters since his transfer as " stupid . " He went on to explain : " They see it as treason or that I betrayed them but it ’ s not like that . I just look what ’ s best for me ... For the fans the only reason [ to leave ] has to be for the money . But it isn ’ t just for the money . " 
 Both clubs received an allocation of approximately 26 @,@ 000 tickets . Manchester City fans were housed in the east end of Wembley , while Arsenal fans occupied the west . Ticket prices stayed the same for the third consecutive year and were advertised at a cost of between £ 20 and £ 45 ; the tickets went on general sale for Manchester City fans on 22 July 2014 . Arsenal chief executive Ivan Gazidis was upset by the low allocation : " We have expressed our disappointment to the FA regarding the ticket allocation for both the FA Cup final and FA Community Shield . " 
 Michael Oliver was selected as the referee for the Shield match ; it marked the fifth time he refereed at Wembley Stadium . The game was the first in English football to use vanishing spray , designed to help referees mark free @-@ kick positions . This came after the spray ’ s success at the 2014 FIFA World Cup . English rock band Embrace provided pre @-@ match entertainment and Britain 's Got Talent finalist Lucy Kay sung the national anthem before the match commenced . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Manchester City were predicted to line up in a 4 – 2 – 3 – 1 formation , with Nasri and James Milner as wide men . Due to a specified pre @-@ season programme , Pellegrini had agreed to excuse several players from the match , namely Martín <unk> , Vincent Kompany , Pablo Zabaleta , Bacary Sagna , Fernandinho , Frank Lampard and Sergio Agüero . Striker Álvaro Negredo was also unavailable for selection because of an injury . Arsenal were expected to line up similarly to Manchester City , with Ramsey as a holding midfielder , and Tomáš Rosický in an advanced role behind Olivier Giroud . Goalkeeper David Ospina was ruled out of the game with a thigh injury ; German internationals Per Mertesacker , Mesut Özil and Lukas Podolski did not feature as they were given extended time off following their national side 's success at the World Cup . 
 When the teamsheets were released , Wenger 's selection showed Rosický and Giroud would start the match as substitutes and competitive debuts were given to Mathieu Debuchy , Calum Chambers and Alexis Sánchez . Arsenal employed a 4 – 1 – 4 – 1 formation to start the game , with a defensive midfielder ( Mikel Arteta ) sitting between a flat back four and a four @-@ man midfield ; Yaya Sanogo led the Arsenal attack as a lone centre @-@ forward . 
 Manchester City organised themselves slightly differently , with two defensive midfielders and an attacking midfielder – Stevan Jovetić – playing behind the main striker , Edin Džeko . Caballero and Fernando made their debuts for the club , while Bruno Zuculini was named on the bench . The team lined up in a 4 – 2 – 3 – 1 formation . There were no English players in the Manchester City starting XI . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 = = = = First half = = = = 
 Manchester City got the match underway and won the first corner kick of the match in the fifth minute . In the eighth minute , Debuchy crossed the ball from the right , but Sanogo 's attempt to head the ball was impeded by Clichy . An Arsenal corner minutes after resulted in Manchester City reacting with a counter @-@ attack ; the ball eventually reached an unmarked Nasri in the penalty area , but the midfielder ’ s shot on goal was blocked by Debuchy ’ s arm . Manchester City appealed for a penalty kick , which was not given by referee Oliver . Arsenal continued to build pressure in Manchester City ’ s half and scored the opening goal . Sanogo kept possession of the ball and passed to Wilshere , who was tackled . The ball then fell to Santi Cazorla , who created space for himself and shot into the bottom right hand corner of Caballero 's goal . A corner taken by Nasri in the 22nd minute was greeted by jeers from the Arsenal supporters , as was his every touch of the ball . Near the half @-@ hour mark Arsenal countered through Sánchez , but his pass to Ramsey was quickly intercepted . From a corner , Sanogo directed his header straight at Caballero . As the game went on Manchester City began to gather momentum , with Aleksandar Kolarov finding success from attacking Arsenal 's right . Despite improved play , Manchester City were losing 0 – 2 after 42 minutes when Sanogo began the move by keeping possession and finding Ramsey with a pass . The midfielder took one touch to side @-@ step Matija <unk> and another to put the ball into the net . Arsenal came close to scoring a third goal just before half @-@ time when Sanogo and Sánchez exchanged passes near the Manchester City area , but Caballero came out of his penalty box to break up the move . 
 = = = = Second half = = = = 
 Arsenal made a triple substitution before the second half commenced – Laurent Koscielny , Sánchez and Sanogo came off for Nacho Monreal , Alex Oxlade @-@ Chamberlain and Olivier Giroud . Manchester City meanwhile replaced Nasri with David Silva . In contrast to the first 45 minutes , Manchester City started well ; three minutes after the start of the half , Kolarov collected the ball from Silva and charged forward , but his cross on the left flank was cleared by Monreal . In the 50th minute , Fernando was shown the game 's first and only yellow card for fouling Wilshere . Manchester City continued to fashion opportunities : Navas beat his opponent Kieran Gibbs on the right and crossed the ball in the Arsenal area . Jovetić 's header was kept out by Wojciech Szczęsny and on the rebound he struck the ball over the goal . Szczęsny denied Jovetić again in the 56th minute , diving to his right to clear . Manchester City made two changes on the hour , bringing on Milner and Bruno Zuculini for Džeko and Yaya Touré . A shot by Giroud from 25 yards ( 23 m ) dipped over Caballero and landed in the his net to make it 3 – 0 to Arsenal . Manchester City responded with some opportunities to score – Jovetić 's attempt at an overhead kick went over the bar in the 65th minute , and minutes later Szczęsny saved from Zuculini in a collision which required treatment for both players . Both teams made more substitutions in the final third of the game – for Arsenal Mathieu Flamini , Rosický and debutant Joel Campbell replaced Wilshere , Cazorla and Ramsey respectively , while Manchester City brought on Micah Richards and Scott Sinclair in place of Kolarov and Navas . Near the end , Szczęsny came out of his penalty box and cleared the ball with his head , but inadvertently collided with Sinclair . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 The trophy was presented to Arteta by former Arsenal player and assistant coach Pat Rice . Arsenal 's win marked the biggest victory in the Community Shield since 1998 . Wenger was delighted with his team ’ s performance and described their play in the first half as complete . He noted that although Arsenal lost possession in the second half and looked " less fluent " , the team retained " spirit and organisation " . He described the win as significant because it gave Arsenal a confidence boost going into the season and suggested it was important to beat a top @-@ six league team because of their poor record last season . Wenger was happy with how Arsenal 's new signings came through the match and reserved special praise for Chambers : " He played with a maturity and intelligence that I was really impressed with . " Olivier Giroud , the man of the match , said of his goal : " I tried instinctively to shoot and to hit the target . I was a bit lucky but that 's what I wanted to do . " 
 Pellegrini was not overly concerned by Manchester City 's defeat and said : " The season starts next Sunday , " referring to their league campaign . He admitted Arsenal had played the better football in the first half , but felt his team were much improved in the second – " we had possession and chances to score but we didn 't . " Pellegrini felt the absence of several Manchester City players had a bearing on the result and said he planned to talk to the players to get them ready for the season ahead . Of Caballero 's inclusion ahead of Joe Hart , the manager said : " That was one game more for the pre @-@ season . " City 's stand @-@ in captain Touré , like his manager , was not despondent about the result ; he described playing Arsenal as a " good test " for the team . 
 FA General Secretary Alex Horne hinted afterwards that the Community Shield could be played overseas , though not any time before 2018 because of the existing contract with Wembley Stadium . He described it as an interesting idea and told reporters : " The NBA are doing it and we know that Spanish football and Italian football are looking at doing that with their own Supercup @-@ type games . " 
 An average of 860 @,@ 000 viewers watched the match live on BT Sport , down by almost 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 on the previous year 's Community Shield which was aired on ITV . The channel 's coverage peaked at 1 @.@ 2 million viewers ( 8 @.@ 4 % of the audience share ) during the second half . 
 = Edmontosaurus = 
 Edmontosaurus ( / <unk> / ed @-@ <unk> @-@ tə @-@ SAWR @-@ əs ) is a genus of hadrosaurid ( duck @-@ billed ) dinosaur . It contains two known species : Edmontosaurus regalis and Edmontosaurus annectens . Fossils of E. regalis have been found in rocks of western North America that date from the late Campanian stage of the Cretaceous Period 73 million years ago , while those of E. annectens were found in the same geographic region but in rocks dated to the end of the Maastrichtian stage of the Cretaceous , 66 million years ago . Edmontosaurus was one of the last non @-@ avian dinosaurs , and lived alongside dinosaurs like Triceratops and Tyrannosaurus shortly before the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event . 
 Edmontosaurus included some of the largest hadrosaurid species , measuring up to 12 metres ( 39 ft ) long and weighing around 4 @.@ 0 metric tons ( 4 @.@ 4 short tons ) . Evidence does exist in the form of two fossilized specimens housed at the Museum of the Rockies for an even greater maximum size of 15 m ( 49 ft ) and weighing 9 @.@ 07 metric tons ( 10 @.@ 00 short tons ) for Edmontosaurus annectens . Several well @-@ preserved specimens are known that include not only bones , but in some cases extensive skin impressions and possible gut contents . It is classified as a genus of saurolophine ( or hadrosaurine ) hadrosaurid , a member of the group of hadrosaurids which lacked large , hollow crests , instead having smaller solid crests or fleshy combs . 
 The first fossils named Edmontosaurus were discovered in southern Alberta ( named after Edmonton , the capital city ) , in the Horseshoe Canyon Formation ( formerly called the lower Edmonton Formation ) . The type species , E. regalis , was named by Lawrence Lambe in 1917 , although several other species that are now classified in Edmontosaurus were named earlier . The best known of these is E. annectens , named by Othniel Charles Marsh in 1892 ; originally as a species of Claosaurus , known for many years as a species of Trachodon , and later as Anatosaurus annectens . Anatosaurus and Anatotitan are now generally regarded as synonyms of Edmontosaurus . 
 Edmontosaurus was widely distributed across western North America . The distribution of Edmontosaurus fossils suggests that it preferred coasts and coastal plains . It was a herbivore that could move on both two legs and four . Because it is known from several bone beds , Edmontosaurus is thought to have lived in groups , and may have been migratory as well . The wealth of fossils has allowed researchers to study its paleobiology in detail , including its brain , how it may have fed , and its injuries and pathologies , such as evidence for tyrannosaur attacks on a few edmontosaur specimens . 
 = = Description = = 
 Edmontosaurus has been described in detail from numerous specimens . Like other hadrosaurids , it was a bulky animal with a long , laterally flattened tail and a head with an expanded , duck @-@ like beak . The skull had no bony crest , unlike many other hadrosaurids , but bore a comb @-@ like crest of skin and scales . The fore legs were not as heavily built as the hind legs , but were long enough to be used in standing or movement . Edmontosaurus was among the largest hadrosaurids : depending on the species , a fully grown adult could have been 9 metres ( 30 ft ) long , and some of the larger specimens reached the range of 12 metres ( 39 ft ) to 13 metres ( 43 ft ) long . Its weight was on the order of 4 @.@ 0 metric tons ( 4 @.@ 4 short tons ) . Traditionally , E. regalis has been regarded as the largest species , though this was challenged by the hypothesis that the larger hadrosaurid Anatotitan copei is a synonym of Edmontosaurus annectens , as put forward by Jack Horner and colleagues in 2004 , and supported in studies by Campione and Evens in 2009 and 2011 . The type specimen of E. regalis , NMC 2288 , is estimated as 9 to 12 metres ( 30 to 39 ft ) long . E. annectens is often seen as smaller . Two mounted skeletons , USNM 2414 and YPM 2182 , measure 8 @.@ 00 metres ( 26 @.@ 25 ft ) long and 8 @.@ 92 metres ( 29 @.@ 3 ft ) long , respectively . However , these are probably subadult individuals , and there is at least one report of a much larger potential E. annectens specimen , almost 12 metres ( 39 ft ) long . Two specimens still under study in the collection of the Museum of the Rockies ; a 7 @.@ 6 m ( 25 ft ) tail labelled as MOR 1142 and another labelled as MOR 1609 , indicate that Edmontosaurus annectens could have been even larger , possibly rivaling Shantungosaurus in size . The specimens of these individuals indicate a length of up to 15 m ( 49 ft ) , as confirmed by paleontologists and the development team of the scientifically accurate simulation game Saurian ( video game ) . Such large individuals of Edmontosaurus would likely have been very rare due to such factors as environmental stress , disease , and predation . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 The skull of a fully grown Edmontosaurus could be over a metre long . One skull of E. annectens ( formerly Anatotitan ) measures 3 @.@ 87 feet ( 1 @.@ 18 m ) long . The skull was roughly triangular in profile , with no bony cranial crest . Viewed from above , the front and rear of the skull were expanded , with the broad front forming a duck @-@ bill or spoon @-@ bill shape . The beak was toothless , and both the upper and lower beaks were extended by keratinous material . Substantial remains of the keratinous upper beak are known from the " mummy " kept at the Senckenberg Museum . In this specimen , the preserved <unk> part of the beak extended for at least 8 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) beyond the bone , projecting down vertically . The nasal openings of Edmontosaurus were elongate and housed in deep depressions surrounded by distinct bony rims above , behind , and below . In at least one case ( the Senckenberg specimen ) , rarely preserved sclerotic rings were preserved in the eye sockets . Another rarely seen bone , the stapes ( the reptilian ear bone ) , has also been seen in a specimen of Edmontosaurus . 
 Teeth were present only in the maxillae ( upper cheeks ) and dentaries ( main bone of the lower jaw ) . The teeth were continually replaced , taking about half a year to form . They were composed of six types of tissues , rivaling the complexity of mammal teeth . They grew in columns , with an observed maximum of six in each , and the number of columns varied based on the animal 's size . Known column counts for the two species are : 51 to 53 columns per maxilla and 48 to 49 per dentary ( teeth of the upper jaw being slightly narrower than those in the lower jaw ) for E. regalis ; and 52 columns per maxilla and 44 per dentary for E. annectens ( an E. saskatchewanensis specimen ) . 
 = = = Postcranial skeleton = = = 
 The number of vertebrae differs between specimens . E. regalis had thirteen neck vertebrae , eighteen back vertebrae , nine hip vertebrae , and an unknown number of tail vertebrae . A specimen once identified as belonging to Anatosaurus edmontoni ( now considered to be the same as E. regalis ) is reported as having an additional back vertebra and 85 tail vertebrae , with an undisclosed amount of restoration . Other hadrosaurids are only reported as having 50 to 70 tail vertebrae , so this appears to have been an overestimate . The anterior back was curved toward the ground , with the neck flexed upward and the rest of the back and tail held horizontally . Most of the back and tail were lined by ossified tendons arranged in a latticework along the neural spines of the vertebrae . This condition has been described as making the back and at least part of the tail " ramrod " straight . The ossified tendons are interpreted as having strengthened the vertebral column against gravitational stress , incurred through being a large animal with a horizontal vertebral column otherwise supported mostly by the hind legs and hips . 
 The shoulder blades were long flat blade @-@ like bones , held roughly parallel to the vertebral column . The hips were composed of three elements each : an elongate ilium above the articulation with the leg , an ischium below and behind with a long thin rod , and a pubis in front that flared into a plate @-@ like structure . The structure of the hip hindered the animal from standing with its back erect , because in such a position the thigh bone would have pushed against the joint of the ilium and pubis , instead of pushing only against the solid ilium . The nine fused hip vertebrae provided support for the hip . 
 The fore legs were shorter and less heavily built than the hind legs . The upper arm had a large deltopectoral crest for muscle attachment , while the ulna and radius were slim . The upper arm and forearm were similar in length . The wrist was simple , with only two small bones . Each hand had four fingers , with no thumb ( first finger ) . The index second , third , and fourth fingers were approximately the same length and were united in life within a fleshy covering . Although the second and third finger had hoof @-@ like unguals , these bones were also within the skin and not apparent from the outside . The little finger diverged from the other three and was much shorter . The thigh bone was robust and straight , with a prominent flange about halfway down the posterior side . This ridge was for the attachment of powerful muscles attached to the hips and tail that pulled the thighs ( and thus the hind legs ) backward and helped maintain the use of the tail as a balancing organ . Each foot had three toes , with no big toe or little toe . The toes had hoof @-@ like tips . 
 = = = Skin = = = 
 Multiple specimens of Edmontosaurus annectens have been found with preserved skin impressions . Several have been well @-@ publicized , such as the " Trachodon mummy " of the early 20th century , and the specimen nicknamed " Dakota " , the latter apparently including remnant organic compounds from the skin . Because of these finds , the scalation of Edmontosaurus annectens is known for most areas of the body . Skin impressions are less well known for E. regalis , but some well @-@ preserved examples have been studied , including one which preserves a soft tissue crest or wattle on the head . It is unknown whether such a crest was present on E. annectens , and whether it was an indicator of sexual dimorphism . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Edmontosaurus was a hadrosaurid ( a duck @-@ billed dinosaur ) , a member of a family of dinosaurs which to date are known only from the Late Cretaceous . It is classified within the Saurolophinae ( alternately Hadrosaurinae ) , a clade of hadrosaurids which lacked hollow crests . Other members of the group include Brachylophosaurus , Gryposaurus , Lophorhothon , Maiasaura , Naashoibitosaurus , Prosaurolophus , and Saurolophus . It was either closely related to or includes the species Anatosaurus annectens ( alternately Edmontosaurus annectens ) , a large hadrosaurid from various latest Cretaceous formations of western North America . The giant Chinese hadrosaurine Shantungosaurus giganteus is also anatomically similar to Edmontosaurus ; M. K. Brett @-@ Surman found the two to differ only in details related to the greater size of Shantungosaurus , based on what had been described of the latter genus . 
 While the status of Edmontosaurus as a saurolophine or ( = " hadrosaurine " ) has not been challenged , its exact placement within the clade is uncertain . Early phylogenies , such as that presented in R. S. Lull and Nelda Wright 's influential 1942 monograph , had Edmontosaurus and various species of Anatosaurus ( most of which would be later considered as additional species or specimens of Edmontosaurus ) as one lineage among several lineages of " flat @-@ headed " hadrosaurs . One of the first analyses using cladistic methods found it to be linked with Anatosaurus ( = Anatotitan ) and Shantungosaurus in an informal " edmontosaur " clade , which was paired with the spike @-@ crested " <unk> " and more distantly related to the " <unk> " and arch @-@ snouted " <unk> " . A 2007 study by Terry Gates and Scott Sampson found broadly similar results , in that Edmontosaurus remained close to Saurolophus and Prosaurolophus and distant from Gryposaurus , Brachylophosaurus , and Maiasaura . However , the most recent review of Hadrosauridae , by Jack Horner and colleagues ( 2004 ) , came to a noticeably different result : Edmontosaurus was nested between Gryposaurus and the " <unk> " , and distant from Saurolophus . The discrepancies are complicated by the relative lack of work on hadrosaurine evolutionary relationships . 
 = = Discovery and history = = 
 = = = Claosaurus annectens = = = 
 Edmontosaurus has had a long and complicated history in paleontology , having spent decades with various species classified in other genera . Its taxonomic history intertwines at various points with the genera Agathaumas , Anatosaurus , Anatotitan , Claosaurus , Hadrosaurus , Thespesius , and Trachodon , and references predating the 1980s typically use Anatosaurus , Claosaurus , Thespesius , or Trachodon for edmontosaur fossils ( excluding those assigned to E. regalis ) , depending on author and date . Although Edmontosaurus was only named in 1917 , its oldest well @-@ supported species ( E. annectens ) was named in 1892 as a species of Claosaurus . 
 The first well @-@ supported species of Edmontosaurus was named in 1892 as Claosaurus annectens by Othniel Charles Marsh . This species is based on USNM 2414 , a partial skull @-@ roof and skeleton , with a second skull and skeleton , YPM 2182 , designated the paratype . Both were collected in 1891 by John Bell Hatcher from the late Maastrichtian @-@ age Upper Cretaceous Lance Formation of Niobrara County ( then part of Converse County ) , Wyoming . This species has some historical footnotes attached : it is among the first dinosaurs to receive a skeletal restoration , and is the first hadrosaurid so restored ; and YPM 2182 and <unk> 2414 are , respectively , the first and second essentially complete mounted dinosaur skeletons in the United States . YPM 2182 was put on display in 1901 , and USNM 2414 in 1904 . 
 Because of the incomplete understanding of hadrosaurids at the time , following Marsh 's death in 1897 Claosaurus annectens was variously classified as a species of Claosaurus , Thespesius or Trachodon . Opinions varied greatly ; textbooks and encyclopedias drew a distinction between the " Iguanodon @-@ like " Claosaurus annectens and the " duck @-@ billed " Hadrosaurus ( based on remains now known as adult Edmontosaurus annectens ) , while Hatcher explicitly identified C. annectens as synonymous with the hadrosaurid represented by those same duck @-@ billed skulls . Hatcher 's revision , published in 1902 , was sweeping : he considered almost all hadrosaurid genera then known as synonyms of Trachodon . This included <unk> , Diclonius , Hadrosaurus , <unk> , <unk> , and Thespesius , as well as <unk> and Polyonax , fragmentary genera now thought to be horned dinosaurs . Hatcher 's work led to a brief consensus , until after 1910 new material from Canada and Montana showed a greater diversity of hadrosaurids than previously suspected . Charles W. Gilmore in 1915 reassessed hadrosaurids and recommended that Thespesius be reintroduced for hadrosaurids from the Lance Formation and rock units of equivalent age , and that Trachodon , based on inadequate material , should be restricted to a hadrosaurid from the older Judith River Formation and its equivalents . In regards to Claosaurus annectens , he recommended that it be considered the same as Thespesius occidentalis . His reinstatement of Thespesius for Lance @-@ age hadrosaurids would have other consequences for the taxonomy of Edmontosaurus in the following decades . 
 During this time frame ( 1902 – 1915 ) , two additional important specimens of C. annectens were recovered . The first , the " Trachodon mummy " ( AMNH 5060 ) , was discovered in 1908 by Charles Hazelius Sternberg and his sons in Lance Formation rocks near Lusk , Wyoming . Sternberg was working for the British Museum of Natural History , but Henry Fairfield Osborn of the American Museum of Natural History was able to purchase the specimen for $ 2 @,@ 000 . The <unk> recovered a second similar specimen from the same area in 1910 , not as well preserved but also found with skin impressions . They sold this specimen ( SM <unk> ) to the Senckenberg Museum in Germany . 
 As a side note , Trachodon <unk> , described by Lawrence Lambe in 1902 for a lower jaw from what is now known as the Dinosaur Park Formation of Alberta , was erroneously described by Glut ( 1997 ) as having been assigned to Edmontosaurus regalis by Lull and Wright . It was not , instead being designated " of very doubtful validity . " More recent reviews of hadrosaurids have concurred . 
 = = = Canadian discoveries = = = 
 Edmontosaurus itself was coined in 1917 by Lawrence Lambe for two partial skeletons found in the Horseshoe Canyon Formation ( formerly the lower Edmonton Formation ) along the Red Deer River of southern Alberta , Canada . These rocks are older than the rocks in which Claosaurus annectens was found . The Edmonton Formation lends Edmontosaurus its name . The type species , E. regalis ( " regal " , or , more loosely , " king @-@ sized " ) , is based on NMC 2288 , consisting of a skull , articulated vertebrae up to the sixth tail vertebra , ribs , partial hips , an upper arm bone , and most of a hind limb . It was discovered in 1912 by Levi Sternberg . The second specimen , paratype NMC 2289 , consists of a skull and skeleton lacking the beak , most of the tail , and part of the feet . It was discovered in 1916 by George F. Sternberg . Lambe found that his new dinosaur compared best to Diclonius mirabilis ( specimens now assigned to Edmontosaurus annectens ) , and drew attention to the size and robustness of Edmontosaurus . Initially , Lambe only described the skulls of the two skeletons , but returned to the genus in 1920 to describe the skeleton of NMC 2289 . The postcrania of the type specimen remains undescribed , still in its plaster jackets . 
 Two more species that would come to be included with Edmontosaurus were named from Canadian remains in the 1920s , but both would initially be assigned to Thespesius . Gilmore named the first , Thespesius edmontoni , in 1924 . T. edmontoni also came from the Horseshoe Canyon Formation . It was based on NMC <unk> , another nearly complete skeleton lacking most of the tail . NMC <unk> was discovered on the Red Deer River in 1912 by a Sternberg party . Its forelimbs , ossified tendons , and skin impressions were briefly described in 1913 and 1914 by Lambe , who at first thought it was an example of a species he had named Trachodon marginatus , but then changed his mind . The specimen became the first dinosaur skeleton to be mounted for exhibition in a Canadian museum . Gilmore found that his new species compared closely to what he called Thespesius annectens , but left the two apart because of details of the arms and hands . He also noted that his species had more vertebrae than Marsh 's in the back and neck , but proposed that Marsh was mistaken in assuming that the annectens specimens were complete in those regions . 
 In 1926 , Charles Mortram Sternberg named Thespesius saskatchewanensis for NMC <unk> , a skull and partial skeleton from the Wood Mountain plateau of southern Saskatchewan . He had collected this specimen in 1921 , from rocks that were assigned to the Lance Formation , now the Frenchman Formation . NMC <unk> included an almost complete skull , numerous vertebrae , partial shoulder and hip girdles , and partial hind limbs , representing the first substantial dinosaur specimen recovered from Saskatchewan . Sternberg opted to assign it to Thespesius because that was the only hadrosaurid genus known from the Lance Formation at the time . At the time , T. saskatchewanensis was unusual because of its small size , estimated at 7 to 7 @.@ 3 metres ( 23 to 24 ft ) in length . 
 = = = Anatosaurus to the present = = = 
 In 1942 , Lull and Wright attempted to resolve the complicated taxonomy of crestless hadrosaurids by naming a new genus , Anatosaurus , to take in several species that did not fit well under their previous genera . Anatosaurus , meaning " duck lizard " , because of its wide , duck @-@ like beak ( Latin <unk> 
 = duck + Greek sauros = 
 lizard ) , had as its type species Marsh 's old Claosaurus annectens . Also assigned to this genus were Thespesius edmontoni , T. saskatchewanensis , a large lower jaw that Marsh had named Trachodon longiceps in 1890 , and a new species , Anatosaurus copei , for two skeletons on display at the American Museum of Natural History that had long been known as Diclonius mirabilis ( or variations thereof ) . Thus , the various species became Anatosaurus annectens , A. copei , A. edmontoni , A. longiceps , and A. saskatchewanensis . Anatosaurus would come to be called the " classic duck @-@ billed dinosaur . " 
 This state of affairs persisted for several decades , until Michael K. Brett @-@ Surman reexamined the pertinent material for his graduate studies in the 1970s and 1980s . He concluded that the type species of Anatosaurus , A. annectens , was actually a species of Edmontosaurus and that A. copei was different enough to warrant its own genus . Although theses and dissertations are not regarded as official publications by the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature , which regulates the naming of organisms , his conclusions were known to other paleontologists , and were adopted by several popular works of the time . Brett @-@ Surman and Ralph Chapman designated a new genus for A. copei ( Anatotitan ) in 1990 . Of the remaining species , A. saskatchewanensis and A. edmontoni were assigned to Edmontosaurus as well , and A. longiceps went to Anatotitan , as either a second species or as a synonym of A. copei . Because the type species of Anatosaurus ( A. annectens ) was sunk into Edmontosaurus , the name Anatosaurus is abandoned as a junior synonym of Edmontosaurus . 
 The conception of Edmontosaurus that emerged included three valid species : the type E. regalis , E. annectens ( including Anatosaurus edmontoni , emended to edmontonensis ) , and E. saskatchewanensis . The debate about the proper taxonomy of the A. copei specimens continues to the present : returning to Hatcher 's argument of 1902 , Jack Horner , David B. Weishampel , and Catherine Forster regarded Anatotitan copei as representing specimens of Edmontosaurus annectens with crushed skulls . In 2007 another " mummy " was announced ; nicknamed " Dakota " , it was discovered in 1999 by Tyler <unk> , and came from the Hell Creek Formation of North Dakota . 
 In a 2011 study by Nicolás Campione and David Evans , the authors conducted the first ever morphometric analysis to compare the various specimens assigned to Edmontosaurus . They concluded that only two species are valid : E. regalis , from the late Campanian , and E. annectens , from the late Maastrichtian . Their study provided further evidence that Anatotitan copei is a synonym of E. annectens ; specifically , that the long , low skull of A. copei is the result of ontogenetic change and represents mature E. annectens individuals . 
 = = Species and distribution = = 
 Edmontosaurus is currently regarded as having two valid species : type species E. regalis , and E. annectens . E. regalis is known only from the Horseshoe Canyon Formation of Alberta , dating from the late Campanian stage of the late Cretaceous period . At least a dozen individuals are known , including seven skulls with associated postcrania , and five to seven other skulls . The species formerly known as Thespesius edmontoni or Anatosaurus edmontoni represents immature individuals . 
 E. annectens is known from the Frenchman Formation of Saskatchewan , the Hell Creek Formation of Montana , and the Lance Formation of South Dakota and Wyoming . It is limited to late Maastrichtian rocks , and is represented by at least twenty skulls , some with postcranial remains . One author , Kraig <unk> , has described E. annectens as " perhaps the most perfectly @-@ known dinosaur to date [ 1994 ] . " Anatosaurus copei and E. saskatchewanensis are now thought to be growth stages of E. annectens : A. copei as adults , and E. saskatchewanensis as juveniles . Trachodon longiceps may be a synonym of E. annectens as well . Anatosaurus edmontoni was mistakenly listed as a synonym of E. annectens in both reviews of the Dinosauria , but this does not appear to be the case . 
 E. annectens differed from E. regalis by having a longer , lower , less robust skull . Although Brett @-@ Surman regarded E. regalis and E. annectens as potentially representing males and females of the same species , all E. regalis specimens come from older formations than E. annectens specimens . 
 <unk> specimens from the Prince Creek Formation of Alaska formerly assigned to Edmontosaurus sp. have been given their own genus and species name , <unk> <unk> . Edmontosaurus was also reported from the <unk> Formation of Big Bend National Park , western Texas , but the remains in question were later referred to Kritosaurus cf. navajovius by Wagner ( 2001 ) , and one specimen has been described as the new species Gryposaurus <unk> . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Edmontosaurus was a wide @-@ ranging genus in both time and space . The rock units from which it is known can be divided into two groups by age : the older Horseshoe Canyon and St. Mary River formations , and the younger Frenchman , Hell Creek , and Lance formations . The time span covered by the Horseshoe Canyon Formation and equivalents is also known as Edmontonian , and the time span covered by the younger units is also known as Lancian . The Edmontonian and Lancian time intervals had distinct dinosaur faunas . 
 The Edmontonian land vertebrate age is defined by the first appearance of Edmontosaurus regalis in the fossil record . Although sometimes reported as of exclusively early Maastrichtian age , the Horseshoe Canyon Formation was of somewhat longer duration . Deposition began approximately 73 million years ago , in the late Campanian , and ended between 68 @.@ 0 and 67 @.@ 6 million years ago . Edmontosaurus regalis is known from the lowest of five units within the Horseshoe Canyon Formation , but is absent from at least the second to the top . As many as three quarters of the dinosaur specimens from badlands near Drumheller , Alberta may pertain to Edmontosaurus . 
 The Lancian time interval was the last interval before the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event that eliminated non @-@ avian dinosaurs . Edmontosaurus was one of the more common dinosaurs of the interval . Robert Bakker reports that it made up one @-@ seventh of the large dinosaur sample , with most of the rest ( five @-@ sixths ) made up of the horned dinosaur Triceratops . The coastal plain Triceratops – Edmontosaurus association , dominated by Triceratops , extended from Colorado to Saskatchewan . 
 The Lance Formation , as typified by exposures approximately 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) north of Fort Laramie in eastern Wyoming , has been interpreted as a bayou setting similar to the Louisiana coastal plain . It was closer to a large delta than the Hell Creek Formation depositional setting to the north and received much more sediment . Tropical <unk> conifers and palm trees dotted the hardwood forests , differentiating the flora from the northern coastal plain . The climate was humid and subtropical , with conifers , palmettos , and ferns in the swamps , and conifers , ash , live oak , and shrubs in the forests . Freshwater fish , salamanders , turtles , diverse lizards , snakes , shorebirds , and small mammals lived alongside the dinosaurs . Small dinosaurs are not known in as great of abundance here as in the Hell Creek rocks , but Thescelosaurus once again seems to have been relatively common . Triceratops is known from many skulls , which tend to be somewhat smaller than those of more northern individuals . The Lance Formation is the setting of two edmontosaur " mummies " . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 In a 2011 study , Campione and Evans recorded data from all known " edmontosaur " skulls from the Campanian and Maastrichtian and used it to plot a morphometric graph , comparing variable features of the skull with skull size . Their results showed that within both recognized Edmontosaurus species , many features previously used to classify additional species or genera were directly correlated with skull size . Campione and Evans interpreted these results as strongly suggesting that the shape of Edmontosaurus skulls changed dramatically as they grew . This has led to several apparent mistakes in classification in the past . The Campanian species Thespesius edmontoni , previously considered a synonym of E. annectens due to its small size and skull shape , is more likely a subadult specimen of the contemporary E. regalis . Similarly , the three previously recognized Maastrichtian edmontosaur species likely represent growth stages of a single species , with E. saskatchewanensis representing juveniles , E. annectens subadults , and Anatotitan copei fully mature adults . The skulls became longer and flatter as the animals grew . 
 = = = Brain and nervous system = = = 
 The brain of Edmontosaurus has been described in several papers and abstracts through the use of endocasts of the cavity where the brain had been . E. annectens and E. regalis , as well as specimens not identified to species , have been studied in this way . The brain was not particularly large for an animal the size of Edmontosaurus . The space holding it was only about a quarter of the length of the skull , and various endocasts have been measured as displacing 374 millilitres ( 13 US fl oz ) to 450 millilitres ( 15 US fl oz ) , which does not take into account that the brain may have occupied as little as 50 % of the space of the endocast , the rest of the space being taken up by the dura mater surrounding the brain . For example , the brain of the specimen with the 374 millilitre endocast is estimated to have had a volume of 268 millilitres ( 9 US fl oz ) . The brain was an elongate structure , and as with other non @-@ mammals , there would have been no neocortex . Like Stegosaurus , the neural canal was expanded in the hips , but not to the same degree : the <unk> space of Stegosaurus had 20 times the volume of its endocranial cast , whereas the <unk> space of Edmontosaurus was only 2 @.@ 59 times larger in volume . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 = = = = Feeding adaptations = = = = 
 As a hadrosaurid , Edmontosaurus was a large terrestrial herbivore . Its teeth were continually replaced and packed into dental batteries that contained hundreds of teeth , only a relative handful of which were in use at any time . It used its broad beak to cut loose food , perhaps by cropping , or by closing the jaws in a clamshell @-@ like manner over twigs and branches and then stripping off the more nutritious leaves and shoots . Because the tooth rows are deeply indented from the outside of the jaws , and because of other anatomical details , it is inferred that Edmontosaurus and most other ornithischians had cheek @-@ like structures , muscular or non @-@ muscular . The function of the cheeks was to retain food in the mouth . The animal 's feeding range would have been from ground level to around 4 metres ( 13 ft ) above . 
 Before the 1960s and 1970s , the prevailing interpretation of hadrosaurids like Edmontosaurus was that they were aquatic and fed on aquatic plants . An example of this is William Morris 's 1970 interpretation of an edmontosaur skull with <unk> beak remnants . He proposed that the animal had a diet much like that of some modern ducks , filtering plants and aquatic invertebrates like mollusks and crustaceans from the water and discharging water via V @-@ shaped furrows along the inner face of the upper beak . This interpretation of the beak has been rejected , as the furrows and ridges are more like those of herbivorous turtle beaks than the flexible structures seen in filter @-@ feeding birds . 
 Between the mid @-@ 1980s and the first decade of the 2000s , the prevailing interpretation of how hadrosaurids processed their food followed the model put forward in 1984 by David B. Weishampel . He proposed that the structure of the skull permitted motion between bones that resulted in backward and forward motion of the lower jaw , and outward bowing of the tooth @-@ bearing bones of the upper jaw when the mouth was closed . The teeth of the upper jaw would grind against the teeth of the lower jaw like rasps , processing plant material trapped between them . Such a motion would parallel the effects of mastication in mammals , although accomplishing the effects in a completely different way . Work in the early 2000s has challenged the Weishampel model . A study published in 2008 by Casey Holliday and Lawrence Witmer found that ornithopods like Edmontosaurus lacked the types of skull joints seen in those modern animals that are known to have kinetic skulls ( skulls that permit motion between their constituent bones ) , such as squamates and birds . They proposed that joints that had been interpreted as permitting movement in dinosaur skulls were actually cartilaginous growth zones . An important piece of evidence for Weishampel 's model is the orientation of scratches on the teeth , showing the direction of jaw action . Other movements could produce similar scratches , though , such as movement of the bones of the two halves of the lower jaw . Not all models have been scrutinized under present techniques . Vincent Williams and colleagues ( 2009 ) published additional work on hadrosaurid tooth microwear . They found four classes of scratches on Edmontosaurus teeth . The most common class was interpreted as resulting from an oblique motion , not a simple up @-@ down or front @-@ back motion , which is consistent with the Weishampel model . This motion is thought to have been the primary motion for grinding food . Two scratch classes were interpreted as resulting from forward or backward movement of the jaws . The other class was variable and probably resulted from opening the jaws . The combination of movements is more complex than had been previously predicted . 
 Weishampel developed his model with the aid of a computer simulation . Natalia Rybczynski and colleagues have updated this work with a much more sophisticated three @-@ dimensional animation model , scanning a skull of E. regalis with lasers . They were able to replicate the proposed motion with their model , although they found that additional secondary movements between other bones were required , with maximum separations of 1 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 4 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 51 to 0 @.@ 55 in ) between some bones during the chewing cycle . Rybczynski and colleagues were not convinced that the Weishampel model is viable , but noted that they have several improvements to implement to their animation . Planned improvements include incorporating soft tissue and tooth wear marks and scratches , which should better constrain movements . They note that there are several other hypotheses to test as well . Further research published in 2012 by Robin Cuthbertson and colleagues found the motions required for Weishampel 's model to be unlikely , and favored a model in which movements of the lower jaw produced grinding action . The lower jaw 's joint with the upper jaw would permit anterior – posterior motion along with the usual rotation , and the anterior joint of the two halves of the lower jaw would also permit motion ; in combination , the two halves of the lower jaw could move slightly back and forth as well as rotating slightly along their long axes . These motions would account for the observed tooth wear and a more solidly constructed skull than modeled by Weishampel . 
 Because scratches dominate the microwear texture of the teeth , Williams et al. suggested Edmontosaurus was a grazer instead of a browser , which would be predicted to have fewer scratches due to eating less abrasive materials . Candidates for ingested abrasives include silica @-@ rich plants like horsetails and soil that was accidentally ingested due to feeding at ground level . The tooth structure indicates combined slicing and grinding capabilities . 
 Reports of gastroliths , or stomach stones , in the hadrosaurid Claosaurus are actually based on a probable double misidentification . First , the specimen is actually of Edmontosaurus annectens . Barnum Brown , who discovered the specimen in 1900 , referred to it as Claosaurus because E. annectens was thought to be a species of Claosaurus at the time . Additionally , it is more likely that the supposed gastroliths represent gravel washed in during burial . 
 = = = = Gut contents = = = = 
 Both of the " mummy " specimens collected by the <unk> were reported to have had possible gut contents . Charles H. Sternberg reported the presence of carbonized gut contents in the American Museum of Natural History specimen , but this material has not been described . The plant remains in the Senckenberg Museum specimen have been described , but have proven difficult to interpret . The plants found in the carcass included needles of the conifer <unk> elegans , twigs from conifer and broadleaf trees , and numerous small seeds or fruits . Upon their description in 1922 , they were the subject of a debate in the German @-@ language journal <unk> Zeitschrift . <unk> , who described the material , interpreted it as the gut contents of the animal , while Abel could not rule out that the plants had been washed into the carcass after death . 
 At the time , hadrosaurids were thought to have been aquatic animals , and <unk> made a point of stating that the specimen did not rule out hadrosaurids eating water plants . The discovery of possible gut contents made little impact in English @-@ speaking circles , except for another brief mention of the aquatic @-@ terrestrial dichotomy , until it was brought up by John Ostrom in the course of an article reassessing the old interpretation of hadrosaurids as water @-@ bound . Instead of trying to adapt the discovery to the aquatic model , he used it as a line of evidence that hadrosaurids were terrestrial herbivores . While his interpretation of hadrosaurids as terrestrial animals has been generally accepted , the Senckenberg plant fossils remain equivocal . Kenneth Carpenter has suggested that they may actually represent the gut contents of a starving animal , instead of a typical diet . Other authors have noted that because the plant fossils were removed from their original context in the specimen and were heavily prepared , it is no longer possible to follow up on the original work , leaving open the possibility that the plants were washed @-@ in debris . 
 = = = Isotopic studies = = = 
 The diet and physiology of Edmontosaurus have been probed by using stable isotopes of carbon and oxygen as recorded in tooth enamel . When feeding , drinking , and breathing , animals take in carbon and oxygen , which become incorporated into bone . The isotopes of these two elements are determined by various internal and external factors , such as the type of plants being eaten , the physiology of the animal , salinity , and climate . If isotope ratios in fossils are not altered by fossilization and later changes , they can be studied for information about the original factors ; <unk> animals will have certain isotopic compositions compared to their surroundings , animals that eat certain types of plants or use certain digestive processes will have distinct isotopic compositions , and so on . Enamel is typically used because the structure of the mineral that forms enamel makes it the most resistant material to chemical change in the skeleton . 
 A 2004 study by Kathryn Thomas and Sandra Carlson used teeth from the upper jaw of three individuals interpreted as a juvenile , a subadult , and an adult , recovered from a bone bed in the Hell Creek Formation of Corson County , South Dakota . In this study , successive teeth in columns in the edmontosaurs ' dental batteries were sampled from multiple locations along each tooth using a <unk> system . This sampling method takes advantage of the organization of hadrosaurid dental batteries to find variation in tooth isotopes over a period of time . From their work , it appears that edmontosaur teeth took less than about 0 @.@ 65 years to form , slightly faster in younger edmontosaurs . The teeth of all three individuals appeared to show variation in oxygen isotope ratios that could correspond to warm / dry and cool / wet periods ; Thomas and Carlson considered the possibility that the animals were migrating instead , but favored local seasonal variations because migration would have more likely led to ratio homogenization , as many animals migrate to stay within specific temperature ranges or near particular food sources . 
 The edmontosaurs also showed enriched carbon isotope values , which for modern mammals would be interpreted as a mixed diet of C3 plants ( most plants ) and C4 plants ( grasses ) ; however , C4 plants were extremely rare in the Late Cretaceous if present at all . Thomas and Carlson put forward several factors that may have been operating , and found the most likely to include a diet heavy in gymnosperms , consuming salt @-@ stressed plants from coastal areas adjacent to the Western Interior Seaway , and a physiological difference between dinosaurs and mammals that caused dinosaurs to form tissue with different carbon ratios than would be expected for mammals . A combination of factors is also possible . 
 = = = <unk> and health = = = 
 In 2003 , evidence of tumors , including <unk> , desmoplastic <unk> , metastatic cancer , and <unk> , was described in Edmontosaurus bones . Rothschild et al. tested dinosaur vertebrae for tumors using computerized tomography and <unk> screening . Several other hadrosaurids , including Brachylophosaurus , <unk> , and <unk> , also tested positive . Although more than 10 @,@ 000 fossils were examined in this manner , the tumors were limited to Edmontosaurus and closely related genera . The tumors may have been caused by environmental factors or genetic propensity . 
 <unk> , or surficial pits in bone at places where bones articulate , is also known in Edmontosaurus . This condition , resulting from cartilage failing to be replaced by bone during growth , was found to be present in 2 @.@ 2 % of 224 edmontosaur toe bones . The underlying cause of the condition is unknown . Genetic predisposition , trauma , feeding intensity , alterations in blood supply , excess thyroid hormones , and deficiencies in various growth factors have been suggested . Among dinosaurs , osteochondrosis ( like tumors ) is most commonly found in hadrosaurids . 
 = = = Locomotion = = = 
 Like other hadrosaurids , Edmontosaurus is thought to have been a facultative biped , meaning that it mostly moved on four legs , but could adopt a bipedal stance when needed . It probably went on all fours when standing still or moving slowly , and switched to using the hind legs alone when moving more rapidly . Research conducted by computer modeling in 2007 suggests that Edmontosaurus could run at high speeds , perhaps up to 45 kilometres per hour ( 28 mph ) . Further simulations using a subadult specimen estimated as weighing 715 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 576 lb ) when alive produced a model that could run or hop bipedally , use a trot , pace , or single foot symmetric quadrupedal gait , or move at a gallop . The researchers found to their surprise that the fastest gait was kangaroo @-@ like hopping ( maximum simulated speed of 17 @.@ 3 metres per second ( 62 km / h ; 39 mph ) ) , which they regarded as unlikely based on the size of the animal and lack of hopping footprints in the fossil record , and instead interpreted the result as indicative of an inaccuracy in their simulation . The fastest non @-@ hopping gaits were galloping ( maximum simulated speed of 15 @.@ 7 metres per second ( 57 km / h ; 35 mph ) ) and running bipedally ( maximum simulated speed of 14 @.@ 0 metres per second ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) ) . They found weak support for bipedal running as the most likely option for high @-@ speed movement , but did not rule out high @-@ speed quadrupedal movement . 
 While long thought to have been aquatic or semiaquatic , hadrosaurids were not as well @-@ suited for swimming as other dinosaurs ( particularly theropods , who were once thought to have been unable to pursue hadrosaurids into water ) . <unk> had slim hands with short fingers , making their forelimbs ineffective for propulsion , and the tail was also not useful for propulsion because of the ossified tendons that increased its rigidity , and the poorly developed attachment points for muscles that would have moved the tail from side to side . 
 = = = Interactions with theropods = = = 
 The time span and geographic range of Edmontosaurus overlapped with Tyrannosaurus , and an adult specimen of E. annectens on display in the Denver Museum of Nature and Science shows evidence of a theropod bite in the tail . Counting back from the hip , the thirteenth to seventeenth vertebrae have damaged spines consistent with an attack from the right rear of the animal . One spine has a portion sheared away , and the others are kinked ; three have apparent tooth puncture marks . The top of the tail was at least 2 @.@ 9 metres ( 9 @.@ 5 ft ) high , and the only theropod species known from the same rock formation that was tall enough to make such an attack is T. rex . The bones are partially healed , but the edmontosaur died before the traces of damage were completely obliterated . The damage also shows signs of bone infection . Kenneth Carpenter , who studied the specimen , noted that there also seems to be a healed fracture in the left hip which predated the attack because it was more fully healed . He suggested that the edmontosaur was a target because it may have been limping from this earlier injury . Because it survived the attack , Carpenter suggested that it may have outmaneuvered or outrun its attacker , or that the damage to its tail was incurred by the hadrosaurid using it as a weapon against the tyrannosaur . 
 Another specimen of E. annectens , pertaining to a 7 @.@ 6 metres ( 25 ft ) long individual from South Dakota , shows evidence of tooth marks from small theropods on its lower jaws . Some of the marks are partially healed . Michael <unk> , informally reporting on the specimen , suggested a scenario where small theropods attacked the throat of the edmontosaur ; the animal survived the initial attack but succumbed to its injuries shortly thereafter . Some edmontosaur bone beds were sites of scavenging . Albertosaurus and Saurornitholestes tooth marks are common at one Alberta bone bed , and Daspletosaurus fed on Edmontosaurus and fellow hadrosaurid Saurolophus at another Alberta site . 
 = = = Social behavior = = = 
 Extensive bone beds are known for Edmontosaurus , and such groupings of hadrosaurids are used to suggest that they were gregarious , living in groups . Three quarries containing Edmontosaurus remains are identified in a 2007 database of fossil bone beds , from Alberta ( Horseshoe Canyon Formation ) , South Dakota ( Hell Creek Formation ) , and Wyoming ( Lance Formation ) . One edmontosaur bone bed , from claystone and mudstone of the Lance Formation in eastern Wyoming , covers more than a square kilometre , although Edmontosaurus bones are most concentrated in a 40 hectares ( 0 @.@ 15 sq mi ) subsection of this site . It is estimated that disassociated remains pertaining to 10 @,@ 000 to 25 @,@ 000 edmontosaurs are present here . 
 Unlike many other hadrosaurids , Edmontosaurus lacked a bony crest . It may have had soft @-@ tissue display structures in the skull , though : the bones around the nasal openings had deep indentations surrounding the openings , and this pair of recesses are postulated to have held inflatable air sacs , perhaps allowing for both visual and auditory signaling . Edmontosaurus may have been dimorphic , with more robust and more lightly built forms , but it has not been established if this is related to sexual dimorphism . 
 Edmontosaurus has been considered a possibly migratory hadrosaurid by some authors . A 2008 review of dinosaur migration studies by Phil R. Bell and Eric Snively proposed that E. regalis was capable of an annual 2 @,@ 600 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 600 mi ) round @-@ trip journey , provided it had the requisite metabolism and fat deposition rates . Such a trip would have required speeds of about 2 to 10 kilometres per hour ( 1 to 6 mph ) , and could have brought it from Alaska to Alberta . In contrast to Bell and Snively , <unk> <unk> and colleagues concluded from a study of bone microstructure that polar Edmontosaurus overwintered . 
 = Marian Rejewski = 
 Marian Adam Rejewski [ <unk> <unk> ] ( 16 August 1905 – 13 February 1980 ) was a Polish mathematician and cryptologist who reconstructed the Nazi German military Enigma cipher machine sight @-@ unseen in 1932 . The cryptologic achievements of Rejewski and colleagues Jerzy Różycki and Henryk Zygalski enabled the British to begin reading German Enigma @-@ encrypted messages at the start of World War II , seven years after Rejewski 's original reconstruction of the machine . The intelligence that was gained by the British from Enigma decrypts formed part of what was code @-@ named Ultra and contributed — perhaps decisively — to the defeat of Germany . 
 In 1929 , while studying mathematics at Poznań University , Rejewski attended a secret cryptology course conducted by the Polish General Staff 's Cipher Bureau ( Biuro Szyfrów ) , which he joined in September 1932 . The Bureau had had no success in reading Enigma @-@ enciphered messages and set Rejewski to work on the problem in late 1932 ; he deduced the machine 's secret internal wiring after only a few weeks . Rejewski and his two colleagues then developed successive techniques for the regular decryption of Enigma messages . His contributions included the cryptologic card catalog , derived using the cyclometer that he had invented , and the cryptologic bomb . 
 Five weeks before the German invasion of Poland in 1939 , Rejewski and colleagues presented their achievements to French and British intelligence representatives summoned to Warsaw . Shortly after the outbreak of war , the Polish cryptologists were evacuated to France , where they continued breaking Enigma @-@ enciphered messages . They and their support staff were again compelled to evacuate after the fall of France in June 1940 , and they resumed work undercover a few months later in Vichy France . After the French " Free Zone " was occupied by Germany in November 1942 , Rejewski and Zygalski fled via Spain , Portugal , and Gibraltar to Britain . There they enlisted in the Polish Armed Forces and were put to work solving low @-@ grade German ciphers . 
 After the war , Rejewski reunited with his family in Poland and worked as an accountant . For two decades , he remained silent about his prewar and wartime cryptologic work to avoid adverse attention from the country 's Soviet @-@ dominated government ; he broke his silence in 1967 when he provided to the Polish Military Historical Institute his memoirs of his work in the Cipher Bureau . He died at age 74 of a heart attack and was interred with military honors at Warsaw 's Powązki Military Cemetery . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Marian Rejewski was born 16 August 1905 in Bromberg in the Prussian Province of Posen ( now Bydgoszcz , Poland ) to Józef and <unk> , née Thoms . After completing secondary school , he studied mathematics at Poznań University 's Mathematics Institute , housed in Poznań Castle . 
 In 1929 , shortly before graduating from university , Rejewski began attending a secret cryptology course which opened on 15 January , organized for select German @-@ speaking mathematics students by the Polish General Staff 's Cipher Bureau with the help of the Mathematics Institute 's Professor Zdzisław Krygowski . The course was conducted off @-@ campus at a military facility and , as Rejewski would discover in France in 1939 , " was entirely and literally based " on French General Marcel <unk> 's 1925 book , Cours de <unk> ( Cryptography Course ) . Rejewski and fellow students Henryk Zygalski and Jerzy Różycki were among the few who could keep up with the course while balancing the demands of their normal studies . 
 On 1 March 1929 Rejewski graduated with a Master of Philosophy degree in mathematics . A few weeks after graduating , and without having completed the Cipher Bureau 's cryptology course , he began the first year of a two @-@ year actuarial statistics course at Göttingen , Germany . He did not complete the statistics course , because while home for the summer of 1930 , he accepted an offer , from Professor Krygowski , of a mathematics teaching assistantship at Poznań University . He also began working part @-@ time for the Cipher Bureau , which by then had set up an outpost at Poznań to decrypt intercepted German radio messages . Rejewski worked some twelve hours a week near the Mathematics Institute in an underground vault referred to <unk> as the " Black Chamber " . 
 The Poznań branch of the Cipher Bureau was disbanded in the summer of 1932 . On 1 September 1932 , Rejewski , Zygalski , and Różycki joined the Cipher Bureau as civilian employees working at the General Staff building ( the Saxon Palace ) in Warsaw . Their first assignment was to solve a four @-@ letter code used by the Kriegsmarine ( German Navy ) . Progress was initially slow , but sped up after a test exchange — consisting of a six @-@ group signal , followed by a four @-@ group response — was intercepted . The cryptologists guessed correctly that the first signal was the question , " When was Frederick the Great born ? " followed by the response , " 1712 . " 
 On 20 June 1934 Rejewski married Irena Maria <unk> , daughter of a prosperous dentist . The couple eventually had two children : a son , Andrzej ( Andrew ) , born in 1936 ; and a daughter , Janina ( Joan ) , born in 1939 . Janina would later become a mathematician like her father . 
 = = Enigma machine = = 
 The Enigma machine was an electromechanical device , equipped with a 26 @-@ letter keyboard and 26 lamps , corresponding to the letters of the alphabet . Inside was a set of wired drums ( rotors and a reflector ) that scrambled the input . The machine used a plugboard to swap pairs of letters , and the <unk> varied from one key press to the next . For two operators to communicate , both Enigma machines had to be set up in the same way . The large number of possibilities for setting the rotors and the plugboard combined to form an astronomical number of configurations , and the settings were changed daily , so the machine code had to be " broken " anew each day . 
 Before 1932 , the Cipher Bureau had succeeded in solving an earlier Enigma machine that functioned without a plugboard , but had been unsuccessful with the Enigma I , a new standard German cipher machine that was coming into widespread use . In late October or early November 1932 , the head of the Cipher Bureau 's German section , Captain Maksymilian Ciężki , tasked Rejewski to work alone on the German Enigma I machine for a couple of hours per day ; Rejewski was not to tell his colleagues what he was doing . 
 = = Solving the wiring = = 
 To decrypt Enigma messages , three pieces of information were needed : ( 1 ) a general understanding of how Enigma functioned ; ( 2 ) the wiring of the rotors ; and ( 3 ) the daily settings ( the sequence and orientations of the rotors , and the plug connections on the plugboard ) . Rejewski had only the first at his disposal , based on information already acquired by the Cipher Bureau . 
 First Rejewski tackled the problem of discovering the wiring of the rotors . To do this , according to historian David Kahn , he pioneered the use of pure mathematics in cryptanalysis . Previous methods had largely exploited linguistic patterns and the statistics of natural @-@ language texts — letter @-@ frequency analysis . Rejewski applied techniques from group theory — theorems about permutations — in his attack on Enigma . These mathematical techniques , combined with material supplied by Gustave Bertrand , chief of French radio intelligence , enabled him to reconstruct the internal wirings of the machine 's rotors and nonrotating reflector . " The solution " , writes Kahn , " was Rejewski 's own stunning achievement , one that elevates him to the pantheon of the greatest cryptanalysts of all time . " Rejewski used a mathematical theorem — that two permutations are conjugate if and only if they have the same cycle structure — that mathematics professor and <unk> co @-@ editor Cipher A. <unk> describes as " the theorem that won World War II " . 
 Before receiving the French intelligence material , Rejewski had made a careful study of Enigma messages , particularly of the first six letters of messages intercepted on a single day . For security , each message was encrypted using different starting positions of the rotors , as selected by the operator . This message setting was three letters long . To convey it to the receiving operator , the sending operator began the message by sending the message setting in a disguised form — a six @-@ letter indicator . The indicator was formed using the Enigma with its rotors set to a common global setting for that day , termed the ground setting , which was shared by all operators . The particular way that the indicator was constructed introduced a weakness into the cipher . 
 For example , suppose the operator chose the message setting <unk> for a message . The operator would first set the Enigma 's rotors to the ground setting , which might be GBL on that particular day , and then encrypt the message setting on the Enigma twice ; that is , the operator would enter <unk> ( which might come out to something like <unk> ) . The operator would then reposition the rotors at <unk> , and encrypt the actual message . A receiving operator could reverse the process to recover first the message setting , then the message itself . The repetition of the message setting was apparently meant as an error check to detect <unk> , but it had the unforeseen effect of greatly weakening the cipher . Due to the indicator 's repetition of the message setting , Rejewski knew that , in the plaintext of the indicator , the first and fourth letters were the same , the second and fifth were the same , and the third and sixth were the same . These relations could be exploited to break into the cipher . 
 Rejewski studied these related pairs of letters . For example , if there were four messages that had the following indicators on the same day : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , then by looking at the first and fourth letters of each set , he knew that certain pairs of letters were related . B was related to T , L was related to B , E was related to L , and T was related to E : ( B , T ) , ( L , B ) , ( E , L ) , and ( T , E ) . If he had enough different messages to work with , he could build entire sequences of relationships : the letter B was related to T , which was related to E , which was related to L , which was related to B ( see diagram ) . This was a " cycle of 4 " , since it took four jumps until it got back to the start letter . Another cycle on the same day might be A <formula> F <formula> W <formula> A , or a " cycle of 3 " . If there were enough messages on a given day , all the letters of the alphabet might be covered by a number of different cycles of various sizes . The cycles would be consistent for one day , and then would change to a different set of cycles the next day . Similar analysis could be done on the 2nd and 5th letters , and the 3rd and 6th , identifying the cycles in each case and the number of steps in each cycle . 
 Using the data thus gained , combined with Enigma operators ' tendency to choose predictable letter combinations as indicators ( such as girlfriends ' initials or a pattern of keys that they saw on the Enigma keyboard < these became known to the allies as " <unk> " ( " <unk> " misspelled ) > ) , Rejewski was able to deduce six permutations corresponding to the <unk> at six consecutive positions of the Enigma machine . These permutations could be described by six equations with various unknowns , representing the wiring within the entry drum , rotors , reflector , and plugboard . 
 = = = French help = = = 
 At this point , Rejewski ran into difficulties due to the large number of unknowns in the set of equations that he had developed . He would later comment in 1980 that it was still not known whether such a set of six equations was soluble without further data . But he was assisted by cryptographic documents that Section D of French military intelligence ( the Deuxième Bureau ) , under future General Gustave Bertrand , had obtained and passed on to the Polish Cipher Bureau . The documents , procured from a spy in the German Cryptographic Service , Hans @-@ Thilo Schmidt , included the Enigma settings for the months of September and October 1932 . About 9 or 10 December 1932 , the documents were given to Rejewski . They enabled him to reduce the number of unknowns and solve the wirings of the rotors and reflector . 
 There was another obstacle to overcome , however . The military Enigma had been modified from the commercial Enigma , of which Rejewski had had an actual example to study . In the commercial machine , the keys were connected to the entry drum in German keyboard order ( " <unk> ... " ) . However , in the military Enigma , the connections had instead been wired in alphabetical order : " <unk> ... " This new wiring sequence foiled British cryptologists working on Enigma , who dismissed the " <unk> ... " wiring as too obvious . Rejewski , perhaps guided by an intuition about a German fondness for order , simply guessed that the wiring was the normal alphabetic ordering . He later recalled that , after he had made this assumption , " from my pencil , as by magic , began to issue numbers designating the connections in rotor N. Thus the connections in one rotor , the right @-@ hand rotor , were finally known . " 
 The settings provided by French Intelligence covered two months that straddled a changeover period for the rotor ordering . A different rotor happened to be in the right @-@ hand position for the second month , and so the wirings of two rotors could be recovered by the same method . Rejewski later recalled : " Finding the [ wiring ] in the third [ rotor ] , and especially ... in the [ reflector ] , now presented no great difficulties . Likewise there were no difficulties with determining the correct torsion of the [ rotors ' ] side walls with respect to each other , or the moments when the left and middle drums turned . " By year 's end 1932 , the wirings of all three rotors and the reflector had been recovered . A sample message in an Enigma instruction manual , providing a plaintext and its corresponding ciphertext produced using a stated daily key and message key , helped clarify some remaining details . 
 There has been speculation as to whether the rotor wirings could have been solved without the documents supplied by French Intelligence . Rejewski recalled in 1980 that another way had been found that could have been used to solve the wirings , but that the method was " imperfect and tedious " and relied on chance . In 2005 , mathematician John Lawrence claimed that it would have taken four years for this method to have had a reasonable likelihood of success . Rejewski had earlier written that " the conclusion is that the intelligence material furnished to us should be regarded as having been decisive to solution of the machine . " 
 = = Solving daily settings = = 
 After Rejewski had determined the wiring in the remaining rotors , he was joined in early 1933 by Różycki and Zygalski in devising methods and equipment to break Enigma ciphers routinely . Rejewski later recalled : 
 Now we had the machine , but we didn 't have the keys and we couldn 't very well require Bertrand to keep on supplying us with the keys every month ... The situation had reversed itself : before , we 'd had the keys but we hadn 't had the machine — we solved the machine ; now we had the machine but we didn 't have the keys . We had to work out methods to find the daily keys . 
 = = = Early methods = = = 
 A number of methods and devices had to be invented in response to continual improvements in German operating procedure and to the Enigma machine itself . The earliest method for reconstructing daily keys was the " grill " , based on the fact that the plugboard 's connections exchanged only six pairs of letters , leaving fourteen letters unchanged . Next was Różycki 's " clock " method , which sometimes made it possible to determine which rotor was at the right @-@ hand side of the Enigma machine on a given day . 
 After 1 October 1936 , German procedure changed , and the number of plugboard connections became variable , ranging between five and eight . As a result , the grill method became considerably less effective . However , a method using a card catalog had been devised around 1934 or 1935 , and was independent of the number of plug connections . The catalog was constructed using Rejewski 's " cyclometer " , a special @-@ purpose device for creating a catalog of permutations . Once the catalog was complete , the permutation could be looked up in the catalog , yielding the Enigma rotor settings for that day . 
 The cyclometer comprised two sets of Enigma rotors , and was used to determine the length and number of cycles of the permutations that could be generated by the Enigma machine . Even with the cyclometer , preparing the catalog was a long and difficult task . Each position of the Enigma machine ( there were 17 @,@ 576 positions ) had to be examined for each possible sequence of rotors ( there were 6 possible sequences ) ; therefore , the catalog comprised 105 @,@ 456 entries . Preparation of the catalog took over a year , but when it was ready about 1935 , it made obtaining daily keys a matter of 12 – 20 minutes . However , on 1 or 2 November 1937 , the Germans replaced the reflector in their Enigma machines , which meant that the entire catalog had to be recalculated from scratch . Nonetheless , by January 1938 the Cipher Bureau 's German section was reading a remarkable 75 % of Enigma intercepts , and according to Rejewski , with a minimal increase in personnel this could have been increased to 90 % . 
 = = = Bomba and sheets = = = 
 In 1937 Rejewski , along with the German section of the Cipher Bureau , transferred to a secret facility near Pyry in the Kabaty Woods south of Warsaw . On 15 September 1938 , the Germans introduced new rules for enciphering message keys ( a new " indicator procedure " ) , making the Poles ' earlier techniques obsolete . The Polish cryptanalysts rapidly responded with new techniques . One was Rejewski 's bomba , an electrically powered aggregate of six Enigmas , which solved the daily keys within about two hours . Six bombas were built and were ready for use by mid @-@ November 1938 . The bomba exploited the fact that the plugboard connections did not affect all the letters ; therefore , when another change to German operating procedure occurred on 1 January 1939 , increasing the number of plugboard connections , the usefulness of the bombas was greatly reduced . The British bombe , the main tool that would be used to break Enigma messages during World War II , would be named after , and likely inspired by , the Polish bomba , though the cryptologic methods embodied in the two machines were different . 
 Around the same time as Rejewski 's bomba , a manual method was invented by Henryk Zygalski , that of " perforated sheets " ( " Zygalski sheets " ) , which was independent of the number of plugboard connections . Rejewski describes the construction of the Zygalski mechanism and its manipulation : 
 Fairly thick paper sheets , lettered " a " through " z " , were prepared for all twenty @-@ six possible positions of rotor L [ the left @-@ hand Enigma rotor ] and a square was drawn on each sheet , divided into 51 by 51 smaller squares . The sides , top , and bottom of each large square ( it could as well be a rectangle ) were lettered " a " through " z " and then again " a " through " y " . This was , as it were , a system of coordinates in which the <unk> and ordinates marked successive possible positions of rotors M [ the middle Enigma rotor ] and N [ the right @-@ hand Enigma rotor ] , and each little square marked permutations , with or without constant points , corresponding to those positions . Cases with constant points were perforated . 
 [ E ] ach constant point had to be perforated as many as four times . [ ... ] When the sheets were superposed and moved in the proper sequence and the proper manner with respect to each other , in accordance with a [ precisely ] defined program , the number of visible apertures gradually decreased . And , if a sufficient quantity of data was available , there finally remained a single aperture , probably corresponding to the right case , that is , to the solution . From the position of the aperture one could calculate the order of the rotors , the setting of their rings , and , by comparing the letters of the cipher keys with the letters in the machine , likewise permutation S ; in other words , the entire cipher key . 
 However , application of both the bomba and Zygalski sheets was complicated by yet another change to the Enigma machine on 15 December 1938 . The Germans had supplied Enigma operators with an additional two rotors to supplement the original three , and this increased the complexity of decryption tenfold . Building ten times as many bombas ( 60 would now be needed ) was beyond the Cipher Bureau 's ability — that many bombas would have cost fifteen times its entire annual equipment budget . 
 Two and a half weeks later , effective 1 January 1939 , the Germans increased the number of plug connections to 7 – 10 , which , writes Rejewski , " to a great degree , decreased the usefulness of the bombs . " Zygalski 's perforated ( " Zygalski " ) sheets , writes Rejewski , " like the card @-@ catalog method , was independent of the number of plug connections . But the manufacture of these sheets , [ ... ] in our [ ... ] circumstances , was very time @-@ consuming , so that by 15 December 1938 , only one @-@ third of the whole job had been done . [ T ] he Germans ' [ introduction of rotors ] IV and V [ ... ] increased the labor of making the sheets tenfold [ since 60 , or ten times as many , sets of sheets were now needed ] , considerably exceeding our [ ... ] capacities . " 
 = = = Allies informed = = = 
 As it became clear that war was imminent and that Polish financial resources were insufficient to keep pace with the evolution of Enigma encryption ( e.g. , due to the prohibitive expense of an additional 54 bombas and due to the Poles ' difficulty in producing in timely fashion the full 60 series of 26 " Zygalski sheets " ) , the Polish General Staff and government decided to initiate their Western allies into the secrets of Enigma decryption . The Polish methods were revealed to French and British intelligence representatives in a meeting at Pyry , south of Warsaw , on 25 July 1939 . France was represented by Gustave Bertrand and Air Force cryptologist Captain Henri Braquenié ; Britain , by Government Code and Cypher School chief Alastair Denniston , veteran cryptologist Alfred Dillwyn Knox , and Commander Humphrey <unk> , head of the section that had developed and controlled the Royal Navy 's intercept and direction @-@ finding stations . The Polish hosts included Cipher Bureau chief Gwido Langer , the Bureau 's German @-@ Section chief Maksymilian Ciężki , the Bureau 's General @-@ Staff @-@ Intelligence supervisor Stefan Mayer , and the three cryptologists Rejewski , Różycki and Zygalski . 
 The Poles ' gift of Enigma decryption to their Western allies , five weeks before the outbreak of World War II , came not a moment too soon . Knowledge that the cipher was <unk> was a morale boost to Allied cryptologists . The British were able to manufacture at least two complete sets of perforated sheets — they sent one to PC Bruno , outside Paris , in mid @-@ December 1939 — and began reading Enigma within months of the outbreak of war . 
 Without the Polish assistance , British cryptologists would , at the very least , have been considerably delayed in reading Enigma . Hugh Sebag @-@ Montefiore concludes that substantial breaks into German Army and Air Force Enigma ciphers by the British would have occurred only after November 1941 at the earliest , after an Enigma machine and key lists had been captured , and similarly into Naval Enigma only after late 1942 . 
 Intelligence gained from solving high @-@ level German ciphers — intelligence codenamed Ultra by the British and Americans — came chiefly from Enigma decrypts . While the exact contribution of Ultra intelligence to Allied victory is disputed , Kozaczuk and <unk> note that " it is widely believed that Ultra saved the world at least two years of war and possibly prevented Hitler from winning . " The English historian Sir Harry Hinsley , who worked at Bletchley Park , similarly assessed it as having " shortened the war by not less than two years and probably by four years " . The availability of Ultra was due to the earlier Polish breaking of Enigma ; Gordon Welchman , head of Bletchley Park 's Hut 6 ( which solved German Army and Air Force Enigma ciphers ) , writes : " Hut 6 Ultra would never have gotten off the ground if we had not learned from the Poles , in the nick of time , the details both of the German military version of the commercial Enigma machine , and of the operating procedures that were in use . " 
 = = In France and Britain = = 
 = = = PC Bruno = = = 
 On 5 September 1939 the Cipher Bureau began preparations to evacuate key personnel and equipment from Warsaw . Soon a special evacuation train , the Echelon F , transported them eastward , then south . By the time the Cipher Bureau was ordered to cross the border into allied Romania on 17 September , they had destroyed all sensitive documents and equipment and were down to a single very crowded truck . The vehicle was confiscated at the border by a Romanian officer , who separated the military from the civilian personnel . Taking advantage of the confusion , the three mathematicians ignored the Romanian 's instructions . They anticipated that in an internment camp they might be identified by the Romanian security police , in which the German Abwehr and SD had informers . The mathematicians went to the nearest railroad station , exchanged money , bought tickets , and boarded the first train headed south . After a dozen or so hours , they reached Bucharest , at the other end of Romania . There they went to the British embassy . Told by the British to " come back in a few days " , they next tried the French embassy , introducing themselves as " friends of Bolek " ( Bertrand 's Polish code name ) and asking to speak with a French military officer . A French Army colonel telephoned Paris and then issued instructions for the three Poles to be assisted in evacuating to Paris . 
 On 20 October 1939 the three Polish cryptologists resumed work on German ciphers at a joint French – Polish – Spanish radio @-@ intelligence unit stationed at Gretz @-@ <unk> , forty kilometers northeast of Paris , and housed in the Château de <unk> ( code @-@ named PC Bruno ) . 
 As late as 3 – 7 December 1939 , when Lt. Col. Langer and French Air Force Capt. Henri Braquenié visited London and Bletchley Park , the British asked that the Polish cryptologists be made available to them in Britain . Langer , however , took the position that they must remain where the Polish Army in exile was forming — on French soil . 
 On 17 January 1940 the Poles found the first Enigma key to be solved in France , one for 28 October 1939 . The PC Bruno staff collaborated by teleprinter with counterparts at Bletchley Park in England . For their mutual communications security , the Polish , French , and British cryptologic agencies used the Enigma machine itself . Bruno closed its Enigma @-@ encrypted messages to Britain with an ironic " Heil Hitler ! " 
 In the first months of 1940 , Alan Turing — principal designer of the British cryptological Bombe , elaborated from the Polish bomba — would visit Bruno to confer about Enigma decryption with the three Polish cryptologists . 
 On 24 June 1940 , after Germany 's victory in the Battle of France , Gustave Bertrand flew Bruno 's international personnel — including fifteen Poles , and seven Spaniards who worked on Italian ciphers — in three planes to Algeria . 
 = = = Cadix = = = 
 Some three months later , in September 1940 , they returned to work covertly in unoccupied southern , Vichy France . Rejewski 's cover was as Pierre <unk> , a lycée professor from Nantes . A radio @-@ intelligence station was set up at the Château des <unk> , code @-@ named Cadix , near Uzès . Cadix began operations on 1 October . Rejewski and his colleagues solved German telegraph ciphers , and also the Swiss version of the Enigma machine ( which had no plugboard ) . Rejewski may have had little or no involvement in working on German Enigma at Cadix . 
 In early July 1941 , Rejewski and Zygalski were asked to try solving messages enciphered on the secret Polish <unk> cipher machine , which was used for secure communications between Cadix and the Polish General Staff in London . <unk> was a rotor machine based on the same cryptographic principle as Enigma , yet had never been subjected to rigorous security analysis . The two cryptologists created consternation by breaking the first message within a couple of hours ; further messages were solved in a similar way . 
 The youngest of the three Polish mathematicians who had worked together since 1929 — Jerzy Różycki — died in the sinking of a French passenger ship on 9 January 1942 , as he was returning to Cadix from a stint in Algeria . By summer 1942 work at Cadix was becoming dangerous , and plans for evacuation were drawn up . Vichy France was liable to be occupied by German troops , and Cadix 's radio transmissions were increasingly at risk of detection by the German <unk> , a unit tasked with locating enemy radio transmitters . Indeed , on 6 November a pickup truck equipped with a circular antenna arrived at the gate of the Château des <unk> where the cryptologists were operating . The visitors , however , did not enter , and merely investigated nearby farms , badly frightening their occupants . Nonetheless , at Bertrand 's suggestion French intelligence ordered the evacuation of Cadix . The order was carried out on 9 November , the day after the Allied " Operation Torch " landings in North Africa . Three days later , on 12 November , the Germans occupied the chateau . 
 = = = Escaping France = = = 
 The Poles were split into groups of two and three . On 11 November 1942 Rejewski and Zygalski were sent to Nice , in the Italian @-@ occupied zone . After coming under suspicion there , they had to flee again , moving or hiding constantly . Their trek took them to Cannes , Antibes , back to Nice , then on to Marseilles , Toulouse , Narbonne , Perpignan , and Ax @-@ les @-@ Thermes , near the Spanish border . On 29 January 1943 , accompanied by a local guide , Rejewski , and Zygalski , bound for Spain , began a climb over the Pyrenees , avoiding German and Vichy patrols . Near midnight , close to the Spanish border , the guide pulled out a pistol and demanded that they hand over their remaining money . 
 After being robbed , Rejewski and Zygalski succeeded in reaching the Spanish side of the border , only to be arrested within hours by security police . They were sent first to a prison in La Seu d 'Urgell , then on 24 March transferred to a prison at <unk> . On 4 May 1943 , after having spent over three months in Spanish prisons , on intervention by the Polish Red Cross the pair were released and sent to Madrid . Leaving there on 21 July , they made it to Portugal ; from there , aboard HMS Scottish , to Gibraltar ; and then by air to RAF Hendon in north London , arriving on 3 August 1943 . 
 = = = Britain = = = 
 Rejewski and Zygalski were inducted as privates into the Polish Armed Forces on 16 August 1943 and were posted to a Polish Army facility in Boxmoor , cracking German SS and SD hand ciphers . The ciphers were usually based on the <unk> ( " double Playfair " ) system , which the two cryptologists had already worked on in France . British cryptologist Alan <unk> suggests that " Setting them to work on the <unk> system was like using racehorses to pull wagons . " On 10 October 1943 , Rejewski and Zygalski were commissioned second lieutenants ; on 1 January 1945 Rejewski , and presumably also Zygalski , were promoted to lieutenant . When Gustave Bertrand fled to England in June 1944 , he and his wife were provided with a house in Boxmoor , a short walk from the Polish radio station and cryptology office , where it seems likely that his collaboration with Rejewski and Zygalski continued . 
 Enigma decryption , however , had become an exclusively British and American domain ; the Polish mathematicians who had laid the foundations for Allied Enigma decryption were now excluded from making further contributions in this area . By that time , at Bletchley Park , " very few even knew about the Polish contribution " because of the strict secrecy and the " need @-@ to @-@ know " principle . 
 = = Back in Poland = = 
 After the Germans suppressed the 1944 Warsaw Uprising , they sent Rejewski 's wife and children west , along with other Warsaw survivors ; the family eventually found refuge with her parents in Bydgoszcz . Rejewski was discharged from the Polish Army in Britain on 15 November 1946 . Six days later , he returned to Poland to be reunited with his wife and family . On his return , he was urged by his old Poznań University professor , Zdzisław Krygowski , to take a university mathematics post at Poznań or Szczecin , in western Poland . Rejewski could have looked forward to rapid advancement because of personnel shortages as a result of the war . However , he was still recovering from rheumatism , which he had contracted in the dank Spanish prisons . Soon after his return to Poland , in the summer of 1947 , his 11 @-@ year @-@ old son Andrzej died of polio after only five days ' illness . After his son 's death , Rejewski did not want to part , even briefly , with his wife and daughter , so they lived in Bydgoszcz with his in @-@ laws . Rejewski took a position in Bydgoszcz as director of the sales department at a cable @-@ manufacturing company , <unk> Polski ( Polish Cable ) . 
 Between 1949 and 1958 Rejewski was repeatedly investigated by the Polish Office of Public Security , who suspected he was a former member of the Polish Armed Forces in the West . He retired in 1967 , and moved with his family back to Warsaw in 1969 , to an apartment he had acquired 30 years earlier with financial help from his father @-@ in @-@ law . 
 Rejewski had written a " Report of <unk> Work on the German Enigma Machine Cipher " in 1942 . Before his 1967 retirement , he began writing his " Memoirs of My Work in the Cipher Bureau of Section II of the [ Polish ] General Staff " , which were purchased by the Polish Military Historical Institute , in Warsaw . Rejewski had often wondered what use Alan Turing ( who in early 1940 had visited the Polish cryptologists at PC Bruno outside Paris ) and the British at Bletchley Park had ultimately made of the Polish discoveries and inventions . For nearly three decades after the war , little was publicly known due to a ban imposed in 1945 by British Prime Minister Winston Churchill . In a 1967 book Władysław Kozaczuk , associated with the Military Historical Institute , disclosed Poland 's breaking of the German Enigma ciphers . 
 Until 1974 , the scant information published concerning Enigma decryption attracted little attention . Ladislas Farago 's 1971 best @-@ seller The Game of the Foxes presented a garbled account of Ultra 's origins : " Commander Denniston went clandestinely to a secluded Polish castle [ sic ] on the eve of the war [ to pick up an Enigma , ' the Wehrmacht 's top system ' during World War II ] . Dilly Knox later solved its keying [ sic ] ... " Still , this was marginally closer to the truth than many British and American best @-@ seller accounts that would follow after 1974 . Their authors were at a disadvantage : they did not know that the founder of Enigma decryption , Rejewski , was still alive and alert , and that it was reckless to fabricate stories out of whole cloth . 
 With Gustave Bertrand 's 1973 publication of his Enigma , substantial information about the origins of Ultra began to seep out ; and with F. W. Winterbotham 's 1974 best @-@ seller , The Ultra Secret , the dam began to burst . Still , many aspiring authors were not averse to filling gaps in their information with whole @-@ cloth fabrications . Rejewski fought a gallant ( if , into the 21st century , not entirely successful ) fight to get the truth before the public . He published a number of papers on his cryptologic work and contributed generously to articles , books , and television programs . He was interviewed by scholars , journalists , and television crews from Poland , East Germany , the United States , Britain , Sweden , Belgium , the Soviet Union , Yugoslavia , and Brazil . 
 Rejewski maintained a lively correspondence with his wartime French host , General Gustave Bertrand , and at the General 's bidding he began translating Bertrand 's Enigma into Polish . In 1976 , at the request of the Józef Piłsudski Institute of America , Rejewski broke enciphered correspondence of Józef Piłsudski and his fellow Polish Socialist conspirators from 1904 . On 12 August 1978 he received from a grateful Polish people the Officer 's Cross of the Order of Polonia Restituta . 
 Rejewski , who had been suffering from heart disease , died of a heart attack on 13 February 1980 , aged 74 , after returning home from a shopping trip . He was buried with military honors at Warsaw 's Powązki Military Cemetery . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 On 21 July 2000 , Poland 's President Aleksander Kwaśniewski posthumously awarded Poland 's highest civilian decoration , the Grand Cross of the Order of Polonia Restituta , to Marian Rejewski and Henryk Zygalski . Rejewski 's daughter , Janina <unk> , also received the War Medal 1939 – 1945 on his behalf , from the British Chief of the Defence Staff in July 2005 . On 1 August 2012 , Marian Rejewski posthumously received the Knowlton Award of the U.S. Military Intelligence Corps Association ; his daughter Janina accepted the award at his home town , Bydgoszcz , on 4 September 2012 . Rejewski had been nominated for the award by NATO Allied Command Counterintelligence . 
 On 5 August 2014 , the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE ) honored Rejewski , Różycki , and Zygalski with its prestigious Milestone award , which recognizes achievements that have changed the world . 
 A three @-@ sided bronze monument was dedicated in 2007 in front of Poznań Castle . Each side bears the name of one of the three Polish mathematicians who broke the Enigma cipher . 
 Rejewski and colleagues were the heroes of <unk> Enigmy ( The Enigma Secret ) , a thriller movie about the Poles ' solution of the German Enigma cipher . Late 1980 also saw a Polish TV series with a similar theme , <unk> Enigmy ( " The Secrets of Enigma " ) . 
 = Wellington R. Burt = 
 Wellington R. Burt ( August 26 , 1831 – March 2 , 1919 ) was a wealthy lumber baron from Saginaw , Michigan . At the time of his death , his wealth was estimated to be between $ 40 and $ 90 million . For a time in the early 1900s , Burt ranked as one of the eight wealthiest men in America . He was best known for his lumber mills and timber holdings , but was also involved in iron mining , railroads , salt mines and finances . Burt was a politician , holding the offices of Mayor of East Saginaw ( 1867 – 68 ) and member of the Michigan Senate ( 1893 – 94 ) . In his final years , he lived alone in a mansion with his servants . Estranged from friends and family and nicknamed " The Lone Pine of Michigan " , he officially died of " senility " at age 87 . 
 Burt had an unusual will , " as bizarre but as finely @-@ wrought as any in U.S. court annals " . It contained a " spite clause " conceived by Burt to avenge a family feud . It specified to wait 21 years after his children and grandchildren were dead before the bulk of the fortune could go to any descendants , in effect alienating his children and grandchildren from the estate , beyond some small annuities . The conditions of the will were met in 2010 after the 1989 death of his last grandchild . In May 2011 , twelve of Burt 's descendants finally received the estate , worth about $ 100 million . 
 Burt 's legacy today is mixed , seen as a vindictive old man , a generous benefactor of the city of Saginaw and a famously wealthy American entrepreneur . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Burt was born on August 26 , 1831 in the town of Pike , near Rochester , New York , the ninth of thirteen siblings and the eldest son . His father was Luther Burt and his mother Florinda Horton Burt . The <unk> were poor farmers who came from an old New England line , tracing back to Henry Burt , who had settled from Scotland in 1640 . The Burt lineage included William Austin Burt ( 1792 – 1858 ) , who was a notable Michigan surveyor described as " the father of the typewriter " . 
 At the age of seven , he moved with his parents to Jackson County , Michigan , where he worked on the family farm . Michigan was then only a few years old and Burt 's subsequent life and career as a first generation Michigander was often identified with the growth and progress of the new state . In 1843 , when Wellington was 12 , his father Luther died . Under the guidance of his mother , he became the farm 's manager and " entered into the struggle incident to pioneer life " . He attended two years of college one at Albion College and one at Michigan Central College ( now Hillsdale College ) . At the age of 22 , he decided to see the world and obtained work as a sailor abroad on freighters in Australia , Central and South America , and New Zealand . He would recall Australia as his favorite foreign country . 
 When he returned home in 1857 at age 26 , he found a burgeoning timber industry in Michigan , the " Green Gold Rush " . He took a job earning $ 13 a month at the Pine River lumber camp near St. Louis , Michigan and within a month was promoted to camp foreman with double wages . He was " tall , strong and knew how to give orders " . Using savings , he started his own lumber company in 1858 , buying 300 acres in Gratiot County . In 1867 , he founded the community of Melbourne on the Saginaw River near Zilwaukee , Michigan , named after his favorite city in Australia . By 1870 , Melbourne was among the largest and most complete mills in the world , but in 1876 , it was destroyed by a fire of unknown origin . Many at the time thought this would be the end of Burt 's fortunes , but he also owned timber land elsewhere , including in St. Louis County , Minnesota , which turned out to be favourable for him , as it was in the heart of the immensely valuable Mesabi iron range . In addition to his various timber and iron mine holdings , Burt made his fortune in the salt industry , in railroads and in foreign bonds and banking investments . He invested in the former CS & M Railroad ( running between Durand and Bay City ) and for a time , owned most of the Ann Arbor Railroad system . He also bought railways in Russia and China . He had plans to build a sugar beet factory in Owosso , Michigan , but the idea failed to come to fruition . 
 Burt 's political career included time as mayor of East Saginaw in 1867 and 1868 , and as unsuccessful Fusion candidate for the position of Governor of Michigan in 1888 . He was elected member of the Michigan State Senate 22nd District for 1893 – 94 again under the Fusion ticket , and as Democratic candidate for U.S. Representative from Michigan 8th District in 1900 . " In the capitol at Lansing " , one Saginaw News account read , " Sen. Burt was more conspicuous for his political naiveté than for any distinguished act of statesmanship . They said he tried hard , but to him , politics were strange shenanigans . You smiled and joked when you meant to kick a man ’ s shins . " 
 Later in his life , Burt lived alone in a 3 @-@ story brick mansion at Cherry St. and E. <unk> Ave . ( it was demolished in 1959 and today is a parking lot ) . With failing eyesight and hearing he was taken care of by servants . Due to his isolation from his family and social circles in later years , he was known as " The Lone Pine of Michigan " . He had radical stomach surgery at the age of 80 . His death certificate lists his cause of death as " senility " . He is buried in Forest Lawn Cemetery , Saginaw County Michigan , USA – Plot : Section 8 , Plot 1 . 
 Burt was married twice and had seven children , 3 daughters from the first wife and 1 daughter and 3 younger sons from the second wife . His first wife was Sarah Torrance ( 1833 – 1867 ) , whom he married May 22 , 1860 ; his second was Armine Mary Richardson ( 1839 – 1904 ) , whom he married February 10 , 1869 . 
 = = Will = = 
 Burt had one of the more bizarre wills in American legal history . It contained a " spite clause " which specified to wait until his children and grandchildren were dead before the estate could be dispersed to any descendants yet unborn in Burt 's lifetime . However , his children did receive relatively small annuities of $ 1 @,@ 000 to $ 5 @,@ 000 each , except for one favorite son who received $ 30 @,@ 000 annually , and one <unk> daughter who got nothing . His secretary received $ 4 @,@ 000 annually , more than most of his children , while a cook , housekeeper , coachman and chauffeur each received $ 1 @,@ 000 annually . 
 Burt 's will stipulated the majority of the estate to be held in a trust until " 21 years after [ the death of ] my last surviving grandchild [ who was alive ] at the time of my death . " This condition was met in 2010 , 21 years after the November 1989 death of Burt 's last grandchild , Marion <unk> . In May 2011 , after time for legal negotiations , the fortune was finally distributed to his descendants . The estate was estimated in total at $ 100 million to $ 110 million . It was split between twelve descendants , weighted based on age seniority . They included three great @-@ grandchildren ; seven great @-@ great grandchildren ; and two great @-@ great @-@ great grandchildren – the youngest beneficiary was 19 and the oldest 94 . The biggest beneficiary received between $ 14 @.@ 5 to $ 16 million , with the smallest beneficiary between $ 2 @.@ 6 to $ 2 @.@ 9 million . In the end thirty of Burt 's descendants , including children and grandchildren , missed out on the inheritance because they were ineligible or died before the will 's conditions were met . 
 It is not entirely clear why Burt made such an unusual will , but newspaper records suggest family feuds were likely at the core of his decision . The will was challenged by his children after he died . A legal hole was found in 1920 because part of the estate was composed of iron leases in Minnesota , and Minnesota had a law against trusts of such long standing . This portion of the estate , amounting to $ 5 million , was distributed to Burt 's children and grandchildren ( a son , three daughters and four granddaughters ) . In 1961 , an additional $ 720 @,@ 000 was taken from the trust in settlement of a suit filed by nine heirs and the estates of three other descendants . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Burt 's legacy is mixed . On the one hand he was once a famous and successful business man who contributed to the community in many ways , and was generally well regarded in his lifetime . On the other hand he is best known today for his bizarre will , giving him the reputation of a vindictive old man . Saginaw historian Thomas B. Mudd said " For awhile [ sic ] , I took Wellington R. Burt as a selfish rich guy , but the picture that emerges is of someone who also threw himself into the community " . 
 Burt could be tough , and not just with his children . Burt had originally devised millions in his will to the city , but retracted it when Saginaw officials increased his South Jefferson property assessment from $ 400 @,@ 000 to $ 1 million four years before he died in 1919 . One well known story recounts how Burt ordered some horses at the lumber mill to be starved and worked to death , " Mr. <unk> , the horses are too fat " , Burt reportedly said . " Trim them down , sir , and when the logs are out , dispose of them . " Mr. <unk> refused to starve and kill the horses so Burt fired him , and found someone who would carry it out . 
 Burt was generous in life and honored after death . His charitable giving to Saginaw during his lifetime was extensive , including funding the City Auditorium , the Burt Manual Training School , a women ’ s hospital , a Salvation Army and a YWCA that later became Jacobson ’ s . The town of Burt , Michigan is named for him , as is Burt Street in Saginaw , which borders the same block as his former home . The Burt Opera House in Taymouth Township carries his name and is still in use today as a community center . Trips on the paddle steamer Wellington R. Burt were once a popular day excursion along the Saginaw River ( 1876 – 1891 ) . Burt was inducted into the Saginaw Hall of Fame in 1967 . 
 = Alexandre Banza = 
 Lieutenant Colonel Alexandre Banza ( 1932 – 12 April 1969 ) was a military officer and politician in the Central African Republic . Born in Carnot , Ubangi @-@ Shari , Banza served with the French Army during the First Indochina War before joining the Central African Republic armed forces . As commander of the Camp Kassaï military base in 1965 , Banza helped Jean @-@ Bédel Bokassa overthrow the government of President David Dacko . Bokassa rewarded Banza by appointing him as minister of state and minister of finance in the new government . Banza quickly established the new regime 's reputation abroad and forged diplomatic relations with other countries . In 1967 , Bokassa and his protégé had a major argument over the president 's extravagances . In April 1968 , Bokassa removed Banza as minister of finance . Recognizing Bokassa 's attempts to undermine him , Banza made a number of remarks highly critical of the president 's handling of the government . Bokassa responded by abolishing the minister of state position . 
 Banza soon decided to stage a coup d 'état . He confided in a few military officers , who he hoped would support his attempt to gain power . One of his confidants , Jean @-@ Claude Mandaba , contacted the president and informed him of the date of the coup , 9 April 1969 . Hours before he was going to execute his bid for power , Banza was ambushed by Mandaba and taken directly to Bokassa . Bokassa nearly beat Banza to death before Mandaba suggested that Banza be put on trial for appearance 's sake . On 12 April , Banza presented his case to a military tribunal , which quickly sentenced him to death by firing squad . He was reportedly taken to an open field , where he was executed and buried in an unmarked grave . Alternate circumstances of Banza 's death have been reported in Time and Le Monde . In the aftermath of the failed coup , Banza 's family , mistress and close associates were all arrested and either sent to jail or deported . With Banza eliminated , Bokassa spent extravagantly and surrounded himself with <unk> . 
 = = Early life and military career = = 
 Banza was born , the first of three sons , in the heart of <unk> territory . In his twenties , he had served with the French army in the First Indochina War and had been stationed in Gabon , Morocco , Tunisia and other locations in colonial Africa . He had a similar military record to his future colleague Jean @-@ Bédel Bokassa , who had also served in the First Indochina War and had been stationed in Africa and Europe as a radio transmissions expert . Afterward , Banza returned to the Central African Republic , where he enlisted in the armed forces . Brian Titley , author of Dark Age : The Political Odyssey of Emperor Bokassa described Banza as an " intelligent , ambitious , and unscrupulous " military officer . 
 = = Role in Saint @-@ Sylvestre coup d 'état = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Central African Republic President David Dacko , Bokassa 's cousin , took over the country in 1960 , after winning a power struggle against Abel Goumba . Bokassa left the French army to join the Central African Republic army in 1962 . By 1965 , the country was in turmoil — plagued by corruption and slow economic growth , while its borders were breached by rebels from neighboring countries . Dacko obtained financial aid from the People 's Republic of China , but in spite of this support , the country 's problems persisted . Bokassa , now commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the army , made plans to take over the government ; Dacko became aware of this , and countered by forming a gendarmerie headed by police chief Jean Izamo , who quickly became Dacko 's closest adviser . 
 Tensions between Dacko and Bokassa increased . In December 1965 , Dacko approved a budget increase for Izamo 's gendarmerie , but rejected the budget proposal for Bokassa 's army . At this point , Bokassa told friends he was annoyed by Dacko 's treatment and was " going for a coup d 'état " . Dacko planned to replace Bokassa with Izamo as his personal military adviser , and wanted to promote army officers loyal to the government , while demoting Bokassa and his close associates . Bokassa realized he had to act against Dacko quickly , and worried that his 500 @-@ man army would be no match for the gendarmerie and the presidential guard . He was also concerned the French would intervene to aid Dacko , as had occurred after the 23 February 1964 coup d 'état in Gabon against President Léon M 'ba . After receiving word of the coup from the country 's military chief of staff , Albert @-@ Bernard Bongo , officials in Paris sent paratroopers to Gabon and restored M 'ba to power in a matter of hours . Banza , who was then commander of the Camp Kassaï military base in northeast Bangui , offered Bokassa his support and persuaded the still @-@ worried commander @-@ in @-@ chief to carry out the coup . He helped Bokassa lay out the plans for the coup , proposed to take place on 31 December 1965 . 
 = = = Execution of the coup = = = 
 Early in the evening of 31 December 1965 , Dacko left the Palais de la Renaissance to visit one of his minister 's plantations southwest of the capital . At 22 : 30 WAT ( UTC 21 : 30 ) , Captain Banza gave orders to his officers to begin the coup ; one of his subordinates was to subdue the security guard in the presidential palace , while the other was to take control of Radio @-@ Bangui to prevent communication between Dacko and his followers . Bokassa called Izamo at his headquarters , asking him to come to Camp de Roux to sign some papers that needed his immediate attention . Izamo , who was at a New Year 's Eve celebration with friends , reluctantly agreed and traveled in his wife 's car to the camp . Upon arrival , he was confronted by Banza and Bokassa , who informed him of the coup in progress . After announcing his refusal to support the coup , Izamo was overpowered and locked in a cellar . 
 Shortly after midnight , in the first minutes of 1 January 1966 , Bokassa and Banza organized their troops and told them of their plan to take over the government . Bokassa claimed that Dacko had resigned from the presidency and given the position to his close adviser Izamo . He then told the soldiers that they had to act now to prevent the gendarmerie from taking over the Central African Republic army . He then asked the soldiers if they would support his course of action ; the men who refused were thrown in jail . At 00 : 30 WAT , Banza , Bokassa and their supporters left Camp de Roux to take over the capital . They encountered little resistance and were able to take Bangui in a matter of hours . Bokassa and Banza then rushed to the Palais de la Renaissance , where they tried to arrest Dacko , who was not there . Bokassa began to panic , as he believed the president had been warned of the coup in advance , and immediately ordered his soldiers to search for Dacko in the countryside until he was found . 
 Dacko was not aware of the events taking place in the capital . After leaving his minister 's plantation near midnight , he headed to Simon Samba 's house to ask the Aka <unk> leader to conduct a year @-@ end ritual . After an hour at Samba 's house , he was informed of the coup in Bangui . He was arrested by a few of Bokassa 's men as he entered <unk> Junction , on the western border of the capital . Dacko was escorted to the presidential palace , where Bokassa hugged the president and told him , " I tried to warn you — but now it 's too late " . President Dacko was then taken to Ngaragba Prison in east Bangui at around 02 : 00 WAT . In a move that he thought would boost his popularity in the country , Bokassa ordered prison director Otto Sacher to release all prisoners in the jail . Bokassa then took Dacko to Camp Kassaï at 03 : 20 WAT , where the president was forced by Banza to resign from office . Banza wanted to kill Dacko , but Bokassa would not allow it , believing that Dacko had not yet outlived his usefulness . Later , Bokassa 's officers announced on Radio @-@ Bangui that the Dacko government had been toppled and Bokassa had taken over control . Meanwhile , Banza took over administrative centers , where politicians , diplomats and other high @-@ level officials were celebrating the coming of the New Year . 
 = = Minister in the Bokassa government = = 
 Banza was appointed minister of finance and minister of state in the new government . The regime first secured diplomatic recognition from President François Tombalbaye of neighboring Chad , whom Bokassa met in <unk> , <unk> . After Bokassa reciprocated by meeting Tombalbaye on 2 April 1966 along the southern border of Chad at Fort Archambault , the two decided to help one another if either was in danger of losing power . Soon after , other African countries began to diplomatically recognize the new government . At first , the French government was reluctant to support the Bokassa regime , so Banza went to Paris to meet with French officials to convince them that the coup was necessary to save the country from turmoil . Bokassa met with Prime Minister Georges Pompidou on 7 July 1966 , but the French remained noncommittal in offering their support . After Bokassa threatened to withdraw from the franc monetary zone , French President Charles de Gaulle decided to make an official visit to the Central African Republic on 17 November 1966 . To the new government , this visit meant that the French had accepted the new changes in the country . 
 As a minister of finance , Banza directed much of his energy and time into lifting the country out of bankruptcy . Banza was also successful in his efforts to build the government 's reputation abroad , all the while establishing himself as a respected and well @-@ liked leader . Many believed that the natural @-@ born leader would not remain as Bokassa 's right @-@ hand man for much longer . After Banza was promoted from Captain to Lieutenant Colonel in 1965 , Bokassa realized that his greatest political threat wasn 't from the remaining group of Dacko supporters , but from Banza himself . 
 Two years later , the two had a major argument over the country 's budget , as Banza adamantly opposed Bokassa 's extravagant spending . Bokassa moved to Camp de Roux , where he felt he could safely run the government without having to worry about Banza 's thirst for power . In the meantime , Banza tried to obtain a support base within the army , spending much of his time in the company of soldiers . Bokassa recognized what his minister was doing , so he sent military units most sympathetic to Banza to the country 's border and brought his own army supporters as close to the capital as possible . In September 1967 , he took a special trip to Paris , where he asked for protection from French troops . Two months later , the government deployed 80 paratroopers to Bangui . 
 On 13 April 1968 , in another one of his frequent cabinet reshuffles , Bokassa demoted Banza to minister of health , but let him remain in his position as minister of state . Cognizant of the president 's intentions , Banza increased his vocalization of dissenting political views . A year later , after Banza made a number of remarks highly critical of Bokassa and his management of the economy , the president , perceiving an immediate threat to his power , removed him as his minister of state . 
 = = = 1969 coup plot = = = 
 Banza revealed his intention to stage a coup to Lieutenant Jean @-@ Claude Mandaba , the commanding officer of Camp Kassaï , who he looked to for support . Mandaba went along with the plan , but his allegiance remained with Bokassa . When Banza contacted his co @-@ conspirators on 8 April 1969 , informing them that they would execute the coup the following day , Mandaba immediately phoned Bokassa and informed him of the plan . When Banza entered Camp Kassaï on 9 April 1969 , he was ambushed by Mandaba and his soldiers . The men had to break Banza 's arms before they could overpower and throw him into the trunk of a Mercedes and take him directly to Bokassa . At his house in <unk> , Bokassa beat Banza nearly to death before Mandaba suggested that Banza be put on trial for appearance 's sake . 
 On 12 April , Banza presented his case before a military tribunal at Camp de Roux , where he admitted to his plan , but stated that he had not planned to kill Bokassa . He was sentenced to death by firing squad , taken to an open field behind Camp Kassaï , executed and buried in an unmarked grave . The circumstances of Banza 's death have been disputed . The American newsmagazine , Time , reported that Banza " was dragged before a Cabinet meeting where Bokassa slashed him with a razor . Guards then beat Banza until his back was broken , dragged him through the streets of Bangui and finally shot him . " The French daily evening newspaper Le Monde reported that Banza was killed in circumstances " so revolting that it still makes one 's flesh creep " : 
 Two versions concerning the end circumstances of his death differ on one minor detail . Did Bokassa tie him to a pillar before personally carving him with a knife that he had previously used for stirring his coffee in the gold @-@ and @-@ midnight blue Sèvres coffee set , or was the murder committed on the cabinet table with the help of other persons ? Late that afternoon , soldiers dragged a still identifiable corpse , with the spinal column smashed , from barrack to barrack to serve as an example . 
 = = Aftermath of coup = = 
 A few days later , Bokassa had Banza 's wife and their nine children arrested and deported to Berbérati and then <unk> . They were released on 6 May 1971 . Banza 's mistress , Julienne Kombo , who entered the Palais de la Renaissance crying hysterically after her lover 's death , was arrested and jailed until 24 June 1972 . Banza 's father was sent to jail , where he died of hunger and exhaustion on 24 April 1970 . Banza 's two younger brothers , <unk> and <unk> , were dismissed from the gendarmerie in July and sent to Ngaragba Prison . In August 1971 , they were taken from the prison , never to be seen again . 
 Bokassa also hunted down Banza 's close associates , such as Joseph <unk> , Faustin Marigot and <unk> Gbaguili . <unk> and Marigot died in prison in June 1969 and April 1971 , respectively . With the exception of Gbaguili , who remained in prison until the downfall of the Bokassa regime on 20 September 1979 , the other associates were released months after their arrest . Gbaguili served as a witness in Bokassa 's criminal trials for treason , murder , cannibalism and embezzlement during the 1980s , explaining in detail the numerous crimes and human rights violations the former dictator had completed . 
 By eliminating his dangerous rival , Bokassa demonstrated his ability to deal ruthlessly with dissidents and political opponents . He started to rule more arbitrarily after the Banza affair , giving himself control of various ministerial positions and the army . In one instance , he promoted Second Lieutenant François Bozizé , the future president of the Central African Republic , to General after he beat a Frenchman who showed disrespect for the president . According to Brian Titley , author of Dark Age : The Political Odyssey of Emperor Bokassa , he surrounded himself with " sycophants , who were all too willing to nurture his growing delusions of grandeur " ; with no one to stop him , he also spent money with reckless abandon . 
 = Maximum sustained wind = 
 The maximum sustained wind associated with a tropical cyclone is a common indicator of the intensity of the storm . Within a mature tropical cyclone , it is found within the eyewall at a distance defined as the radius of maximum wind , or RMW . Unlike gusts , the value of these winds are determined via their sampling and averaging the sampled results over a period of time . Wind measuring has been standardized globally to reflect the winds at 10 metres ( 33 ft ) above the Earth 's surface , and the maximum sustained wind represents the highest average wind over either a one @-@ minute ( US ) or ten @-@ minute time span ( see the definition , below ) , anywhere within the tropical cyclone . Surface winds are highly variable due to friction between the atmosphere and the Earth 's surface , as well as near hills and mountains over land . 
 Over the ocean , satellite imagery determines the value of the maximum sustained winds within a tropical cyclone . Land , ship , aircraft reconnaissance observations , and radar imagery can also estimate this quantity , when available . This value helps determine damage expected from a tropical cyclone , through use of such scales as the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . 
 = = Definition = = 
 The maximum sustained wind normally occurs at a distance from the center known as the radius of maximum wind , within a mature tropical cyclone 's eyewall , before winds decrease at farther distances away from a tropical cyclone 's center . Most weather agencies use the definition for sustained winds recommended by the World Meteorological Organization ( WMO ) , which specifies measuring winds at a height of 10 metres ( 33 ft ) for 10 minutes , and then taking the average . However , the United States National Weather Service defines sustained winds within tropical cyclones by averaging winds over a period of one minute , measured at the same 10 metres ( 33 ft ) height . This is an important distinction , as the value of the highest one @-@ minute sustained wind is about 14 % greater than a ten @-@ minute sustained wind over the same period . 
 = = Determination of value = = 
 In most tropical cyclone basins , use of the satellite @-@ based Dvorak technique is the primary method used to determine a tropical cyclone 's maximum sustained winds . The extent of spiral banding and difference in temperature between the eye and eyewall is used within the technique to assign a maximum sustained wind and pressure . Central pressure values for their centers of low pressure are approximate . The intensity of example hurricanes is derived from both the time of landfall and the maximum intensity . The tracking of individual clouds on minutely satellite imagery could be used in the future in estimating surface winds speeds for tropical cyclones . 
 Ship and land observations are also used , when available . In the Atlantic as well as the Central and Eastern Pacific basins , reconnaissance aircraft are still utilized to fly through tropical cyclones to determine flight level winds , which can then be adjusted to provide a fairly reliable estimate of maximum sustained winds . A reduction of 10 percent of the winds sampled at flight level is used to estimate the maximum sustained winds near the surface , which has been determined during the past decade through the use of GPS dropwindsondes . Doppler weather radar can be used in the same manner to determine surface winds with tropical cyclones near land . 
 = = Variation = = 
 Friction between the atmosphere and the Earth 's surface causes a 20 % reduction in the wind at the surface of the Earth . Surface roughness also leads to significant variation of wind speeds . Over land , winds maximize at hill or mountain crests , while sheltering leads to lower wind speeds in valleys and lee slopes . Compared to over water , maximum sustained winds over land average 8 % lower . More specifically , over a city or rough terrain , the wind gradient effect could cause a reduction of 40 % to 50 % of the geostrophic wind speed aloft ; while over open water or ice , the reduction is between 10 % and 30 % . 
 = = Relationship to tropical cyclone strength scales = = 
 In most basins , maximum sustained winds are used to define their category . In the Atlantic and northeast Pacific oceans , the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale is used . This scale can be used to determine possible storm surge and damage impact on land . In most basins , the category of the tropical cyclone ( for example , tropical depression , tropical storm , hurricane / typhoon , super typhoon , depression , deep depression , intense tropical cyclone ) is determined from the cyclone 's maximum sustained wind . Only in Australia is this quantity not used to define the tropical cyclone 's category ; in their basin , wind gusts are used . 
 = The Blunder Years = 
 " The Blunder Years " is the fifth episode of The Simpsons ’ thirteenth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 9 , 2001 . The episode sees Homer , after being hypnotized by the hypnotist Mesmerino while having dinner at the restaurant Pimento Grove , reminded by a repressed traumatic experience from his childhood . The Simpsons set out to find the corpse that triggered Homer 's psychological trauma , which evolves into a murder mystery later in the episode . 
 The episode was written by Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham while Steven Dean Moore served as the director . The original idea for the episode came from current show runner Al Jean , which involved the murder mystery in the episode . The writers then incorporated Homer 's flashbacks , at which point the episode was titled " The Blunder Years " , a parody on the television show The Wonder Years . Following the release of The Simpsons ' thirteenth season on DVD and Blu @-@ ray , the episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After tricking his wife Marge into believing that the model for the Burly paper towel corporation Chad Sexington would have dinner with the Simpsons , Homer takes the family to the Pimento Grove to watch live performers as compensation . One of the acts is a hypnotist called Mesmerino . Homer volunteers , and Mesmerino hypnotizes him into thinking he is twelve years old again . As Homer starts to reminisce , he starts screaming incessantly all through the night . Mesmerino attempts to hypnotize him back into reality , but Homer still keeps on screaming . The next day , Homer 's co @-@ workers Lenny and Carl bring him home early from work , still screaming . They finally manage to calm him down with some Yaqui tea . He starts to recall the events leading up to the scream @-@ inducing incident . In a flashback , Homer , Lenny , and Carl are hiking in the woods and are confronted by a young Fat Tony , but they are saved by a young Moe . 
 Upon noticing that his bar was empty , the present @-@ day Moe arrives at the Simpsons ' home . Moe remembers that while they sat by a fire , they saw a near @-@ meltdown at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant . The next day , they go to the old quarry for a swim , and Homer jumps in , only to find that there was no water but only mud . Though Homer admits that he remembers falling into the mud , he also recalls that there was no water in the quarry because something was blocking the inlet pipe . When Homer <unk> it , all the water came out and he finds a rotting corpse on top of his legs , causing him to scream incessantly . 
 Since Homer never told about his painful memory of the corpse to anyone , the Simpsons realise that it is still in the old quarry and decide to investigate . They go to the old quarry where they meet Chief Wiggum , who comes with them . Marge uses Burly paper towels to drain the water from the quarry . Then , they find the body , now a skeleton , and go into the inlet pipe to see where the body came from . They find that the pipe leads to a hatch which , in turn , leads to Mr. Burns 's office in the nuclear power plant . They confront him about the body after he accidentally says ' corpse hatch ' once they opened the hatch . Knowing that this would come , Burns confesses to them that the dead man is Smithers ' father , Waylon Smithers , Sr .. 
 However , Burns swore that he did not murder him , and to prove his point , he shows an old surveillance tape , filmed during the 1960s when Smithers ' father goes into an unstable reactor core to prevent an imminent meltdown that would destroy the city . Smithers ' father succeeds in saving the city , but he dies of radiation poisoning , leaving Burns to raise Smithers as his own son out of empathy . Burns tells the Simpsons and Wiggum that he dumped Smithers Sr. ' s body into the sewer pipe " since cover ups were all the rage back then " , and that he kept the truth from Waylon Jr. because he was an infant back then ; Smithers then enters the room , having heard the entire story . Burns apologizes to Smithers for lying to him , saying he wanted to spare him from the trauma of his father 's real death . However , Smithers admits that he is glad that his father died as a real hero rather than being killed from a tribe of savage Amazon women , which Burns told him earlier . Declaring the case of the haunted quarry solved , Homer stores the skull in his " Memories " box , despite Marge 's insistence to give it to Smithers , to which Homer responds that Smithers will just bury it again . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Blunder Years " was written by Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham and directed by Steven Dean Moore . It was first broadcast on Fox in the United States on December 9 , 2001 . Although the episode was written by Maxtone @-@ Graham , the original idea for the episode , which involved Homer finding Smithers ' father 's corpse , was conceived by writer and current show runner Al Jean . At that point , the episode was titled " Smithers ' Father 's Apparent Murder " until the writers incorporated flashbacks to Homer 's childhood that resembled the story of the film Stand By Me , based on the novella The Body by Stephen King . At this point , the writers changed the episode title to " The Blunder Years " . 
 Homer 's first flashback shows a clip of him falling down Springfield Gorge on a skateboard , a scene taken from the episode " Bart the Daredevil " . The Simpsons ' staff were concerned that this would make people think the episode was in fact a clip show , so they kept the clip short . The staff also debated how horrific Smithers ' father 's corpse would look . The first design was " more horrific " than the one seen in the episode , and it more closely resembled Smithers . The corpse seen in the episode was an altered version of the first design . The video recorded by Mr. Burns ' security camera was originally supposed to be shot in the same angle as a real security camera , but according to director Steven Dean Moore , to follow the narrative , the staff " had to lose [ the camera angle ] " . This led to some confusion , since one of the shots were from inside the core , making it look as if the security camera was actually inside it . The staff intended to cut the shot , but they later decided to keep it in ; Jean explained in the DVD audio commentary for the episode that " Nobody ever notices it " . The end of the episode originally had Chad Sexington showing up for his date with Marge , causing Homer to scream uncontrollably again ; however , it was cut in favor of Hank Azaria 's improvisation as Moe , which , according to Simpsons writer Carolyn Omine , was Azaria 's " favorite thing [ he ] had ever done " on The Simpsons . 
 American actor and director Paul Newman guest starred as himself in the episode , however he had only one line of dialogue . Newman recorded approximately five or six takes of his line over the phone from the set of a movie he was shooting at the time . According to Maxtone @-@ Graham , Newman recorded his line with no rigmarole ; " He just said , ' Sure , I 'll do it ' , and he did it instantly . " The episode also features Joe Mantegna , who plays a young Fat Tony . Welsh singer @-@ songwriter Judith Owen , wife of Simpsons ' cast member Harry Shearer , also makes an appearance in the episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's title is a reference to the television show The Wonder Years . Homer 's flashbacks to his childhood were based on the plot of the film Stand By Me , which in turn is based on Stephen King 's novella The Body . However , the scenes in the quarry were based on the coming of age film Breaking Away , directed by Peter Yates . Burly , the brand of paper towels featured in the episode , is based on the real brand Brawny Paper Towels . The model for Burly paper towels , called Chad Sexington , was based on the Brawny paper towels ' logo ; however , the logo , within " a year or two of [ the episode ] " , was changed into a more " right @-@ of @-@ center " looking brunette , according to Dean Moore . One of the walls in Pimento Grove shows photos of several characters and guest stars who have appeared on The Simpsons , including Birch Barlow , Stephen Hawking , and Ringo Starr . Mesmerino later reads a letter in a similarly to Carnac the Magnificent , played by Johnny Carson on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson . Mama Celeste also appears in the episode , when Homer fantasizes the image on the box coming to life , only for it to threaten him with a pizza cutter : " You touch @-@ a me , and I cut you ! " 
 = = Release = = 
 Following the release of the thirteenth season of The Simpsons on DVD and Blu @-@ ray , " The Blunder Years " received mixed reviews from critics . Giving the episode a positive review , Dominic von <unk> of <unk> stated that the episode was one of the season 's " comedy gems " , praising Paul Newman 's guest appearance in particular . Writing for DVD Verdict , Jennifer Malkowski gave a favorable review of the episode , giving a B rating and pointed at the scene in which " Homer says finding a corpse explains everything that 's gone wrong in his life — especially his fear of corpses " as the highlight of the episode . Colin Jacobsson of DVD Movie Guide was positive , calling the episode a " reasonably amusing spoof [ of Stand By Me ] " . He enjoyed " Marge 's lust for Burly " and " Homer 's rampaging fear " , and concluded by saying that , while nothing in the episode " dazzles " , it still " adds up to a good episode " . 
 Ron Martin of 411mania was less enthusiastic about the episode . Calling the episode a " bad parody of Stand By Me " , Martin wrote that " any moments this episode might have had are annulled by the constant annoyance of Homer screaming through the first half of the episode " . Writing for Project : Blu , Nate Boss was critical , specifically denouncing the episode 's plot as unoriginal . He concluded his review by writing " How crap is this ? I. Don 't . Know ! More crap than dinner with Chad Sexington , the model for Burly towels , that 's for sure . " 
 = Ron Hamence = 
 Ronald Arthur Hamence ( 25 November 1915 – 24 March 2010 ) was a cricketer who played for South Australia ( SA ) and Australia . A short and compact right @-@ handed batsman , Hamence excelled in getting forward to drive and had an array of attractive back foot strokes . Already the youngest Australian to play district cricket , he was also , from the death of Bill Brown in 2008 until his own death in 2010 , the oldest surviving Australian Test cricketer . 
 While Hamence only played three Test matches for his national team , he had a successful domestic career , being called South Australia 's most successful batsman in 1950 . He played 99 first @-@ class matches from 1935 until 1951 , which brought him a career total of 5 @,@ 285 runs that came at an average of 37 @.@ 75 runs per innings and included 11 centuries . He scored two of these centuries in his first and last first @-@ class matches . 
 = = Career = = 
 Born in the Adelaide suburb of Hindmarsh , Hamence was the cousin of Charlie Walker , a fellow Australian cricketer . At 15 years and 25 days , Hamence became the youngest district cricketer in South Australian cricket history when he made his debut for Adelaide club West Torrens in 1930 . While playing with the SA team , he worked as a public servant at the Government Printing Office . He was a compact batsman preferring attack over defence , however he suffered a weakness throughout his career against fast bowling . 
 He joined South Australia part way through the 1935 – 36 season , and in March 1936 , he scored a century ( 121 ) on his first @-@ class cricket debut against Tasmania at the Adelaide Oval . This was to be his only match of the season , which left him with a debut season average of 121 @.@ 00 . At the start of his first full season , he followed this up with scores of 16 and four against the touring England team and Victoria and seven and 19 against New South Wales . On Christmas Day , 1936 , however , he scored his second first @-@ class century , 104 against Queensland in the first innings . He would go on to score 52 in the second . 
 Scores of three not out , 28 , 27 , 35 and four followed before his next significant score , 52 , against Queensland on 12 February 1937 . He ended the season with 336 runs , one century , and an average of 30 @.@ 54 . He then suffered his worst period of form thus far at the start of the 1937 – 38 season , failing to reach double figures from 17 December 1937 until early January 1938 , when he scored 64 in the second innings , against Victoria . He followed this with 49 against New South Wales , and ended his third season with 283 runs at an average of 21 @.@ 76 . He did not play another cricket match until 16 December 1938 at the start of the next season , however he returned with a score of 90 against New South Wales , and followed that up two matches later with 84 against Victoria . He narrowly missed out on his third century in November 1939 when he was caught by Morris Sievers for 99 against Victoria . He scored 41 , 12 , 6 and 20 to see out the rest of the year , ending with 239 runs at an average of 47 @.@ 80 , his most successful full season thus far . 
 In 1940 , he began the year with 26 and two against Queensland , and then a 43 against New South Wales . A series of low scores followed until he hit a vein of strong form beginning in February of that year . He scored 63 against Western Australia on 16 February 1940 in his last match of the 1939 – 40 season . He began the following season with 41 in the following match against New South Wales . Hamence then enjoyed great success against Victoria , where he scored 130 and 103 not out in one inter @-@ state match , and then 85 and 62 in the next . Following this , in a match at the Melbourne Cricket Ground between two representative selections to raise money for the war effort , he played for Don Bradman 's XI and scored 73 and 35 . He returned to play for South Australia for a match against New South Wales , where he scored 31 and five . He ended the 1940 – 41 season with the highest average for a single season he would achieve in his career , 569 runs at 63 @.@ 22 , with two hundreds . 
 = = = Second World War and after = = = 
 Hamence was not to play another first @-@ class match until December 1945 after the end of the Second World War . During the war , he served for four years with the Royal Australian Air Force . Upon his return , he immediately hit form for South Australia against New South Wales where he hit 74 not out and 75 in a match starting 14 December 1945 . He then scored 56 against Victoria on 18 January , and then after three single figure scores he hit 76 against Queensland . He then experienced a drop in form , with only one significant score , 46 against Wellington , for seven innings . He ended the 1945 – 46 season with 332 runs at 36 @.@ 88 . At the start of the 1946 – 47 season , however , he enjoyed his greatest success thus far , scoring consecutive centuries in three innings from 15 November 1946 until 19 December : 116 against Victoria and 132 and 101 not out against New South Wales , the latter followed up by a score of 48 in the second innings . This was followed by a career @-@ best 145 against the touring MCC team on 24 January 1947 , and 63 against Queensland on 21 February . He ended the season with 675 runs at 56 @.@ 25 . 
 = = = International debut , England , India and the Invincibles = = = 
 These centuries led to his debut for Australia in the Fifth Test at Sydney on 28 February 1947 . Hamence scored 30 not out in the first innings as Australia made 253 in response to England 's first innings 280 . England managed 186 in response and Australia , set 213 to win , reached it in 52 @.@ 2 overs . However Hamence made only one in his second innings . He returned to domestic cricket , however over six innings his highest score was 27 . 
 Nevertheless , Hamence was picked to play in the Second and Third Tests against the touring Indian cricket team in Australia in 1947 – 48 . He made 25 in the first innings of both matches , with the first , starting 12 December 1947 , ended in a draw before Hamence could bat again . In the Third Test , which started on 1 January 1948 , Australia achieved victory with centuries from Don Bradman and Arthur Morris meaning Hamence was again not needed to bat in the second innings . He was then replaced by Neil Harvey for the final two Tests . 
 Returning once again to domestic cricket , Hamence scored 85 and 66 against Queensland , and this kept him in the running for a place in the national team , as he toured with The Invincibles in England in 1948 . He was not selected to play in any of the Tests , however he reiterated when interviewed in 2008 that he felt no resentment over not having played . Hamence was a popular member of the touring squad and his cheerful nature and splendid tenor voice added to the good spirits of the team . His success in the warm up games was mixed , scores of 92 , 46 and 49 not out against Cambridge University , Essex and Lancashire mixed with a duck , seven , one , three , two and five against other counties . Against Somerset , approaching his first century of the tour , the Australian players , keen to see Hamence succeed , left their card games to applaud only to see him dismissed for 99 , his highest score for the season . He also faced Scotland for two matches in August 1948 , scoring six and 15 . Overall on the tour he played 19 matches scoring 582 runs at an average of 32 @.@ 33 . 
 His touring colleague Sid Barnes criticised the omission of Hamence from much meaningful cricket on the tour . He wrote : " For instance , against the Gentlemen at Lord 's we were 532 when Hamence came to bat . Brown got 120 , Bradman 150 , Hassett , not out , 200 and Miller 69 . Hamence was left not out with 24 . This was an innings in which he could have been sent in first wicket down , where he batted with his interstate team ... Despite this , Hassett still went in before Hamence in the next game , against Somerset ... Hamence batted No. 6 ... but he should have been sent in No. 3 . " Bradman , following the Invincibles tour described Hamence as " a fine batsman of the strictly orthodox type . Very sound and reliable with his game based on driving " and a " very safe fieldsman " . 
 Barnes reported that Hamence , along with the other frequent omissions Colin McCool and Doug Ring , termed themselves the " Ground Staff " . He added : " In the dressing room during county games they would break out into ironic song about the few chances they got . " Bradman did later state that " because of the strong array of batsman ahead of him , [ Hamence ] seldom had an opportunity to make big scores " but " was an extremely useful reserve who could have been played in the Tests with confidence " . 
 = = = Return , retirement and later life = = = 
 Hamence scored 58 and 45 in his first match upon return to Australia , playing for Bradman 's XI against a team captained by Lindsay Hassett on 3 December 1948 . He then scored a career best 173 against New South Wales , and 55 the following match against Queensland . He then faced Western Australia for his 91st first @-@ class match , scoring another century when he hit 117 against Western Australia . Hamence then suffered a loss of form , not exceeding 31 for 11 innings . He scored a 53 against New South Wales , 64 not out against Queensland and 58 against Victoria , however he then scored nine , one and five in his next three innings . A 48 and 78 against New South Wales and Western Australia followed , however it was becoming clear that his form was waning . Hamence played his final match against Freddie Brown 's MCC team on 27 October 1950 , scoring 114 in the first innings as South Australia reached 350 , and then seven in his final innings before being run out by Bob Berry . His final full season saw him score 418 runs at 32 @.@ 15 . 
 In total , Hamence played 69 matches for South Australia , scoring 4 @,@ 244 runs at an average of 38 @.@ 93 , with 11 centuries and 22 fifties . Aside from his 52 @.@ 75 average for Bradman 's XI , South Australia was to be Hamence 's most successful team . Of his eleven centuries , three were scored against Victoria , against whom he had an average of 41 @.@ 75 , however he scored the most runs , and his highest score , against New South Wales . In 2001 , Hamence was awarded the Centenary Medal for services to Australian society through the sport of cricket . 
 He died in an Adelaide nursing home , aged 94 , in 2010 . 
 = = Test match performance = = 
 = Chrysiridia rhipheus = 
 Chrysiridia rhipheus ( Madagascan sunset moth ) is a day @-@ flying moth of the family <unk> . It is considered one of the most impressive and appealing @-@ looking lepidopterans . Famous worldwide , it is featured in most coffee table books on Lepidoptera and is much sought after by collectors . It is very colourful , though the iridescent parts of the wings do not have pigment ; rather the colours originate from optical interference . Adults have a wingspan of 7 – 9 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) . 
 Dru Drury , who described the moth in 1773 , placed it in the genus Papilio , considering it a butterfly . Jacob Hübner placed it in the moth genus Chrysiridia in 1823 . Later <unk> led to junior synonyms such as Chrysiridia madagascariensis ( Lesson , 1831 ) . 
 At first the moth was thought to be from China or Bengal , but was later found to be endemic to Madagascar . It is found throughout the year in most parts of the island , with peak populations between March and August , and smallest numbers between October and December . Females lay about 80 eggs under the leaves of Omphalea spp . The caterpillars are whitish @-@ yellow with black spots and red feet and are covered in club @-@ ended black setae . Silk spun from the mouth helps the caterpillars hold on to smooth leaves and climb back to the plant when they fall . After completing four instars , the caterpillars spin an open network cocoon . The pupal stage lasts from 17 to 23 days . Chrysiridia rhipheus is the sole specialist herbivore of the four species of Omphalea in Madagascar . Omphalea is toxic : the toxins are sequestered by the feeding caterpillar and retained in the pupal and adult stages . Thousands of these moths migrate between the eastern and western ranges of their host plants . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Madagascan sunset moth was first described by the British entomologist Dru Drury in 1773 from a specimen obtained from a Captain May of Hammersmith . Because of its resemblance to swallowtail butterflies , Drury described the species as Papilio <unk> The specimen Drury received had the head of a different species attached , probably that of a butterfly , which had clubbed antennae — this trait is frequently used to differentiate moths from butterflies . Once the inaccuracy in Drury 's specimen was found , the moth was placed in the genus Urania , until 1823 when the German entomologist Jacob Hübner placed it in a new genus , Chrysiridia . The moth has also been described under other names . Because Drury described his specimen as having clubbed antennae and being tailless , William Swainson thought it was a different species than the complete specimen described by Cramer . In 1833 , Swainson named the butterfly <unk> <unk> and the moth <unk> orientalis . Other synonyms include U. <unk> by Maassen in 1879 and U. <unk> var. madagascariensis by Lesson in 1831 . 
 Native Malagasy people call it <unk> or <unk> , from <unk> for " spirit " or " butterfly " and andriana for " noble " or " king " , therefore meaning " noble butterfly " , " noble spirit " , " king butterfly " or " king spirit " . 
 The genus Chrysiridia is entirely African and the only other species in the genus is the East African C. <unk> . Chrysiridia is one of three diurnal <unk> genera . The other two genera are Urania , its sister taxon , and Alcides , the most basal . In the group , the use of <unk> is an ancestral state ( a <unk> ) . The more basal Alcides feed on <unk> and Omphalea , while Urania and Chrysiridia feed only on Omphalea . 
 = = Description = = 
 Chrysiridia rhipheus has a wingspan of 7 – 9 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) , and sometimes up to 11 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) . Moths from the highlands , 900 – 1 @,@ 080 metres ( 2 @,@ 950 – 3 @,@ 540 ft ) , have a median wingspan of 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) ; moths from lower altitudes , 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) , have a median wingspan of 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) . Like many other <unk> moths , the sunset moth has an uncanny resemblance to swallowtail butterflies , especially in its tails and colourful wings , and can easily be mistaken for a butterfly . 
 The sunset moth is black with iridescent red , blue and green markings . There is a fringe of white scales on the wing edges , wider on the hindwings . The moth has six tails , very often lost or damaged during its life . Pattern variations are common , and the moth is often partly asymmetrical ; one of the factors causing this is temperature shock during the pupal stage . 
 = = = Wing microstructure = = = 
 Unlike in many other moths , the colour of C. rhipheus 's wings does not come from pigments . The colour originates from coherent scattering and interference of light by the microstructure of the ribbon @-@ like scales covering the moth 's wings . These structural characteristics make this species and its Neotropical relative Urania common subjects of research in optical science . 
 The colours on the Madagascan sunset moth 's wings are produced by the conjunction of two optical phenomena : 
 An air @-@ cuticle multilayer in the scales creates optical interference . Each scale contains cuticle layers with randomly located blocks of cuticle that hold them in place and maintain an air gap between them . The layers and air gaps are narrower than the wavelength of visible light . The structure varies from one layer at the proximal end of each scale , to about six layers at the distal end . This multilayer structure strongly reflects certain wavelengths of light , which are determined by the thicknesses of the layers and the angle at which the light hits the scale . 
 The scales are highly curved , which creates inter @-@ scale reflection . This mechanism is unusual among Lepidoptera . The proximal part of each scale is almost flat ; the scale then gradually curves up and then steeply bends down at the distal end , covering the proximal part of the next row of scales . Because of this shape , adjacent rows of scales have valley @-@ like grooves between them . This allows light to strike one scale , reflect at a roughly 90 ° angle , strike the next scale , and be reflected away from the wing . Because the angle of each reflection is far from normal incidence , the interference effect favours reflection of different colours of light than are seen when light strikes near the top of the curved part of the scale . 
 The colour seen in each part of the wing is the combination of the colours reflected by these two effects . 
 Because the cuticle layers are arranged in rows , with a cylindrical curve , the amount of the second type of reflection is dependent on the polarization of the incoming light . This makes the moth 's overall colour polarization @-@ dependent . Many insects can detect polarization of light , so it has been proposed that this feature may be used as a visual signal between moths . This has not yet been studied , however . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Drury 's specimen was given to him by Captain May of Hammersmith and believed to have come from China . Cramer believed the specimen came from Chandernagore in Bengal , however , giving rise to the French name " page de <unk> " . It is now known that Chrysiridia rhipheus is endemic to Madagascar . Thousands of adult moths seasonally migrate between geographically isolated populations of their host plant Omphalea spp . They can be found almost everywhere on the island , except in the south @-@ west and the extreme <unk> south of the <unk> where their host plant is absent . They migrate from the three species in the dry deciduous forest in the west ( O. ankaranensis , O. occidentalis and O. palmata ) to the eastern rainforest species ( O. oppositifolia ) . The western species are largely in protected areas . The eastern species , on the other hand , is mostly unprotected and dispersed in widely scattered populations threatened by deforestation . Being the only evergreen species , O. oppositifolia is probably crucial for the moth 's survival . The Jamaican moth Urania <unk> , from the same subfamily ( <unk> ) , most likely became extinct after the loss of one of its host plant species . 
 The moths migrate in response to changes in the host plants . Chrysiridia larvae defoliate the whole plant , and even eat the flowers and fruit , and thus have a considerable negative impact on the reproduction and survival of seedlings . The plants probably react by changing their nutrient and secondary compound levels , becoming toxic to the larvae and causing high mortality . Omphalea populations that are not damaged by moths for long periods of time have lower toxicity . These factors cause mass increases in local population , followed by sudden crashes . The population crashes might result from increased larval mortality , but are more likely caused by the emigration of the adult moths . Through semiochemicals , the plant may recruit hymenopteran parasitoids as a protection , hence playing a role in the population dynamics of the moth . 
 = = = Host plants = = = 
 Like C. <unk> and species of the genus Urania , C. rhipheus is a specialist species whose caterpillars feed strictly on species of the pantropical genus Omphalea ( Euphorbiaceae ) . Four species of the genus Omphalea are endemic to Madagascar : 
 O. ankaranensis , a shrub from the limestone karst of northern Madagascar 
 O. palmata , a dry forest shrub , closely related to O. ankaranensis , but from western Madagascar 
 O. occidentalis , also a dry forest species of western Madagascar 
 O. oppositifolia , a tree from the east coast rainforest of Madagascar 
 Omphalea , like many other members of the Euphorbiaceae , possesses leaf nectaries that attract <unk> wasps , which are predators of early instar caterpillars . The leaf nectaries also attract ants . The ants usually protect their host plant , eating both the nectar and plant @-@ eating insects on it . However , they generally completely ignore Chrysiridia caterpillars , making it likely that the caterpillars possess a chemical deterrent as a primary defence . This chemical deterrent comes from the host plants . Omphalea species contain <unk> alkaloids potentially sequestered or excreted by the caterpillar , the pupa and the adult moth . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Unlike most moths , the sunset moth is day flying and the bright aposematic colours warn predators of its toxicity , a strategy seen in many diurnal moths . Another habit the moth has in common with many butterflies is the night resting posture — the wings are held vertically over the back . During their migrations they roost in a group for the night . The moth flies over the crown of trees and in clearings . Sometimes because of high winds it is carried about 100 m ( 300 ft ) , it then falls , inert and wings closed , to the ground . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 Continuous generations of the moth are present all year . The highest populations are found from March to August ( fall and winter ) , while the lowest are from October to December ( spring ) . The females lay their eggs late in the afternoon or at nightfall , and locate potential oviposition sites visually . Like the eggs of other <unk> , the sunset moth 's eggs are domed with projecting ribs . A single egg weighs about 1 milligram ( 3 @.@ 5 × 10 − 5 oz ) and usually has 17 ribs , but sometimes 18 or less often 16 . The eggs are usually laid on the lower surface of Omphalea leaves , but occasionally on the upper surface . Eggs are laid in groups of 60 to 110 , usually about 80 . 
 After they hatch , the small caterpillars only eat the tissue ( parenchyma ) between the veins of the leaves . They do this to avoid the sticky and toxic latex produced by the plant 's <unk> and transported in the veins . After 3 – 4 days , the caterpillars also eat flowers , fruit , tendrils , petioles and young stems ( as well as continuing to eat leaves ) , defoliating the entire plant . They are particularly fond of the glands at the base of the leaf , near the petiole . They can deal with the chemical defences in the latex , which does not cause the problem of mouthpart coagulation . The caterpillars spin silk from their mouth with an ' ∞ ' motion of the head as they walk , this keeps them from falling from the smooth surface of the leaves . The silk also permits them to climb back to the plant should they fall . Strong rain makes them fall despite the silk . There are four instars , and the caterpillar stage lasts from two months in the warm season to two and a half to three months in the cold season . The caterpillar is whitish @-@ yellow with black spots and red feet and is covered in club @-@ ended black setae . It has five pairs of prolegs on segments 3 to 6 and 10 , and six true legs attached to the thorax . 
 After completing all but its last moult , the caterpillar spins a cocoon out of silk . The cocoon can be in the tree crown or between two leaves , but is most often near the ground , between moss and bark . It is an open network cocoon with large and irregular mesh . In the warm season , the cocoon takes about 10 hours to spin , the metamorphosis takes place about 29 hours later and lasts about 6 minutes . These durations are slightly longer in the cold season . The chrysalis stage lasts 17 days in November , the warmest month , and 23 days in July , the coldest month . Five to six days before eclosion , the motifs of the wings start to become visible . The moth emerges during the night or in low light , by splitting the pupal case from the top . Once out of the pupal exuvia ( the pupal exoskeleton ) , the moth finds a horizontal surface , from which it suspends itself by its four anterior legs . The wings are deployed in about 10 minutes , by pumping haemolymph into the wing veins . The moth then beats them a few times , waits 45 minutes to let them harden , then beats them lightly again . The moth finally takes flight between one and a half to two hours later . 
 = = = Nectar sources = = = 
 Adult moths prefer white or whitish @-@ yellow flowers as a nectar source , which indicates that visual cues play a large role in their selection . Most flowers visited are inflorescences of small flowers or have dense filaments , giving them the appearance of a bottle brush , often because of the conspicuous projecting stamens as in many Leguminosae ( <unk> , Myrtaceae and <unk> ) . However , not all white flowers elicit a response : the white and showy flowers of Omphalea oppositifolia are not visited by the adult moths . Nectar sources include the flowers of : 
 Terminalia <unk> ( Indian almond ) 
 Camellia sinensis ( tea plant ) 
 <unk> japonica ( <unk> ) 
 Eucalyptus spp . , especially E. saligna 
 <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> indica ( common mango tree ) 
 All these flowers are white , with the exception of Camellia sinensis which has a yellow centre , and all either have dense filaments or are formed of tight clusters of small flowers . 
 = = In culture = = 
 This spectacular moth is considered one of the most impressive and beautiful Lepidoptera , rivalling almost any of the butterflies in brilliance of colouring and form . It is featured in most coffee table books on the Lepidoptera , and is much sought after by collectors . It is collected in the wild , and raised commercially for the international butterfly trade ; its wings were used to make jewellery in the Victorian era . The Madagascan sunset moth appeared on a 6 <unk> postage stamp in the Lesotho Postal Services Butterflies of Africa issue of 20 August 2007 . Only one of the four species of host plants , Omphalea oppositifolia , is used to raise the moth commercially , mainly using plants collected in the wild , but also some cultivated for the purpose . 
 In Malagasy , <unk> is polysemous for " butterfly " or " moth " and " soul " , there is little doubt that this is because a pupa resembles a covered corpse and that the adult emerges from it — like the soul from body of the dead . The Malagasy people believe the soul of the dead or of ancestors appears in the form of a Lepidopteran , and thus to attack it is to attack the ancestors . 
 = How a Mosquito Operates = 
 How a Mosquito Operates ( 1912 ) is a silent animated film by American cartoonist Winsor McCay . The six @-@ minute short depicts a giant mosquito tormenting a sleeping man . The film is one of the earliest works of animation , and its technical quality is considered far ahead of its contemporaries . It is also known under the titles The Story of a Mosquito and Winsor McCay and his Jersey Skeeters . 
 McCay had a reputation for his proficient drawing skills , best remembered in the elaborate cartooning of the children 's comic strip Little Nemo in Slumberland he began in 1905 . He delved into the emerging art of animation with the film Little Nemo ( 1911 ) , and followed its success by adapting an episode of his comic strip Dream of the Rarebit Fiend into How a Mosquito Operates . McCay gave the film a more coherent story and more developed characterization than in the Nemo film , with naturalistic timing , motion , and weight in the animation . 
 How a Mosquito Operates had an enthusiastic reception when McCay first showed it as part of his vaudeville act . He further developed the character animation he introduced in Mosquito with his best @-@ known animated work , Gertie the Dinosaur ( 1914 ) . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 A man looks around apprehensively before entering his room . A giant mosquito with a top hat and briefcase flies in after him through a transom . It repeatedly feeds on the sleeping man , who tries in vain to shoo it away . The mosquito eventually drinks itself so full that it explodes . 
 = = Style = = 
 How a Mosquito Operates is one of the earliest examples of line @-@ drawn animation . McCay used minimal backgrounds and capitalized on strengths of the film medium , then in its infancy , by focusing on the physical , visual action of the characters . No intertitles interrupt the silent visuals . 
 Rather than merely expanding like a balloon , as the mosquito drinks its abdomen fills consistent with its bodily structure in a naturalistic way . The heavier it becomes , the more difficulty it has keeping its balance . In its excitement as it feeds , it does push @-@ ups on the man 's nose and flips its hat in the air . The mosquito has a personality : egotistical , persistent , and calculating ( as when it <unk> its proboscis on a stone wheel ) . It makes eye contact with the viewers and waves at them . McCay balances horror with humor , as when the mosquito finds itself so engorged with blood that it must lie down . 
 = = Background = = 
 Winsor McCay ( c . 1869 – 1934 ) developed prodigiously accurate and detailed drawing skills early in life . As a young man , he earned a living drawing portraits and posters in dime museums , and attracted large crowds with his ability to draw quickly in public . McCay began working as a full @-@ time newspaper illustrator in 1898 , and started drawing comic strips in 1903 . His greatest comic @-@ strip success was the children 's fantasy Little Nemo in Slumberland , which he launched in 1905 . McCay began performing on the vaudeville circuit the following year , doing chalk talks — performances in which he drew in front of a live audience . 
 Inspired by flip books his son Robert brought home , McCay said he " came to see the possibility of making moving pictures " of his cartoons . He declared himself " the first man in the world to make animated cartoons " , though the American James Stuart Blackton and the French Émile Cohl were among those who had made earlier ones , and McCay had photographed his first animated short under Blackton 's supervision . McCay featured his Little Nemo characters in the film , which debuted in movie theatres in 1911 , and he soon incorporated it into his vaudeville act . 
 The animated sequences in Little Nemo have no plot : much like the early experiments of Émile Cohl , McCay used his first film to demonstrate the medium 's capabilities — with fanciful sequences demonstrating motion for its own sake . In Mosquito he wanted greater believability , and balanced outlandish action with naturalistic timing , motion , and weight . Since he had already demonstrated in his first film that pictures could be made to move , in the second he introduced a simple story . 
 Vaudeville acts and humor magazines commonly joked about large New Jersey mosquitoes they called " Jersey skeeters " , and McCay had used mosquitoes in his comic strips — including a Little Nemo episode in which a swarm of mosquitoes attack Nemo after he returns from a trip to Mars . McCay took the idea for the film from a June 5 , 1909 , episode of his comic strip Dream of the Rarebit Fiend , in which a mosquito ( without top hat or briefcase ) gorges itself on an alcoholic until it becomes so bloated and drunk that it cannot fly away . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 McCay began working on the film in May 1911 . Shortly after , he left the employ of the New York Herald for the newspapers of William Randolph Hearst — a sign of his rising stardom . A magazine advertisement in July announced a " moving picture , containing six thousand sketches ... [ that ] will be a ' release ' for vaudeville next season by Mr. McCay . The film will be named How a Mosquito Operates . " 
 McCay made the 6 000 drawings on translucent rice paper . The film came before the development of cel animation , in which animators draw on clear sheets of celluloid and lay them over static backgrounds . Thus , on each drawing McCay had to redraw the background , which appears to waver slightly due to the difficulty of reproducing it perfectly each time . McCay re @-@ used some of the drawings to loop repeated actions , a technique he used once in Little Nemo and more extensively in his later films . 
 McCay finished drawing the film in December 1911 . A snowstorm hit when he was to have the drawings taken to Vitagraph Studios for photographing , so he hired a enclosed horse @-@ drawn taxi to have them taken there . It disappeared , and a few days later the police found the abandoned taxi with the drawings unharmed inside , the horses two to three miles away . The first attempt to shoot the artwork resulted in unacceptable amounts of flicker due the arc lighting the studio used , and it was re @-@ shot . The completed work came to 600 feet of film . 
 How a Mosquito Operates debuted in January 1912 as part of McCay 's vaudeville act , which he toured through that spring and summer . Film producer Carl Laemmle bought the distribution rights under the restriction that he not have the film shown in the US until McCay had finished using it in his vaudeville act . Universal – Jewel released the film in 1916 under the title Winsor McCay and his Jersey Skeeters , and it has sometimes been called The Story of a Mosquito . 
 In a lost live @-@ action prologue , McCay and his daughter , " pestered to death by mosquitoes " at their summer home in New Jersey , find a professor who speaks the insects ' language . The professor tells McCay to " make a series of drawings to illustrate just how the insect does its deadly work " , and after months of work McCay invites the professor to watch the film . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 How a Mosquito Operates was released at a time when audience demand for animation outstripped the studios ' ability to supply it . According to animator Chris Webster , at a time when most studios struggled to make animation merely work , McCay showed a mastery of the medium and a sense of how to create believable motion . 
 The film opened to large audiences , and was well received . The Detroit Times described audiences laughing until they cried , and " [ going ] home feeling that [ they ] had seen one of the best programs " in the theater 's history . The paper called the film " a marvelous arrangement of colored drawings " , referring to the final explosive sequence , which McCay had hand @-@ painted red ( colored versions of this sequence have not survived ) . The New York Morning Telegraph remarked , " [ McCay 's ] moving pictures of his drawings have caused even film magnates to marvel at their cleverness and humor " . Audiences found his animation so lifelike that they suggested he had traced the characters from photographs or resorting to tricks using wires : 
 I drew a great ridiculous mosquito , pursuing a sleeping man , peeking through a keyhole and pouncing on him over the transom . My audiences were pleased , but declared the mosquito was operated by wires to get the effect before the cameras . 
 To show that he had not used such tricks , McCay chose a creature for his next film that could not have been photographed : a Brontosaurus . The film , Gertie the Dinosaur , debuted as part of his vaudeville act in 1914 . Before he brought out Gertie , he hinted at the film 's subject in interviews in which he spoke of animation 's potential for " serious and educational work " . 
 American animator John Randolph Bray 's first film , The Artist 's Dream , appeared in 1913 ; it alternates live @-@ action and animated sequences , and features a dog that explodes after eating too many sausages . Though these aspects recall McCay 's first two films , Bray said that he did not know of McCay 's efforts while working on The Artist 's Dream . 
 Following Mosquito , animated films tended to be story @-@ based ; for decades they rarely drew attention to the technology underlying it , and live @-@ action sequences became infrequent . Animator and McCay biographer John Canemaker commended McCay for his ability to imbue a mosquito with character and personality , and stated the technical quality of McCay 's animation was far ahead of its time , unmatched until the Disney studios gained prominence in the 1930s with films such as Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) . 
 = HMS Ramillies ( 1892 ) = 
 HMS Ramillies was a Royal Sovereign @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the Royal Navy , named after the Battle of Ramillies . The ship was built by J. & G. Thompson at Clydebank , starting with her keel laying in August 1890 . She was launched in March 1892 and commissioned into the Mediterranean Fleet as flagship the following October . She was armed with a main battery of four 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns and a secondary battery of ten 6 @-@ inch guns . The ship had a top speed of 16 @.@ 5 knots . 
 Ramillies served as flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet up to 1899 , and again from 1900 to 1902 . After taking part in manoeuvres off the coast of Portugal , she returned to England for a refit in 1903 . Upon completion , she was commissioned into the Reserve in 1905 . She suffered damage while participating in combined manoeuvres the following year , and was recommissioned into the Special Service Division of the Home Fleet in 1907 , becoming the Parent Ship of the 4th Division of the Home Fleet in 1910 . She was relieved of that role a year later , before being reduced to material reserve at Devonport in August 1911 , and stripped and laid up at Motherbank for disposal in July 1913 . She was sold for scrap in October 1913 and towed to Italy to be broken up the following month . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Royal Sovereign @-@ class battleships were based on Admiral @-@ class barbette ships , but contained several alterations . The freeboard was raised , the barbettes ' armour was extended and an upper belt and secondary armour were added . They could also obtain a higher speed , but were 4 @,@ 000 tonnes larger . Ramillies was 410 feet ( 120 m ) long overall and had a beam of <unk> and a draft of <unk> 6in . She displaced up to 15 @,@ 580 tonnes at her full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by eight coal @-@ fired cylindrical boilers . With natural draught , her engines provided a top speed of 15 @.@ 5 knots at 9 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ; 16 @.@ 5 knots at 11 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower could be obtained with forced draught . She had a crew of 712 officers and enlisted men . When built , ships of the Royal Sovereign class rolled too heavily under certain conditions . Bilge keels were added to compensate for the problem , and the ships " proved to be excellent seaboats quite capable ... of maintaining high speeds in a seaway " . The ships were well @-@ constructed and probably the most substantial built for the Royal Navy , even if they " suffered ... from excessive weight and fittings . " In the view of R. A. Burt , they were " highly successful ; at that time , they were probably unequalled in all @-@ round fighting efficiency . " 
 Ramillies was armed with four breech @-@ loading 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns on two barbettes with armour ranging from 11 to 17 inches in thickness . Ramillies also carried ten quick @-@ fire ( QF ) 6 @-@ inch guns , four of which were mounted in casemates on the main deck , plus sixteen QF 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and twelve QF 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . She was also equipped with seven 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , two of which were submerged . Between 1899 and 1902 , the 3 @-@ pounder guns were removed from the upper tops ; the above @-@ water torpedo tubes were removed in 1902 – 05 . The remaining 6 @-@ inch guns on the upper deck were mounted on 5 @-@ inch armoured casemates between 1902 and 1904 . All of the armour was supplied by the builders , J. & G. Thompson , of Clydebank . The waterline belt was <unk> long by <unk> <unk> deep , and its armour varied in thickness between 14 and 18 inches ; the bulkheads were protected by 14 to 16 inches of armour . The middle deck covering the belt was 3 inches thick and the lower deck forward and aft of the belt was 2 @.@ 5 inches thick , while the upper belt between the middle and main decks was coated in 3 to 4 inches of armour . The casemates for the 6 @-@ inch guns were protected by an equal thickness of armour and the conning tower was protected with 14 inch armour on the forward side , and 3 inches of armour on the aft . The ship 's armoured deck was 2 @.@ 5 to 3 inches thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Ramillies was built by J. & G. Thompson , of Clydebank , at a cost of £ 902 @,@ 600 , plus £ 78 @,@ 295 for guns . She was laid down on 11 August 1890 , launched on 1 March 1892 and completed the following October . She had been constructed at such a small incline that it took nearly an hour and a half to travel down the slipway and into the water ; most of the crowd that had gathered dissipated in the meantime . Ramillies was commissioned at Portsmouth on 17 October 1893 as the Flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet . She departed on 28 October and arrived at Malta on 8 November to relieve Sans Pareil as acting flagship . Francis C. B. Bridgeman @-@ Simpson was appointed Captain of Ramillies on the day of her commission ; the commander of the Mediterranean Fleet at the time was Admiral Sir Michael Culme @-@ Seymour . On 9 December 1896 , Ramillies was recommissioned at Malta for further service in the Mediterranean Fleet . In July 1899 , she became a private ship in the fleet , relieved as flagship by battleship HMS Renown , but the following January , she became the flagship of Rear Admiral Lord Charles Beresford , second @-@ in @-@ command of the Mediterranean Fleet . In October 1902 , she was once again relieved as flagship , this time by HMS Venerable . 
 In May 1902 , Ramillies was at Palermo to attend festivities in connection with the opening of an agricultural exhibition by King Victor Emmanuel ; the King and the Italian Minister of Marine paid her a visit when she arrived in Rome later in the month . She took part in combined manoeuvres off the coast of Portugal in August 1903 , but that month she was paid off from Mediterranean service and transferred to the Portsmouth Reserve while she was refitted . Her refit complete , she was commissioned into the reserve at Chatham on 30 January 1905 . That April , Ramillies transferred her crew to battleship HMS London and was recommissioned with a new crew into the Sheerness @-@ Chatham Reserve Division . 
 On 30 January 1906 , she transferred her crew to battleship HMS Albemarle and recommissioned with yet another crew for service in the Chatham Reserve . That June , she participated in combined manoeuvres of the Atlantic Fleet , Channel Fleet , and Reserve Fleet , but in the process collided with HMS Resolution , suffering stern damage . As a result , her propellers were disabled . That November , her crew was transferred once more to the battleship HMS Africa . The following March , Ramillies was recommissioned at Devonport with a reduced crew into the Special Service Division of the Home Fleet . In October 1910 , she became Parent Ship in the Home Fleet 's 4th Division . Her sister ship HMS Royal Oak relieved her of her Parent ship duties in June 1911 and she placed on the material reserve at Devonport during that August . She was stripped and laid up ready for disposal in July 1913 , before being auctioned off for scrap on 7 October 1913 ; the buyer , George Cohen , of Swansea , paid £ 42 @,@ 300 for her . She was resold to an Italian company , who in November of that year , towed her to Italy to be broken up . 
 = = Captains = = 
 The following is an incomplete list of Captains who commanded Ramillies : 
 17 October 1893 : Francis C. B. Bridgeman @-@ Simpson . 
 17 January 1895 : William H. May . 
 9 December 1896 : William Des V. Hamilton . 
 1 January 1900 : Robert S. Lowry . 
 24 January 1902 : Hon. Walter George Stopford . 
 16 October 1902 : Francis G. Kirby . 
 15 March 1905 : Robert G. Fraser . 
 13 March 1906 : Charles H. Dare , MVO . 
 12 September 1906 : Caspar J. Baker . 
 1 February 1908 : Hubert Grant @-@ Dalton . 
 2 February 1909 : Arthur W. Ewart . 
 = 2 / 14th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2 / 14th Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army that served during World War II . Part of the 21st Brigade , 7th Division , the battalion was raised from Second Australian Imperial Force volunteers drawn mainly from the state of Victoria . After completing training in Australia in 1940 , the battalion deployed to the Middle East where it was stationed in Egypt and Palestine before it saw action against the Vichy French in Syria in June and July 1941 , in a short lived campaign . Garrison duties in Lebanon followed before the battalion was withdrawn to Australia in early 1942 as Australian forces were concentrated in the Pacific to respond to the threat posed by Japan 's entry into the war . 
 After a short period of training in Australia , the battalion was deployed to New Guinea in August 1942 as the Australians sent reinforcements to the Kokoda Track to fight against Japanese forces that had been advancing towards Port Moresby . After the Japanese exhausted their supplies and began to fall back towards their beachheads on the north coast , the 2 / 14th saw further action around Gona . In September 1943 , after a period of re @-@ organisation in Australia , the battalion took part in the advance on Lae as the Allies went on the offensive in New Guinea , before taking part in the fighting in the Markham and Ramu Valleys of the Finisterre Range campaign . The battalion 's final involvement in the war came in the landing on Balikpapan in 1945 . The 2 / 14th was disbanded after the war , in early 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The 2 / 14th Battalion was raised on 26 April 1940 at Puckapunyal , Victoria , shortly after the start of World War II as part of the all @-@ volunteer Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) , which was established at the time from personnel that had volunteered to serve in combat overseas . The battalion was assigned to the 21st Brigade , 7th Division , and would remain part of this formation throughout its existence . It had an authorised strength of around 900 personnel , and most of those were drawn from the state of Victoria , although some were allocated from other states later as reinforcements . Many of the battalion 's initial recruits had previous military experience , having served in the Militia prior to volunteering for the 2nd AIF , with the majority having to relinquish rank to transfer . Officially the battalion 's average age on formation was 29 , although the battalion historian , William Russell , asserts that this is not necessarily accurate as men were found to have altered their ages both up ( from as young as 15 ) and down ( from as old as 55 ) upon recruitment . In keeping with 2nd AIF recruitment practices , there were many pairs of brothers who were early recruits ; there was even one case of a father and son who served in the same platoon . 
 Soon after battalion headquarters was established , the battalion 's first commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel William Cannon , began choosing his officers , who then set about the task of forming their own companies and platoons , as the unit structure was built up around four rifle companies – designated ' A ' through to ' D ' – with a battalion headquarters and a headquarters company consisting of several specialist platoons including signals , pioneer , anti @-@ aircraft , transport , administration and mortars . The battalion 's companies were formed largely along territorial lines , with ' A ' Company being drawn mainly from the Mildura and north @-@ eastern regions of Victoria , while ' B ' Company was drawn from Geelong , the Western District , Prahran , Brighton and the Mornington Peninsula . ' C ' Company consisted largely of men from Ballarat and Melbourne 's inner suburbs , and men of Scottish ancestry , while those of Irish ancestry formed ' D ' Company . Once the battalion 's complement of men had arrived at Puckapunyal and formation was complete , basic training began in May 1940 . On 18 August , the battalion was presented its regimental colours in a ceremony by members of the 14th Battalion , who had served during World War I. This was done in order to establish links with the units of the First Australian Imperial Force , and later , in early October , the 2 / 14th Battalion changed its Unit Colour Patch from a black over blue diamond to the yellow and blue rectangle of its earlier counterpart . Shortly after this , although still only partially trained , the battalion received orders to deploy overseas , and on 18 October the men embarked upon the Aquitania in Sydney , New South Wales , bound for the Middle East . 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
 Travelling via India , the battalion arrived at Kantara , in Egypt on 25 November 1940 and were transported to Julius Camp in Palestine , where the soldiers undertook further training . Later , they were moved to Dimra in January 1941 , before being sent in April to Mersa Matruh , in Egypt , to defend against a possible German attack there during the Siege of Tobruk . Although no German attack came there , during their time at Maaten <unk> the battalion was subjected to aerial attack . It remained there until the end of May when the battalion was relieved by a South African battalion . The 21st Brigade then returned to Palestine to begin preparations for operations in Syria and Lebanon against the Vichy French in order to prevent the area from falling into the hands of the Germans who could then have launched an attack on the Suez Canal from there , or captured the oilfields in Persia ( present @-@ day Iran ) . 
 The 2 / 14th Battalion 's involvement in the Syria – Lebanon campaign began on the night of 7 / 8 June when the unit advanced across the Palestine border from <unk> and attacked Vichy outposts around the village of Alma <unk> . Following this , the battalion advanced along the coast towards Tyre , from where it evicted the French defenders before forcing a crossing over the Litani River . On 11 June , the 21st Brigade 's advance towards Sidon came up against determined resistance around the <unk> River , at Merdjayoun . The 2 / 14th Battalion found themselves up against troops from the French Foreign Legion 's 6th Foreign Infantry Regiment . For the next few days the battalion came under attack from Vichy French aircraft and artillery before being committed to a flanking action on 15 June . Conducting a 30 @-@ kilometre ( 19 mi ) march during the heat of the day , the Australians approached Sidon through the mountains but arrived just after the town fell to the 2 / 27th Battalion . 
 Following this , on 17 June , the battalion was moved to the central sector of the Allied advance in order to reinforce the 2 / 31st Battalion , attached to the 25th Brigade , which was holding off a Vichy French counter @-@ attack at Jezzine . After Damascus was captured on 22 June , the 2 / 14th Battalion was committed to the fighting to secure a number of features on Mount <unk> , high ground north @-@ east of the town which dominated the surrounding area . These attacks proved unsuccessful , and quite costly for the 2 / 14th , with 12 killed and 47 wounded on 24 June . The fighting around Jezzine continued until 29 June when the French began to withdraw . After this , the Australians regained the initiative and on 2 July the 2 / 14th Battalion left Jezzine to begin preparations for the Battle of Damour , to which it was committed on 5 July 1941 . Between then and 9 July , the 2 / 14th were involved in a number of attacks , capturing French positions on Hills 243 and 567 . 
 On 12 July , an armistice came into effect , ending the fighting . Following this , the 2 / 14th Battalion was initially used to conduct battlefield clearance tasks before moving to Beirut where the men were used as garrison troops overseeing the repatriation of captured Vichy soldiers to France . Later , in September , the battalion was transferred to the north to construct defensive positions near Tripoli in Lebanon . In December 1941 , following the Japanese attacks on Pearl Harbor and in Malaya , the decision was made to bring the 6th and 7th Divisions back to Australia . In early January 1942 , the 7th Division left Syria , where it had been undertaking garrison duties , and returned to Palestine . The 2 / 14th were moved to a camp near Jerusalem , and during this time command of the battalion passed to Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Key , who had previously commanded the 2 / 8th Battalion . On 30 January 1942 the 2 / 14th Battalion embarked on the transport Ile de France from Port Tewfik in Egypt , bound for Australia . The 2 / 14th 's casualties during its deployment to the Middle East were 21 killed , 94 wounded and 11 captured . 
 = = = Kokoda Track = = = 
 The battalion returned to Australia via Bombay , where the infantrymen were transferred to the troopship City of Paris in early February . They arrived in Adelaide , South Australia , on 24 March 1942 . After this a period of leave followed , and then the battalion undertook defensive duties and training around <unk> , Queensland , before being dispatched along with the rest of the 7th Division to New Guinea where the situation on the Kokoda Track was becoming critical for the Australians as the Japanese advanced towards Port Moresby . 
 On 13 August 1942 , the 21st Brigade , including the 2 / 14th Battalion , disembarked in Port Moresby . Three days later , 16 August , the battalion was transported on trucks to <unk> before marching to <unk> , reaching <unk> on 21 August . On 25 August , the battalion received orders to relieve the severely depleted 39th Battalion , which was holding the Japanese at Isurava . Due to a shortage of supplies it was only possible for one company to move at a time , and as a result ' C ' Company was dispatched to Isurava first , while ' B ' and ' D ' Companies were dispatched to Alola and ' A ' Company moved to Templeton 's Crossing . ' C ' Company subsequently reached the 39th 's position late in the evening of 26 August . The following day , the Japanese launched a fresh offensive with three battalions from the 144th Infantry Regiment , and throughout the day a number of minor engagements took place . On 27 August , the Japanese offensive began in earnest as the 39th Battalion 's positions around Isurava were subjected to heavy mortar and artillery fire . Japanese infantry broke into the position through the gaps between one of company 's depleted platoons , but the situation was restored by two Australian counter @-@ attacks . 
 The rest of the 2 / 14th Battalion arrived on 28 August amidst continuing fighting , bringing with them a 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) mortar for indirect fire support . The 39th Battalion then moved to the rear , but remained in support of the 2 / 14th in order to help repel the next wave of the Japanese attack . By 29 August , the Japanese had about six battalions around Isurava , and in the morning fresh attacks succeeded in breaking into the 2 / 14th 's position with ' C ' Company , on the battalion 's right , being forced to give ground . With the situation critical , the Australians launched a counter @-@ attack . As a part of this attack , Private Bruce Kingsbury charged the Japanese , firing his Bren light machine gun from the hip , killing at least 30 of them and forcing others to withdraw . Although Kingsbury was subsequently killed by a sniper , his actions allowed the Australians to briefly regain their positions and later he was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross , Australia 's highest military decoration . Further attacks during the day , however , forced the battalion to fall back 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) down the track . 
 On 30 August , the Japanese began threatening the 2 / 14th 's left flank from the high ground situated there , and as another attack put the battalion 's rear in jeopardy , the battalion was forced to give more ground . At this point , the brigade commander , Brigadier Arnold Potts , authorised a withdrawal to Alola . With the Japanese pressing against their rear guard , over the course of the following fortnight , the battalion fought a series of delaying actions and fighting withdrawals towards Ioribaiwa and Imita Ridge . By the time it reached Imita Ridge , the 2 / 14th was so depleted that it was amalgamated with the 2 / 16th Battalion to form a composite battalion of just over 300 men , and as the 21st Brigade prepared to make a final stand , the battalions of the 25th Brigade arrived to relieve them . Following this , the composite battalion was withdrawn from the line on 16 September . The 2 / 14th Battalion had begun the Kokoda campaign with 546 men , but upon arriving at <unk> , where they had been placed in reserve , there were only 88 men available , of whom only three were officers . Casualties were high , with 110 men being killed in action , with two more dying of their wounds and another four being killed in accidents . A further 132 were also wounded . 
 = = = Gona = = = 
 Following the 21st Brigade 's relief , the fighting in New Guinea began to turn in favour of the Allies , as the Japanese , having exhausted their supplies , began to fall back towards their beachheads on the north coast . By November 1942 , although the 2 / 14th had been reformed at Koitaki , near Port Moresby , it was still not up to full strength , with a total of only 341 men of all ranks . Nevertheless , the situation in New Guinea meant that the 21st Brigade was needed to help capture the Japanese beachhead around Gona on the north @-@ eastern coast . The 2 / 14th Battalion , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Hugh Challen who had replaced Key in late September , was placed in the vanguard of the brigade 's move , being air transported to Popondetta on 25 November . 
 Organised into three half @-@ strength companies , the following day the battalion began the 32 @-@ kilometre ( 20 mi ) march towards Gona . On 29 November , the 2 / 14th attacked along the coast to the east of Gona . The Japanese positions were well @-@ concealed and amidst strong resistance the 2 / 14th suffered heavy casualties , losing 13 killed and 23 wounded . Early in the morning on 30 November the battalion lost another three killed before it launched a well @-@ planned deliberate attack on the remaining Japanese fortified position . For only two minor casualties , the 2 / 14th forced the Japanese defenders to abandon their positions and managed to break through to the beach , securing about 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) along the coast . 
 On 8 December , a reinforced platoon from the 2 / 14th was ordered to conduct a reconnaissance around Haddy 's Village , 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) west of Gona , where the Japanese had landed reinforcements on 6 December . Under the command of Lieutenant Bob Dougherty , the platoon launched a surprise attack against the numerically superior force . In the hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting that followed over 90 Japanese were killed or wounded , while six men from the 2 / 14th were wounded . The attack proved a success and enabled the Australians around Gona to attack without concern about being engaged by the Japanese reinforcements . Gona was subsequently taken on 9 December . Dougherty , who was recommended for the Victoria Cross for his actions , was killed leading a patrol around the village on 11 December . The battalion remained in the area until 8 January 1943 , by which time there were only 21 fit personnel left . They were subsequently returned to Australia . Casualties during the fighting around Buna , Gona and Sanananda amounted to 50 killed in action or died of wounds or accidentally , as well as 88 wounded . 
 = = = Lae and the <unk> = = = 
 By the time that the 21st Brigade arrived back in Australia , it was heavily depleted , with only 44 per cent of its authorised strength . The 2 / 14th subsequently underwent a period of rebuilding around Ravenshoe , in Queensland , in preparation for further operations . During this time the units of the 7th Division were converted to the " jungle " divisional establishment , which saw a reduction in the 2 / 14th Battalion 's authorised strength to just over 800 men . As the battalion was brought back up to strength , in July there was a change of command . On 5 July , Lieutenant Colonel Ralph Honner , who had previously commanded the 39th Battalion during the fighting on the Kokoda Track , replaced Challen as commanding officer . In August , along with the rest of the 21st Brigade the battalion moved to Port Moresby where it undertook training for the next month in preparation for the Salamaua – Lae campaign . However , the battalion was destined to only take a limited role in the campaign , and on 15 September it was dispatched to the airfields at Nadzab to relieve the US Army 's 503rd Parachute Infantry Regiment and defend the vital airfields from possible Japanese attack . 
 After this , the 2 / 14th was committed to the advance into the Markham Valley and Finisterre Range , in the vanguard of the 21st Brigade 's advance from Kaiapit to Dumpu in late September and early October . Moving through the 2 / 16th Battalion 's position and advancing on to <unk> , the 2 / 14th left the Markham Valley and proceeded into the Ramu Valley . The 2 / 14th then moved on the 2 / 16th 's right flank , protecting it from any Japanese attacks that might have eventuated from the north . On 4 October 1943 , the battalion reached <unk> village . It was there that the battalion 's commanding officer , Honner , was seriously wounded when he moved beyond the main defensive position in order to personally carry out a reconnaissance of the surrounding area . A platoon was sent in to extricate Honner as the Japanese began advancing on his position , and after directing a company @-@ level attack against the Japanese , Honner handed over command to Captain Ian Hamilton , commander of ' C ' Company , who served as acting commander briefly until Major Mert Lee arrived from brigade headquarters . Lee remained in acting command until the battalion second @-@ in @-@ command , Major Philip Rhoden , returned from a staff course to officially take over command of the battalion as a lieutenant colonel in December . 
 Throughout early 1944 , the battalion was mainly involved in patrol operations in support of the 21st Brigade 's advance up the Faria River to capture the Japanese positions around on the <unk> Saddle during the Battle of Shaggy Ridge . As a part of this effort , the battalion 's most significant engagement came on 11 October 1943 when 9 Platoon , under Lieutenant Noel <unk> , destroyed a Japanese company in capturing a ridge that overlooked the valley . The Japanese company had been threatening to cut off the supply line of the 2 / 27th Battalion , which was leading the 21st Brigade 's advance and the following day , heavy fighting took place around John 's Knoll and Trevor 's Ridge . After this , the battalion undertook mainly patrol actions in the following weeks , these actions varied in size from small groups to company @-@ sized forces , and varied in length from one day to up to a week . In late November , the battalion relieve the 2 / 25th Battalion around John 's Knoll , marching 17 miles ( 27 km ) . From there , they occupied an outpost position opposite a strong Japanese position , against which they clashed several times throughout December until being withdrawn to the rear around the Lakes area in late December , and then Port Moresby in early January 1944 . Although there were only limited engagements with the Japanese during the four months that the 2 / 14th were involved in the campaign , the battalion still suffered heavily with 958 men being evacuated due to illness or accidental injury during this time . Of these , four died and a further 546 were permanently removed from the theatre . In contrast , battle casualties during this time amounted to seven killed in action , three died of wounds and 25 wounded . 
 = = = Borneo = = = 
 After being withdrawn back to Australia in March 1944 , the units of the 7th Division received six weeks ' leave before reforming on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland . Following this the 2 / 14th Battalion undertook a period of training before finally being committed to their last campaign of the war in mid @-@ 1945 . This campaign saw them take part in the amphibious landings at Balikpapan on 1 July 1945 . During the initial landings early on 1 July , the 2 / 14th came ashore at the wrong place , landing at Yellow Beach when it had been scheduled to land at Green Beach . Nevertheless , the landing was largely unopposed and after 45 minutes of reorganisation the Australians were able to establish themselves at their correct form up point and begin the advance to their first objective : the bridge over the Klandasan Besar . Advancing unopposed they crossed the bridge and at nightfall dug @-@ in in front of the <unk> ridge , along the Vasey Highway . The following day , the battalion captured the <unk> airstrip as the 21st Brigade began the advance to the east . The 2 / 27th Battalion subsequently relieved the 2 / 14th at <unk> and on 3 July , the battalion began to move towards the Manggar airstrip . The 21st Brigade then came up against stronger opposition near the <unk> <unk> River , which held them up until the evening . 
 The following day the 2 / 14th resumed its advance towards Manggar and after crossing the river and beginning to move across the strip the battalion 's lead company began to receive artillery fire from Japanese coastal defence guns . Naval gunfire support was called in to provide counter @-@ battery fire , but this was only partially effective and the following day air support and tanks were brought it . For the next three days minor infantry actions were undertaken around the periphery of the position while direct and indirect fire support was used to reduce the position , with a view to limiting casualties amongst the infantry . Finally , on 9 July , the battalion attacked the two remaining Japanese positions , which had been named " Frost " and " Brown " by the Australians . Supported by a naval bombardment and Liberator heavy bombers which dropped napalm , two companies from the 2 / 14th Battalion captured the position where it found over 100 Japanese dead along with a number of artillery pieces including two 120 mm naval guns and four 75 mm high @-@ angle guns , as well as numerous heavy mortars and machine @-@ guns . This represented the last of the 2 / 14th Battalion 's major combat actions of the war . The 21st Brigade subsequently captured <unk> and then as the tempo of operations wound down in anticipation of the end of the war , the Australians began conducting patrol operations in the interior , stretching towards the 25th Brigade 's area along the Milford Highway . The battalion 's casualties in its final campaign of the war amounted to 21 killed and 41 wounded . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 Following the cessation of hostilities in August 1945 , the 2 / 14th Battalion remained on Borneo until October 1945 when it was moved to Makassar in the Celebes Islands ( present @-@ day Sulawesi , Indonesia ) . The battalion 's personnel arrived there on 1 October 1945 but shortly thereafter the 2 / 14th was transported by sea to Pare @-@ Pare , arriving there on 5 October . While there the battalion undertook garrison duties , guarding Japanese prisoners of war and maintaining administration and law and order until the Dutch were in a position to re @-@ assert colonial rule . Despite the complex political situation , the 2 / 14th Battalion managed to achieve this without violence and on 5 January 1946 the 50th Battalion , Royal Netherlands East Indies Army , began to arrive to relieve them . This was completed by 17 January . On 22 January 1946 the battalion embarked on HMAS Kanimbla , bound for Australia . Upon arrival in Brisbane , Queensland , the demobilisation process began and the battalion 's ranks were quickly reduced . Finally , on 22 February 1946 , at Victoria Barracks the final paperwork was signed off and the battalion was disbanded . 
 During the course of the war , a total of 2 @,@ 990 men served in the battalion ; of these 222 were killed in action or died of wounds , or of illness or accident on active service . A further 378 men from the 2 / 14th were wounded in action , while 11 men became prisoners of war . The vast majority of these casualties came during the fighting around Kokoda where the battalion suffered 248 battle casualties . For their service during the war , members of the 2 / 14th received the following gallantry and distinguished service decorations : one Victoria Cross , four Military Crosses , three Distinguished Conduct Medals , 19 Military Medals , one British Empire Medal and 44 Mentions in Despatches . In addition , one member was appointed as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire . One section from the battalion , 7 Section from 9 Platoon , ' A ' Company , is believed to be , according to Dornan , " the most highly decorated section in Australian and British military history " . Of the 11 men that were assigned to 7 Section when it was first formed in 1940 , one of them received the Victoria Cross , one received a Distinguished Conduct Medal and four received the Military Medal . 
 = = Commanders = = 
 The following officers served as commanding officer of the 2 / 14th Battalion : 
 Lieutenant Colonel William Cannon ( 1940 – 42 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Key ( 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Hugh Challen ( 1942 – 43 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Ralph Honner ( 1943 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Philip Rhoden ( 1943 – 46 ) . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 2 / 14th Battalion received the following battle honours for its service during the war : 
 North Africa , Syria 1941 , Syrian Frontier , <unk> , Jezzine , Damour , South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 1945 , Kokoda Trail , Isurava , Eora Creek – Templeton 's Crossing I , Efogi – <unk> , Ioribaiwa , Buna – Gona , Gona , <unk> River , Lae – Nadzab , Liberation of Australian New Guinea , Ramu Valley , Shaggy Ridge , Borneo 1945 , and Balikpapan . 
 = House with Chimaeras = 
 House with Chimaeras or <unk> House ( Ukrainian : <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> z <unk> ) is an Art Nouveau building located in the historic <unk> neighborhood of Kiev , the capital of Ukraine . Situated across the street from the President of Ukraine 's office at No. 10 , <unk> Street , the building has been used as a presidential residence for official and diplomatic ceremonies since 2005 . The street in front of the building is closed off to all automobile traffic , and is now a patrolled pedestrian zone due to its near proximity to the Presidential Administration building . 
 Architect Vladislav Gorodetsky originally constructed the House with Chimaeras for use as his own upmarket apartment building during the period of 1901 – 1902 . However , as the years went by , Gorodetsky eventually had to sell the building due to financial troubles , after which it changed ownership numerous times before finally being occupied by an official Communist Party polyclinic until the early 2000s . When the building was vacated , its interior and exterior decor were fully reconstructed and restored according to Gorodetsky 's original plans . 
 The building derives its popular name from the ornate decorations depicting exotic animals and hunting scenes , which were sculpted by Italian architect Emilio Sala since Gorodetsky was an avid hunter . The name does not refer to the chimaera of mythology , but to an architectural style known as chimaera decoration in which animal figures are applied as decorative elements to a building . Gorodetsky 's unique architectural style earned him praise as the Antoni Gaudí of Kiev . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction and early history = = = 
 The House with Chimaeras was designed by the architect Vladislav Gorodetsky in 1901 – 1902 . Gorodetsky was born in 1863 into a prosperous Polish szlachta family in the <unk> region . After finishing the Imperial Academy of Arts in Saint Petersburg in 1890 , he moved to Kiev , where he lived for almost 30 years . At the time of the building 's construction , Gorodetsky had already established himself as a prominent Kiev architect , having designed and constructed together with his close friend and partner engineer Anton Strauss many city buildings , from the St. Nicholas Roman Catholic Cathedral to the <unk> <unk> and what today is the National Art Museum of Ukraine . Besides architecture , Gorodetsky was also interested in big @-@ game hunting , which explains why his building features many animals . 
 Gorodetsky financed the house 's construction with borrowed money , with the intent for it to be an apartment building . Each floor formed a single apartment , connected by an elevator and stairs . Gorodetsky himself occupied the fourth floor of the building , measuring at about 380 m2 ( 4 @,@ 100 sq ft ) . 
 Gorodetsky bought the first lot of land on February 1 , 1901 , with construction work commencing on March 18 of that year . Construction of the exterior walls was finished by August 21 , and the roof installed and all masonry work was completed on September 13 . Due to the economic hardships within the Russian Empire , the completion of the building was delayed . In May 1903 , only one apartment on the lowest level and Gorodetsky 's own apartment were occupied . The total cost of the land and construction amounted to 133 @,@ 000 rubles . In total , 1 @,@ 550 m2 ( 16 @,@ 700 sq ft ) of land were used for construction of the building and cost a total of 15 @,@ 640 rubles . The projected annual profit from the rentals was 7 @,@ 200 rubles . A cowshed was located on the premises due to Gorodetsky 's insistence on fresh in @-@ house milk , though it was specifically placed in a way that the smell of the cows would not disturb the tenants . On a lot adjacent to the building , a miniature alpine garden ( approx . 320 m2 or 3 @,@ 400 sq ft ) and a fountain were built . 
 Due to financial mismanagement which included his Safari hunting hobby , in July 1912 , Gorodetsky pledged the building as a collateral against a loan taken from Kiev Mutual Credit Association . When Gorodetsky defaulted on the loan , the building was auctioned off in 1913 , and became the property of the engineer Daniel <unk> , the son of a Kiev trader , who was also the Chairman of the Board of Directors of <unk> sugar factory , and a French <unk> agent in Kiev . In 1916 , the house belonged to the <unk> sugar factory . In 1918 , the building 's ownership changed again , to Samuel <unk> . In 1921 , after the Bolsheviks gained control of Kiev , several of the departments of the Kiev Military District took offices in the House with Chimaeras . 
 = = = Ownership 1921 – 2002 = = = 
 After the period of unrest following the Russian Revolution of 1917 , the building was nationalized and later converted for communal living . Each apartment was occupied by about nine to ten families . During the Second World War ( 1941 – 1943 ) , the building was abandoned . Due to exposure to the harsh elements during the war , the building suffered significant damage to its structure . After the war , the building was briefly used as a residence for evacuated actors from the Ivan Franko Theater ; however , the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic took ownership of the building and later transformed it into the Polyclinic ( clinic ) No. 1 for their elite . The polyclinic used the building up until the end of the 20th century . During that time , the building almost split in half . One part sagged 22 cm ( 9 in ) , and a major vertical crack formed , having a width of about 40 cm ( 16 in ) . Some of the building 's architectural details had either been chipped away , or had cracked . 
 The building 's restoration work was scheduled for 2002 , however the operators of the polyclinic were reluctant to leave , having occupied the building for over 40 years . In order to force the occupants out of the building , the workers boarded up all of the windows and threatened to do the same to the doors if the polyclinic did not vacate the premises . Only the president 's involvement in the matter forced the polyclinic to move out completely . 
 = = = Reconstruction and official use = = = 
 During the time of the restoration , conducted by <unk> and headed by Natalia <unk> , the workers unearthed the whole lower floor , which had been filled in during Soviet times to strengthen the building 's foundation . Restoration of the elaborate decor of the interior had to be fully redone . In the courtyard , the restorers placed an artificial lake , fountains , and a miniature garden — all of which had been in Gorodetsky 's original plans . 
 The building was opened as a filial " Masterpieces of Ukrainian Art " of the National Museum of Arts in November 2004 . It was expected that the building would serve a dual purpose as a museum and as the presidential meeting place for state visitors . In April 2005 , the Kiev City Council submitted a bill for 104 million hryvnias ( approx . US $ 20 million ) to the Ukrainian Government for reconstruction and restoration of the House with Chimaeras . The Council also allowed the Ukrainian government to construct a new square ( closing off all automobile traffic ) in front of the building for use in official ceremonies . 
 Since May 2005 , the building has been an official presidential residence , used for official and diplomatic ceremonies . The House with Chimaeras was used as a meeting place between Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko and Russian President Vladimir Putin , when the latter visited Kiev on December 22 , 2006 . Included in the building are rooms for negotiations , tête @-@ à @-@ tête talks , the signing of official documents , as well as a special room for the press . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The building was designed in the Art Nouveau style , which was at that time a relatively new style and featured flowing , curvilinear designs often incorporating floral and other plant @-@ inspired motifs . Gorodetsky featured such motifs in the building 's exterior decor in the forms of mythical creatures and big @-@ game animals . His work on the House with Chimaeras has earned him the nickname of the Gaudí of Kiev . 
 Due to the steep slope on which the building is situated , it had to be specially designed out of concrete to fit into its foundations correctly . From the front , the building appears to have only three floors . However , from the rear , all of its six floors can be seen . One part of the building 's foundation was made of concrete piles , and the other as a continuous foundation . Usually , these two approaches do not mix well but Gorodetsky somehow succeeded in overcoming this technical problem . 
 The Italian sculptor Emilio Sala was responsible for both the internal and external sculptural decorations , such as mermaids , dolphins , and frogs on the roof of the building , sinking ships and hunting trophies on the exterior walls , and exuberant interior decorations , such as grand stairways and chandeliers depicting huge catfish strangled in the stems of lotus flowers . The exterior sculptures created by Sala were made out of cement . Production of the cement was by the « For » company of which Gorodetsky was the co @-@ director . Cement was used exclusively as the primary building material by the request of the company 's head director , Richter . At the time of the building 's construction , cement was not popular as a building material , so its use was employed as publicity for both the house and the building material . 
 = = = Floor plan = = = 
 The House with Chimaeras was designed in such a way that the tenants would occupy the whole floor , each floor had all the necessary household rooms ranging from private kitchens to small powder rooms . The open floor plan and extra rooms featured throughout the building are characteristic of the houses of the wealthy of the early 20th century . In total , the building has an area of 3 @,@ 309 @.@ 5 m2 ( 35 @,@ 623 @.@ 16 sq ft ) . 
 On the lowest level of the building , which is located deep in the hill , were two stables , two rooms for coachmen , a shared laundry , and two separate apartments . Each of the two apartments consisted of a foyer , a kitchen , one bathroom , and a storage room . The first of these apartments had two residential rooms , and the second three rooms . Each floor above the lowest level was designed to house a single apartment only . 
 The apartment on the second floor consisted of six residential rooms in addition to a foyer , kitchen , buffet , three servant 's rooms , a bathroom , two toilets , and two storage rooms . There were also four wine cellars on the same level . The cellars belonged to the apartments on the upper levels . On the third floor , the apartment consisted of eight residential rooms , a foyer , a kitchen , dish washing room , two rooms for servants , a bathroom , and two toilets . This apartment was placed slightly lower than the level of <unk> Street , from the front entrance . 
 The grandest apartment , which belonged to Gorodetsky , consisted of a study , a great room and a living room , a dining room , a boudoir , a bedroom , a children 's room , a room for a governess , a guest room , three rooms for servants , a kitchen , dishwashing room , bathroom , two toilets , and two storage rooms . On the floor above was an apartment similar in size and design to Gorodetsky 's apartment . The apartment on the top floor had one less room ; to make up for this , there was a connecting terrace which provided a panoramic view of the city . 
 = = Legends = = 
 Throughout the years , the unusual nature of the House with Chimaeras has given rise to a number of stories occasionally repeated in guide @-@ books or newspapers , which are however either untrue or lacking any verifiable source . 
 According to the first legend , Vladislav Gorodetsky 's daughter had committed suicide jumping into Dnieper River either because of some unfortunate love affair or because of a family feud . As a result , Gorodetsky went slightly mad and built this gloomy house in his daughter 's memory . 
 A second legend has it that Gorodetsky made a bet with some other architects , including the architect Alexander <unk> , who had tried to prove that was impossible to build a house on such terrain , because the site ( near the Ivan Franko Theater ) overhangs a swamp ( Koz <unk> <unk> ) . The Construction Committee of Kiev had prohibited construction of any structures on this particular lot , but eventually the construction of the building allowed Gorodetsky to win the bet . 
 According to the third legend , Gorodetsky had cursed the house when forced to leave it in 1913 ( due to his inability to repay his creditors ) ; all of the house 's tenants would be either unhappy or would meet some sort of financial misfortune . There is a story that all the businesses who rented a portion of the building either went bankrupt , had their funds stolen or were disbanded . 
 = Rahm Emanuel = 
 Rahm Israel Emanuel ( / <unk> / ; born November 29 , 1959 ) is an American politician who serves as the 55th mayor of Chicago . A member of the Democratic Party , Emanuel was elected in 2011 , becoming Chicago 's first Jewish mayor . He was reelected on April 7 , 2015 . 
 Born in Chicago , Emanuel is a graduate of Sarah Lawrence College and Northwestern University . Working early in his career in Democratic politics , Emanuel was appointed as director of the finance committee for Bill Clinton 's 1992 presidential campaign . In 1993 , he joined the Clinton administration , where he served as the assistant to the president for political affairs and as the senior advisor to the president for policy and strategy before resigning , in 1998 . Beginning a career in finance , Emanuel worked at the investment bank Wasserstein Perella & Co. from 1998 for 2 1 / 2 years and served on the board of directors of Freddie Mac . 
 In 2002 , Emanuel ran for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives vacated by Rod Blagojevich , who resigned to become governor of Illinois . Emanuel won the first of three terms representing Illinois 's 5th congressional district , a seat he held from 2003 to 2009 . During his tenure in the House , Emanuel held two Democratic leadership positions , serving as the chair of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee from 2005 to 2007 and as the chair of the House Democratic Caucus , from 2007 to 2009 . After the 2008 presidential election , President Barack Obama appointed Emanuel to serve as White House chief of staff . 
 In October 2010 , Emanuel resigned as chief of staff to run as a candidate in Chicago 's 2011 mayoral election . Because of questions over his eligibility to run for mayor , Emanuel 's candidacy was initially rejected by the Illinois First District Appellate Court , though he was later found eligible to run in a unanimous decision by the Supreme Court of Illinois . Emanuel won with 55 % of the vote over five other candidates in the nonpartisan mayoral election , succeeding 22 @-@ year incumbent Richard M. Daley . Although Emanuel did not obtain an absolute majority in the February 2015 mayoral election , he defeated Cook County Board Commissioner Jesús " Chuy " García in the April 7 runoff election . 
 Since November 2015 Emanuel 's approval rating has plunged in response to a series of scandals , most directly the police shooting of 17 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> McDonald , the city 's subsequent attempts to withhold a video of the shooting , and the lack of an investigation into the matter . In early December the federal Justice Department announced an investigation into the operations of the Chicago police department , a move which Emanuel initially opposed . By December over half of Chicagoans favored Emanuel 's resignation , with highly critical evaluations of the mayor appearing in such sources as The New York Times and The New Yorker , and coming from such figures as the Reverend Al Sharpton . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Emanuel 's grandfather was a Romanian Jew from Moldova . The surname Emanuel ( Hebrew : <unk> ) , which means " God with us " , was adopted by their family in honor of his father 's brother Emanuel Auerbach , who was killed in 1933 in an altercation with Arabs in Jerusalem . 
 Emanuel 's father , Benjamin M. Emanuel , is a Jerusalem @-@ born pediatrician at Michael Reese Hospital who was once a member of the Irgun , a Jewish paramilitary organization that operated in Mandate Palestine . His mother , Marsha ( née <unk> ) , is the daughter of a West Side Chicago union organizer who worked in the civil rights movement , and briefly owned a local rock and roll club and later became an adherent of Benjamin Spock 's writings . Emanuel 's parents met during the 1950s in Chicago . 
 Emanuel was born on November 29 , 1959 in Chicago , Illinois . His first name , Rahm ( <unk> ) means high or lofty in Hebrew . He has been described by his older brother Ezekiel , an oncologist and bioethicist at the University of Pennsylvania , as " quiet and observant " as a child . Ari , the youngest , is the co @-@ CEO of William Morris Endeavor , a talent agency with headquarters in Beverly Hills , California ; he also has a younger adopted sister , Shoshana . 
 = = Education and upbringing = = 
 While he lived in Chicago , Emanuel attended the Bernard Zell Anshe <unk> Day School . After his family moved to Wilmette , north of the city , Emanuel attended public schools : <unk> School , Locust Junior High School , and New Trier West High School . He and his brothers attended summer camp in Israel , including the summer following the June 1967 Six @-@ Day War . Ezekiel has written that their father " did not believe in falsely building his sons ' self @-@ esteem by purposefully letting us win , or tolerating sloppy play . " About Rahm , he also wrote , 
 Though fiercely intelligent ... he was not naturally inclined to sit at a desk and put in extra effort to turn a B into an A. As my father often said , without noting that the phrase applied to himself at that same age , " Rahm always tries to get the maximum for the minimum . " 
 Rahm was encouraged by his mother to take ballet lessons and is a graduate of the Evanston School of Ballet , as well as a student of The Joel Hall Dance Center , where his children later took lessons . He won a scholarship to the Joffrey Ballet , but turned it down to attend Sarah Lawrence College , a liberal arts school with a strong dance program . While an undergraduate , Emanuel was elected to the Sarah Lawrence Student Senate . He graduated from Sarah Lawrence in 1981 with a Bachelor of Arts in Liberal Arts , and went on to receive a Master of Arts in Speech and Communication from Northwestern University in 1985 . 
 Emanuel took part in a two @-@ week civilian volunteer holiday , known as the Sar @-@ El , where , as a civilian volunteer , he assisted the Israel Defense Forces during the 1991 Gulf War , helping to repair truck brakes in one of Israel 's northern bases . 
 While a high school student working part @-@ time at an Arby 's restaurant , Emanuel severely cut his right middle finger on a meat slicer , which was later infected from swimming in Lake Michigan . His finger was partially amputated due to the severity of the infection . 
 = = Political staffer career = = 
 Emanuel began his political career with the public interest and consumer rights organization Illinois Public Action . He went on to serve in a number of capacities in local and national politics , initially specializing in fundraising for Illinois campaigns , and then nationally . 
 Emanuel worked for Democrat Paul Simon 's 1984 election to the U.S. Senate . He also worked as the national campaign director for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee in 1988 , and was senior advisor and chief fundraiser for Richard M. Daley 's successful initial campaign for mayor of Chicago , in 1989 . 
 At the start of then @-@ Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton 's presidential primary campaign , Emanuel was appointed to direct the campaign 's finance committee . Emanuel insisted that Clinton schedule much time for fundraising and greatly delay campaigning in New Hampshire . Clinton embarked on an aggressive national fundraising campaign that allowed the campaign to keep buying television time as attacks on Clinton 's character threatened to swamp the campaign during the New Hampshire primary . Clinton 's primary rival , Paul Tsongas ( the New Hampshire Democratic primary winner ) , later withdrew , citing a lack of campaign funds . Richard Mintz , a Washington public relations consultant who worked with Emanuel on the campaign , spoke about the soundness of the idea : " It was that [ extra ] million dollars that really allowed the campaign to withstand the storm we had to ride out in New Hampshire [ over Clinton 's relationship with Gennifer Flowers and the controversy over his draft status during the Vietnam War ] . " Emanuel 's knowledge of the top donors in the country , and his rapport with " heavily Jewish " donors helped Clinton amass a then @-@ unheard @-@ of sum of $ 72 million . While working on the Clinton campaign Emanuel was a paid retainer of the investment bank Goldman Sachs . 
 Following the campaign , Emanuel became a senior advisor to Clinton at the White House from 1993 to 1998 . In the White House , Emanuel was initially Assistant to the President for Political Affairs and then Senior Advisor to the President for Policy and Strategy . He was a leading strategist in White House efforts to institute NAFTA and universal health care , among other Clinton initiatives . 
 Emanuel is known for his " take @-@ no @-@ prisoners style " that has earned him the nickname " <unk> . " Emanuel sent a dead fish in a box to a pollster who was late delivering polling results . On the night after the 1992 election , angry at Democrats and Republicans who " betrayed " them in the 1992 election , Emanuel stood up at a celebratory dinner with colleagues from the campaign and began plunging a steak knife into the table and began rattling off names while shouting " Dead ! Dead ! Dead ! " . Before Tony Blair gave a pro @-@ Clinton speech during the impeachment crisis , Emanuel reportedly screamed at Blair " Don 't fuck this up ! " while Clinton was present . Blair and Clinton both burst into laughter . However , by 2007 friends of Emanuel were saying that he has " mellowed out " . Stories of his personal style have entered the popular culture , inspiring articles and websites that chronicle these and other quotes and incidents . The character Josh Lyman in The West Wing was said to be based on Emanuel , though executive producer Lawrence O 'Donnell denied this . 
 = = Career in finance = = 
 After serving as an advisor to Bill Clinton , in 1998 Emanuel resigned from his position in the Clinton administration and joined the investment banking firm Wasserstein Perella , where he worked for 2 1 / 2 years . Although he did not have an MBA degree or prior banking experience , he became a managing director at the firm ’ s Chicago office in 1999 , and according to Congressional disclosures , made $ 16 @.@ 2 million in his two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ years as a banker . At Wasserstein Perella , he worked on eight deals , including the acquisition by Commonwealth Edison of Peco Energy and the purchase by <unk> Golder Rauner of the <unk> home security unit from SBC Communications . 
 = = = Freddie Mac = = = 
 Emanuel was named to the Board of Directors of Freddie Mac by President Clinton in 2000 . He earned at least $ 320 @,@ 000 during his time there , including later stock sales . During Emanuel 's time on the board , Freddie Mac was plagued with scandals involving campaign contributions and accounting irregularities . The Obama Administration rejected a request under the Freedom of Information Act to review Freddie Mac board minutes and correspondence during Emanuel 's time as a director . The Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight later accused the board of having " failed in its duty to follow up on matters brought to its attention . " Emanuel resigned from the board in 2001 before his first bid for Congress . 
 = = Congressional career = = 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 In 2002 , Emanuel pursued the U.S. House seat in the 5th district of Illinois , previously held by Rod Blagojevich , who successfully ran for governor of Illinois . His strongest opponent in the crowded primary of eight was former Illinois state representative Nancy Kaszak . During the primary , Edward Moskal , president of the Polish American Congress , a political action committee endorsing Kaszak , called Emanuel a " millionaire carpetbagger . " Emanuel won the primary and defeated Republican candidate Mark Augusti in the general election . Emanuel 's inaugural election to the House was the closest he ever had , as he won over 70 % of the vote in all of his re @-@ election bids . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 Emanuel was elected after the October 2002 joint Congressional resolution authorizing the Iraq War , and so did not vote on it . However , in the lead up to the resolution , Emanuel spoke out strongly in support of the war , urging a United States ' " muscular projection of force " in Iraq . Emanuel has been the focus of anti @-@ war protests for his support of funding bills for the war in Iraq , and his support , during Democratic party primaries , of Democratic candidates that were more hawkish . 
 In January 2003 , Emanuel was named to the House Financial Services Committee and sat on the subcommittee that oversaw Freddie Mac . A few months later , Freddie Mac Chief Executive Officer Leland <unk> was forced out and the committee and subcommittee commenced more than a year of hearings into Freddie Mac . Emanuel skipped every hearing allegedly for reasons of avoiding any appearance of favoritism , impropriety , or conflict of interest . 
 = = = House leadership = = = 
 After his role in helping the Democrats win the 2006 elections , Emanuel was believed to be a leading candidate for the position of Majority Whip . Nancy Pelosi , who became the next Speaker of the House of Representatives , persuaded him not to challenge Jim Clyburn , but instead to succeed Clyburn in the role of Democratic Caucus Chairman . In return , Pelosi agreed to assign the caucus chair more responsibilities , including " aspects of strategy and messaging , incumbent retention , policy development and rapid @-@ response communications . " Caucus vice @-@ chair John Larson remained in his role instead of running for the chairman position . 
 After Vice President Dick Cheney asserted that he did not fall within the bounds of orders set for the executive branch , Emanuel called for cutting off the $ 4 @.@ 8 million the Executive Branch provides for the Vice President 's office . 
 = = = Positions on political issues = = = 
 Social issues 
 Emanuel is generally liberal on social issues . He has maintained a 100 @-@ percent pro @-@ choice voting record , supports LGBT rights including same @-@ sex marriage , and is a strong supporter of gun control , rated " F " by the NRA in December 2003 . He has also strongly supported the banning of numerous rifles based upon " sporting purposes " criteria . 
 During his original 2002 campaign , Emanuel spoke in support of the goal of " to help make health care affordable and available for all Americans " . 
 In his 2006 book , co @-@ authored with Bruce Reed , The Plan : Big Ideas for America , Emanuel advocated a three @-@ month compulsory universal service program for Americans between the ages of 18 and 25 . An expanded version was later proposed by Barack Obama during his 2008 campaign . 
 Iraq war 
 During his original 2002 campaign , Emanuel " indicated his support of President Bush 's position on Iraq , but said he believed the President needed to better articulate his position to the American people " . 
 In the 2006 congressional primaries , Emanuel , then head of the Democratic congressional campaign committee , helped organize a run by Tammy Duckworth , an Iraq war veteran with no political experience , against grassroots candidate Christine <unk> in Illinois ' 6th district . <unk> withdrawal from Iraq was a central point of <unk> ' campaign and Duckworth opposed a withdrawal timetable . 
 Middle east 
 In June 2007 , Emanuel condemned an outbreak of Palestinian violence in the Gaza Strip and criticized Arab countries for not applying the same kind of pressure on the Palestinians as they have on Israel . At a 2003 pro @-@ Israel rally in Chicago , Emanuel told the marchers that Israel was " ready for peace " but would not get there until Palestinians " turn away from the path of terror " . 
 = = Democratic Party leadership = = 
 = = = Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee chairman = = = 
 Emanuel assumed the position of Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee chairman ( DCCC ) after the death of the previous chair , Bob Matsui . Emanuel led the Democratic Party 's effort to capture the majority in the House of Representatives in the 2006 elections . The documentary <unk> , featuring Emanuel , chronicles those elections . After Emanuel 's election as chairman of the Democratic Caucus , Chris Van <unk> became committee chair for the 110th Congress . Emanuel had disagreements over Democratic election strategy with Democratic National Committee Chairman Howard Dean . Dean favored a " fifty @-@ state strategy " , building support for the Democratic Party over the long term , while Emanuel advocated a more tactical approach focusing attention on key districts . 
 The Democratic Party gained 30 seats in the House in the 2006 elections and Emanuel received considerable praise for his stewardship of the DCCC , even from Illinois Republican Rep. Ray LaHood who said " He legitimately can be called the golden boy of the Democratic Party today . He recruited the right candidates , found the money and funded them , and provided issues for them . Rahm did what no one else could do in seven cycles . " However , he also faced some criticism for his failure to support some progressive candidates , as Howard Dean advocated . 
 Emanuel aligned himself with the Democratic Leadership Council . 
 = = = 2008 Presidential election = = = 
 Emanuel declared in April 2006 that he would support Hillary Rodham Clinton should she pursue the presidency in 2008 . Emanuel remained close to Clinton since leaving the White House , talking strategy with her at least once a month as chairman of the DCCC . However , Emanuel 's loyalties came into conflict when his home @-@ state Senator , Barack Obama , expressed interest in the race . Asked in January 2007 , about his stance on the Democratic presidential nomination , he said : " I 'm hiding under the desk . I 'm very far under the desk , and I 'm bringing my paper and my phone . " Emanuel remained neutral in the race until June 4 , 2008 , the day after the final primary contests , when he endorsed Obama . 
 = = White House Chief of Staff = = 
 On November 6 , 2008 , Emanuel accepted the position of White House Chief of Staff for US President Barack Obama . He resigned his congressional seat effective January 2 , 2009 . A special primary to fill his vacated congressional seat was held on March 3 , 2009 , and the special general election on April 7 . John <unk> , a candidate for that seat , said at a forum that Emanuel had told him he may be interested in running for the seat again in the future . 
 Some Republican leaders criticized Emanuel 's appointment because they believed it went against Obama 's campaign promises of less divisive politics , given Emanuel 's reputation as a partisan Democrat . Republican Senator Lindsey Graham disagreed , saying : " This is a wise choice by President @-@ elect Obama . He 's tough but fair , honest , direct and candid . " Ira Forman , executive director of the National Jewish Democratic Council , said that the choice indicated that Obama would not listen to the " wrong people " regarding the U.S. – Israel relationship . Some commentators opined that Emanuel would be good for the Israeli – Palestinian peace process because if Israeli leaders made excuses for not dismantling settlements , Emanuel would be tough and pressure the Israelis to comply . Some Palestinians expressed dismay at Emanuel 's appointment . 
 Weeks after accepting the appointment , Emanuel participated on a panel of corporate chief executive officers sponsored by the Wall Street Journal and said , " You never want a serious crisis to go to waste . " The quote was taken out of context by some commentators as evidence " ... that the left supposedly wants to exploit circumstances to ram its agenda through . " Emanuel explained later , " ... what I said was , never allow a good crisis to go to waste when it 's an opportunity to do things that you had never considered , or that you didn 't think were possible . " 
 In a 2009 article in The New York Times , Emanuel was characterized as being " perhaps the most influential chief of staff of a generation " . 
 He has a reputation for his no @-@ holds @-@ barred negotiation style that involves " his share of shouting and cursing " . Ezekiel Emanuel has written , " The impatient , pushy Emanuel style is so well known that during a recent job interview I was asked , point @-@ blank , whether I had the level @-@ headed temperament the position required ..... [ A ] s obvious to our flaws are to others , it 's difficult to recognize them in ourselves . " At a January 2010 closed @-@ door meeting in the White House with liberal activists , Emanuel called them " fucking retarded " for planning to run TV ads attacking conservative Democrats who didn 't support Obama 's health @-@ care overhaul . After the remarks were quoted in a front @-@ page story of the Wall Street Journal , and after he was criticized by Sarah Palin , Emanuel apologized to organizations for the mentally handicapped for using the word " retarded . " But he never apologized to liberals . 
 According to Jonathan Alter 's book , The Promise , Emanuel opposed Barack Obama 's plan for a broad health care reform , but Obama overrode him . Emanuel advocated a smaller plan because it could get bipartisan support . Emanuel wanted to expand coverage for children , and increase the number of single mothers eligible for Medicaid . For that reason , it was called " the Titanic plan . " 
 As Chief of Staff , Emanuel would make his staff laugh . During a staff meeting , when Chief Technology Officer <unk> Chopra gave uniformly upbeat reports , Emanuel is said to have looked at him and said : " Whatever you 're taking , I want some . " Emanuel had a hand in war strategy , political maneuvering , communications and economic policy . Bob Woodward wrote in Obama 's Wars that Emanuel made a habit of telephoning CIA Director Leon Panetta and asking about the lethal drone strikes aimed at Al Qaeda , asking " Who did we get today ? " 
 In 2010 , Emanuel was reported to have conflicts with other senior members of the president 's team and ideological clashes over policy . He was also the focal point of criticism from left @-@ leaning Democrats for the administration 's perceived move to the center . By September 2010 , with the Democrats anticipating heavy losses in midterm elections , this was said to precipitate Emanuel 's departure as Chief of Staff . 
 = = Mayor of Chicago = = 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 On September 30 , 2010 , it was announced that Emanuel would leave his post as White House Chief of Staff to run for Mayor of Chicago . He was replaced by Pete Rouse on October 2 , 2010 . 
 Emanuel 's eligibility for office was challenged on the basis of his lack of residency in Chicago for one year prior to the election . The Board of Elections and the Cook County Circuit Court affirmed his eligibility . A divided Court of Appeals reversed the Circuit Court , holding on January 24 , 2011 , that residency for purposes of a candidate is different from residency for purposes of being a voter . A further appeal to the Illinois Supreme Court resulted in a unanimous decision reversing the Court of Appeals and affirming Emanuel 's eligibility . 
 Emanuel 's mayoral campaign was the inspiration for a satirical Twitter account called <unk> , which received over 43 @,@ 000 followers , more popular than Emanuel 's actual Twitter account . Emanuel announced on February 28 that if the author would reveal himself , he would donate $ 5 @,@ 000 to the charity of the author 's choice . When Chicago journalist Dan Sinker revealed himself , Emanuel donated the money to Young Chicago Authors , a community organization which helps young people with writing and publishing skills . 
 Emanuel was elected on February 22 , 2011 with 55 % of the vote and was sworn in as the 55th Mayor of Chicago on May 16 , 2011 at the Pritzker Pavilion . At his inauguration were outgoing Mayor Richard M. Daley , Vice President Joe Biden , Labor Secretary Hilda Solis , Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner , and William M. Daley , brother of the outgoing mayor and who would later serve as White House Chief of Staff . Emanuel is Chicago 's first Jewish mayor . 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 An August 2014 , Chicago Tribune poll reported Emanuel had a 35 % approval rating as mayor of Chicago . 
 In 2015 , Emanuel won 56 percent of the vote in the run @-@ off election against Jesús " Chuy " García held on April 7 , 2015 . He had been hurt by sharp neighborhood criticism of his decision to shut down 50 public schools in black and Latino neighborhoods and his installation of red light cameras , together with anger at the high level of gun violence on the streets . On the other hand , he was supported by the business community and most elements of the Democratic party . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 Emanuel assembled a transition team from varied backgrounds . On November 16 , the city council voted unanimously to adopt the mayor 's first budget , which decreased the budget by $ 34 million and increased spending by $ 46 @.@ 2 million , supported by increasing fees and fines . Despite most Aldermen opposing cuts to library workers and the closure of mental health clinics , they ultimately supported it , calling it " honest " . At a news conference in November 2012 , Emanuel listed his top three priorities for the state legislature as security and pension reform , adding a casino to Chicago , and equal marriage rights for same @-@ sex couples . At a press conference with Illinois Governor Pat Quinn , who previously vetoed legislation to put a casino in Chicago , the two were " very close " to reaching a deal . 
 = = = = Police and community relations = = = = 
 In August 2012 , a federal lawsuit was filed by eleven Chicago police officers alleging they were removed from the mayoral security detail and replaced with officers who worked on Emanuel 's mayoral campaign , in violation of the 1983 Shakman Decree , which bars city officials from making political considerations in the hiring process . 
 Rahm Emanuel faced a great deal of criticism for his handling of the October 20 , 2014 police shooting of <unk> McDonald . The dash @-@ cam video of the shooting was initially withheld , and only was released after a judge ordered it on November 24 , 2015 . After the video release , Emanuel was condemned for covering up the incident and allowing Chicago police to use excessive force against minorities . Chicago Tribune columnist John Kass wrote that the Emanuel administration withheld from the public the police dashboard camera video of the shooting in order to secure the re @-@ election . Emanuel responded to criticism of the shooting and how it was handled by firing police Superintendent Garry McCarthy . In early December , the federal Justice Department announced an investigation into the Chicago Police Department , a move which Emanuel initially called " misguided . " Illinois state legislator La Shawn Ford also introduced a bill to recall the mayor ( an effort most pundits claim is more symbolic than practical ) . 
 Protests erupted soon after the release of the video , and on Black Friday protesters shut down part of the city 's Magnificent Mile . Public calls for resignation grew steadily over this period , including a well @-@ circulated op @-@ ed published in The New York Times . By early December , Emanuel 's approval rating had sunk to 18 % , with 67 % of Chicagoans disapproving of his job performance and slightly more than half of those polled calling for his resignation . During the week of December 10 , protestors blocked streets and continued to call for Emanuel to resign . Additional protests against Emanuel and Chicago 's Police Department were held on the city 's busy Michigan Avenue shopping area on December 24 , 2015 . 
 On December 26 , 2015 , a police officer killed two people in another shooting , including a woman whom the officer had shot by mistake . On December 28 , Emanuel announced that he was cutting short his vacation in Cuba to deal with the crisis . Emanuel announced several changes to the Chicago police department on December 30 , including doubling the number of <unk> issued to officers . On New Year 's Eve the Emanuel administration released emails revealing they had sought to coordinate with independent agencies such as the Independent Police Review Authority regarding public relations after the shooting . The same day The New Yorker added to the wave of negative media attention surrounding the mayor by publishing " The Sudden But Well @-@ <unk> Fall of Rahm Emanuel " , an article critically reevaluating Emanuel 's legacy as a political operative since the early 90s . 
 = = = = Public education = = = = 
 In 2012 , during the contract negotiations between the city the Chicago Teachers Union ( CTU ) , compromise could not be reached over issues like health insurance increases , teacher evaluations , and seniority pay increases . On August 8 , 2012 , the CTU voted 90 % to authorize a strike . On September 10 , the CTU began a strike after CTU President Lewis declared that negotiations with the city were not succeeding . On September 14 , the CTU reached a tentative agreement with the city which included preferences for teachers who have been laid off due to a school closing to be hired in another school and student test scores having less of a role in teacher evaluations than the city had originally planned . This tentative agreement did not hold , and the strike continued , after which Emanuel announced his intention to seek a legal injunction , forcing teachers back to work . On September 17 , Emanuel 's efforts to end the strike stalled as the walkout went into the second week . Delegates from the CTU voted to end the strike on September 18 , 2012 , and students began their return to the schools the following day . 
 On September 17 , 2013 , Emanuel 's appointed Chicago Board of Education announced the closing of 50 Chicago public schools , 49 elementary schools and a high school — the largest school closure in Chicago history . 
 = = = = Public health = = = = 
 On August 16 , 2011 , Emanuel unveiled " Healthy Chicago , " the city ’ s first @-@ ever public health blueprint with the Chicago Department of Public Health 's Commissioner Bechara <unk> . Emanuel initiated the consolidation of City Council committees from 19 to 16 in a cost control effort . On October 30 , 2012 , Emanuel voiced his support for the demolition of the abandoned Prentice Women 's Hospital Building , in order for Northwestern University , which owns the property , to build a new facility . Preservationists supported historical landmark status . Days later , the Commission on Chicago Landmarks voted that the building met landmark status criteria then reversed their decision later in the same meeting . On November 15 , a judge granted a temporary stay of the decision in order for a lawsuit filed by preservation coalitions against the landmark commission to be heard . 
 = = = = Transparency = = = = 
 Emanuel rejected requests under Illinois ' Freedom of Information Act from The Chicago Tribune for various communication and information logs for himself and his staff , labelling it " unduly burdensome . " After a second request by the Tribune , they were informed that 90 percent of the emails had been deleted by Emanuel and his top aides . As a result , Emanuel came under fire for going against his campaign promise to create " the most open , accountable , and transparent government that the City of Chicago has ever seen . " 
 = = = = Tax @-@ exempt status of Lollapalooza = = = = 
 Lollapalooza , an annual summer music festival in Grant Park , was exempt from taxation . Emanuel 's brother Ari is the co @-@ CEO of William Morris Endeavor , which co @-@ owns the event . In 2011 Rahm Emanuel asked the City Council to appoint an independent third party negotiator , to avoid having the negotiation seen as biased . Although the deal was reached before Emanuel took office , tax breaks must be negotiated every year . It was later revealed that the festival received its tax exemption for 2011 in the final days of the Daley administration . In 2012 , Lollapalooza paid taxes for the first time in seven years and extended its contract to host in Grant Park through 2021 . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 Mayor of Chicago 
 US House of Representatives 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Emanuel and his wife , Amy Merritt Rule , have a son and two daughters and the family lives in the Ravenswood neighborhood on Chicago 's north side . Rule converted to Judaism shortly before their wedding . Emanuel is a close friend of fellow Chicagoan David Axelrod , chief strategist for Obama 's 2008 and 2012 presidential campaign , and Axelrod signed the <unk> , the Jewish marriage contract , at Emanuel 's wedding . The <unk> are members of the Chicago synagogue Anshe Sholom B 'nai Israel . Rabbi Asher Lopatin of the congregation described Emanuel 's family as " a very involved Jewish family , " adding that " Amy was one of the teachers for a class for children during the High Holidays two years ago . " Emanuel has said of his Judaism : " I am proud of my heritage and treasure the values it has taught me . " Emanuel 's children attend the private University of Chicago Laboratory Schools in the Hyde Park neighborhood on Chicago 's south side . 
 Each year during the winter holidays , Emanuel takes a family trip where his children can be exposed to other cultures and parts of the world . Prior family trips have been to Vietnam , India , Kenya , Zambia , and South America . His 2015 holiday trip was scheduled for the island of Cuba . 
 Emanuel trains for and participates in triathlons . In 2011 , he scored 9th out of 80 competitors in his age group . A passionate cyclist , he rides a custom @-@ built , state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art Parlee road bike . 
 = = Works = = 
 = New York State Route 268 = 
 New York State Route 268 ( NY 268 ) is a state highway located in southwestern Delaware County , New York , in the United States . It runs from NY 97 in Hancock north over 10 miles ( 16 km ) to a bridge over Cannonsville Reservoir near the former site of the hamlet of Rock Rift in Tompkins . There , it ends at a junction with NY 10 . NY 268 meets the Quickway ( NY 17 ) east of the Hancock village limits . 
 From Hancock to the NY 17 interchange , NY 268 follows the pre @-@ Quickway routing of NY 17 . Between NY 17 and NY 10 , the route follows the former alignment of New York State Route 236 , a connector between then @-@ NY 17 and NY 10 that existed during the 1930s . In the floods of 2006 some of the areas along this rural highway suffered serious landslides , leading to a temporary closure of the road . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 268 begins at an intersection with NY 97 in eastern Hancock . The route heads northeast , paralleling the Quickway ( NY 17 ) and following the east branch of the Delaware River 's northern bank through the town of Hancock toward the hamlet of Cadosia . South of the hamlet , NY 268 connects to NY 17 at exit 87A ; however , there is no access between NY 268 and westbound NY 17 . Just past the exit , NY 268 leaves the pre @-@ Quickway routing of NY 17 and follows Cadosia Creek north through a large valley into Cadosia . 
 Past Cadosia , NY 268 proceeds through a heavily rural area of Delaware County . Upon entering the town of Tompkins , the route passes through Kerry Siding , a small community composed of less than a dozen structures . Farther north , Cadosia Creek reaches its source 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the town line and midway between Kerry Siding and Apex , another small hamlet situated on the route . NY 268 continues past Apex to the eastern portion of the Cannonsville Reservoir , which it crosses by way of a 184 @.@ 1 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 604 ft ) bridge before terminating at NY 10 on the northern bank of the reservoir . 
 All of NY 268 is part of New York State Bicycle Route 17 , which continues southeast toward Port Jervis on NY 97 and west toward Deposit on NY 10 . 
 = = History = = 
 The segment of modern NY 268 between the Hancock hamlet of Cadosia and NY 10 in Tompkins was originally designated NY 236 c . 1931 . At its southern end , the route connected to NY 17 , which followed current NY 268 southwest into the village of Hancock at the time . The NY 236 designation was removed c . 1939 ; however , the route remained state @-@ maintained long afterward as NY 989 and later NY 990P , both unsigned reference route designations . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , NY 17 was rerouted onto a new limited @-@ access highway , known as the Quickway , in the vicinity of Hancock and Cadosia . The former routing of NY 17 remained state maintained as an extension of NY 989 and NY 990P between the two locations . All of NY 990P was redesignated as NY 268 between 1989 and 1993 . In the floods of 2006 between June 25 and July 5 , some of the areas along NY 268 suffered serious landslides and , as a result , was temporarily closed off by the New York State Department of Transportation . The road was reopened to traffic in mid @-@ July . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Delaware County . 
 = Pirates of the Caribbean : Armada of the Damned = 
 Pirates of the Caribbean : Armada of the Damned is a cancelled action @-@ adventure role @-@ playing video game that was being developed by Propaganda Games for the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and Microsoft Windows platforms . Originally set to be published by Disney Interactive Studios , it was the first attempt to create an open world game based on the Pirates of the Caribbean film franchise . The project was cancelled in October 2010 , soon before the closure of Propaganda Games . 
 Set before events of The Curse of the Black Pearl , the game was to follow James Sterling , a pirate captain whose main mission was to travel across the Caribbean Sea to make a reputation for himself . Although little was unveiled about the story , it was intended to be independent from the films ' main arc and include new characters . Gameplay was to have emphasized role @-@ playing elements , including real @-@ time combat and weapon customization . 
 After its announcement at 2009 's Electronic Entertainment Expo , the game received positive responses from most video game journalists . Daemon Hatfield from IGN thought it " a promising action RPG " , while GamesRadar praised the gameplay , comparing it to Assassin 's Creed . Journalists were disappointed when Disney cancelled the game several months before its planned release date . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Armada of the Damned was conceived as an action @-@ adventure role @-@ playing video game played from a third @-@ person perspective and set in an open world environment based on the Pirates of the Caribbean universe . The player was to take the role of James Sterling , a pirate captain whose main mission was to travel across the Caribbean Sea and make a reputation for himself . Some of Sterling 's features could be directly customized by the player , although Armada of the Damned was centered on a choice system that would affect the character 's appearance , personality , weapons , attacks , quests , and story developments . 
 Although most of the character 's specifications could be customized , some elements were to be determined by the game 's two character types , Legendary and Dreaded . Choosing a type at the beginning of the game affected several gameplay and story elements . Each character type had unique features that shaped the way the game was experienced , including how the environment and non @-@ playable characters interacted with the player . 
 Combat in Armada of the Damned was split between land and sea . Sterling had a light and a heavy attack , which could be combined to create combos that increased the damage he inflicted . Correct timing lead to a bonus attack at the end of the combo that improved its strength . Sterling could also curse his opponents . The curse was a spell that weakened all surrounding enemies when it was used as a finishing move . All attacks , special moves , and combinations varied depending of the pirate type chosen and could be upgraded at will . 
 In the game , the player was given a customizable ship named the Nemesis , commanded by Sterling and his crew . The player 's choices in the game would determine the crew they could hire , which in turn affected the ship 's attributes . The vessel could be used to explore the Caribbean Sea and battle other crafts . During combat , the player could maneuver the ship , fire the cannons , or board the enemy vessel for hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . If the enemy craft was boarded and the enemy crew was eliminated , the player received more loot than if it was destroyed . Loot salvaged in these battles could be sold in markets . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Little information was revealed about Armada of the Damned 's plot . Sterling had no connection with the film series ' characters and story arcs . The game and the films shared the same universe , but the former was to take place before the events of the latter . Sterling , raised in a poor family , was a young adventurer with dreams of fame and fortune who decided to become a pirate . Although he was killed on his first voyage , Sterling was revived by supernatural forces which gave him a second chance . After these events , the player had the option to follow two paths : become either a Legendary or a Dreaded pirate . On the Legendary path , the player would be a well @-@ respected pirate who acted in good faith . On the Dreaded path , the player would be mysterious and feared . 
 = = Development = = 
 Propaganda Games , a studio founded in 2005 and owned by Disney Interactive Studios , developed Armada of the Damned . The studio was established by former employees of EA Canada and focused on the development of action @-@ adventure games for Disney . Propaganda 's first game , Turok ( 2008 ) , became a commercial success , selling more than one million copies . After Turok 's release , the studio began working on a project for the Pirates of the Caribbean franchise . Propaganda 's vice president and general manager Dan <unk> said that this was because " it is a universe fans will be dying to explore " . The studio revealed that they worked on several scripts to improve the gameplay focus . Armada of the Damned included an interactive choice system to shape the game , making choices an important feature . 
 According to game director Alex Peters , Armada of the Damned 's characters were developed unattached from those that appear in the film series . " We were very clear that we didn 't want to be associated with being a movie game " , he commented . This desire led to the creation of James Sterling , a character that would fit the studio 's needs and feel familiar to the characters featured in the films . An original music score was written for Armada of the Damned , while the musical themes from the films were " treated tastefully and only used on occasion . " After the game 's cancellation , the score was used in Lego Pirates of the Caribbean : The Video Game , which was released in 2011 . 
 = = Cancellation = = 
 During Armada of the Damned 's development , Propaganda Games also worked on Tron : Evolution , which was released in December 2010 . In October 2010 , Disney Interactive Studios announced that Armada of the Damned 's development team would be laid off as part of a restructuring program . However , Propaganda would finish development of Tron : Evolution and its post @-@ launch downloadable content . 
 The restructuring reduced the studio 's staff by more than 100 people and led to the cancellation of Armada of the Damned . The remaining development team worked to finish Tron : Evolution , whose team was also affected by the lay offs . However , after the game failed to attain critical or commercial success , Disney cancelled its planned downloadable content and closed Propaganda Games . 
 = = Reception = = 
 After its announcement at 2009 's Electronic Entertainment Expo , Armada of the Damned was met with positive reactions from most video game journalists . Daemon Hatfield from IGN named it " a promising action RPG , " elaborating that " even though Armada of the Damned uses the Pirates of the Caribbean license ... [ it ] is its own game , an adventure that lets players create their own pirate and wander the seas of the Caribbean seeking fame and fortune . " Chris Antista from GamesRadar praised its gameplay , comparing it with Assassin ’ s Creed . He stated that " the game has spectacularly preserved the spirit of the films , and they ’ ve done it without parasitically clinging to moments you ’ ve already seen on the big screen . " 
 An editor from the Official Xbox Magazine speculated that since the first Pirates of the Caribbean film was " followed by a progressive descent into mediocrity and <unk> with <unk> tentacles in the sequels , any game that 's set before the first movie is likely to be amazing . " Matt Miller from Game Informer was impressed with the game , praising its Mass Effect @-@ like speech and combat systems . He commented that " we didn 't go into our meeting for Pirates with great expectations , but came out pleasantly amazed at the potential of the game . " Joystiq 's Mike Schramm compared the game to Fable , noting that " what is there looks good – the combat was solid , if a little shallow , and the graphics and polish are well on their way . " 
 Journalists expressed disappointment when Disney reduced the staff at Propaganda Games and cancelled development of the game several months before its planned release date . IGN 's Ryan Clements stated that " it 's a shame that [ Armada of the Damned 's ] potential won 't be realized at this point in time . " Justin Towell , writing for GamesRadar , was frustrated by Disney 's decision : " It makes no sense to completely abandon work on a game that 's clearly not that far off completion . " Game Informer 's Jeff Marchiafava also expressed sadness about the cancellation , saying " What kind of noise does a depressed pirate make ? Because we would totally be making that noise right now . " 
 = Feminism in India = 
 Feminism in India is a set of movements aimed at defining , establishing , and defending equal political , economic , and social rights and equal opportunities for Indian women . It is the pursuit of women 's rights within the society of India . Like their feminist counterparts all over the world , feminists in India seek gender equality : the right to work for equal wages , the right to equal access to health and education , and equal political rights . Indian feminists also have fought against culture @-@ specific issues within India 's patriarchal society , such as inheritance laws and the practice of widow immolation known as Sati . 
 The history of feminism in India can be divided into three phases : the first phase , beginning in the mid @-@ nineteenth century , initiated when male European colonists began to speak out against the social evils of Sati ; the second phase , from 1915 to Indian independence , when Gandhi incorporated women 's movements into the Quit India movement and independent women 's organisations began to emerge ; and finally , the third phase , post @-@ independence , which has focused on fair treatment of women at home after marriage , in the work force and right to political parity . 
 Despite the progress made by Indian feminist movements , women living in modern India still face many issues of discrimination . India 's patriarchal culture has made the process of gaining land @-@ ownership rights and access to education challenging . In the past two decades , there has also emerged a disturbing trend of sex @-@ selective abortion . To Indian feminists , these are seen as injustices worth struggling against . 
 As in the West , there has been some criticism of feminist movements in India . They have especially been criticised for focusing too much on women already privileged , and neglecting the needs and representation of poorer or lower caste women . This has led to the creation of caste @-@ specific feminist organisations and movements . 
 = = Definition in the Indian context = = 
 Women 's role in Pre @-@ colonial social structures reveals that feminism was theorised differently in India than in the West . In India , women 's issues first began to be addressed when the state commissioned a report on the status of women to a group of feminist researchers and activists . The report recognised the fact that in India , women were oppressed under a system of structural hierarchies and injustices . During this period , Indian feminists were influenced by the Western debates being conducted about violence against women . However , due to the difference in the historical and social culture of India , the debate in favour of Indian women had to be conducted creatively and certain Western ideas had to be rejected . Women 's issues began to gain an international prominence when the decade of 1975 – 1985 was declared the United Nations Decade for Women . 
 Historical circumstances and values in India have caused feminists to develop a feminism that differs from Western feminism . For example , the idea of women as " powerful " is accommodated into patriarchal culture through religion , which has retained visibility in all sections of society . This has provided women with traditional " cultural spaces . " Furthermore , in the West the notion of " self " rests in competitive individualism where people are described as " born free yet everywhere in chains . " In India the individual is usually considered to be just one part of the larger social collective . Survival of the individual is dependent upon cooperation , and self @-@ denial for the greater good is valued . 
 Indian women negotiate survival through an array of oppressive patriarchal family structures : age , ordinal status , relationship to men through family of origin , marriage and procreation as well as patriarchal attributes . Examples of patriarchal attributes include : dowry , siring sons etc . , kinship , caste , community , village , market and the state . It should however be noted that several communities in India , such as the Nairs of Kerala , <unk> of Mangalore , certain Maratha clans , and Bengali families exhibit matriarchal tendencies . In these communities , the head of the family is the oldest woman rather than the oldest man . Sikh culture is also regarded as relatively gender @-@ neutral . 
 In India , of communities recognised in the national Constitution as Scheduled Tribes , " some ... [ are ] matriarchal and matrilineal " " and thus have been known to be more egalitarian . " According to interviewer Anuj Kumar , Manipur , " has a matriarchal society " , but this may not be a scholarly assessment . This is because though mothers there are in forefront of most of the social activism , the society has always been patriarchal . Their women power is visible because of historical reasons . Manipur was ruled by strong dynasties and the need for expansions of borders , crushing any outsider threats , etc. engaged the men . So , women had to take charge of home @-@ front . 
 In Muslim families , women and men are considered equal , but not in the westernised sense . The Quran teaches that the minds of males and females work differently and are generally different biologically . Therefore , Islam grants different rights to the husband and wife . One such right which the wife owes to her husband is being head of the household . 
 The heterogeneity of the Indian experience reveals that there are multiple <unk> , contributing to the existence of multiple feminisms . Hence , feminism in India is not a singular theoretical orientation ; it has changed over time in relation to historical and cultural realities , levels of consciousness , perceptions and actions of individual women , and women as a group . The widely used definition is " An awareness of women 's oppression and exploitation in society , at work and within the family , and conscious action by women and men to change this situation . " Acknowledging sexism in daily life and attempting to challenge and eliminate it through deconstructing mutually exclusive notions of femininity and masculinity as biologically determined categories opens the way towards an equitable society for both men and women . 
 The male and female dichotomy of polar opposites with the former oppressing the latter at all times is refuted in the Indian context because it was men who initiated social reform movements against various social evils . Patriarchy is just one of the hierarchies . Relational hierarchies between women within the same family are more adverse . Here women are pitted against one another . Not all women are powerless at all times . 
 There have been intense debates within the Indian women 's movements about the relationship between Western and Indian feminisms . Many Indian feminists simultaneously claim a specific " Indian " sensitivity as well as an international feminist solidarity with groups and individuals worldwide . The rise of liberal feminism in the West in the 1970s focused deeply on demands for equal opportunities in education and employment , as well as ending violence against women . To a large extent , the emerging feminist movement in India was influenced by Western ideals . These called for education and equal rights , but also adapted their appeals to local issues and concerns , such as dowry @-@ related violence against women , Sati , sex selective abortion and custodial rape . Some Indian feminists have suggested that these issues are not specifically " Indian " in nature but rather a reflexion of a wider trend of patriarchal oppression of women . 
 = = History = = 
 Unlike the Western feminist movement , India 's movement was initiated by men , and later joined by women . The efforts of these men included abolishing sati , which was a widow 's death by burning on her husband 's funeral pyre , abolishing the custom of child marriage , abolishing the disfiguring of widows , introducing the marriage of upper caste Hindu widows , promoting women 's education , obtaining legal rights for women to own property , and requiring the law to acknowledge women 's status by granting them basic rights in matters such as adoption . 
 The 19th century was the period that saw a majority of women 's issues come under the spotlight and reforms began to be made . Much of the early reforms for Indian women were conducted by men . However , by the late 19th century they were joined in their efforts by their wives , sisters , daughters , <unk> and other individuals directly affected by campaigns such as those carried out for women 's education . By the late 20th century , women gained greater autonomy through the formation of independent women 's own organisations . By the late thirties and forties a new narrative began to be constructed regarding " women 's activism " . This was newly researched and expanded with the vision to create ' logical ' and organic links between feminism and Marxism , as well as with anti @-@ communalism and anti @-@ <unk> , etc . The Constitution of India did guarantee ' equality between the sexes , ' which created a relative lull in women 's movements until the 1970s . 
 During the formative years of women 's rights movements , the difference between the sexes was more or less taken for granted in that their roles , functions , aims and desires were different . As a result , they were not only to be reared differently but treated differently also . Over the course of time , this difference itself became a major reason for initiating women 's movements . Early 19th century reformers argued that the difference between men and women was no reason for the subjection of women in society . However , later reformers were of the opinion that indeed it was this particular difference that subjugated women to their roles in society , for example , as mothers . Therefore , there was a need for the proper care of women 's rights . With the formation of women 's organisations and their own participation in campaigns , their roles as mothers was again stressed but in a different light : this time the argument was for women 's rights to speech , education and emancipation . However , the image of women with the mother as a symbol underwent changes over time – from an emphasis on family to the creation of an archetypal mother figure , evoking deep , often atavistic images . 
 = = = First phase : 1850 – 1915 = = = 
 The colonial venture into modernity brought concepts of democracy , equality and individual rights . The rise of the concept of nationalism and introspection of discriminatory practices brought about social reform movements related to caste and gender relations . This first phase of feminism in India was initiated by men to uproot the social evils of sati ( widow immolation ) , to allow widow remarriage , to forbid child marriage , and to reduce illiteracy , as well as to regulate the age of consent and to ensure property rights through legal intervention . In addition to this , some upper caste Hindu women rejected constraints they faced under Brahminical traditions . However , efforts for improving the status of women in Indian society were somewhat thwarted by the late nineteenth century , as nationalist movements emerged in India . These movements resisted ' colonial interventions in gender relations ' particularly in the areas of family relations . In the mid to late nineteenth century , there was a national form of resistance to any colonial efforts made to ' modernise ' the Hindu family . This included the Age of Consent controversy that erupted after the government tried to raise the age of marriage for women . 
 Several Indian states were ruled by women during British colonial advance including Jhansi ( Rani <unk> ) , <unk> ( Rani <unk> ) , Bhopal ( <unk> Begum ) and Punjab ( Jind Kaur ) . 
 = = = Second Phase : 1915 – 1947 = = = 
 During this period the struggle against colonial rule intensified . Nationalism became the pre @-@ eminent cause . Claiming Indian superiority became the tool of cultural revivalism resulting in an <unk> model of Indian womanhood similar to that of Victorian womanhood : special yet separated from public space . Gandhi legitimised and expanded Indian women 's public activities by initiating them into the non @-@ violent civil disobedience movement against the British Raj . He exalted their feminine roles of caring , self @-@ abnegation , sacrifice and tolerance ; and carved a niche for those in the public arena . Peasant women played an important role in the rural <unk> of <unk> and Bardoli . Women @-@ only organisations like All India Women 's Conference ( <unk> ) and the National Federation of Indian Women ( <unk> ) emerged . Women were grappling with issues relating to the scope of women 's political participation , women 's franchise , communal awards , and leadership roles in political parties . 
 The 1920s was a new era for Indian women and is defined as ' feminism ' that was responsible for the creation of localised women 's associations . These associations emphasised women 's education issues , developed livelihood strategies for working @-@ class women , and also organised national level women 's associations such as the All India Women 's Conference . <unk> was closely affiliated with the Indian National Congress . Under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi , it worked within the nationalist and anti @-@ colonialist freedom movements . This made the mass mobilisation of women an integral part of Indian nationalism . Women therefore were a very important part of various nationalist and anti @-@ colonial efforts , including the civil disobedience movements in the 1930s . 
 After independence , the All India Women 's Conference continued to operate and in 1954 the Indian Communist Party formed its own women 's wing known as the National Federation of Indian Women . However , feminist agendas and movements became less active right after India 's 1947 independence , as the nationalist agendas on nation building took precedence over feminist issues . 
 Women 's participation in the struggle for freedom developed their critical consciousness about their role and rights in independent India . This resulted in the introduction of the franchise and civic rights of women in the Indian constitution . There was provision for women 's upliftment through affirmative action , maternal health and child care provision ( crèches ) , equal pay for equal work etc . The state adopted a patronising role towards women . For example , India 's constitution states that women are a " weaker section " of the population , and therefore need assistance to function as equals . Thus women in India did not have to struggle for basic rights as did women in the West . The utopia ended soon when the social and cultural ideologies and structures failed to honour the newly acquired concepts of fundamental rights and democracy . 
 = = = Post @-@ 1947 = = = 
 Post independence feminists began to redefine the extent to which women were allowed to engage in the workforce . Prior to independence , most feminists accepted the sexual divide within the labour force . However , feminists in the 1970s challenged the inequalities that had been established and fought to reverse them . These inequalities included unequal wages for women , relegation of women to ' unskilled ' spheres of work , and restricting women as a reserve army for labour . In other words , the feminists ' aim was to abolish the free service of women who were essentially being used as cheap capital . Feminist class @-@ consciousness also came into focus in the 1970s , with feminists recognising the inequalities not just between men and women but also within power structures such as caste , tribe , language , religion , region , class etc . This also posed as a challenge for feminists while shaping their overreaching campaigns as there had to be a focus within efforts to ensure that fulfilling the demands of one group would not create further inequalities for another . Now , in the early twenty @-@ first century , the focus of the Indian feminist movement has gone beyond treating women as useful members of society and a right to parity , but also having the power to decide the course of their personal lives and the right of self @-@ determination . 
 In 1966 Indira Gandhi became the first female Prime Minister of India . She served as prime minister of India for three consecutive terms ( 1966 – 77 ) and a fourth term from 1980 until she was assassinated in 1984 . 
 The state of Kerala is often viewed as the ideal progressive leader in the women ’ s rights movement in India among states . Kerala maintains very high relative levels of female literacy and women ’ s health , as well as greater female inheritance and property rights . For example , a 1998 study conducted by Bina Agarwal found that while only 13 % of all women in India with landowning fathers inherited that land as daughters , 24 % of such women were able to do so in the state of Kerala . This is important because it has been shown that measures to improve such access to property and economic independence through channels such as education not only directly improve women ’ s wellbeing and capabilities , but also reduce their risk of exposure to marital or any sort of domestic violence . 
 In 2014 , an Indian family court in Mumbai ruled that a husband objecting to his wife wearing a kurta and jeans and forcing her to wear a sari amounts to cruelty inflicted by the husband and can be a ground to seek divorce . The wife was thus granted a divorce on the ground of cruelty as defined under section 27 ( 1 ) ( d ) of Special Marriage Act , 1954 . 
 In 2016 a judgment of the Delhi high court was made public in which it was ruled that the eldest female member of a Hindu Undivided Family can be its " Karta " . 
 = = Issues = = 
 Despite " on @-@ paper " advancements , many problems still remain which inhibit women from fully taking advantage of new rights and opportunities in India . 
 There are many traditions and customs that have been an important part of Indian culture for hundreds of years . Religious laws and expectations , or " personal laws " enumerated by each specific religion , often conflict with the Indian Constitution , eliminating rights and powers women should legally have . Despite these crossovers in legality , the Indian government does not interfere with religion and the personal laws they hold . Religions , like Hinduism , call for women to be faithful servants to God and their husbands . They have a term called <unk> that describes a wife who has accepted service and devotion to her husband and his family as her ultimate religion and duty . Indian society is largely composed of hierarchical systems within families and communities . These hierarchies can be broken down into age , sex , ordinal position , kinship relationships ( within families ) , and caste , lineage , wealth , occupations , and relationship to ruling power ( within the community ) . When hierarchies emerge within the family based on social convention and economic need , girls in poorer families suffer twice the impact of vulnerability and stability . From birth , girls are automatically entitled to less ; from playtime , to food , to education , girls can expect to always be entitled to less than their brothers . Girls also have less access to their family 's income and assets , which is exacerbated among poor , rural Indian families . From the start , it is understood that females will be burdened with strenuous work and exhausting responsibilities for the rest of their lives , always with little to no compensation or recognition . 
 India is also a patriarchal society , which , by definition , describes cultures in which males as fathers or husbands are assumed to be in charge and the official heads of households . A patrilineal system governs the society , where descent and inheritance are traced through the male line and men are generally in control of the distribution of family resources . 
 These traditions and ways of Indian life have been in effect for so long that this type of lifestyle is what women have become accustomed to and expect . Indian women often do not take full advantage of their constitutional rights because they are not properly aware or informed of them . Women also tend to have poor utilisation of voting rights because they possess low levels of political awareness and sense of political efficacy . Women are not often encouraged to become informed about issues . Due to this , political parties do not invest much time in female candidates because there is a perception that they are a " wasted investment . " 
 The female @-@ to @-@ male ratio in India is 933 to 1000 , showing that there are numerically fewer women in the country than men . This is due to several factors , including infanticides , most commonly among female infants , and the poor care of female infants and childbearing women . Although outlawed , infanticides are still highly popular in rural India , and are continuing to become even more prominent . This is due to the fact , most especially in rural areas , that families cannot afford female children because of the dowry they must pay when their daughter gets married . Like infanticide , the payment of dowry is also illegal , but is still a frequent and prevalent occurrence in rural India . Women are considered to be " worthless " by their husbands if they are not " able " to produce a male child , and can often face much abuse if this is the case . 
 = = = Birth ratio = = = 
 Between the years of 1991 to 2001 , the female @-@ male ratio of the population of India fell from 94 @.@ 5 girls per 100 boys to 92 @.@ 7 girls per 100 boys . Some parts of the country , such as Kerala , did not experience such a decline , but in the richer Indian states of Punjab , Haryana , Gujarat , and Maharashtra , the female @-@ male ratio fell very sharply ( the female @-@ male ratios in these states were between 79 @.@ 3 and 87 @.@ 8 ) . This is evidence of <unk> inequality , and an indication that sex @-@ selective abortion has become more pervasive . The Indian parliament has banned the use of sex determination techniques for foetuses due to this , but enforcement of this law has been largely ignored . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Most of the average Indian woman 's life is spent in marriage ; many women are still married before the legal age of 18 , and the incidence of non @-@ marriage is low in India . <unk> and raising children are the priorities of early adulthood for Indian women . Thus , if they enter the workforce at all , it is far later than Indian men . Urban Indian men reach the peak of their labour force participation between the ages of 25 and 29 , while urban Indian women do so between the ages of 40 and 44 . Because of this , women have less time for the acquisition of skills and fewer opportunities for job improvements . 
 There is a poor representation of women in the Indian workforce . Females have a ten percent higher drop @-@ out rate than males from middle and primary schools , as well as lower levels of literacy than men . Since unemployment is also high in India , it is easy for employers to manipulate the law , especially when it comes to women , because it is part of Indian culture for women not to argue with men . Additionally , labour unions are insensitive to women 's needs . Women also have to settle for jobs that comply with their obligations as wives , mothers , and homemakers . 
 = = = Muslim personal law ( MPL ) = = = 
 One of the major issues are aspects of sharia ( Islamic law ) known as Muslim personal law ( MPL ) or Muslim family law . Some of the thorny issues regarding the way in which MPL has thus far been formulated include polygyny , divorce , custody of children , maintenance and marital property . In addition , there are also more macro issues regarding the underlying assumptions of such legislation , for example , the assumption of the man as head of the household . 
 = = = Dress code = = = 
 Another issue that concerns women is the dress code expected of them . Islam requires both men and women to dress modestly ; this concept is known as hijab and covers a wide interpretation of behavior and garments . There is mixed opinion among feminists over extremes of externally imposed control . Women from other religions are also expected to follow dress codes . 
 = = Theology = = 
 = = = Hindu feminism = = = 
 In the Hindu religion , there has been partial success in terms of gender equality reform laws and family law . While this is a major advancement relative to other religions in India , it is still not a complete triumph in terms of feminism and relieving oppression . Gandhi came up with the term <unk> shakti ( women power ) for the concept of womanhood . In the Hindu religion , Gods are not exclusively male . Hinduism sheds a positive light on femininity ; females are considered to complement and complete their male counterparts . It is important to note that both the deity of knowledge and the deity of wealth are female . 
 There has been some criticism from Dalit groups that Indian feminism tends to represent " upper caste " and upper class Hindu women , while ignoring and marginalising the interests of Dalit women . Debates on caste and gender oppression have been furthered by Other Backward Class ( <unk> ) members of different political parties , arguing in state assemblies that " lower caste " women 's interests are best represented by women from these castes . Working towards this end , women within Dalit castes have formed organisations such as the All India Dalit Women 's Forum and the National Federation of Dalit Women and Dalit Solidarity , which focus on the gendered implications of caste based violence and oppression , such as the ways in which Dalit women suffer from urban poverty and displacement . 
 = = = Islamic feminism = = = 
 The Hindu and Muslim communities in India were treated differently by the government in that separate types of concessions were made for each community in order to accommodate their separate religious laws and regulations . The case of Shah Bano begun in 1985 was one such example of Rajiv Gandhi attempting to make " concessions " for the Muslim community to in turn secure support for the Congress . Shah Bano , a 73 @-@ year @-@ old Muslim woman , was divorced by her husband after forty @-@ three years of marriage . According to the Sharia or Muslim Law , her husband was not required to pay her alimony . Shah Bano challenged this decision in the Supreme Court , which ultimately ruled in her favour and ordered her husband to pay her a monthly maintenance allowance . This caused chaos amongst the Muslim clerics who denounced the judgement and suggested that their religion , Islam was under attack in the country . In a fear of losing overall Muslim support , Rajiv succumbed to the pressures of the Conservative <unk> from Muslims community and his own party and backed the Muslim Women ( Protection of Rights on Divorce ) Bill which restricts alimony for Muslim Women only for 90 days after divorce . This caused an outcry from Muslim feminists and Hindu nationalists who found the appeasement of Muslim males by the Congress for political purposes wrong and opportunistic . 
