 In 1942 , Pittsburgh artist J. Howard Miller was hired by Westinghouse Electric 's internal War Production Coordinating Committee , through an advertising agency , to create a series of posters to display to the company 's workers . The intent of the poster project was to raise worker morale , to reduce absenteeism , to direct workers ' questions to management , and to lower the likelihood of labor unrest or a factory strike . Each of the more than 42 posters designed by Miller was displayed in the factory for two weeks , then replaced by the next one in the series . Most of the posters featured men ; they emphasized traditional roles for men and women . One of the posters pictured a smiling male manager with the words " Any Questions About Your Work ? ... Ask your Supervisor . " 
 No more than 1 @,@ 800 copies of the 17 @-@ by @-@ 22 @-@ inch ( 559 by 432 mm ) " We Can Do It ! " poster were printed . It was not initially seen beyond several Westinghouse factories in East Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , and the Midwest , where it was scheduled to be displayed for two five @-@ day work weeks starting Monday , February 15 , 1943 . The targeted factories were making plasticized helmet liners impregnated with Micarta , a phenolic resin invented by Westinghouse . Mostly women were employed in this enterprise , which yielded some 13 million helmet liners over the course of the war . The slogan " We Can Do It ! " was probably not interpreted by the factory workers as empowering to women alone ; they had been subjected to a series of paternalistic , controlling posters promoting management authority , employee capability and company unity , and the workers would likely have understood the image to mean " Westinghouse Employees Can Do It " , all working together . The upbeat image served as gentle propaganda to boost employee morale and keep production from lagging . The pictured red , white and blue clothing was a subtle call to patriotism , one of the frequent tactics of corporate war production committees . 
 = = Rosie the Riveter = = 
 During World War II , the " We Can Do It ! " poster was not connected to the 1942 song " Rosie the Riveter " , nor to the widely seen Norman Rockwell painting called Rosie the Riveter that appeared on the cover of the Memorial Day issue of the Saturday Evening Post , May 29 , 1943 . The Westinghouse poster was not associated with any of the women nicknamed " Rosie " who came forward to promote women working for war production on the home front . Rather , after being displayed for two weeks in February 1943 to some Westinghouse factory workers , it disappeared for nearly four decades . Other " Rosie " images prevailed , often photographs of actual workers . The Office of War Information geared up for a massive nationwide advertising campaign to sell the war , but " We Can Do It ! " was not part of it . 
 Rockwell 's emblematic Rosie the Riveter painting was loaned by the Post to the US Treasury Department for use in posters and campaigns promoting war bonds . Following the war , the Rockwell painting gradually sank from public memory because it was copyrighted ; all of Rockwell 's paintings were vigorously defended by his estate after his death . This protection resulted in the original painting gaining value — it sold for nearly $ 5 million in 2002 . Conversely , the lack of protection for the " We Can Do It ! " image is one of the reasons it experienced a rebirth . 
 Ed Reis , a volunteer historian for Westinghouse , noted that the original image was not shown to female <unk> during the war , so the recent association with " Rosie the Riveter " was unjustified . Rather , it was targeted at women who were making helmet liners out of Micarta . Reis joked that the woman in the image was more likely to have been named " Molly the Micarta <unk> or Helen the Helmet Liner Maker . " 
 = = Rediscovery = = 
 In 1982 , the " We Can Do It ! " poster was reproduced in a magazine article , " Poster Art for Patriotism 's Sake " , a Washington Post Magazine article about posters in the collection of the National Archives . 
 In subsequent years , the poster was re @-@ appropriated to promote feminism . Feminists saw in the image an embodiment of female empowerment . The " We " was understood to mean " We Women " , uniting all women in a sisterhood fighting against gender inequality . This was very different from the poster 's 1943 use to control employees and to discourage labor unrest . History professor Jeremiah Axelrod commented on the image 's combination of femininity with the " masculine ( almost macho ) composition and body language . " 
 Smithsonian magazine put the image on its cover in March 1994 , to invite the viewer to read a featured article about wartime posters . The US Postal Service created a 33 ¢ stamp in February 1999 based on the image , with the added words " Women Support War Effort " . A Westinghouse poster from 1943 was put on display at the National Museum of American History , part of the exhibit showing items from the 1930s and ' 40s . 
 = = Wire service photograph = = 
 In 1984 , former war worker Geraldine Hoff Doyle came across an article in Modern Maturity magazine which showed a wartime photograph of a young woman working at a lathe , and she assumed that the photograph was taken of her in mid @-@ to @-@ late 1942 when she was working briefly in a factory . Ten years later , Doyle saw the " We Can Do It ! " poster on the front of the Smithsonian magazine and assumed the poster was an image of herself . Without intending to profit from the connection , Doyle decided that the 1942 wartime photograph had inspired Miller to create the poster , making Doyle herself the model for the poster . Subsequently , Doyle was widely credited as the inspiration for Miller 's poster . From an archive of Acme news photographs , Professor James J. Kimble obtained the original photographic print , including its yellowed caption identifying the woman as Naomi Parker . The photo is one of a series of photographs taken at Naval Air Station Alameda in California , showing Parker and her sister working at their war jobs during March 1942 . These images were published in various newspapers and magazines beginning in April 1942 , during a time when Doyle was still attending high school in Michigan . In February 2015 , Kimble interviewed the Parker sisters , now named Naomi Fern Fraley , 93 , and her sister Ada Wyn <unk> , 91 , and found that they had known for five years about the incorrect identification of the photo , and had been rebuffed in their attempt to correct the historical record . 
 Although many publications have repeated Doyle 's unsupported assertion that the wartime photograph inspired Miller 's poster , Westinghouse historian Charles A. Ruch , a Pittsburgh resident who had been friends with J. Howard Miller , said that Miller was not in the habit of working from photographs , but rather live models . Penny Coleman , the author of Rosie the Riveter : Women working on the home front in World War II , said that she and Ruch could not determine whether the wartime photo had appeared in any of the periodicals that Miller would have seen . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Today , the image has become very widely known , far beyond its narrowly defined purpose during WWII . It has adorned T @-@ shirts , tattoos , coffee cups and refrigerator magnets — so many different products that the Washington Post called it the " most over @-@ exposed " souvenir item available in Washington , D.C. It was used in 2008 by some of the various regional campaigners working to elect Sarah Palin , Ron Paul and Hillary Clinton . Michelle Obama was worked into the image by some attendees of the 2010 Rally to Restore Sanity and / or Fear . The image has been employed by corporations such as Clorox who used it in advertisements for household cleaners , the pictured woman provided in this instance with a wedding ring on her left hand . Parodies of the image have included famous women , men , animals and fictional characters . A bobblehead doll and an action figure toy have been produced . The Children 's Museum of Indianapolis showed a 4 @-@ by @-@ 5 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 by 1 @.@ 5 m ) replica made by artist Kristen Cumings from thousands of Jelly Belly candies . 
 After Julia Gillard became the first female prime minister of Australia in June 2010 , a Melbourne street artist calling himself Phoenix pasted Gillard 's face into a new monochrome version of the " We Can Do It ! " poster . <unk> Magazine published a photograph of the poster taken on Hosier Lane , Melbourne , in July 2010 , showing that the original " War Production Co @-@ ordinating Committee " mark in the lower right had been replaced with a URL pointing to Phoenix 's Flickr <unk> . In March 2011 , Phoenix produced a color version which stated " She Did It ! " in the lower right , then in January 2012 he pasted " Too Sad " diagonally across the poster to represent his disappointment with developments in Australian politics . 
 Geraldine Doyle died in December 2010 . Utne Reader went ahead with their scheduled January – February 2011 cover image : a parody of " We Can Do It ! " featuring Marge Simpson raising her right hand in a fist . The editors of the magazine expressed regret at the passing of Doyle , " the likely inspiration for the Rosie character " . 
 A stereoscopic ( 3D ) image of " We Can Do It ! " was created for the closing credits of the 2011 superhero film Captain America : The First Avenger . The image served as the background for the title card of English actress Hayley Atwell . 
 The Ad Council claimed the poster was developed in 1942 by its precursor , the War Advertising Committee , as part of a " Women in War Jobs " campaign , helping to bring " over two million women " into war production . In February 2012 during the Ad Council 's 70th anniversary celebration , an interactive application designed by Animax 's <unk> digital agency was linked to the Ad Council 's Facebook page . The Facebook app was called " <unk> Yourself " , referring to Rosie the Riveter ; it allowed viewers to upload images of their faces to be incorporated into the " We Can Do It ! " poster , then saved to be shared with friends . Ad Council President and CEO Peggy Conlon posted her own " <unk> " face on Huffington Post in an article she wrote about the group 's 70 @-@ year history . The staff of the television show Today posted two " <unk> " images on their website , using the faces of news anchors Matt Lauer and Ann Curry . However , Seton Hall University professor James J. Kimble and University of Pittsburgh professor Lester C. Olson researched the origins of the poster and determined that it was not produced by the Ad Council nor was it used for recruiting women workers . 
 = So Under Pressure = 
 " So Under Pressure " is a dance @-@ pop song performed by Australian singer Dannii Minogue . The song was written by Minogue , Terry Ronald and LMC , and produced by Lee Monteverde for Minogue 's fifth album Club Disco ( 2007 ) and was also used as the lead single for her greatest hits compilation The Hits & Beyond ( 2006 ) . The song 's lyrics discuss the cancer diagnoses of Minogue 's sister Kylie . 
 The song was released as a single on 12 June 2006 in the United Kingdom . It entered the top forty in Australia , Ireland and the UK and became Minogue 's tenth consecutive Upfront Club Chart number one . The song 's music video , directed by Phil Griffin , features Minogue in a variety of high pressure situations . She has described it as " the hardest video I 've ever done " . 
 = = Background and reception = = 
 In 2005 , Minogue began writing and recording material with longtime collaborator Terry Ronald and British dance group LMC . During one of their sessions , they penned " So Under Pressure " , which was inspired by the cancer diagnoses of her sister Kylie as well as that of an unnamed friend . Minogue has described the recording of " So Under Pressure " as a " real achievement " as she was " brave enough to put all [ her feelings ] into words " . Allmusic reviewer John Lucas called the track one of " Minogue 's more inventive moments " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " So Under Pressure " was officially released in the United Kingdom and Ireland on 12 June 2006 . The song debuted on the UK Singles Chart on 19 June 2006 at number twenty . The following week , " So Under Pressure " fell to number sixty and exited the chart in its third week of release . The track became Minogue 's seventh consecutive Upfront Club Chart number one in the UK . In Ireland , the song reached number thirty @-@ one , remaining on the singles chart for one week . " So Under Pressure " proved popular in Irish dance clubs where it reached number six on the Dance Singles Chart . 
 The track was released in Australia on 29 July 2006 . It debuted on 8 August 2006 at number sixteen and became Minogue 's eighth top twenty single . The song remained on the singles chart for five weeks , exiting on 5 September 2006 . It was the 30th highest selling dance single in Australia for 2006 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Phil Griffin in mid @-@ 2006 . Minogue described the video : 
 " I tried to put different things in the video that made me feel under pressure and it really did ! It was the hardest video <unk> ever done so I kept thinking , why on earth did I come up with this concept ? People don ’ t realise but I definitely have that Australian tomboy side to me . I love snakes and sharks and jumping out of planes and stuff . Growing up it never occurred to me that it wasn ’ t a girly thing to ride a bike , covered in mud holding frogs and collecting lizards ! " . 
 The music video 's crew did not believe that Minogue could work with the python , but she said that it did not bother her at all . The music video was released commercially on The Hits & Beyond special edition companion DVD , released in June 2006 . 
 The video opens with a scene of Minogue in a white room dressed in a black swimsuit . She is then shown lying on top of a white platform with a python wrapped around her body . Scenes of Minogue and her three dancers walking a catwalk , posing for photographs and dancing are intercut throughout the music video . The video concludes with Minogue trapped inside a spinning perspex box . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " So Under Pressure " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following people contributed to " So Under Pressure " : 
 Dannii Minogue – lead vocals 
 Justine <unk> – backing vocals 
 Lee Monteverde – keyboards 
 Chris Martin – guitar 
 Terry Ronald – backing vocals , additional vocal production 
 Recorded and mixed at <unk> Studios 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Let 's Stay Together ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Let 's Stay Together " is the third episode of the fifth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 83rd overall episode of the series . It was directed by co @-@ executive producer John Riggi and written by co @-@ executive producer Jack Burditt . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on October 7 , 2010 . Guest stars in this episode include John Amos , Todd Buonopane , Reg E. Cathey , Queen Latifah and Rob Reiner . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) must appear before Congress to discuss NBC 's merger with the fictitious company network <unk> ( a parody of Comcast ) . He hopes that he will charm celebrity members for the deal to go through , but one Congresswoman ( Latifah ) demands more diversity in the NBC programming lineup . As a result , Jack enlists Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) to come up with some new development ideas . Meanwhile , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) , the head writer of the fictitious sketch show The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) is fed up with the criticism her writing staff gives her , and finally Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) helps Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) reapply in the competitive NBC page program . 
 This episode of 30 Rock was generally , though not universally , well received among television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by 4 @.@ 90 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 1 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 NBC executive Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) attends a Congressional hearing in Washington D.C. regarding the Kabletown @-@ NBC merger deal . He is able to consolidate support for the deal , until Representative Regina Bookman ( Queen Latifah ) calls out NBC for being racist and demands that there be more diversity in the programming lineup . Following the hearing , Jack goes back to New York and asks Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) and " Dot Com " Slattery ( Kevin Brown ) to produce a program for the African @-@ American community . Dot Com suggests a show called Let 's Stay Together , about an African @-@ American family in the 1970s , but when Grizz Griswold ( Grizz Chapman ) suggests that a talking dog be added to the show , Tracy orders Dot Com to incorporate it into the rewrite , much to Dot Com 's dismay . 
 Meanwhile , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) , the head writer of the sketch show TGS with Tracy Jordan , is unhappy about the lack of respect she gets from her writing staff and complains to Jack , her boss , about the situation . Jack asks her if staff writer James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) can be promoted to co @-@ head writer in an effort to diversify NBC . Liz accepts , seeing this as an opportunity for someone else to get the lack of respect and complaints she does . She gets upset , though , when Toofer gets a television interview as head writer , and insists that she herself should also be there as she is co @-@ head writer . The two appear on Rutherford Rice 's ( Reg E. Cathey ) talk show Right On , a show aimed toward African @-@ American audiences . Liz gets visibly upset when Rice gives Toofer all of the credit she deserves , and as a result of her behavior she is escorted off the set by a security guard . 
 At the same time , Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) , a former NBC page , is back at NBC and wants to reapply to the page program , but notes that it has become a pageant . When Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) hears of this , she volunteers to help him win the pageant using her own pageant experience . Jenna treats Kenneth as her mother Verna ( Jan Hooks ) treated her during her pageant years . After a failed , over @-@ the @-@ top performance in front of Human resources mediator Jeffrey Weinerslav ( Todd Buonopane ) , Jenna vows to get Kenneth his job back . She goes to Jack to ask him for his help , and Jack orders Jeffrey to hire Kenneth back . 
 When Representative Bookman makes an unexpected visit to New York , Jack tries to show NBC 's commitment to diversity , but is thwarted when Bookman sees signs next to two bathrooms that read " Colored " and " White " that were really intended for the paper recycling bins that had been removed only moments ago , and Jeffrey informing Jack and Bookman that the minority slot in the page program was filled by Kenneth . Jack tries to improve the situation by giving " head writer " Toofer a medal for his work , but Bookman sees right through this , and discovers that Liz is the only one that truly deserves her respect , and congratulates her . After more grandstanding , Bookman tells Jack she will vote no on the Kabletown @-@ NBC deal unless he gives her reason not to . 
 The episode ends with a taping of the Let 's Stay Together rewrite , including the talking dog . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Let 's Stay Together " was written by co @-@ executive producer Jack Burditt and directed by co @-@ executive producer and staff writer John Riggi . This was Burditt 's thirteenth writing credit after " Jack Meets Dennis " , " The Baby Show " , " The Fighting Irish " , " Cleveland " , " Rosemary 's Baby " , " Subway Hero " , " Sandwich Day " , " The One with the Cast of Night Court " , " St. Valentine 's Day " , " The Ones " , " Kidney Now ! " , and " Don Geiss , America and Hope " . This was Riggi 's fourth helmed episode , having directed " Goodbye , My Friend " , " The Problem Solvers " and " The Moms " . This episode of 30 Rock originally aired on NBC in the United States on October 7 , 2010 , as the third episode of the show 's fifth season and the 83rd overall episode of the series . 
 In September 2010 , it was announced that actress and singer Queen Latifah would guest star on the show as a Congresswoman named Regina Bookman who demands from Alec Baldwin 's character , Jack Donaghy , more diversity in its NBC programming lineup . Latifah is a fan of the show and big fan of Baldwin and series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey . She said in an interview she was " out of my mind " excited to guest star . Latifah is due to appear in a future episode of 30 Rock . In addition , it was also confirmed that actor / director Rob Reiner would appear as himself , and in " Let 's Stay Together " he played a Congressman . Michael Ausiello of Entertainment Weekly reported in August 2010 that the show set a casting call " for an African @-@ American male in the 30s @-@ 60s age range " to play a fictitious host named Rutherford Rice , a well @-@ spoken host of Right On , a fictitious talk show focusing on African @-@ American issues . In this episode , Rutherford Rice was played by actor Reg E. Cathey , best known for his role on the HBO drama The Wire as Norman Wilson . Actor John Amos made a brief appearance in the episode in which he stars in one scene from the Let 's Stay Together show alongside a talking dog named Stanley the Dog . This was actor Todd Buonopane 's fourth appearance as the character Jeffrey Weinerslav , an NBC Human resource mediator . Buonopane previously appeared in the season three episodes " Believe in the Stars " , " Cutbacks " , and " Jackie Jormp @-@ Jomp " . 
 In an August 2010 interview , co @-@ showrunner and executive producer Robert Carlock was asked if the series would continue to make reference of the real @-@ life acquisition of NBC Universal by cable company Comcast — which occurred in November 2009 — to which Carlock replied that their version of the acquisition was in the " works " . Carlock noted that the NBC @-@ Comcast deal would not change the show 's " reason for existence " , explaining that since the merger has occurred it has made things " even funnier " for the staff writers . " To us it 's great , we 've been able to do our version of ' ripped from the headlines , ' which a lot of comedies don 't get to do . " In the episode , Representative Bookman called out NBC for being racist in regards to its programming lacking diversity . This subplot was based on real @-@ life in which Jeff Zucker , then @-@ President and CEO of NBC Universal , who attended the House Judiciary Committee hearing in February 2010 in discussions of the NBC @-@ Comcast deal , was asked by United States Representative Maxine Waters why the NBC network had not attempted to create shows that would appeal to the black community . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the beginning of the episode , Liz tells Jack that her writing staff have been replacing her name @-@ plate title with various names including " F. Krueger . " She explains that the name refers to a time in which she got a chemical peel , wore a red and green sweater with a fedora . This is a reference to the fictional horror villain from the A Nightmare on Elm Street series Freddy Krueger 's appearance . During the hearing in Washington D.C. , Representative Rob Reiner says " The acclaimed director of When Harry Met Sally ... would never do that ! " , a reference to Reiner who directed the 1989 romantic comedy When Harry Met Sally .... 
 One of the applicants to become an NBC page plays a keyboard and sings in the tune of musician Billy Joel 's 1989 song " We Didn 't Start the Fire " . After returning from the hearing in Washington , in which Representative Bookman accused NBC of being racist , Jack tells Liz that during the hearing he did not pay attention to Bookman 's heartfelt speech as he was too busy trying to remember the name " of the black kid on Community " , a reference to actor Donald Glover who stars in Community — another NBC program — and who Jack is referring to . In addition , Glover was a former writer on 30 Rock . Coincidentally , guest star Queen Latifah executive produces the romantic comedy television series Let 's Stay Together that airs on BET . 
 30 Rock and Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip — both of which debuted on 2006 – 07 NBC lineup — revolved around the off @-@ camera happenings on a sketch comedy series . The first season episode " Jack the Writer " contained a self @-@ referencing walk and talk sequence , which was commonly used on Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip and Sorkin 's previous series The West Wing . In this episode , the walk and talk sequence is seen here in which Jack , before departing to Washington , has a discussion with Liz . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Let 's Stay Together " was watched by 4 @.@ 90 million households , according to the Nielsen Media Research . It received a 2 @.@ 1 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , that is 2 @.@ 1 percent of all people in that group , and 7 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . This was a decrease from the previous episode , " When It Rains , It Pours " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 688 million American viewers . 
 Andy Greenwald of New York magazine called " Let 's Stay Together " a " pretty great episode for a show that ... seems to have gotten its groove back . " Television columnist Alan Sepiwall for HitFix who enjoyed the previous week 's episode as he believed the show was back in peak , noted that the show " was back to more uneven , but still funny , territory " with this episode . Sepinwall felt that parts of the episode " worked just fine " , and enjoyed Liz 's disastrous appearance on Right On . He , however , did not like Jenna and Kenneth 's pageant story . A contributor from The Huffington Post said the episode had a " ton of hilarious moments " , and that Queen Latifah " was the highlight of the show " . Vanity Fair 's Juli Weiner enjoyed Maulik Pancholy 's appearance as Jack 's assistant Jonathan , writing that Jonathan is " perhaps the most underutilized character on the show , and we were happy to see him get some screen time this episode . " Further in her recap , Weiner said " Thank you , Jenna and Jack , for mercifully putting an end to the tension @-@ less Kenneth 's @-@ rehiring narrative . " Meredith Blake from the Los Angeles Times deemed it a " wildly clever and satiric episode " that also " delivered an important critique about the limitations of diversity programs . " Blake said that Jane Krakowski 's Jenna was on fire in " Let 's Stay Together " . Scott Eidler of The Cornell Daily Sun commented that the show has always dealt with racism issues " pretty well " and that the issue featured here " was no exception . " Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad reported that " Let 's Stay Together " was one of his favorite episodes of the season , and that it was a " massively pleasing episode . " <unk> Smith of The Atlantic wrote that Latifah " stole the show " and " drove the action " as her character Regina Bookman in this episode of 30 Rock . 
 The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin called this episode " clumsy and tired " , explaining it was " misfiring on all cylinders . The satire was toothless , the playing strained and the whole enterprise reeked of mild desperation . " He continued in his recap that " Let 's Stay Together " had a " golden opportunity to comment insightfully and hilariously about the tricky intersection of politics , power , race and privilege " , however " it recycled jokes that were unfunny and overly familiar the first time around " . In conclusion , Rabin gave it a C grade rating . Brad Sanders of the Indiana Daily Student opined that the show 's writing " is still sharp – not ' as sharp as ever , ' but sharp – but a lot of the most interesting plots have already played out , and a lot of the new plots aren 't interesting . " Sanders said that the stories featured here had " a few big laughs ... but they 're assembled so haphazardly and put into such a bulky framework that the train just never gets enough steam to salvage the episode . " 
 = West Virginia Mountaineers football = 
 The West Virginia Mountaineers football team represents West Virginia University ( also referred to as " WVU " or " West Virginia " ) in the NCAA Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) of college football . Dana Holgorsen is WVU 's current head coach , the 33rd in the program 's history . West Virginia plays its home games on Mountaineer Field at Milan Puskar Stadium on the campus of West Virginia University in Morgantown , West Virginia . The Mountaineers compete in the Big 12 Conference . 
 With a 727 – 482 – 45 record as of the conclusion of the 2015 season , WVU ranks 14th in victories among NCAA FBS programs , as well as the most victories among those programs that never claimed nor won a National Championship . West Virginia was originally classified as a College Division school in the 1937 season , and joined the University Division , forerunner of Division I , in 1939 . It has been a member of Division I FBS since 1978 ( known as Division I @-@ A until 2006 ) . The Mountaineers have registered 81 winning seasons in their history , including one unbeaten season ( 10 – 0 – 1 in 1922 ) and five 11 @-@ win seasons ( 1988 , 1993 , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 ) . The Mountaineers have won or shared a total of 15 conference championships , including eight Southern Conference titles and seven Big East Conference titles . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1891 – 1920 ) = = = 
 The West Virginia University football program traces its origin back to November 28 , 1891 when its first team fell to Washington & Jefferson 72 – 0 on a converted cow pasture . Despite its humble beginning , West Virginia enjoyed a 25 – 23 – 3 overall record prior to 1900 , which proved to be a fruitful century of Mountaineer football . The early 1900s brought about early successes for the program , namely during the 1903 and 1905 seasons when WVU posted records of 7 – 1 and 8 – 1 respectively . WVU produced a 6 – 3 record in the 1904 season , despite losing to Penn State , Pitt , and Michigan by a combined score of 217 – 0 . The 1908 – 20 period produced the four @-@ year head coaching tenures of C.A. <unk> ( 1908 – 11 ) and Mont McIntire ( 1916 – 17 , 1919 – 20 ) , representing the longest coaching tenures during this early period of Mountaineer football . <unk> 's Mountaineers produced a 17 – 13 – 3 record , while McIntire 's teams produced the most success of any Mountaineer team prior to 1921 , compiling a 24 – 11 – 4 record including an 8 – 2 finish in 1919 . That same Mountaineer team also produced West Virginia 's first ever Consensus All @-@ American and potential College Football Hall of Fame inductee , Ira Errett Rodgers . Rodgers scored 19 touchdowns and kicked 33 extra points for WVU in 1919 season , leading the nation with 147 total points . Rodgers also threw 11 touchdown passes that season , an unheard of feat at the time and a Mountaineer record until 1949 . 
 = = = The Spears and Rodgers years ( 1921 – 31 ) = = = 
 The Mountaineers enjoyed their first period of success during the 1920s , coinciding with the successful coaching tenures of Clarence Spears ( 1921 – 24 ) and Ira Errett Rodgers ( 1925 – 30 , 1943 – 45 ) . Under the tutelage of Spears , West Virginia compiled a 30 – 6 – 3 record with its best performance coming in the 1922 season . The 1922 edition of the Mountaineers remains the only team in West Virginia history to produce an unbeaten season , finishing with a 10 – 0 – 1 mark . Spears 's Mountaineers surrendered only 34 total points in 1922 , posting six consecutive shutouts to finish the regular season . The 1922 season also produced notable victories against rival Pitt and against Gonzaga in the East @-@ West Bowl , the program 's first bowl game appearance . Offensive tackle Russell Meredith garnered First @-@ Team All @-@ American honors . In homage to the successes of the 1922 season , West Virginia University undertook construction of what became the first incarnation of Mountaineer Field . 
 The Mountaineers continued their success under Spears in posting subsequent one @-@ loss seasons in 1923 ( 7 – 1 – 1 ) and in 1924 ( 8 – 1 ) , with Spears departing the program for Minnesota thereafter . Ira Errett Rodgers replaced Spears and the Mountaineers posted an 8 – 1 record in 1925 . After a 6 @-@ 4 finish in 1926 and a 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 record in 1927 , the program produced a 8 – 2 finish in 1928 . Rodgers 's first tenure as West Virginia coach ended with records of 4 – 3 – 3 in 1929 and 5 @-@ 5 in 1930 . 
 = = = The Neale , Tallman and Glenn years ( 1931 – 39 ) = = = 
 Taking over for Rodgers in 1931 was Earle " Greasy " Neale , but his tenure was short @-@ lived as the Mountaineers failed to produce a single winning season under his guise , going a combined 12 – 16 – 3 over Neale 's three years as coach . Charles Tallman , an End who achieved All @-@ American status with the Mountaineers in 1923 with the Mountaineers , replaced Neale in 1934 and produced immediate results as the program posted 6 – 4 records in 1934 and 1936 . Although West Virginia posted a 3 – 4 – 2 record in 1935 , the program produced an All @-@ American in Joe Stydahar , an offensive tackle . " Jumbo Joe " later became both a College Football Hall of Fame and Pro Football Hall of Fame inductee . Despite his winning record , Tallman resigned after the 1936 season to pursue his career in law enforcement as Superintendent of the West Virginia State Police . 
 Marshall Glenn picked up right where Tallman left off , leading West Virginia to an 8 – 1 – 1 record in 1937 . The season concluded with an upset of Texas Tech in the 1938 Sun Bowl . Running back Harry Clarke led the way for the Mountaineers that season , rushing for a then school record 921 yards and 10 touchdowns . Glenn 's success was short @-@ lived , however , as subsequent WVU teams posted losing records of 4 – 5 – 1 in 1938 and 2 – 6 – 1 in 1939 , leading to his ouster . 
 = = = The split tenures of Rodgers and Kern , and the DeGroot years ( 1940 – 49 ) = = = 
 West Virginia experienced a lag in success during much of the 1940s , producing only three winning seasons while witnessing the split coaching tenures of Bill Kern ( 1940 – 42 , 1946 – 47 ) and the second appearance of Ira Errett Rodgers ( 1943 – 45 ) . Under the direction of head coach Dudley DeGroot in the 1948 season , the Mountaineers returned to prominence with a 9 – 3 finish , adding another Sun Bowl victory to its resume with a 21 – 12 defeat of Texas Western ( now known as UTEP ) . Despite that successful first season at the program 's helm , DeGroot resigned after a disappointing 4 – 6 – 1 finish in 1949 . 
 = = = The Lewis , Corum and Carlen years ( 1950 – 69 ) = = = 
 When Art " Pappy " Lewis became West Virginia 's head coach in 1950 , he remarked that it was the job that he had always wanted . Known by his peers as an exceptional recruiter and by his players as a father figure , Lewis established a family @-@ like atmosphere within the Mountaineer football program . Lewis 's Mountaineer teams held true to form , experiencing their most consistent success during the 1950s as it ever had previously . After forgettable campaigns in 1950 and ' 1951 , the 1952 season brought WVU its first winning season since 1948 . The Mountaineers finished with a 7 – 2 record , highlighted by a 16 – 0 upset victory of No. 18 Pitt in Pittsburgh . It was this winning season that would set the tone for the halcyon days of Art Lewis 's program . 
 Beginning with the 1953 season , the Mountaineers would reel off three consecutive eight @-@ win seasons and five Southern Conference ( SoCon ) championships in six seasons . Led by three All @-@ Americans — running back Tommy Allman , guard Gene Lamone , and center Bob Orders — the Mountaineers finished with an 8 – 2 record , their first SoCon championship , a No. 10 ranking in the Associated Press ( AP ) Poll , and a berth in the 1953 Sugar Bowl with Georgia Tech . The 1954 edition of the Mountaineers also finished the regular season with an 8 – 1 mark , losing their only game to Pitt by a 13 – 10 score . The Mountaineers did not earn a bowl bid , however , despite winning their second consecutive SoCon title and earning a No. 12 ranking in the AP Poll . In 1955 , the Mountaineers engineered yet another eight @-@ win season and SoCon championship , but upset losses to Pitt and Syracuse doomed West Virginia 's shot at a bowl bid . Despite its disappointing finish , WVU produced two All @-@ American offensive linemen and future College Football Hall of Fame inductees in Bruce Bosley and Sam Huff . Bosley earned Consensus All @-@ American status that season , becoming the first Mountaineer to do so since Ira Errett Rodgers in 1919 . 
 Despite finishing with a modest 6 – 4 record in 1956 , West Virginia won its fourth consecutive SoCon title with a 5 – 0 record in conference play . The 1957 season was yet another winning endeavor for Lewis and WVU , finishing with a 7 – 2 – 1 record and a 3 – 0 mark in Southern Conference play . Although the Mountaineers once again compiled an undefeated SoCon record , Mountaineers were not awarded the conference championship , as VMI earned the title with a 9 – 0 – 1 overall record and 6 – 0 record in SoCon play . In 1958 , the Mountaineers had their first losing season in eight years , but their 4 – 0 record in SoCon play earned them a 5th conference title in six seasons . Unfortunately for Art Lewis and his Mountaineers , 1958 was the final season that West Virginia would win a conference championship under his tenure . The Mountaineers finished 3 – 7 in 1959 , losing the final five games of the season by a combined score of 24 – 140 . Lewis resigned as head coach afterward . Despite the program 's drop off in success in his final two seasons as coach , Lewis produced 58 victories overall during his tenure at West Virginia , placing him third overall in the program 's history . 
 After Lewis 's departure , the program hit an all @-@ time low in 1960 under first @-@ year head coach Gene Corum , posting its worst season to date : 0 – 8 – 2 . The Mountaineers were simply outclassed by their opponents , being outscored 40 – 259 on the season . The Mountaineers rebounded , however , and by 1962 were back to their winning ways , posting an 8 – 2 record and 4 – 0 conference record . Despite their undefeated conference record , once again the SoCon crown eluded the Mountaineers in favor of the VMI <unk> and their 6 – 0 record in conference play . West Virginia did not have to wait long for its next SoCon title , however , as the program won the title in the 1964 and 1965 seasons consecutively . The Mountaineers finished 7 – 4 in 1964 and participated in the Liberty Bowl against Utah , West Virginia 's first bowl game in 11 years as well as the first major college football bowl game ever played indoors and to be broadcast nationwide in the United States . Corum 's tenure ended thereafter , posting a 29 – 30 – 2 record over his six seasons as head coach . Corum 's legacy went well beyond wins and losses , however , as he integrated WVU football in 1963 with the program 's first African @-@ American recruits in Roger Alford and Dick Leftridge . 
 Following the 1965 season , Jim Carlen took over for Corum as head coach . After a 3 – 5 – 2 finish in 1966 , Carlen guided the Mountaineers to their 8th and final SoCon championship in 1967 . West Virginia left the Southern Conference thereafter , participating as an independent until 1991 . Carlen 's Mountaineers would produce subsequent winning seasons in 1968 and 1969 , posting records of 7 – 3 and 10 – 1 , respectively . The 1969 edition of the Mountaineers was the most successful West Virginia team since the 1922 season . Not only did the Mountaineers win 10 games , but they earned their first bowl game victory since 1948 with a Peach Bowl victory over No. 19 South Carolina , as well as a No. 18 final ranking in the Coaches Poll . The dynamic rushing tandem of running back Bob Gresham ( 1 @,@ 155 yards and 9 touchdowns ) and fullback Jim Braxton ( 843 yards , 12 touchdowns ) led the Mountaineers . Gresham became the second Mountaineer to ever rush for more than 1 @,@ 000 yards ( Garrett Ford , Sr. was the first with 1 @,@ 068 yards in 1966 ) . At the conclusion of the 1969 season , Carlen departed West Virginia for Texas Tech . The Mountaineers responded by hiring Bobby Bowden . 
 = = = The Bowden years ( 1970 – 75 ) = = = 
 It appeared that the Bobby Bowden era of Mountaineer football could not have begun more smoothly early in the 1970 season , or so it seemed . The Mountaineers were 4 – 1 to start the season and led arch rival Pitt 35 – 8 at halftime in week six . What transpired was one of the most infamous collapses in Backyard Brawl and West Virginia football history . The Mountaineers surrendered 28 unanswered points , losing to the Panthers 36 – 35 and leading Bowden to remark that he had " embarrassed the whole state of West Virginia " in the process . Despite the disappointment of the Pitt defeat , West Virginia went on to finish the 1970 season with a 8 – 3 <unk> Jim Braxton and linebacker Dale Farley earned All @-@ American honors . 
 The Mountaineers continued their winning ways under Bowden in 1971 and 1972 , posting records of 7 – 4 and 8 – 4 respectively . The 1972 West Virginia team earned the program 's first trip back to a bowl game in three years , participating once again in the Peach Bowl against North Carolina State . The season also witnessed the offensive prowess of running back Kerry Marbury and wide receiver Danny Buggs . Marbury ran for 16 touchdowns in 1972 , a record that remained unbroken until 2002 . Buggs recorded 35 receptions for 791 yards and eight touchdowns , ran for four touchdowns , and returned two punts for touchdowns to amass 14 total touchdowns . 
 The 1973 and 1974 seasons , however , were not successful campaigns for the Mountaineers , as they finished with lackluster records of 6 – 5 and 4 – 7 . Despite the disappointment of those seasons , Danny Buggs earned All @-@ American status for his contributions in both campaigns . His 69 @-@ yard punt return for a touchdown with 36 seconds remaining to beat Maryland in the 1973 season opener remains one of the greatest moments in Mountaineer history . The 1975 season , however , was successful . The Mountaineers compiled a 9 – 3 record , a 13 – 10 Peach Bowl victory over North Carolina State , and a final ranking of No. 17 in the Coaches Poll and # 20 in the AP Poll . Additionally , the Mountaineers upset the No. 20 Pitt Panthers 17 – 14 on a game @-@ winning field goal in the closing seconds in yet another memorable chapter of the Backyard Brawl . Bowden later described the victory as one of the most exciting ones of his coaching career . Following the 1975 season , Bowden left WVU to become the head coach at Florida State , where he would become the second winningest coach in NCAA Division I @-@ A / FBS history . In just six seasons with the Mountaineers , Bowden produced a 42 – 26 record , good for fifth all @-@ time in the program . Bowden 's departure not only signaled the end of his tenure at West Virginia , but to the end of WVU 's winning ways in the 1970s . 
 = = = The Cignetti years ( 1976 – 79 ) = = = 
 Under the direction of Frank Cignetti , the Mountaineers endured four consecutive losing seasons . West Virginia completed the 1976 season with a 5 – 6 record , losing four of its final six games . The disappointment of 1976 was realized again the following season , as the Mountaineers posted another 5 – 6 finish in 1977 . After a promising 4 – 1 start to the season , including an upset road victory over No. 11 Maryland , WVU lost five of its final six games . The Mountaineers finished 2 @-@ 9 in 1978 , being outscored 364 – 167 . It was later revealed that Cignetti had suffered from a rare form of cancer during the season , nearly losing his life on the operating table during a procedure to remove his spleen in the winter of 1978 . The 1979 season was Cignetti 's final with the program . The Mountaineers produced another 5 – 6 finish , losing their first three games and later dropping three out of their final four games . 
 Despite the program 's losing seasons during Cignetti 's tenure , Cignetti managed to land prized recruit and future Consensus All @-@ American linebacker Darryl Talley , as well as standout quarterback and future Athletic Director Oliver Luck and running back Robert Alexander . Cignetti ’ s coaching staffs also consisted of some of the best coaches in college football , including Nick Saban , Joe Pendry and Rick Trickett ( who , along with Rich Rodriguez , was later credited as an innovator in utilizing the zone blocking scheme in conjunction with the run @-@ based spread offense at WVU ) . However , with a 17 – 27 record during his four years with the program , and in having to follow in the footsteps of the great Bobby Bowden ( who later became the second all @-@ time leader in victories amongst NCAA FBS coaches ) , Cignetti 's legacy is one of the most conflicted in the program 's history . 
 = = = The Nehlen years , part one ( 1980 – 90 ) = = = 
 In the wake of Frank Cignetti 's firing , the West Virginia Athletic Department determined that a full rebuild was in order . On December 10 , 1979 , West Virginia introduced Don Nehlen as its new head coach , the 30th coach in the program 's history . Coinciding with Nehlen 's hire was the construction of the second incarnation of Mountaineer Field , the program 's current home stadium . Nehlen brought several changes to the Mountaineer football program , including a new logo and color scheme that remains in use to this day . The result was consistency and success for the program during his two @-@ decade tenure at West Virginia . After a 6 – 6 campaign in 1980 , Nehlen 's 1981 Mountaineer team produced the first of 15 winning seasons under his direction . It also marked the first of three consecutive nine @-@ win seasons and four consecutive bowl game appearances for the Mountaineers . Led by senior quarterback Oliver Luck 's 2 @,@ 448 yards passing and 16 touchdowns , the 1981 team posted a 9 – 3 record and earned a trip back to the Peach Bowl , where they defeated the Florida Gators 26 – 6 . WVU also finished ranked in the polls for the first time since 1975 , coming in at No. 17 and No. 18 in the AP and Coaches Polls , respectively . 
 The 1982 Mountaineers experienced similar success . Sparked by their come @-@ from @-@ behind upset victory over No. 9 Oklahoma to open the season , the Mountaineers finished with a 9 – 2 record , remaining ranked in the AP poll throughout the season en route to a Gator Bowl berth with Bobby Bowden and Florida State . Despite its Gator Bowl loss , West Virginia once again finished the season 9 – 3 and ranked 19th in both final polls . The team also produced the program 's first Consensus All @-@ American since 1955 in senior linebacker Darryl Talley . The Mountaineers won their first six games at the outset of the 1983 season , attaining a No. 4 ranking in the AP Poll . With a 41 – 23 upset loss to 1983 in week 8 , however , West Virginia 's hopes of an undefeated season collapsed . WVU lost three of its final five regular season games before defeating Kentucky in the Hall of Fame Classic to finish the season at 9 – 3 . It was the third consecutive season for WVU to finish ranked , coming in at No. 16 in both the AP and Coaches Polls . Quarterback Jeff Hostetler led the offensive attack with 2 @,@ 345 yards passing and 16 touchdowns , while Kicker Paul Woodside received All @-@ American honors in converting 21 of 25 field goal attempts and all 37 of his extra point attempts en route to a team @-@ leading 100 points . 
 Although the 1984 season had all off the makings of a memorable one for West Virginia , the Mountaineers experienced another letdown . WVU started the season with a 7 – 1 record , posting an upset victory over No. 4 Boston College and its first victory over Penn State in 25 meetings along the way . The Mountaineers were upset in each of their final three regular season games , however , losing to Virginia , Rutgers and Temple . WVU rebounded to defeat Texas Christian in the Bluebonnet Bowl , finishing the season at 8 – 4 with a No. 21 ranking in the final Coaches poll . The Mountaineers also produced three All @-@ Americans in return specialist Willie <unk> , kicker Paul Woodside , and tight end Rob Bennett . 
 After four consecutive seasons of bowl berths and finishes in at least one of the polls , West Virginia went on a two @-@ year drought in 1985 and 1986 , finishing those seasons with records of 7 – 3 – 1 and 4 – 7 ( Nehlen 's first of only four losing seasons ) respectively . The shortcomings of those seasons came to a head in 1987 , where the Mountaineers endured a season of growing pains and near @-@ misses . Despite a 1 – 3 start , West Virginia rallied to finish the regular season at 6 – 5 with four of its five losses coming by deficits of 5 points or less . Freshman quarterback Major Harris led the way for the Mountaineers , compiling 16 total touchdowns and providing glimpses of what was to come in his illustrious collegiate career . The season culminated in a 35 – 33 loss to No. 11 Oklahoma State in the Sun Bowl , a game in which the Mountaineers led 24 – 14 at halftime and lost on a failed two @-@ point conversion attempt with 1 : 13 remaining . 
 The 1988 edition of the Mountaineers featured gifted sophomore quarterback Major Harris and a stifling defense . Entering the season at No. 16 in the AP Poll , West Virginia achieved an undefeated regular season , compiling 11 wins for the first time in its history . The Mountaineers averaged 43 points and 483 yards per game during the regular season , rolling up 30 or more points in 10 of their games , including a 51 – 30 rout of rival Penn State , the most points ever surrendered by a Joe Paterno @-@ coached team . The success of the regular season culminated in West Virginia 's first and only trip to a National Championship Game in its history , where the No. 3 Mountaineers met No. 1 Notre Dame in the Fiesta Bowl . On the third play of the game , Harris separated his left shoulder , an injury that diminished his scrambling ability as he amassed only 11 yards rushing . Despite the injury and with WVU trailing 26 – 13 in the 3rd quarter , Harris and the Mountaineers were in position to mount a comeback at the Irish 26 @-@ yard line . The WVU offense sputtered , however , and Notre Dame 's Tony Rice put the game out of reach with his second touchdown pass of the contest . Notre Dame went on to win 34 – 21 and claimed the National Championship . The once prolific Mountaineer offense amassed only 282 total yards against the Irish defense . West Virginia finished the 1988 campaign ranked No. 5 in both the AP and Coaches Polls . Major Harris compiled 610 yards rushing , 1 @,@ 915 yards passing , and 20 total touchdowns on the season . 
 Coming off of its first ever 11 @-@ win season and with junior Major Harris returning to lead a potent offense , West Virginia entered the 1989 season with high expectations and a No. 17 ranking in the AP Poll . The Mountaineers raced to a 4 – 0 record and to No. 9 in the AP Poll . In Week 5 against No. 10 Pitt , however , West Virginia fell victim to another memorable collapse in the Backyard Brawl . Trailing 31 – 9 in the 4th quarter , Pitt scored 22 unanswered points and kicked a game @-@ tying field goal as time expired to force a 31 – 31 tie . The Mountaineers suffered another defeat the following week with a 12 – 10 home loss to Virginia Tech , followed by a 19 – 9 loss to No. 16 Penn State in State College . Despite those defeats , WVU finished the regular season at 8 – 2 – 1 , a No. 17 ranking in the AP Poll , and a trip to the Gator Bowl to face No. 14 Clemson . The Mountaineers faltered , however , losing 27 – 7 and finished the season at 8 – 3 – 1 with a No. 21 ranking in the final AP Poll . The 1990 season , West Virginia 's final as a NCAA Division I @-@ A Independent , coincided with a lackluster 4 – 7 finish . 
 = = = The Nehlen years , part two ( 1991 – 2000 ) = = = 
 West Virginia entered the 1991 season as new members of the Big East in what became a 20 @-@ year affiliation with the conference . After finishes of 6 – 5 in 1991 and 5 – 4 – 2 in 1992 , the Mountaineers returned to ranks of the college football elite in the 1993 season . For the second time in six seasons , West Virginia produced an undefeated , 11 @-@ win regular season in 1993 . The Mountaineers engineered several close victories , beginning with a 36 – 34 upset of No. 17 Louisville at home in Morgantown . In its final two regular season games , WVU twice erased 4th quarter deficits to defeat No. 4 Miami and No. 11 Boston College . Despite finishing the regular season undefeated and ranked No. 2 in the Coaches Poll and No. 3 in the AP Poll , West Virginia was not selected to play in the Orange Bowl for a possible National Championship . The Bowl Coalition system , designed to place the top two ranked teams in a bowl to determine the National Champion , slotted the Mountaineers at No. 3 behind 11 – 1 Florida State . The Seminoles were selected to play No. 1 Nebraska in the Orange Bowl for the National Championship , while West Virginia settled for a Sugar Bowl berth against SEC Champion Florida . The Gators routed the Mountaineers 41 – 7 , denying West Virginia its perfect season . WVU finished the season at 11 – 1 , ranked No. 6 in the Coaches Poll and No. 7 in the AP Poll . Robert Walker amassed a then @-@ school record 1 @,@ 250 rushing yards , along with 11 touchdowns on the season . 
 Unfortunately for Nehlen , the 1993 season was his final season with double @-@ digit victories as his subsequent Mountaineer teams failed to recapture that level of success . After posting a 7 – 6 record in 1994 and a 5 – 6 mark in 1995 , the 1996 Mountaineers showed promise of returning the program to national prominence . West Virginia began the 1996 season with a 7 – 0 record , only to lose three of its final four regular season games en route to an 8 – 3 record and a 20 – 13 defeat in the Gator Bowl at the hands of No. 12 North Carolina to finish 8 – 4 . The Mountaineers put together another strong start in 1997 , taking a 7 – 2 record into the final two weeks of the season . Once again , the Mountaineers faltered as they lost 21 – 14 at Notre Dame and 41 – 38 in triple overtime to a 5 – 5 Pitt team to finish the regular season at 7 – 4 . The late season collapse culminated in another bowl game defeat , this time to Georgia Tech in the <unk> Bowl . Despite the disappointing conclusion to the season , quarterback Marc Bulger emerged as a capable leader throwing for 2 @,@ 465 yards and 14 touchdowns . Running back Amos Zereoué shattered Robert Walker 's rushing record with 1 @,@ 589 yards , and his 18 rushing touchdowns are the second most in a single season at WVU . 
 The 1998 season brought high expectations for the Mountaineers , as WVU entered the season ranked No. 11 in the AP Poll . Despite dropping its opening game to No. 1 Ohio State , West Virginia rebounded to win its next four games and went on to finish the season with an 8 – 3 record and 5 – 2 mark in Big East conference play . The Mountaineers failed to attain nine wins , however , as they lost their 8th consecutive bowl game in the Insight.com Bowl to Missouri . Bulger set two WVU records with 3 @,@ 607 yards passing and 31 touchdown passes , while Zereoué amassed 1 @,@ 462 yards rushing and 13 touchdowns in his final season as a Mountaineer . Receivers Shawn Foreman and David Saunders finished with eight touchdown receptions each . After a 4 – 7 finish in 1999 , Don Nehlen 's final season with the Mountaineers in 2000 culminated in a 7 – 5 record with a victory in the Music City Bowl over Ole Miss , ending West Virginia 's streak of futility in bowl games . 
 Overall , Nehlen posted a 149 – 93 – 4 record during his tenure at West Virginia , making him both the longest @-@ serving and most successful head coach in Mountaineer history . While his coaching tenure contained numerous successes , Nehlen 's time at WVU also included its share of shortcomings as his Mountaineer teams often struggled against ranked opponents and in bowl games . However , as the man responsible for shaping the Mountaineer football program and bringing it to national relevancy in his 21 seasons in Morgantown , Nehlen was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 2005 . Most importantly , his tenure laid the foundation for the program 's most successful and prominent era . 
 = = = The Rodriguez years ( 2001 – 2007 ) = = = 
 After Nehlen 's retirement , WVU welcomed its first new head coach in 20 years and the 31st coach in its history : Rich Rodriguez . Rodriguez 's tenure began ignominiously , as the 2001 edition of the Mountaineers finished 3 – 8 , its worst record since 1978 . The failures of 2001 , however , set the stage for the emergence of the most successful era in Mountaineer football history . 
 The 2002 season represented the biggest single @-@ season turnaround in program history . Despite a 5 – 3 record through the season 's first eight games , the Mountaineers reeled off four consecutive victories , including upset road wins over then @-@ ranked rivals Virginia Tech ( No. 13 ) and Pitt ( No. 17 ) <unk> Virginia finished the regular season at 9 – 3 overall , with a 6 – 1 conference record for second place in the Big East , and a berth in the Continental Tire Bowl with Virginia . Despite losing its bowl game , West Virginia finished with a 9 – 4 record and was ranked in both the final Coaches ( No. 20 ) and AP ( No. 25 ) polls for the first time since 1993 . The momentum generated from the 2002 campaign was short @-@ lived as the Mountaineers stumbled to a 1 – 4 record early in the 2003 season . In similar fashion to the previous season , West Virginia rebounded and recorded seven wins in a row , including upsets of No. 3 Virginia Tech and No. 16 Pitt . The Mountaineers ended the regular season at 8 – 4 with a 6 – 1 conference mark , earning them a share of their first Big East title since 1993 . West Virginia earned a trip to the Gator Bowl for a rematch with rival Maryland . The result for the Mountaineers was a near duplicate of their 34 – 7 defeat to the Terrapins earlier in the season , as they fell 41 – 7 and finished the season 8 – 5 . 
 In contrast to 2002 and 2003 , the 2004 season may best be remembered for what the Mountaineers failed to accomplish . West Virginia , ranked No. 10 in the AP Poll to begin the season , carried an 8 – 1 record through its first nine games . The Mountaineers collapsed in the final two games of the regular season , however , losing to No. 21 Boston College and to Pitt . West Virginia squandered its opportunity to win the Big East outright , leading to a four @-@ way tie for first place and the BCS Fiesta Bowl nomination going to Pitt by tiebreaker . The disappointing season drew to a close with 30 – 18 loss to Florida State in the Gator Bowl , giving WVU an 8 – 4 record . 
 The 2005 season was a noteworthy one for the Mountaineers . After a 5 – 1 ( albeit offensively sluggish ) start to the season , the Mountaineers came alive in Week 7 against No. 19 Louisville . Quarterback Pat White and running back Steve Slaton helped to erase a 24 – 7 4th quarter deficit en route to a thrilling 46 – 44 triple overtime victory . From that point forward , the Mountaineers outscored their opponents 156 – 39 en route to a 10 – 1 finish and a 7 – 0 record in conference play for their second outright Big East championship . The Mountaineers also earned their first ever BCS bowl game berth , facing No. 8 Georgia in the Sugar Bowl . West Virginia scored 21 points in the 1st quarter , holding on for a 38 – 35 upset victory . The Mountaineers finished the 2005 season with their third 11 @-@ win season and achieved rankings of No. 5 and No. 6 in the AP and Coaches Polls , respectively . 
 The Mountaineers once again posted 11 wins in the 2006 season , narrowly missing out on another Big East championship after losses to Louisville and South Florida . The Mountaineers produced another triple @-@ overtime thriller with a 41 – 39 victory over No. 13 Rutgers in the final game of the regular season . West Virginia remained ranked in the top 15 in both polls throughout the season , earning another New Year 's Day bowl game as they met Georgia Tech in the Gator Bowl . The Mountaineers came away with another 38 – 35 victory , winning consecutive bowl games for the first time since the 1983 and 1984 seasons . Additionally , center Dan Mozes and running back Steve Slaton earned Consensus All @-@ American honors . Slaton 's 1 @,@ 744 yards rushing set the WVU single @-@ season rushing record . 
 The 2007 season may well be regarded as the most infamous season in West Virginia football history . The Mountaineers attained a preseason ranking of No. 3 and had National Championship aspirations . WVU raced to a 10 – 1 record , including a 66 – 21 victory over UConn to secure its fifth Big East title and its second BCS bowl appearance . The Mountaineers rose to as high as No. 2 in the AP Poll and No. 1 in the Coaches Poll , needing only a victory at home over a 4 – 7 , 28 @-@ point underdog Pitt team in the 100th installment of the Backyard Brawl to secure its second ever National Championship Game appearance . That victory did not come , as The Mountaineer offense sputtered against an inspired Pitt defense to the tune of a devastating 13 – 9 defeat . 
 = = = The Stewart years ( 2007 @-@ 2011 ) = = = 
 The fallout of the Pitt defeat reached beyond National Championship implications for the program , as it culminated in the departure of Rich Rodriguez to Michigan . Rodriguez left prior to West Virginia 's meeting with No. 3 Oklahoma in the Fiesta Bowl . The Mountaineers proved resilient , however , as they put together a 48 – 28 victory over the heavily favored Sooners . Long @-@ time assistant coach Bill Stewart , named as interim head coach for the game , was rewarded afterward with a five @-@ year contract to become West Virginia 's 32nd head coach . The Mountaineers concluded the 2007 season with an 11 – 2 record and were ranked at No. 6 in both of the final AP and Coaches Polls . 
 The Mountaineers transitioned into the Bill Stewart era in the 2008 season . It was also the final season of Pat White 's decorated collegiate career . WVU amassed a 9 – 4 record and a second @-@ place finish in the Big East , closing the season Meineke Car Care Bowl victory over North Carolina and a No. 23 ranking in the AP Poll . The bowl victory was West Virginia 's fourth in a row , giving White a postseason record of 4 – 0 as a starting quarterback , a feat never before accomplished in collegiate play . White 's biggest accomplishment came in Week 13 , however , when he set the NCAA rushing yardage record for quarterbacks with a 200 @-@ yard performance in a 35 – 21 win over Louisville . 
 The 2009 season culminated in another nine @-@ win campaign and second @-@ place finish in the Big East for the Mountaineers . Most notably , WVU ended its two @-@ year losing streak in the Backyard Brawl and exacted a measure of revenge for the 2007 defeat with an upset victory over No. 8 Pitt on Tyler <unk> 's game @-@ winning 43 @-@ yard field goal in the closing seconds . West Virginia 's season ended on a sour note , however , as it lost the Gator Bowl to a 6 – 6 Florida State team in Bobby Bowden 's final game . The 2010 season brought the program its third consecutive nine @-@ win season . Nonetheless , the season was ultimately a disappointment for the Mountaineers . Despite assembling arguably the strongest defense in program history ( surrendering only 176 total points , an average of 13 @.@ 5 per game ) and having a talented offense , West Virginia struggled with consistency all season . The Mountaineers lost to No. 15 LSU , Syracuse and UConn by a combined 14 points , while the Mountaineer defense did not surrender more than 23 points scored against in a single game throughout the season . The most glaring defeat of the season came against Connecticut in Week 9 where West Virginia lost four fumbles , including one at Connecticut 's 1 @-@ yard line in overtime , in a 16 @-@ 13 loss . The loss came back to haunt the Mountaineers as they once again lost out on a BCS Bowl bid by virtue of a tiebreaker to Connecticut . 
 Prior to West Virginia 's Champs Sports Bowl match up with North Carolina State , Athletic Director Oliver Luck announced the hiring of Dana Holgorsen as the " coach @-@ in @-@ waiting , " serving as offensive coordinator during the 2011 season and replacing Stewart as head coach in 2012 . Luck reasoned that he did not believe that the Mountaineers had an opportunity to win a national championship with the program under Stewart 's guise . Nearly six months later , the coach @-@ in @-@ waiting arrangement imploded as Stewart resigned amid accusations of initiating a smear campaign against Holgorsen . 
 = = = The Holgorsen years ( 2011 @-@ 2016 ) = = = 
 The onset of the Dana Holgorsen era brought about heightened expectations for the program as the Mountaineers entered the 2011 season as the odds @-@ on favorite to win the Big East title . The Mountaineers finished the regular season with a 9 – 3 record ( 5 – 2 in Big East play ) and a share of its 7th Big East title . The Mountaineers were the only Big East team ranked in the final BCS standings ( No. 23 ) , earning the BCS bid by tiebreaker and an Orange Bowl berth against ACC champion No. 14 Clemson . West Virginia 's first ever appearance in the Orange Bowl was a memorable one , as the Mountaineers soundly defeated Clemson 70 – 33 , setting a NCAA record for points scored in a bowl game . The Mountaineers finished the season at 10 – 3 and ranked No. 17 in the AP Poll and No. 18 in the Coaches Poll . Stedman Bailey and Tavon Austin produced the two most prolific single @-@ season receiving yard totals in WVU history , finishing with 1 @,@ 279 yards and 1 @,@ 186 yards , respectively . 
 From 2002 – 2011 , the Mountaineer football program yielded its most prolific era to date , producing a 95 – 33 record . During that span WVU participated in ten bowl games , finished ranked in at least one of the AP or Coaches Polls on seven occasions , won six Big East Conference titles , and produced three BCS bowl game victories . 
 In the midst of continued college football conference realignment , WVU received an invitation to join the Big 12 Conference beginning July 1 , 2012 . West Virginia subsequently expressed its intention to leave the Big East prior to the 27 @-@ month waiting period stipulated by the conference 's by @-@ laws . The resulting litigation between WVU and the Big East produced a $ 20 million settlement , allowing the Mountaineers to depart from the Big East for the 2012 season . Despite starting its inaugural season in the Big 12 at 5 – 0 and climbing into the top 5 in the AP and Coaches Polls after upsetting No. 11 Texas in Austin , WVU lost six of its final eight games en route to a 7 – 6 finish . The season culminated in a loss to rival Syracuse in the Pinstripe Bowl . The season ended WVU 's run of 10 consecutive seasons with at least eight victories . 
 The 2013 season brought WVU 's first losing campaign since 2001 . After a 4 – 5 start and an opportunity to secure bowl eligibility with two victories , WVU faltered in its final three games to finish 4 – 8 . The Mountaineers rebounded in the 2014 season , posting a 7 – 6 record against a schedule featuring five opponents ranked in the top 15 . WVU raced to a 6 – 2 start , highlighted by an upset of eventual Big 12 champion Baylor , only to lose four of its final five games . The Mountaineers returned to a bowl game in 2014 , losing to Texas A & M in the Liberty Bowl . WVU returned to the eight @-@ win plateau in 2015 season , posting a 7 @-@ 5 record during the regular season and winning the Cactus Bowl , to finish at 8 @-@ 5 . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 See also : Mountaineer Field at Milan Puskar Stadium , Mountaineer Field ( 1924 ) 
 = = = Mountaineer Field = = = 
 Since 1891 , the Mountaineers have played their home games in Morgantown , West Virginia along with neutral @-@ site games at numerous locations throughout West Virginia , most notably in Charleston , Clarksburg , Fairmont , Parkersburg and Wheeling . The construction of Old Mountaineer Field in 1924 gave WVU its first permanent home facility . Located next to Woodburn Hall in what is now considered the Downtown portion of the WVU campus , the first incarnation of Mountaineer Field consisted of a horseshoe @-@ type seating arrangement . The stadium eventually grew in capacity to its peak of 38 @,@ 000 by 1979 . The physical location of the stadium made it impossible for further expansion to take place , however , and led to the relocation of the football program to the new Mountaineer Field in 1980 . The old stadium was razed in 1987 . At the southwest corner where the stadium once stood , there is a horseshoe @-@ shaped monument commemorating the stadium . From 1924 – 1979 the Mountaineers played 267 games at Old Mountaineer Field , compiling a 171 – 82 – 14 record . 
 The Mountaineers have played their home games at the second incarnation of Mountaineer Field since 1980 . The bowl @-@ shaped stadium is located on the <unk> portion of the WVU campus . Originally constructed with an east @-@ west configuration of the seating areas and a capacity of 50 @,@ 000 , subsequent seating additions at the north and south ends of the facility increased the capacity to over 63 @,@ 000 by 1986 through the 2003 season . Suites were first introduced to Mountaineer Field in 1994 , with 12 suites being constructed in the first row of the press box on the stadium 's west end . General admission seating in the north end zone was replaced with 19 suites in 2004 to create the " Touchdown Terrace " section , while four additional suites were added in the south end zone in 2007 . The construction of Touchdown Terrace in 2004 brought the stadium 's capacity to 60 @,@ 000 , where it currently stands . 
 As of November 29 , 2003 , the stadium has been named " Milan Puskar Stadium " in honor of Milan Puskar , the founder of Morgantown @-@ based Mylan Pharmaceuticals , in recognition of his $ 20 million donation to the University . 
 Due to Mountaineer Field 's capacity and the relatively smaller populations of West Virginia 's largest cities , it has been suggested that Morgantown becomes the largest " city " in the state on game days due to the influx of spectators at the stadium . Crowds at Mountaineer Field have earned the reputation of being loud and boisterous , creating a hostile atmosphere for opposing teams . 
 The largest crowd to ever attend a game at the stadium was 70 @,@ 222 , set on November 20 , 1993 . The Mountaineers have enjoyed relative success in their 33 seasons at Mountaineer Field , compiling a 154 – 58 – 4 home record . 
 = = = Milan Puskar Center = = = 
 Also constructed in 1980 was the " Facilities Building " ( now the Milan Puskar Center ) to house the program 's football offices . Originally located south of Mountaineer Field , in 1985 the facility was connected to the stadium when a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ seat expansion enclosed the South end zone bowl . The 39 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot facility houses the team 's locker room and training facilities , including a 23 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot weight training facility on the first floor of the complex . The second floor of the Puskar Center houses the offensive and defensive wings for the coaching staffs , the team meeting room , player position rooms , the football staff conference room , and the Reynolds Family Academic Performance Center . Also located on the second floor of the Puskar Center is the Donald J. <unk> Hall of Traditions . Made possible through a gift by WVU alumnus and <unk> , Inc. founder Ken Kendrick , the Hall of Traditions opened in 2006 to honor the history of the WVU football program . The Hall of Traditions houses interactive displays , videos , photos , records and information on the program , including featured displays of the 2005 Sugar Bowl and 2007 Fiesta Bowl seasons . The Hall is open to the public on weekdays throughout the year . The Puskar Center is also home to the Robert and Erma Hartley Club Level , featuring upscale amenities for Mountaineer fans on game days . The facility underwent significant renovations in 2012 and 2013 , aimed specifically at improving the weight room , the aesthetics of the facility 's interior , and the coaches ' meeting areas . The renovation also included the construction of a lounge area for WVU 's football players . 
 = = Traditions = = 
 See also : WVU Pageantry , WVU Sports Traditions , and WVU Band Traditions 
 = = = Pregame show = = = 
 Performed by the Pride of West Virginia marching band , the pregame show includes such traditions as the 220 @-@ beat per minute run @-@ on introductory drum cadence , the formation of the " Flying WV " logo to the tune of " Fight Mountaineers , " and the forming of the state of West Virginia while playing the university fight song " Hail , West Virginia . " The band also performs the University 's theme song , John Denver 's " Take Me Home , Country Roads , " as well as Aaron Copland 's " Simple Gifts . " The fans participate in several cheers during the pregame show , notably chanting " W @-@ V @-@ U " to the roll of the band 's drum line prior to the playing of " Fight Mountaineers , " as well as chanting " Let 's Go Mountaineers " in between playings of " Hail , West Virginia . " 
 = = = Stadium chants = = = 
 WVU students encompassing the " Mountaineer Maniacs " section and fans alike participate in several chants during WVU home games . The " Let 's Go ... Mountaineers " chant , with the east end of the stadium shouting " Let 's Go ... " and the west end responding with " Mountaineers , " is the most popular amongst those in attendance . West Virginia fans also participate in the " 1st Down " and " 3rd Down " cheers . The " 1st Down " cheer can be heard at both home and away games prior to the announcement of a Mountaineer first down . Mountaineer fans raise their hands and hold a cheer of " OH ! " in unison until the first down call is made by the public address announcer . Following the call , the fans lift their arms up and down three times to a chant of " W @-@ V @-@ U , " clap and then signal to the end zone chanting " first down ! " The " 3rd Down " cheer is similar , with Mountaineer fans raising their arms and waving three fingers upon the announcement of " third down " by the public address . After every home win , West Virginia fans link arm @-@ in @-@ arm and sing along to an audio version of " Take Me Home , Country Roads . " 
 = = = The Mountaineer = = = 
 WVU incorporated the Mountaineers nickname in 1905 after the coining of West Virginia 's state motto , " Mountaineers are Always Free . " Prior to 1905 , the team was referred to as the " Snakes . " The Mountaineer mascot first appeared at WVU sporting events during the 1934 – 35 school year and has been a fixture ever since . The Mountaineer is selected each year by the Mountain Honorary , composed of members of West Virginia University 's senior class . The Mountaineer 's costume is tailored to fit each winner , and male Mountaineers customarily grow beards during their tenure to go along with the coonskin cap and rifle , although the beard is not a requirement for the mascot position . The mascot is modeled after the Mountaineer bronze statute located in front of the <unk> student union building on the WVU campus . During football games , the Mountaineer mascot will fire his musket upon the team 's entrance prior to kickoff , at the conclusion of each quarter and following every score . 
 = = = Gold Rush = = = 
 Introduced by head coach Rich Rodriguez during the 2007 season , the " Gold Rush " is an ongoing tradition with WVU fans at Mountaineer Field . Partially inspired by the Penn State " whiteout " tradition , as well as the " black @-@ out " effect created by Louisville Cardinals fans dressed in black during their game against WVU in 2006 , Rodriguez encouraged Mountaineer fans to dress entirely in gold for the rematch between WVU and Louisville in 2007 . WVU 's home schedule has featured a Gold Rush home game in each of its subsequent seasons . Since 2008 , West Virginia University has worked in conjunction with the United Way to promote the event , selling gold T @-@ shirts to fans with the proceeds benefiting the WVU United Way Campaign . As of the 2013 season , the Mountaineers are 5 – 2 in Gold Rush games . 
 = = = Mountaineer <unk> = = = 
 Instituted during the 2011 season by head coach Dana Holgorsen , the Mountaineer <unk> is a recent addition to WVU 's game day football traditions as well as a recognition of the significance of West Virginia 's coal industry . Named for the shuttle that transports coalminers into and out of an underground mine at the start and end of their shift , the Mountaineer players and coaching staff walk along the pathway dividing the parking lot outside of Mountaineer Field . They are accompanied by the Mountaineer mascot , the Pride of West Virginia Marching Band , and the Mountaineer cheerleaders . WVU students and fans line the path to create a tunnel @-@ like effect for the passing team members , providing for an interactive and enthusiastic environment . When the team reaches the east end of Mountaineer Field , they stop to rub a 350 @-@ pound chunk of coal donated by Alpha Natural Resources from the Upper Big Branch coal mine . 
 = = Logos = = 
 Beginning in 1970 , the Mountaineers donned the program 's first official logo — the WVU " state outline " — on their helmets through the 1979 season . West Virginia used a white helmet with the state outline logo from 1970 – 72 , a gold helmet with the same logo from 1973 – 78 , and reverted to the white helmet and state outline logo in 1979 . 
 The " Flying WV " is the trademark logo for West Virginia Mountaineer football , adorning the team 's helmet and uniform . It debuted in 1980 along with the current gold and blue color scheme as a part of a football uniform redesign by head coach Don Nehlen , and has since become one of the most widely recognized logos in collegiate athletics . In adopting the Flying WV logo on the team 's helmets , Nehlen wanted to create a distinct image for the football program that could be easily identified . When Nehlen began his tenure as head coach in 1980 , he initially had difficulty in distinguishing between WVU and its opponents while watching game film . The logo itself was created by sports artist John Martin , brother of then @-@ Athletic Director Dick Martin . John Martin 's primary inspiration for the logo was the depiction of mountains created with the combination of the state initials ' W ' and ' V ' . The surge in the logo 's popularity led to its adoption as the official logo of West Virginia University in 1985 . 
 = = Uniforms = = 
 Since 1980 , West Virginia 's standard uniform has consisted of a dark blue jersey ( home ) or a white jersey ( away ) with gold pants and a dark blue helmet adorned by the gold " Flying WV " logo on both sides . West Virginia 's uniform scheme has also included a gold helmet , white helmet , gold jersey , dark blue pants , and white pants at various stages throughout its history . WVU also added a gray uniform and helmet combination to its rotation exclusively for the 2012 season . 
 WVU introduced new uniforms for the 2013 season . The helmets , jerseys , and pants each feature blue , gold , and white primary color sets , creating 27 different possible uniform combinations . The reintroduction of the gold and white helmets to the uniform scheme marked the first time each have been used since the late 1970s . All of the helmets feature a matte , non @-@ glossy paint finish and the " Flying WV " logo adorned on each side . WVU introduced a white throwback helmet during the 2013 season , featuring the 1970s " state outline " logo . The West Virginia state motto , Montani Semper Liberi , ( “ Mountaineers are Always Free ” ) , is stitched inside the back collar of all three jerseys . A canary image is stitched inside the front collar , representative of West Virginia ’ s coal mining heritage for their use in testing toxicity levels in the mines . The jerseys also have a unique number style exclusive to WVU , featuring sharp points and edges inspired by a miner ’ s pickaxe . 
 The Mountaineers wore a Nike Pro Combat uniform , specifically designed to pay tribute to West Virginia 's coal mining industry , for the 2010 season edition of the Backyard Brawl . The uniform consisted of a shade of white accented by a layer of coal dust , along with accents of university gold that referenced canaries utilized in coal mining . The helmet also implemented the coal dust accent , along with a yellow line down the center designed to embody the beam of light emitted by a miner 's headlamp . West Virginia also donned the Pro Combat uniforms later that season for its Champs Sports Bowl match up with North Carolina State . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 = = = Traditional = = = 
 In terms of competitiveness , intensity and longevity , the Backyard Brawl with the Pittsburgh Panthers is West Virginia 's fiercest and most storied rivalry . Separated by only 70 miles , the two universities have competed on a mostly annual basis since 1895 ( beginning in 1920 and resuming again in 1943 after World War II ) , generating some of the most exciting and memorable games in college football history . Although Pitt holds a 61 – 40 – 3 series lead , more than half of its victories in the Backyard Brawl came prior to 1952 when the Panthers dominated the series 34 – 9 – 1 . The Mountaineers hold a 26 – 22 – 2 edge over the Panthers since 1962 when the series began to interchange annually between Morgantown and Pittsburgh . West Virginia has also won seven of the last ten meetings . Put on hiatus following the 2011 season due to conference realignment , the series will resume with four games running from 2022 @-@ 2025 . 
 West Virginia also enjoyed a long @-@ standing rivalry with the Syracuse Orange . The schools have competed annually since 1955 , with the 1993 addition of the Ben <unk> Trophy being awarded to the victor . The significance of the trophy resides in the fact that Ben <unk> was a West Virginia native , former WVU player , and legendary head coach at Syracuse . While Syracuse holds a 33 – 27 lead in the series , WVU has won eight of the last ten games between the schools . Much like the status of the Backyard Brawl , Syracuse 's departure from the Big East for the Atlantic Coast Conference and WVU 's joining of the Big 12 Conference casts doubt over the future of the series . 
 The Mountaineers and Maryland Terrapins have met on a semi @-@ annual basis since 1919 , recently rekindling a cross @-@ border rivalry that was once the longest continuous non @-@ conference series for these geographical neighbors . The Mountaineers lead the series 28 – 22 – 2 . 
 The Mountaineers also once enjoyed a fierce rivalry with their Appalachia counterparts , the Virginia Tech Hokies . The schools once competed on an annual basis from 1973 to 2005 , doing so as Big East Conference rivals starting in 1991 . Beginning in 1997 , West Virginia and Virginia Tech competed for the Black Diamond Trophy , symbolizing the Appalachian region ’ s rich coal heritage . While West Virginia held a 28 – 22 – 1 advantage in the series , Virginia Tech won nine of the last twelve meetings between the schools . Since the Hokies departed the Big East for the ACC in 2004 and ended the series in 2006 , the rivalry has been dormant . The rivalry is set to be renewed with a neutral @-@ site game in 2017 and with a set of games for the 2021 and 2022 seasons . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Much less competitive was the one @-@ sided series between West Virginia and Penn State . They met annually from 1947 – 1992 . Penn State leads the series 48 – 9 – 2 . At one point , from 1959 to 1983 , Penn State had won 25 consecutive meetings between the two . Mountaineer victories in the series were so rare that any defeat of the Nittany Lions was cause for celebration amongst the West Virginia faithful . The series ended in 1992 with Penn State commencing Big Ten Conference play in 1993 . On Sept . 19 , 2013 , the schools announced that they would renew the series with two games in 2023 and 2024 . 
 The Friends of Coal Bowl between West Virginia and the Marshall Thundering Herd has also been uncompetitive . Rather , the series traces its origin back to West Virginia governmental intervention by former state Governor Joe Manchin , coupled with supposed political pressure . It is debatable as to whether the series constitutes a true " rivalry " ( Marshall has never beaten the Mountaineers in twelve meetings ) . Consequently , there is considerable doubt for the future of the Friends of Coal Bowl as the final game of the series was played in 2012 and there are no plans to renew the series . 
 = = Coaches = = 
 = = = Current coaching staff = = = 
 Head Coach 
 Dana Holgorsen 
 Assistant Coaches 
 Blue Adams - <unk> 
 Matt Caponi - Safeties 
 Tyron Carrier - Receivers 
 Ron Crook - Offensive Line 
 Tony Gibson - Defensive Coordinator , Linebackers 
 Mark Scott - Defense , Special Teams 
 Ja <unk> Seider - Running Backs 
 Bruce Tall - Defensive Line 
 Joe Wickline - Offensive Coordinator 
 = = = Head coaches = = = 
 The West Virginia Mountaineers have had 33 head coaches throughout the program 's history . With 149 victories , Don Nehlen is first overall in the program 's history , followed by Rich Rodriguez ( 60 wins ) and Art Lewis ( 58 ) . 
 = = Team accomplishments = = 
 = = = Championships = = = 
 West Virginia has won or shared a conference championship on 15 occasions , including eight Southern Conference ( SoCon ) titles and seven Big East Conference titles . As members of the SoCon and the Big East , the Mountaineers have amassed a record of 154 – 64 – 3 ( <unk> winning percentage ) in conference play . 
 The ECAC Lambert @-@ Meadowlands Trophy is an annual award given to the best team in the Eastern Region of FBS @-@ level college football . West Virginia has received the award as Eastern Champion on four occasions . 
 = = = Bowl games = = = 
 West Virginia has participated in 34 bowl games throughout its history , compiling a 15 – 19 record . The Mountaineers endured a dubious string of post @-@ season futility from 1987 to 2004 , losing 11 of 12 bowl games including eight consecutive losses between 1987 and 1998 . As of 2012 , however , WVU has won five of its last seven bowl games . Of those 32 bowl appearances , the Mountaineers have participated in 12 " major " Division I @-@ A / FBS bowl games , including three BCS Bowl Games , one Bowl Coalition Game and one National Championship Game . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 West Virginia has finished a season ranked in at least one of the Associated Press ( AP ) or Coaches polls on 19 occasions . The Mountaineers have finished ranked amongst the top 10 in college football on five occasions . West Virginia attained its highest @-@ ever ranking in the polls during week 14 of the 2007 season , when they were ranked # 1 in the Coaches Poll and # 2 in the AP Poll . Since the implementation of the Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) in 1998 , West Virginia has finished the regular season ranked seven times in the final BCS standings . The Bowl Coalition , a predecessor to the current BCS system , ranked WVU at # 3 in its final standings at the conclusion of the 1993 regular season . While the Mountaineers are 43 – 101 – 2 against opponents ranked in the AP Poll , they have an all @-@ time record of 146 – 67 – 1 when ranked in the AP Poll themselves . 
 = = Individual accolades = = 
 = = = Retired numbers = = = 
 Ira Errett Rodgers - # 21 
 Sam Huff - # 75 
 = = = Heisman Trophy candidates = = = 
 West Virginia has produced six Heisman Trophy candidates . Major Harris is the only Mountaineer to be considered as a finalist for the award , garnering consideration in the 1988 and 1989 seasons . 
 = = = National award winners and finalists = = = 
 A total of 20 Mountaineer players and coaches have been finalists for numerous college football awards . Don Nehlen and Calvin Magee have won awards as coaches , while Dan Mozes , Pat White , and Tavon Austin have earned awards as players . 
 = = = All @-@ Americans = = = 
 A total of 38 Mountaineers have been recognized as First @-@ Team All @-@ Americans by various media selectors . Among those selections , eleven have achieved Consensus All @-@ American status . Of those consensus All @-@ Americans , four were unanimous selections . 
 = = = Conference award winners = = = 
 During WVU 's 18 @-@ season tenure in the Southern Conference , a total of seven Mountaineers were recognized with superlative conference honors . Art Lewis received Coach of the Year distinction on consecutive occasions ( 1953 & 1954 ) while Bruce Bosley was named the SoCon Player of the Year and Jacobs Blocking Award winner in 1955 . During WVU 's 21 seasons in the Big East , a total of 12 Mountaineers were recognized with superlative conference honors . Don Nehlen ( 1993 ) and Rich Rodriguez ( 2003 ) were unanimous selections for Big East Coach of the Year , while Todd Sauerbrun was the unanimous selection for Big East Special Teams Player of the Year in 1994 and Amos Zereoué was the unanimous selection for Big East Rookie of the Year in 1996 . Tavon Austin was WVU 's first Big 12 Conference award recipient , garnering Co @-@ Special Teams Player of the Year honors in 2012 . 
 = = = All @-@ Conference selections = = = 
 = = = = Southern Conference = = = = 
 From 1950 to 1967 , West Virginia competed in the Southern Conference . During their 18 seasons in the SoCon , a total of 35 Mountaineers were recognized as First @-@ Team All @-@ Southern Conference selections . 
 = = = = Big East = = = = 
 The Mountaineers competed in the Big East Conference from 1991 to 2011 . During their 21 seasons in the Big East , a total of 61 Mountaineers were recognized as First @-@ Team All @-@ Big East selections . Among those players , Tavon Austin ( as a Return Specialist , 2011 ) , Noel Devine , Pat White ( 2007 ) , Eric Wicks ( 2006 ) , Adam " Pac @-@ Man " Jones ( as a Cornerback , 2004 ) , Grant Wiley ( 2003 ) , Barrett Green , Canute Curtis , Aaron Beasley ( 1995 ) , Todd Sauerbrun ( 1994 ) and Adrian Murrell ( 1992 ) were unanimous selections by the conference . 
 = = = = Big 12 = = = = 
 Since joining the Big 12 Conference in 2012 , eight Mountaineers have been recognized as First @-@ Team All @-@ Big 12 selections . 
 = = Hall of Fame inductees = = 
 = = = College Football Hall of Fame = = = 
 The National Football Foundation , overseer of the College Football Hall of Fame , recognizes ten individuals as WVU inductees . Conversely , the Mountaineer football program recognizes 13 individuals as inductees . 
 = = = Pro Football Hall of Fame = = = 
 Two Mountaineers hold the distinguished title of Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees . Joe Stydahar , an offensive tackle , was inducted in 1967 . Despite Stydahar 's impressive collegiate career , Chicago Bears owner / coach George Halas took a chance in selecting the little @-@ known tackle with the Bears ' first ever draft selection in the 1936 NFL Draft . Halas 's gamble paid off as " Jumbo Joe " produced an illustrious playing career with the Bears , earning four NFL All @-@ Star selections , six All @-@ Pro selections , three NFL championships , and an induction into the NFL 's All @-@ Decade Team for the 1930s . Stydahar also served as head coach of the Los Angeles Rams and the Chicago Cardinals , winning the 1951 NFL Championship with the Rams . During his Hall of Fame enshrinement speech , Stydahar thanked his family and friends from his " dear state , West Virginia . " 
 Sam Huff , a linebacker , was inducted in 1982 . Originally a third round selection by the New York Giants in the 1956 NFL Draft , Huff played for the Giants from 1956 – 1963 and later for the Washington Redskins from 1964 @-@ 1969 . Huff 's football career , let alone his future in the NFL , almost never came to pass , however . As a junior in high school , WVU head coach Art Lewis came to Huff 's town to look at another prospect . Luckily for Huff ( and for the Mountaineers ) , Lewis wound up recruiting Sam instead . Fate intervened once more for Huff at the end of his collegiate career , as Giants scout Al DeRogatis came to Morgantown to look at All @-@ American guard Bruce Bosley . DeRogatis instead discovered Huff , proclaiming that " there 's another guard here who will be even greater . His name is Sam Huff . " Huff became a five @-@ time Pro Bowl selection , a four @-@ time First @-@ Team All @-@ Pro selection , an inductee in the NFL 1950s All @-@ Decade Team , and was named as one of the 70 Greatest Redskins of all @-@ time . Huff was also recognized as the NFL 's Top Linebacker in 1959 . 
 = = = WVU Sports Hall of Fame = = = 
 Since 1991 , the West Virginia University Sports Hall of Fame recognizes outstanding Mountaineer athletes . Former athletes , coaches and administrators are eligible for selection 10 years following their association with WVU athletics . The following individuals have been inducted into the WVU Sports Hall of Fame for their contributions to the Mountaineer football program : 
 = = Mountaineers in the NFL = = 
 WVU has produced a total of 180 NFL draft selections . This section accounts for past and present West Virginia University football players that have participated in the National Football League . 
 = = = Active alumni = = = 
 As of June 2016 , a total of 29 Mountaineers were listed on team rosters in the NFL . 
 = = = All @-@ star and Pro Bowl honorees = = = 
 Among the numerous Mountaineers that have participated in the NFL , a total of 32 have received all @-@ star or Pro Bowl recognition . 
 = = = NFL first round draft selections = = = 
 Of West Virginia 's 181 players selected in the NFL draft , 12 Mountaineers have been selected in the first round . 
 = = Future non @-@ conference opponents = = 
 Announced schedules as of September 10 , 2015 
 = You Really Got Me = 
 " You Really Got Me " is a song written by Ray Davies for English rock band the Kinks . The song , originally performed in a more blues @-@ oriented style , was inspired by artists such as Lead Belly and Big Bill Broonzy . Two versions of the song were recorded , with the second performance being used for the final single . Although it was rumoured that future Led Zeppelin guitarist Jimmy Page had performed the song 's guitar solo , the myth has since been proven false . 
 " You Really Got Me " was built around power chords ( perfect fifths and octaves ) and heavily influenced later rock musicians , particularly in the genres of heavy metal and punk rock . Built around a guitar riff played by Dave Davies , the song 's lyrics were described by Dave as " a love song for street kids . " 
 " You Really Got Me " was released on 4 August 1964 as the group 's third single , and reached number one on the UK singles chart the next month , remaining for two weeks . The song became the group 's breakthrough hit ; it established them as one of the top British Invasion acts in the United States , reaching number seven there later in the year . " You Really Got Me " was later included on the Kinks ' debut album , Kinks . The song was covered by American rock band Van Halen in 1978 , reaching the Billboard Top 40 . 
 = = Background = = 
 " You Really Got Me " was written by Ray Davies , the Kinks ' vocalist and main songwriter , sometime between 9 and 12 March 1964 . Created on the piano in the front room of the Davies ' home , the song was stylistically very different from the finished product , being much lighter and somewhat jazz @-@ oriented . Ray said of the song 's writing , " When I came up with [ ' You Really Got Me ' ] I hadn 't been writing songs very long at all . It was one of the first five I ever came up with . " 
 During the spring of 1964 , Ray Davies played an early version of " You Really Got Me " on piano to rock photographer Allan Ballard during a photo shoot . Ballard later remembered , " It was quite a small , pokey , Victorian Terrace , a bit scruffy , and in the hallway they had an upright piano . Ray sat down and plonked out , ' Der @-@ der , der , Der @-@ der ! ' He said , ' What do you reckon to this ? ' It meant nothing to me at the time , but it ended up as ' You Really Got Me ' . " 
 Ray , initially planning for the song to be a " more laid @-@ back number " , later played the chords of the song to brother Dave Davies , the Kinks ' lead guitarist . However , upon hearing the track , Dave decided that the riff would be much more powerful on a guitar . Ray said of the track 's change to a guitar @-@ centred track , " I wanted it to be a jazz @-@ type tune , because that 's what I liked at the time . It 's written originally around a sax line ... Dave ended up playing the sax line in fuzz guitar and it took the song a step further . " The band then began to perform the new track in some of their live shows , where it was well received . 
 In 1998 , Ray said , " I 'd written ' You Really Got Me ' as tribute to all those great blues people I love : Lead Belly and Big Bill Broonzy . " Dave cited Gerry Mulligan as an inspiration , saying , " Ray was a great fan of Gerry Mulligan , who was in [ the Jazz on a Summer 's Day movie ] , and as he sat at the piano at home , he sort of messed around in a vein similar to Mulligan and came up with this figure based on a 12 @-@ bar blues " . Dave has also said that song had been inspired by Jimmy Giuffre 's song " The Train and the River " . According to the band 's manager , Larry Page , the song 's characteristic riff came about while working out the chords of the Kingsmen 's " Louie Louie " . Lyrically , the song was said to be influenced by an encounter with one of the band 's " first serious female fans . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 The song was recorded by the Kinks at least twice in the summer of 1964 . The band 's demo was in a " bluesy " style , while a full studio version recorded in June was slower and less emphatic than the final single . Although the band wanted to rerecord the song , their record company Pye refused to fund another session on the ground that the band 's first two singles had failed to chart . Ray Davies , however , hated the original recording of the track , threatening that he would refuse to perform or promote the single unless it was rerecorded . Manager Larry Page also refused to publish the original recording . When Pye stood its ground , the band 's own management broke the stalemate by funding the session themselves . Ray Davies ' adamant attitude on behalf of the career @-@ making song effectively established him as the leader and chief songwriter of the Kinks . Davies later said , " I was floundering around trying to find an identity . It was in 1964 that I managed to do that , to be able to justify myself and say , ' I exist , I 'm here . ' I was literally born when that song hit . " 
 The influential distortion sound of the guitar track was created after guitarist Dave Davies sliced the speaker cone of his guitar amplifier with a razor blade and poked it with a pin . The amplifier was affectionately called " little green " , after the name of the amplifier made by the Elpico company , and purchased in Davies ' neighbourhood music shop , linked to a Vox AC @-@ 30 . In 2014 , Dave Davies accused brother Ray of lying about participating in Dave 's guitar distortion sound . Dave wrote on his Facebook page , " My brother is lying . I don 't know why he does this but it was my Elpico amp that I bought and out of frustration I cut the speaker cone up with a razor blade and I was so shocked and surprised and excited that it worked that I demonstrated the sound to Ray and [ Kinks bassist ] Pete [ Quaife ] … Ray liked the sound and he had written a riff on the piano which formed the basis of the song ' You Really Got Me ' and I played the riff on my guitar with my new sound . I alone created this sound . " 
 According to recent Kinks ' releases that give full official performance credits of the track , group members Ray Davies ( vocals and rhythm guitar ) , Dave Davies ( lead guitar ) , Pete Quaife ( bass ) are joined by session men Bobby Graham ( drums ) , and Arthur Greenslade ( piano ) . Regular Kinks drummer Mick Avory plays the tambourine . 
 = = Guitar solo = = 
 The guitar solo on the recording has been the subject of the persistent myth that it was not played by the Kinks ' lead guitarist Dave Davies , but by then @-@ session player Jimmy Page , who later joined the Yardbirds and Led Zeppelin . Among those claiming Page played lead guitar was Jon Lord of Deep Purple , who also claimed to play piano on the track . Page has always denied playing the song 's guitar solo , going so far as to state in a 1970s interview cited in Sound on Sound magazine that " I didn 't play on ' You Really Got Me ' and that 's what pisses him [ Ray Davies ] off . " Rock historian and author Doug Hinman makes a case that the rumour was begun and fostered by the established British rhythm and blues community , many of whose members were resentful that an upstart band of teenagers such as the Kinks could produce such a powerful and influential blues @-@ based recording , seemingly out of nowhere . 
 Shel Talmy , the producer on the track , has gone on record and put the controversy to rest in an interview with The Guardian , saying " contrary to myth , Jimmy didn 't play on ' You Really Got Me ' . " In a 7 November 2014 interview with SiriusXM 's ' Town Hall ' , Page finally confirmed that he did not play on the song , saying " Oh , Crikey ! I wasn 't on ' You Really Got Me , ' but I did play on the Kinks ' records . That 's all I 'm going to say about it . But every time I do an interview , people ask me about ' You Really Got Me . ' So maybe somebody can correct Wikipedia so people won 't keep asking me . " 
 In his 1998 autobiographical release The Storyteller , Ray Davies discusses the guitar solo . He confirms that his brother Dave played the solo and it was preceded by some bantering between the two : 
 Halfway through the song it was time for Dave 's guitar solo . This moment had to be right . So I shouted across the studio to Dave , give him encouragement . But I seemed to spoil his concentration . He looked at me with a dazed expression . ' Fuck off . ' If you doubt me , if you doubt what I 'm saying , I challenge you to listen to the original Kinks recording of ' You Really Got Me ' . Halfway through the song , after the second chorus , before the guitar solo , there 's a drum break . Boo ka , boo boo ka , boo ka , boo boo . And in the background you can hear ' fuck off ' . You can , you can . When I did the vocal I tried to cover it up by going ' Oh no ' , but in the background you still hear it ' fuck off ' . And it 's even clearer on CD , it 's really embarrassing . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 While Ray Davies had been instructed at the time to write " Beatle @-@ type " material for commercial reasons , " You Really Got Me " was written as a more R & B @-@ based composition . The song is centred on a guitar riff by Dave Davies , which has since been referred to as " instantly identifiable . " American musicologist Robert Walser described " You Really Got Me " as " the first hit song built around power chords . " The song has since been labeled as an early influence of the heavy metal genre , with critic Denise Sullivan of AllMusic writing , " ' You Really Got Me ' remains a blueprint song in the hard rock and heavy metal arsenal . " However , Dave Davies has since rejected the idea that the song is heavy metal , saying " I 've never really like that term , heavy metal . I think , in all humility , it was the first heavy guitar riff rock record . Just because of the sound — if you played it on a ukulele , it might not have been so powerful . " 
 The lyrics of the song are about lust and sex . Dave Davies said of the song 's lyrics , " ' You Really Got Me ' [ is ] such a pure record , really . It 's a love song for street kids . They 're not going to wine and dine you , even if they knew how to chat you up . [ They say ] ' I want you — come here . ' " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " You Really Got Me " was released as the band 's third single on 4 August 1964 , backed with " It 's Alright " . Within three days of the single 's release , " You Really Got Me " began to appear on local charts . Eventually , the song climbed to the top of the British charts , the band 's first single to do so . Ray Davies later claimed that , due to the single 's high demand , Pye Records put all their other records on hold to solely produce copies of " You Really Got Me " . Due to the high level of success the single achieved in the UK , a rush @-@ release of " You Really Got Me " was put out in America on 2 September 1964 , despite being delayed from its initial release date of 26 August . Although it did not enter the charts until 26 September , the record rose to number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song later appeared on the band 's debut album , Kinks , with the title of the American release of the album being changed to You Really Got Me . Plans for Ray to sing versions of the song in French , German , Spanish , and Japanese for their respective markets were proposed by Shel Talmy , but they never materialized . 
 Upon release , the single received a positive review from Record Mirror , which said , " Highly promising group with strong guitar sound and a compact sort of vocal performance . Mid @-@ tempo but bustling song should sell well . " In Melody Maker , singer Dave Berry was featured in a blindfold test of the song , with Berry at first guessing the song was by the Kingsmen . He said , " It 's fabulous , this one . I like these records that sound as if they 've gone into a recording studio and done what they wanted to on the spot . It 's a good chance of being a big hit . " The Melody Maker review had a lasting impact on Ray Davies , who said that Berry " had a few hits – so he mattered " and that Berry 's belief that the band had " done what they wanted " had " said it all " for him . 
 The Kinks ' use of distorted guitar riffs continued with songs like " All Day and All of the Night " , " Tired of Waiting for You " , and " Set Me Free " , among others . Pete Townshend of the Who , a band also produced by Talmy at that time , has stated that their first single , " I Can 't Explain " , was influenced by the Kinks ' work at the time . Other artists influenced by " You Really Got Me " include Tom Petty , John Lydon , Chris Bell of Big Star , and Jimi Hendrix , who , according to Dave Davies , describing the song as " a landmark record . " 
 In 1999 , " You Really Got Me " was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame . Rolling Stone magazine placed the song at number 82 on their list of the 500 greatest songs of all time and at number four on their list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time . In early 2005 , the song was voted the best British song of the 1955 – 1965 decade in a BBC radio poll . In March 2005 , Q magazine placed it at number nine in its list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Tracks . In 2009 , it was named the 57th Greatest Hard Rock Song by VH1 . 
 = = Live history = = 
 Prior to its release , the Kinks performed " You Really Got Me " in some of their early concerts . It was a crowd favourite , with Ray Davies later claiming to feel a connection with the crowd as he performed the song . Ray later said , " Our success came from playing [ the song ] live . When we played ' You Really Got Me ' people actually took notice . They realised we had something original . " 
 The Kinks continued to perform successfully for over 30 years through many musical styles , but " You Really Got Me " remained a mainstay in concert . During some shows , the song was played in a medley with its follow @-@ up single " All Day and All of the Night , " while in 1977 , a performance on Saturday Night Live featured a four song medley of " You Really Got Me , " " All Day and All of the Night , " " A Well Respected Man , " and " Lola . " In a live performance on the Don Lane Show in 1982 , " You Really Got Me " was featured in a medley with the band 's 1981 song , " Destroyer . " In 1984 , Dave Davies claimed that , even after twenty years of performing " You Really Got Me , " the track was " still fun to play live . " 
 A live version of " You Really Got Me " was released on the band 's 1980 live album , One for the Road . This version , following the minor success of the same album 's live version of " Lola " , was released as a single in America , backed with the live take of Low Budget 's " Attitude " . However , the single failed to chart . This version was later included on the 1986 compilation album , Come Dancing with the Kinks : The Best of the Kinks 1977 @-@ 1986 . 
 Other live renditions of " You Really Got Me " have also been released . A version on Live at Kelvin Hall recorded at Kelvin Hall in Glasgow , Scotland was released in 1967 , while a performance at the Mann Music Center in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania appeared on 1994 's To the Bone . The Davies brothers also performed a live version in Boston , Massachusetts with the Smithereens in November 1991 , which later appeared on the latter band 's 1995 compilation album Attack of the Smithereens . Both Ray and Dave Davies still perform the song in solo shows , generally as a closing number . 
 In December 2015 , Ray Davies joined brother Dave onstage at one of his concerts to perform " You Really Got Me . " The event marked the first time the brothers performed on stage together in nearly twenty years , sparking rumors of a possible Kinks reunion . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Van Halen version = = 
 The American hard rock band Van Halen released a cover of " You Really Got Me " for their 1978 debut album , Van Halen in 1978 . As the band 's first single , it was a popular radio hit which helped jump @-@ start the band 's career , as it had done for the Kinks 14 years earlier . This version , which was cited by Eddie Van Halen as an " updated " version of the original , featured " histrionic " guitar playing by Eddie Van Halen and " vocal shenanigans " by David Lee Roth . The song had been played by the band live for years before its studio release . On the radio , it is often featured with " Eruption " , the instrumental that precedes it on the album , as an intro . 
 The song was released as a single as a result of an encounter between Eddie Van Halen and members of the band Angel . Eddie Van Halen and Angel drummer Barry Brandt had both been bragging about their new material to one another , resulting in Eddie Van Halen showing a demo of " You Really Got Me " to Brandt . On the following day , the band 's producer , Ted Templeman told Van Halen that Angel was recording their own cover of " You Really Got Me " to release before Van Halen 's version . As a result , the song was rush @-@ released as a single before Angel could do so . 
 Eddie Van Halen has since expressed dissatisfaction with the use of " You Really Got Me " as the band 's debut single . He said , " It kind of bummed me out that Ted [ Templeman ] wanted our first single to be someone else 's tune . I would have maybe picked " Jamie 's Cryin ' " , just because it was our own . " 
 The Kinks ' Dave Davies has claimed to dislike Van Halen 's rendition of the song , saying " There 's the thing : good art isn 't always about having the <unk> technique . I shouldn 't encourage him , but I 'm sure Eddie Van Halen played better when he was drunk . " He also told of how a concert @-@ goer approached him after a live show and congratulated him on performing a " great cover of the Van Halen song . " Ray Davies , on the other hand , claimed to like the track because it made him laugh . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 David Lee Roth – lead vocals 
 Eddie Van Halen – guitar , backing vocals 
 Alex Van Halen – drums 
 Michael Anthony – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = Hurricane Linda ( 1997 ) = 
 Hurricane Linda was the second @-@ strongest eastern Pacific hurricane on record . Forming from a tropical wave on September 9 , 1997 , Linda steadily intensified and reached hurricane status within 36 hours of developing . It rapidly intensified , reaching winds of 185 mph ( 295 km / h ) and an estimated central pressure falling to 902 millibars ( 26 @.@ 6 inHg ) ; both were records for the eastern Pacific until Hurricane Patricia surpassed it in 2015 . The hurricane was briefly forecast to move toward southern California , but instead , it turned out to sea and dissipated on September 17 . It was the fifteenth tropical cyclone , thirteenth named storm , seventh hurricane , and fifth major hurricane of the 1997 Pacific hurricane season . 
 While near peak intensity , Hurricane Linda passed near Socorro Island , where it damaged meteorological instruments . The hurricane produced high waves along the southwestern Mexican coastline , forcing the closure of five ports . If Linda had made landfall on southern California as predicted , it would have been the strongest storm to do so since a storm in 1939 . Though it did not hit the state , the hurricane produced light to moderate rainfall across the region , causing mudslides and flooding in the San Gorgonio Wilderness ; two houses were destroyed and 77 others were damaged , and damage totaled $ 3 @.@ 2 million ( 1997 USD , $ 4 @.@ 3 million 2008 USD ) . Despite the intensity , the name was not retired . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Linda are believed to have been in a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on August 24 . The wave tracked westward across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea without development . An area of convection developed to the west of Panama in the Pacific Ocean on September 6 , which is believed to have been related to the tropical wave . The system continued westward , and within three days of entering the basin , a poorly defined circulation formed . Banding features began to develop , and at around 1200 UTC on September 9 , the system organized into Tropical Depression Fourteen @-@ E. At the time , it was approximately 460 miles ( 740 km ) south of the Mexican city of Manzanillo . 
 On becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression moved northwestward at 6 and 12 miles per hour ( 9 @.@ 7 and 19 @.@ 3 km / h ) , partially under the influence of a mid- to upper @-@ level low near the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula . Deep convection and banding features increased , and the depression intensified into a tropical storm early on September 10 . Upon being designated , the cyclone was named Linda by the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) . As upper @-@ level outflow became well @-@ established , the storm began to strengthen quickly . By September 11 , an intermittent eye appeared , by which time the NHC estimated that Linda reached hurricane status . The storm began to rapidly intensify ; its small eye became well @-@ defined and surrounded by very cold convection . In a 24 ‑ hour period , the minimum pressure dropped 81 millibars ( 2 @.@ 4 inHg ) , or an average drop of 3 @.@ 38 millibars ( 0 @.@ 100 inHg ) per hour . Such intensification met the criterion for explosive deepening , an average hourly pressure decrease of at least 2 @.@ 5 millibars ( 0 @.@ 074 inHg ) . By early September 12 , Hurricane Linda reached Category 5 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale , and around 0600 UTC , Linda attained estimated peak winds of 185 mph ( 295 km / h ) about 145 mi ( 235 km ) southeast of Socorro Island . Its maximum sustained winds were estimated between 180 mph ( 285 km / h ) and 195 mph ( 315 km / h ) , based on Dvorak T @-@ numbers of 7 @.@ 5 and 8 @.@ 0 respectively , and gusts were estimated to have reached 220 mph ( 350 km / h ) . The hurricane 's pressure is estimated at 902 millibars ( 26 @.@ 6 inHg ) , making Linda the most intense Pacific hurricane at the time . When the storm was active , its pressure was estimated to have been slightly lower , at 900 millibars ( 27 inHg ) . 
 Shortly after reaching peak intensity , Hurricane Linda passed near Socorro Island as a Category 5 hurricane . Around that time , tropical cyclone forecast models suggested that the hurricane would turn toward southern California due to an approaching upper @-@ level trough . Had Linda struck the state , it would have been much weaker at that time , possibly moving ashore as a tropical storm . Instead , Hurricane Linda turned west @-@ northwestward away from land in response to a building ridge to the north of the hurricane . Despite remaining away from land , moisture from the storm reached southern California to produce rainfall . On September 14 , the Hurricane Hunters and airplanes from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration investigated the hurricane to provide better data on the powerful hurricane . Hurricane Linda quickly deteriorated as it tracked toward cooler waters , weakening to tropical storm status on September 15 . Two days later , when located about 1 @,@ 105 miles ( 1 @,@ 778 km ) west of the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula , it weakened to tropical depression status . Linda no longer met the criteria for a tropical cyclone by September 18 , although its remnant circulation persisted for a few more days before dissipating . 
 Forecasters and computer models did not anticipate how quickly Linda would strengthen ; in one advisory , the NHC under @-@ forecast how strong the winds would be in 72 hours by 115 miles per hour ( 185 km / h ) . The maximum potential intensity for Linda was 880 millibars ( 26 inHg ) , 22 millibars ( 0 @.@ 65 inHg ) lower than its actual intensity . The 1997 season was affected by the 1997 @-@ 98 El Niño event , which brought warmer than normal water temperatures and contributed to the high intensity of several storms . Hurricane Linda occurred about a month after the similarly powerful Hurricane Guillermo , which also reached Category 5 status . The passage of Linda cooled the waters in the region , causing Hurricane Nora to weaken when it passed through the area on September 21 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Although the eye of Hurricane Linda did not make landfall , the hurricane passed near Socorro Island while near peak intensity . The hurricane cut power to wind and pressure instruments . A station on the island recorded a pressure of 986 millibars ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) before it stopped producing data . No tropical cyclone warnings or watches were issued for the hurricane . However , the threat for high tides and strong winds in Mexico prompted officials to issue coastal flood warnings and to close five ports . Waves of up to 7 @.@ 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) were reported along the coastline , causing flooding in the states of Michoacán , Jalisco , Nayarit , and Sinaloa . 
 When Linda was predicted to turn towards the northeast , it was forecast to move ashore in southern California as a weak tropical storm , which would have made Linda the first to do so since a tropical storm in 1939 . The Oxnard , California National Weather Service office issued public information and special weather statements that discussed the possible impact of Linda on southern California . The advisories mentioned forecasting uncertainty , and advised the media not to exaggerate the storm . The office noted a threat for significant rainfall — possibly causing flash flooding — as well as high surf . To prepare for possible flooding , workers cleaned storm drains and prepared sandbags for coastal properties . 
 Although the storm did not make the turn , 15 and 18 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 and 5 @.@ 5 m ) waves reached southern California . In Newport Beach , a wave swept five people off a jetty and carried them 900 feet ( 270 m ) out to sea , although all were rescued by a passing boat . Moisture from the hurricane moved across the state , producing heavy rainfall and <unk> @-@ sized hail . A station in Forrest Falls , located within the San Gorgonio Wilderness , recorded rainfall rates of 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) per hour . The rainfall caused severe flooding and mudslides which destroyed two houses , damaged 77 others , and inflicted $ 3 @.@ 2 million in damage ( 1997 USD , $ 4 @.@ 3 million 2008 USD ) . San Diego recorded 0 @.@ 05 inches ( 1 @.@ 3 mm ) of rain , the first measurable precipitation in 164 days ; this tied the record for the longest duration without rainfall at the station , previously set in 1915 and 1924 . Moisture from Linda extended into the Upper Midwest , contributing to a record daily rainfall total of 1 @.@ 97 inches ( 50 mm ) in Minneapolis , Minnesota . 
 = = Records = = 
 With an estimated pressure of 902 millibars ( 26 @.@ 6 inHg ) , Hurricane Linda became the most intense Pacific hurricane since reliable records began in the 1966 season . Until Hurricane Patricia of 2015 , Linda was also believed to have been the strongest since overall records began in the basin in 1949 . The previous most intense hurricane was Hurricane Ava in 1973 , which contained a confirmed pressure of 915 millibars ( 27 @.@ 0 inHg ) . Since no observations recorded the pressure during Linda 's peak , its peak intensity was estimated . As such , Ava remained the strongest measured hurricane in the basin at that time . 
 = G. Ledyard Stebbins = 
 George Ledyard Stebbins Jr . ( January 6 , 1906 – January 19 , 2000 ) was an American botanist and geneticist who is widely regarded as one of the leading evolutionary biologists of the 20th century . Stebbins received his Ph.D. in botany from Harvard University in 1931 . He went on to the University of California , Berkeley , where his work with E. B. Babcock on the genetic evolution of plant species , and his association with a group of evolutionary biologists known as the Bay Area <unk> , led him to develop a comprehensive synthesis of plant evolution incorporating genetics . 
 His most important publication was Variation and Evolution in Plants , which combined genetics and Darwin 's theory of natural selection to describe plant speciation . It is regarded as one of the main publications which formed the core of the modern evolutionary synthesis and still provides the conceptual framework for research in plant evolutionary biology ; according to Ernst Mayr , " Few later works dealing with the evolutionary systematics of plants have not been very deeply affected by Stebbins ' work . " He also researched and wrote widely on the role of hybridization and polyploidy in speciation and plant evolution ; his work in this area has had a lasting influence on research in the field . 
 From 1960 , Stebbins was instrumental in the establishment of the Department of Genetics at the University of California , Davis , and was active in numerous organizations involved in the promotion of evolution , and of science in general . He was elected to the National Academy of Science , was awarded the National Medal of Science , and was involved in the development of evolution @-@ based science programs for California high schools , as well as the conservation of rare plants in that state . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Stebbins was born in Lawrence , New York , the youngest of three children . His parents were George Ledyard Stebbins , a wealthy real estate financier who developed Seal Harbor , Maine and helped to establish Acadia National Park , and Edith Alden Candler Stebbins ; both parents were native New Yorkers and Episcopalians . Stebbins was known throughout his life as Ledyard , to distinguish himself from his father . The family encouraged their sons ' interest in natural history during their periodic journeys to Seal Harbor . In 1914 , Edith contracted tuberculosis and the Stebbins moved to Santa Barbara , California to improve her health . In California , Stebbins was enrolled at the Cate School in <unk> where he became influenced by Ralph Hoffmann , an American natural history instructor and amateur ornithologist and botanist . After graduating from high school , he embarked on a major in political studies at Harvard . By the third year of his undergraduate study , he had decided to major in botany . 
 Stebbins started graduate studies at Harvard in 1928 , initially working on flowering plant taxonomy and biogeography — particularly that of the flora of New England — with Merritt Lyndon Fernald . He completed his MA in 1929 and continued to work toward his Ph.D. He became interested in using chromosomes for taxonomic studies , a method that Fernald did not support . Stebbins chose to concentrate his doctoral work on the cytology of plant reproductive processes in the genus <unk> , with <unk> E. C. Jeffrey as his supervisor and Fernald on his supervisory panel . During his Ph.D. candidature , Stebbins sought advice and supervision from geneticist Karl Sax . Sax identified several errors in Stebbins 's work and disapproved of his interpretation of results that , while in accordance with Jeffrey 's views , were inconsistent with the work of contemporary geneticists . Jeffrey and Sax argued over Stebbins 's dissertation , and the thesis was revised numerous times to accommodate their differing views . 
 Stebbins 's Ph.D. was granted by Harvard in 1931 . In March that year , he married Margaret Chamberlin , with whom he had three children . In 1932 , he took a teaching position in biology at Colgate University . While at Colgate , he continued his work in cytogenetics ; in particular , he continued to study the genetics of <unk> and began to study the behaviour of chromosomes in hybrid peonies bred by biologist Percy Saunders . Saunders and Stebbins attended the 1932 International Congress of Genetics in Ithaca , New York . Here , Stebbins 's interest was captured by talks given by Thomas Hunt Morgan and Barbara McClintock , who spoke about chromosomal crossover . Stebbins reproduced McClintock 's crossover experiments in the peony , and published several papers on the cytogenetics of Paeonia , which established his reputation as a geneticist . 
 = = UC Berkeley = = 
 In 1935 , Stebbins was offered a genetics research position at the University of California , Berkeley working with geneticist E. B. Babcock . Babcock needed assistance with a large Rockefeller @-@ funded project characterizing the genetics and evolutionary processes of plants from the genus Crepis and was interested in developing Crepis into a model plant , to enable genetic investigations similar to those possible in the model insect Drosophila melanogaster . Like the genera that Stebbins had previously studied , Crepis commonly hybridized , displayed polyploidy ( chromosome doubling ) , and could make seed without fertilization ( a process known as apomixis ) . The collaboration between Babcock and Stebbins produced numerous papers and two monographs . The first monograph , published in 1937 , resulted in splitting off the Asiatic Crepis species into the genus <unk> . The second , published in 1938 , was titled The American Species of Crepis : their interrelationships and distribution as affected by polyploidy and apomixis . 
 In The American Species of Crepis , Babcock and Stebbins described the concept of the polyploid complex , and its role in plant evolution . Some genera , such as Crepis , have a complex of reproductive forms that center on sexually diploid populations that have also given rise to polyploid ones . Babcock and Stebbins also observed that allopolyploid types formed from the hybridization of two different species always have a wider distribution than diploid or <unk> species , and proposed that polyploids formed through hybridization have a greater potential to exploit varied environments , because they inherit all traits from both parents . They also showed that hybridization in the polyploid complex could provide a mechanism for genetic exchange between diploid species that were otherwise unable to breed . Their observations offered insight into species formation and knowledge of how all these complex processes could provide information on the history of a genus . This monograph was described by Swedish botanist Åke Gustafsson as the most important work on the formation of species during that period . 
 Stebbins 's review , " The significance of polyploidy in plant evolution " , published in American Naturalist in 1940 , demonstrated how work done on artificial polyploids and natural polyploid complexes had shown that polyploidy was important in developing large , complex , and widespread genera . However , by looking at the history of polyploidy in plant families , he argued that polyploidy was only common in herbaceous perennials and infrequent in woody plants and annuals . As such , polyploids played a conservative role in evolution since problems with fertility prevented the acquisition and replication of new genetic material that might lead to a new line of evolution . This work continued with the 1947 paper " Types of polyploids : their classification and significance " , which detailed a system for the classification of polyploids and described Stebbins ' ideas about the role of <unk> in angiosperm evolution , where he argued that chromosome number may be a useful tool for the construction of phylogenies . These reviews were highly influential and provided a basis for others to study the role of polyploidy in evolution . 
 In 1939 , with Babcock 's support , Stebbins was made a full professor in the Department of Genetics at UC Berkeley , after the Department of Botany failed to promote him . Stebbins was required to teach a course on evolution , and during his preparation he became excited by contemporary research combining genetics and evolution . He became associated with a group known as the Bay Area <unk> , which included botanist Jens Clausen , taxonomist David D. Keck , physiologist William <unk> and the evolutionary geneticist Theodosius Dobzhansky . During this time he also became friends with the botanist Herbert Baker . With the encouragement of this group of scientists , Stebbins directed his research towards evolution . He became involved with the Society for the Study of Evolution in 1946 , and was one of the few botanists involved with the new organization . 
 His research on plant evolution also progressed during this period ; he worked on the genetics of forage grasses , looking at polyploidy and the evolution of the Poaceae and publishing numerous papers on the subject though the 1940s . He produced an artificial <unk> grass from the diploid species <unk> erecta through treatment with the chromosome doubling agent colchicine . He was able to establish the plant in the field , and after 39 years of field trials was able to show that the autopolyploid was not as successful as its diploid parent in an unchanging environment . 
 = = Variation and Evolution in Plants = = 
 Columbia University 's Jesup Lectures were the starting point for many of the most important works of the modern evolutionary synthesis . The presenters introduced the connection between two important discoveries — the units of evolution ( genes ) with selection as the primary mechanism of evolution . In 1941 , Edgar Anderson ( whose work on hybridization in the genus Iris had interested Stebbins since they met in 1930 ) and Ernst Mayr co @-@ presented the lecture series and Mayr later published his lectures as Systematics and the Origin of Species . In 1946 , Stebbins was invited on Dobzhansky 's recommendation to present the prestigious lectures . Stebbins ' lectures drew together the otherwise disparate fields of genetics , ecology , systematics , cytology , and paleontology . In 1950 , these lectures were published as Variation and Evolution in Plants , which proved to be one of the most important books in 20th @-@ century botany . The book brought botanical science into the new synthesis of evolutionary theory , and became part of the canon of biological works written between 1936 and 1950 that formed the modern synthesis of evolution . 
 Variation and Evolution in Plants was the first book to provide a wide @-@ ranging explanation of how evolutionary mechanisms operated in plants at the genetic level . It brought concepts related to plant evolution into line with animal evolution as it emerged from Dobzhansky 's 1937 Genetics and the Origin of Species and provided the conceptual framework to organize a disparate set of disciplines into a new field : plant evolutionary biology . In the book Stebbins argued that evolution needed to be studied as a dynamic problem and that evolution must be considered on three levels : first , that of individual variation within an interbreeding population ; second , that of the distribution and frequency of this variation ; and third , that of the separation and divergence of populations as the result of the building up of isolating mechanisms leading to the formation of species . He used the work of <unk> Clausen , Keck , <unk> , and <unk> to show that it was possible to distinguish between genotypic and phenotypic variation — that is , genetically identical plants could have different phenotypes in different environments . One of the book 's most original chapters used the cytogenetics work of C. D. Darlington to show that genetic systems like hybridization and polyploidy were also subject to selection . 
 The book offered few original hypotheses , but Stebbins hoped that by summarising the available research on plant evolution the book would " help to open the way towards a deeper understanding of evolutionary problems and more fruitful research in the direction of their solution . " The book effectively ended any serious belief in alternative mechanisms of evolution in plants , such as Lamarckian evolution or soft inheritance , which were still upheld by some botanists . Following that publication , Stebbins was regarded as an expert on modern evolutionary theory and is widely credited with the founding of the science of plant evolutionary biology . Variation and Evolution in Plants continues to be widely cited in contemporary scientific botanical literature more than 50 years after its publication . 
 Stebbins regarded his contribution to the modern synthesis as the application of genetic principles already established by other workers to botany . " I didn 't add any new elements [ to the modern synthetic theory ] to speak of . I just modified things so that people could understand how things were in the plant world . " 
 = = UC Davis and later life = = 
 Stebbins took an appointment at the University of California , Davis in 1950 , where he was a key figure in the establishment of the University 's Department of Genetics ; he was the Department 's first chairman and held the position from 1958 to 1963 . At Davis , the focus of his research changed to incorporate newer areas , such as developmental morphology and genetics in crop plants , including barley . He continued to publish widely and extensively on plant evolution , writing over 200 papers and several books after 1950 . 
 Stebbins and Edgar Anderson wrote a paper in 1954 on the importance of hybridization in adapting to new environments . They proposed novel adaptations would facilitate the invasion of habitats not utilized previously by either parent and that novel adaptations may facilitate the formation of stabilized hybrid species . Following this paper , Stebbins developed the first model of adaptive radiation . He proposed that a high degree of genetic variability was necessary for major evolutionary advances , that because of slow mutation rates , genetic recombination was the most likely source of this variation , and that variation could be maximised though hybridization . As of 2006 , research is ongoing regarding whether hybridization is an accidental consequence of evolution or if it is necessary for the creation and evolution of plant species ; it has been argued that contemporary studies are part of an intellectual lineage that started with the work of Stebbins and Anderson . 
 Stebbins wrote several books during his time at UC Davis . These included his follow @-@ up to Variation and Evolution , Flowering Plants : Evolution Above the Species Level , which was published in 1974 , following his delivery of the Prather Lectures at Harvard . Stebbins discusses the origins , genetics and developmental biology of the angiosperms . He argues for the role of adaptive radiation in the diversification of the angiosperms and the usefulness of applying our current understanding of species ' genetics and ecology to gain knowledge about the evolution of ancient species . He also wrote Processes of Organic Evolution , The Basis of Progressive Evolution , Chromosomal Evolution in Plants and the textbook Evolution with co @-@ authors Dobzhansky , Francisco Ayala and James W. Valentine . His last book , Darwin to DNA , Molecules to Humanity was published in 1982 . 
 Stebbins was passionate about teaching evolution , advocating during the 1960s and 70s the teaching of Darwinian evolution in public schools . He worked closely with the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study to develop high school curricula based on evolution as the central unifying principle in biology . He also opposed scientific creationism groups . Stebbins was active in numerous science organizations — including the International Union of Biological Sciences , the Western Society of Naturalists , the Botanical Society of America , and the Society for the Study of Evolution — and served as President of the American Society of Naturalists . He was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1952 . Stebbins received numerous awards for his contributions to science : the National Medal of Science , the Gold Medal from the Linnean Society of London , the Addison Emery Verrill Medal from the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History , and the John Frederick Lewis Award from the American Philosophical Society . He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1952 . He was awarded the 1983 Leidy Award from the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia . 
 Stebbins was active in conservation issues in California during his later life . He established a California Native Plant Society branch in Sacramento in the early 1960s . Through the society , he created an active field trip program to increase interest in the native flora of California and to document rare plants . Stebbins was the state President of the Society during 1966 . The society was instrumental in preventing the destruction of a beach on the Monterey Peninsula that he referred to as " Evolution Hill " — the area is now known as the <unk> Morse Botanical Area and is managed by the Del Monte Forest Foundation . He was a major contributor to the Society 's 1996 book California 's Wild Gardens : A Living Legacy . Stebbins was instrumental in the establishment of the Inventory of Rare and Endangered Vascular Plants of California by the California Native Plant Society ; it is still used by state and federal bodies in the United States for conservation policy @-@ making . Stebbins was also a member of the Sierra Club . 
 During his tenure at UC Davis , he trained more than 30 graduate students in genetics , developmental biology and agricultural science . In 1973 , Stebbins gave his last lectures at UC Davis and was made professor emeritus . Following his retirement , he travelled widely , taught , and visited colleagues for the next 20 years . His last paper , " A brief summary of my ideas on evolution " , was published in the American Journal of Botany in 1999 . The same year he was co @-@ recipient with Ernst Mayr of the Distinguished Service award from the American Institute of Biological Sciences . A colloquium was held by the National Academies of Science in 2000 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the publication of Variation and Evolution in Plants . Stebbins died in his home in Davis the same year from a cancer @-@ related illness . Stebbins was honored at a Unitarian memorial service — he had been active in the church in his later years following his 1958 marriage to his second wife , Barbara Monaghan Stebbins . His ashes were scattered at Stebbins Cold Canyon Reserve . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stebbins made an enormous contribution to scientific thought and botany by developing an intellectual framework for studying plant evolution including modern concepts of plant species and plant speciation . His contributions to the literature of plant evolutionary biology , in addition to his seven books , include more than 280 journal articles and book chapters , a compilation of which were published in 2004 — The Scientific Papers of G. Ledyard Stebbins ( 1929 – 2000 ) ( ISBN 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 15 @-@ 5 ) . Betty <unk> , a historian of science who is preparing a book @-@ length biography on Stebbins , described Stebbins 's scientific contribution as follows : 
 In science as in everything , small @-@ scale synthesizers usually get credit from all constituent parties , but truly great synthesizers can fall between the cracks in the cycle of scientific credit . Ledyard Stebbins was in the latter category ; neither fish nor fowl , he frequently failed to receive credit for work in some areas , usually at the hands of narrower colleagues . Few , however , have challenged his contributions to plant evolutionary biology , nor questioned his ability to synthesize disparate literature into a coherent framework . His ability to read quickly , recognize novel insights , digest new material , and then integrate the knowledge were the hallmarks of his scientific work style . He was a masterful synthesizer and master of the review essay or synthetic thought piece . 
 In 1980 , the University of California , Davis , named a parcel of land near Lake Berryessa , California , the Stebbins Cold Canyon Reserve in recognition of his contributions to conservation and evolutionary science . The reserve is part of the University of California Natural Reserve System . The UC Davis Herbarium maintains a G. Ledyard Stebbins student grant program , established in celebration of his 90th birthday . 
 Calystegia stebbinsii , <unk> stebbinsii , Harmonia stebbinsii , <unk> stebbinsii , <unk> stebbinsii and others are named in honor of Stebbins . 
 = = Key publications = = 
 Variation and Evolution in Plants ( 1950 ) 
 Processes of Organic Evolution ( 1966 ) 
 The Basis of Progressive Evolution ( 1969 ) 
 Chromosomal Evolution in Higher Plants ( 1971 ) ( ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2287 @-@ 0 ) 
 Flowering plants : evolution above the species level ( 1974 ) . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Evolution ( 1977 ) with Dobzhansky , Ayala and Valentine 
 Darwin to DNA , Molecules to Humanity ( 1982 ) ( ISBN 0 @-@ 7167 @-@ 1331 @-@ 4 ) 
 = = = General biographical references = = = 
 = The Man with Two Brians = 
 " The Man with Two Brians " is the fifth episode of the seventh season of the animated series Family Guy . It premiered on Fox in the United States on November 9 , 2008 . The episode centers on anthropomorphic dog Brian after he is injured during a stunt being enacted by his owner , Peter , after he watches Jackass with his friends . The family comes to realize that Brian may be getting too old , so Peter brings home an optimistic new dog . Brian is prompted to leave when his family begins to favor New Brian over him . 
 The episode was written by John Viener and marked the directorial debut of Dominic Bianchi . It received generally favorable reviews from critics for its storyline and various cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 60 million households in its original airdate . Johnny Knoxville , Will Sasso and Camille Guaty provided guest performances in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After watching Jackass , Peter and his friends , Cleveland , Quagmire , and Joe are impressed into filming their own highly dangerous stunts . In one stunt , Peter attempts to jump a lake but instead crashes into a tree , causing him to fall into the lake and become incapacitated . Brian swims out to save him from drowning , but strains his back during the rescue and also ends up stranded in the water along with Peter , before being rescued by Joe . Lois berates Peter for his actions , since Brian is becoming old and has been smoking and drinking . Peter begins to grow upset about Brian 's age so he obtains another dog and names him New Brian . His positive attitude and desirable personality make Brian feel like an outcast and Brian becomes sad that he is now unloved , and rejected . For example in one scene , when the Griffins hear New Brian fart , they think it is cute and when Brian does it , they get furious and kick him out . He ultimately decides to leave the residence , while his family begins to miss him . 
 Meanwhile , New Brian 's constant cheerfulness begins to aggravate Stewie . Stewie pleads for Brian to return , but he informs him that as long as New Brian is there , he has no place in the Griffin household . Stewie reveals to New Brian that they do not like several of his traits , including how he humps the leg of one of their chairs , but New Brian replies by boasting about how he violated Rupert , Stewie 's teddy bear . Stewie then stabs New Brian to death off @-@ screen and forges a suicide note . The Griffins then ultimately accept Brian back , while Stewie , traumatized by what happened to Rupert , frantically washes him in the shower while comforting him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Man with Two Brians " was written by John Viener and directed by Dominic Bianchi . In the storyboard animatic scene of Brian 's rescue of a drowning Peter , music from Rambo : First Blood Part II was used . The scene in which Peter broke his neck and the design of New Brian were both based on drawings by creator Seth MacFarlane . New Brian was supposed to be a Golden Retriever , but his color was changed so that he would stand out from the yellow kitchen . In the scene when Peter wears the costume from The Greatest American Hero , the theme from E.T. was originally used . Several scenes were cut when the episode aired on television , mostly due to lack of time . The song New Brian sang to Peter was written by series writer Alec Sulkin . The original ending for the episode was a Beverly Hills , 90210 basketball joke , but it was cut . 
 " The Man with Two Brians " , along with the first eight episodes of the seventh season were released on DVD by 20th Century Fox in the United States and Canada on June 16 , 2009 . The " Volume 7 " DVD release features bonus material including deleted scenes , animatics , and commentaries for every episode . 
 Johnny Knoxville , star of Jackass , provided his own voice in this episode , and Will Sasso and Camille Guaty guest starred as various characters . The episode 's writer , John Viener , provided the voice of New Brian . Recurring voice actors and writers Kirker Butler , Mark Hentemann , Danny Smith and Alec Sulkin made minor appearances in the episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The television series Jackass is referred to frequently by Peter and his neighbors , and is the principal reason that they try to do stunts . Johnny Knoxville <unk> and takes a shotgun blast which blows off part of his face . In the episode , while being launched off a ramp and flying through the air , Peter wears the costume from The Greatest American Hero and sings that series ' theme song . 
 Peter dresses up like a stereotypical adolescent bully featured in 1980s films , and makes references to Pretty in Pink , No Retreat , No Surrender and The Karate Kid . He then looks at the ocean on a pier as Howard Jones ' song , " No One Is to Blame " , plays . In one scene , Stewie refers to " aging supermodel Carol Alt . " Before New Brian and Lois sing " Summer Nights " as featured in Grease , Peter sings R.E.M. ' s " Everybody Hurts " . Stewie reads and then rips apart Nancy Reagan 's memoir , My Turn . Mumm @-@ Ra , the antagonist from the 1980s cartoon Thundercats and its 2011 remake , appears in the scene where Cleveland Brown is making Brian go to the bathroom on a leash whilst staying at his house . Mumm @-@ Ra watches through his cauldron and laughs evilly before remarking , " I 'm watching you make stool ! " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The Man with Two Brians " was watched by 8 @.@ 60 million households according to the Nielsen ratings . The episode acquired a 4 @.@ 3 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , and was the most @-@ watched show in the Animation Domination block that night . Family Guy finished fourth in its timeslot , after NBC 's Sunday Night Football , ABC 's Desperate Housewives and CBS 's The Amazing Race . 
 The episode received generally favorable reviews from television sources and critics . Ahsan Haque of IGN gave the episode 7 @.@ 5 / 10 and said : " While it featured more than [ ... ] a couple of genuinely unfunny ideas , this episode succeeds for the most part . [ ... ] While this episode definitely won 't make anyone 's top ten list of great Family Guy , there was a much better balance between random humor and storytelling in this outing " . Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club gave the episode an A- , and said that Family Guy " started things out on the wrong foot with an oh @-@ so @-@ relevant Jackass storyline . [ ... ] Most of the Jackass stuff was way too stale – Peter <unk> Quagmire into the crate of bees notwithstanding – but thankfully it was just setup for a far superior storyline , the introduction of a younger ' New Brian ' " . 
 Robin Pierson of The TV Critic was more critical about the episode , and gave it 32 / 100 and said : " As usual the problem with this episode is that there is no point to it . [ The episode had ] some needless jokes but others which were bearable and a logical enough story even though it addressed nothing . 
 = Community Trolls = 
 Community Trolls was the group name of a short @-@ lived musical duo between Michael Stipe of R.E.M. and Matthew Sweet . In 1983 , they collaborated as part of the Athens , Georgia music scene , writing and recording three songs together . One of the compositions , " Tainted Obligation " , was nearly released on a compilation album in 1986 , and later appeared on bootlegs ; it was released officially in 2002 . Another Community Trolls ' song , " Six Stock Answers " , appeared in an unreleased indie film featuring Stipe , Sweet and some of their friends . 
 Community Trolls , who may have at times included additional band members , performed in public at least twice . By sometime in 1984 , however , Sweet began distancing himself from the Athens music scene , and in 1985 he got a record deal and moved to New York . While some people accused him of using his Athens music connections to get ahead and then desert the scene , R.E.M. did not hold any hard feelings towards him . 
 = = Background = = 
 As a teenager in Lincoln , Nebraska , Sweet was a big fan of Mitch Easter . Easter produced R.E.M. ' s first single , the Hib @-@ Tone version of " Radio Free Europe " . Sweet loved its B @-@ side , " Sitting Still " , and became a fan of the band . When R.E.M. performed in Lincoln in September 1982 , Sweet went to the show . At that point R.E.M. were still relatively unknown , so there was almost nobody at the concert . Sweet met the band and gave Michael Stipe a tape of songs he had been working on . R.E.M. was from Athens , Georgia , which was becoming famous for its vibrant music scene . Sweet had also read about Athens in New York Rocker magazine . 
 R.E.M. put Sweet in touch with Easter , who wrote Sweet a number of long letters , and suggested he move to Athens after graduating from high school . Meanwhile , Stipe really liked Sweet 's tape , and he also played it for his sister , Lynda , and friend Linda Hopper , who were both in the band Oh @-@ OK . All three sent Sweet postcards saying he should come perform in Athens , with Lynda and Linda inviting him to open for Oh @-@ OK there . Sweet told his parents that he wanted to study at the University of Georgia , in Athens . Within weeks of moving there , he had become a member of Oh @-@ OK , who recorded their EP Furthermore What in August 1983 with him on board . While a member of Oh @-@ OK , Sweet also began collaborating with Michael Stipe as the band Community Trolls . 
 = = Songs = = 
 Sometime in the autumn of 1983 , Stipe and Sweet wrote at least three songs together . Of their songwriting process , Sweet has said : " [ Stipe ] was the real powerhouse behind it . I was pretty tentative in those days . We just sat around , Michael went through the little book he wrote lyrics in , with me just kind of strumming along behind . " 
 = = = " Tainted Obligation " = = = 
 They recorded their three compositions with producer John Keane that fall , but only one of the tracks from the session , " Tainted Obligation " , has been officially released . Stipe plays accordion on the song , and Sweet acoustic guitar , with vocals by both . 
 In 1986 , " Tainted Obligation " was planned for inclusion on the Zippo / Demon Records compilation album Don 't Shoot , but ultimately was left off . It was included on a UK cassette advance version of the compilation , but was removed before the album was officially released . In the early 1990s , the song surfaced as " Tainted Obligations " on R.E.M. bootlegs such as Stab It and Steer It and Chestnut . The track was released officially on the 2002 Matthew Sweet compilation To Understand : The Early Recordings of Matthew Sweet . In a review of the album , Rolling Stone critic Gavin Edwards describes the song as " enchanting " and as having " harmonies as pretty as you can imagine " . 
 = = = " Six Stock Answers " and " My Roof to Your Roof " = = = 
 Two other documented Community Trolls ' songs are entitled " Six Stock Answers " and " My Roof to Your Roof " . " Six Stock Answers " , whose vocals are by Stipe , was used in an unreleased low @-@ budget forty @-@ five @-@ minute Super @-@ 8 film called Just Like a Movie . It was shot in September 1983 in Athens by New York Rocker photographer Laura Levine , a friend of the members of R.E.M. Those with acting roles included Levine , Michael Stipe , Sweet , Hopper , Lynda Stipe , and R.E.M. ' s Bill Berry . One scene in the film , a parody of the " Subterranean Homesick Blues " sequence in D. A. Pennebaker 's Bob Dylan documentary Dont Look Back , shows Michael Stipe wearing a skirt and tights flipping placards with the song 's lyrics , " Six stock answers to 74 @,@ 000 questions " repeated ad nauseam . Just Like a Movie 's plot has two rival bands performing on the same night , leading up to the climax question of " Which band is everybody going to go see ? " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Community Trolls ' first public performance was busking outside the 40 Watt Club in Athens in September , 1983 . On September 30 , Community Trolls played a set between two R.E.M. sets at the <unk> in Athens , performing four songs : " Six Stock Answers " , " My Roof to Your Roof " , " Tainted Obligation " and the Velvet Underground 's " Pale Blue Eyes " . ( R.E.M. biographer Marcus Gray believes it is likely that footage of the show , including the Trolls ' set , was used in Just Like a Movie . ) Part of R.E.M. ' s performance , and the Trolls ' four songs , have been released on the R.E.M. bootleg 20th Century Boys Volume 1 . Sweet performed with members of R.E.M. at least one other time while he was in Athens : When R.E.M. shared a bill with Oh @-@ OK on October 3 , 1983 , at the University of Georgia 's Legion Field , Sweet joined R.E.M. onstage and played guitar . 
 = = Possible other band members = = 
 Although only Stipe and Sweet performed in the studio on " Tainted Obligation " , it is not clear whether other musicians may have sometimes been included in the band . Gray writes that " the line @-@ up of the Community Trolls remains elusive , but Sweet was guitarist and singer " . In the book Rolling Stone 's Alt @-@ Rock @-@ A @-@ Rama , their line @-@ up is described as an " Athens @-@ based , <unk> ensemble , which included Matthew Sweet , [ and which ] featured Michael Stipe 's vocals on a handful of tracks " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Around the time as he was collaborating with Stipe , and while still a member of Oh @-@ OK , Sweet began writing songs for another project , the Buzz of Delight , which consisted of Sweet and former Oh @-@ OK drummer David Pierce . In October 1983 , they recorded a six @-@ song EP , <unk> , released in the spring of 1984 on DB Records , and performed in New York , Florida and Georgia State to promote it . In the summer and November 1984 , the Buzz of Delight recorded more songs , none of which were immediately released . ( In 1990 , one previously unreleased Buzz of Delight track appeared on the DB Records compilation Squares Blot out the Sun , and , in 2002 , three others on To Understand . ) Meanwhile , Stipe continued his work with R.E.M. , who were getting acclaim and success with their album Murmur . In 1983 , it was named album of the year by Rolling Stone and Trouser Press , and by the middle of 1984 , it had sold 200 @,@ 000 copies . In November 1983 , R.E.M. began recording their follow @-@ up , Reckoning . 
 Sweet began distancing himself from other people in the Athens music scene and in 1984 quit Oh @-@ OK ; by 1985 , the Buzz of Delight had broken up . That year , Sweet got a record deal with CBS Records and moved to New York City . He was accused of being opportunistic and using his Athens connections to get a record deal and leave . Sweet maintains that when he went to CBS , he never claimed to have anything to do with Athens , so that nobody could say he used the town . He says that after months of living in Athens , he realized things weren 't as happy there as everyone pretended , and that there was backstabbing going on . In 1993 , he said , " Things really turned dark there when R.E.M. got famous , because everyone wanted that fame so bad . Maybe I wanted it too , but I had this musical goal all of my own and wasn 't going to go along with the way it was done there . " Everybody was telling him that he should be touring and building up a following before doing his record , like R.E.M. had done . However , more than making the record itself and becoming a rock star , Sweet 's main motivation was to get money to buy studio gear . 
 R.E.M. , for their part , held no hard feelings towards Sweet . Peter Buck has said , " The guy wanted to make records . I don 't see anything wrong with that . " Years later , Sweet recorded with R.E.M. ' s Mike Mills on the song " The Ballad of El <unk> " , on the Big Star tribute Big Star , Small World . It was originally scheduled to come out in 1998 , but its release was delayed until 2006 . On March 26 , 2011 , Sweet and Mills performed the Big Star song " September Gurls " together live at a tribute to Big Star singer Alex Chilton ; Stipe also performed at this concert , singing " The Letter " , by Chilton 's 1960s group , the Box Tops . 
 = McKinley Birthplace Memorial dollar = 
 The McKinley Birthplace Memorial dollar was a commemorative coin struck in gold by the United States Bureau of the Mint in 1916 and 1917 , depicting the 25th President of the United States , William McKinley . The coin 's obverse was designed by Mint Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber , and the reverse by his assistant , George T. Morgan . As McKinley had appeared on a version of the 1903 @-@ dated Louisiana Purchase Exposition dollar , the 1916 release made him the first person to appear on two issues of U.S. coins . 
 The coins were to be sold at a premium to finance the National McKinley Birthplace Memorial at Niles , Ohio , and were vended by the group constructing it . The issue was originally proposed as a silver dollar ; this was changed when it was realized it would not be appropriate to honor a president who had supported the gold standard with such a piece . The coins were poorly promoted , and did not sell well . Despite an authorized mintage of 100 @,@ 000 , only about 20 @,@ 000 were sold , many of these at a reduced price to Texas coin dealer B. Max Mehl . Another 10 @,@ 000 pieces were returned to the Mint for melting . 
 = = Background = = 
 William McKinley was born in Niles , Ohio , in 1843 . He left college to work as a teacher , and enlisted in the Union Army when the American Civil War broke out in 1861 . He served throughout the war , ending it as a brevet major . Afterwards , he attended law school and was admitted to the bar . He settled in Canton , Ohio , and after practicing there , was elected to Congress in 1876 . In 1890 , he was defeated for re @-@ election , but was elected governor the following year , serving two two @-@ year terms . 
 With the aid of his close adviser Mark Hanna , he secured the Republican nomination for president in 1896 , amid a deep economic depression . He defeated his Democratic rival , William Jennings Bryan , after a front porch campaign in which he advocated " sound money " , that is , the gold standard unless modified by international agreement . This contrasted to " free silver " , pushed by Bryan in his campaign . 
 McKinley was president during the Spanish – American War of 1898 , in which the U.S. victory was quick and decisive . As part of the peace settlement , Spain turned over to the United States its overseas colonies of Puerto Rico , Guam , and the Philippines . With the nation prosperous , McKinley defeated Bryan again in the 1900 presidential election . President McKinley was assassinated by Leon Czolgosz in September 1901 , and was succeeded by Vice President Theodore Roosevelt . 
 In the years after McKinley 's death , several memorials were built to him , including a large structure housing his remains at Canton . Another memorial was built at his birthplace in Niles under the auspices of the National McKinley Birthplace Memorial Association ( the Association ) . Designed by the firm of McKim , Mead , and White , the Greek Classic memorial was built of Georgia marble and was dedicated in 1917 . Housing a museum , library , and auditorium , as well as a statue of McKinley and busts of his associates , it remains open to the public , free of charge . 
 = = Inception and preparation = = 
 The McKinley Birthplace Memorial dollar was proposed as a fundraiser for the construction of the site in Niles . In February 1915 , the Association 's head , Joseph G. Butler , Jr . , met with Ohio Congressman William A. Ashbrook , chairman of the House Committee on Coinage , Weights , and Measures , to propose a silver dollar in honor of McKinley . Ashbrook was willing , and the two men saw Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo and Acting Director of the Mint Frederic Dewey , who envisioned no difficulty . Accordingly , Ashbrook introduced a bill in the final days of the 63rd Congress , which took no action on it . When the 64th Congress opened in December 1915 , Ashbrook reintroduced his bill , H.R. 2 . 
 A hearing was held before Ashbrook 's committee on January 13 . Originally , the bill called for mintage of 100 @,@ 000 silver dollars in commemoration of McKinley , but at the hearing , Butler requested that they be gold instead , stating , " if you will recall the fact , McKinley was elected in 1896 mainly on the question of the gold standard . " The gold dollar had not been struck as a circulating coin since 1889 . Asked a question from New York Congressman James W. Husted as to whether a gold dollar would be too small to be a souvenir , Butler responded , " No ; I do not think so . I think , on the other hand , a silver dollar might be too large . I think we can dispose of gold dollars very much easier . Mr. Husted , and you know gold dollars are rather scarce just now . " Ashbrook agreed , and stated : 
 my understanding is that these dollars will be sold at not less than $ 2 each which would make a profit of at least $ 100 @,@ 000 . I think there will be no trouble about disposing of them at that price . I understand they will be on sale in this memorial , and visitors who go to see it very largely will not leave the building without buying one , and will be willing to pay at least $ 2 . I might say in that connection that any gold dollar coined by the United States is worth at least $ 2 at this time . They all command a premium , and there is no reason why this dollar would not sell for at least $ 2 and likely more . 
 Ohio Senator Warren G. Harding was present at the House committee meeting and spoke in favor of the bill , arguing that " this assistance on the part of the Federal Government will cost nothing more than the making of the dies " . On being told that the dies , per the legislation , would be at the Association 's expense , Harding replied , " I did not notice that . Then , it essentially costs the Government nothing whatever to render this mark of tribute and assistance . " The committee reported the bill favorably on January 18 , amending the bill to allow for the 100 @,@ 000 gold dollars , to be purchased by the Association at par and sold at a profit to help build the memorial . The report indicated that the committee members " believe it is a deserved testimonial to the worth and service of a great man who lost his life while serving our Nation as its Chief Executive " . The bill passed the House on February 7 , 1916 , and the Senate on February 15 . It was enacted when President Woodrow Wilson signed it on February 23 , 1916 . 
 The act provided that no more than 100 @,@ 000 pieces be struck , with the necessary gold bullion to be acquired in the open market . The Association could purchase the coins at face value . The act required that the pieces be struck at the Philadelphia Mint , one of only two pieces of authorizing legislation in the classic commemorative coin series ( through 1954 ) that specified the place of striking ( the Panama @-@ Pacific issue of 1915 had to be struck in San Francisco ) . The act also required that the dies be destroyed after the coining was done , something numismatists Anthony Swiatek and Walter Breen questioned as duplicating provisions in the Coinage Act of 1873 . 
 The designs were prepared in @-@ house at the Philadelphia Mint by Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber , who designed the obverse and his assistant , George T. Morgan , who prepared the reverse . They did not seek outside artists to submit proposals . Numismatic author Q. David Bowers suggested that this was because Secretary McAdoo had sought non @-@ employees to propose designs for the five Panama @-@ Pacific coins along with those sketches prepared by Barber and his assistants , and the Mint 's engravers had prepared only two of the five , and that because the artist assigned one , Evelyn Longman , had fallen ill . When the McKinley designs were submitted to the Commission of Fine Arts on March 31 , 1916 , it recommended changes , though Don Taxay , who so stated , does not say what they were . In any event , no alteration was made , and the designs were approved . 
 = = Design = = 
 The obverse of the dollar features an unadorned bust of McKinley , facing left , with the name of the country above and " McKinley Dollar " ( in all capitals ) below . McKinley , who had appeared on one version of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition dollar ( issued beginning in 1903 ) , thus became the first person to appear on two different issues of American coinage . The earlier pieces had also been designed by Barber , and the later coins , according to Bowers , " present an image so different that the uninformed observer would not know that the same man was being depicted " . Bowers suggested that Barber might have been trying to create " a distinctively new version " . Taxay agreed , opining that Barber 's " chief concern seems to have been in making the portrait of McKinley as different as possible from that on the Louisiana Purchase coins " . 
 The reverse , designed by Morgan , is intended to be a facing view of the McKinley birthplace memorial in Niles , but according to Swiatek and Breen , " the most charitable view must characterize it as inaccurate and incompetently done " . Above the building is " McKinley Birthplace / Niles Ohio " , and beneath it the date and " Memorial " . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule , in his volume on U.S. coins , disliked the McKinley pieces . " When Barber and Morgan collaborated ... the results were almost always oppressive . The McKinley Memorial dollars of 1916 and 1917 bear witness to these stylistic judgments , the unclothed bust on the obverse looking <unk> Roman and the classical , colonnaded Memorial Building placed across a reverse further constricted by too much , too large lettering . " 
 = = Distribution and collecting = = 
 The Philadelphia Mint struck 20 @,@ 000 gold dollars in August and October 1916 , plus 26 extra reserved for inspection and testing at the 1917 meeting of the United States Assay Commission . In February 1917 , 10 @,@ 000 more ( plus 14 assay coins ) were minted , again at Philadelphia . The Association sold these to the public at $ 3 each , the same price at which the Louisiana Purchase pieces , which sold poorly , had been vended . The McKinley Memorial pieces were ill @-@ publicized , and few were sold at full price . Texas coin dealer B. Max Mehl purchased 10 @,@ 000 pieces at an unknown price , selling them for years afterwards at $ 2 @.@ 50 each . 
 The Washington Post reported on July 30 , 1916 that the gold dollars had been released and were being " gobbled up as souvenirs " . Nevertheless , according to Mehl in his 1937 volume on commemoratives , " the Committee in charge apparently realized that the number of collectors in the country could not and would not absorb an issue of 100 @,@ 000 coins at $ 3 @.@ 00 each " and some 10 @,@ 000 coins " were disposed of at a greatly reduced price to the ' Texas Dealer ' [ that is , himself ] who in turn distributed them extensively among collectors of the country at a reduced price " . A total of 10 @,@ 023 were returned by the Committee to the Mint for melting . It is uncertain how many of each year were melted , as the Mint did not keep records of this . Mehl estimated that the Committee sold 15 @,@ 000 of the 1916 and 5 @,@ 000 of the 1917 ( including the sale to him ) , meaning that about 5 @,@ 000 of each were melted . Bowers deemed these figures " probably correct " , given Mehl 's personal dealings with the Committee . Bowers calculated that 8 @,@ 000 of the 1916 were sold by the Committee to collectors and the public , plus 7 @,@ 000 to Mehl . He opined that 2 @,@ 000 of the 1917 were sold by the Committee at full price , plus 3 @,@ 000 to Mehl . Swiatek , in his 2012 book on commemoratives , estimated that between a third and half of the melted pieces were dated 1917 . 
 According to R. S. Yeoman 's 2015 edition of A Guide Book of United States Coins , the 1916 is catalogued for $ 500 in slightly @-@ worn AU @-@ 50 ( almost uncirculated ) to $ 1 @,@ 850 in near @-@ pristine MS @-@ 66 . The 1917 is listed at $ 550 in AU @-@ 50 and $ 3 @,@ 250 in MS @-@ 66 . A 1916 in MS @-@ 68 condition was sold by Heritage Auctions in 2009 for $ 16 @,@ 100 . 
 = Hammersmith & City line = 
 The Hammersmith & City line of the London Underground runs between Hammersmith and Barking . Coloured salmon pink on the tube map , it serves 29 stations in 15 @.@ 8 miles ( 25 @.@ 5 km ) . It runs below ground in the central section between Paddington and Bow Road ; between Farringdon and Aldgate East it skirts the City of London , the capital 's financial heart . The tunnels are just below the surface and are a similar size to those on British main lines . Most of the track and all stations are shared with the District , Circle or Metropolitan lines , the other parts of London Underground 's sub @-@ surface railway , and over 114 million passenger journeys are made each year on this line and the Circle line . Of the 29 stations served , 14 are below ground . 
 In 1863 the Metropolitan Railway began the world 's first underground railway service between Paddington and Farringdon with wooden carriages and steam locomotives . The following year a railway west from Paddington to Hammersmith opened and this soon became operated and owned jointly by the Metropolitan and Great Western railways . The line was extended to the east in stages , reaching the East London Railway in 1884 . The line was electrified in 1906 , and in 1936 , after the Metropolitan Railway had been absorbed by London Passenger Transport Board , some Hammersmith & City trains were extended over the former District Railway line to Barking . The Hammersmith & City route was shown on the tube map as part of the Metropolitan line until 1990 , when it appeared as a separate line . 
 The track and signalling systems are being upgraded , and the old 6 @-@ car C Stock trains have been replaced by new 7 @-@ car S Stock trains in a programme to increase capacity by 65 per cent by 2019 . 
 The line runs parallel to the Great Western Main Line between Paddington and Westbourne Park , and parallel to the London , Tilbury and Southend Railway between West Ham and Barking . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Metropolitan Railway = = = 
 The first line built by the Metropolitan Railway ( Met ) was from Paddington to near Smithfield , near London 's financial heart in the City ; with gas @-@ lit wooden carriages hauled by steam locomotives opened on 10 January 1863 it was the world 's first underground railway . The line was built mostly under the New Road using the " cut @-@ and @-@ cover " method between Paddington and King 's Cross and then in tunnel and cuttings beside Farringdon Road . Supported by the Met and the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) , the Hammersmith & City Railway ( H & CR ) was built from the GWR 's main line a mile west of Paddington station to the developing suburbs of Shepherd 's Bush and Hammersmith . Built on viaduct largely across open fields , the line opened on 13 June 1864 with a GWR service from Farringdon to Hammersmith , services to Addison Road ( now Kensington ( Olympia ) ) on the West London Railway via a link at Latimer Road starting a few weeks later . From 1865 the Met ran trains to Hammersmith and the GWR trains to Addison Road . In 1867 the line became jointly owned by the two companies . In 1871 two additional tracks parallel to the GWR between Westbourne Park and Paddington were brought into use for the H & CR , and in 1878 the flat crossing at Westbourne Park was replaced by a dive @-@ under . A year earlier some services had been extended via London & South Western Railway 's Hammersmith ( Grove Road ) railway station and their line to Richmond . 
 The railway was extended east of Farringdon and a terminus opened at Aldgate on 18 November 1876 . The Met wished to access the South Eastern Railway via the East London Railway ( ELR ) and jointly with the District Railway built lines from their Mansion House station to the Met 's Aldgate station and east from Aldgate to reach the ELR at Whitechapel . In October 1884 the Met extended some Hammersmith services over the ELR to New Cross . 
 In 1902 the Whitechapel & Bow Railway was opened , linking the District Railway at Whitechapel to the London , Tilbury and Southend Railway ( LT & SR ) at an above @-@ ground junction at Bow , to the west of Bromley @-@ by @-@ Bow station , and some District services were extended from Whitechapel to East Ham . When the line was electrified in 1906 services to Richmond were withdrawn and the western termini became Hammersmith and Kensington ( Addison Road ) , and to the east services were diverted from the ELR to Whitechapel , until the ELR was electrified in 1914 and services ran from Hammersmith to New Cross and New Cross Gate . The 6 @-@ car electric multiple units were jointly owned by the Met and GWR until 1923 when the GWR sold theirs to the Met . 
 = = = London Transport = = = 
 On 1 July 1933 the Metropolitan Railway was amalgamated with other Underground railways , tramway companies and bus operators to form the London Passenger Transport Board . To relieve congestion on the District line east of Whitechapel from 1936 some trains from Hammersmith were diverted from the East London line to Barking . Through trains to New Cross and New Cross Gate were withdrawn in November 1939 , the Hammersmith & City line trains terminating at Whitechapel while the longer 8 @-@ car Uxbridge line trains ran to Barking . However , this caused operational problems and from 1941 Barking was again served by trains from Hammersmith . 
 From 1937 new steel O stock trains , with doors remotely operated by the guard , replaced the wooden @-@ bodied trains dating from 1906 . It had been intended to operate the new trains with four or six cars , but after initial problems with the traction current only six @-@ car formations were used . Services to Kensington ( Olympia ) via the curve at Latimer Road were suspended in 1940 after bomb damage to the West London line and not restarted after the war . When the similar trains running on the Circle line were lengthened to six cars in 1959 and 1960 , the stock of the two lines was integrated with maintenance at Hammersmith depot . Aluminium C Stock trains , with public address systems and originally unpainted , replaced these trains from 1970 . One person operation was proposed in 1972 , but due to conflict with the trade unions was not introduced until 1984 . 
 = = = A separate identity = = = 
 The route between Hammersmith and Barking was shown on the tube map as part of the Metropolitan line , but since 1990 has been shown separately , the Metropolitan line becoming the route from Aldgate to Baker Street and northwards through " Metro @-@ Land " to Uxbridge , Watford and Amersham . In 2003 , the infrastructure of the Hammersmith & City line was partly privatised in a public – private partnership , managed by the Metronet consortium . Metronet went into administration in 2007 and the local government body Transport for London took over responsibilities . The reconstruction of Whitechapel station for the new Crossrail underground line required the reversing platforms to be taken out of use and since December 2009 all services have been extended to Plaistow or Barking . 
 The C Stock trains have recently been replaced by S7 Stock ; the first new train entered service on the Hammersmith & City line on 6 July 2012 , running a shuttle service between Hammersmith and Moorgate before operating between Hammersmith and Barking on 9 December 2012 . By March 2014 all services were provided by S7 Stock trains . 
 = = Route = = 
 The line is 15 @.@ 8 miles ( 25 @.@ 5 km ) long with 29 stations . Almost all of its track is shared with the other London Underground sub @-@ surface lines : from Hammersmith to Baker Street with the Circle line , from Baker Street to Aldgate with the Circle and Metropolitan lines , and from Aldgate East station to Barking with the District line . All its stations are shared with other lines . 
 The line is electrified with a four @-@ rail DC system : a central conductor rail is energised at − 210 V and a rail outside the running rails at + 420 V , giving a potential difference of 630 V. Much of the 2 @-@ mile @-@ 35 @-@ chain ( 3 @.@ 9 km ) double @-@ track railway from the Hammersmith terminus to Westbourne Park station is on a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high brick viaduct . After Westbourne Park the line passes beneath the Great Western main line re @-@ surfacing at Royal Oak station and running alongside the main lines to Paddington station . The line enters a cut @-@ and @-@ cover tunnel at the end of the platforms and meets the Circle line from Bayswater at Praed Street Junction before passing through Edgware Road station in a cutting . After King 's Cross St Pancras the line is in cutting , passing under the Ray Street Gridiron that carries the City Widened Lines used for Thameslink services . There are bay platforms at Moorgate . Just before Aldgate the line diverges from the Circle and Metropolitan lines to Aldgate East . The line passes over the London Overground at Whitechapel station continuing on the 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) former Whitechapel & Bow Railway to Bow Road where it surfaces , and then to Bromley @-@ by @-@ Bow , where it runs alongside the London , Tilbury and Southend line from Fenchurch Street . At the next station , West Ham , there is interchange with the Jubilee line , the Docklands Light Railway and c2c . There is a bay platform at the next station , Plaistow , and the line terminates after two more stations at Barking . 
 = = Services = = 
 As of December 2012 off @-@ peak there are six trains per hour , calling at all stations , and requiring 15 trains for the peak @-@ hour service . Together with the Circle line , over 114 million passenger journeys are made each year . The journey from Hammersmith to Barking takes 61 minutes off @-@ peak . The central section from Paddington to Aldgate East is in Fare Zone 1 , to the west to Hammersmith and east to Bromley @-@ by @-@ Bow in Zone 2 . Barking and East Ham are in Zone 4 . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 Services are provided by seven @-@ car S Stock , part of Bombardier 's Movia family , with air @-@ conditioning as the sub @-@ surface tunnels ( unlike those on the deep @-@ level tube lines ) are able to disperse the exhausted hot air . These trains have regenerative brakes , returning around 20 per cent of their energy to the network . With a top speed of 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) , a 7 @-@ car S Stock train has a capacity of 865 passengers , compared to 739 for the six @-@ car C Stock train it replaced . With a length of 384 feet ( 117 m ) , S Stock trains are 79 feet ( 24 m ) longer than 305 @-@ foot ( 93 m ) long C Stock trains and station platforms have been lengthened . It is planned to increase the traction voltage from the present nominal 630 V to 750 V to give better performance and allow the trains to return more energy to the network through their regenerative brakes . 
 = = Depot = = 
 The line 's depot is at Hammersmith , close to Hammersmith station , built by the Great Western Railway to be operated by the Metropolitan Railway when the joint railway was electrified in the early 20th century . Sidings at Barking and near High Street Kensington ( Triangle Sidings ) stable trains overnight . Sidings at Farringdon were used during the C stock era ; due to the greater length of the new S stock trains , these are no longer in use . 
 = = Upgrade programme = = 
 Together with the introduction of S Stock trains , the track , electrical supply and signalling systems are being upgraded in a programme planned to increase peak @-@ hour capacity on the Circle and Hammersmith & City lines by 65 per cent by the end of 2018 . A single control room for the sub @-@ surface railway is to be established in Hammersmith and an automatic train control ( ATC ) system will replace signalling equipment installed from the 1940s . The cross @-@ London Crossrail line , planned to open in 2018 , is expected to reduce crowding between Paddington and Whitechapel . 
 = = List of stations = = 
 = Gustav Holst = 
 Gustav Theodore Holst ( born Gustavus Theodore von Holst ; 21 September 1874 – 25 May 1934 ) was an English composer , arranger and teacher . Best known for his orchestral suite The Planets , he composed a large number of other works across a range of genres , although none achieved comparable success . His distinctive compositional style was the product of many influences , Richard Wagner and Richard Strauss being most crucial early in his development . The subsequent inspiration of the English folksong revival of the early 20th century , and the example of such rising modern composers as Maurice Ravel , led Holst to develop and refine an individual style . 
 There were professional musicians in the previous three generations of Holst 's family , and it was clear from his early years that he would follow the same calling . He hoped to become a pianist , but was prevented by neuritis in his right arm . Despite his father 's reservations , he pursued a career as a composer , studying at the Royal College of Music under Charles Villiers Stanford . Unable to support himself by his compositions , he played the trombone professionally and later became a teacher — a great one , according to his colleague Ralph Vaughan Williams . Among other teaching activities he built up a strong tradition of performance at Morley College , where he served as musical director from 1907 until 1924 , and pioneered music education for women at St Paul 's Girls ' School , where he taught from 1905 until his death in 1934 . He was the founder of a series of Whitsun music festivals , which ran from 1916 for the remainder of his life . Holst 's works were played frequently in the early years of the 20th century , but it was not until the international success of The Planets in the years immediately after the First World War that he became a well @-@ known figure . A shy man , he did not welcome this fame , and preferred to be left in peace to compose and teach . 
 In his later years his uncompromising , personal style of composition struck many music lovers as too austere , and his brief popularity declined . Nevertheless , he was a significant influence on a number of younger English composers , including Edmund Rubbra , Michael Tippett and Benjamin Britten . Apart from The Planets and a handful of other works , his music was generally neglected until the 1980s , since when recordings of much of his output have been available . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 = = = = Family background = = = = 
 Holst was born in Cheltenham , Gloucestershire , the elder of the two children of Adolph von Holst , a professional musician , and his wife , Clara Cox , née <unk> . She was of mostly British descent , daughter of a respected Cirencester solicitor ; the Holst side of the family was of mixed Swedish , Latvian and German ancestry , with at least one professional musician in each of the previous three generations . 
 Holst 's great @-@ grandfather , Matthias Holst , born in Riga , Latvia , was of German origin ; he served as composer and harp @-@ teacher to the Imperial Russian Court in St Petersburg . Matthias 's son Gustavus , who moved to England with his parents as a child in 1802 , was a composer of salon @-@ style music and a well @-@ known harp teacher . He appropriated the aristocratic prefix " von " and added it to the family name in the hope of gaining enhanced prestige and attracting pupils . 
 Holst 's father , Adolph von Holst , became organist and choirmaster at All Saints ' Church , Cheltenham ; he also taught , and gave piano recitals . His wife , Clara , a former pupil , was a talented singer and pianist . They had two sons ; Gustav 's younger brother , Emil Gottfried , became known as Ernest Cossart , a successful actor in the West End , New York and Hollywood . Clara died in February 1882 , and the family moved to another house in Cheltenham , where Adolph recruited his sister Nina to help raise the boys . Gustav recognised her devotion to the family and dedicated several of his early compositions to her . In 1885 Adolph married Mary Thorley Stone , another of his pupils . They had two sons , Matthias ( known as " Max " ) and Evelyn ( " Thorley " ) . Mary von Holst was absorbed in theosophy and not greatly interested in domestic matters . All four of Adolph 's sons were subject to what one biographer calls " benign neglect " , and Gustav in particular was " not overburdened with attention or understanding , with a weak sight and a weak chest , both neglected — he was ' miserable and scared ' . " 
 = = = = Childhood and youth = = = = 
 Holst was taught to play the piano and the violin ; he enjoyed the former very much more than the latter . At the age of twelve he took up the trombone at Adolph 's suggestion , thinking that playing a brass instrument might improve his asthma . Holst was educated at Cheltenham Grammar School between 1886 and 1891 . He started composing in or about 1886 ; inspired by Macaulay 's poem Horatius he began , but soon abandoned , an ambitious setting of the work for chorus and orchestra . His early compositions included piano pieces , organ voluntaries , songs , anthems and a symphony ( from 1892 ) . His main influences at this stage were Mendelssohn , Chopin , Grieg and above all Sullivan . Adolph tried to steer his son away from composition , hoping that he would have a career as a pianist . Holst 's health played a decisive part in his musical future ; he had never been strong , and in addition to his asthma and poor eyesight he suffered from neuritis , which made playing the piano difficult . He said that the affected arm was " like a jelly overcharged with electricity " . 
 After Holst left school in 1891 , Adolph paid for him to spend four months in Oxford studying counterpoint with George Frederick Sims , organist of Merton College . On his return Holst obtained his first professional appointment , aged seventeen , as organist and choirmaster at Wyck Rissington , Gloucestershire . The post brought with it the conductorship of the Bourton @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Water Choral Society , which offered no extra remuneration but provided valuable experience that enabled him to hone his conducting skills . In November 1891 Holst gave what was perhaps his first public performance as a pianist ; he and his father played the Brahms Hungarian Dances at a concert in Cheltenham . The programme for the event gives his name as " Gustav " rather than " Gustavus " ; he was called by the shorter version from his early years . 
 = = = Royal College of Music = = = 
 In 1892 Holst wrote the music for an operetta in the style of Gilbert and Sullivan , Lansdown Castle , or The Sorcerer of Tewkesbury . The piece was performed at Cheltenham Corn Exchange in February 1893 ; it was well received and its success encouraged him to persevere with composing . He applied for a scholarship at the Royal College of Music ( RCM ) in London , but the composition scholarship for that year was won by Samuel Coleridge @-@ Taylor . Holst was accepted as a non @-@ scholarship student , and Adolph borrowed £ 100 to cover the first year 's expenses . Holst left Cheltenham for London in May 1893 . Money was tight , and partly from frugality and partly from his own inclination he became a vegetarian and a teetotaller . Two years later he was finally granted a scholarship , which slightly eased his financial difficulties , but he retained his austere personal regime . 
 Holst 's professors at the RCM were Frederick Sharpe ( piano ) , William Stephenson Hoyte ( organ ) , George Case ( trombone ) , George Jacobi ( instrumentation ) and the director of the college , Hubert Parry ( history ) . After preliminary lessons with W. S. <unk> and Frederick Bridge , Holst was granted his wish to study composition with Charles Villiers Stanford . To support himself during his studies Holst played the trombone professionally , at seaside resorts in the summer and in London theatres in the winter . His daughter and biographer , Imogen Holst , records that from his fees as a player " he was able to afford the necessities of life : board and lodging , manuscript paper , and tickets for standing room in the gallery at Covent Garden Opera House on Wagner evenings " . He secured an occasional engagement in symphony concerts , playing in 1897 under the baton of Richard Strauss at the Queen 's Hall . 
 Like many musicians of his generation , Holst came under Wagner 's spell . He had recoiled from the music of Götterdämmerung when he heard it at Covent Garden in 1892 , but encouraged by his friend and fellow @-@ student Fritz Hart he persevered and quickly became an ardent Wagnerite . Wagner supplanted Sullivan as the main influence on his music , and for some time , as Imogen put it , " ill @-@ assimilated wisps of Tristan inserted themselves on nearly every page of his own songs and overtures . " Stanford admired some of Wagner 's works , and had in his earlier years been influenced by him , but Holst 's sub @-@ Wagnerian compositions met with his disapprobation : " It won 't do , me boy ; it won 't do " . Holst respected Stanford , describing him to a fellow @-@ pupil , Herbert Howells , as " the one man who could get any one of us out of a technical mess " , but he found that his fellow students , rather than the faculty members , had the greater influence on his development . 
 In 1895 , shortly after celebrating his twenty @-@ first birthday , Holst met Ralph Vaughan Williams , who became a lifelong friend and had more influence on Holst 's music than anybody else . Stanford emphasised the need for his students to be self @-@ critical , but Holst and Vaughan Williams became one another 's chief critics ; each would play his latest composition to the other while still working on it . Vaughan Williams later observed , " What one really learns from an Academy or College is not so much from one 's official teachers as from one 's fellow @-@ students ... [ we discussed ] every subject under the sun from the lowest note of the double bassoon to the philosophy of Jude the Obscure . In 1949 he wrote of their relationship , " Holst declared that his music was influenced by that of his friend : the converse is certainly true . " The year 1895 was also the bicentenary of Henry Purcell , which was marked by various performances including Stanford conducting Dido and Aeneas at the Lyceum Theatre ; the work profoundly impressed Holst , who over twenty years later confessed to a friend that his search for " the ( or a ) musical idiom of the English language " had been inspired " unconsciously " by " hearing the <unk> in Purcell 's Dido " . 
 Another early influence was William Morris . In Vaughan Williams 's words , " It was now that Holst discovered the feeling of unity with his fellow men which made him afterwards a great teacher . A sense of comradeship rather than political conviction led him , while still a student , to join the Kelmscott House Socialist Club in Hammersmith . " At Kelmscott House , Morris 's home , Holst attended lectures by his host and Bernard Shaw . His own socialism was moderate in character , but he enjoyed the club for its good company and his admiration of Morris as a man . His ideals were influenced by Morris 's but had a different emphasis . Morris had written , " I do not want art for a few any more than education for a few , or freedom for a few . I want all persons to be educated according to their capacity , not according to the amount of money which their parents happen to have " . Holst said , " ' Aristocracy in art ' — art is not for all but only for the chosen few — but the only way to find those few is to bring art to everyone — then the artists have a sort of masonic signal by which they recognise each other in the crowd . " He was invited to conduct the Hammersmith Socialist Choir , teaching them madrigals by Thomas Morley , choruses by Purcell , and works by Mozart , Wagner and himself . One of his choristers was ( Emily ) Isobel Harrison ( 1876 – 1969 ) , a beautiful soprano two years his junior . He fell in love with her ; she was at first unimpressed by him , but she came round and they were engaged , though with no immediate prospect of marriage given Holst 's tiny income . 
 = = = Professional musician = = = 
 In 1898 the RCM offered Holst a further year 's scholarship , but he felt that he had learned as much as he could there and that it was time , as he put it , to " learn by doing " . Some of his compositions were published and performed ; the previous year The Times had praised his song " Light Leaves Whisper " , " a moderately elaborate composition in six parts , treated with a good deal of expression and poetic feeling " . Occasional successes notwithstanding , Holst found that " man cannot live by composition alone " ; he took posts as organist at various London churches , and continued playing the trombone in theatre orchestras . In 1898 he was appointed first trombonist and répétiteur with the Carl Rosa Opera Company and toured with the Scottish Orchestra . Though a capable rather than a virtuoso player he won the praise of the leading conductor Hans Richter , for whom he played at Covent Garden . His salary was only just enough to live on , and he supplemented it by playing in a popular orchestra called the " White Viennese Band " , conducted by Stanislas Wurm . Holst enjoyed playing for Wurm , and learned much from him about drawing rubato from players . Nevertheless , longing to devote his time to composing , Holst found the necessity of playing for " the Worm " or any other light orchestra " a wicked and loathsome waste of time " . Vaughan Williams did not altogether agree with his friend about this ; he admitted that some of the music was " trashy " but thought it had been useful to Holst nonetheless : " To start with , the very worst a trombonist has to put up with is as nothing compared to what a church organist has to endure ; and secondly , Holst is above all an orchestral composer , and that sure touch which distinguishes his orchestral writing is due largely to the fact that he has been an orchestral player ; he has learnt his art , both technically and in substance , not at second hand from text books and models , but from actual live experience . " 
 With a modest income secured , Holst was able to marry Isobel ; the ceremony was at Fulham Register Office on 22 June 1901 . Their marriage lasted until his death ; there was one child , Imogen , born in 1907 . In 1902 Dan Godfrey and the Bournemouth Municipal Orchestra premiered Holst 's symphony The Cotswolds ( Op. 8 ) , the slow movement of which is a lament for William Morris who had died in October 1896 , three years before Holst began work on the piece . In 1903 Adolph von Holst died , leaving a small legacy . Holst and his wife decided , as Imogen later put it , that " as they were always hard up the only thing to do was to spend it all at once on a holiday in Germany " . 
 = = = Composer and teacher = = = 
 While in Germany , Holst reappraised his professional life , and in 1903 he decided to abandon orchestral playing to concentrate on composition . His earnings as a composer were too little to live on , and two years later he accepted the offer of a teaching post at James Allen 's Girls ' School , Dulwich , which he held until 1921 . He also taught at the Passmore Edwards Settlement , where among other innovations he gave the British premieres of two Bach cantatas . The two teaching posts for which he is probably best known were director of music at St Paul 's Girls ' School , Hammersmith , from 1905 until his death , and director of music at Morley College from 1907 to 1924 . Vaughan Williams wrote of the former establishment : " Here he did away with the childish sentimentality which schoolgirls were supposed to appreciate and substituted Bach and Vittoria ; a splendid background for immature minds . " Several of Holst 's pupils at St Paul 's went on to distinguished careers , including the soprano Joan Cross , and the oboist and cor anglais player Helen Gaskell . Of Holst 's impact on Morley College , Vaughan Williams wrote : " [ A ] bad tradition had to be broken down . The results were at first discouraging , but soon a new spirit appeared and the music of Morley College , together with its offshoot the ' Whitsuntide festival ' ... became a force to be reckoned with " . Before Holst 's appointment , Morley College had not treated music very seriously ( Vaughan Williams 's " bad tradition " ) , and at first Holst 's exacting demands drove many students away . He persevered , and gradually built up a class of dedicated music @-@ lovers . 
 According to the composer Edmund Rubbra , who studied under him in the early 1920s , Holst was " a teacher who often came to lessons weighted , not with the learning of Prout and Stainer , but with a miniature score of Petrushka or the then recently published Mass in G minor of Vaughan Williams " . He never sought to impose his own ideas on his composition pupils . Rubbra recalled that he would divine a student 's difficulties and gently guide him to finding the solution for himself . " I do not recall that Holst added one single note of his own to anything I wrote , but he would suggest — if I agreed ! — that , given such and such a phrase , the following one would be better if it took such and such a course ; if I did not see this , the point would not be insisted upon ... He frequently took away [ because of ] his abhorrence of <unk> . " 
 As a composer Holst was frequently inspired by literature . He set poetry by Thomas Hardy and Robert Bridges and , a particular influence , Walt Whitman , whose words he set in " Dirge for Two Veterans " and The Mystic Trumpeter ( 1904 ) . He wrote an orchestral Walt Whitman Overture in 1899 . While on tour with the Carl Rosa company Holst had read some of Max Müller 's books , which inspired in him a keen interest in Sanskrit texts , particularly the Rig Veda hymns . He found the existing English versions of the texts unconvincing , and decided to make his own translations , despite his lack of skills as a linguist . He enrolled in 1909 at University College , London to study the language . Imogen commented on his translations : " He was not a poet , and there are occasions when his verses seem naïve . But they never sound vague or slovenly , for he had set himself the task of finding words that would be ' clear and dignified ' and that would ' lead the listener into another world ' . " His settings of translations of Sanskrit texts included Sita ( 1899 – 1906 ) , a three @-@ act opera based on an episode in the Ramayana ( which he eventually entered for a competition for English opera set by the Milan music publisher Tito Ricordi ) ; Savitri ( 1908 ) , a chamber opera based on a tale from the Mahabharata ; four groups of Hymns from the Rig Veda ( 1908 – 14 ) ; and two texts originally by Kālidāsa : Two Eastern Pictures ( 1909 – 10 ) and The Cloud Messenger ( 1913 ) . 
 Towards the end of the nineteenth century , British musical circles had experienced a new interest in national folk music . Some composers , such as Sullivan and Elgar , remained indifferent , but Parry , Stanford , Stainer and Alexander Mackenzie were founding members of the Folk @-@ Song Society . Parry considered that by recovering English folk song , English composers would find an authentic national voice ; he commented , " in true folk @-@ songs there is no sham , no got @-@ up glitter , and no vulgarity " . Vaughan Williams was an early and enthusiastic convert to this cause , going round the English countryside collecting and noting down folk songs . These had an influence on Holst . Though not as passionate on the subject as his friend , he incorporated a number of folk melodies in his own compositions and made several arrangements of folk songs collected by others . The Somerset Rhapsody ( 1906 – 07 ) , was written at the suggestion of the folk @-@ song collector Cecil Sharp and made use of tunes that Sharp had noted down . Holst described its performance at the Queen 's Hall in 1910 as " my first real success " . A few years later Holst became excited by another musical renaissance — the rediscovery of English madrigal composers . Weelkes was his favourite of all the Tudor composers , but Byrd also meant much to him . 
 Holst was a keen rambler . He walked extensively in England , Italy , France and Algeria . In 1908 he travelled to Algeria on medical advice as a treatment for asthma and the depression that he suffered after his opera Sita failed to win the Ricordi prize . This trip inspired the suite Beni Mora , which incorporated music he heard in the Algerian streets . Vaughan Williams wrote of this exotic work , " if it had been played in Paris rather than London it would have given its composer a European reputation , and played in Italy would probably have caused a riot . " 
 = = = 1910s = = = 
 In June 1911 Holst and his Morley College students gave the first performance since the seventeenth century of Purcell 's The Fairy @-@ Queen . The full score had been lost soon after Purcell 's death in 1695 , and had only recently been found . Twenty @-@ eight Morley students copied out the complete vocal and orchestral parts . There were 1 @,@ 500 pages of music and it took the students almost eighteen months to copy them out in their spare time . A concert performance of the work was given at The Old Vic , preceded by an introductory talk by Vaughan Williams . The Times praised Holst and his forces for " a most interesting and artistic performance of this very important work " . 
 After this success , Holst was disappointed the following year by the lukewarm reception of his choral work The Cloud Messenger . He again went travelling , accepting an invitation from H. Balfour Gardiner to join him and the brothers Clifford and Arnold Bax in Spain . During this holiday Clifford Bax introduced Holst to astrology , an interest that later inspired his suite The Planets . Holst cast his friends ' horoscopes for the rest of his life and referred to astrology as his " pet vice " . 
 In 1913 , St Paul 's Girls ' School opened a new music wing , and Holst composed St Paul 's Suite for the occasion . The new building contained a sound @-@ proof room , handsomely equipped , where he could work undisturbed . Holst and his family moved to a house in Brook Green , very close to the school . For the previous six years they had lived in a pretty house overlooking the Thames at Barnes , but the river air , frequently foggy , affected his breathing . For use at weekends and during school holidays , Holst and his wife bought a cottage in Thaxted , Essex , surrounded by mediaeval buildings and ample rambling opportunities . In 1917 they moved to a house in the centre of the town , where they stayed until 1925 . 
 At Thaxted , Holst became friendly with the Rev Conrad Noel , known as the " Red Vicar " , who supported the Independent Labour Party and espoused many causes unpopular with conservative opinion . Noel also encouraged the revival of folk @-@ dancing and <unk> as part of church ceremonies , innovations which caused controversy among traditionally @-@ minded churchgoers . Holst became an occasional organist and choirmaster at Thaxted Parish Church ; he also developed an interest in bell @-@ ringing . He started an annual music festival at Whitsuntide in 1916 ; students from Morley College and St Paul 's Girls ' School performed together with local participants . Holst 's a cappella carol , " This Have I Done For My True Love " , was dedicated to Noel in recognition of his interest in the ancient origins of religion ( the composer always referred to the work as " The Dancing Day " ) . It received its first performance during the Third Whitsun Festival at Thaxted in May 1918 . During that festival , Noel , a staunch supporter of Russia 's October Revolution , demanded in a Saturday message during the service that there should be a greater political commitment from those who participated in the church activities ; his claim that several of Holst 's pupils ( implicitly those from St Paul 's Girls ' School ) were merely " camp followers " caused offence . Holst , anxious to protect his students from being embroiled in ecclesiastical conflict , moved the Whitsun Festival to Dulwich , though he himself continued to help with the Thaxted choir and to play the church organ on occasion . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 At the outbreak of the First World War , Holst tried to enlist but was rejected as unfit for military service . He felt frustrated that he could not contribute to the war effort . His wife became a volunteer ambulance driver ; Vaughan Williams went on active service to France as did Holst 's brother Emil ; Holst 's friends the composers George Butterworth and Cecil Coles were killed in battle . He continued to teach and compose ; he worked on The Planets and prepared his chamber opera Savitri for performance . It was first given in December 1916 by students of the London School of Opera at the Wellington Hall in St John 's Wood . It attracted no attention at the time from the main newspapers , though when professionally staged five years later it was greeted as " a perfect little masterpiece . " In 1917 he wrote The Hymn of Jesus for chorus and orchestra , a work which remained unperformed until after the war . 
 In 1918 , as the war neared its end , Holst finally had the prospect of a job that offered him the chance to serve . The music section of the YMCA 's education department needed volunteers to work with British troops stationed in Europe awaiting demobilisation . Morley College and St Paul 's Girls ' School offered him a year 's leave of absence , but there remained one obstacle : the YMCA felt that his surname looked too German to be acceptable in such a role . He formally changed " von Holst " to " Holst " by deed poll in September 1918 . He was appointed as the YMCA 's musical organiser for the Near East , based in Salonica . 
 Holst was given a spectacular send @-@ off . The conductor Adrian Boult recalled , " Just before the Armistice , Gustav Holst burst into my office : ' Adrian , the YMCA are sending me to Salonica quite soon and Balfour Gardiner , bless his heart , has given me a parting present consisting of the Queen 's Hall , full of the Queen 's Hall Orchestra for the whole of a Sunday morning . So we 're going to do The Planets , and you 've got to conduct ' . " There was a burst of activity to get things ready in time . The girls at St Paul 's helped to copy out the orchestral parts , and the women of Morley and the St Paul 's girls learned the choral part in the last movement . The performance was given on 29 September to an invited audience including Sir Henry Wood and most of the professional musicians in London . Five months later , when Holst was in Greece , Boult introduced The Planets to the general public , at a concert in February 1919 ; Holst sent him a long letter full of suggestions , but failed to convince him that the suite should be played in full . The conductor believed that about half an hour of such radically new music was all the public could absorb at first hearing , and he gave only five of the seven movements on that occasion . 
 Holst enjoyed his time in Salonica , from where he was able to visit Athens , which greatly impressed him . His musical duties were wide @-@ ranging , and even obliged him on occasion to play the violin in the local orchestra : " it was great fun , but I fear I was not of much use " . He returned to England in June 1919 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 On his return from Greece , Holst resumed his teaching and composing . In addition to his existing work he accepted a lectureship in composition at the University of Reading and joined Vaughan Williams in teaching composition at their alma mater the RCM . Inspired by Adrian Boult 's conducting classes at the RCM , Holst tried to further pioneer music education for women by proposing to the High Mistress of St Paul 's Girls ' School that he should invite Boult to give classes at the school : " It would be glorious if the SPGS turned out the only women conductors in the world ! " In his soundproof room at SPGS he composed the Ode to Death , a setting of a poem by Whitman , which according to Vaughan Williams is considered by many to be Holst 's most beautiful choral work . 
 Holst , in his forties , suddenly found himself in demand . The New York Philharmonic and Chicago Symphony Orchestra vied to be the first to play The Planets in the US . The success of that work was followed in 1920 by an enthusiastic reception for The Hymn of Jesus , described in The Observer as " one of the most brilliant and one of the most sincere pieces of choral and orchestral expression heard for some years . " The Times called it " undoubtedly the most strikingly original choral work which has been produced in this country for many years . " To his surprise and dismay Holst was becoming famous . Celebrity was something wholly foreign to his nature . As the music scholar Byron Adams puts it , " he struggled for the rest of his life to extricate himself from the web of garish publicity , public incomprehension and professional envy woven about him by this unsought @-@ for success . " He turned down honours and awards offered to him , and refused to give interviews or autographs . 
 Holst 's comic opera The Perfect Fool ( 1923 ) was widely seen as a satire of Parsifal , though Holst firmly denied it . The piece , with Maggie Teyte in the leading soprano role and Eugene Goossens conducting , was enthusiastically received at its premiere in the Royal Opera House . At a concert in Reading in 1923 , Holst slipped and fell , suffering concussion . He seemed to make a good recovery , and he felt up to accepting an invitation to the US , lecturing and conducting at the University of Michigan . After he returned he found himself more and more in demand , to conduct , prepare his earlier works for publication , and , as before , to teach . The strain caused by these demands on him was too great ; on doctor 's orders he cancelled all professional engagements during 1924 , and retreated to Thaxted . In 1925 he resumed his work at St Paul 's Girls ' School , but did not return to any of his other posts . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Holst 's productivity as a composer benefited almost at once from his release from other work . His works from this period include the First Choral Symphony to words by Keats ( a Second Choral Symphony to words by George Meredith exists only in fragments ) . A short Shakespearian opera , At the Boar 's Head , followed ; neither had the immediate popular appeal of A Moorside Suite for brass band of 1928 . 
 In 1927 Holst was commissioned by the New York Symphony Orchestra to write a symphony . Instead , he wrote an orchestral piece Egdon Heath , inspired by Thomas Hardy 's Wessex . It was first performed in February 1928 , a month after Hardy 's death , at a memorial concert . By this time the public 's brief enthusiasm for everything Holstian was waning , and the piece was not well received in New York . Olin Downes in The New York Times opined that " the new score seemed long and undistinguished " . The day after the American performance , Holst conducted the City of Birmingham Orchestra in the British premiere . The Times acknowledged the bleakness of the work but allowed that it matched Hardy 's grim view of the world : " Egdon Heath is not likely to be popular , but it says what the composer wants to say , whether we like it or not , and truth is one aspect of duty . " Holst had been distressed by hostile reviews of some of his earlier works , but he was indifferent to critical opinion of Egdon Heath , which he regarded as , in Adams 's phrase , his " most perfectly realized composition " . 
 Towards the end of his life Holst wrote the Choral Fantasia ( 1930 ) and he was commissioned by the BBC to write a piece for military band ; the resulting prelude and scherzo Hammersmith was a tribute to the place where he had spent most of his life . The composer and critic Colin Matthews considers the work " as uncompromising in its way as Egdon Heath , discovering , in the words of Imogen Holst , ' in the middle of an over @-@ crowded London ... the same tranquillity that he had found in the solitude of Egdon Heath ' " . The work was unlucky in being premiered at a concert that also featured the London premiere of Walton 's Belshazzar 's Feast , by which it was somewhat overshadowed . 
 Holst wrote a score for a British film , The Bells ( 1931 ) , and was amused to be recruited as an extra in a crowd scene . Both film and score are now lost . He wrote a " jazz band piece " that Imogen later arranged for orchestra as Capriccio . Having composed operas throughout his life with varying success , Holst found for his last opera , The Wandering Scholar , what Matthews calls " the right medium for his oblique sense of humour , writing with economy and directness " . 
 Harvard University offered Holst a lectureship for the first six months of 1932 . Arriving via New York he was pleased to be reunited with his brother , Emil , whose acting career under the name of Ernest Cossart had taken him to Broadway ; but Holst was dismayed by the continual attentions of press interviewers and photographers . He enjoyed his time at Harvard , but was taken ill while there : a duodenal ulcer prostrated him for some weeks . He returned to England , joined briefly by his brother for a holiday together in the Cotswolds . His health declined , and he withdrew further from musical activities . One of his last efforts was to guide the young players of the St Paul 's Girls ' School orchestra through one of his final compositions , the Brook Green Suite , in March 1934 . 
 Holst died in London on 25 May 1934 , at the age of 59 , of heart failure following an operation on his ulcer . His ashes were interred at Chichester Cathedral in Sussex , close to the memorial to Thomas Weelkes , his favourite Tudor composer . Bishop George Bell gave the memorial oration at the funeral , and Vaughan Williams conducted music by Holst and himself . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Holst 's absorption of folksong , not only in the melodic sense but in terms of its simplicity and economy of expression , helped to develop a style that many of his contemporaries , even admirers , found austere and cerebral . This is contrary to the popular identification of Holst with The Planets , which Matthews believes has masked his status as a composer of genuine originality . Against charges of coldness in the music , Imogen cites Holst 's characteristic " sweeping modal tunes mov [ ing ] reassuringly above the steps of a descending bass " , while Michael Kennedy points to the 12 Humbert Wolfe settings of 1929 , and the 12 Welsh folksong settings for unaccompanied chorus of 1930 – 31 , as works of true warmth . 
 Many of the characteristics that Holst employed — unconventional time signatures , rising and falling scales , ostinato , bitonality and occasional polytonality — set him apart from other English composers . Vaughan Williams remarked that Holst always said in his music what he wished to say , directly and concisely ; " He was not afraid of being obvious when the occasion demanded , nor did he hesitate to be remote when remoteness expressed his purpose " . Kennedy has surmised that Holst 's economy of style was in part a product of the composer 's poor health : " the effort of writing it down compelled an artistic economy which some felt was carried too far " . However , as an experienced instrumentalist and orchestra member , Holst understood music from the standpoint of his players and made sure that , however challenging , their parts were always practicable . According to his pupil Jane Joseph , Holst fostered in performance " a spirit of practical comradeship ... none could know better than he the boredom possible to a professional player , and the music that rendered boredom impossible " . 
 = = = Early works = = = 
 Although Holst wrote a large number of works — particularly songs — during his student days and early adulthood , almost everything he wrote before 1904 he later classified as derivative " early horrors " . Nevertheless , the composer and critic Colin Matthews recognises even in these apprentice works an " instinctive orchestral flair " . Of the few pieces from this period which demonstrate some originality , Matthews pinpoints the G minor String Trio of 1894 ( unperformed until 1974 ) as the first <unk> work produced by Holst . Matthews and Imogen Holst each highlight the " Elegy " movement in The Cotswold Symphony ( 1899 – 1900 ) as among the more accomplished of the apprentice works , and Imogen discerns glimpses of her father 's real self in the 1899 Suite de ballet and the Ave Maria of 1900 . She and Matthews have asserted that Holst found his genuine voice in his setting of Whitman 's verses , The Mystic Trumpeter ( 1904 ) , in which the trumpet calls that characterise Mars in The Planets are briefly anticipated . In this work , Holst first employs the technique of bitonality — the use of two keys simultaneously . 
 = = = Experimental years = = = 
 At the beginning of the 20th century , according to Matthews , it appeared that Holst might follow Schoenberg into late Romanticism . Instead , as Holst recognised afterwards , his encounter with Purcell 's Dido and Aeneas prompted his searching for a " musical idiom of the English language " ; the folksong revival became a further catalyst for Holst to seek inspiration from other sources during the first decade or so of the new century . 
 = = = = Indian period = = = = 
 Holst 's interest in Indian mythology , shared by many of his contemporaries , first became musically evident in the opera Sita ( 1901 – 06 ) . During the opera 's long gestation , Holst worked on other Indian @-@ themed pieces . These included Maya ( 1901 ) for violin and piano , regarded by the composer and writer Raymond Head as " an insipid salon @-@ piece whose musical language is dangerously close to Stephen Adams " . Then , through Vaughan Williams , Holst discovered and became an admirer of the music of Ravel , whom he considered a " model of purity " on the level with Haydn , another composer he greatly admired . The combined influence of Ravel , Hindu spiritualism and English folk tunes enabled Holst to get beyond the once all @-@ consuming influences of Wagner and Richard Strauss and to forge his own style . Imogen Holst has acknowledged Holst 's own suggestion ( written to Vaughan Williams ) : " [ O ] ne ought to follow Wagner until he leads you to fresh things " . She notes that although much of his grand opera , Sita , is " ' good old Wagnerian bawling ' ... towards the end a change comes over the music , and the beautifully calm phrases of the hidden chorus representing the Voice of the Earth are in Holst 's own language . " 
 According to Rubbra , the publication in 1911 of Holst 's Rig Veda Hymns was a landmark event in the composer 's development : " Before this , Holst 's music had , indeed , shown the clarity of utterance which has always been his characteristic , but harmonically there was little to single him out as an important figure in modern music . " Dickinson describes these vedic settings as pictorial rather than religious ; although the quality is variable the sacred texts clearly " touched vital springs in the composer 's imagination " . While the music of Holst 's Indian verse settings remained generally western in character , in some of the vedic settings he experimented with Indian raga ( scales ) . 
 The chamber opera Savitri ( 1908 ) is written for three solo voices , a small hidden female chorus , and an instrumental combination of two flutes , a cor anglais and a double string quartet . The music critic John Warrack comments on the " extraordinary expressive subtlety " with which Holst deploys the sparse forces : " ... [ T ] he two unaccompanied vocal lines opening the work skilfully convey the relationship between Death , steadily advancing through the forest , and Savitri , her frightened answers fluttering round him , unable to escape his harmonic pull " . Head describes the work as unique in its time for its compact intimacy , and considers it Holst 's most successful attempt to end the domination of Wagnerian chromaticism in his music . Dickinson considers it a significant step , " not towards opera , but towards an idiomatic pursuit of [ Holst 's ] vision " . Of the Kālidāsa texts , Dickinson dismisses The Cloud Messenger ( 1910 – 12 ) as an " accumulation of desultory incidents , opportunistic dramatic episodes and ecstatic outpourings " which illustrate the composer 's creative confusion during that period ; the Two Eastern Pictures ( 1911 ) , in Dickinson 's view , provide " a more memorable final impression of Kālidāsa " . 
 = = = = Folksong and other influences = = = = 
 Holst 's settings of Indian texts formed only a part of his compositional output in the period 1900 to 1914 . A highly significant factor in his musical development was the English folksong revival , evident in the orchestral suite A Somerset Rhapsody ( 1906 – 07 ) , a work that was originally to be based around eleven folksong themes ; this was later reduced to four . Observing the work 's kinship with Vaughan Williams 's Norfolk Rhapsody , Dickinson remarks that , with its firm overall structure , Holst 's composition " rises beyond the level of ... a song @-@ selection " . Imogen acknowledges that Holst 's discovery of English folksongs " transformed his orchestral writing " , and that the composition of A Somerset Rhapsody did much to banish the chromaticisms that had dominated his early compositions . In the Two Songs without Words of 1906 , Holst showed that he could create his own original music using the folk idiom . An orchestral folksong fantasy Songs of the West , also written in 1906 , was withdrawn by the composer and never published , although it emerged in the 1980s in the form of an arrangement for wind band by James Curnow . 
 In the years before the First World War , Holst composed in a variety of genres . Matthews considers the evocation of a North African town in the Beni Mora suite of 1908 the composer 's most individual work to that date ; the third movement gives a preview of minimalism in its constant repetition of a four @-@ bar theme . Holst wrote two suites for military band , in E flat ( 1909 ) and F major ( 1911 ) respectively , the first of which became and remains a brass band staple . This piece , a highly original and substantial musical work , was a signal departure from what Short describes as " the usual transcriptions and operatic selections which pervaded the band repertoire " . Also in 1911 he wrote Hecuba 's Lament , a setting of Gilbert Murray 's translation from Euripides built on a seven @-@ beat refrain designed , says Dickinson , to represent Hecuba 's defiance of divine wrath . In 1912 Holst composed two psalm settings , in which he experimented with plainsong ; the same year saw the enduringly popular St Paul 's Suite ( a " gay but retrogressive " piece according to Dickinson ) , and the failure of his large scale orchestral work Phantastes . 
 = = = Full flowering = = = 
 = = = = The Planets = = = = 
 Holst conceived the idea of The Planets in 1913 , partly as a result of his interest in astrology , and also from his determination , despite the failure of Phantastes , to produce a large @-@ scale orchestral work . The chosen format may have been influenced by Schoenberg 's <unk> <unk> , and shares something of the aesthetic , Matthews suggests , of Debussy 's Nocturnes or La mer . Holst began composing The Planets in 1914 ; the movements appeared not quite in their final sequence ; " Mars " was the first to be written , followed by " Venus " and " Jupiter " . " Saturn " , " Uranus " and " Neptune " were all composed during 1915 , and " Mercury " was completed in 1916 . 
 Each planet is represented with a distinct character ; Dickinson observes that " no planet borrows colour from another " . In " Mars " , a persistent , uneven rhythmic cell consisting of five beats , combined with trumpet calls and harmonic dissonance provides battle music which Short asserts is unique in its expression of violence and sheer terror , " ... Holst 's intention being to portray the reality of warfare rather than to glorify deeds of heroism " . In " Venus " , Holst incorporated music from an abandoned vocal work , A Vigil of Pentecost , to provide the opening ; the prevalent mood within the movement is of peaceful resignation and nostalgia . " Mercury " is dominated by uneven metres and rapid changes of theme , to represent the speedy flight of the winged messenger . " Jupiter " is renowned for its central melody , in Dickinson 's view " a fantastic relaxation in which many retain a far from sneaking delight " . Dickinson and other critics have decried the later use of the tune in the patriotic hymn " I Vow to Thee , My Country " — despite Holst 's full complicity . 
 For " Saturn " , Holst again used a previously @-@ composed vocal piece , Dirge and <unk> , as the basis for the movement , where repeated chords represent the relentless approach of old age . " Uranus " , which follows , has elements of Berlioz 's Symphonie fantastique and Dukas 's The Sorcerer 's Apprentice , in its depiction of the magician who " disappears in a whiff of smoke as the sonic impetus of the movement diminishes from <unk> to ppp in the space of a few bars " . " Neptune " , the final movement , concludes with a wordless female chorus gradually receding , an effect which Warrack likens to " unresolved timelessness ... never ending , since space does not end , but drifting away into eternal silence " . Apart from his concession with " I Vow to Thee ... " ' , Holst insisted on the unity of the whole work , and opposed the performance of individual movements . Nevertheless , Imogen writes that the piece has " suffered from being quoted in snippets as background music " . 
 = = = = Maturity = = = = 
 During and after the composition of The Planets , Holst wrote or arranged numerous vocal and choral works , many of them for the wartime Thaxted Whitsun Festivals , 1916 – 18 . They include the Six Choral Folksongs of 1916 , based on West Country tunes , of which " Swansea Town " , with its " sophisticated tone " , is deemed by Dickinson to be the most memorable . Holst downplayed such music as " a limited form of art " in which " mannerisms are almost inevitable " ; the composer Alan Gibbs , however , believes Holst 's set at least equal to Vaughan Williams 's Five English Folk Songs of 1913 . 
 Holst 's first major work after The Planets was the Hymn of Jesus , completed in 1917 . The words are from a Gnostic text , the apocryphal Acts of St John , using a translation from the Greek which Holst prepared with assistance from Clifford Bax and Jane Joseph . Head comments on the innovative character of the Hymn : " At a stroke Holst had cast aside the Victorian and Edwardian sentimental oratorio , and created the precursor of the kind of works that John Tavener , for example , was to write in the 1970s " . Matthews has written that the Hymn 's " ecstatic " quality is matched in English music " perhaps only by Tippett 's The Vision of Saint Augustine " ; the musical elements include plainsong , two choirs distanced from each other to emphasise dialogue , dance episodes and " explosive chordal dislocations " . 
 In the Ode to Death ( 1918 – 19 ) , the quiet , resigned mood is seen by Matthews as an " abrupt volte @-@ face " after the life @-@ enhancing spirituality of the Hymn . Warrack refers to its aloof tranquillity ; Imogen Holst believed the Ode expressed Holst 's private attitude to death . The piece has rarely been performed since its premiere in 1922 , although the composer Ernest Walker thought it was Holst 's finest work to that date . The influential critic Ernest Newman considered The Perfect Fool " the best of modern British operas " , but its unusually short length ( about an hour ) and parodic , whimsical nature — described by The Times as " a brilliant puzzle " — put it outside the operatic mainstream . Only the ballet music from the opera , which The Times called " the most brilliant thing in a work glittering with brilliant moments " , has been regularly performed since 1923 . Holst 's libretto attracted much criticism , although Edwin Evans remarked on the rare treat in opera of being able to hear the words being sung . 
 = = = Later works = = = 
 Before his enforced rest in 1924 , Holst demonstrated a new interest in counterpoint , in his <unk> Overture of 1922 for full orchestra and the neo @-@ classical <unk> Concerto of 1923 , for flute , oboe and strings . In his final decade he mixed song settings and minor pieces with major works and occasional new departures ; the 1925 <unk> for flute , violin and oboe , each instrument playing in a different key , is cited by Imogen as Holst 's only successful chamber work . Of the Choral Symphony completed in 1924 , Matthews writes that , after several movements of real quality , the finale is a rambling anticlimax . Holst 's penultimate opera , At the Boar 's Head ( 1924 ) , is based on tavern scenes from Shakespeare 's Henry IV , Parts 1 and 2 . The music , which is largely derived from old English melodies gleaned from Cecil Sharp and other collections , has pace and verve ; the contemporary critic Harvey Grace discounted the lack of originality , a facet which he said " can be shown no less convincingly by a composer 's handling of material than by its invention " . 
 Egdon Heath ( 1927 ) was Holst 's first major orchestral work after The Planets . Matthews summarises the music as " elusive and unpredictable [ with ] three main elements : a <unk> wandering melody [ for strings ] , a sad brass processional , and restless music for strings and oboe . " The mysterious dance towards the end is , says Matthews , " the strangest moment in a strange work " . Richard Greene in Music & Letters describes the piece as " a <unk> dance in a siciliano rhythm with a simple , stepwise , rocking melody " , but lacking the power of The Planets and , at times , monotonous to the listener . A more popular success was the Moorside Suite for brass band , written as a test piece for the National Brass Band Festival championships of 1928 . While written within the traditions of north @-@ country brass band music , the suite , Short says , bears Holst 's unmistakable imprint , " from the skipping 6 / 8 of the opening Scherzo , to the vigorous melodic fourths of the concluding March , the intervening Nocturne bearing a family resemblance to the slow @-@ moving procession of Saturn " . 
 After this , Holst tackled his final attempt at opera in a cheerful vein , with The Wandering Scholar ( 1929 – 30 ) , to a text by Clifford Bax . Imogen refers to the music as " Holst at his best in a <unk> ( playful ) frame of mind " ; Vaughan Williams commented on the lively , folksy rhythms : " Do you think there 's a little bit too much 6 / 8 in the opera ? " Short observes that the opening motif makes several reappearances without being identified with a particular character , but imposes musical unity on the work . 
 Holst composed few large @-@ scale works in his final years . A Choral Fantasia of 1930 was written for the Three Choirs Festival at Gloucester ; beginning and ending with a soprano soloist , the work , also involving chorus , strings , brass and percussion , includes a substantial organ solo which , says Imogen Holst , " knows something of the ' colossal and mysterious ' loneliness of Egdon Heath " . Apart from his final uncompleted symphony , Holst 's remaining works were for small forces ; the eight Canons of 1932 were dedicated to his pupils , though in Imogen 's view that they present a formidable challenge to the most professional of singers . The Brook Green Suite ( 1932 ) , written for the orchestra of St Paul 's School , was a late companion piece to the St Paul 's Suite . The Lyric Movement for viola and small orchestra ( 1933 ) was written for Lionel Tertis . Quiet and contemplative , and requiring little virtuosity from the soloist , the piece was slow to gain popularity among <unk> . Robin Hull , in Penguin Music Magazine , praised the work 's " clear beauty — impossible to mistake for the art of any other composer " ; in Dickinson 's view , however , it remains " a frail creation " . Holst 's final composition , the orchestral scherzo movement of a projected symphony , contains features characteristic of much of Holst 's earlier music — " a summing up of Holst 's orchestral art " , according to Short . Dickinson suggests that the somewhat casual collection of material in the work gives little indication of the symphony that might have been written . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Holst made some recordings , conducting his own music . For the Columbia company he recorded Beni Mora , the Marching Song and the complete Planets with the London Symphony Orchestra ( LSO ) in 1922 , using the acoustic process . The limitations of early recording prevented the gradual fade @-@ out of women 's voices at the end of " Neptune " , and the lower strings had to be replaced by a tuba to obtain an effective bass sound . With an anonymous string orchestra Holst recorded the St Paul 's Suite and Country Song in 1925 . Columbia 's main rival , HMV , issued recordings of some of the same repertoire , with an unnamed orchestra conducted by Albert Coates . When electrical recording came in , with dramatically improved recording quality , Holst and the LSO re @-@ recorded The Planets for Columbia in 1926 . 
 In the early LP era little of Holst 's music was available on disc . Only six of his works are listed in the 1955 issue of The Record Guide : The Planets ( recordings under Boult on HMV and <unk> , and another under Sir Malcolm Sargent on Decca ) ; the Perfect Fool ballet music ; the St Paul 's Suite ; and three short choral pieces . In the stereo LP and CD eras numerous recordings of The Planets were issued , performed by orchestras and conductors from round the world . By the early years of the 21st century most of the major and many of the minor orchestral and choral works had been issued on disc . The 2008 issue of The Penguin Guide to Recorded Classical Music contained seven pages of listings of Holst 's works on CD . Of the operas , Savitri , The Wandering Scholar , and At the Boar 's Head have been recorded . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Warrack emphasises that Holst acquired an instinctive understanding — perhaps more so than any English composer — of the importance of folksong . In it he found " a new concept not only of how melody might be organized , but of what the implications were for the development of a mature artistic language " . Holst did not found or lead a school of composition ; nevertheless , he exercised influences over both contemporaries and successors . According to Short , Vaughan Williams described Holst as " the greatest influence on my music " , although Matthews asserts that each influenced the other equally . Among later composers , Michael Tippett is acknowledged by Short as Holst 's " most significant artistic successor " , both in terms of compositional style and because Tippett , who succeeded Holst as director of music at Morley College , maintained the spirit of Holst 's music there . Of an early encounter with Holst , Tippett later wrote : " Holst seemed to look right inside me , with an acute spiritual vision " . Kennedy observes that " a new generation of listeners ... recognized in Holst the fount of much that they admired in the music of Britten and Tippett " . Holst 's pupil Edmund Rubbra acknowledged how he and other younger English composers had adopted Holst 's economy of style : " With what enthusiasm did we pare down our music to the very bone " . 
 Short cites other English composers who are in debt to Holst , in particular William Walton and Benjamin Britten , and suggests that Holst 's influence may have been felt further afield . Above all , Short recognises Holst as a composer for the people , who believed it was a composer 's duty to provide music for practical purposes — festivals , <unk> , ceremonies , Christmas carols or simple hymn tunes . Thus , says Short , " many people who may never have heard any of [ Holst 's ] major works ... have nevertheless derived great pleasure from hearing or singing such small masterpieces as the carol ' In the Bleak Midwinter ' " . 
 On 27 September 2009 , after a weekend of concerts at Chichester Cathedral in memory of Holst , a new memorial was unveiled to mark the 75th anniversary of the composer 's death . It is inscribed with words from the text of The Hymn of Jesus : " The heavenly spheres make music for us " . In April 2011 a BBC television documentary , Holst : In the Bleak Midwinter , charted Holst 's life with particular reference to his support for socialism and the cause of working people . 
 = Hervey le Breton = 
 Hervey le Breton ( also known as Hervé le Breton ; died 30 August 1131 ) was a Breton cleric who became Bishop of Bangor in Wales and later Bishop of Ely in England . Appointed to Bangor by King William II of England , when the Normans were advancing into Wales , Hervey was unable to remain in his diocese when the Welsh began to drive the Normans back from their recent conquests . Hervey 's behaviour towards the Welsh seems to have contributed to his expulsion from his see . Although the new king , Henry I wished to translate Hervey to the see of Lisieux in Normandy , it was unsuccessful . 
 In 1109 , a new diocese was created in England , at Ely , and Hervey was appointed to the bishopric created . While bishop , Hervey ordered the compilation of a house chronicle , which later became the Liber Eliensis . He supervised the construction of a causeway between Ely and Exning , which allowed easier access to Ely . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hervey was a native of Brittany , and some sources state a chaplain of King William II of England , while others are less certain that he was a chaplain for the king . He was appointed Bishop of Bangor in 1092 by King William . Bangor at the time was in the Kingdom of Gwynedd , which had recently been overrun by the Normans , and following the killing of Robert of Rhuddlan had been taken over by Hugh d 'Avranches , 1st Earl of Chester . The appointment of Hervey was probably intended to further consolidate the Norman hold on the area . Bangor was under the jurisdiction of the diocese of Canterbury , but Hervey was consecrated by Thomas of Bayeux , who was the Archbishop of York , since the see of Canterbury was vacant at the time . 
 = = Problems at Bangor = = 
 Relations between Hervey and the Welsh appear to have been very bad . The Liber Eliensis described the situation as follows : 
 Since they [ the Welsh ] did not show the respect and reverence due to a bishop , he [ Hervey ] wielded the sharp two @-@ edged sword to subdue them , constraining them both with repeated excommunications and with the host of his kinsmen and other followers . They resisted him nonetheless and pressed him with such dangers that they killed his brother and intended to deal with him the same way , if they could lay hands on him . 
 Hervey was forced to rely on his own armed bands for protection . In 1094 a Welsh revolt against Norman rule in Gwynedd began under the leadership of Gruffudd ap Cynan , and by the late 1090s Hervey had been driven from his diocese by the Welsh . William of Malmesbury , however , states that the reason Hervey left Bangor was that the revenues of the see were too low . He remained nominally Bishop of Bangor until 1109 . King Henry I of England tried to translate Hervey to the see of Lisieux in 1106 , but the attempt was unsuccessful . The main opposition came from Archbishop Anselm of Canterbury , who was the metropolitan of Bangor , and refused to allow Hervey to go to a Norman bishopric . Anselm had the ability to decide the issue as Pope Paschal II had turned the decision of whether to translate Hervey to another see over to Anselm in 1102 . While in exile , Hervey served as King Henry 's confessor . Bangor itself remained vacant until 1120 , when David the Scot was appointed . 
 = = Appointment to Ely = = 
 Before his death in 1107 , Richard the abbot of Ely had attempted to secure from the papacy the elevation of his abbey into a bishopric . After Richard 's death , Hervey was appointed to oversee the abbey during the vacancy . He convinced the monks of Ely to support Richard 's project , which received the conditional approval of Archbishop Anselm , contingent on papal approval . Paschal signalled his approval , and in 1109 the monastery became a bishopric . Ely still remained a monastic house , as the abbey itself became the cathedral and the monks of the abbey became the monks of the cathedral chapter . Also in 1109 , the pope approved Hervey 's translation to a new see , and he was made Bishop of Ely . He was enthroned at Ely in October 1109 . 
 While bishop , Hervey ordered the compilation of a history of the refounding of the abbey of Ely , which later became incorporated into the Liber Eliensis . This was a Latin reworking of an Old English book of grants compiled by Bishop Æthelwold of Winchester . He was energetic in recovering the feudal rights of the bishopric against knights who had intruded themselves on the lands , but were not rendering knight service to the bishop . As bishop , he attended a legatine council , or council held by a papal legate , in 1127 , and a royal council in 1129 , but otherwise his administrative actions remain obscure . The causeway between the island of Ely and Exning , which made it easier for pilgrims to visit the shrine of Saint Ethelreda , was built under Hervey 's orders . Insight into his activities as bishop is given in the Pipe Roll of 1130 , the first surviving Pipe Roll . In that record , Hervey is recorded as owing King Henry 45 pounds to provide an office for a nephew , 100 pounds on an old settlement with the king , another 100 pounds for the settlement of a case dealing with Ramsey Abbey , Bury St. Edmunds Abbey and the bishop , 240 pounds for the right to be rid of a surplus of knights , and finally 1000 pounds for the king to allow the bishop 's knights to serve <unk> at Ely instead of Norwich . 
 = = Death = = 
 Hervey died on 30 August 1131 . He was buried in Ely Cathedral on 31 August 1131 . He was disliked by Archbishop Anselm , and he was described as a man of " secular tastes " . His nephew , William Brito , was a royal chaplain and was appointed Archdeacon of Ely by 1110 . Another nephew was Richard , who in 1130 is recorded in the Pipe Roll as paying a fine to the king because of land that his uncle had given him . Another of Hervey 's relative was Gilbert Universalis , who was appointed to the see of London in 1128 by Henry I. 
 = Too Much Too Soon ( album ) = 
 Too Much Too Soon is the second studio album by American hard rock band the New York Dolls , released on May 10 , 1974 , by Mercury Records . The group was dissatisfied with the sound of their 1973 self @-@ titled debut album , so frontman David Johansen enlisted veteran producer Shadow Morton for Too Much Too Soon . Morton had become disenchanted by the music industry , but was motivated by the band 's energy and agreed to work with them as a challenge . They recorded the album at A & R Studios in New York City . 
 Although the New York Dolls shared an affinity for Morton , they produced little original material with him . To complete Too Much Too Soon , they covered older songs and re @-@ recorded their past demos . Johansen impersonated different characters on some of the novelty covers , while Morton incorporated many studio sound effects and female backing vocals in his production . For the album , lead guitarist Johnny Thunders wrote and recorded " Chatterbox " , his first lead vocal track . 
 Too Much Too Soon was released to poor sales and only charted at number 167 on the Billboard 200 . After a problem @-@ ridden national tour , the New York Dolls were dropped by Mercury and disbanded in 1975 . The album received positive reviews from most critics , who felt Morton 's production highlighted the group 's raw sound and made it a better record than their first . Like their debut album , Too Much Too Soon became one of the most popular cult records in rock music and has since been viewed by music journalists as a predecessor to punk rock . 
 = = Background = = 
 After being signed by Mercury Records , the New York Dolls released their self @-@ titled debut album in 1973 to poor sales . Although it was praised by critics , the band members were not satisfied with producer Todd Rundgren 's sound for the album and had disagreements with him before recording Too Much Too Soon . Songwriting and production partners Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller were originally enlisted to produce their second album , while the band 's guitarist Johnny Thunders wanted to produce it himself . However , Leiber and Stoller withdrew shortly before recording was to begin . The group held a single session with Mercury A & R executive Paul Nelson at Media Sound Recording Studios , where they recorded 14 songs , most of which were cover songs . 
 At the recommendation of Leiber and Stoller , frontman David Johansen asked veteran producer Shadow Morton to work on Too Much Too Soon . Morton was best known for his work with the Shangri @-@ Las , of whom the New York Dolls were fans , and had also been Johansen 's original choice to produce their debut album . Morton had become disenchanted with the music industry and wanted to challenge himself by producing the band 's second album : " The Dolls had energy , sort of a disciplined weirdness . I took them into the room as a challenge . I was bored with the music and the business . The Dolls can certainly snap you out of boredom . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 With Morton , the New York Dolls recorded Too Much Too Soon in 1974 at A & R Studios in New York City . The album was later mastered at Sterling Sound and Masterdisk . During the sessions , Morton had Johansen record his vocals several times and incorporated sound effects such as gongs , gunshots , and feminine choruses . In a report on the album 's progress for Melody Maker , journalist Lenny Kaye wrote that they were taking more time than they had on their first record , " bringing in occasional strings and horns , following Shadow 's advice not ' to settle ' . " Morton and the band shared an affinity for each other , as he found the group 's energy in the studio refreshing , while Johansen was fond of Morton and the " looser " feel he provided for their music : " That man is completely unpretentious . He doesn 't think he ever did a marvellous thing in his life . " 
 The New York Dolls and Morton produced little original material together and had to record cover songs and re @-@ recorded some of the band 's earlier demos to complete Too Much Too Soon ; " Babylon " , " Who Are the Mystery Girls ? " , " It 's Too Late " , and " Human Being " had been recorded by the band in March 1973 as demos for Mercury before the label signed them . They had also recorded demos of two songs written by guitarist Sylvain Sylvain , " Teenage News " and " Too Much Too Soon " , before working with Morton , but neither were considered for the album . Sylvain said he confronted Morton about this decision , recalling he had been in a rush : " He was too quick with me and said that he 'd been told only to listen to David Johansen and Johnny Thunders . He didn 't want to tell me who had told him that but obviously it was the managers . I just walked out , it was all driving me nuts . " 
 According to journalist Tony Fletcher , Morton would have been more productive on Too Much Too Soon had it not been for his alcoholism and the lifestyles of the band members — bassist Arthur Kane was also an alcoholic , while Thunders and drummer Jerry Nolan had heroin addictions . Robert Christgau believed the New York Dolls relied more on cover songs for the album because , " like so many cocky songwriters , David Johansen overloaded his debut with originals and then found that record promotion wasn 't a life activity that inspired new ones . " English writer Clinton Heylin said their inability to sell enough records before may have discouraged them from writing original songs . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to Billboard magazine , Too Much Too Soon was another hard rock record by the New York Dolls but with a more " sophisticated " production . Music journalist Nina Antonia wrote that because of the group 's " untamable wildness " , the record still sounded eccentric despite attempts by Morton to " polish " their sound , such as by subduing their otherwise unrefined guitar playing . The album featured covers of the Cadets ' 1956 hit " Stranded in the Jungle " , Archie Bell 's 1969 hit " There 's Gonna Be a Showdown " , and Sonny Boy Williamson 's " Don 't Start Me Talkin ' " . On the novelty cover songs , Johansen impersonated characters such as the high @-@ stepper in " ( There 's Gonna Be A ) Showdown " and Charlie Chan in " Bad Detective " , which has lyrics describing a nonsensical narrative set in China . On " Stranded in the Jungle " , he alternated between a comical reject and a lecherous man at lover 's lane . Journalist Ellen Willis remarked that , like the band 's 1973 song " Personality Crisis " , " Stranded in the Jungle " suggested a theme of " clashing cultures and the dilemma of preserving one 's uniqueness while reaching out to others " . 
 For " Babylon " , Johansen wrote the lyrics as a tribute to the New York Dolls ' following from outside New York City : " [ The song ] is about people who live in Babylon , Long Island , New York , who go into the city every night dressed to kill . These people have to get home before sun @-@ up , you know , like vampires that can 't get caught by the sun . " By contrast , Spin magazine 's Eric Weisbard and Craig Marks interpreted " Babylon " as a reference to the Biblical city of the same name because of how the song portrayed " the symbol of decadence as a sanctuary " . The song 's subject leaves Babylon for Manhattan , where she is then hired to work in a massage parlour . 
 " It 's Too Late " was a commentary on nostalgic fashions and made reference to actress Diana Dors in a lyric rebuking drug use . According to Antonia , the song criticized indifferent , decadent people who cannot , as Johansen sang , " <unk> New York français " . On " Who Are the Mystery Girls ? " , he scolded those who abuse love , wanting to " kick it on the floor " and " beat it like a scatter rug " . " Puss ' n ' Boots " was titled after an illustrated , <unk> magazine sold in adult book stores . Johansen said the song was about shoe fetishism , " or as Arthur [ Kane ] observed , it 's about ' the woofers in relationship with the <unk> ' . " Its lyrics depicted adversities faced by the protagonist , " Little <unk> Target " , as he tried to change his name in pursuit of his shoe fetish before the music ended with a gunshot , a sound effect inspired by the Olympics ' 1958 song " Western Movies " . Willis interpreted a feminist subtext in the song , citing the lyrics " sometimes you gotta get away someway / and now you 're walkin ' just like you 're ten feet tall ... I hope you don 't get shot for tryin ' . " 
 " Chatterbox " was written and sung by Thunders , whom Willis felt " uses his voice as a wailing instrument " similarly to rock singer Robert Plant . The song was Thunders 's first time singing lead and featured vocals Weisbard and Marks said were delivered in a quavering but proud New York accent . His lyrics described the narrator 's growing frustration over a crossed @-@ wire phone connection with a female subject . On " Human Being " , an ode to self @-@ respect and personal liberty , Thunders introduced his guitar playing with a roughly performed variation on Bill Doggett 's 1956 song " Honky Tonk " . Johansen addressed critics of the band in the song , telling them if they found him objectionable they should instead find themselves " a saint " , " a boy who 's gonna be what I ain 't " , and a " plastic doll with a fresh coast of paint who 's gonna sit through the madness and always act so quaint " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Too Much Too Soon was titled after the biography of the same name on actress Diana Barrymore . According to music journalist Jon Savage , the title was " more than applicable to the Dolls themselves " because of alcoholism and other issues among the band members , including Thunders 's heroin use and Nolan 's contraction of hepatitis . A dedication to Barrymore was printed in the album 's gatefold LP . For its front cover , the group eschewed the drag image that their first album had presented and they had developed a reputation for in favor of a fake concert shot . During the shoot , Thunders held a doll in his arm as if to strike it against his guitar to add shock value . 
 Released on May 10 , 1974 , Too Much Too Soon was another commercial failure for the New York Dolls , as it only charted at number 167 on the Billboard 200 . It performed well below Mercury 's expectations and sold less than 100 @,@ 000 copies . Two double A @-@ sided , 7 " singles were released to promote the album — " Stranded in the Jungle " / " Who Are the Mystery Girls ? " in July and " ( There 's Gonna Be A ) Showdown " / " Puss ' n ' Boots " in September 1974 — but neither charted . According to Antonia , the selected singles demonstrated how " the Dolls were in need of a hit single and their current producer wanted to see them attain it " by accommodating radio audiences with toned @-@ down studio versions of songs the band had performed more rowdily in concert . Joe Gross wrote in The New Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) that the band 's attempt to garner more airplay by enlisting Morton did not work because , " with a slicker sound , background choruses , and cleaner riffs , the Dolls just sounded <unk> " . 
 When Too Much Too Soon was released in Europe in July , the New York Dolls performed at the Buxton Festival in Derbyshire and the Rock Prom Festival at Olympia in London . They also embarked on their second tour of the United States , which lasted only a few months . It was marred by cancelled shows and conflicts between the band members stemming from their escalating addictions to alcohol and other drugs . Because of their alcoholism , they failed to set up a recording session for a scheduled third album after the tour had ended , and by 1975 , they were dropped by Mercury and disbanded . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Too Much Too Soon received positive reviews from critics . In a review of the album for Rolling Stone , Dave Marsh hailed the New York Dolls as the leading hard rock band in the US and noted what he felt was Nolan 's competent drumming , Johansen 's ability to add depth to his characters , and Thunders 's innovative guitar playing . Marsh especially praised his playing on " Chatterbox " , calling it " a classic " , and believed even the most brazen songs sounded successful because Morton 's production highlighted the group 's more unrefined musical qualities . Writing for Creem magazine , Christgau said the polished sound reproduction preserved the band 's raw qualities , especially in the case of Johansen 's vocals and Nolan 's drumming , and remarked that Rundgren " should be ashamed — Shadow Morton has gotten more out of the Dolls than they can give us live on any but their best nights . " Robert Hilburn from the Los Angeles Times felt Too Much Too Soon was a better @-@ produced album that proved the band to be " the real thing " , calling it the best record of derisive punk rock since Exile on Main St. ( 1972 ) by the Rolling Stones . In The New Yorker , Ellen Willis wrote that she learned to appreciate Too Much Too Soon more than New York Dolls after seeing the band perform songs from the former album in concert , particularly " Human Being " and " Puss ' n ' Boots " , while Ron Ross from Phonograph Record magazine said the group 's " easy going ironic sensibility " was expressed " far more amusingly and accessibly " here than on their debut album . 
 Some reviewers were critical of Too Much Too Soon for what they felt was a poorly recorded and overproduced sound . In a negative review for NME , Nick Kent said it sounded cluttered and " shot through with unfulfilled potential " , while Circus magazine panned the record as " cut after cut of annoying screeching " . It was nonetheless voted the tenth best album of 1974 in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics nationwide , published in The Village Voice . Willis , one of the critics polled , listed it as her fifth favorite record of the year . Christgau , the poll 's creator and supervisor , named it third best , and in a decade @-@ end list for The Village Voice , he named it the fourth best album of the 1970s . Los Angeles Times critic Richard Cromelin included it in his list of favorite records from the decade and wrote that Morton 's production made it slightly better than New York Dolls . 
 Along with New York Dolls , Too Much Too Soon became one of the most popular cult albums in rock music . According to AllMusic senior editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine , the group predated punk rock with their " gleeful sleaziness and reckless sound " on the record , which he said was embellished by Morton 's production details and exemplified by " musically visceral and dangerous " songs such as " Human Being " . In 1986 , Sounds magazine ranked it sixtieth on its list of the 100 best albums of all time . After it was reissued by Mercury in 1987 , Don McLeese of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote that Morton 's production highlighted the New York Dolls ' sense of humor and was rendered vividly by the CD remaster . However , he felt Too Much Too Soon was marred by inconsistent material and rated it lower than their first record . In a review of the reissue , Don Waller of the Los Angeles Times said the underappreciated album was just as much an " instant classic " as New York Dolls . 
 In 2005 , Too Much Too Soon was remastered and reissued by Hip @-@ O Select and Mercury , after which Christgau wrote in Blender that both it and New York Dolls make up " a priceless proto @-@ punk legacy " . He wrote that although Johansen 's best original songs are on the first record , Too Much Too Soon has consistent hooks , clever lyrics , and exceptional cover songs , including " two R & B novelties whose theatrical potential was barely noticed until the Dolls penetrated their holy essence " . That year , rock journalist Toby Creswell named " Babylon " as one of the greatest songs of all time in his book 1001 Songs . In the Encyclopedia of Popular Music ( 2006 ) , Colin Larkin felt the band 's issues with alcohol and other drugs affected their performance on the record , which he deemed " a charismatic collection of punk / glam @-@ rock anthems , typically delivered with ' wasted ' cool " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = New York Dolls = = = 
 David Johansen – vocals , gong 
 Arthur " Killer " Kane – bass 
 Jerry Nolan – drums , percussion 
 Sylvain Sylvain – guitar , piano , vocals 
 Johnny Thunders – guitar , vocals 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 Album Graphics – graphic supervision 
 Dennis <unk> – engineering 
 Bob Gruen – photography 
 Gilbert Kong – mastering 
 Hans G. Lehmann – photography 
 Pieter <unk> – photography 
 Shadow Morton – production 
 Paul Nelson – A & R 
 Dixon Van Winkle – engineering 
 = = Release history = = 
 Information is adapted from Nina Antonia 's Too Much Too Soon : The New York Dolls ( 2006 ) . 
 = Go Man Go = 
 Go Man Go ( 1953 – 1983 ) was an American Quarter Horse stallion and race horse . He was named World Champion Quarter Running Horse three times in a row , one of only two horses to achieve that distinction . Go Man Go was considered to be of difficult temperament . While waiting in the starting gate for his very first race , he threw his jockey , broke down the gate , and ran alone around the track ; he was eventually caught and went on to win the race . During his five years of competition until his retirement from racing in 1960 he had 27 wins , earning more than $ 86 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 726 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . 
 Neither of Go Man Go 's parents raced . His sire ( father ) , the Thoroughbred stallion Top Deck , was bred by the King Ranch . His dam ( mother ) hailed from Louisiana ; Go Man Go is thought to have gained his swiftness on the track from her . For the first years of Go Man Go 's racing career , his owner faced difficulty in registering him with the American Quarter Horse Association ( AQHA ) , a matter that remained unresolved until 1958 . 
 Go Man Go went on to sire two All American Futurity winners and seven Champion Quarter Running Horses . He was inducted into the American Quarter Horse Hall of Fame , as were two of his offspring . His daughters also produced , or were the mothers of , a number of race winners , including the Hall of Fame members Kaweah Bar and Rocket Wrangler . The director of racing for the AQHA once compared his impact on Quarter Horse racing and breeding to that of Man o ' War in Thoroughbred racing , or that of human athletes such as Ben Hogan and Babe Ruth . 
 = = Background and early life = = 
 Go Man Go was foaled in Wharton , Texas in 1953 , as a result of the second breeding between the Thoroughbred stallion Top Deck and the Appendix Quarter Horse mare Lightfoot Sis . Top Deck was bred by the King Ranch , and was unraced . J. B. Ferguson had purchased Lightfoot Sis when her then @-@ owner , Octave Fontenot of Prairie Ronde , Louisiana , decided to get out of the horse breeding business . Ferguson paid $ 350 for her ( approximately $ 3 @,@ 100 as of 2016 ) and bred her in 1952 to Top Deck ( TB ) , resulting in Go Man Go 's birth the next year . Ferguson also purchased Top Deck , after the stallion injured himself as a yearling . 
 Lightfoot Sis showed classic short speed in her pedigree , although she was unraced due to an injury as a filly that left her blind in one eye . Her sire was the Thoroughbred stallion Very Wise , and her dam was a Quarter Horse mare named Clear Track . 
 Scott Wells , a racing correspondent , wrote in The <unk> Magazine that Go Man Go " grew up lean and hard @-@ boned , long @-@ bodied and long @-@ hipped , but not the best looking horse in the world . Not the best looking , just the best . " Go Man Go had a reputation for being difficult to handle . His trainer once told Walt Wiggins , Sr. that Go Man Go was " <unk> plain mean as a bear most of the time " . Throughout his racing career , Go Man Go stayed mean . One of his jockeys , Robert Strauss , recalled later that Go Man Go " was ornery from the day I met him , but he was the greatest horse I ever rode " . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 In his five @-@ year racing career , Go Man Go competed in 47 races . He appeared to take naturally to racing ; during his training he ran off with his rider — his eventual jockey Robert Strauss — before he was supposed to run . As Strauss said , " When we were breaking him , he ran off with me before we ever wanted him to run . I mean , just flat ran off with me . " Robert 's brother Eldridge , who was the trainer , once worked the colt minus half a shoe and Go Man Go still managed a time of 18 @.@ 9 seconds for a 350 @-@ yard ( 320 m ) distance . 
 In the moments before his very first race began , Go Man Go flipped over in the starting gate , unseated his rider , crashed through the front , and ran around the whole track . He finally allowed himself to be caught and reloaded into the starting gate and went on to win that race . He won his next five races with a total lead of nine horse @-@ lengths . He faced Vandy 's Flash , himself a World Champion Quarter Racing Horse , twelve times . Their last meeting , on September 6 , 1959 at Ruidoso Downs , was also Go Man Go 's final race , and was the only one of their races won by Vandy 's Flash . 
 Go Man Go won 27 times , placed second 9 times and was third 3 times . Because he placed so regularly , by the end of his racing career tracks had difficulty filling races if other racing stables knew he was entered . His race earnings were $ 86 @,@ 151 ( approximately $ 725 @,@ 900 as of 2016 ) with 88 AQHA racing points , which earned him a Superior Race Horse award as well as a Race Register of Merit from the AQHA . The best speed rating , or racing grade , he achieved was AAAT , the highest grade awarded at the time . Go Man Go was named World Champion Quarter Running Horse for three years running , from 1955 to 1957 . He was the first two @-@ year @-@ old to win the title . He was a multiple stakes winner , and his wins included the Pacific Coast Quarter Racing Association Futurity , LA Autumn Championship , and the <unk> G Stakes , which he won three times in a row . At his retirement , he held the world records at 440 yards ( 400 m ) and 350 yards ( 320 m ) , as well as age and sex records at 400 yards ( 370 m ) . Go Man Go is still the only stallion who has been World Champion Quarter Running Horse three times , and , along with the mare Woven Web ( TB ) , is one of only two horses to be three @-@ time winners of the award . 
 = = Ownership and registration problems = = 
 In 1955 , when Go Man Go was a two @-@ year @-@ old , A.B. Green bragged that he intended to buy the horse from Ferguson . Although Ferguson did not want to sell , he felt he had to at least set a price . After hearing rumors that Green was prepared with a cashier 's check for $ 40 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 353 @,@ 300 as of 2016 ) , Ferguson set the price at $ 42 @,@ 000 cash ( approximately $ 371 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) and twenty @-@ one breedings to the stallion . To Ferguson 's surprise , Green had that much cash available ; Ferguson felt compelled to sell Go Man Go . Two years later , at a Los Alamitos race meet , Green claimed that his newest horse , Double Bid , could <unk> Go Man Go . This incensed Ferguson , who had just entered Go Man Go 's full brother Mr Mackay in a race with Double Bid . Ferguson bet Green $ 42 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 353 @,@ 900 as of 2016 ) against Go Man Go that Mr Mackay would beat Double Bid in the upcoming race . Mr Mackay won the race , and Ferguson regained ownership of Go Man Go . Later in 1960 , because he also owned Go Man Go 's full brother , father , and mother , he sold Go Man Go to Frank Vessels Sr. and Bill and Harriet Peckham for $ 125 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 999 @,@ 900 as of 2016 ) . Later , however , all three horses retained by Ferguson died prematurely . 
 Green ran into problems with Go Man Go 's registration . At that time , the AQHA had two types of registration , the Appendix and the Tentative . Appendix @-@ registered horses were the offspring of Thoroughbreds and either Tentative @-@ registered Quarter Horses or Appendix @-@ registered Quarter Horses . Go Man Go was originally registered in the Appendix , as his dam was an Appendix @-@ registered mare . The way to advance out of the Appendix into the Tentative registry was to qualify on performance grounds and pass a conformation examination conducted by the AQHA . Go Man Go certainly qualified under the performance criteria , but his conformation was such that he resembled a Thoroughbred more than he resembled a Quarter Horse . Green knew that in order to increase his stud fees — the price paid for the right to breed a mare to a stallion — Go Man Go needed to acquire a regular registration number instead of his Appendix number . So Green appealed to the Executive Committee of the AQHA , which had the authority to award Tentative numbers to horses regardless of conformation exam results . In both 1956 and 1957 , the committee declined to take action , waiting to evaluate the quality of Go Man Go 's first foals before making a decision . Finally , in 1958 , they awarded Go Man Go number 82 @,@ 000 in the Tentative registry . 
 = = Breeding career and legacy = = 
 Retired to the breeding shed , Go Man Go early on proved his worth as a stallion . Of his first foal crop , born in 1958 , three reached the finals of the All American Futurity : Mr Meyers , <unk> Miss and Angie Miss . His stud fee in 1960 was $ 500 ( approximately $ 3 @,@ 999 as of 2016 ) , but by 1963 it had risen to $ 2 @,@ 500 ( approximately $ 19 @,@ 323 as of 2016 ) . He sired 942 foals , of which 552 earned their Race Register of Merit . Seventy @-@ two of his offspring were awarded a Superior Race Horse award . Among his get , or offspring , were Go Josie Go , <unk> Miss , Duplicate Copy , Story Man , and <unk> Man . His daughter <unk> won the All American Futurity and was inducted into the American Quarter Horse Hall of Fame . Another daughter , Ought To Go was also inducted into the AQHA Hall of Fame . Two <unk> were also inducted into the AQHA Hall of Fame : Kaweah Bar and Rocket Wrangler . Eight of his offspring won Champion Quarter Running Horse awards . His entry listing his offspring who won Race Register of Merits in the Quarter Racing Digest covers five full pages plus part of another . As a broodmare sire , or maternal grandsire , his daughters have produced Rocket Wrangler , Mr Kid Charge , Kaweah Bar , and Go Together . As of April 2008 , his offspring had earned over $ 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 on the racetrack . 
 As a breeding stallion , Go Man Go continued to have a reputation as a scoundrel , although Kathlyn Green , wife of A. B. Green , disputed that image . She said that he liked to have his lip tugged , and would lean over the stall door waiting for people to come along and tug on it for him . However , she said of him " he absolutely hated getting his feet dirty " . Go Man Go passed through a number of hands after Green owned him , including Les Gosselin , Frank Vessels , and Harriett Peckham , who was his owner by 1972 . In 1967 , when Vessels sold his half @-@ interest in Go Man Go to Briarwood Farms , the deal was said to be a record price for a Quarter Horse . Go Man Go died in 1983 and was buried near the headquarters of the Buena Suerte Ranch in Roswell , New Mexico . His crown @-@ shaped granite headstone is engraved : " Go Man Go , The King . " 
 Go Man Go was inducted into the American Quarter Horse Hall of Fame in 1990 . A further honor was the naming of a stakes race after him , the Grade I Go Man Go Handicap run in September at Los Alamitos . Walt Wiggins , a racing commentator and author , said of Go Man Go : " He was a brilliant <unk> , some say the fastest ever . He was wild and reckless , a rogue at first , and often a clown who seldom saw the uniqueness of his talents or the seriousness of his commission . He had intrinsic greatness and couldn 't care less . " Dan <unk> , who was Director of Racing for the AQHA for many years , described Go Man Go 's impact on the Quarter Horse breed as " He was to Quarter Horse racing what Babe Ruth was to baseball , what Ben Hogan was to Golf and what Man o <unk> was to Thoroughbred racing . Horses may have run faster and horses have earned more money , but the fame of Go Man Go lingers . " 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 = French ironclad Invincible = 
 The French ironclad Invincible was the second of the three wooden @-@ hulled Gloire @-@ class ironclads built for the French Navy in 1858 – 62 . The ships of the Gloire class were classified as armoured frigates because they only had a single gun deck and their traditional disposition of guns arrayed along the length of the hull also meant that they were broadside ironclads . Invincible had an uneventful career and was deployed in North American waters during the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 . The unseasoned timber of her hull rotted quickly and she was condemned in 1872 and scrapped in 1876 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Designed by the French naval architect Henri Dupuy de Lôme , the ships of the class were intended to fight in the line of battle , unlike the first British ironclads . The ship was 77 @.@ 25 metres ( 253 ft 5 in ) long , with a beam of 17 metres ( 55 ft 9 in ) . Invincible had a maximum draft of 8 @.@ 48 metres ( 27 ft 10 in ) , a depth of hold of 10 @.@ 67 metres ( 35 ft 0 in ) and displaced 5 @,@ 650 tonnes ( 5 @,@ 560 long tons ) . The ships of the class had a high metacentric height of 2 @.@ 1 metres ( 7 ft ) and consequently rolled badly . With their gun ports only 1 @.@ 88 metres ( 6 ft 2 in ) above the waterline , they proved to be very wet . She had a crew of 570 officers and enlisted men . 
 Invincible had a single horizontal return connecting @-@ rod compound steam engine that drove one propeller . The engine was powered by eight Indret oval boilers and was designed for a capacity of 2 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 900 kW ) . On sea trials , Invincible reached 13 @.@ 2 knots ( 24 @.@ 4 km / h ; 15 @.@ 2 mph ) . She carried a maximum of 675 tonnes ( 664 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 4 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 500 mi ) at a speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . The Gloire @-@ class ships were initially fitted with a light barquentine rig with three masts that had a sail area around 1 @,@ 100 square metres ( 11 @,@ 800 sq ft ) . This was later changed to a full ship rig of 2 @,@ 500 square metres ( 27 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , but later had to be reduced because of excessive rolling . 
 The Gloire @-@ class ships were armed with 36 Modèle 1858 164 @.@ 7 @-@ millimetre ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns , 34 of which were positioned on the single gun deck in the broadside . The remaining two guns were placed on the upper deck as chase guns . They fired a 44 @.@ 9 @-@ kilogram ( 99 @.@ 0 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of only 322 metres per second ( 1 @,@ 060 ft / s ) and proved to be ineffective against armour . They were replaced by rifled breech @-@ loading Modèle 1864 guns in 1868 . Six 240 @-@ millimetre ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns were mounted in the centre of the gun deck and a pair of 194 @-@ millimetre ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) guns replaced the original chase guns . 
 Invincible 's wooden hull was completely armoured with wrought iron plates 120 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick . Backed by the 760 @-@ millimetre ( 30 in ) sides of the hull , the armour extended 5 @.@ 4 metres ( 17 ft 9 in ) above the waterline and 2 @.@ 0 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) below . The Gloire @-@ class ships had an open @-@ topped conning tower with armour 100 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick and 10 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) of armour underneath the wooden upper deck . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Ordered on 4 March 1858 , Invincible was laid down at the Arsenal de Toulon on 1 May 1858 , launched on 4 April 1861 and completed in March 1862 . In September – October 1863 , she conducted tactical trials with other ironclads . While assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet , the ship made a port visit in August 1865 to Brest where the fleet hosted the British Channel Fleet . As part of the festivities , Invincible put on a banquet for the midshipmen of both fleets that was reportedly the noisiest and most enjoyable of the visit . A few days later the French fleet made a reciprocal visit to Portsmouth where it was hosted by the Channel Fleet . During the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 , the ship was sent to defend the islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon from Prussian commerce raiders . Built of unseasoned timber , Invincible was in poor shape upon her return and was decommissioned . Condemned on 12 August 1872 , the ship was scrapped in 1876 at Cherbourg . 
 = No. 114 Mobile Control and Reporting Unit RAAF = 
 No. 114 Mobile Control and Reporting Unit is a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) radar surveillance and air defence unit . Located at RAAF Base Darwin , Northern Territory , it is controlled by No. 41 Wing , under Surveillance and Response Group . Its role is to " prepare for , conduct and sustain effective deployable Air Surveillance and Air Battle Management in the Unit 's designated area of responsibility " . The unit was formed during World War II , and deployed in the South West Pacific . Since the war it has seen service in the Malayan Emergency , the Konfrontasi between Indonesia and Malaysia in the mid @-@ 1960s , and the War in Afghanistan . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 No. 114 Mobile Control and Reporting Unit was formed as No. 14 ( Mobile ) Fighter Sector Headquarters at Camden , New South Wales , on 23 May 1943 , under the command of Wing Commander Gordon Steege . The following month it deployed to Goodenough Island in New Guinea as part of No. 71 ( Fighter ) Wing , and became operational on 27 June . It controlled two radar stations , No. 401 of the US Army Signal Corps and No. 305 of the RAAF . On 8 August it moved to Kiriwina , under the aegis of No. 73 ( Fighter ) Wing . Steege relinquished command on 1 October to take charge of No. 73 Wing . 
 Responsible for controlling anti @-@ aircraft batteries and air @-@ to @-@ air interceptions of Japanese raiders , the unit was renamed No. 114 ( Mobile ) Fighter Sector on 18 October . It registered its first " kill " on 31 October , when it directed a Spitfire of No. 79 Squadron to intercept a Japanese " Tony " fighter north @-@ east of Kiriwina . On 2 March 1944 , No. 114 Fighter Sector began redeploying with No. 73 Wing from Goodenough to Los Negros Island . Charged with coordinating air defence during the Admiralty Islands campaign , it was renamed No. 114 Mobile Fighter Control Unit ( MFCU ) five days later . The redesignated unit became operational on 2 April , and controlled Nos. 337 , 340 , 345 , 346 and 347 Radar Stations . 
 In January 1945 , No. 114 MFCU was withdrawn to Brisbane , where it began preparations to participate in the Australian @-@ led liberation of Tarakan . In April , with a complement of over 800 officers and men , and Nos. 167 , 168 , 308 , 354 and 355 Radar Stations under its command , it embarked for Morotai in the Dutch East Indies . From there it departed for Tarakan , arriving with the main invasion force on 1 May . Controlled by No. 78 ( Fighter ) Wing under the Australian First Tactical Air Force ( No. 1 TAF ) , No. 114 MFCU became operational on the island four days after the landing . In addition to its regular duties , it temporarily took responsibility for maintaining contact with No. 1 TAF headquarters on Morotai and US Army Air Forces commands in the Philippines , when equipment belonging to the RAAF 's Mobile Telecommunications Unit failed to be unloaded at Tarakan before the departure of its transport ship . 
 = = = Cold War and after = = = 
 No. 114 MFCU was rapidly reduced in size following the end of the war . It departed Tarakan for Australia on 3 December 1945 with No. 78 Wing , arriving at RAAF Station Deniliquin , New South Wales , on the 14th . Still under the wing 's control , it relocated to RAAF Station Schofields on 31 May and then to RAAF Station Williamtown on 1 August , disbanding on 1 April 1948 . No. 114 MFCU was re @-@ established under a newly organised No. 78 Wing on 24 January 1949 — " in name only " , however , as it remained non @-@ operational . It began training in late 1955 prior to anticipated reactivation , and was renamed No. 114 Mobile Control and Reporting Unit ( MCRU ) on 12 March 1956 . It relocated to RAAF Dubbo and stood up as an independent unit on 14 November . 
 No. 114 MCRU deployed to Malaya in 1958 , becoming operational at RAAF Base Butterworth on 19 August . It took over responsibility for aerial surveillance and ground @-@ controlled interception from the Royal Air Force 's No. 487 Signals Unit on 1 December . From Butterworth , No. 114 MCRU directed the Sabre fighters of Nos. 3 and 77 Squadrons and the Canberra bombers of No. 2 Squadron in the last years of the Malayan Emergency . It also sent controllers on attachment to Ubon Air Base in Thailand , where No. 79 Squadron was based from 1962 . On 3 September 1964 , the unit went on to a 24 @-@ hour operational footing to support the Sidewinder @-@ armed Sabres of Nos. 3 and 77 Squadrons during the Konfrontasi between Indonesia and Malaysia , though no combat ensued . Konfrontasi having been declared over in August 1966 , No. 114 MCRU transferred its responsibilities to RAF Western Hill on 22 September , and disbanded at Butterworth on 31 October . 
 The unit was reactivated again at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland , on 1 April 1968 , employing the Plessey " Hub Cap " automated air defence system , which utilised Westinghouse radar and Marconi computer programs . It was to have moved directly from Butterworth to Amberley but delivery of the Hub Cap system , ordered in 1965 , was delayed owing to programming issues . The system was also physically larger and heavier than had been anticipated , rendering it less easily transportable . In 1979 , No. 114 MCRU upgraded to the Westinghouse AN / TPS @-@ 43 radar system , improving both its mobility and its tactical capabilities . It inaugurated the RAAF 's Tactical Air Defence System ( TADS , subsequently Tactical Air Defence Radar System or <unk> ) on 10 July 1985 . No. 114 MCRU was presented with a Squadron Standard on 23 May 1990 , becoming the only non @-@ flying unit in the Air Force to receive such an honour . The standard displays battle honours for the Pacific ( 1943 – 45 ) , New Britain ( 1943 ) , New Guinea ( 1943 – 44 ) and Borneo ( 1945 ) . No. 114 MCRU was transferred to RAAF Base Tindal , Northern Territory , in May – June 1997 , and then to RAAF Base Darwin in December 1999 . The AN / TPS @-@ 43 was retired in September 2005 , and replaced by the AN / TPS @-@ 77 radar . In May 2007 , a detachment of 75 members of No. 114 MCRU deployed for active service at Kandahar Airfield in southern Afghanistan , utilising the AN / TPS @-@ 77 to coordinate coalition combat air operations . The detachment returned to Australia in August 2009 . No. 114 MCRU celebrated its 70th anniversary at Darwin on 23 May 2013 . It marked ten years service with the AN / TPS @-@ 77 radar in November 2015 . 
 = The Proposal ( film ) = 
 The Proposal is a 2009 American romantic comedy film set in Sitka , Alaska . Directed by Anne Fletcher and written by Peter Chiarelli , the film features Ryan Reynolds and Sandra Bullock in the leading roles , with Betty White , Mary Steenburgen , and Craig T. Nelson in supporting roles . The film was produced by Mandeville Films and released on June 19 , 2009 , in North America by Touchstone Pictures . The plot centers on a Canadian executive , Margaret Tate , who learns that she may face deportation from the U.S. because of her expired visa . Determined to retain her position as editor in chief of a publishing house , Tate convinces her assistant , Andrew Paxton , to temporarily act as her fiancé . Initially planning on resuming their lives after Tate resolves her visa issues , they appear to abandon those plans as their relationship intensifies . 
 Development on the film began in 2005 , when Chiarelli wrote the film 's script . Principal filming occurred over a period of two months from March to May 2008 . The film received mixed reviews from critics , who criticized its script , but praised the chemistry between Bullock and Reynolds . The film was a box office success , grossing over $ 317 million worldwide , becoming the highest grossing romantic comedy film of 2009 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Margaret Tate is an executive editor in chief of a book publishing company . After learning she is about to be deported to Canada because she violated the terms of her work visa , she persuades her assistant , Andrew Paxton , to marry her . She reminds Andrew that if she 's deported , the work he put in as her assistant will be lost , and he 'll be set back in his dream to become an editor . Mr. Gilbertson , a U.S. immigration agent , informs them that he suspects they are committing fraud to avoid Margaret 's deportation . Gilbertson tells them that they 'll be asked questions about each other separately . If their answers don 't match , Margaret will be deported to Canada permanently and Andrew will be convicted of a felony punishable by a $ 250 @,@ 000 fine and five years in prison . Andrew insists that Margaret make him an editor after their marriage and publish the book he 's been recommending to her . Margaret agrees . 
 The couple travels to Sitka , Alaska , Andrew 's hometown , to meet his family . Margaret meets Andrew 's mother Grace and grandmother Annie a.k.a. " <unk> " . During the trip to the family home , Margaret notices that nearly every shop in town carries the name Paxton and learns that Andrew 's family is in fact very wealthy . During a welcome home party , Andrew confronts his father , Joe , who is angry about Andrew 's dating the boss he has so long disliked and thinks he is using her to get ahead in his career . After their argument , Andrew announces the engagement to everyone . Margaret also meets Gertrude , Andrew 's ex @-@ girlfriend . 
 The next day , Grace and Annie take Margaret to a local bar to watch a strip dance by a locally famous but over @-@ the @-@ hill exotic dancer , Ramone . Stepping away from the show , Margaret learns from Gertrude that Andrew wanted to become an editor and make his own life and that Andrew had proposed to Gertrude . However , Gertrude refused because she didn 't want to leave Sitka for New York . Returning home , Margaret learns of the conflict between Andrew and Joe . That night , Margaret asks Andrew about his relationship with his father , but Andrew refuses to talk . Instead , Margaret opens up to Andrew . 
 The next day , the family convinces them to marry while they 're in Sitka . After Margaret realizes how close Andrew 's family is , she becomes upset , gets on Andrew 's boat , and speeds away with him . She tells him she has been alone since she was sixteen years old after her parents died and had forgotten what it felt like to have a family . She lets go of the helm and stumbles to the back of the boat . Andrew makes a sharp turn to avoid hitting a buoy , and Margaret falls out of the boat . Andrew quickly turns the boat around and saves her because she can 't swim . At the wedding ceremony , Margaret confesses the truth about the wedding to the guests , including Gilbertson , who informs her she has twenty @-@ four hours to leave for Canada . Margaret returns to the Paxton home to pack her things . Andrew rushes to their room only to find Margaret has already left , leaving the aforementioned book manuscript with a note of praise and a promise to publish it . Gertrude attempts to comfort Andrew and asks if he is going to go after her . As he rushes out to find Margaret , another argument arises between him and Joe . Annie fakes a heart attack and convinces them to reconcile before she " passes away " . After she succeeds in getting things moving again , she owns up to faking the heart attack . Andrew 's parents realize he really loves Margaret . He goes to New York and tells Margaret he loves her in front of the entire office staff . They kiss , then go to Gilbertson and inform him they are again engaged , but for real this time . The film ends with Gilbertson asking questions ( some of them irrelevant ) not only to Andrew and Margaret , but also Joe , Grace , Annie and Ramone . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ryan Reynolds as Andrew Paxton , Margaret 's assistant whose ultimate career goal is to become an editor . 
 Sandra Bullock as Margaret Tate , a chief editor at a major New York City book publisher . 
 Mary Steenburgen as Grace Paxton , Andrew 's mother . 
 Craig T. Nelson as Joe Paxton , Andrew 's father who owns the family business that dominates the entire town of Sitka . 
 Betty White as Grandma Annie " <unk> " , Andrew 's grandmother and Joe 's mother . 
 Denis O 'Hare as Mr. Gilbertson , the immigration agent investigating Margaret 's case . 
 Oscar Nuñez as Ramone , a resident of Sitka who holds many jobs , including waiter , male stripper , shopkeeper and minister . 
 Malin Åkerman as Gertrude , Andrew 's ex @-@ girlfriend . 
 Michael Nouri as publisher Bergen , Tate 's superior . 
 Aasif Mandvi as Bob Spaulding , an editor . 
 Michael Mosley as Chuck , Andrew 's friend . 
 = = Production = = 
 Peter Chiarelli initially wrote the script for the film in 2005 . In May 2007 , it was announced that Sandra Bullock had been given a lead role for The Proposal . Julia Roberts was originally approached by producers for a lead role in the film , but later declined . Nearly two months after the announcement , it was reported that negotiations were being finalized for Ryan Reynolds to star opposite to Bullock . In January 2008 , Touchstone Pictures signed Anne Fletcher to direct the film . It premiered on June 1 , 2009 at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , California . 
 Filming for The Proposal initiated in April 2008 in Rockport , Massachusetts . In the oncoming days leading to production , areas of the town were temporarily remodeled to represent Sitka , Alaska , the setting of most of the film . Principal photography officially began on April 9 at <unk> Neck , where it continued over a period of 24 hours . Filming continued at the Motif Number One building on Bradley Wharf ( April 14 – 16 ) , the Haskins Building ( April 15 – 18 ) , and the central business district of Rockport ( April 17 ) . Principal photography relocated to Manchester @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea , Massachusetts on April 22 , where it resumed over an approximate period of two weeks . In response , city officials accommodated the producers by renting out all publicly owned parking lots . Filming for The Proposal was shortly delayed after Bullock and her husband were involved in a car accident . The wedding scene was filmed in a three @-@ story twentieth century Victorian home ; photography took place at the residence for three weeks . In an interview with the New York Times , the owners of the home stated that Nelson Coates knocked on their door asking for leaves . Initially , the owners directed Coates to other residences in the area ; however , they eventually gave the film 's producer a tour of the house . Production occurred on the first floor of the home . Outside of the Cape Ann area , filming took place in Boston , Massachusetts at the State Street Bank Building and in Lower Manhattan in New York City . The Proposal contained 350 special effect shots , and some parts were edited using computer @-@ generated imagery . The score to The Proposal was composed by Aaron Zigman , who recorded his score with the Hollywood Studio Symphony at the Sony Scoring Stage . 
 As part of an extensive advertising campaign , Reynolds discussed about taking part in the production of a nude scene . The scene was filmed in a period of three days , and took approximately twelve takes to complete . Expressing that she was initially nervous , Bullock stated in an interview with Sky News that " when everyone else acts like it 's just a normal day it really helps you relax . " Although she revealed that producers provided them with fig leaves , Bullock stated that they would continuously fall off . She added , " You could literally see everything . " Similar sentiments were expressed by Reynolds , who in an interview with People , stated , " Filming a scene that involves being entirely naked and takes a couple days can be a little awkward . " He continued : " Thankfully you 're there for so long and you 're doing it for so long that you dispense with the awkwardness pretty quickly and start to have mundane , normal conversations – the difference being you 're not wearing pants . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Proposal was released in the United States on June 19 , 2009 . On its opening day , the film grossed an estimated $ 12 @.@ 7 million in 3 @,@ 056 theaters , becoming the highest grossing film of the day . It later went on to gross over $ 34 million during its opening weekend , beating out Year One , Up , and The Hangover . In an exit poll conducted by Disney , nearly 63 % of the opening audience consisted of female viewers , 78 % were eighteen or older , and 71 % were classified as couples . It marked the biggest opening weekend out of any film in Bullock 's career , nearly doubling from her previous holder , Premonition . As of October 2011 , the film had grossed over $ 164 million in the United States and Canada . 
 Box office performances showed similar numbers in international markets . The film was released in Australia on June 18 , 2009 , grossing over $ 2 @.@ 8 million on its opening weekend . In Russia , the film grossed over $ 2 @.@ 6 million on its opening weekend , accounting for 34 % of all total film revenue in that country . In South Africa the film debuted at number two , losing out to the new release Ice Age : Dawn of the Dinosaurs . It managed to gross over $ 2 @.@ 6 million as of October 2011 . In the United Kingdom , estimated first opening weekend grosses stand at £ 3 @.@ 2 million . The film has grossed over $ 317 million worldwide , with international grosses standing at $ 153 million . It is the twentieth highest @-@ grossing film of 2009 . 
