 Land transport utilized the advanced system of Roman roads . The in @-@ kind taxes paid by communities included the provision of personnel , animals , or vehicles for the cursus publicus , the state mail and transport service established by Augustus . Relay stations were located along the roads every seven to twelve Roman miles , and tended to grow into a village or trading post . A mansio ( plural mansiones ) was a privately run service station franchised by the imperial bureaucracy for the cursus publicus . The support staff at such a facility included muleteers , secretaries , blacksmiths , <unk> , a veterinarian , and a few military police and couriers . The distance between mansiones was determined by how far a wagon could travel in a day . Mules were the animal most often used for pulling carts , travelling about 4 mph . As an example of the pace of communication , it took a messenger a minimum of nine days to travel to Rome from Mainz in the province of Germania Superior , even on a matter of urgency . In addition to the mansiones , some taverns offered accommodations as well as food and drink ; one recorded tab for a stay showed charges for wine , bread , mule feed , and the services of a prostitute . 
 = = = Trade and commodities = = = 
 Roman provinces traded among themselves , but trade extended outside the frontiers to regions as far away as China and India . The main commodity was grain . Chinese trade was mostly conducted overland through middle men along the Silk Road ; Indian trade , however , also occurred by sea from Egyptian ports on the Red Sea . Also traded were olive oil , various foodstuffs , <unk> ( fish sauce ) , slaves , ore and manufactured metal objects , fibres and textiles , timber , pottery , glassware , marble , papyrus , spices and materia medica , ivory , pearls , and gemstones . 
 Though most provinces were capable of producing wine , regional varietals were desirable and wine was a central item of trade . Shortages of vin <unk> were rare . The major suppliers for the city of Rome were the west coast of Italy , southern Gaul , the Tarraconensis region of Hispania , and Crete . Alexandria , the second @-@ largest city , imported wine from Laodicea in Syria and the Aegean . At the retail level , taverns or speciality wine shops ( <unk> ) sold wine by the jug for carryout and by the drink on premises , with price ranges reflecting quality . 
 = = = Labour and occupations = = = 
 Inscriptions record 268 different occupations in the city of Rome , and 85 in Pompeii . Professional associations or trade guilds ( collegia ) are attested for a wide range of occupations , including fishermen ( <unk> ) , salt merchants ( <unk> ) , olive oil dealers ( <unk> ) , entertainers ( <unk> ) , cattle dealers ( <unk> ) , goldsmiths ( <unk> ) , teamsters ( <unk> or <unk> ) , and stonecutters ( <unk> ) . These are sometimes quite specialized : one collegium at Rome was strictly limited to craftsmen who worked in ivory and citrus wood . 
 Work performed by slaves falls into five general categories : domestic , with epitaphs recording at least 55 different household jobs ; imperial or public service ; urban crafts and services ; agriculture ; and mining . Convicts provided much of the labour in the mines or quarries , where conditions were notoriously brutal . In practice , there was little division of labour between slave and free , and most workers were illiterate and without special skills . The greatest number of common labourers were employed in agriculture : in the Italian system of industrial farming ( latifundia ) , these may have been mostly slaves , but throughout the Empire , slave farm labour was probably less important than other forms of dependent labour by people who were technically not enslaved . 
 Textile and clothing production was a major source of employment . Both textiles and finished garments were traded among the peoples of the Empire , whose products were often named for them or a particular town , rather like a fashion " label " . Better ready @-@ to @-@ wear was exported by businessmen ( <unk> or <unk> ) who were often well @-@ to @-@ do residents of the production centres . Finished garments might be retailed by their sales agents , who travelled to potential customers , or by <unk> , clothing dealers who were mostly freedmen ; or they might be peddled by itinerant merchants . In Egypt , textile producers could run prosperous small businesses employing apprentices , free workers earning wages , and slaves . The fullers ( <unk> ) and dye workers ( <unk> ) had their own guilds . <unk> were guild workers who specialized in textile production and the recycling of old clothes into pieced goods . 
 = = = GDP and income distribution = = = 
 Economic historians vary in their calculations of the gross domestic product of the Roman economy during the Principate . In the sample years of 14 , 100 , and 150 AD , estimates of per capita GDP range from 166 to 380 HS . The GDP per capita of Italy is estimated as 40 to 66 percent higher than in the rest of the Empire , due to tax transfers from the provinces and the concentration of elite income in the heartland . 
 In the <unk> – Friesen economic model , the total annual income generated by the Empire is placed at nearly 20 billion HS , with about 5 percent extracted by central and local government . Households in the top 1 @.@ 5 percent of income distribution captured about 20 percent of income . Another 20 percent went to about 10 percent of the population who can be characterized as a non @-@ elite middle . The remaining " vast majority " produced more than half of the total income , but lived near subsistence . 
 = = Architecture and engineering = = 
 The chief Roman contributions to architecture were the arch , vault and the dome . Even after more than 2 @,@ 000 years some Roman structures still stand , due in part to sophisticated methods of making cements and concrete . Roman roads are considered the most advanced roads built until the early 19th century . The system of roadways facilitated military policing , communications , and trade . The roads were resistant to floods and other environmental hazards . Even after the collapse of the central government , some roads remained usable for more than a thousand years . 
 Roman bridges were among the first large and lasting bridges , built from stone with the arch as the basic structure . Most utilized concrete as well . The largest Roman bridge was Trajan 's bridge over the lower Danube , constructed by Apollodorus of Damascus , which remained for over a millennium the longest bridge to have been built both in terms of overall span and length . 
 The Romans built many dams and reservoirs for water collection , such as the Subiaco Dams , two of which fed the Anio Novus , one of the largest aqueducts of Rome . They built 72 dams just on the Iberian peninsula , and many more are known across the Empire , some still in use . Several earthen dams are known from Roman Britain , including a well @-@ preserved example from <unk> ( Lanchester ) . 
 The Romans constructed numerous aqueducts . A surviving treatise by Frontinus , who served as curator <unk> ( water commissioner ) under Nerva , reflects the administrative importance placed on ensuring the water supply . Masonry channels carried water from distant springs and reservoirs along a precise gradient , using gravity alone . After the water passed through the aqueduct , it was collected in tanks and fed through pipes to public fountains , baths , toilets , or industrial sites . The main aqueducts in the city of Rome were the Aqua Claudia and the Aqua Marcia . The complex system built to supply Constantinople had its most distant supply drawn from over 120 km away along a sinuous route of more than 336 km . Roman aqueducts were built to remarkably fine tolerance , and to a technological standard that was not to be equalled until modern times . The Romans also made use of aqueducts in their extensive mining operations across the empire , at sites such as Las <unk> and Dolaucothi in South Wales . 
 Insulated glazing ( or " double glazing " ) was used in the construction of public baths . Elite housing in cooler climates might have <unk> , a form of central heating . The Romans were the first culture to assemble all essential components of the much later steam engine , when Hero built the <unk> . 
 = = Daily life = = 
 = = = City and country = = = 
 In the ancient world , a city was viewed as a place that fostered civilization by being " properly designed , ordered , and adorned . " Augustus undertook a vast building program in Rome , supported public displays of art that expressed the new imperial ideology , and reorganized the city into neighbourhoods ( vici ) administered at the local level with police and firefighting services . A focus of Augustan monumental architecture was the Campus Martius , an open area outside the city center that in early times had been devoted to equestrian sports and physical training for youth . The Altar of Augustan Peace ( Ara Pacis Augustae ) was located there , as was an obelisk imported from Egypt that formed the pointer ( gnomon ) of a <unk> . With its public gardens , the Campus became one of the most attractive places in the city to visit . 
 City planning and urban lifestyles had been influenced by the Greeks from an early period , and in the eastern Empire , Roman rule accelerated and shaped the local development of cities that already had a strong Hellenistic character . Cities such as Athens , Aphrodisias , Ephesus and Gerasa altered some aspects of city planning and architecture to conform to imperial ideals , while also expressing their individual identity and regional preeminence . In the areas of the western Empire inhabited by Celtic @-@ speaking peoples , Rome encouraged the development of urban centres with stone temples , forums , monumental fountains , and amphitheatres , often on or near the sites of the preexisting walled settlements known as oppida . Urbanization in Roman Africa expanded on Greek and Punic cities along the coast . 
 The network of cities throughout the Empire ( <unk> , <unk> , civitates or in Greek terms poleis ) was a primary cohesive force during the Pax Romana . Romans of the 1st and 2nd centuries AD were encouraged by imperial propaganda to " inculcate the habits of peacetime " . As the classicist Clifford Ando has noted : 
 Most of the cultural appurtenances popularly associated with imperial culture — public cult and its games and civic banquets , competitions for artists , speakers , and athletes , as well as the funding of the great majority of public buildings and public display of art — were financed by private individuals , whose expenditures in this regard helped to justify their economic power and legal and provincial privileges . 
 Even the Christian polemicist Tertullian declared that the world of the late 2nd century was more orderly and well @-@ cultivated than in earlier times : " Everywhere there are houses , everywhere people , everywhere the res publica , the commonwealth , everywhere life . " The decline of cities and civic life in the 4th century , when the wealthy classes were unable or disinclined to support public works , was one sign of the Empire 's imminent dissolution . 
 In the city of Rome , most people lived in multistory apartment buildings ( insulae ) that were often squalid <unk> . Public facilities — such as baths ( thermae ) , toilets that were flushed with running water ( <unk> ) , conveniently located basins or elaborate fountains ( <unk> ) delivering fresh water , and large @-@ scale entertainments such as chariot races and gladiator combat — were aimed primarily at the common people who lived in the insulae . Similar facilities were constructed in cities throughout the Empire , and some of the best @-@ preserved Roman structures are in Spain , southern France , and northern Africa . 
 The public baths served hygienic , social and cultural functions . Bathing was the focus of daily socializing in the late afternoon before dinner . Roman baths were distinguished by a series of rooms that offered communal bathing in three temperatures , with varying amenities that might include an exercise and weight @-@ training room , sauna , exfoliation spa ( where oils were massaged into the skin and scraped from the body with a strigil ) , ball court , or outdoor swimming pool . Baths had hypocaust heating : the floors were suspended over hot @-@ air channels that circulated warmth . Mixed nude bathing was not unusual in the early Empire , though some baths may have offered separate facilities or hours for men and women . Public baths were a part of urban culture throughout the provinces , but in the late 4th century , individual tubs began to replace communal bathing . Christians were advised to go to the baths for health and cleanliness , not pleasure , but to avoid the games ( ludi ) , which were part of religious festivals they considered " pagan " . Tertullian says that otherwise Christians not only availed themselves of the baths , but participated fully in commerce and society . 
 Rich families from Rome usually had two or more houses , a townhouse ( domus , plural <unk> ) and at least one luxury home ( villa ) outside the city . The domus was a privately owned single @-@ family house , and might be furnished with a private bath ( <unk> ) , but it was not a place to retreat from public life . Although some neighbourhoods of Rome show a higher concentration of well @-@ to @-@ do houses , the rich did not live in segregated enclaves . Their houses were meant to be visible and accessible . The atrium served as a reception hall in which the paterfamilias ( head of household ) met with clients every morning , from wealthy friends to poorer dependents who received charity . It was also a center of family religious rites , containing a shrine and the images of family ancestors . The houses were located on busy public roads , and ground @-@ level spaces facing the street were often rented out as shops ( tabernae ) . In addition to a kitchen garden — <unk> might substitute in the insulae — townhouses typically enclosed a peristyle garden that brought a tract of nature , made orderly , within walls . 
 The villa by contrast was an escape from the bustle of the city , and in literature represents a lifestyle that balances the civilized pursuit of intellectual and artistic interests ( <unk> ) with an appreciation of nature and the agricultural cycle . Ideally a villa commanded a view or vista , carefully framed by the architectural design . It might be located on a working estate , or in a " resort town " situated on the seacoast , such as Pompeii and Herculaneum . 
 The programme of urban renewal under Augustus , and the growth of Rome 's population to as many as 1 million people , was accompanied by a nostalgia for rural life expressed in the arts . Poetry praised the idealized lives of farmers and shepherds . The interiors of houses were often decorated with painted gardens , fountains , landscapes , vegetative ornament , and animals , especially birds and marine life , rendered accurately enough that modern scholars can sometimes identify them by species . The Augustan poet Horace gently satirized the dichotomy of urban and rural values in his fable of the city mouse and the country mouse , which has often been retold as a children 's story . 
 On a more practical level , the central government took an active interest in supporting agriculture . Producing food was the top priority of land use . Larger farms ( latifundia ) achieved an economy of scale that sustained urban life and its more specialized division of labour . Small farmers benefited from the development of local markets in towns and trade centres . Agricultural techniques such as crop rotation and selective breeding were disseminated throughout the Empire , and new crops were introduced from one province to another , such as peas and cabbage to Britain . 
 Maintaining an affordable food supply to the city of Rome had become a major political issue in the late Republic , when the state began to provide a grain dole ( annona ) to citizens who registered for it . About 200 @,@ 000 – 250 @,@ 000 adult males in Rome received the dole , amounting to about 33 <unk> per month , for a per annum total of about 100 @,@ 000 tons of wheat primarily from Sicily , north Africa , and Egypt . The dole cost at least 15 percent of state revenues , but improved living conditions and family life among the lower classes , and subsidized the rich by allowing workers to spend more of their earnings on the wine and olive oil produced on the estates of the landowning class . 
 The grain dole also had symbolic value : it affirmed both the emperor 's position as universal benefactor , and the right of all citizens to share in " the fruits of conquest " . The annona , public facilities , and spectacular entertainments mitigated the otherwise dreary living conditions of lower @-@ class Romans , and kept social unrest in check . The satirist Juvenal , however , saw " bread and circuses " ( <unk> et circenses ) as emblematic of the loss of republican political liberty : 
 The public has long since cast off its cares : the people that once bestowed commands , consulships , legions and all else , now <unk> no more and longs eagerly for just two things : bread and circuses . 
 = = = Food and dining = = = 
 Most apartments in Rome lacked kitchens , though a charcoal brazier could be used for rudimentary cookery . Prepared food was sold at pubs and bars , inns , and food stalls ( tabernae , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) . <unk> and restaurant dining were for the lower classes ; fine dining could be sought only at private dinner parties in well @-@ to @-@ do houses with a chef ( <unk> ) and trained kitchen staff , or at banquets hosted by social clubs ( collegia ) . 
 Most people would have consumed at least 70 percent of their daily calories in the form of cereals and legumes . Puls ( pottage ) was considered the aboriginal food of the Romans . The basic grain pottage could be elaborated with chopped vegetables , bits of meat , cheese , or herbs to produce dishes similar to polenta or risotto . 
 Urban populations and the military preferred to consume their grain in the form of bread . Mills and commercial ovens were usually combined in a bakery complex . By the reign of Aurelian , the state had begun to distribute the annona as a daily ration of bread baked in state factories , and added olive oil , wine , and pork to the dole . 
 The importance of a good diet to health was recognized by medical writers such as Galen ( 2nd century AD ) , whose treatises included one On Barley Soup . Views on nutrition were influenced by schools of thought such as humoral theory . 
 Roman literature focuses on the dining habits of the upper classes , for whom the evening meal ( <unk> ) had important social functions . Guests were entertained in a finely decorated dining room ( triclinium ) , often with a view of the peristyle garden . Diners lounged on couches , leaning on the left elbow . By the late Republic , if not earlier , women dined , reclined , and drank wine along with men . 
 The most famous description of a Roman meal is probably Trimalchio 's dinner party in the Satyricon , a fictional extravaganza that bears little resemblance to reality even among the most wealthy . The poet Martial describes serving a more plausible dinner , beginning with the <unk> ( " tasting " or " appetizer " ) , which was a composed salad of mallow leaves , lettuce , chopped leeks , mint , arugula , mackerel garnished with rue , sliced eggs , and marinated sow udder . The main course was succulent cuts of kid , beans , greens , a chicken , and leftover ham , followed by a dessert of fresh fruit and vintage wine . The Latin expression for a full @-@ course dinner was ab ovo usque mala , " from the egg to the apples , " equivalent to the English " from soup to nuts . " 
 A book @-@ length collection of Roman recipes is attributed to Apicius , a name for several figures in antiquity that became synonymous with " gourmet . " Roman " foodies " indulged in wild game , fowl such as peacock and flamingo , large fish ( mullet was especially prized ) , and shellfish . Luxury ingredients were brought by the fleet from the far reaches of empire , from the Parthian frontier to the Straits of Gibraltar . 
 Refined cuisine could be <unk> as a sign of either civilized progress or decadent decline . The early Imperial historian Tacitus contrasted the indulgent luxuries of the Roman table in his day with the simplicity of the Germanic diet of fresh wild meat , foraged fruit , and cheese , unadulterated by imported seasonings and elaborate sauces . Most often , because of the importance of landowning in Roman culture , produce — cereals , legumes , vegetables , and fruit — was considered a more civilized form of food than meat . The Mediterranean staples of bread , wine , and oil were <unk> by Roman Christianity , while Germanic meat consumption became a mark of paganism , as it might be the product of animal sacrifice . 
 Some philosophers and Christians resisted the demands of the body and the pleasures of food , and adopted fasting as an ideal . Food became simpler in general as urban life in the West diminished , trade routes were disrupted , and the rich retreated to the more limited self @-@ sufficiency of their country estates . As an urban lifestyle came to be associated with decadence , the Church formally discouraged gluttony , and hunting and pastoralism were seen as simple , virtuous ways of life . 
 = = = Recreation and spectacles = = = 
 When Juvenal complained that the Roman people had exchanged their political liberty for " bread and circuses " , he was referring to the state @-@ provided grain dole and the circenses , events held in the entertainment venue called a circus in Latin . The largest such venue in Rome was the Circus Maximus , the setting of horse races , chariot races , the equestrian Troy Game , staged beast hunts ( venationes ) , athletic contests , gladiator combat , and historical re @-@ enactments . From earliest times , several religious festivals had featured games ( ludi ) , primarily horse and chariot races ( ludi circenses ) . Although their entertainment value tended to overshadow ritual significance , the races remained part of archaic religious observances that pertained to agriculture , initiation , and the cycle of birth and death . 
 Under Augustus , public entertainments were presented on 77 days of the year ; by the reign of Marcus Aurelius , the number of days had expanded to 135 . Circus games were preceded by an elaborate parade ( <unk> <unk> ) that ended at the venue . Competitive events were held also in smaller venues such as the amphitheatre , which became the characteristic Roman spectacle venue , and stadium . Greek @-@ style athletics included <unk> , boxing , wrestling , and the <unk> . Aquatic displays , such as the mock sea battle ( naumachia ) and a form of " water ballet " , were presented in engineered pools . State @-@ supported theatrical events ( ludi <unk> ) took place on temple steps or in grand stone theatres , or in the smaller enclosed theatre called an <unk> . 
 Circuses were the largest structure regularly built in the Roman world , though the Greeks had their own architectural traditions for the similarly purposed hippodrome . The Flavian Amphitheatre , better known as the Colosseum , became the regular arena for blood sports in Rome after it opened in 80 AD . The circus races continued to be held more frequently . The Circus Maximus could seat around 150 @,@ 000 spectators , and the Colosseum about 50 @,@ 000 with standing room for about 10 @,@ 000 more . Many Roman amphitheatres , circuses and theatres built in cities outside Italy are visible as ruins today . The local ruling elite were responsible for sponsoring spectacles and arena events , which both enhanced their status and drained their resources . 
 The physical arrangement of the amphitheatre represented the order of Roman society : the emperor presiding in his opulent box ; senators and equestrians watching from the advantageous seats reserved for them ; women seated at a remove from the action ; slaves given the worst places , and everybody else packed in @-@ between . The crowd could call for an outcome by booing or cheering , but the emperor had the final say . Spectacles could quickly become sites of social and political protest , and emperors sometimes had to deploy force to put down crowd unrest , most notoriously at the Nika riots in the year 532 , when troops under Justinian slaughtered thousands . 
 The chariot teams were known by the colours they wore , with the Blues and Greens the most popular . Fan loyalty was fierce and at times erupted into sports riots . Racing was perilous , but charioteers were among the most celebrated and well @-@ compensated athletes . One star of the sport was Diocles , from Lusitania ( present @-@ day Portugal ) , who raced chariots for 24 years and had career earnings of 35 million sesterces . Horses had their fans too , and were commemorated in art and inscriptions , sometimes by name . The design of Roman circuses was developed to assure that no team had an unfair advantage and to minimize collisions ( <unk> , " shipwrecks " ) , which were nonetheless frequent and spectacularly satisfying to the crowd . The races retained a magical aura through their early association with chthonic rituals : circus images were considered protective or lucky , curse tablets have been found buried at the site of racetracks , and charioteers were often suspected of sorcery . Chariot racing continued into the Byzantine period under imperial sponsorship , but the decline of cities in the 6th and 7th centuries led to its eventual demise . 
 The Romans thought gladiator contests had originated with funeral games and sacrifices in which select captive warriors were forced to fight to expiate the deaths of noble Romans . Some of the earliest styles of gladiator fighting had ethnic designations such as " Thracian " or " Gallic " . The staged combats were considered munera , " services , offerings , benefactions " , initially distinct from the festival games ( ludi ) . 
 Throughout his 40 @-@ year reign , Augustus presented eight gladiator shows in which a total of 10 @,@ 000 men fought , as well as 26 staged beast hunts that resulted in the deaths of 3 @,@ 500 animals . To mark the opening of the Colosseum , the emperor Titus presented 100 days of arena events , with 3 @,@ 000 gladiators competing on a single day . Roman fascination with gladiators is indicated by how widely they are depicted on mosaics , wall paintings , lamps , and even graffiti drawings . 
 Gladiators were trained combatants who might be slaves , convicts , or free volunteers . Death was not a necessary or even desirable outcome in matches between these highly skilled fighters , whose training represented a costly and time @-@ consuming investment . By contrast , <unk> were convicts sentenced to the arena with little or no training , often unarmed , and with no expectation of survival . Physical suffering and humiliation were considered appropriate retributive justice for the crimes they had committed . These executions were sometimes staged or ritualized as re @-@ enactments of myths , and amphitheatres were equipped with elaborate stage machinery to create special effects . Tertullian considered deaths in the arena to be nothing more than a dressed @-@ up form of human sacrifice . 
 Modern scholars have found the pleasure Romans took in the " theater of life and death " to be one of the more difficult aspects of their civilization to understand and explain . The younger Pliny rationalized gladiator spectacles as good for the people , a way " to inspire them to face honourable wounds and despise death , by exhibiting love of glory and desire for victory even in the bodies of slaves and criminals " . Some Romans such as Seneca were critical of the brutal spectacles , but found virtue in the courage and dignity of the defeated fighter rather than in victory — an attitude that finds its fullest expression with the Christians martyred in the arena . Even martyr literature , however , offers " detailed , indeed luxuriant , descriptions of bodily suffering " , and became a popular genre at times indistinguishable from fiction . 
 = = = = Personal training and play = = = = 
 In the plural , ludi almost always refers to the large @-@ scale spectator games . The singular <unk> , " play , game , sport , training , " had a wide range of meanings such as " word play , " " theatrical performance , " " board game , " " primary school , " and even " gladiator training school " ( as in Ludus Magnus , the largest such training camp at Rome ) . 
 Activities for children and young people included hoop rolling and knucklebones ( astragali or " jacks " ) . The sarcophagi of children often show them playing games . Girls had dolls , typically 15 – 16 cm tall with jointed limbs , made of materials such as wood , terracotta , and especially bone and ivory . Ball games include trigon , which required dexterity , and harpastum , a rougher sport . Pets appear often on children 's memorials and in literature , including birds , dogs , cats , goats , sheep , rabbits and geese . 
 After adolescence , most physical training for males was of a military nature . The Campus Martius originally was an exercise field where young men developed the skills of horsemanship and warfare . Hunting was also considered an appropriate pastime . According to Plutarch , conservative Romans disapproved of Greek @-@ style athletics that promoted a fine body for its own sake , and condemned Nero 's efforts to encourage gymnastic games in the Greek manner . 
 Some women trained as gymnasts and dancers , and a rare few as female gladiators . The famous " bikini girls " mosaic shows young women engaging in apparatus routines that might be compared to rhythmic gymnastics . Women in general were encouraged to maintain their health through activities such as playing ball , swimming , walking , reading aloud ( as a breathing exercise ) , riding in vehicles , and travel . 
 People of all ages played board games pitting two players against each other , including <unk> ( " Raiders " ) , a game of strategy in which opponents coordinated the movements and capture of multiple game pieces , and XII scripta ( " Twelve Marks " ) , involving dice and arranging pieces on a grid of letters or words . A game referred to as <unk> ( dice ) or tabula ( the board ) , to which the emperor Claudius was notoriously addicted , may have been similar to backgammon , using a dice @-@ cup ( <unk> ) . Playing with dice as a form of gambling was disapproved of , but was a popular pastime during the December festival of the Saturnalia with its carnival , norms @-@ overturned atmosphere . 
 = = = Clothing = = = 
 In a status @-@ conscious society like that of the Romans , clothing and personal adornment gave immediate visual clues about the etiquette of interacting with the wearer . Wearing the correct clothing was supposed to reflect a society in good order . The toga was the distinctive national garment of the Roman male citizen , but it was heavy and impractical , worn mainly for conducting political business and religious rites , and for going to court . Contrary to popular perception , the clothing Romans wore ordinarily was dark or colourful , and the most common male attire seen daily throughout the provinces would have been tunics , cloaks , and in some regions trousers . The study of how Romans dressed in daily life is complicated by a lack of direct evidence , since portraiture may show the subject in clothing with symbolic value , and surviving textiles from the period are rare . 
 The basic garment for all Romans , regardless of gender or wealth , was the simple sleeved tunic . The length differed by wearer : a man 's reached mid @-@ calf , but a soldier 's was somewhat shorter ; a woman 's fell to her feet , and a child 's to its knees . The tunics of poor people and labouring slaves were made from coarse wool in natural , dull shades , with the length determined by the type of work they did . Finer tunics were made of lightweight wool or linen . A man who belonged to the senatorial or equestrian order wore a tunic with two purple stripes ( <unk> ) woven vertically into the fabric : the wider the stripe , the higher the wearer 's status . Other garments could be layered over the tunic . 
 The Imperial toga was a " vast expanse " of semi @-@ circular white wool that could not be put on and draped correctly without assistance . In his work on oratory , Quintilian describes in detail how the public speaker ought to orchestrate his gestures in relation to his toga . In art , the toga is shown with the long end dipping between the feet , a deep curved fold in front , and a bulbous flap at the midsection . The drapery became more intricate and structured over time , with the cloth forming a tight roll across the chest in later periods . The toga <unk> , with a purple or purplish @-@ red stripe representing inviolability , was worn by children who had not come of age , curule magistrates , and state priests . Only the emperor could wear an all @-@ purple toga ( toga picta ) . 
 In the 2nd century , emperors and men of status are often portrayed wearing the pallium , an originally Greek mantle ( <unk> ) folded tightly around the body . Women are also portrayed in the pallium . Tertullian considered the pallium an appropriate garment both for Christians , in contrast to the toga , and for educated people , since it was associated with philosophers . By the 4th century , the toga had been more or less replaced by the pallium as a garment that embodied social unity . 
 Roman clothing styles changed over time , though not as rapidly as fashions today . In the Dominate , clothing worn by both soldiers and government bureaucrats became highly decorated , with woven or embroidered stripes ( <unk> ) and circular roundels ( <unk> ) applied to tunics and cloaks . These decorative elements consisted of geometrical patterns , stylised plant motifs , and in more elaborate examples , human or animal figures . The use of silk increased , and courtiers of the later Empire wore elaborate silk robes . The militarization of Roman society , and the waning of cultural life based on urban ideals , affected habits of dress : heavy military @-@ style belts were worn by bureaucrats as well as soldiers , and the toga was abandoned . 
 = = The arts = = 
 People visiting or living in Rome or the cities throughout the Empire would have seen art in a range of styles and media on a daily basis . Public or official art — including sculpture , monuments such as victory columns or triumphal arches , and the iconography on coins — is often analysed for its historical significance or as an expression of imperial ideology . At Imperial public baths , a person of humble means could view wall paintings , mosaics , statues , and interior decoration often of high quality . In the private sphere , objects made for religious dedications , funerary commemoration , domestic use , and commerce can show varying degrees of aesthetic quality and artistic skill . A wealthy person might advertise his appreciation of culture through painting , sculpture , and decorative arts at his home — though some efforts strike modern viewers and some ancient connoisseurs as strenuous rather than tasteful . Greek art had a profound influence on the Roman tradition , and some of the most famous examples of Greek statues are known only from Roman Imperial versions and the occasional description in a Greek or Latin literary source . 
 Despite the high value placed on works of art , even famous artists were of low social status among the Greeks and Romans , who regarded artists , artisans , and craftsmen alike as manual labourers . At the same time , the level of skill required to produce quality work was recognized , and even considered a divine gift . 
 = = = Portraiture = = = 
 Portraiture , which survives mainly in the medium of sculpture , was the most copious form of imperial art . Portraits during the Augustan period utilize youthful and classical proportions , evolving later into a mixture of realism and idealism . Republican portraits had been characterized by a " warts and all " <unk> , but as early as the 2nd century BC , the Greek convention of heroic nudity was adopted sometimes for portraying conquering generals . Imperial portrait sculptures may model the head as mature , even craggy , atop a nude or <unk> body that is smooth and youthful with perfect musculature ; a portrait head might even be added to a body created for another purpose . Clothed in the toga or military regalia , the body communicates rank or sphere of activity , not the characteristics of the individual . 
 Women of the emperor 's family were often depicted dressed as goddesses or divine personifications such as Pax ( " Peace " ) . Portraiture in painting is represented primarily by the Fayum mummy portraits , which evoke Egyptian and Roman traditions of commemorating the dead with the realistic painting techniques of the Empire . Marble portrait sculpture would have been painted , and while traces of paint have only rarely survived the centuries , the Fayum portraits indicate why ancient literary sources marvelled at how lifelike artistic representations could be . 
 = = = Sculpture = = = 
 Examples of Roman sculpture survive abundantly , though often in damaged or fragmentary condition , including freestanding statues and statuettes in marble , bronze and terracotta , and reliefs from public buildings , temples , and monuments such as the Ara Pacis , Trajan 's Column , and the Arch of Titus . <unk> in amphitheatres such as the Colosseum were originally filled with statues , and no formal garden was complete without statuary . 
 Temples housed the cult images of deities , often by famed sculptors . The religiosity of the Romans encouraged the production of decorated altars , small representations of deities for the household shrine or votive offerings , and other pieces for dedicating at temples . Divine and mythological figures were also given secular , humorous , and even obscene depictions . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 <unk> carved marble and limestone sarcophagi are characteristic of the 2nd to the 4th centuries with at least 10 @,@ 000 examples surviving . Although mythological scenes have been most widely studied , sarcophagus relief has been called the " richest single source of Roman iconography , " and may also depict the deceased 's occupation or life course , military scenes , and other subject matter . The same workshops produced sarcophagi with Jewish or Christian imagery . 
 = = = Painting = = = 
 Much of what is known of Roman painting is based on the interior decoration of private homes , particularly as preserved at Pompeii and Herculaneum by the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 AD . In addition to decorative borders and panels with geometric or vegetative motifs , wall painting depicts scenes from mythology and the theatre , landscapes and gardens , recreation and spectacles , work and everyday life , and frank pornography . Birds , animals , and marine life are often depicted with careful attention to realistic detail . 
 A unique source for Jewish figurative painting under the Empire is the Dura @-@ Europos synagogue , dubbed " the Pompeii of the Syrian Desert , " buried and preserved in the mid @-@ 3rd century after the city was destroyed by Persians . 
 = = = Mosaic = = = 
 Mosaics are among the most enduring of Roman decorative arts , and are found on the surfaces of floors and other architectural features such as walls , vaulted ceilings , and columns . The most common form is the tessellated mosaic , formed from uniform pieces ( tesserae ) of materials such as stone and glass . Mosaics were usually crafted on site , but sometimes assembled and shipped as ready @-@ made panels . A mosaic workshop was led by the master artist ( <unk> ) who worked with two grades of assistants . 
 <unk> mosaics share many themes with painting , and in some cases portray subject matter in almost identical compositions . Although geometric patterns and mythological scenes occur throughout the Empire , regional preferences also find expression . In North Africa , a particularly rich source of mosaics , homeowners often chose scenes of life on their estates , hunting , agriculture , and local wildlife . Plentiful and major examples of Roman mosaics come also from present @-@ day Turkey , Italy , southern France , Spain , and Portugal . More than 300 Antioch mosaics from the 3rd century are known . 
 Opus sectile is a related technique in which flat stone , usually coloured marble , is cut precisely into shapes from which geometric or figurative patterns are formed . This more difficult technique was highly prized , and became especially popular for luxury surfaces in the 4th century , an abundant example of which is the Basilica of Junius Bassus . 
 = = = Decorative arts = = = 
 Decorative arts for luxury consumers included fine pottery , silver and bronze vessels and implements , and glassware . The manufacture of pottery in a wide range of quality was important to trade and employment , as were the glass and metalworking industries . Imports stimulated new regional centres of production . Southern Gaul became a leading producer of the finer red @-@ gloss pottery ( terra <unk> ) that was a major item of trade in 1st @-@ century Europe . Glassblowing was regarded by the Romans as originating in Syria in the 1st century BC , and by the 3rd century Egypt and the Rhineland had become noted for fine glass . 
 = = = Performing arts = = = 
 In Roman tradition , borrowed from the Greeks , literary theatre was performed by all @-@ male troupes that used face masks with exaggerated facial expressions that allowed audiences to " see " how a character was feeling . Such masks were occasionally also specific to a particular role , and an actor could then play multiple roles merely by switching masks . Female roles were played by men in drag ( travesti ) . Roman literary theater tradition is particularly well represented in Latin literature by the tragedies of Seneca . The circumstances under which Seneca 's tragedies were performed are however unclear ; scholarly conjectures range from minimally staged readings to full production pageants . More popular than literary theatre was the genre @-@ defying mimus theater , which featured scripted scenarios with free improvisation , risqué language and jokes , sex scenes , action sequences , and political satire , along with dance numbers , juggling , acrobatics , tightrope walking , striptease , and dancing bears . Unlike literary theater , mimus was played without masks , and encouraged stylistic realism in acting . Female roles were performed by women , not by men . Mimus was related to the genre called <unk> , an early form of story ballet that contained no spoken dialogue . <unk> combined expressive dancing , instrumental music and a sung libretto , often mythological , that could be either tragic or comic . 
 Although sometimes regarded as foreign elements in Roman culture , music and dance had existed in Rome from earliest times . Music was customary at funerals , and the tibia ( Greek aulos ) , a woodwind instrument , was played at sacrifices to ward off ill influences . Song ( <unk> ) was an integral part of almost every social occasion . The Secular Ode of Horace , commissioned by Augustus , was performed publicly in 17 BC by a mixed children 's choir . Music was thought to reflect the orderliness of the cosmos , and was associated particularly with mathematics and knowledge . 
 Various woodwinds and " brass " instruments were played , as were stringed instruments such as the cithara , and percussion . The cornu , a long tubular metal wind instrument that curved around the musician 's body , was used for military signals and on parade . These instruments are found in parts of the Empire where they did not originate , and indicate that music was among the aspects of Roman culture that spread throughout the provinces . Instruments are widely depicted in Roman art . 
 The hydraulic pipe organ ( hydraulis ) was " one of the most significant technical and musical achievements of antiquity " , and accompanied gladiator games and events in the amphitheatre , as well as stage performances . It was among the instruments that the emperor Nero played . 
 Although certain forms of dance were disapproved of at times as non @-@ Roman or unmanly , dancing was embedded in religious rituals of archaic Rome , such as those of the dancing armed Salian priests and of the <unk> Brothers , priesthoods which underwent a revival during the Principate . Ecstatic dancing was a feature of the international mystery religions , particularly the cult of Cybele as practised by her eunuch priests the Galli and of Isis . In the secular realm , dancing girls from Syria and Cadiz were extremely popular . 
 Like gladiators , entertainers were <unk> in the eyes of the law , little better than slaves even if they were technically free . " Stars " , however , could enjoy considerable wealth and celebrity , and mingled socially and often sexually with the upper classes , including emperors . Performers supported each other by forming guilds , and several memorials for members of the theatre community survive . Theatre and dance were often condemned by Christian polemicists in the later Empire , and Christians who integrated dance traditions and music into their worship practices were regarded by the Church Fathers as shockingly " pagan . " St. Augustine is supposed to have said that bringing clowns , actors , and dancers into a house was like inviting in a gang of unclean spirits . 
 = = Literacy , books , and education = = 
 Estimates of the average literacy rate in the Empire range from 5 to 30 percent or higher , depending in part on the definition of " literacy " . The Roman obsession with documents and public inscriptions indicates the high value placed on the written word . The Imperial bureaucracy was so dependent on writing that the Babylonian Talmud declared " if all seas were ink , all reeds were pen , all skies parchment , and all men scribes , they would be unable to set down the full scope of the Roman government 's concerns . " Laws and edicts were posted in writing as well as read out . Illiterate Roman subjects would have someone such as a government scribe ( <unk> ) read or write their official documents for them . Public art and religious ceremonies were ways to communicate imperial ideology regardless of ability to read . Although the Romans were not a " People of the Book " , they had an extensive priestly archive , and inscriptions appear throughout the Empire in connection with statues and small votives dedicated by ordinary people to divinities , as well as on binding tablets and other " magic spells " , with hundreds of examples collected in the Greek Magical Papyri . The military produced a vast amount of written reports and service records , and literacy in the army was " strikingly high " . Urban graffiti , which include literary quotations , and low @-@ quality inscriptions with misspellings and solecisms indicate casual literacy among non @-@ elites . In addition , numeracy was necessary for any form of commerce . Slaves were <unk> and literate in significant numbers , and some were highly educated . 
 Books were expensive , since each copy had to be written out individually on a roll of papyrus ( volumen ) by scribes who had apprenticed to the trade . The codex — a book with pages bound to a spine — was still a novelty in the time of the poet Martial ( 1st century AD ) , but by the end of the 3rd century was replacing the volumen and was the regular form for books with Christian content . Commercial production of books had been established by the late Republic , and by the 1st century AD certain neighbourhoods of Rome were known for their bookshops ( tabernae <unk> ) , which were found also in Western provincial cities such as Lugdunum ( present @-@ day Lyon , France ) . The quality of editing varied wildly , and some ancient authors complain about error @-@ ridden copies , as well as plagiarism or forgery , since there was no copyright law . A skilled slave copyist ( <unk> <unk> ) could be valued as highly as 100 @,@ 000 sesterces . 
 Collectors amassed personal libraries , such as that of the Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum , and a fine library was part of the cultivated leisure ( <unk> ) associated with the villa lifestyle . Significant collections might attract " in @-@ house " scholars ; Lucian mocked mercenary Greek intellectuals who attached themselves to philistine Roman patrons . An individual benefactor might endow a community with a library : Pliny the Younger gave the city of <unk> a library valued at 1 million sesterces , along with another 100 @,@ 000 to maintain it . Imperial libraries housed in state buildings were open to users as a privilege on a limited basis , and represented a literary canon from which disreputable writers could be excluded . Books considered subversive might be publicly burned , and Domitian crucified copyists for reproducing works deemed treasonous . 
 Literary texts were often shared aloud at meals or with reading groups . Scholars such as Pliny the Elder engaged in " multitasking " by having works read aloud to them while they dined , bathed or travelled , times during which they might also dictate drafts or notes to their secretaries . The multivolume Attic Nights of Aulus Gellius is an extended exploration of how Romans constructed their literary culture . The reading public expanded from the 1st through the 3rd century , and while those who read for pleasure remained a minority , they were no longer confined to a sophisticated ruling elite , reflecting the social fluidity of the Empire as a whole and giving rise to " consumer literature " meant for entertainment . Illustrated books , including erotica , were popular , but are poorly represented by extant fragments . 
 = = = Primary education = = = 
 Traditional Roman education was moral and practical . Stories about great men and women , or cautionary tales about individual failures , were meant to instill Roman values ( mores maiorum ) . Parents and family members were expected to act as role models , and parents who worked for a living passed their skills on to their children , who might also enter apprenticeships for more advanced training in crafts or trades . Formal education was available only to children from families who could pay for it , and the lack of state intervention in access to education contributed to the low rate of literacy . 
 Young children were attended by a <unk> , or less frequently a female <unk> , usually a Greek slave or former slave . The pedagogue kept the child safe , taught self @-@ discipline and public behaviour , attended class and helped with tutoring . The emperor Julian recalled his pedagogue Mardonius , a eunuch slave who reared him from the age of 7 to 15 , with affection and gratitude . Usually , however , pedagogues received little respect . 
 Primary education in reading , writing , and arithmetic might take place at home for privileged children whose parents hired or bought a teacher . Others attended a school that was " public , " though not state @-@ supported , organized by an individual schoolmaster ( <unk> ) who accepted fees from multiple parents . <unk> ( <unk> slave children ) might share in <unk> or public @-@ schooling . Schools became more numerous during the Empire , and increased the opportunities for children to acquire an education . School could be held regularly in a rented space , or in any available public niche , even outdoors . Boys and girls received primary education generally from ages 7 to 12 , but classes were not segregated by grade or age . For the socially ambitious , bilingual education in Greek as well as Latin was a must . 
 Quintilian provides the most extensive theory of primary education in Latin literature . According to Quintilian , each child has in @-@ born ingenium , a talent for learning or linguistic intelligence that is ready to be cultivated and sharpened , as evidenced by the young child 's ability to memorize and imitate . The child incapable of learning was rare . To Quintilian , ingenium represented a potential best realized in the social setting of school , and he argued against homeschooling . He also recognized the importance of play in child development , and disapproved of corporal punishment because it discouraged love of learning — in contrast to the practice in most Roman primary schools of routinely striking children with a cane ( <unk> ) or birch rod for being slow or disruptive . 
 = = = Secondary education = = = 
 At the age of 14 , upperclass males made their rite of passage into adulthood , and began to learn leadership roles in political , religious , and military life through mentoring from a senior member of their family or a family friend . Higher education was provided by <unk> or <unk> . The <unk> or " grammarian " taught mainly Greek and Latin literature , with history , geography , philosophy or mathematics treated as <unk> of the text . With the rise of Augustus , contemporary Latin authors such as Vergil and Livy also became part of the curriculum . The rhetor was a teacher of oratory or public speaking . The art of speaking ( ars <unk> ) was highly prized as a marker of social and intellectual superiority , and <unk> ( " speaking ability , eloquence " ) was considered the " glue " of a civilized society . Rhetoric was not so much a body of knowledge ( though it required a command of references to the literary canon ) as it was a mode of expression and decorum that distinguished those who held social power . The ancient model of rhetorical training — " restraint , coolness under pressure , modesty , and good humour " — endured into the 18th century as a Western educational ideal . 
 In Latin , <unk> ( Greek <unk> ) could mean both " unable to read and write " and " lacking in cultural awareness or sophistication . " Higher education promoted career advancement , particularly for an equestrian in Imperial service : " eloquence and learning were considered marks of a well @-@ bred man and worthy of reward " . The poet Horace , for instance , was given a top @-@ notch education by his father , a prosperous former slave . 
 Urban elites throughout the Empire shared a literary culture <unk> with Greek educational ideals ( paideia ) . Hellenistic cities sponsored schools of higher learning as an expression of cultural achievement . Young men from Rome who wished to pursue the highest levels of education often went abroad to study rhetoric and philosophy , mostly to one of several Greek schools in Athens . The curriculum in the East was more likely to include music and physical training along with literacy and numeracy . On the Hellenistic model , Vespasian endowed chairs of grammar , Latin and Greek rhetoric , and philosophy at Rome , and gave teachers special exemptions from taxes and legal penalties , though primary schoolmasters did not receive these benefits . Quintilian held the first chair of grammar . In the eastern empire , Berytus ( present @-@ day Beirut ) was unusual in offering a Latin education , and became famous for its school of Roman law . The cultural movement known as the Second <unk> ( 1st – 3rd century AD ) promoted the assimilation of Greek and Roman social , educational , and aesthetic values , and the Greek proclivities for which Nero had been criticized were regarded from the time of Hadrian onward as integral to Imperial culture . 
 = = = Educated women = = = 
 Literate women ranged from cultured aristocrats to girls trained to be calligraphers and scribes . The " girlfriends " addressed in Augustan love poetry , although fictional , represent an ideal that a desirable woman should be educated , well @-@ versed in the arts , and independent to a frustrating degree . Education seems to have been standard for daughters of the senatorial and equestrian orders during the Empire . A highly educated wife was an asset for the socially ambitious household , but one that Martial regards as an unnecessary luxury . 
 The woman who achieved the greatest prominence in the ancient world for her learning was Hypatia of Alexandria , who educated young men in mathematics , philosophy , and astronomy , and advised the Roman prefect of Egypt on politics . Her influence put her into conflict with the bishop of Alexandria , Cyril , who may have been implicated in her violent death in 415 at the hands of a Christian mob . 
 = = = Decline of literacy = = = 
 Literacy began to decline , perhaps dramatically , during the socio @-@ political Crisis of the Third Century . Although the Church Fathers were well @-@ educated , they regarded Classical literature as dangerous , if valuable , and <unk> it through moralizing and allegorical readings . Julian , the only emperor after the conversion of Constantine to reject Christianity , banned Christians from teaching the Classical curriculum , on the grounds that they might corrupt the minds of youth . 
 While the book roll had emphasized the continuity of the text , the codex format encouraged a " piecemeal " approach to reading by means of citation , fragmented interpretation , and the extraction of maxims . In the 5th and 6th centuries , reading became rarer even for those within the Church hierarchy . 
 = = Literature = = 
 In the traditional literary canon , literature under Augustus , along with that of the late Republic , has been viewed as the " Golden Age " of Latin literature , embodying the classical ideals of " unity of the whole , the proportion of the parts , and the careful articulation of an apparently seamless composition . " The three most influential Classical Latin poets — Vergil , Horace , and Ovid — belong to this period . Vergil wrote the Aeneid , creating a national epic for Rome in the manner of the Homeric epics of Greece . Horace perfected the use of Greek lyric meters in Latin verse . Ovid 's erotic poetry was enormously popular , but ran afoul of the Augustan moral programme ; it was one of the ostensible causes for which the emperor exiled him to <unk> ( present @-@ day Constanța , Romania ) , where he remained to the end of his life . Ovid 's Metamorphoses was a continuous poem of fifteen books weaving together Greco @-@ Roman mythology from the creation of the universe to the deification of Julius Caesar . Ovid 's versions of Greek myths became one of the primary sources of later classical mythology , and his work was so influential in the Middle Ages that the 12th and 13th centuries have been called the " Age of Ovid . " 
 The principal Latin prose author of the Augustan age is the historian Livy , whose account of Rome 's founding and early history became the most familiar version in modern @-@ era literature . Vitruvius 's book De Architectura , the only complete work on architecture to survive from antiquity , also belongs to this period . 
 Latin writers were immersed in the Greek literary tradition , and adapted its forms and much of its content , but Romans regarded satire as a genre in which they surpassed the Greeks . Horace wrote verse satires before fashioning himself as an Augustan court poet , and the early Principate also produced the satirists Persius and Juvenal . The poetry of Juvenal offers a lively curmudgeon 's perspective on urban society . 
 The period from the mid @-@ 1st century through the mid @-@ 2nd century has conventionally been called the " Silver Age " of Latin literature . Under Nero , disillusioned writers reacted to <unk> . The three leading writers — Seneca the philosopher , dramatist , and tutor of Nero ; Lucan , his nephew , who turned Caesar 's civil war into an epic poem ; and the novelist Petronius ( Satyricon ) — all committed suicide after incurring the emperor 's displeasure . Seneca and Lucan were from Hispania , as was the later <unk> and keen social observer Martial , who expressed his pride in his Celtiberian heritage . Martial and the epic poet Statius , whose poetry collection <unk> had a far @-@ reaching influence on Renaissance literature , wrote during the reign of Domitian . 
 The so @-@ called " Silver Age " produced several distinguished writers , including the encyclopedist Pliny the Elder ; his nephew , known as Pliny the Younger ; and the historian Tacitus . The Natural History of the elder Pliny , who died during disaster relief efforts in the wake of the eruption of Vesuvius , is a vast collection on flora and fauna , gems and minerals , climate , medicine , freaks of nature , works of art , and antiquarian lore . Tacitus 's reputation as a literary artist matches or exceeds his value as a historian ; his stylistic experimentation produced " one of the most powerful of Latin prose styles . " The Twelve Caesars by his contemporary Suetonius is one of the primary sources for imperial biography . 
 Among Imperial historians who wrote in Greek are Dionysius of Halicarnassus , the Jewish historian Josephus , and the senator Cassius Dio . Other major Greek authors of the Empire include the biographer and antiquarian Plutarch , the geographer Strabo , and the rhetorician and satirist Lucian . Popular Greek romance novels were part of the development of long @-@ form fiction works , represented in Latin by the Satyricon of Petronius and The Golden Ass of Apuleius . 
 From the 2nd to the 4th centuries , the Christian authors who would become the Latin Church Fathers were in active dialogue with the Classical tradition , within which they had been educated . Tertullian , a convert to Christianity from Roman Africa , was the contemporary of Apuleius and one of the earliest prose authors to establish a distinctly Christian voice . After the conversion of Constantine , Latin literature is dominated by the Christian perspective . When the orator Symmachus argued for the preservation of Rome 's religious traditions , he was effectively opposed by Ambrose , the bishop of Milan and future saint — a debate preserved by their missives . 
 In the late 4th century , Jerome produced the Latin translation of the Bible that became authoritative as the Vulgate . Augustine , another of the Church Fathers from the province of Africa , has been called " one of the most influential writers of western culture " , and his Confessions is sometimes considered the first autobiography of Western literature . In The City of God against the Pagans , Augustine builds a vision of an eternal , spiritual Rome , a new imperium sine fine that will outlast the collapsing Empire . 
 In contrast to the unity of Classical Latin , the literary aesthetic of late antiquity has a tessellated quality that has been compared to the mosaics characteristic of the period . A continuing interest in the religious traditions of Rome prior to Christian dominion is found into the 5th century , with the Saturnalia of Macrobius and The Marriage of Philology and Mercury of Martianus Capella . Prominent Latin poets of late antiquity include Ausonius , Prudentius , Claudian , and Sidonius . Ausonius ( d. ca . 394 ) , the <unk> tutor of the emperor Gratian , was at least nominally a Christian , though throughout his occasionally obscene mixed @-@ genre poems , he retains a literary interest in the Greco @-@ Roman gods and even <unk> . The imperial panegyrist Claudian ( d . 404 ) was a vir illustris who appears never to have converted . Prudentius ( d. ca . 413 ) , born in Hispania Tarraconensis and a fervent Christian , was thoroughly versed in the poets of the Classical tradition , and transforms their vision of poetry as a monument of immortality into an expression of the poet 's quest for eternal life culminating in Christian salvation . Sidonius ( d . 486 ) , a native of Lugdunum , was a Roman senator and bishop of Clermont who cultivated a traditional villa lifestyle as he watched the Western empire succumb to barbarian incursions . His poetry and collected letters offer a unique view of life in late Roman Gaul from the perspective of a man who " survived the end of his world " . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Religion in the Roman Empire encompassed the practices and beliefs the Romans regarded as their own , as well as the many cults imported to Rome or practised by peoples throughout the provinces . The Romans thought of themselves as highly religious , and attributed their success as a world power to their collective piety ( pietas ) in maintaining good relations with the gods ( pax <unk> ) . The archaic religion believed to have been handed down from the earliest kings of Rome was the foundation of the mos maiorum , " the way of the ancestors " or " tradition " , viewed as central to Roman identity . There was no principle analogous to " separation of church and state " . The priesthoods of the state religion were filled from the same social pool of men who held public office , and in the Imperial era , the Pontifex Maximus was the emperor . 
 Roman religion was practical and contractual , based on the principle of do ut des , " I give that you might give . " Religion depended on knowledge and the correct practice of prayer , ritual , and sacrifice , not on faith or dogma , although Latin literature preserves learned speculation on the nature of the divine and its relation to human affairs . For ordinary Romans , religion was a part of daily life . Each home had a household shrine at which prayers and libations to the family 's domestic deities were offered . Neighborhood shrines and sacred places such as springs and groves dotted the city . Apuleius ( 2nd century ) described the everyday quality of religion in observing how people who passed a cult place might make a vow or a fruit offering , or merely sit for a while . The Roman calendar was structured around religious observances . In the Imperial era , as many as 135 days of the year were devoted to religious festivals and games ( ludi ) . Women , slaves , and children all participated in a range of religious activities . 
 In the wake of the Republic 's collapse , state religion had adapted to support the new regime of the emperors . As the first Roman emperor , Augustus justified the novelty of one @-@ man rule with a vast program of religious revivalism and reform . Public vows formerly made for the security of the republic now were directed at the wellbeing of the emperor . So @-@ called " emperor worship " expanded on a grand scale the traditional Roman veneration of the ancestral dead and of the Genius , the divine tutelary of every individual . Upon death , an emperor could be made a state divinity ( <unk> ) by vote of the Senate . Imperial cult , influenced by Hellenistic ruler cult , became one of the major ways Rome advertised its presence in the provinces and cultivated shared cultural identity and loyalty throughout the Empire . Cultural precedent in the Eastern provinces facilitated a rapid dissemination of Imperial cult , extending as far as the Augustan military settlement at Najran , in present @-@ day Saudi Arabia . Rejection of the state religion became tantamount to treason against the emperor . This was the context for Rome 's conflict with Christianity , which Romans variously regarded as a form of atheism and novel <unk> . 
 The Romans are known for the great number of deities they honoured , a capacity that earned the mockery of early Christian polemicists . As the Romans extended their dominance throughout the Mediterranean world , their policy in general was to absorb the deities and cults of other peoples rather than try to eradicate them . One way that Rome promoted stability among diverse peoples was by supporting their religious heritage , building temples to local deities that framed their theology within the hierarchy of Roman religion . Inscriptions throughout the Empire record the side @-@ by @-@ side worship of local and Roman deities , including dedications made by Romans to local gods . By the height of the Empire , numerous cults of pseudo @-@ foreign gods ( Roman reinventions of foreign gods ) were cultivated at Rome and in the provinces , among them cults of Cybele , Isis , Epona , and of solar gods such as Mithras and Sol Invictus , found as far north as Roman Britain . Because Romans had never been obligated to cultivate one god or one cult only , religious tolerance was not an issue in the sense that it is for competing monotheistic systems . 
 Mystery religions , which offered initiates salvation in the afterlife , were a matter of personal choice for an individual , practised in addition to carrying on one 's family rites and participating in public religion . The mysteries , however , involved exclusive oaths and secrecy , conditions that conservative Romans viewed with suspicion as characteristic of " magic " , conspiracy ( <unk> ) , and subversive activity . Sporadic and sometimes brutal attempts were made to suppress religionists who seemed to threaten traditional morality and unity . In Gaul , the power of the druids was checked , first by forbidding Roman citizens to belong to the order , and then by banning <unk> altogether . At the same time , however , Celtic traditions were reinterpreted ( interpretatio romana ) within the context of Imperial theology , and a new Gallo @-@ Roman religion coalesced , with its capital at the Sanctuary of the Three Gauls in Lugdunum ( present @-@ day Lyon , France ) . The sanctuary established precedent for Western cult as a form of Roman @-@ provincial identity . 
 The monotheistic rigour of Judaism posed difficulties for Roman policy that led at times to compromise and the granting of special exemptions . Tertullian noted that the Jewish religion , unlike that of the Christians , was considered a religio <unk> , " legitimate religion . " Wars between the Romans and the Jews occurred when conflict , political as well as religious , became intractable . When Caligula wanted to place a golden statue of his deified self in the Temple in Jerusalem , the potential sacrilege and likely war were prevented only by his timely death . The Siege of Jerusalem in 70 AD led to the sacking of the temple and the dispersal of Jewish political power ( see Jewish diaspora ) . 
 Christianity emerged in Roman Judea as a Jewish religious sect in the 1st century AD . The religion gradually spread out of Jerusalem , initially establishing major bases in first Antioch , then Alexandria , and over time throughout the Empire as well as beyond . Imperially authorized persecutions were limited and sporadic , with martyrdoms occurring most often under the authority of local officials . 
 The first persecution by an emperor occurred under Nero , and was confined to the city of Rome . Tacitus reports that after the Great Fire of Rome in AD 64 , some among the population held Nero responsible and that the emperor attempted to deflect blame onto the Christians . After Nero , a major persecution occurred under the emperor Domitian and a persecution in 177 took place at Lugdunum , the Gallo @-@ Roman religious capital . A surviving letter from Pliny the Younger , governor of <unk> , to the emperor Trajan describes his persecution and executions of Christians . The Decian persecution of 246 – 251 was a serious threat to the Church , but ultimately strengthened Christian defiance . Diocletian undertook what was to be the most severe persecution of Christians , lasting from 303 to 311 . 
 In the early 4th century , Constantine I became the first emperor to convert to Christianity . During the rest of the fourth century Christianity became the dominant religion of the Empire . The emperor Julian made a short @-@ lived attempt to revive traditional and Hellenistic religion and to affirm the special status of Judaism , but in 380 ( Edict of Thessalonica ) , under Theodosius I Christianity became the official state church of the Roman Empire , to the exclusion of all others . From the 2nd century onward , the Church Fathers had begun to condemn the diverse religions practised throughout the Empire collectively as " pagan . " Pleas for religious tolerance from traditionalists such as the senator Symmachus ( d . 402 ) were rejected , and Christian monotheism became a feature of Imperial domination . Christian heretics as well as non @-@ Christians were subject to exclusion from public life or persecution , but Rome 's original religious hierarchy and many aspects of its ritual influenced Christian forms , and many pre @-@ Christian beliefs and practices survived in Christian festivals and local traditions . 
 = = Political legacy = = 
 Several states claimed to be the Roman Empire 's successors after the fall of the Western Roman Empire . The Holy Roman Empire , an attempt to resurrect the Empire in the West , was established in 800 when Pope Leo III crowned Frankish King Charlemagne as Roman Emperor on Christmas Day , though the empire and the imperial office did not become formalized for some decades . After the fall of Constantinople , the Russian Tsardom , as inheritor of the Byzantine Empire 's Orthodox Christian tradition , counted itself the Third Rome ( Constantinople having been the second ) . These concepts are known as <unk> imperii . 
 When the Ottomans , who based their state on the Byzantine model , took Constantinople in 1453 , Mehmed II established his capital there and claimed to sit on the throne of the Roman Empire . He even went so far as to launch an invasion of Italy with the purpose of re @-@ uniting the Empire and invited European artists to his capital , including Gentile Bellini . 
 In the medieval West , " Roman " came to mean the church and the Pope of Rome . The Greek form Romaioi remained attached to the Greek @-@ speaking Christian population of the Eastern Roman Empire , and is still used by Greeks in addition to their common appellation . 
 The Roman Empire 's territorial legacy of controlling the Italian peninsula would serve as an influence to Italian nationalism and the unification of Italy ( Risorgimento ) in 1861 . 
 In the United States , the founders were educated in the classical tradition , and used classical models for landmarks and buildings in Washington , D.C. , to avoid the feudal and religious connotations of European architecture such as castles and cathedrals . In forming their theory of the mixed constitution , the founders looked to Athenian democracy and Roman republicanism for models , but regarded the Roman emperor as a figure of tyranny . They nonetheless adopted Roman Imperial forms such as the dome , as represented by the US Capitol and numerous state capitol buildings , to express classical ideals through architecture . Thomas Jefferson saw the Empire as a negative political lesson , but was a chief proponent of its architectural models . Jefferson 's design for the Virginia State Capitol , for instance , is modelled directly from the Maison Carrée , a Gallo @-@ Roman temple built under Augustus . The renovations of the National Mall at the beginning of the 20th century have been viewed as expressing a more overt imperialist kinship with Rome . 
 = Navenby = 
 Navenby / <unk> / is a village and civil parish in Lincolnshire , England . Lying 8 miles ( 13 km ) south from the county town of Lincoln and 9 miles ( 14 km ) north @-@ northwest from Sleaford , Navenby has a population of 1 @,@ 666 , rising to 2 @,@ 128 at the 2011 census and is a dormitory village for Lincoln . It forms part of the North Kesteven local government district and , in March 2011 , it was named as the ' Best Value Village ' in England following a national survey . 
 A Bronze Age cemetery and the remains of an Iron Age settlement have been discovered in the village . Historians also believe Navenby was a significant staging point on the Roman Ermine Street , as the Romans are reported to have maintained a small base or garrison in the village . Navenby became a market town after receiving a charter from Edward the Confessor in the 11th century . The charter was later renewed by William Rufus , Edward III and Richard II . When the market fell into disuse in the early 19th century , Navenby returned to being a village . 
 The civil parish of Navenby is rural , covering more than 2 @,@ 100 acres ( 850 ha ) . It straddles Ermine Street , a Roman road built between 45 and 75 AD , which runs between London and York . The Viking Way , a 147 @-@ mile ( 237 km ) footpath between the Humber Bridge in North Lincolnshire and Oakham in Rutland , also cuts through the village . The Vikings exerted great influence over Lincolnshire in the 9th and 10th centuries , as can be seen in the many local place names ending in -by , such as Navenby . Names ending with -by meant homestead or village . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Archaeological investigations around Navenby indicate the area has been occupied since at least the British Bronze Age , about 600 BC . The remains of British Iron Age farms have been found at Chapel Lane , a site now protected as a public open space by the district and parish councils and supported by Navenby Archaeology Group . 
 Significant Roman finds include parts of shops and houses that would have fronted onto Ermine Street , down which Roman armies marched to and from the Legionary Fortress at Lincoln . The city of Lincoln was very important at that time , probably the capital of the late Roman Province of Flavia Caesariensis . Evidence suggests that Navenby was a significant staging point along Ermine Street . The Romans are reported to have maintained a small base or garrison in the village , and a possible Romano @-@ British temple and burial sites have been unearthed in the area . A 2009 archaeological dig uncovering a road , building foundations and Roman graves along with pottery and coins , showed Navenby to be a Roman Service Station . 
 <unk> dated to the middle Saxon period have been discovered near the junction of High Dyke with Chapel Lane . Late Saxon remains have also been found under and around St Peter 's Church , suggesting the original Roman village had moved from Ermine Street to Church Lane and North Lane by the late @-@ Saxon period . 
 Navenby 's Saxon name is unknown . The present name is derived from the Old Norse <unk> + by , which means " farmstead or village of a man called <unk> " . In the Domesday Book of 1086 , Navenby appears as <unk> and <unk> . The Vikings exerted considerable influence over Lincolnshire in the 9th and 10th centuries , as can be seen in the many local place names ending in -by . The Viking Way , a 147 @-@ mile ( 237 km ) footpath that cuts through the village , is a lasting reminder of their presence . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 Navenby , originally an agricultural village , became a market town after receiving a charter from Edward the Confessor in the 11th century . The charter was later renewed by William Rufus , Edward III , and Richard II . 
 The wide main street , down which farmers once drove their sheep to market , is lasting evidence of its market town status . A market square once stood at the centre , marked by a cross in honour of Queen Eleanor . Today , the square has gone and the cross is a ruin . 
 Parish records exist for Navenby from 1681 , although bishops ' transcripts go back to 1562 . The documents show the village hosted several annual fairs each year : a market fair on 17 October at which farm animals were traded ; a feast on the Thursday before Easter ; and a Hiring Fair held each May Day , at which servants gathered to seek employment . 
 The records also show that part of the parish of Navenby was enclosed in 1772 . Such was the significance of Navenby at this time that a workhouse for the parish poor was erected here , although the building was later given over to other uses . A Sick Society was founded in 1811 and a Parish School was built next to St Peter 's Church in 1816 , paid for by subscription . Following the 1834 Poor Law Amendment Act Navenby parish became part of the Lincoln Poor Law Union . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 When the market closed in the early 19th century Navenby lost its status as a market town , and once again became an agricultural village . The Penny Cyclopaedia of 1839 , published by The Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge , described the village in this way : 
 Navenby is in the hundred of Boothby Graffoe , parts of Kesteven , on the road from Grantham to Lincoln , 124 miles [ 200 km ] from London . 
 The church is partly of Early English and partly of Decorated English architecture . The windows of the chancel are very fine specimens of Decorated character , particularly the east window , the mullions and tracery of which are remarkably graceful . 
 There were in 1833 two dame schools , with 18 children ; two day @-@ schools , with 25 children ; and one endowed day and Sunday school , with 109 children in the week and 166 on Sunday . 
 Many buildings were erected in Navenby during the 19th century , including a small Wesleyan Methodist chapel in about 1830 , which was completely rebuilt in 1840 . A Temperance Hall was built in 1852 , later used as a second base by the Wesleyan Reformers . 
 A Volunteer Fire Brigade was founded in 1844 , comprising five men and a manual engine . The Provincial Gas Light and Coke Company began supplying gas lighting to the village in 1857 , and in 1867 a railway station was built three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) west of the village , on the Lincoln @-@ to @-@ Grantham branch of the Great Northern Railway . 
 By 1871 , the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln was the principal landowner and Lord of the Manor of Navenby . A witch bottle was discovered in the foundations of a Navenby farmhouse in 2005 , thought to date back to about 1830 . Containing pins , human hair and urine , the bottle was believed to protect a household against evil spells . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 Navenby was an agricultural village at the beginning of the 20th century , but the outbreak of the First World War brought changes for the community . A small airfield , Wellingore Heath , was opened on land bordering Navenby in 1917 , to provide a base for the Royal Flying Corps and the Royal Naval Air Service . The flat landscape , with its cliff @-@ top situation , proved an ideal situation for flight operations . 
 T. E. Lawrence , perhaps better known as Lawrence of Arabia , was stationed at nearby RAF Cranwell just after the war , in 1926 , where he wrote a revised version of his Seven Pillars Of Wisdom . He mentioned Navenby in a letter to a friend at the time , saying : 
 I 'm too shy to go looking for dirt . That 's why I can 't go off stewing into the Lincoln or Navenby brothels with the fellows . They think it 's because I 'm superior : proud , or peculiar or ' posh ' , as they say : and its because I wouldn 't know what to do , how to carry myself , where to stop . Fear again : fear everywhere . 
 Wellingore airfield closed after the war ended , but it was re @-@ opened in 1935 and its facilities expanded during the winter of 1939 – 40 . By then known as RAF Wellingore , notable officers stationed there included Wing Commander Guy Gibson . Group Captain Douglas Bader is known to have briefly messed at Wellingore while on R & R leave from the Battle of Britain too , and both Gibson and Bader were regular visitors to Navenby . The base served as a satellite field for RAF Digby until 1944 and as a relief landing ground for RAF Cranwell from April 1944 until its final closure in 1945 , after which it was used as a camp for prisoners of war from Germany and Ukraine ; the inmates were often made to work on the surrounding farmland . 
 Navenby lost many men during the two World Wars . The village war memorial , a rough hewn stone Celtic Cross mounted on a plinth with a three @-@ stepped base , is in the churchyard of St Peter 's . It was manufactured by Messrs G Maile & Son Ltd at a cost of £ 200 , and unveiled in April 1921 . On it are inscribed the names of the 22 casualties from the First World War and the 8 from the Second World War . 
 Following an initial decline in the population of Navenby at the turn of the 20th century , the post @-@ war years saw numbers rise steeply . This increase can be directly linked to the 35 @-@ plus new houses built from the end of the Great War until the 1950s , as well as to other building projects from the 1970s onwards . Other post @-@ war changes include the move away from a dependence on farming . Although Navenby continues to be surrounded by farms , it is now largely a dormitory village for Lincoln , Grantham and beyond . Figures from the 2001 census show that , out of a population of 1 @,@ 666 , almost 600 commute to work each day . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The parish of Navenby was originally in the higher division of the ancient Boothby Graffoe wapentake , in the North Kesteven division of the county of Lincolnshire . The term wapentake dates back to the Vikings and was used to describe a collection of local parishes . It originally meant " show your weapon " and the idea behind the term was that all those in favour of a resolution would raise their sword or axe to show agreement . 
 The History of the County of Lincoln , a book written by Thomas Allen in 1834 , states : 
 The Wapentake of Boothby Graffoe is bounded on the north by <unk> wapentake ; on the east by Lincoln Liberty and <unk> wapentake ; on the south by <unk> wapentake ; and on the west by Nottinghamshire . It is separated into High and Low Divisions . Through this wapentake a Roman road passes from Lincoln to Brough , a village just without the bounds of the county . The High division of the wapentake of Boothby Graffoe contains the villages of Boothby , Coleby , Harmston , Navenby , <unk> , <unk> , Welbourn and Wellingore . Navenby used to be a market town . The living is a rectory , rated at £ 17 10s . 0d . , and is in the patronage of the Master and Fellows of Christ Church College , Cambridge . 
 Navenby was classed as an ancient parish from the 11th to the 19th century , as it came " under the jurisdiction of a clergyman " and existed before 1597 . Early records show that the Manor of Navenby was granted to the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln in 1292 . The money generated by land rent was used by Roger de Newton , the first incumbent of the chantry chapel at Harby , Nottinghamshire , to maintain the building . This followed the death of Queen Eleanor , wife of Edward I , while on a visit to Lincoln . Eleanor died at de Newton 's manor house at Harby in November 1290 and the chapel was erected in her honour . 
 The parish began to take on civil as well as ecclesiastical duties following the 16th @-@ century Dissolution of the Monasteries and the Tudor Poor Law Acts of 1601 . The ecclesiastical parish of Navenby was originally placed in the <unk> Rural Deanery , but was transferred to the Graffoe Rural Deanery in 1968 , and it is still part of the Diocese of Lincoln . Navenby officially became a civil parish in the 19th century and became a member of the Lincoln Poor Law Union in 1834 . The parish was also part of the Lincoln Rural Sanitary District . The Navenby civil parish boundaries were adjusted in 1931 , to include the civil parish of nearby <unk> . 
 Following the Local Government Act 1888 , Navenby was governed by Branston Rural District Council from 1894 to 1931 . The village then came under the control of North Kesteven Rural District Council from 1931 to 1974 , after the Local Government Act 1972 reformed the districts of Holland , Kesteven and much of Lindsey into the shire county of Lincolnshire . Today Navenby remains part of the North Kesteven district . 
 Before the 1832 Reform Act , Lincolnshire sent twelve members to parliament , including two for the county , two for the city of Lincoln and two for the boroughs of Boston , Grantham , Great Grimsby and Stamford . As a result of the act , Lincolnshire 's electoral divisions were amended , and Navenby became part of the South Division Parliamentary District for Lincolnshire . Two Whig candidates , Henry Handley and Gilbert John Heathcote , were returned in the first election . The village remained in the South Division until 1867 , when it was transferred to the Mid Division . In 1885 it joined the North Kesteven Division , and in 1918 it became part of the Grantham Division , until 1974 . 
 Today , Navenby has its own parish council , dealing with issues such as play @-@ area revamps and the protection of public open spaces . The council is based at High Street , Navenby . As of 2014 , the chairman is Steve <unk> . The second tier of local government provided for Navenby is the Conservative @-@ controlled North Kesteven District Council , which is responsible for housing problems and public health . The council is based at Kesteven Street , Sleaford . Navenby is part of the Cliff Villages ward and is represented by two local councillors on the district council : Mrs Marianne Jane Overton and Mrs Laura Louise Conway , who both belong to the Rural Independent Group . 
 Conservative @-@ led Lincolnshire County Council provides the top tier of local government for Navenby , with responsibility for highways , sites of special interest and schools . It is based at the County Offices in Newland , Lincoln . Navenby has one representative on this council , Marianne Overton , who also represents Branston ward . Following the election of May 2010 , Navenby is represented at government level by Stephen Phillips , the Conservative MP for Sleaford and North Hykeham constituency . The former MP , the Right Honorable Douglas Hogg QC , stood down from the post before the election after having to pay back the cost of cleaning his moat . 
 Navenby comes under the East Midlands constituency for the European Parliament , which is represented by six politicians , including former Conservative turned Liberal Democrat Bill Newton Dunn . Newton Dunn lives in Navenby and his European responsibilities include Vice @-@ Chairman of Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy Committee . In the 1980s , Newton Dunn coined the much @-@ used phrase " Democratic deficit " . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 The civil parish of Navenby straddles the old Roman Ermine Street , known locally as High Dyke . The road runs between the neighbouring villages of Boothby Graffoe and Wellingore and covers more than 2 @,@ 100 acres ( 850 ha ) . The Viking Way , a 147 @-@ mile ( 237 km ) footpath between the Humber Bridge in North Lincolnshire and Oakham in Rutland , also passes through the village . 
 Navenby is located at 53 ° 06 ′ 36 ″ N 0 ° 31 ′ 26 ″ W and known as a Lincolnshire Cliff Village , as it is situated on a ridge of Jurassic limestone called the Lincoln Edge or Lincoln Cliff . The small cliff is one of the most distinctive hills in Lincolnshire . Lying 8 @.@ 7 miles ( 14 km ) south of Lincoln and 8 @.@ 9 miles ( 14 @.@ 3 km ) north @-@ northwest of Sleaford , Navenby enjoys warm summers and dry frosty winters . 
 During the Ice Age , most of the region surrounding Navenby was covered by ice sheets and this has influenced the topography and nature of the soils . Much of Lincolnshire is low @-@ lying , in some places below sea level , but Navenby 's cliff @-@ top position means it is 226 feet ( 69 m ) above sea level , giving it commanding views over the River Witham valley . 
 The parish of Navenby is elongated in an east – west direction , extending east to the Lincoln Heath and west to the River Brant . The size of the parish has varied over the past two centuries . In 1821 it covered 2 @,@ 110 acres ( 854 ha ) ; in 1951 it was 3 @,@ 345 acres ( 1 @,@ 354 ha ) . 
 = = = Housing , streets and nearby places = = = 
 Although house prices have traditionally been lower than the national average in Navenby , they have risen quickly in recent years . In 2004 , the average house price rose by 8 @.@ 2 % to £ 163 @,@ 186 , according to the Land Registry , while in 1999 the average was £ 60 @,@ 000 . The district surrounding Navenby – North Kesteven – remains a relatively inexpensive place to purchase property . Consequently , owner occupation is 77 % – which is higher than both the regional and national averages . However , the rising prices of recent years are resulting in housing becoming increasingly " out of reach for those on average incomes " . A 2004 Housing Needs Study , carried out by Fordham Associates for North Kesteven District Council , highlighted the need for 460 " affordable homes " to be built each year for the next five years in Navenby and the surrounding villages . 
 More than a dozen houses , pubs and other buildings have been granted listed status in Navenby . Houses of specific interest include Grade II listed Dial House in North Lane , which has a priest hole , and the Old Rectory in North Lane , which was built of Ashlar stone in 1859 by H A Darbyshire , a London architect . 
 Several of Navenby 's street names hint at its past . For example , the street now known as Clint Lane used to be Watery Lane , apparently due to the number of springs that ran along it . The only " watery " part of Clint Lane today is a duck pond . The street includes a mix of 18th @-@ century cottages , Victorian properties , Grade II listed farm buildings and 20th @-@ century homes . 
 Gas Lane , which is next to Clint Lane , used to be called Meg 's Lane . It was renamed Gas Lane after the Provincial Gas Light and Coke Company set up a base there in 1857 . The firm later became the Navenby and Wellingore Gas Light and Coke Company . Although the business has long since disappeared , the street name survives . 
 The street now known as Church Lane used to be Church Street . The road was named for the village church , St Peter 's , which is located here , as is a former village school , now a private house . The school was built by subscription in 1816 and carries the inscription " The Benefit Society 1821 " . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 According to the Köppen classification , the British Isles experience a maritime climate characterised by relatively cool summers and mild winters . Compared with other parts of the country , Lincolnshire – and Navenby – are slightly warmer and sunnier in the summer and colder and <unk> in the winter . Owing to Navenby 's inland position , far from the landfall of most Atlantic depressions , it is one of the driest places to live in the UK , receiving , on average , less than 2 ft ( 610 mm ) of rain per year . The mean annual daily duration of bright sunshine is four hours and 12 minutes ; the absence of any high ground is probably responsible for the area being one of the sunniest parts of the British Isles . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The United Kingdom Census 2001 found Navenby had 861 households and a population of 1 @,@ 666 , of which 792 were male and 874 female . This figure shows a population growth of more than 70 % in the past 30 years , mainly due to on @-@ going house @-@ building projects . 
 The 2001 census revealed there were only three second homes in the village , but that many villagers commuted each day to work . The great majority of properties are owner @-@ occupied , with just over 100 rented from the council or private landlords . Most of the houses ( over 500 ) are classified as detached , the average number of rooms per property is 6 @.@ 0 and the average household size is 2 @.@ 3 . 
 Ethnic diversity is minimal in Navenby . Statistics for 2001 show that of 707 households questioned , 703 were classed as white . Of those 707 households , 104 were pensioners living alone , 176 were couples without children , 27 were lone parents and 153 couples with dependent children . 343 of the households had at least one vehicle . Sickness rates were surprising high – with 237 households reporting one or more people with limiting long @-@ term illness . A total of 82 % call themselves Christians . 
 People aged between 25 and 44 represent the majority of Navenby residents , with 451 recorded in 2001 . This is closely followed by people aged 45 – 64 ( 442 ) and children aged 5 – 15 ( 221 ) . Children aged under 4 ( 69 ) and people aged 16 – 24 ( 115 ) are in the minority . Almost 200 people ( 190 ) over the age of 75 were living in Navenby in 2001 . The mean age of Navenby 's population is 43 @.@ 5 and the median age is 43 @.@ 5 . In 1851 , 136 babies in every 1 @,@ 000 died in their first year . This figure dropped to 107 per 1 @,@ 000 in 1911 and three per 1 @,@ 000 by 2001 . 
 The people of Navenby enjoy a high employment rate , although most work outside the village . Almost 600 commute each day , with the average journey to work being 12 @.@ 5 miles ( 20 @.@ 18 km ) . The 2001 census revealed that of 1 @,@ 186 people questioned aged 16 – 74 , 722 were economically active , with men working an average of 44 @.@ 8 hours each week and women an average of 31 @.@ 2 . The service industry was the largest sector of the local economy , employing 67 % of all workers , compared to 1841 when 48 % worked in agriculture . Manufacturing work was carried out by 178 people in 2001 and 565 were in the service industries . Of these workers , 371 were classed as managerial and professional . In 1841 , just 16 @.@ 6 % of male workers had middle class jobs , but the 2001 census showed this figure had increased to 47 @.@ 9 % . 
 Those with few or no qualifications numbered 597 in 2001 , while 328 had higher diplomas , degrees or further degrees . In contrast , about 53 % of children aged 5 – 14 went to school in 1851 , but today 58 % of those aged 16 – 17 stay on at school . 
 = = Economy and media = = 
 Navenby was originally an agricultural village , with most people living off the land or trading goods in the local market . Statistics show that , in 1841 , 48 % of villagers worked in agriculture , but today the majority of villagers , 67 % , are employed in the service industry and most commute to work away from Navenby . The village does , however , offer limited work opportunities , with the High Street lined with shops , fast @-@ food stores and public houses . A doctors ' surgery , building society and residential care home are based in the village , although the post office closed in January 2011 . 
 Nearby Lincoln offers a wider variety of work , with its economy based mainly on public administration , commerce , arable farming and tourism . Over the past few years , Lincoln has also seen rapid development in its retail sector , in an attempt to compete with the neighbouring cities of Nottingham and Sheffield . 
 The local newspaper for Navenby is the Lincolnshire Echo , which includes news and sports reports , as well as job advertisements . The local radio stations for the village are BBC Radio Lincolnshire on 94 @.@ 9 FM and Lincs FM on 102 @.@ 2 FM . The newest addition to the local airwaves is Siren FM , a community radio station that broadcasts on 107 @.@ 3 FM from the University of Lincoln . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The centre of Navenby village is a designated conservation area ; many of the stone and brick @-@ built houses date back hundreds of years . More than 20 of the properties , as well as the 1935 red telephone kiosk in High Street , have listed building status . 
 = = = Mrs Smith 's Cottage = = = 
 Mrs Smith 's Cottage is a mid @-@ 19th century Grade II listed building made from early Victorian red bricks . The range , the heart of the house , was in daily use for cooking and heating until the mid @-@ 1990s . The only access to the bedrooms is by a ladder . Electricity was installed in the 1930s , and the only other visible modern innovations are the coldwater tap – installed to prevent the local council condemning the cottage in the late 1970s – and an inside toilet . The original outside privy and washhouse can still be viewed . 
 The cottage is named after its last resident , Mrs Hilda Smith , who lived there until 1995 , when she was 102 years old . When Mrs Smith died , villagers mounted a campaign to ensure the cottage was kept as " something special " for Navenby . 
 Today the cottage is run as a museum , having been granted official museum status in March 2000 . It is open for much of the year and staffed by volunteers . The old pig sty and storage shed , deemed beyond repair , were demolished and the bricks used to construct a purpose @-@ built visitor centre , used for exhibitions about Navenby and the local area . 
 = = = St Peter 's Church = = = 
 The Grade I listed Anglican parish church in Navenby is dedicated to Saint Peter . Despite parish registers existing from 1681 , and Bishop 's transcripts that go back to 1562 , it is difficult to date the building as it has a mishmash of styles , although its origins are probably 13th century . 
 St Peter 's is made up of three parts , including a mid @-@ 19th @-@ century west tower , which replaced the original in 1859 – 60 after it fell down . The perpendicular clerestory is decorated with shields in quatrefoils and is lit with closely set three @-@ light windows . The tall decorated chancel has very large windows . The side windows have reticulated tracery . The large east window was partly rebuilt in 1875 – 76 , and is composed of six lights with two large <unk> nodding to each other , as well as a very large reticulation unit . 
 The sedilia and piscina are thought to date back to William de <unk> , who was rector of St Peter 's from 1325 – 29 . He was Edward I 's chancellor and later became Canon of Llandaff . A founder 's tomb , which is in a slightly different style , is probably that of his successor , John de Fenton , who was rector until 1832 . The font is a lavish Victorian affair by Charles Kirk Junior , which was shown at the 1862 International Exhibition in London . The Pulpit is Jacobean and the Rood screen by Temple Moore dates from 1910 . The Royal Arms are signed " Thomas Hunton of Lincoln . Painter 1710 . " There is a late 13th @-@ century grave slab , with an inscription in Norman script which says " Pray for Richard de Lue " ( Louth ) . 
 The church also contains an Easter Sepulchre . The carving is recognised as one of the finest in Lincolnshire , if not in the country , and receives a mention in virtually every book written on churches and their architecture . The churchyard is managed as a nature reserve . 
 In 1982 , church officials threatened to close St Peter 's Church after being refused permission to sell silverware to pay for urgent repairs . The Archdeacon , the Venerable Michael Adie , ruled that such sales were against church policy , and that funds must be raised locally . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Navenby village lies at the eastern end of Navenby parish and is best accessed by road , as the A607 trunk road passes through the heart of the village . Navenby can also be reached from the A15 road , which runs past the end of Green Man Lane and links Lincoln with Sleaford . Editors of the website <unk> claim this is one of the most haunted roads in Britain . 
 Navenby once had its own railway station , built in 1867 as part of the Lincoln to Grantham branch of the Great Northern Railway . It fell victim , however , to the government 's post @-@ war railway closure programme , which was designed to modernise the service and return it to profitability . Some 3 @,@ 318 miles ( 5 @,@ 340 km ) of railway were closed between 1948 and 1962 under this scheme , including Navenby station , which was shut in 1962 . Today , the closest main line stations are Newark North Gate and Grantham , both on the high @-@ speed London to Scotland East Coast Main Line ; nearby branch line stations include Lincoln Central and Sleaford . 
 Bus services to and from Navenby are limited . The main service is provided by the Stagecoach travel company , which runs the Number 1 service from Lincoln to Grantham , via Navenby , along the A607 every 30 minutes , from 7 am until 7 pm , every day except Sunday . There is only one bus on a Sunday . The same Number 1 service runs in the opposite direction too , from Grantham to Lincoln via Navenby , every 30 minutes each day except Sunday . Hodson 's Coaches of Navenby runs an extra bus each Sunday to Lincoln . 
 = = Education = = 
 Navenby is served by its own village school , Navenby Church of England Primary School . It is a voluntary controlled school for children aged 4 – 11 . There is a choice of nearby senior schools for older Navenby pupils , although none are within the village . Lincolnshire County Council operates a preference system for parents , which allows them to choose a preferred school , rather than one for which they are in the catchment area . The closest senior school to Navenby , and the one that is within the Designated Transport Area , is Sir William Robertson High School at Welbourn . This is a mixed comprehensive school named after Field Marshal William Robertson , who was born in Welbourn and served in the First World War . 
 Other senior schools within a 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) radius include Branston Community Academy , and two grammar schools in nearby Sleaford – Carre 's Grammar School for boys and Kesteven and Sleaford High School for girls . Private schools are available in Lincoln . 
 Nearby Lincoln has two higher education institutions , the older being Bishop Grosseteste University , which started life in 1862 as a teacher training college linked to the Anglican Church . During the 1990s , the college branched out into new subject areas with a focus on the arts and drama . The larger University of Lincoln began as the University of Lincolnshire and Humberside in 1996 , when the University of Humberside opened a Lincoln campus next to Brayford Pool . Lincoln Art College and <unk> Agricultural College , which had previously been part of De Montfort University in Leicester , were absorbed into the university in 2001 . The university changed its name to the University of Lincoln in 2002 . In the 2005 / 6 academic year , 8 @,@ 292 full @-@ time undergraduates were studying at the university . 
 Many local senior schools offer sixth form tuition , and further education courses for students aged 16 and over are also provided by Lincoln College , which is the largest educational institution in Lincolnshire . It has 18 @,@ 500 students , of whom 2 @,@ 300 are full @-@ time . 
 = = Culture and community = = 
 Navenby used to be served by several public houses , but The Butcher 's Arms and The Green Man Inn have long been converted into private houses . Now , just the King 's Head and The Lion and Royal remain . 
 The Grade II listed 18th @-@ century King 's Head is probably the oldest public house in the village ; the nearby Lion and Royal dates from 1824 and is also Grade II listed . It was probably just called " The Lion " when it first opened , but added " Royal " to its name in honour of a special visitor . There is a large emblem over the front door , topped by the Prince of Wales 's feathers , presented after the Prince ( later Edward VII ) stayed there , albeit briefly , in 1870 . 
 The former Green Man Inn , at the junction of Green Man Lane and the A15 , was once a staging post for travellers and may have also been a court house . The Lincoln Club was established here in about 1741 , catering for the " distinguished gentlemen of Lincolnshire " . Sir Francis Dashwood , founder of the notorious Hellfire Club , was a member , as were Lord Monson of Burton and Lord Robert Manners of <unk> . 
 Lincolnshire has a number of local dishes , including stuffed chine and <unk> , and Navenby is home to several local food champions . Navenby baker Pete <unk> was named as Great Britain 's Baker of the Year in 2004 , for his Lincolnshire Plum Bread recipe , and Odling Bros butchers ' shop has enjoyed repeated success in an annual competition to find the best Lincolnshire pork sausages in the county . 
 Local legend has it that Navenby is part of the Temple Bruer Pentagram . The pentagram includes the nearby villages of Temple Bruer – which has strong connections with the Knights Templar of the 12th century – as well as Wellingore and Harmston . It appears the sign is centred on the sewage works just west of Navenby . The pentagram is seen as having magical associations and is often said to have offered protection to witches . It also , however , has links with Christianity , Freemasonry and the Knights Templar , who used the pentagram symbol to represent " infinity , <unk> and oneness " . 
 Although the A607 trunk road passes through Navenby , the village can also be accessed from the " haunted " A15 , which runs past the end of Green Man Lane . According to local legend , a hanging tree once stood at the junction of the two roads , and those who died there still haunt the area . 
 Scottish singer Barbara Dickson , OBE , briefly lived in Navenby in the 1970s . She went on to star in the Willy Russell musical Blood Brothers in 1982 , as well as sing on the cast album recording of Chess , <unk> with Elaine Paige . Another Navenby notable is Fenella Stoner , an artist who has exhibited at the Royal Academy and often paints pictures of the village and her garden . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Navenby 's water is supplied by the Anglian Water company , and there is a sewage treatment works just west of the village . 
 Healthcare is provided by the United Lincolnshire Hospitals NHS Trust , and a doctors ' surgery operates in North Lane . The nearest NHS hospital is Lincoln County Hospital , <unk> Road , Lincoln , which is 8 @.@ 7 miles ( 14 km ) north of Navenby . The second closest is Grantham and District Hospital , <unk> Rd , Grantham . The nearest dentists are also based in Lincoln or Grantham . The East Midlands Ambulance Service NHS Trust operates ambulances in the Navenby area , and the village is also covered by The Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire Air Ambulance , based at nearby Royal Air Force Waddington on the edge of Waddington village . 
 Other emergency services are provided by Lincolnshire Fire and Rescue , whose nearest fire stations are in Lincoln and Grantham , and the Lincolnshire Police Force . The nearest police stations are in Lincoln , Sleaford and Grantham . 
 = = Sport and clubs = = 
 Navenby has a bowls club , Navenby Bowls Club , with approximately 50 members . The bowls season lasts from May to August and club members take part in three Bowls Leagues ; Division 3 of the Cliff Bowls League , Section C of the City Evening League and Division 3 of the Lincoln and District League . At least three evening matches are held each week during the season . 
 Navenby 's FA Chartered Standard junior football club , Navenby Juniors , has teams from Under 7 to Under 18 's playing in the Grantham , Mid Lincs and Newark leagues , and a Development Squad for boys and girls aged 4 to 5 . 
 Nearby Lincoln has a professional football team , Lincoln City F.C. , nicknamed " The Imps " , which plays at the Sincil Bank stadium . Navenby villager Tracey Duxbury was a member of the Lady Imps team , the women 's team attached to Lincoln City , until 2007 . She became one of the youngest people to achieve the UEFA B coaching licence in 2006 and now plays with the West Ham United Ladies . 
 Other clubs include Navenby Archaeology Group , which aims to uncover the village 's extensive historic past . There is also the Women 's Institute , which has celebrated its 40th anniversary in 2007 , and Artists of Navenby , a 40 @-@ strong group of artists . 
 = Burundi women 's national football team = 
 The Burundi women 's national football team represents Burundi in women 's international football competitions . The team , however , has not competed in a match recognised by FIFA , the sport 's international governing body . A senior national team is inactive , but an under @-@ 20 team has played in numerous matches . Further development of football in the country faces challenges found across Africa , including inequality and limited access to education for women . A women 's football programme did not exist in Burundi until 2000 , and only 455 players had registered for participation on the national level by 2006 . 
 = = Team = = 
 In 1985 , few countries had women 's national football teams . While the sport grew in popularity worldwide in the ensuing years , Burundi did not have a team more than two decades later . By 2009 , however , Burundi had a FIFA @-@ recognised senior national team nicknamed the Swallows and a FIFA @-@ recognised Burundi women 's under @-@ 20 national team . The under @-@ 20 team played one international match in 2002 , one in 2004 and one in 2006 . 
 The senior national football team has never competed in a FIFA @-@ sanctioned fixture and has not competed at the Women 's World Cup . The team was one of 200 preparing for a qualification tournament for the cup in 2007 , but did not play in the competition . The team has withdrawn from numerous other events . Burundi was to play in the 2008 African Women 's Championship but withdrew from the tournament , giving the Democratic Republic of the Congo an automatic qualification . The team also withdrew from the 2010 CAF Women 's Championship and the 2012 CAF Women 's Championship before the first @-@ round qualifiers . Burundi has not participated in other major events on the continent , including the 2011 All @-@ Africa Games . As of March 2012 , the team was not ranked by FIFA . 
 Burundi was scheduled to participate in a competition in 2007 organised by the Confederation of African Football ( CAF ) in Zanzibar . Nicholas Musonye , the secretary of the Council for East and Central Africa Football Associations ( Cecafa ) , said of the event , " CAF wants to develop women 's football in this region in recognition of the milestones Cecafa has achieved over the years . CAF appreciates what Cecafa has done despite the hardships the association has gone through , from financial problems to political instability in member states and poor management of associations . Member states in the Cecafa region have not taken women 's football seriously . CAF now wants to sponsor a long @-@ term campaign to attract women from this region into the game . " The competition was canceled due to lack of funds . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 The development of women 's football in Africa faces several challenges , including limited access to education , poverty amongst women , inequalities and human rights abuses . Many quality female footballers leave their home countries for better opportunities elsewhere . Another issue facing women 's football is institutional . Most of the funding for the sport in Africa comes from FIFA , not from national football federations . 
 The Fédération de Football du Burundi , the country 's national association , created a woman 's football programme in 2000 . By 2006 , there were just 455 registered women players , and the absence of a thriving women 's game has been an obstacle for the national team . Lydia <unk> is the head of the national football association . 
 Outside the national federation , the Commission nationale du football <unk> was established by the 1990s , and a league and women 's teams were organised in the same period in <unk> . 
 = Knife Edge Two Piece 1962 – 65 = 
 Knife Edge Two Piece 1962 – 65 is an abstract bronze sculpture by Henry Moore . It is one of Moore 's earliest sculptures in two pieces , a mode that he started to adopt in 1959 . Its form was inspired by the shape of a bone fragment . Moore created the sculpture from an edition of 10 working models in 1962 ; these working models are now in public collections . Moore created four full @-@ size casts between 1962 @-@ 1965 , with one retained by him . The three casts are on public display on College Green in Westminster , London , Queen Elizabeth Park in Vancouver , and the garden at Kykuit , the house of the Rockefeller family in Tarrytown , New York . Moore 's own cast is on display at his former studio and estate , ' <unk> ' in Perry Green , Hertfordshire in southern England . A similar work , Mirror Knife Edge 1977 ( or Knife Edge Mirror Two Piece ) , is displayed at the entrance to I. M. Pei 's east wing of the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. The Westminster cast was donated by Moore through the Contemporary Art Society to what he believed was the City of London , but its actual ownership was undetermined for many years . The Westminster cast subsequently fell into disrepair , and was restored in 2013 after it became part of the British Parliamentary Art Collection ; it was granted a Grade II * listing in January 2016 . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1960 Moore was moving on from his earlier works , directly inspired by the human form and with textured surfaces , such as Draped Seated Woman 1957 – 58 , to more rounded abstract shapes , inspired by the shapes of stones or bones . Moore made a connected work in 1961 , also inspired by bone , Standing Figure ( Knife Edge ) ( LH 482 ) . 
 = = Working model = = 
 In 1962 Moore created an edition of 10 working models ( LH 504 ) for a new two @-@ piece sculpture . The Tate Gallery in London acquired a small working model in 1963 . Other working models are in the collections of the <unk> in The Hague , the <unk> Art Museum in Helsinki , the Memorial Art Gallery of the University of Rochester in Rochester , New York , and the <unk> in Zurich . Moore planned the full @-@ size sculpture to be over 10 feet high , large enough for a person to walk between the two elements . 
 = = Sculpture = = 
 The full @-@ size sculpture , catalogued as " LH 516 " , was cast in an edition of four ( or " 3 + 1 " ; one being retained by the artist ) . Moore was inspired by the " lightness and strength of bone fragment " in creating the piece . The full @-@ size sculptures , 366 centimetres ( 144 in ) long and weighing about 3 tonnes ( 3 @.@ 3 tons ) , were cast by Hermann Noack in Berlin . 
 The second cast of the work is located in Abingdon Street Gardens ( better known as College Green ) in the City of Westminster . The other full @-@ size casts are located near the <unk> Floral Conservatory in Queen Elizabeth Park in Vancouver , donated by Prentice <unk> ; near the Rose Garden of the Rockefeller family house at Kykuit at Tarrytown , New York . Moore donated his artist 's copy ( 0 / 3 ) to the Henry Moore Foundation in 1977 , and it is displayed at Perry Green , Hertfordshire . 
 Moore made a larger and reversed version of the sculpture , Mirror Knife Edge 1977 or Knife Edge Mirror Two Piece ( LH 714 ) – which is <unk> or about <unk> feet and weighs about 15 short tons ( 14 t ) – which was commissioned for the entrance to I. M. Pei 's east wing of the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. The work is carefully cleaned and conserved each year to maintain the distinction between its shiny and patinated surfaces , as the artist intended . 
 = = Westminster cast = = 
 The second cast of Knife Edge Two Piece is located in Abingdon Street Gardens , also known as College Green , opposite the Palace of Westminster in London . In 1965 Whitney Straight , the chairman of the Contemporary Art Society , wrote to Charles Pannell MP , the Minister of State for Public Buildings and Works to tell him that the society was " considering the possibility of ‘ making a gift of a substantial work of art to be erected at some suitable site in London " . The Contemporary Art Society met with Henry Moore to discuss their proposal and Moore subsequently chose the site at Abingdon Street Gardens for the sculpture . Moore waived his usual fee , and the Contemporary Art Society paid for the cost of the casting . The sculpture was unveiled by Robert Mellish , the Minister of Public Building and Works , on 1 September 1967 . 
 Moore liked the site so much that he did not even visit an alternative site in Hyde Park ; he felt that the sculpture might have been lost in such a big park , recalling an experience he had trying to find the sculpture Riva by Jacob Epstein in the park . He welcomed the fact that the sculpture would be next to a public path and would have seating nearby to allow contemplation , and compared the gardens favourably with the setting for Hubert Le Sueur ’ s equestrian statue of Charles I at Charing Cross , “ which , in order to look at closely and appreciate in detail , you have to risk your life in crossing a maze of traffic ” . The siting of the sculpture was disliked by some , with Neil Marten MP asking Parliament why " this lovely part of Westminster should be littered with something that looks like a crashed unidentified flying object . " 
 Moore believed he had donated the work to the City of London , but the Henry Moore Foundation believed it was owned by the City of Westminster , and its delivery was accepted by the Ministry of Public Building and Works . The land where it is situated was a <unk> in the Second World War , and is owned by the Parliamentary Estate ; Westminster City Council operates a car park underneath . The sculpture was moved and placed on a plinth in 1969 . No formal arrangements were ever made for the ownership and care of Knife Edge Two Piece , and it fell into a state of disrepair . Though it is worth an estimated £ 5m , no conservation work ever took place on the sculpture , and its ownership was unresolved until the House of Commons agreed to take responsibility for it . Knife Edge Two Piece entered the Parliamentary Art Collection in 2011 . It was granted a Grade II * listing in January 2016 . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 The Chair of the House of Commons Works of Art Committee , Frank Doran MP , had been concerned by the appearance of the sculpture and enquired of the Minister for Culture , Communications and Creative Industries , Ed Vaizey MP , what plans there were for its care and maintenance . Vaizey replied that the House of Commons should take ownership of the statue and responsibility for its care . Vaizey subsequently described Knife Edge Two Piece as " one of the most televised works of art in London " . Restoration work was originally planned to be completed in time for the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , but was not begun until February 2013 . 
 Due to a lack of maintenance , the protective lacquer covering Knife Edge Two Piece degraded and exposed the surface of the sculpture to the elements . This resulted in oxidation of the bronze metal . Subsequent deterioration of the <unk> and years of graffiti scratched into the surface resulted in further corrosion . The conservation aimed to remove the remaining protective lacquer and surface dirt , and to remove the result of corrosion and oxidation from the sculpture , and take the surface back to the bare metal . Following the removal of graffiti the sculpture was <unk> to return it to its original colour . It was finally waxed with a weatherproof surface to protect it from future damage . The conservation work was undertaken by Rupert Harris Conservation , working in consultation with the Henry Moore Foundation . The cost of the conservation was £ 16 @,@ 190 , with £ 11 @,@ 000 contributed by the Henry Moore Foundation . 
 = And Still I Rise = 
 And Still I Rise is author Maya Angelou 's third volume of poetry , published by Random House in 1978 . It was published during one of the most productive periods in Angelou 's career ; she had written three autobiographies and published two other volumes of poetry up to that point . Angelou considered herself a poet and a playwright , but was best known for her seven autobiographies , especially her first , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , although her poetry has also been successful . She began , early in her writing career , alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry . Although her poetry collections have been best @-@ sellers , they have not received serious critical attention . 
 And Still I Rise is made up of 32 short poems , divided into three parts . The poems ' themes focus on a hopeful determination to rise above difficulty and discouragement , and on many of the same topics as Angelou 's autobiographies and previous volumes of poetry . Two of her most well @-@ known and popular poems , " Phenomenal Woman " and " Still I Rise " , are found in this volume . She speaks for her race and gender in many of the poems , and again emphasizes the strength and resiliency of her community . Like her previous volumes of poetry , the reviews of And Still I Rise were mixed 
 The collection 's title poem , " Still I Rise " , was the center of an advertising campaign for the United Negro College Fund . Two others , " Phenomenal Woman " and " Just For a Time " , were previously published in Cosmopolitan . " Phenomenal Woman " was one of Angelou 's poems featured in the film Poetic Justice . 
 = = Background = = 
 And Still I Rise is Maya Angelou 's third volume of poetry . She studied and began writing poetry at a young age . After her rape at the age of eight , as recounted in her first autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings ( 1969 ) , she dealt with her trauma by memorizing and reciting great works of literature , including poetry , which helped bring her out of her self @-@ imposed muteness . 
 The publication of And Still I Rise occurred during one of the most productive periods of Angelou 's career . She had written songs for Roberta Flack and had composed movie scores . She had written articles , short stories , TV scripts and documentaries , autobiographies , and poetry ; she produced plays ; and she was named a visiting professor of several colleges and universities . In 1977 , Angelou appeared in a supporting role in the television mini @-@ series Roots . She was given a multitude of awards during this period , including over thirty honorary degrees from colleges and universities from all over the world . 
 Although Angelou considered herself a playwright and poet when her editor Robert Loomis challenged her to write Caged Bird , she was best known for her autobiographies . Many of Angelou 's readers identify her as a poet first and an autobiographer second , but like Lynn Z. Bloom , many critics consider her autobiographies more important than her poetry . Critic William Sylvester agrees , and states that although her books have been best @-@ sellers , her poetry has " received little serious critical attention " . Bloom also believes that Angelou 's poetry was more interesting when she recited it . Bloom calls her performances " characteristically dynamic " and says that Angelou " moves exuberantly , vigorously to reinforce the rhythms of the lines , the tone of the words . Her singing and dancing and electrifying stage presence transcend the predictable words and phrases " . 
 Angelou began , early in her writing career , alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry . By the time And Still I Rise was published in 1978 , she had published three autobiographies , eventually going on to publish seven . In 1993 , she read her poem " On the Pulse of Morning " at President Bill Clinton 's inauguration . The following year , her publisher , Random House , placed the poems in And Still I Rise in her first collection of poetry , The Complete Collected Poems of Maya Angelou . Also in the 1994 collection were her two previous collections , Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' fore I Diiie ( 1971 ) and Oh Pray My Wings Are Gonna Fit Me Well , along with her two volumes published afterwards , Shaker , Why Don 't You Sing ? ( 1983 ) and I Shall Not Be Moved ( 1990 ) . Angelou 's publisher placed four poems in a smaller volume , entitled Phenomenal Woman , in 1995 . 
 Two of the poems in And Still I Rise , " Phenomenal Woman " and " Just For a Time " , appeared in Cosmopolitan in 1978 . In 1994 , the title poem , " Still I Rise " , was part of an advertising campaign for the 50th anniversary of the United Negro College Fund . 
 = = Themes = = 
 According to scholar Carol E. Neubauer , the themes in the poem in And Still I Rise , as the title of the volume suggests , focus on a hopeful determination to rise above difficulty and discouragement . Neubauer states , " These poems are inspired and spoken by a confident voice of strength that recognizes its own power and will no longer be pushed into passivity " . Angelou focuses on the same themes as her previous volumes , including love , loneliness , and Southern racism , but with the added twist of the nature of women and the importance of family . They cover a wider range of topics , including springtime , aging , sexual awakening , drug addiction , and Christian salvation . 
 " Phenomenal Woman " , a crowd @-@ pleaser that Angelou often performed for audiences , has been called her " personal theme @-@ poem " . Neubauer and literary critic Harold Bloom both consider it one of the best poems in the volume . The poem was featured in the motion picture Poetic Justice ( 1993 ) , directed by John Singleton . Bloom calls it a " hymn @-@ like poem to woman 's beauty " . Angelou " skillfully engages " in some word @-@ play with the word " phenomenally " . As Angelou often does in her poetry , " Phenomenal Woman " is paired with the one that follows it , " Men " , in which Angelou uses a raw egg metaphor to contrast dominant masculinity with fragile and cautious femininity . She celebrates both " her slightly mysterious power " and the excitement created by men . The poem is characteristic of Angelou 's style , with terse and forceful lines and irregular rhymes . The short and often monosyllabic words , as Neubauer states , " create an even , provocative rhythm that resounds with underlying confidence " . Angelou said that she wrote the poem for all women , regardless of their race or appearance . She also stated , " Now , I know men are phenomenal , but they have to write their own poem " . 
 Many of Angelou 's poems focus on racial subjects and themes . They continue the themes of mild protest and survival also found in her autobiographies , and inject hope through humor . In " Ain 't That Bad ? " , she uses the Black English vernacular word " bad " to connote positive connections with Black culture , mores , customs , and leaders , and to help build Black pride . Scholar Lyman B. Hagen calls it a " shouting poem " due to its short lines and repetition . In " Lady Luncheon Club " , Angelou humorously describes an overly intellectual speaker at a woman 's club . 
 Critic Robert B. Stepto states that the poem " One More Round " is heavily influenced by the work and protest songs of the past . The even @-@ number stanzas in the eight @-@ stanza poem create a refrain like those found in many work songs and are variations of many protest poems . He is impressed with the creation of a new art form out of work and protest forms , but does not feel that Angelou develops it enough . 
 In Angelou 's favorite poem , " Still I Rise " , which shares its title with a play she wrote in 1976 , she refers to the indomitable spirit of Black people , using repetition and the categorization of injustices against them . She quoted it during interviews and often included it in her public readings . Despite adversity and racism , Angelou expresses her faith that one will overcome and triumph . Hagen compares " Still I Rise " with spirituals that express hope . As she does in " Phenomenal Woman " and throughout her poetry and autobiographies , Angelou speaks not only for herself , but for her entire gender and race . Reviewer Ellen Lippmann calls " Still I Rise " a " proud , even defiant statement of behalf of all Black people " . Angelou , during an interview in 1997 , stated that she used the poem to help sustain her during hard times , and that many people , both Black and white , used it in the same way . 
 Two of the poems in And Still I Rise , " Woman 's Work " and " Momma 's Welfare Roll " , speak about women positively . " Woman Work " , without explaining or complaining , lists the mundane chores a stay @-@ at @-@ home wife and mother must accomplish . Neubauer compares the poem to " Phenomenal Woman " , both of which share the same strong rhyme scheme , forceful rhythms , and theme of women 's vitality . In " Momma Welfare Roll " , Angelou speaks about the courage of a mother who goes on welfare , and acknowledges the demeaning turmoil she experiences when accepting government assistance . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 Like many reviewers of Angelou 's poetry , Ellen Lippmann of School Library Journal finds Angelou 's prose stronger than her poetry , but found her strength more apparent in the poems in this volume than it was in her first autobiography . Mary Silva Cosgrave , in her review in Horn Book Magazine , praises Angelou for finding rhythm in everyday life and is impressed with the poems in And Still I Rise , especially " Phenomenal Woman " ; Cosgrave states , " To her third collection of poems the author has brought a life full of zest and style that is phenomenally her own " . Harold Bloom states that although " Phenomenal Woman " has received few reviews , it is one of the most popular and powerful poems Angelou recites in her public appearances . 
 Stepto considers the poems in And Still I Rise as slight and " thin stuff " , and expresses his disbelief that Angelou 's poems would be produced by a major publishing house while poetry written by other lesser @-@ known talents could not . He is able to see the possibilities of what he considered good poetry in her writing , and states that her best poems borrow " various folk rhythms and forms and thereby buttresses her poems by evoking aspects of a culture 's written and unwritten heritage " . He places Angelou 's work in the tradition of other Black poets , and compares the poems in And Still I Rise to the works of Langston Hughes , Gwendolyn Brooks , and Sterling Brown . For example , many of Angelou 's poems remind Stepto of Brown 's poems . " Still I Rise " reminds Stepto of Brown 's most famous poem , " Strong Men " . Stepto explains Angelou 's success and popularity as a poet with her autobiographies , which he calls " marvelous " and the real reason for her success as a poet . He states that her poetry serves as explanatory texts for her prose works , which he calls " more adeptly rendered self @-@ portraits " . 
 Joyce Boyarin Blundell is positive in her review of And Still I Rise in Library Journal . She recognizes many of the same themes in Angelou 's autobiographies , but calls the poems in this volume uneven . Blundell finds the poems similar to speech patterns and songs the most effective , while she finds others " mired in hackneyed metaphor and forced rhyme " . Despite the volume 's weaknesses , she considers it successful as a statement of a Black woman 's experiences and of her determination to survive and grow . 
 = = Poems = = 
 And Still I Rise consists of 32 poems , divided into three parts . The first part , entitled " Touch Me , Life , Not Softly " , has been called " joyful " and affirms the poet 's strength as a woman and as a lover . Part Two , " Traveling " , focus on the hardships , such as drug addiction , child abuse , inner @-@ city life , and conditions in the Old South , that the author and others have experienced . Part Three , " And Still I Rise " , which gets its name from the volume 's title poem , reiterates the themes in Part One and emphasizes the strength she finds in herself and in her community . The volume is dedicated to Jessica Mitford , Gerard W. Purcell , and Jay Allen , whom Angelou calls " a few of the Good Guys " . 
 = R v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs , ex p Bancoult ( No 2 ) = 
 R v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs , ex p Bancoult ( No 2 ) was a case in the House of Lords concerning the removal of the Chagos Islanders and the exercise of the Royal Prerogative . The Chagos Islands , acquired by the United Kingdom in 1814 , were reorganised as the British Indian Ocean Territory ( BIOT ) in 1965 for the purpose of removing its inhabitants . Under a 1971 Order in Council , the Chagossians were forcibly removed , and the central island of Diego Garcia leased to the United States for use as a military outpost . 
 In 2000 , Olivier Bancoult brought a judicial review claim against the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs for the initial ordinance which led to the Chagossian removal . Bancoult sought a writ of certiorari on the grounds that the ordinance was ultra vires ( " beyond power " - that is , that the ordinance had been made without legal authority ) , a claim upheld by both the Divisional Court and the Court of Appeal . In response , Robin Cook , the Foreign Secretary , repealed the 1971 Order in Council and announced he would not appeal against the decision , allowing the Chagossians to return home . 
 In 2004 , a second Order in Council , the British Indian Ocean Territory ( Constitution ) Order 2004 , was produced , again reinstating the off @-@ limits nature of the Chagos Islands . Bancoult brought a second case , arguing that this Order was again ultra vires and unreasonable , and that the British government had violated legitimate expectation by passing the second Order after giving the impression that the Chagossians were free to return home . 
 The new Order was again struck down by the Divisional Court and Court of Appeal before proceeding to the House of Lords where it was heard by Lords Hoffmann , Bingham , Rodger , Carswell and Mance between 30 June and 3 July 2008 . In their judgment , issued on 22 October 2008 , the Lords decided by a 3 @-@ 2 majority to uphold the new Order in Council , stating that it was valid and , although judicial review actions could look at Orders in Council , the national security and foreign relations issues in the case barred them from doing so . In addition , Cook 's statement had not been clear and unambiguous enough to provide legitimate expectation . 
 The reaction to the decision was negative , with academics accusing the majority Law Lords of failing to do their job as members of the judiciary to " rework things like neo @-@ imperial texts and outdated legal attitudes to the prerogative in order to cure obvious injustices and to vindicate a modern conception of the rule of law " ; at the same time , their approach to legitimate expectation was also questioned , with the case described as an " unfortunate regression " from Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service , where judges were willing to debate legitimate expectation in a similarly politically sensitive situation . 
 In 2015 Bancoult went to court to argue that the judgement should be set aside due to the non @-@ disclosure of a 2002 feasibility study relating to the resettlement of the former inhabitants of the Chagos Islands . The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom ruled against reviewing the case on 29 June 2016 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Chagos Islands = = = 
 The Chagos Islands are a cluster of 60 islands and seven atolls in the Indian Ocean . First occupied by lepers from Mauritius , France acquired the islands in the late 18th century , and slaves were brought in from Africa and India to maintain coconut plantations placed there . Following Napoleon 's defeat in 1814 , the islands were ceded to the British in the Treaty of Paris , who administered them as a dependency of the Colony of Mauritius . Although the slaves were given their freedom in 1835 , many remained on the Chagos Islands as contract workers , and their descendants and later immigrants are considered the indigenous people - the Chagossians . 
 In 1965 , the British government reconstituted the islands as the British Indian Ocean Territory ( BIOT ) through the British Indian Ocean Territory Order 1965 , a statutory instrument under the Colonial Boundaries Act 1895 . This instrument created the office of " Commissioner of BIOT " , who given power to " make laws for the peace , order and good government of the territory " . Accordingly , the Commissioner issued the Immigration Ordinance 1971 , an Order in Council under the Royal Prerogative which required anyone entering or remaining in BIOT to seek permission beforehand . 
 This ordinance , with the reorganisation of the islands , was enacted to provide a method for removing the Chagos Islanders so that the islands could be used by the United States as a military base , particularly the island of Diego Garcia . From 1964 onwards the United States and United Kingdom had been in talks about leasing Diego Garcia to the US for military purposes , and by an exchange of notes dated 30 December 1966 , the UK government transferred Diego Garcia to the US for the purpose of hosting a defensive communications base . This agreement was to last for 50 years , with an additional 20 @-@ year extension if neither party wished to withdraw . 
 Between 1967 and 1972 all 1 @,@ 600 islanders were evacuated , and Diego Garcia continues to play a vital role in US military operations . Following a billion @-@ dollar expansion program , the base has served as a " bomber forward operating location " for offensive operations in Afghanistan and Iraq . A US State Department letter dated 21 June 2000 described it as an " all but indispensable platform " . 
 = = = Bancoult ( No 1 ) = = = 
 In 2000 , Olivier Bancoult , a native Chagossian and leader of the Chagos Refugees Group , brought a judicial review claim against the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs for the initial ordinance which led to the Chagossian removal . Bancoult sought a writ of certiorari on the grounds that the ordinance was ultra vires and failed the Wednesbury test of reasonableness , as it was irrational . 
 The case , R ( Bancoult ) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs , went to the Divisional Court , where it was heard by judges Richard Gibbs and John Laws . Bancoult 's argument was made on several grounds : firstly , that the Crown could not exclude a British citizen from British territory , except in times of war , without a valid statutory basis or prerogative power . Secondly , the Chagossians had a constitutional right to inhabit their land under the Magna Carta , one which could not be abridged with delegated legislation , and third , the Commissioner of BIOT 's duty to legislate " for the peace , order and good government " of BIOT 's inhabitants could not be said to be fulfilled by relocating those inhabitants . 
 The respondent , the Foreign & Commonwealth Office ( FCO ) , argued that the English courts had no jurisdiction over the case , since the Crown is divisible amongst its territories , and the BIOT had its own courts . According to the FCO , Magna Carta , as a British constitutional document , was inapplicable to the Chagos Islands . They also maintained that " make laws for the peace , order and good government of the Territory " gave the Commissioner a wide enough jurisdiction to account for the order forcibly removing the Chagossians , and that the court could not decide in such a way as to force the government to break its treaty with the United States . 
 The Divisional Court gave its judgment on 3 November 2000 , on three main issues : firstly , the court 's right to hear the case , secondly , the Chagossians ' constitutional right of residence and , thirdly , the status of the Commissioner 's actions . The court found that it did have discretion to hear the case : while the Crown was divisible , the actions of the BIOT were clearly the actions of the British government , since every BIOT action was ordered and dealt with by the Foreign & Commonwealth Office . Laws J found that the Magna Carta did apply to foreign nations , as it was " the nearest approach to an irreplaceable ' fundamental statute ' that England has ever had ... For in brief it means this , that the King is and shall be below the law " . This did not alone validate Bancoult 's case , since it did not mean that the government 's actions were illegal . 
 The final section of the judgment was on the legality of the Commissioner 's 1971 ordinance . Laws J held that it was " elementary " that " a legislature created by a measure passed by a body which is legally prior to it must act within the confines of the power thereby conferred " ; in this case that the Commissioner 's jurisdiction was to legislate " for the peace , order and good government " of BIOT . While the latitude given to the Commissioner was wide , it " may be a very large tapestry , but every tapestry has a border " . The court found that in the 1971 ordinance , the Commissioner had exceeded his authority , and the ordinance was made ultra vires . Therefore , the ordinance was quashed . 
 = = = Government response = = = 
 In response to the Divisional Court 's decision , Foreign Secretary Robin Cook stated on 3 November 2000 that he would accept the ruling , issuing the Immigration Ordinance 2000 which repealed the 1971 ordinance in its entirety . Due to " security issues " , the British government was only prepared to let the Chagossians return to the outer islands , which were lacking in basic amenities . A " feasibility study " was conducted ; a preliminary study was produced on 20 June 2000 and the full study was published on 10 July 2002 . It concluded that : 
 anything other than short @-@ term resettlement on a purely subsistence basis would be highly precarious and would involve expensive underwriting by the UK Government for an open @-@ ended period - probably permanently . Accordingly , the Government considers that there would be no purpose in commissioning any further study into the feasibility of resettlement ; and that it would be impossible for the Government to promote or even permit resettlement to take place . After long and careful consideration we have therefore decided to legislate to prevent it . 
 On 1 June 2004 , a second Order in Council was produced — the British Indian Ocean Territory ( Constitution ) Order 2004 — Section 9 of which provided that " no person has the right of abode in the territory " and " no person is entitled to enter or be present in the territory except as authorised by or under this Order or any other law for the time being in force in the territory " . At the same time , the British Indian Ocean Territory ( Immigration ) Order 2004 came into effect , prohibiting entry to or presence in BIOT without a permit . In response , Bancoult brought a second case , claiming that Cook 's statement had created a legitimate expectation ( later frustrated by the 2004 orders ) and questioning the validity of the Constitution Order 2004 , particularly the legality of Section 9 . 
 = = Judgment = = 
 The case first went to the Divisional Court , where Hooper LJ and Cresswell J decided in favour of Bancoult on 11 May 2006 . The court found that the " interests of BIOT must be or must primarily be those whose right of abode and unrestricted right to enter and remain was being in effect removed " , and that as Section 9 of the Constitutional Order did not serve the interests of it or its inhabitants , it was irrational . At the same time , the court was asked to rule on whether an Order in Council could be questioned in judicial review proceedings . It decided that , under Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service , the decisive element was not the origin of the power ( in this case , the Royal Prerogative ) but the nature of the power . Accordingly , Orders in Council were subject to judicial review . This decision was appealed to the Court of Appeal of England and Wales , composed of Butler @-@ Sloss , Sedley and Neuberger LJJ , who agreed with the Divisional Court in their judgment issued on 23 May 2007 . 
 = = = House of Lords = = = 
 The case was then taken to the House of Lords , where it was heard by Lords Hoffmann , Bingham , Rodger , Carswell and Mance . The pleadings occurred between 30 June and 3 July 2008 , and judgment was issued on 22 October 2008 . The judgment covered two matters : firstly , whether the courts could subject Orders in Council to judicial review and , secondly , the legality of the 2004 Order . The Lords unanimously agreed that , while Orders in Council are pieces of primary legislation , similar to Acts of Parliament ( which cannot be subject to judicial review ) , there is a significant difference in that Orders in Council are an executive product and lack the " representative character " that comes with Parliamentary authority and approval . Accordingly , the Lords saw " no reason why prerogative legislation should not be subject to review on ordinary principles of legality , rationality and procedural impropriety in the same way as any other executive action " . 
 However , by a majority of 3 to 2 , the Lords upheld the legality of the Constitutional Order , including Section 9 . The majority — Lords Hoffmann , Rodger and Carswell — held that BIOT was a " conquered or ceded colony " and therefore was subject to the prerogative powers of the Crown . They rejected the principle that there was a constitutional right to reside in one 's own country , calling it " extreme " , and concluded that in any case no such right could not trump legislation such as an Order in Council . The phrase " peace , order and good government " , they thought , should be understood as referring not just to the inhabitants of BIOT but to the governance of the region . The wording was to be treated " as apt to confer plenary lawmaking authority " and reviewing the Order was a matter for the government and Parliament , not for the courts , since it was a political issue of national security and foreign relations . At the same time , no legitimate expectation had been created following Bancoult ( No 1 ) . The standard requirement for legitimate expectation , as decided in R v North and East Devon Health Authority , ex parte Coughlan , was that there must be a " clear and unambiguous " promise made that led to a reliance or a detriment ; Robin Cook 's statement after the first Bancoult case could not be described as a clear and unambiguous promise of resettlement , and the requirements of reliance and detriment were not met . 
 Lords Bingham and Mance , dissenting , took the view that the Order in Council was unreasonable and therefore invalid . Bingham noted that the proper way to interpret an exercise of the royal prerogative was to look at how it had been exercised previously , and that he could not find any previous record of the prerogative being used to " exile an indigenous population from its homeland " . He argued that this prerogative power did not exist : " [ t ] he Crown has never had a prerogative power to prevent its subjects from entering the Kingdom , or to expel them from it " . Accordingly , the Order was ultra vires . Bingham also maintained that it was irrational , since visits to the outer islands did not threaten US security , and unacceptable , in that no consideration had been given to the Chagossians . On the subject of legitimate expectation , the dissenters maintained that the statement should be " construed according to the ordinary meaning that would be attached to it by those , principally the Chagossians and their supporters , to whom it was directed " ; Bingham saw the ordinary meaning as being that the Chagossians would be allowed to return home . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Bancoult was the first case to directly state that , where there is a legitimate expectation , the information must have been relied upon , leading to a detriment . In prior cases it was simply an additional element , and not explicitly required . At the same time , Bancoult raised questions about the oversight of Orders in Council , given that it highlighted the courts are unwilling to review a piece of executive legislation where there are political elements in play . The decision also raised " the classic problem of balancing human rights issues and concerns relating to security and defence " . 
 The public and academic reaction to the decision was negative . Thomas Poole considered that the Law Lords had failed in their duty as members of the judiciary : " where old principles no longer fit contemporary constitutional and moral standards , why should we follow them ? Surely the judicial task is to rework things like neo @-@ imperial texts and outdated legal attitudes to the prerogative in order to cure obvious injustices and to vindicate a modern conception of the rule of law " . Margit Cohn agreed , writing on the legitimate expectation issue that " It is difficult to accept that a public statement made by a Secretary of State , followed by the promulgation of an order that removed the previous prohibition to return , could not have created at least some sort of expectation " . Cohn further described the case as an " unfortunate regression " from the GCHQ case , where judges had been willing to debate legitimate expectation in a similarly politically sensitive situation . T.T. Arvind went further , drawing parallels with the judicial response to the Zong Massacre to argue that the decision , despite its formalist rhetoric , was in reality a pragmatic one which abandoned centuries of settled constitutional jurisprudence in relation to the limited scope of the Royal Prerogative . 
 = Fairbanks Daily News @-@ Miner = 
 The Fairbanks Daily News @-@ Miner is a morning daily newspaper serving the city of Fairbanks , Alaska , the Fairbanks North Star Borough , the Denali Borough , and the Yukon @-@ Koyukuk Census Area in the United States state of Alaska . It is the farthest north daily in the United States , and one of the farthest north in the world . The oldest continuously operating daily in Alaska , by circulation it is the second @-@ largest daily in the state . It was purchased by the Helen E. Snedden Foundation in 2016 . The Snedden family were longtime owners of News @-@ Miner , selling it to a family trust for Dean Singleton and Richard Scudder , founders of the Media News Group in 1992 . 
 The News @-@ Miner was founded as the Weekly Fairbanks News in 1903 by George M. Hill and assumed the News @-@ Miner name in 1909 , under editor William Fentress Thompson , when Zachary Hickman sold his newspaper , The Miner News to the Fairbanks News . Thompson guided the paper through tough economic times as the gold near Fairbanks was mined out . During this period , the News @-@ Miner absorbed Fairbanks ' other newspapers and became the sole publication in Fairbanks . During the 1920s , the News @-@ Miner experimented with aerial delivery to remote mining camps , becoming one of the first newspapers in the world to make regular deliveries by aircraft . After Thompson 's death in 1926 , former Fairbanks mayor <unk> Hjalmar Nordale became the paper 's editor . 
 In 1929 , the News @-@ Miner was purchased by Alaska industrialist Austin E. Lathrop , who operated it under a series of editors until 1950 . In that year , the paper was purchased by Charles Willis Snedden , who proceeded on a course of modernization . Under Snedden 's leadership , the News @-@ Miner became one of the first papers in Alaska to print in color and survived a fire and the biggest flood in Fairbanks history . 
 The News @-@ Miner has employed several notable Alaskans , including Sen. Bob Bartlett . Its mascot , Sourdough Jack , has been featured on the cover of every daily paper since 1952 . The News @-@ Miner has received numerous awards and recognitions during its history , particularly from the Alaska Press Club , which recognizes achievements by Alaska newspapers on an annual basis . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The Fairbanks Daily News @-@ Miner is a morning newspaper published daily in the city of Fairbanks in the U.S. state of Alaska . Because Fairbanks is located at a latitude of 64 @.@ 838 degrees north , the News @-@ Miner offices are located farther north than those of any other daily newspaper in North America . The newspaper has a daily circulation of between 9 @,@ 000 and 12 @,@ 500 copies ( sources vary ) , and a Sunday circulation of about 18 @,@ 000 . Overall readership statistics are somewhat higher . The News @-@ Miner operates a Web site , <unk> , which records roughly 250 @,@ 000 unique visitors per year , according to Alexa . 
 The News @-@ Miner 's circulation area encompasses about 179 @,@ 287 square miles ( 464 @,@ 351 km2 ) in central and northern Alaska . The circulation area includes the Fairbanks North Star Borough , the Yukon @-@ Koyukuk Census Area , the northern portion of the Denali Borough , and portions of the Southeast Fairbanks Census Area . Major settlements in the circulation area include the city of Fairbanks and the towns of North Pole , Delta Junction , Healy , Fort Yukon , and Tok . There are no other daily newspapers in the News @-@ Miner 's circulation area , but Fairbanks and southern portions of the Denali Borough are secondary circulation areas for the Alaska Dispatch News , a daily newspaper based 260 miles ( 418 km ) south , in Anchorage . 
 The paper 's coverage centers on local news with moderate reporting on state issues that affect Fairbanks and the surrounding area . Local sports , particularly the Alaska Goldpanners ( Alaska Baseball League ) , Fairbanks Ice Dogs ( North American Hockey League ) , and the various sports teams of the University of Alaska Fairbanks are covered regularly by the newspaper . The News @-@ Miner produces several specialty publications in addition to the regular paper . Two publications : Latitude 65 , a weekly arts supplement released on Friday ; and Sundays , a feature reporting section published on Sundays ; also are produced by newspaper staff . Several annual publications — a visitors ' guide , winter survival guide , and others — also are released by the newspaper on a regular basis . 
 = = Early years = = 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 In 1901 , trader Ebenezer Barnette sailed up Alaska 's Tanana River in hopes of establishing a trading post on the trail connecting the coastal town of Valdez with the gold @-@ mining community of Eagle . Due to low water , however , the steamboat Barnette chartered was unable to continue up the river . Discouraged , Barnette deposited his cache of goods on a riverbank of the Chena River and sailed downstream with the intent of making another attempt to sail up the river during the following year . In 1902 , miner Felix Pedro struck gold at a spot about 15 miles north of the spot where Barnette left his supplies . Seeing an opportunity , Barnette decided to establish a trading post at the spot . Other miners and suppliers arrived , attracted by the gold , and Barnette named the settlement Fairbanks , after Indiana Senator and later Vice President of the United States Charles W. Fairbanks . 
 Through the fall and winter of 1902 , word of the gold strike and the new settlement spread throughout Alaska and the Yukon . Printer George M. Hill , who had been working in Dawson City , packed up his small press and traveled to Fairbanks in early 1903 . On September 19 , 1903 , he printed the first newspaper in the new settlement : Volume I , Issue I of the Weekly Fairbanks News . Little is known about Hill 's operation , but he likely used either a Washington Hand Press or an " Army " press — both were small machines designed for transport on a single pack horse or pack mule . Single copies of the first editions of the paper were $ 0 @.@ 25 each , or $ 10 for a year 's subscription . The paper was 10 pages and had multiple advertisements , including one proclaiming that an election would be held on November 10 of that year for the purpose of incorporating the town . On the front page was a statement of policy : 
 = = = Newspaper wars = = = 
 In May 1904 , Hill sold the Weekly Fairbanks News to R.J. McChesney , who invested in a Linotype machine and a larger press . These improvements and the growing population of Fairbanks — by 1905 , it had 2 @,@ 500 residents — allowed the Weekly Fairbanks News to expand to semi @-@ weekly , then daily publication , in the process becoming the Fairbanks Daily News on July 1 , 1905 . On September 3 , the News had its first competition when the Fairbanks Sunday Times began publishing on the sole day that the News did not . Other papers soon arrived in the area . In 1906 , the Valdez News reported , " With the newspaper plans already in Fairbanks and with those which are being shipped there this year , the Tanana metropolis will be well supplied . There are no less than five of them all told ... " In May 1906 , McChesney sold the Daily News to Fairbanks ' founder , Ebenezer Barnette . Later that month , an enormous fire destroyed the Daily News press and much of Fairbanks . 
 Rather than wait for replacement equipment , Barnette purchased the press of a newly arrived editor , William Fentress Thompson , who had intended to set up his own newspaper . As part of the purchasing deal in August 1906 , Thompson was allowed to publish an evening paper — the Tanana Daily Miner — while the Fairbanks Daily News was published in the morning . The deal lasted only through September , as Thompson and Barnette conflicted on a personal level . The Tanana Miner was reduced to a weekly newspaper , then Thompson was deposed as editor of the Fairbanks News in June 1907 and took the Tanana Miner to the settlement of Chena , outside Fairbanks . Barnette , meanwhile , became embroiled in a series of legal troubles . He faced opposition from the owner of the Fairbanks Times , A.L. Anderson , who had fought Barnette about several gold claims near Fairbanks and purchased the Times to compete against Barnette . 
 In 1907 , Barnette was accused of embezzling money from the Fairbanks bank he operated , and he was sued by the man who had funded the venture that led to the founding of Fairbanks . During the lawsuit , it was revealed that Barnette had been convicted of larceny in Oregon . As his legal bills added up , Barnette decided to lease the Fairbanks Daily News to a group of local businessmen . On June 15 , 1908 , Barnette ended the lease agreement by selling the newspaper to J. Harmon Caskey and Henry Roden . That same year , the campaign to elect Alaska 's first delegate to Congress was under way , and one of the candidates , Jack Corson , purchased one @-@ third of the newspaper . Corson 's campaign manager promptly was named the editor of the Daily News , and the paper switched to actively supporting Corson 's candidacy . 
 During this time , William Thompson — best known as W.F. Thompson — began gathering investors to purchase the Fairbanks Daily News . After Corson 's candidacy failed and Thompson amassed $ 15 @,@ 000 from investors , he purchased the Daily News in March 1909 . On March 18 , 1909 , the Daily News published its last issue . Four days later , it reopened under the name Fairbanks Daily News @-@ Miner , an amalgam of the names of the Daily News and Thompson 's previous operation , the Tanana Miner . He chose the name over his first idea , the Daily Alaska Miner . 
 = = Territorial days = = 
 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 When Thompson assumed majority ownership of the renamed Fairbanks Daily News @-@ Miner in early 1909 , it was one of three daily newspapers in Fairbanks . The other two were the Fairbanks Times and the Tanana Daily Tribune . Competition among the three newspapers was intense , and they often clashed about issues such as city council meetings , a permanent bridge over the Chena River , and the mineral prospects of the town of Iditarod , where gold had just been discovered . The intense rivalries were driven by the declining economic situation in Fairbanks , as the initial gold findings that inspired the Fairbanks Gold Rush began to wane . 
 From the time Thompson took control until shortly after the Second World War , the News @-@ Miner lacked a dedicated connection to the Associated Press . In the early years of the Thompson administration , he had a dedicated correspondent in Seattle whose job was to read the early editions of the Seattle newspapers , then hurry to the telegraph office and summarize what he had read to Thompson on the other end of the telegraph cable . This system later was replaced by a dedicated contract with the Alaska Communications System , but that contract limited the News @-@ Miner to no more than 9 @,@ 000 words per day of messages . 
 On January 10 , 1910 , the Tanana Tribune was absorbed by the News @-@ Miner . The owners of the Tribune received shares in the News @-@ Miner ( which were later bought back by Thompson ) , and one of the Tribune 's owners received its printing plant , which was moved to Tacoma , Washington . In 1911 , Thompson feared the declining state of the Fairbanks economy and decided to leave Alaska . He sold his shares in the company , but returned after several months absence and demanded the shares back . Los Bernard , who briefly served as the paper 's publisher , returned the shares to Thompson , who resumed his role as publisher and editor . Thompson 's return coincided with a series of small gold discoveries at <unk> and <unk> that boosted the Fairbanks economy , as gold @-@ seekers bought supplies in the town . 
 Thompson still wished to leave Alaska , however , and in 1915 , he sold a majority share of News @-@ Miner stock on option to O.P. Gaustad , a Republican Party booster . Scandal erupted when it was revealed that Gaustad was merely a stand @-@ in for James Wickersham , who was Alaska 's delegate to Congress . Partially because of the scandal , Gaustad was unable to sell the shares he held an option for , and Thompson returned to Alaska in spring 1916 to <unk> his role as publisher . Later that year , Republican interests took over the Fairbanks Times , which had leaned toward the Democratic Party . The new owners of the Times were unable to come up with financing for new equipment , however , and the Times went out of business in October 1916 . 
 Following the discontinuation of the Times , the Alaska Weekly Citizen shifted to a daily publication schedule . This lasted until 1920 , when a fire destroyed the Citizen 's printing plant . The News @-@ Miner printed the two papers in conjunction for a time — both mastheads appeared on the same paper — but after the Citizen was unable to obtain loans to rebuild , the News @-@ Miner assumed its subscription list and business contracts and it became the sole daily newspaper in Fairbanks . 
 = = = Tough times = = = 
 In May 1920 , the Spanish Flu reached Fairbanks and infected most of the newspaper staff . " We had to keep writing of flu and the typesetters kept setting flu stories until they began to imagine they had the flu and went — one , two , three — just like that , " said Thompson in a story on the outbreak . Two years later , Thompson and the News @-@ Miner strongly protested the city 's order to evict the prostitutes living in a regulated district within Fairbanks . On September 24 , 1922 , Thompson reported that the News @-@ Miner 's press had been sabotaged , oil had been mixed with the paper 's printing ink , and a fire had been set in its office , presumably as a result of the paper 's stance against eviction . 
 The decline of Fairbanks ' economy was partially offset by the construction of the Alaska Railroad , and the arrival of President Warren G. Harding to dedicate the railroad in 1923 . Harding visited the News @-@ Miner offices and set a small bit of type for a special edition commemorating the visit . Less than one month later , however , Harding died on his return from Alaska . Harding 's visit coincided with the first commercial airplane flight in the state of Alaska on July 19 . By the next year , copies of the News @-@ Miner were delivered regularly by aircraft to remote mining camps and roadhouses . In the process , the News @-@ Miner became the first newspaper to regularly deliver via aircraft . 
 Three years after Harding 's death , William Thompson died on January 4 , 1926 . He was replaced by assistant editor <unk> Hjalmar Nordale , who had been mayor of Fairbanks . At the time , the newspaper was in dire straits . Circulation had declined with the falling Fairbanks population , and reached a low of about 500 in 1925 , less than half what it was in 1909 . The paper still relied on an old flatbed press , which dated from the turn of the century . The newspaper offices were aging , and there was little money to upgrade . Nordale was further stressed by a conflict between him and Thompson 's widow , who was the majority shareholder . The conflict arose when two competing candidates for political office attempted to buy the paper 's editorial support with pledges of money . When Mrs. Thompson accepted one of the offers , Nordale asked that his name be removed from the newspaper . During the months leading up to the election , the News @-@ Miner produced dozens of editorials and reproduced the speeches of the candidate . After the candidate lost , however , he failed to follow through on his promises of payment . Nordale was reinstated as editor on February 1 , 1927 , vindicated by the candidate 's indictment on four counts of violating the federal Corrupt Practices Act . 
 = = = Bob Bartlett = = = 
 In 1927 , Nordale hired a recent University of Alaska Fairbanks graduate named Bob Bartlett . Bartlett had worked for the paper during school vacations , but he made journalism a full @-@ time job following graduation . For four years , Bartlett was the only reporter ( other than the editor ) who regularly wrote local stories . In late 1930 , Bartlett was made the paper 's assistant editor in lieu of a raise that the paper couldn 't afford to pay . Bartlett remained the paper 's assistant editor until 1933 , when he became the secretary to Anthony Dimond , Alaska 's delegate to the U.S. Congress . Bartlett became the delegate to Congress in 1945 , and in 1958 , when Alaska hosted its first election for state office , Bartlett was elected one of its first two U.S. Senators . 
 = = = Lathrop era = = = 
 In October 1928 , the News @-@ Miner cut costs by moving to a new office . This allowed the purchase of a new Linotype machine , and further upgrades were promised when on November 8 , 1929 , the News @-@ Miner was purchased by Austin E. Lathrop , an Alaska industrialist . Though Lathrop promised to inject money into the News @-@ Miner , his strong Republican leanings opposed those of Nordale , a confirmed Democrat . Nordale resigned in April 1930 and was replaced by Bernard Stone . Stone and Lathrop turned the News @-@ Miner profitable before Stone was replaced by Charles R. Settlemier in 1936 . In 1935 , the News @-@ Miner purchased two cylinder presses to replace the old flatbed press still in use . Owing to shipping difficulties , however , the presses and the new crew needed to operate them did not arrive until 1936 . By that time , the News @-@ Miner was preparing to move into the new Lathrop Building , built by and named after the newspaper 's owner . 
 As the Great Depression hit the United States , Fairbanks bucked the poor economic trend . Thanks to the Alaska Railroad , large gold dredges could be brought in , and these returned the area 's gold mines to profitability . In 1938 , Lathrop took advantage of the good economic situation by reviving the Alaska Miner as a weekly supplement to the News @-@ Miner . The Miner covered happenings in the gold @-@ mining camps outside Fairbanks and was focused on areas outside the city . In 1939 , Fairbanks radio station <unk> was founded , and it shared the Lathrop building with the News @-@ Miner , which occupied the bottom floors of the building . 
 In January 1941 , a disagreement between Settlemier , one of his reporters , and the editor of the Alaska Miner resulted in several changes to the News @-@ Miner . Settlemier was replaced as editor by the reporter , David B. Tewkesbury , and the Alaska Miner was discontinued . Its editor , E.F. Jessen , created Jessen 's Weekly , a separate newspaper , to compete with the News @-@ Miner . The Weekly lasted until 1968 , when it was closed by the Internal Revenue Service . The same year that Jessen founded his weekly newspaper , the United States became involved in the Second World War . Travel to and from Alaska was restricted , and after Japan invaded the Alaska islands of Attu and Kiska , the News @-@ Miner was censored by the U.S. Army . Fairbanks benefited from a military construction boom as the United States built the Northwest Staging Route to ferry Lend @-@ Lease aircraft to the Soviet Union . The boom left the News @-@ Miner short @-@ staffed , but it continued operations throughout the war . 
 Just before the Japanese surrender that ended the war , News @-@ Miner editor David Tewkesbury died . He was replaced by Art Bremer , a reporter . The post @-@ war boom caused a sudden shortage of newsprint , as paper mills were not able to meet the demand of a growing number of newspapers nationwide . This shortage caused the News @-@ Miner to run short until Lathrop used his industrial connections to divert a shipment from a newspaper that was going out of business . 
 The post @-@ war years also saw the News @-@ Miner take a more active role in territorial politics . Prior to the 1948 election , Lathrop believed Republican presidential candidate Thomas Dewey would handily defeat Democratic incumbent Harry Truman . To take advantage of the anticipated governmental shift , Lathrop instructed the News @-@ Miner to ramp up its pro @-@ Republican editorials . In order to assist that process , he appointed William Strand , a war correspondent for the Chicago Tribune , as the News @-@ Miner 's new editor . Though Truman won the 1948 election , the News @-@ Miner stayed politically active in endorsing Republican candidates and issues . This ended only with Lathrop 's death on July 26 , 1950 . 
 = = Snedden era = = 
 One week before Lathrop 's death , he negotiated the sale of the News @-@ Miner to Charles Willis " Bill " Snedden . Snedden was an efficiency expert and former printer who had been employed by Henry Kaiser during WWII . After the war , he began troubleshooting newspapers . Through 1949 and 1950 , Snedden did an efficiency study of the News @-@ Miner and recommended about $ 100 @,@ 000 in upgrades . Lathrop was unwilling to spend that much on the newspaper , and <unk> suggested that if Lathrop was unwilling to upgrade , Snedden would be interested in purchasing the paper . The two men worked out a verbal agreement before Lathrop was killed in a coal train accident . 
 One of Snedden 's first actions was to <unk> the paper 's stance on Alaska statehood . Lathrop and the News @-@ Miner had been strongly opposed to statehood , but after Snedden took control , he analyzed the issue and came out strongly in favor of Alaska statehood . The News @-@ Miner continually published editorials in favor of statehood , and encouraged other newspapers across the U.S. to do the same . In 1955 and 1956 , when the Alaska Constitutional Convention took place at the University of Alaska Fairbanks , the News @-@ Miner set up special telephone lines from the convention chambers to the newspaper 's office . Daily reports were printed , recording the delegates ' progress . 
 The News @-@ Miner strongly supported the political campaign for statehood until 1959 , when Alaska became the 49th state of the United States . On the day the U.S. Congress voted to have Alaska admitted as a state , Snedden arranged for a U.S. Air Force jet to fly copies of the News Miner , the Anchorage Times , and other Alaska newspapers to Washington , D.C. On the morning after the vote , each Congressman had an Alaska newspaper proclaiming statehood . 
 Snedden also embarked on a series of upgrades to the News @-@ Miner 's printing equipment . In 1953 , rotary printing was introduced to Fairbanks after Snedden purchased a used rotary press from The Sacramento Union . To house the press , Snedden built a two @-@ story building adjacent to the Lathrop Building . The Lathrop Building still contained most of the News @-@ Miner 's offices and typesetting equipment , but it was not large enough to contain the new press without extensive renovations , thus requiring a new building . Shortly after the new press was introduced , the News @-@ Miner produced its first full @-@ color newspaper . The new equipment also allowed for larger print jobs , and Snedden introduced an annual Progress Edition that was intended to be distributed outside Alaska in order to attract business and industry to the state . In 1954 , the News @-@ Miner obtained a dedicated teletype to the Associated Press , avoiding the need for contracts for telephone and telegraph service to a correspondent in Seattle who would relay AP material to the News @-@ Miner . 
 On November 23 , 1957 , tragedy struck when the Lathrop Building caught on fire . Firemen rushed to the scene to put out the blaze and did so quickly , but not before the television and radio studios on the top floors of the building were destroyed . The News @-@ Miner offices and printing facilities on the lower floors were spared from the flames , but suffered water damage . Due to winter temperatures , the water soon froze . Despite the conditions , the paper was produced on time the next day . 
 In 1964 , the largest earthquake ever recorded in the United States struck Anchorage and southern Alaska , cutting communications to the outside world . The quake was felt in Fairbanks , and it took 40 minutes for communications to be re @-@ established with the Associated Press office in Seattle . When the connection was restored , the News @-@ Miner sent the first reports of the earthquake to the outside world . The quake also destroyed the offices of the Anchorage Times , the leading newspaper in that city . The News @-@ Miner offered its press facilities to the Times , and the two papers shared a masthead as Anchorage recovered from the tremor . 
 Shortly before the earthquake , the News @-@ Miner placed an order for a modern offset printing press . To house the new press , which could not fit in the Lathrop Building , Snedden ordered the construction of a new printing facility and office — named the Aurora Building — north of the Chena River . The Alaska Railroad sold Snedden the land for the building , which was built at a cost of $ 1 million in 1965 . Snedden ordered the foundation for the new building to be raised 22 inches above the 100 @-@ year flood line . This fact saved the News @-@ Miner two years later , when a massive flood swept through Fairbanks . The water was three inches deep throughout the paper 's offices and even deeper in the press and boiler rooms , which were slightly below that raised level . The flood halted production for a time , and the Anchorage Times reciprocated the post @-@ earthquake favor by publishing the News @-@ Miner 's masthead on its editions and posting occasional stories from Fairbanks until electrical power was restored to the town . 
 In the early 1970s , prior to the construction of the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline , the Fairbanks economy was unsteady . The News @-@ Miner planned to expand its printing plant , but many in the company were unsure if the economy could support the added capacity . Over the objections of the News @-@ Miner newsroom , Snedden decided to expand the Aurora Building by adding a second floor at a cost of $ 2 million . In 1974 , as construction of the pipeline got under way , demand for office space in Fairbanks was so great that Alyeska Pipeline Company rented several News @-@ Miner offices in the newly expanded building . About this time , the News @-@ Miner replaced its Associated Press <unk> with a satellite connection . 
 = = MediaNews Group era = = 
 In the late 1980s and early 1990s , Snedden created a plan to let the paper 's employees buy the company and keep ownership local . This plan was under way at the time of Snedden 's death in 1989 , but by 1992 , many of the paper 's employees were nearing retirement age . This factor , and the need for costly upgrades to expand the paper onto the Internet , led to a decision to sell the News @-@ Miner to Dean Singleton and Richard Scudder , co @-@ founders of the MediaNews Group newspaper chain . In order to preserve the paper 's independence — something desired by Snedden — the News @-@ Miner was purchased by the family trusts of the two men , with ownership split 50 / 50 between the two trusts . 
 Chuck Gray , the last publisher of the paper under Snedden 's ownership ( he served from 1989 – 1992 ) , was retained as publisher emeritus in an advisory capacity . Paul Massey was named the first publisher of the post @-@ Snedden era . He was replaced by Marilyn Romano in 2003 . Romano took a job with Alaska Airlines in 2011 as regional vice president Kathryn <unk> became the interim publisher / general manager . In 2014 , veteran newspaper executive Marti Buscaglia was named publisher . 
 Though the News @-@ Miner is owned separately from the rest of the MediaNews Group newspapers , it is considered a part of the group in order to take advantage of bulk purchasing discounts . The News @-@ Miner owns the Kodiak Daily Mirror . 
 = = Back to the <unk> = = 
 In January 2016 , the News @-@ Miner was sold to the Helen E. Snedden Foundation . Fuller Cowell was named publisher . 
 = = Sourdough Jack = = 
 Since 1952 , the News @-@ Miner has featured a small cartoon figure named Sourdough Jack at the bottom of its front page . The drawing of Sourdough Jack is always paired with a comment on a news story , pun , or joke , apparently having been spoken by the figure . The idea for Sourdough Jack came from News @-@ Miner editor John J. Ryan , who said , " People had many complaints about the town . ... He could make fun of that stuff and that would give people a chance to laugh at their problems . " Sourdough Jack 's name came from Ryan 's nickname ( Jack ) and the traditional nickname given to an old miner ( sourdough ) . Jack Ryan worked for the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer later in his life . John Ryan changed his name in the 70 's to John O 'Ryan . 
 In the first days of the cartoon 's existence , Jack often commented on alcohol , his lack of a job , and his wife . In recent years , the cartoon has taken a politically correct tone , except on occasion . After the Sept . 11 attacks , Sourdough Jack was pictured shaking his fist and saying , " It 's time to terrorize the terrorists ! " About that time , the original Sourdough Jack drawings that had been reproduced since 1952 were replaced by new drawings made in a similar style . This was required due to the growing fuzziness of the reproduced image and the transition to digital newspaper production . 
 = = Awards and accomplishments = = 
 In its history , the News @-@ Miner has been awarded dozens of accolades by the Alaska Press Club and other organizations . In 1986 , News @-@ Miner reporter Stan Jones was awarded a George Polk Award for writing a story that led to impeachment proceedings against Alaska governor Bill Sheffield . In 2009 , the paper won several commendations from the Alaska Press Club for photography , sportswriting , features writing , and other accomplishments . 
 = John Babcock = 
 John Henry Foster " Jack " Babcock ( July 23 , 1900 – February 18 , 2010 ) was , at age 109 , the last known surviving veteran of the Canadian military to have served in the First World War and , after the death of Harry Patch , was the conflict 's oldest surviving veteran . Babcock first attempted to join the army at the age of fifteen , but was turned down and sent to work in Halifax until he was placed in the Young Soldiers Battalion in August 1917 . Babcock was then transferred to the United Kingdom , where he continued his training until the end of the war . 
 Having never seen combat , Babcock did not consider himself a veteran and moved to the United States in the 1920s , where he joined the United States Army and eventually became an electrician . In May 2007 , following the death of Dwight Wilson , he became the last surviving veteran of the First World War who served with the Canadian forces . From that point he received international attention , including 109th birthday greetings from Queen Elizabeth II , the Governor General of Canada and the Canadian Prime Minister , until his death on February 18 , 2010 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Babcock was born into a family of thirteen children on a farm in Frontenac County , Ontario . According to Babcock , the barn where he was born ( which no longer exists ) was located off Highway 38 in South Frontenac Township . His father died in 1906 after a tree @-@ cutting accident , when Babcock was only six years old . As described in his account given to Maclean 's , while his father was cutting down one tree , another dead tree fell on his shoulder . Although he was brought into the house on bobsleigh , he only survived another two hours . Babcock said that this was an " awful blow " to the family . 
 School was never a concern for Babcock , and he did not earn his high school diploma until the age of 95 . On growing up in the area , Babcock claims that he " didn 't do very much , " although he admits that " [ i ] t was a fun place to grow up . " Babcock partook in fishing , hunting , and swimming — especially around the local Sydenham Lake — in order to pass the time with the other kids his age . He would return to the area in 1919 , after his wartime experiences , but soon after left for the United States . Nevertheless , Babcock 's relatives continue to work at the Crater Dairy farm ( named after the <unk> crater , a remnant of a meteor strike ) and the community grew to greatly respect John . 
 = = World War I = = 
 At the age of fifteen and a half , Babcock was impressed at Perth Road by two recruiting officers , one a lieutenant and one a sergeant , who quoted from the poem " The Charge of the Light Brigade " . He was also enticed by the offered salary , which was $ 1 @.@ 10 per day , as opposed to the 50 cents he could have made through physical labour . Babcock was recruited in Sydenham , Ontario and joined the 146th Battalion of the Canadian Expeditionary Force . He was then sent to Valcartier , Quebec . There Babcock underwent a physical , where it was discovered that he was underage . He was designated status A @-@ 4 : physically fit , but underage . At the time , the minimum age for combat was eighteen . Babcock was turned down , but managed to make it all the way to Halifax by train before he was stopped by the company commander . 
 In Halifax he was sent to Wellington Barracks , the city 's peacetime barracks , where he wrestled freight onto large army vehicles and dug ditches . Tired of the work , Babcock took the opportunity to volunteer for the Royal Canadian Regiment when fifty recruits were called on , claiming that his age was 18 . Officials quickly discovered that he was only 16 , however , and they placed him in a reserve battalion known as the Boys ( or Young Soldiers ) Battalion in August 1917 . Babcock then undertook an ocean voyage to England and , in Liverpool , he was stationed with the 26th Reserve and sent to Bexhill @-@ on @-@ Sea where he trained with about 1 @,@ 300 others , about a third of whom were veterans from battles in France . 
 The Young Soldiers Battalion trained the recruits for eight hours a day . In his spare time Babcock went on leave to Scotland , where he met his first girlfriend , a woman from the Women 's Army Auxiliary Corps . He was also introduced to the pleasures of beer and the horrors of war that some of the older veterans had come across . Babcock asserts that he would have fought in the conflict , given the chance , but the war ended before he could be brought to the front lines . For this reason , Babcock claims that he never felt like " a real soldier " and rarely talked of his experiences until his centenary . He also never joined any veterans associations . 
 = = = Experiences = = = 
 Babcock 's brother Manley enlisted after John and served with the engineers as a sapper . Manley suffered a nervous breakdown after the war . This , in Babcock 's eyes , was one of many psychological problems that occurred during and after the war . He recalls at least one instance where a soldier shot himself with a .45 after his comrades discovered that he had emigrated from Germany , while another ran himself through with a bayonet after a pack drill . Babcock also recounted the importance of honesty in the Canadian Army . In one case , one of his comrades stole a dollar watch and received nine months in prison and Babcock cites that as an example of the strict discipline in the military structure . By March 1918 he had been promoted to acting corporal , but was reduced to the rank of private for neglect of duty . By October of that year , however , he had been restored to acting lance corporal . Soldiers holding acting ranks in the Canadian forces receive the salary and allowances of the rank , but can be restored to a previous rank at any time due to their lack of the necessary training or experience to hold that position permanently . In Canada during wartime , individuals could be promoted to acting ranks in order to meet service requirements . 
 = = After the First World War = = 
 With relatives in the United States , Babcock paid the $ 7 head tax and moved there in 1921 . He received a Canadian Army pension that totaled $ 750 shortly after the conflict and took advantage of veteran vocational training in his native country to become an electrician . He ran a small light plant in his home neighborhood of Sydenham , and later had a career as an industrial supply salesman in the United States . 
 He became a United States citizen in 1946 after serving in the United States Army and achieving the rank of sergeant . In so doing , he lost his Canadian citizenship , as Canadian law prior to 1977 limited dual citizenship . After the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 he attempted to sign up for active duty with the army 's flying service ( the United States Air Force was not formed until 1947 ) , but was turned down for being too old . He therefore spent World War II in the United States Army and among his duty stations was Fort Lewis , located in Tacoma , Washington . 
 At the age of 65 , Babcock became a pilot . As of 2006 he was in good mental and physical health , displayed by his ability to quickly recite the alphabet backwards , spell out his name in Morse Code , and take daily walks with his wife to keep in shape . At the age of 100 he wrote an autobiography titled Ten Decades of John Foster Babcock . It was distributed only to family and friends . 
 Babcock was married twice , first to Elsie , then to Dorothy , a woman nearly thirty years his junior whom he met when she was taking care of his first wife while she was dying . Babcock had one son ( Jack Jr . ) , one daughter ( Sandra ) , eight grandchildren , and five great @-@ grandchildren . One grandchild , Matt , was an army dentist in Iraq during the Iraq War . John and Dorothy resided in Spokane , Washington , where Babcock lived from 1932 until his death . Babcock was not the only centenarian in his family ; his younger sister Lucy died in July 2007 at the age of 102 . 
 = = Last surviving Canadian veteran = = 
 From the death of Dwight Wilson on May 9 , 2007 , Babcock was the last known Canadian veteran of the First World War . He was proud of his status as the last surviving Canadian World War I veteran , although he did not feel the need to be honoured in a specific state funeral . Instead , he was of the opinion that " they should commemorate all of them , instead of just one . " He was also quoted as saying " I 'm sure that all the attention I 'm getting isn 't because of anything spectacular I 've done . It 's because I 'm the last one . " 
 Nevertheless , Babcock received much attention on the occasion of his 107th birthday , with wishes from Queen Elizabeth II as Queen of Canada ( who Babcock joked is a " nice looking gal " ) , Governor General Michaëlle Jean , Prime Minister Stephen Harper , and Foreign Affairs Minister Peter MacKay . James Moore , a Member of Parliament from British Columbia , visited Babcock personally to deliver gifts and greetings . For his birthday , Babcock and his wife went to <unk> for his favourite meal of hamburgers and French fries . Among the gifts he received was a necktie adorned with a poppy pattern , a symbol of the First World War . In his hometown of South Frontenac , mayor Gary Davison sent a letter of congratulations , while the local coffee shop named their local blend , " The Jack , " after him . 
 Babcock was invited to the opening of a Pentagon exhibit on March 6 , 2008 , featuring photos of nine First World War veterans , but was unable to attend . At the time he was one of only two of the veterans pictured to be alive , along with American Frank Buckles , who did participate in the event . In 2008 , he was visited by Canadian officials and wrote to Prime Minister Stephen Harper that he was interested in regaining his Canadian citizenship in a letter that was hand @-@ delivered to him in a cabinet meeting . The request was approved by the Prime Minister and the paperwork was signed by Governor General Michaëlle Jean , after which officials from Citizenship and Immigration Canada were flown to Spokane to complete the swearing in ceremony . That same year , Babcock participated in the Canadian Remembrance Day ceremonies , appearing via video to symbolically pass the torch of remembrance , urging people to " hold it high " . Babcock credited his longevity to the intense physical training that he received in both the United States and Canadian armies . 
 Babcock died on February 18 , 2010 , at the age of 109 , having been housebound since October 2009 following a case of pneumonia . He was cremated and his remains were scattered across the Pacific Northwest . Governor General Jean and Prime Minister Harper made statements of condolence shortly after his death and , on the anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge ( April 9 ) , Canada 's monarch , Queen Elizabeth II , issued a statement marking the two events , stating : " As proud and grateful Canadians , we pause today to mark not only the ninety @-@ third anniversary of this Nation 's victory at Vimy Ridge but also to pay tribute to the passing of a truly remarkable generation who helped to end the most terrible conflict the world had ever known . " The local Royal Canadian Legion in Sydenham , Ontario has a collection of First World War items on display , including a roll call with Babcock 's name on it , in his honour . 
 = Mickey Micelotta = 
 Robert Peter " Mickey " Micelotta ( born October 20 , 1928 ) is a former American shortstop in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He played 13 total seasons of professional baseball , two of which were spent in the National League with the Philadelphia Phillies . In 17 career MLB games , Micelotta posted a batting average of <unk> and had two runs in nine plate appearances . 
 Born and raised in Wisconsin , Micelotta first played professionally with the Dayton Indians and Carbondale Pioneers in 1947 . Over the next three seasons , he played for various minor league teams in the Phillies organization before missing the 1951 and 1952 seasons , serving in the Korean War . He returned and played for the Terre Haute Phillies in 1953 and the Syracuse Chiefs from 1954 to 1955 , splitting time between the Chiefs and the Phillies ' major league squad . Micelotta spent the next three seasons with the Miami Marlins and three seasons after that with the Birmingham Barons before retiring from baseball . 
 = = Early baseball career = = 
 Born in Corona , New York , Micelotta made his professional debut in 1947 at the age of 18 and played for two different teams that year . He played in 40 games for the Dayton Indians of the Ohio State League and in 25 games for the Carbondale Pioneers of the North Atlantic League . Micelotta spent the 1948 season with two teams in the Philadelphia Phillies minor league system . He spent 58 games with the Bradford Blue Wings of the New York – Penn League and 60 games with the Dover Phillies of the Eastern Shore League , both D @-@ class teams . In 1949 , Micelotta was promoted to the C @-@ class Vandergrift Pioneers of the Middle Atlantic League ; in 129 games for the Pioneers , he hit .287 and hit a then @-@ career high seven triples . 
 Micelotta moved to the Schenectady Blue Jays of the Canadian – American League the following season , where he had a three @-@ hit game against the Gloversville @-@ Johnstown Glovers , which the Blue Jays won , 8 – 7 . Micelotta finished the season with a .257 batting average in 133 games . He missed the 1951 and 1952 seasons as a result of serving in the United States Army during the Korean War . Micelotta returned to baseball in 1953 , and played for the Terre Haute Phillies of the Illinois – Indiana – Iowa League . In 115 games for them , he had a .297 batting average and 15 home runs . After the season ended , the Philadelphia Phillies purchased his contract , adding him to their roster for the upcoming season . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 As the 1954 season began , the Phillies noted that Micelotta had a good chance at winning a major league roster spot due to manager Steve O 'Neill being impressed with his fielding and hitting power . His performance during spring training was regarded highly , and he was noted on a list of promising rookies throughout the majors . Micelotta made the roster for the 1954 Phillies and made his major league debut on April 20 . Micelotta played in 13 games for the Phillies that year , served primarily as a pinch runner , and scored two runs in three total at @-@ bats . In June , he was demoted to the Syracuse Chiefs of the International League , where he finished the season . In 95 games for the Chiefs , Micelotta <unk> .229 batting average and 38 runs batted in . 
 Micelotta remained on the Phillies ' 40 @-@ man roster to start the 1955 season , but near the end of spring training , the Phillies chose to send him and three others to Syracuse for the season . He spent the first three months of the season with the Chiefs , then was called back up to the Phillies due to both Granny Hamner and Roy Smalley getting injured . He played in four games during his time with the club , going hitless in four at @-@ bats and playing his final major league game on August 2 . After Hamner and Smalley returned from the disabled list , Micelotta was sent back to Syracuse , where he finished out the year . In 127 games for Syracuse in 1955 , Micelotta had a .244 batting average and a career @-@ high nine triples . 
 = = Later baseball career = = 
 Micelotta was still considered a promising prospect in 1956 , and spent spring training trying to fight his way back on the roster . By the end of March , with a couple of weeks to go until the season began , he was noted as playing very well , and the Phillies were considering keeping him on the major league roster for the season . He ended up not making the team , and spent the season with the Miami Marlins . During his time with Miami in 1956 , Micelotta was known for his defensive plays at the shortstop position , making three good ones in a 6 – 1 loss against the Havana Cubans in late May . He finished the season with a .236 batting average and 12 home runs in 146 games . 
 Due to Micelotta 's " very mediocre " hitting and being unable to help the Phillies as a result , he remained with Miami for the 1957 season . He , Woody Smith , Bobby Young , and Pancho Herrera were considered to be one of the best infields in the International League , with one writer saying , " they make plays the Phillies couldn 't make . " Micelotta finished the year with a .216 batting average in 143 games . He again played a full season with Miami in 1958 after spending the offseason playing in the Dominican Winter League . His performances that season included a triple late in a game against the Richmond Virginians to win it , 3 – 2 , and a walk @-@ off home run against the Montreal Royals to win that game , 2 – 1 . He finished the season with a .201 batting average in 127 games played . 
 After the season ended , Micelotta was released from the Marlins , and he joined the Birmingham Barons , a Detroit Tigers affiliate in the Southern Association , where he spent the final three seasons of his professional career . In 1959 , Micelotta played in all 154 games for Birmingham and had a batting average of .239 , as well as career highs in stolen bases ( 10 ) and strikeouts ( 117 ) . The following season , Micelotta was named to the Southern Association All @-@ Star Team alongside fellow Barons Stan <unk> and Ron <unk> . He finished the season with a .253 batting average in 150 games and career highs in home runs ( 20 ) and runs batted in ( 87 ) . 
 Micelotta 's comeback season in 1960 resulted in the Detroit Tigers bringing him into spring training as someone who could serve as a utility infielder on the major league roster . After spending March with the Tigers , he was sent back to Birmingham , where he spent the 1961 season . In a match against the Atlanta Crackers , Micelotta had three runs batted in as Birmingham won , 11 – 2 . He finished his final season of professional baseball with a .237 batting average , seven home runs , and 55 runs batted in in 112 games while splitting time between shortstop and third <unk> after retiring from baseball , Micelotta worked in the carpet business in New York , then later moved to Greenacres , Florida . 
 = Mr. Monk and the Three Pies = 
 " Mr. Monk and the Three Pies " is the eleventh episode of the second season of the American comedy @-@ drama detective television series Monk , and the show 's 24th episode overall . The series follows Adrian Monk ( Tony Shalhoub ) , a private detective with obsessive – compulsive disorder and multiple phobias , and his assistant Sharona Flemming ( Bitty Schram ) . In this episode , Monk 's brother , Ambrose , is introduced to the series , and request Monk to investigate his neighbor , whom he suspects of murdering . 
 It was written by Tom Scharpling and Daniel Dratch , and directed by Randall Zisk . The episode guest starred John Turturro , who accepted to play Ambrose after a Shalhoub 's invite . When the episode first aired in the United States on the USA Network on January 23 , 2004 , it was watched by 5 @.@ 9 million viewers . " Mr. Monk and the Three Pies " was generally well received by critics , with most of the praise regarding Turturro 's performance . It also led Turturro to win an Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a fair in Tewkesbury , a woman wins a cherry pie , and Pat van Ranken ( Holt <unk> ) kills her and steals her car . While Captain Stottlemeyer ( Ted Levine ) dismisses it as a carjacking gone wrong , Adrian Monk ( Tony Shalhoub ) remains suspicious . Later , Sharona Fleming ( Bitty Schram ) gets a call from Monk 's brother Ambrose ( John Turturro ) , an agoraphobic who does not leave his house for thirty @-@ two years . The brothers have not spoken for seven years — Adrian is angry at Ambrose because he never called or wrote after Adrian 's wife died . Ambrose calls Adrian , as he suspects his neighbor , van Ranken , of murdering his wife , Rita ( Crystal Santos ) . Ambrose heard gunshots and noticed van Ranken was gone all night . When asked , van Ranken said Rita had flown to Argentina and that his truck was broken . However , Adrian notices the truck has been moved recently . 
 Adrian and Sharona visit van Ranken , on the pretext of taking back a bag of flour that Rita borrowed from Ambrose , and van Ranken lies about his wife 's whereabouts . The next day , van Ranken wins another cherry pie , and Adrian and Sharona see him rooting it . Ambrose remembers that Rita baked three cherry pies to give away at the fair , deducing that must be something in one of them . Though skeptical , Stottlemeyer admits there was no pie in the car when the police got there . However , the airline records confirm that Rita boarded a plane to Argentina on the night of the murder . The next day , Adrian and Sharona track van Ranken back to the fair again , and the third pie is won by van Ranken . 
 Adrian explains that when van Ranken was disposing of his wife 's corpse , a woman arrived to collect the pies . Van Ranken realized that one of the shell casings from his gun was nowhere to be found , believing it landed in one of the pies . It convinces Stottlemeyer to search the third pie , but nothing is found inside it . Later , over dinner with Ambrose , Adrian berates him for not calling after Trudy died , and Ambrose , taken aback , says the reason he did not call was because he felt guilty : Trudy was running an errand to get cough medicine for him when she was killed , and he blames himself . He breaks down crying , and Adrian , shocked , tells him it was not his fault , and embraces him . 
 Later , Adrian and van Ranken each reenact the murder , realizing that the shell casing is in the bag of flour in Ambrose 's house . Adrian and Sharona race to Tewkesbury , realizing that Ambrose is in danger . Van Ranken tries to get the flour back but Ambrose sees through his ruse . He locks the door , causing van Ranken to set the house on fire . While Sharona calls the fire department , Adrian rushes inside and resort to drag Ambrose out . Meanwhile , Stottlemeyer and Lieutenant Disher ( Jason Gray @-@ Stanford ) arrest van Ranken ; they just found Rita 's body , and the " Rita van Ranken " who flew to Argentina is actually his girlfriend . At the end of the episode , the reconciled brothers visit Trudy 's grave . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Mr. Monk and the Three Pies " was co @-@ written by Tom Scharpling and Daniel Dratch , and directed by Randall Zisk . The episode guest starred John Turturro as Ambrose Monk . Shalhoub and Turturro , " longtime friends " , according to USA Today , had graduated from Yale School of Drama . They had previously worked on the 1991 film Barton Fink and in a 1998 off @-@ Broadway production of the play Waiting for Godot . Shalhoub also lived with the <unk> while working on an East Coast project . As one of the executive producers of Monk by time , Shalhoub personally contacted Turturro . Turturro was also encouraged to the take the role by his family ; he declared , " My whole family likes the show . My ( 13 @-@ year @-@ old ) son likes the show . " After the sent of the episode 's script to him and his acceptance , Turturro , who Shalhoub thought " liked the sound of the character , " worked with the series " for about four or five days " , as Shalhoub cannot precisely remember . 
 Ambrose was added to further reveal Monk 's backstory ; Shalhoub commented , " We wanted to use this as a vehicle to get us into more backstory for Monk , to explore where Monk comes from , his family situation - and we thought that this brother character would be a good place to start . " While noted " Monk shows more emotion than usual because of the family tie " , Shalhoub also remarked the fact that he is angry with his brother was a good way to show " a whole other part of [ Adrian ] . He 's more abrupt and less sympathetic . It 's a healthy thing to see that he 's not a complete saint . " Turturro , by his turn , said " The [ episode 's ] tone is oddly touching . It 's hard to find the right tone . Tony does a great job of that , mixing comedy and drama " . Shalhoub was " really gratified " for Turturro 's performance , while Turturro called the episode " a pleasure " to do . Responding to a question about the possible return of Ambrose , Shalhoub " would love to see that character come back , " and Turturro would accept it , " especially if I don 't have to have a complete emotional breakdown . " He became a recurring character , and returned for " Mr. Monk Goes Home Again " and " Mr. Monk 's 100th Case " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Mr. Monk and the Three Pies " was first broadcast in the United States on the USA Network at 10 pm EST on January 23 , 2004 . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was viewed by an estimated number of 5 @.@ 9 million viewers and had a 4 @.@ 5 household rating . 
 Shalhoub elected the episode among his favorites twice ; he put it along with " Mr. Monk Takes His Medicine " and " Mr. Monk and the Garbage Strike " during the Monk Cast Favorites Marathon , and mentioned " Mr. Monk and the Three Pies " , " Mr. Monk Takes His Medicine " and " Mr. Monk Is Someone Else " as his favorite ones as the end of the series . Schram also selected it to be her favorite episode , attributing the choice to dynamic between Shalhoub and Turturro . 
 Austin Smith from the New York Post wrote that it is " one of the finest episodes of a TV show you 're likely to see all year in 2004 " . <unk> 's reviewer Rich Rosell called it " one of the series ' best @-@ written episodes " , remarking " Turturro and Shalhoub are excellent together " . Jeffrey Robinson of DVD Talk appointed it as his " absolute favorite episode ( of the entire series ! ) " , saying Turturro side @-@ by @-@ side with Shalhoub is " stunning . " Robinson added that Ambrose " makes Monk look like a normal person " , saying of the story : " it 's diabolically fun to watch these two neurotic brothers solve a murder mystery . " 
 It was said that " the comedy here has more than a hint of pathos " by People , with the writer declaring " It 's rare to see brothers portrayed so convincingly , particularly on a show in the field of light entertainment . But don 't be afraid : The episode has moments that are funny , pure and simple . " Writing for The Star @-@ Ledger , Alan Sepinwall compared the murder that conducts the plot to Rear Window 's plot ; although stated that " Plot has never been the series ' strong suit " , he declared " this one 's fun in its own right " . The real reason to watch it , however , " is to see Shalhoub and Turturro get on each other 's nerves , and to witness Monk revisiting his childhood home " , according to Sepinwall . The Sydney Morning Herald 's Michael Idato called Turturro " a great addition to the dynamic " and appreciated the possibility of his return later in the series . 
 At the 56th Primetime Emmy Awards , Turturro won the award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series for his acting as Ambrose on the episode . 
 = Gavin Newsom = 
 Gavin Christopher Newsom ( born October 10 , 1967 ) is an American businessman and television personality who currently serves as the 49th Lieutenant Governor of California . He is notable for hosting a television show named after him in Current TV and for his guest appearances in HBO 's Real Time with Bill Maher . Newsom has been involved in controversial and high @-@ profile relationships , including his former marriage to Fox News contributor Kimberly Guilfoyle and an infidelity scandal in 2007 . His political career highlights include his advocacy for same @-@ sex marriage and the legalization of cannabis in the United States . 
 Newsom studied at Redwood High School and graduated from Santa Clara University . After graduation , he co @-@ founded businesses with family friend Gordon Getty , who was an investor . Newsom began his political career in 1996 when San Francisco Mayor Willie Brown appointed him to serve on the city 's Parking and Traffic Commission and as a member of the Board of Supervisors the following year . Newsom drew voter attention with his Care Not Cash program , which was designed to move homeless people into city @-@ assisted care . 
 In 2003 , he was elected as the 42nd Mayor of San Francisco , the city 's youngest in a hundred years . Newsom was re @-@ elected in 2007 with 72 percent of the vote . He was elected Lieutenant Governor of California in 2010 . In February 2015 , Newsom announced he was opening a committee to run for Governor of California in 2018 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Gavin Christopher Newsom was born in San Francisco , California , to Tessa Thomas ( Menzies ) and William Alfred Newsom III , a retired state appeals court justice and attorney for Getty Oil . He is a fourth @-@ generation San Franciscan . His father is of Irish descent , while one of his maternal great @-@ grandfathers , Scotsman Thomas Addis , was a pioneer scientist in the field of nephrology and a professor of medicine at Stanford University . Newsom is the second cousin , twice removed , of musician Joanna Newsom . Newsom 's parents separated when he was 2 and divorced in 1972 . At age 10 , Newsom moved with his mother and sister , to nearby Marin County . In May 2002 , his mother died after a five @-@ year fight with breast cancer . 
 While Newsom later reflected that he did not have an easy childhood , he attended kindergarten and first grade at the French American bilingual school in San Francisco . He eventually transferred because of severe dyslexia that still affects him . His dyslexia has made it difficult for him to write , spell , read and work with numbers . He attended third through fifth grades at Notre Dame des Victoires , where he was placed in remedial reading classes . Newsom graduated from Redwood High School in 1985 . He played basketball and baseball in high school . 
 Newsom was an outfielder in baseball . His baseball skills placed him on the cover of the Marin Independent Journal . Newsom 's childhood friend Derek Smith recalled Newsom as " one of the hardest working players on the team who became a great player because of his effort , instead of his natural abilities . " Newsom 's father attended his games with San Francisco politicians that included John Burton and Quentin Kopp . Newsom 's father had ties to several other local politicians . Newsom 's aunt was married to Ron Pelosi , the brother @-@ in @-@ law of former Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi . Newsom 's father was also a friend of Governor Jerry Brown . 
 Tessa Newsom worked three jobs to support Gavin and his sister Hilary Newsom Callan , who is the president of the PlumpJack Group , named after the opera Plump Jack composed by family friend Gordon Getty . In an interview with The San Francisco Chronicle , his sister recalled Christmas holidays when their mother told them there wouldn 't be any gifts . Tessa opened their home to foster children , instilling in Newsom the importance of public service . His father 's finances were strapped in part because of his tendency to give away his earnings . Newsom worked several jobs in high school to help support his family . 
 Newsom attended Santa Clara University on a partial baseball scholarship and student loans , where he graduated in 1989 with a B.S. in political science . Newsom was a left @-@ handed pitcher for Santa Clara , but he threw his arm out after two years and hasn 't thrown a baseball since . He lived in the Alameda Apartments , which he later compared to living in a hotel . He later reflected on his education fondly , crediting the Jesuit approach of Santa Clara that he said has helped him become an independent thinker who questions orthodoxy . Newsom spent a semester studying abroad in Rome . 
 = = Business career = = 
 On May 14 , 1991 , Newsom and his investors created the company PlumpJack Associates L.P. In 1992 , the group started the PlumpJack Winery with the financial help of his family friend Gordon Getty . PlumpJack was the name of an opera written by Getty , who invested in 10 of Newsom 's 11 businesses . Getty told the San Francisco Chronicle that he treated Newsom like a son and invested in his first business venture because of that relationship . According to Getty , later business investments were because of " the success of the first . " 
 One of Newsom 's early interactions with government occurred when Newsom resisted the San Francisco Health Department requirement to install a sink at his PlumpJack Winery . The Health Department argued that wine was a food . The department required the store to install a $ 27 @,@ 000 sink in the carpeted wine shop on the grounds that the shop needed the sink for a mop . When Newsom was later appointed supervisor , he told the San Francisco Examiner : " That 's the kind of bureaucratic malaise I 'm going to be working through . " 
 The business grew to an enterprise with more than 700 employees . The PlumpJack Cafe Partners L.P. opened the PlumpJack Café , also on Fillmore Street , in 1993 . Between 1993 and 2000 , Newsom and his investors opened several other businesses that included the PlumpJack Squaw Valley Inn with a PlumpJack Café ( 1994 ) , the Napa Valley winery ( 1995 ) , the Balboa Café Bar and Grill ( 1995 ) , the PlumpJack Development Fund L.P. ( 1996 ) , the <unk> Bar ( 1998 ) , PlumpJack Wines shop Noe Valley branch ( 1999 ) , <unk> retail clothing ( 2000 ) , and a second Balboa Café at Squaw Valley ( 2000 ) . Newsom 's investments included five restaurants and two retail clothing stores . Newsom 's annual income was greater than $ 429 @,@ 000 from 1996 to 2001 . In 2002 , his business holdings were valued at more than $ 6 @.@ 9 million . Newsom gave a monthly $ 50 gift certificate to PlumpJack Café employees whose business ideas failed , because in his view , " There can be no success without failure . " 
 Newsom sold his share of his San Francisco businesses when he became mayor in 2004 . He maintained his ownership in the PlumpJack companies outside San Francisco that included the PlumpJack Winery in Oakville , California , new PlumpJack @-@ owned Cade Winery in Angwin , California , and the PlumpJack Squaw Valley Inn . He is currently the president in absentia of <unk> Wines Inc . , which is connected to the PlumpJack Winery in Napa County . Newsom earned between $ 141 @,@ 000 and $ 251 @,@ 000 in 2007 from his business interests . In February 2006 he paid $ 2 @,@ 350 @,@ 000 for his residence in the Russian Hill neighborhood , which he put on the market in April 2009 for $ 2 @,@ 995 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Newsom 's first political experience came when he volunteered for Willie Brown 's successful campaign for mayor in 1995 . Newsom hosted a private fundraiser at his PlumpJack Café . In 1996 , Mayor Brown appointed Newsom to a vacant seat on the Parking and Traffic Commission , and he was later elected president of the commission . In 1997 , Brown appointed him to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors seat vacated by Kevin Shelley . At the time , he became the youngest member of San Francisco 's board of supervisors and also the board 's only heterosexual Caucasian male . Newsom was sworn in by his father and pledged to bring his business experience to the board . Willie Brown called Newsom " part of the future generation of leaders of this great city . " Newsom described himself as a " social liberal and a fiscal watchdog . " Newsom was subsequently elected to a full four @-@ year term to the board in 1998 . 
 In 1999 , San Francisco 's voters chose to exchange at @-@ large elections to the board for the previous district system and Newsom was reelected in 2000 and in 2002 to represent District 2 , which includes the Pacific Heights , Marina , Cow Hollow , Sea Cliff , and Laurel Heights . He faced no opposition in his 2002 reelection . His district had the highest income level and the highest Republican registration in San Francisco . In 2000 , Newsom paid $ 500 to the San Francisco Republican Party to be on the party 's endorsement slate . 
 As supervisor , Newsom gained public attention for his role in advocating reform of the city 's Municipal Railway ( Muni ) . He was one of two supervisors endorsed by Rescue Muni , a transit riders group , in his 1998 reelection . He sponsored Proposition B to require Muni and other city departments to develop detailed customer service plans . The measure passed with 56 @.@ 6 % of the vote . Newsom sponsored a ballot measure from Rescue Muni ; a version of the measure was approved by voters in November 1999 . 
 Newsom also supported allowing restaurants to serve alcohol at their outdoor tables , banning tobacco advertisements visible from the streets , stiffer penalties for landlords , and a resolution to commend Colin Powell for raising money for youth programs that was defeated . Newsom 's support for business interests at times strained his relationship with labor leaders . 
 During Newsom 's time as supervisor , he was pro @-@ development and for smart growth along with being " anti @-@ handout . " He supported housing projects through public – private partnerships to increase homeownership and affordable housing in San Francisco . Newsom supported HOPE , a failed local ballot measure that would have allowed an increased condo @-@ conversion rate if a certain percentage of tenants within a building were buying their units . As a candidate for mayor , he supported building 10 @,@ 000 new housing units to create 15 @,@ 000 new construction jobs . 
 As supervisor , Newsom had as his centerpiece a voter initiative called Care Not Cash ( Measure N ) , which offered care , supportive housing , drug treatment , and help from behavioral health specialists for the homeless in lieu of direct cash aid from the state 's general assistance program . Many homeless rights advocates protested against Care Not Cash . The successfully passed ballot measure raised the political profile of Gavin Newsom and provided the volunteers , donors and campaign staff , which helped make him a leading contender for the mayorship in 2003 . 
 = = Mayoral races = = 
 = = = 2003 = = = 
 Newsom placed first in the November 4 , 2003 , general election in a nine @-@ man field . Newsom received 41 @.@ 9 percent of the vote to Green Party candidate Matt Gonzalez 's 19 @.@ 6 in the first round of balloting , but he faced a closer race in the December 9 runoff when many of the city 's liberal groups coalesced around Gonzalez . The race was partisan with attacks against Gonzalez for his support of Ralph Nader in the 2000 presidential election and attacks against Newsom for contributing $ 500 to a Republican slate mailer in 2000 that endorsed issues Newsom supported . Democratic leadership felt that they needed to reinforce San Francisco as a Democratic stronghold after losing the 2000 presidential election and the 2003 recall election to Arnold Schwarzenegger . National figures from the Democratic Party , including Bill Clinton , Al Gore , and Jesse Jackson , campaigned on Newsom 's behalf . Five supervisors endorsed Gonzalez while Newsom received the endorsement of Willie Brown . 
 Newsom won the runoff race , capturing 53 percent of the vote to Gonzalez 's 47 percent and winning by 11 @,@ 000 votes . Newsom ran as a business @-@ friendly centrist Democrat and a moderate in San Francisco politics ; some of his opponents called him conservative . Newsom claimed he was a centrist in the Dianne Feinstein mold . He ran on the slogan " great cities , great ideas " and presented over 21 policy papers . Newsom pledged to continue working on San Francisco 's homelessness issue . Newsom was sworn in as mayor on January 3 , 2004 . He called for unity among the city 's political factions and promised to address the issues of potholes , public schools , and affordable housing . Newsom said he was " a different kind of leader " who " isn 't afraid to solve even the toughest problems . " 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 San Francisco 's progressive community attempted to find a candidate to run a strong campaign against Newsom . Supervisors Ross <unk> and Chris Daly considered running against Newsom , but both declined . Matt Gonzalez also decided not to challenge Newsom . When the August 10 , 2007 , filing deadline passed , the discussion around San Francisco shifted to talk about Newsom 's second term . He was challenged in the election by 13 candidates that included George Davis , a nudist activist , and Michael Powers , owner of the Power Exchange sex club . Conservative former supervisor Tony Hall withdrew by early September due to lack of support . The San Francisco Chronicle declared in August 2007 that Newsom faced no " serious threat to his reelection bid . " Newsom raised $ 1 @.@ 6 million for his reelection campaign by early August . He won re @-@ election on November 6 , 2007 with over 72 % of the vote . Upon taking office for a second term , Newsom promised to focus on the environment , homelessness , health care , education , housing , and rebuilding San Francisco General Hospital . 
 = = Mayoralty = = 
 As mayor , Newsom focused on development projects in Hunters Point and Treasure Island . He signed the Health Choices Plan in 2007 to provide San Francisco residents with universal healthcare . Under Newsom , San Francisco ostensibly joined the Kyoto Protocol , although it could not actually join a treaty between sovereign states . In 2004 , Newsom gained national attention when he directed the San Francisco city – county clerk to issue marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples , in violation of the state law passed in 2000 . 
 Implementation of Care Not Cash began on July 1 , 2004 . As part of his Care Not Cash initiative , 5 @,@ 000 more homeless people were given permanent shelter in the city . As of October 21 , 2007 , about 2 @,@ 000 people have been placed into permanent housing with support . Other programs initiated by Newsom to end chronic homelessness include the San Francisco Homeless Outreach Team ( SF HOT ) , and Project Homeless Connect ( PHC ) . 
 On October 27 , 2004 , during a strike by hotel workers on a dozen San Francisco hotels , Newsom joined UNITE HERE union members on a picket line in front of the Westin St. Francis Hotel . He vowed that the city would boycott the hotels by not sponsoring city events in any of them until the hotels agreed to a contract with workers . The contract dispute was settled in September 2006 . Newsom 's support of the workers angered some businesses who had been traditional Newsom backers . 
 In 2005 , Newsom pushed for a state law to allow communities in California to create policy discriminating against breeds of dogs . He requested that then state senator Jackie Speier introduce a change to then @-@ existing California law , which stated that counties could not target specific breeds of dog . The animal control agency under his direction created a working dog task force report that cited Denver , Colorado , as a best practice for a law in California . 
 In 2009 , Newsom came under attack for the City of San Francisco 's policy of illegally harboring juvenile criminal aliens . The city was circumventing U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement by harboring or sending the aliens back to their own native countries . In 2010 , Newsom was removed from the San Francisco County Democratic Central Committee . <unk> chairman Aaron Peskin said that Newsom no longer resided in the city and therefore did not deserve a seat on the committee . 
 In 2009 , Newsom received the Leadership for Healthy Communities Award along with Mayor Michael Bloomberg of New York City and three other public officials for his commitment to making healthful food and physical activity options more accessible to children and families . For example , in 2008 , he hosted the Urban Rural Roundtable to explore ways to promote regional food development and increased access to healthy affordable food , and he secured $ 8 million in federal and local funds for the Better Streets program , which ensures that public health perspectives are fully integrated into urban planning processes . He also signed a menu @-@ labeling bill into law , requiring that chain restaurants print nutrition information on their menus . In 2010 , Newsom was named " America 's Most Social Mayor " by <unk> , based on analysis of the social media profiles of mayors from the 100 largest cities in the United States . 
 = = = Same @-@ sex marriage = = = 
 In 2004 , Newsom gained national attention when he directed the San Francisco city – county clerk to issue marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples , in violation of the then @-@ current state law . In August 2004 , the Supreme Court of California annulled the marriages that Newsom had authorized , as they conflicted with state law at that time . Still , Newsom 's unexpected move brought national attention to the issues of gay marriage , solidifying political support for Newsom in San Francisco and in the gay community . 
 During the 2008 election , Newsom was a prominent and vocal opponent of Proposition 8 , the ballot initiative to reverse the California Supreme Court ruling that there was a constitutional right to same @-@ sex marriage . In the months leading up to election day , Proposition 8 supporters released a commercial featuring Newsom saying the following words in a speech regarding same @-@ sex marriage : " This door 's wide open now . It 's going to happen , whether you like it or not . " Some observers noted that polls shifted in favor of Proposition 8 following the release of the commercial ; this , in turn , led to speculation that Newsom unwittingly played a role in the passage of the amendment . 
 = = Lieutenant governor = = 
 In April 2009 , Newsom announced his intention to run for governor of California in the 2010 election . In September 2009 , he received the endorsement of former president Bill Clinton . During the campaign , Newsom remarked that , if elected , he 'd like to be referred to as " The <unk> " ( a reference to Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger 's nickname , " The <unk> " ) . Throughout the campaign , however , Newsom suffered low poll numbers , trailing Democratic frontrunner Jerry Brown by more than 20 points in most polls . In October 2009 , Newsom dropped out of the gubernatorial race . 
 In February 2010 , Newsom filed initial paperwork to run for lieutenant governor , and officially announced his candidacy in March . He received the Democratic nomination in June , and won the election on November 2 , 2010 . Newsom was sworn in as lieutenant governor on January 10 , 2011 . The one @-@ week delay was to ensure that a successor as mayor of San Francisco was chosen before he left office . Edwin M. Lee , the city administrator , took office the day after Newsom was sworn in as lieutenant governor . In May 2012 , Newsom debuted on Current TV as the host of The Gavin Newsom Show . In 2012 , Newsom drew criticism for his negative view of California 's state capital Sacramento . 
 Newsom released his first book , Citizenville : How to Take the Town Square Digital and Reinvent Government , on February 7 , 2013 . The book discusses the Gov 2 @.@ 0 movement that is taking place across the United States . Following the release of Citizenville , Newsom began to work with the Center for Information Technology Research in the Interest of Society at the University of California , Berkeley on the California Report Card ( CRC ) . The CRC is a mobile @-@ optimized platform that allows California residents to " grade " their state on six timely issues . The CRC exemplifies ideas presented in Newsom 's Citizenville , encouraging direct public involvement in government affairs via modern technology . On November 4 , 2014 , Newsom was re @-@ elected as lieutenant governor of California , defeating Republican Ron Nehring with 57 @.@ 2 % of the vote . His second term began on January 5 , 2015 ; the same date when Governor Brown was sworn in for a second term after his re @-@ election . 
 On February 11 , 2015 , Newsom announced that he was opening a campaign account for governor in the 2018 elections , allowing him to raise funds for a campaign to succeed Jerry Brown as the fortieth Governor of California . In 2015 , Newsom partnered with the Institute for Advanced Technology and Public Policy at California Polytechnic State University to launch Digital Democracy , an online tool that uses facial and voice recognition to enable users to navigate California legislative proceedings . In July 2015 , Newsom released the final report of the Blue Ribbon Commission on Marijuana Policy , which he had convened with the American Civil Liberties Union of California in 2013 . The report 's recommendations to regulate marijuana were intended to inform a legalization measure on the November 2016 ballot . 
 In December 2015 , Newsom called on the University of California to reclassify computer science courses as a core academic class in order to incentivize more high schools to offer computer science curriculum . In 2016 , the Lieutenant Governor passed a series of reforms at the University of California to provide student @-@ athletes with additional academic and injury @-@ related support , and to ensure that contracts for athletic directors and coaches emphasized academic progress . This came in response to several athletics programs , including the University of California , Berkeley 's football team , which garnered the lowest graduation rates in the country . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Newsom was baptized and reared Roman Catholic . He describes himself as an " Irish Catholic rebel ... in some respects , but one that still has tremendous admiration for the Church and very strong faith . " When asked about the current state of the Catholic Church , he said the church was in crisis . Newsom said he stays with the Church because of his " strong connection to a greater purpose , and ... higher being ... " Newsom identifies himself as a practicing Catholic , stating that he has a " strong sense of faith that is perennial : day in and day out . " 
 In December 2001 , Newsom married Kimberly Guilfoyle , a former San Francisco prosecutor and legal commentator for Court TV , CNN , and MSNBC and who is now a prominent personality on Fox News Channel . The couple married at Saint Ignatius Catholic Church on the campus of the University of San Francisco , where Guilfoyle attended law school . The couple appeared in the September 2004 issue of Harper 's Bazaar , a fashion magazine , in a spread of them at the Getty mansion with the title the " New Kennedys . " In January 2005 , they jointly filed for divorce , citing " difficulties due to their careers on opposite coasts . " 
 In 2005 , Newsom was selected as a Young Global Leader by the World Economic Forum . In January 2007 , it was revealed that Newsom had had a romantic relationship in mid @-@ 2005 with Ruby Rippey @-@ Tourk , the wife of his former deputy chief of staff and then campaign manager , Alex Tourk . Tourk filed for divorce shortly after the revelation and left Newsom 's campaign and administration . Newsom 's affair with Rippey @-@ Tourk impacted his popularity with male voters , who viewed his indiscretions as a betrayal of a close friend and ally . 
 Newsom announced in February 2007 that he would seek treatment for alcohol abuse . In September 2006 , Newsom began dating actress Jennifer Siebel after being set up for a blind date by a mutual friend , Kathy Wilsey . In December 2007 their engagement was announced , and they were married in Stevensville , Montana , in July 2008 . In September 2009 , Siebel gave birth to a girl , Montana Tessa Newsom . Siebel gave birth to a son , Hunter Siebel Newsom , on June 12 , 2011 . Daughter <unk> was born July 3 , 2013 . On February 26 , 2016 the <unk> announced the birth of their fourth child , Dutch . 
 In 2012 , Newsom and his family moved out of San Francisco and bought a house in <unk> , California . The house is a mid @-@ century home on 1 @.@ 38 acres . It also hosts direct views of Mount Tamalpais . Newsom bought it for $ 2 @.@ 145 million . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = Shepton Mallet = 
 Shepton Mallet is a town and civil parish in the Mendip district of Somerset in South West England . Situated approximately 18 miles ( 29 km ) south of Bristol and 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) east of Wells , the town is estimated to have a population of 10 @,@ 369 . It contains the administrative headquarters of Mendip District Council . 
 The Mendip Hills lie to the north , and the River Sheppey runs through the town . Shepton Mallet lies on the route of the Fosse Way , the principal Roman road into the south west of England , and there is evidence of Roman settlement . The town contains a fine parish church and a considerable number of listed buildings . Shepton Mallet Prison was England 's oldest prison still in use until its closure in March 2013 . 
 In medieval times , the wool trade was important in the town 's economy , although this declined in the 18th century to be replaced by other industries such as brewing ; the town continues to be a major centre for the production of cider . Shepton Mallet is the closest town to the site of the Glastonbury Festival , the largest music festival in Europe . Also nearby is the Royal Bath and West of England Society showground which hosts the Royal Bath and West Show , and other major shows and festivals . 
 = = History = = 
 The name Shepton derives from the Old English <unk> and tun , meaning ' sheep farm ' ; the Domesday Book of 1086 records a settlement known as <unk> . The current spelling is recorded at least as far back as 1496 , in a letter from Henry VII . The second part of the name derives from that of the Norman Malet family who took a lease from Glastonbury Abbey around 1100 . The second ' L ' appears to have been added in the 16th century . 
 = = = Prehistoric settlement = = = 
 Archaeological investigations have found evidence for prehistoric activity in the Shepton Mallet area , with substantial amounts of Neolithic flint being found , as well as some pottery fragments from the late Neolithic period . The two barrows on Barren Down , to the north of the town centre , have been found to contain cremation burials from the bronze age , and a further bronze age burial site contained a skeleton as well as some pottery . The remains of iron age roundhouses were found at Cannard 's Grave , in the vicinity of what would later become the Fosse Way , along with artefacts such as <unk> and beads , and a probable iron age farm settlement enclosure has been identified at Field Farm . In the countryside surrounding the town , there is evidence of iron age cave dwellings in Ham Woods , to the north @-@ west , and a number of burial mounds have been identified at Beacon Hill , a short distance north of the town . 
 = = = Roman occupation = = = 
 Shepton Mallet is situated approximately halfway between the Roman towns of Bath and Ilchester on the Fosse Way , and , although there are no visible remains ( apart from the line of the Roman road itself ) , there is archaeological evidence for both early military , and later civilian , settlement lasting into the 5th century . Domed pottery kilns , with pottery still in situ , were identified on the site of the Anglo @-@ Bavarian Brewery in the mid @-@ 19th century , suggesting military activity in the 1st and 2nd centuries . Several hoards of Roman coins ranging from the 1st to 4th centuries have also been found , as well as over 300 fibula brooches , potsherds and other artefacts . In addition , a few isolated burials near the route of the Fosse Way were found during the 19th century . 
 A lead coffin within a rock @-@ cut grave was discovered at a site adjacent to the Fosse Way in 1988 . This discovery , and the impending commercial development of the site by the landowner , Showerings , led archaeologists to undertake more extensive excavations in the 1990s . The grave was found to be part of a larger cemetery which contained 17 burials lying on a rough east @-@ west alignment , indicating probable Christian adherence . Two other , smaller , cemeteries contained graves aligned north @-@ south , possibly signifying pagan religious practices . One burial was within a substantial stone coffin which had been positioned beneath a mausoleum , the foundations of which remained . 
 A particularly notable find in the Fosse Way burials was a Chi @-@ Rho amulet , at the time thought to be from the 5th century , and so held to be among the earliest definite evidence of Christianity in England . A copy of the amulet was presented to the then Archbishop of Canterbury , George Carey , by the churches of the Diocese of Bath and Wells . Although the amulet now resides in the Museum of Somerset , analysis by Liverpool University in 2008 using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy demonstrated that it was a hoax , as the silver within it dated to the 19th century or later . 
 As well as the cemeteries , the excavations in the 1990s confirmed the presence of a linear settlement , stretching along the Fosse Way for perhaps a kilometre , comprising cobbled streets , wooden and stone workshops and houses ( some with two storeys ) containing hearths and ovens , industrial areas , and a stone @-@ lined well . A great many artefacts were found , including both local and imported pottery ( such as samian ware ) , items of jewellery such as brooches , rings and bracelets , toilet items including tweezers , ear scoops and nail cleaners , bronze and iron tools , and a lead ingot which probably originated from the Romans ' lead mines on the Mendip Hills . Coins minted across the Roman empire were also found . The finds on the site indicate occupation from the late 1st , or early 2nd , century to the late 4th , or early 5th , century , although as no public buildings were found the settlement was probably not , technically , a town . 
 = = = Saxon and Norman periods = = = 
 There is a small amount of evidence of Saxon settlement in the town , including some Saxon stonework in the parish church of St Peter and St Paul . In addition , a charter of King Ine of Wessex , dating from 706 and witnessed by nine Bishops including the Archbishop of Canterbury , records the granting of the area in which Shepton Mallet is now situated to Abbot <unk> of Glastonbury Abbey . According to some legends <unk> of Glastonbury was buried in Shepton . The town fell within the <unk> Hundred , and the hundred courts were held at Cannard 's Grave , a short distance to the south of the town . 
 The Exeter Domesday Book records that , at the death of Edward the Confessor in 1066 , the site was held ( probably by lease from the Abbey ) by one <unk> , and by Roger de <unk> at the time of the survey in 1086 . When Roger de <unk> died , sometime before or around 1100 , the land passed to the <unk> , a very prominent Norman family , who caused their name to be added to that of the settlement ( and also of another of their holdings , <unk> – now Curry Mallet ) . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 The Malet family retained the estate until the reign of King John , when on the death of William Malet ( fl . 1192 – 1215 ) ( and on the payment by his sons @-@ in @-@ law of a fine of two thousand marks , due to William having participated in a rebellion against the King ) it passed through his daughter Mabel to her husband Hugh de <unk> . Some generations later , the part of the estate containing Shepton Mallet was sold to a relative , Sir Thomas Gournay . His son , also called Thomas , participated in the murder of Edward II , and his estates were confiscated by Edward III in 1337 . However the family regained favour with the King some years later , and the lands were returned . When Mathew de Gournay died childless in 1406 , the estate again reverted to the Crown , before being granted out to Sir John de <unk> . It was once again confiscated from his son by Henry VI during the Wars of the Roses ( due to the family siding with Edward IV ) , but was restored to Sir John 's grandson , Edward <unk> , when Edward IV regained the throne . However , he died without issue , and there followed a succession of grants and reversions until Glastonbury Abbey was dissolved by Henry VIII , and the Abbey 's lands , including Shepton Mallet , were granted to the Duchy of Cornwall in 1536 . 
 Charters for the holding of markets and fairs were granted in 1235 ( though this charter was swiftly revoked following objections by the Bishop of Wells to the competition it represented to the market in that city ) , 1260 and 1318 , and indicate that the town was developing and prospering in the 13th and early 14th centuries . However the Black Death struck the town in 1348 , reducing the population to about 300 . In the late 14th and early 15th centuries , the population and economy of the town were bolstered by the arrival of craftsmen and merchants from France and the Low Countries who came to England to escape wars and religious persecution in their home countries . They introduced cloth @-@ making which , together with the local wool trade , became a major industry in Shepton and other towns in Somerset and Wiltshire . Indeed , it appears that wool became such a source of riches for the town that when , in 1496 , Henry VII needed to raise money to fight the Scots , he called upon the wool @-@ merchants of Shepton to contribute £ 10 to the cause : 
 = = = Civil War and the Monmouth Rebellion = = = 
 In 1625 , a House of Correction was established in Shepton Mallet . 
 In the English Civil War the town supported the parliamentary side , although Shepton appears to have mostly escaped conflict apart from a bloodless confrontation between supporters of the King , led by Sir Ralph Hopton , and Parliament , led by Colonel William Strode , in the market place on 1 August 1642 . In 1645 Sir Thomas Fairfax led the New Model Army through the town on the way to capturing Bristol , and in 1646 the church organ was apparently destroyed by Cromwellian soldiers . 
 During the Monmouth Rebellion in 1685 , the Duke of Monmouth was welcomed when he passed through Shepton Mallet , staying in Longbridge House in Cowl Street on the night of 23 June , with his men quartered throughout the town , before setting out for Bristol the following day . Many Shepton men joined the cause , but Monmouth failed to take Bath or Bristol and had to return to Shepton on 30 June . Following the Battle of Sedgemoor , the Duke fled and spent the night of 6 July at Downside , a mile north of Shepton , before continuing his flight for two more days before his capture . Following the Bloody Assizes , twelve local supporters of Monmouth were hanged and quartered in the Market Place of the town . 
 In 1699 Edward Strode built almshouses , close to the rectory his family had built to house the town 's grammar school , which lasted until 1900 . 
 = = = 18th – 20th centuries = = = 
 In the 17th and 18th centuries the wool and cloth industries continued to thrive , powered by the waters of the River Sheppey . There were reputed to be 50 mills in the town and surrounding area in the early 18th century , and a number of fine clothiers ' houses survive , particularly in Bowlish , a hamlet on the western edge of Shepton Mallet . Although these industries employed some 4 @,@ 000 people towards the end of the century , they were already beginning to decline by this time . Discontent at the mechanisation of the mills resulted in the deaths of two men in a riot in the town in 1775 , an event which apparently discouraged the mill @-@ owners from modernising further . The decision resulted in Shepton 's cloth trade losing out to the steam @-@ powered mills in the north of England in the early 19th century . The manufacture of silk and crepe revived the town 's fortunes somewhat , and Shepton 's mills manufactured the silk used in Queen Victoria 's wedding dress . However these industries also died out eventually . 
 While wool , cloth and silk were declining , other industries were growing , and in the 19th and 20th centuries brewing , in particular , became one of the town 's major industries . The Anglo @-@ Bavarian Brewery , built in 1864 and still a local landmark , was the first in England to brew lager . At its height , the brewery was exporting 1 @.@ 8 million bottles a year to Australia , New Zealand , India , South Africa , South America and the West Indies . It closed in 1921 . However the town , which is the home of Babycham , is still an important centre for cider production . 
 For a period during World War II , Shepton Mallet Prison was used to store important national records from the Public Record Office , including Magna Carta , the Domesday Book , the logbooks of HMS Victory , dispatches from the Battle of Waterloo , and the " scrap of paper " signed by Hitler and Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain at the Munich Conference of September 1938 . The prison also became a US Army detention facility , and between 1943 and 1945 , 18 American servicemen were executed within the prison walls , having been convicted by US court @-@ martial of murder , rape or both . 
 The population of Shepton Mallet was fairly stable through the 19th century and the first part of the 20th : in 1801 , it was 5 @,@ 104 and in 1851 only slightly more at 5 @,@ 117 , although by 1901 it had swelled to 5 @,@ 446 , before falling back to 5 @,@ 260 in 1951 . By 2001 , it had increased significantly to 8 @,@ 981 . 
 = = Governance and public services = = 
 Shepton Mallet is in the Mendip local government district which is part of the county of Somerset . In the 80 years prior to 1974 , the town had lain within Shepton Mallet Urban District . The town elects one councillor to Somerset County Council ; at the last election in 2012 , a conservative was elected . Shepton Mallet has four councillors on Mendip District Council , two elected by each of the two wards that make up the town . After the elections in 2015 all were Conservatives . 
 The civil parish of Shepton Mallet has adopted the style of a town , and there is a Town Council of 16 members . Councillors are split equally between the two wards : Shepton East and Shepton West . The most recent elections were in May 2015 , following which the council is made up of five Conservatives , five Liberal Democrats , three members of the Labour Party and three independent councillors . 
 Shepton Mallet falls within the Wells parliamentary constituency . Since the general election on 7 May 2015 the MP is James Heappey of the Conservative Party . The town is within the South West England European Parliamentary constituency , which elects six MEPs . It is twinned with three European towns : <unk> in Germany , <unk> sur Seine in France , and <unk> in Sweden . 
 There are two doctors ' surgeries in Shepton Mallet , a National Health Service community hospital formerly operated by Somerset Primary Care Trust , and an independent sector treatment centre , which carries out a range of surgical procedures . The nearest general hospital is the Royal United Hospital in Bath . Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service have a retained fire station in the town , which is adjacent to the ambulance station operated by South Western Ambulance Service NHS Trust . Avon and Somerset Constabulary closed the local police station in 2014 and the town falls within the Somerset East policing district . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Shepton Mallet lies in the southern foothills of the Mendip Hills . The area is geologically founded on Forest Marble , Blue Lias and Oolitic limestone . 
 = = = Nearby cave systems = = = 
 To the north of the town are several caves of the Mendip Hills , including Thrupe Lane Swallet which is a geological Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) , and the St. Dunstan 's Well Catchment which is an important cave system including a series of spectacularly @-@ decorated caves which in total extend to about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) of mapped passage . The caves at Fairy Cave Quarry were formed mainly by the erosive action of water flowing beneath the water @-@ table at considerable pressure ( so called ' phreatic ' development ) , but as the water table has fallen many of the caves now lie well above it and the system now contains a variety of cave formations ( stalagmites , stalactites and calcite curtains ) which in their extent and preservation are amongst the best in Britain . Shatter Cave and <unk> Cave are generally considered to be amongst the finest decorated caves in Britain in terms of their sheer abundance of pure white and translucent calcite deposits . Small numbers of greater horseshoe bat ( Rhinolophus ferrumequinum ) , lesser horseshoe bat ( R. hipposideros ) and Natterer 's bat ( Myotis nattereri ) hibernate in the cave system . An area of nationally rare species @-@ rich unimproved calcareous grassland of the Sheep 's @-@ fescue @-@ Meadow Oat @-@ grass type occurs in the field to the east of Stoke Lane Quarry . 
 = = = Surrounding countryside = = = 
 The countryside surrounding the town is mostly given over to farming , although there are a few areas of nearby woodland . Approximately 1 @.@ 8 mi ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) to the north @-@ east of the town centre is Beacon Hill Wood ( owned by the Woodland Trust ) , which is at the junction of the Fosse Way and another Roman road that runs along the top of the Mendip Hills , and which contains a number of tumuli . To the northwest of the town are Ham Woods , within which are the Windsor Hill railway tunnels and a viaduct , remnants of the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway . The East Mendip Way long @-@ distance path passes around the northern edge of Shepton Mallet and through Ham Woods . 
 South @-@ west of the town is the Friar 's Oven SSSI which is the site of herb @-@ rich calcareous grassland classified as the Upright Brome ( Bromus erectus ) type , and north @-@ east is the Windsor Hill Quarry geological SSSI , and also the Windsor Hill Marsh biological SSSI , a marshy silted pond with adjacent damp , slightly acidic grassland of interest for its diverse flora , in large part down to the varied habitats present within the small area . Two species are present which are rare in Somerset : Flat @-@ sedge ( <unk> compressus ) and Slender Spike @-@ rush ( Eleocharis <unk> ) . Other marshland plants found there include Purple <unk> , Yellow Flag ( Iris pseudacorus ) , Hard Rush ( Juncus <unk> ) , Soft Rush ( J. <unk> ) , Flowering Rush ( Butomus <unk> ) , Devil 's @-@ bit <unk> ( Succisa pratensis ) , three species of Horsetail <unk> spp. and seven sedges Carex spp . 
 = = = River Sheppey = = = 
 The centre and oldest parts of Shepton Mallet are adjacent to the River Sheppey , and thus at the bottom of a valley , approximately 115 m ( 377 ft ) above sea level . The edges of the town lie about 45 m ( 148 ft ) higher up . The river has cut a narrow valley , and between Shepton Mallet and the village of Croscombe , to the west , it is bounded by steeply @-@ sloping fields and woodland . However the river flows through much of Shepton Mallet itself in underground culverts . The river occasionally floods after heavy rain , such as on 20 October 2006 , and again on 29 May 2008 , when rainfall was so heavy that the culverts were unable to cope with the volume of water , resulting in the flooding of some of the lower @-@ lying parts of the town . Some houses around Leg Square , Lower Lane and Draycott Road were submerged to a depth of 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) . A study by the Environment Agency identified that the current standard of flood protection in those parts of the town was insufficient , as it was of a 5 – 10 @-@ year event standard , whereas current guidelines require protection of a 50 – 200 @-@ year standard . In the summer of 2010 , the Agency began construction of a flood alleviation scheme at a cost of about £ 1 @.@ 3 million . 
 = = = Areas of the town = = = 
 Within Shepton Mallet there are several distinct areas which originated as separate communities around the central point of the church and Market Place . The town centre is small , basically consisting of two streets : High Street , which runs south from the Market Place towards the Townsend Retail Park , and the pedestrianised Town Street which runs north from the Market Place to Waterloo Bridge . To the east , separated from the Market Place by the Academy complex , is the parish church of St Peter and St Paul . Lower Lane , which runs under Waterloo Bridge along the bottom of the river valley to the north of the town centre , is one of the few parts of the town where the River Sheppey runs above ground . At the eastern end is Leg Square , which is surrounded by three large houses originally built by owners of some of the town 's mills . Very close by is Cornhill , on which the former prison stands . 
 Moving roughly eastwards , Garston Street , also in the valley @-@ bottom , consists of a long row of weavers ' and other artisans ' cottages dating from the 17th century . The eastern end of this area , adjacent to Kilver Street , is now occupied by the cider breweries . Across Kilver Street ( the A37 ) is Kilver Court , which over the course of the 20th century has been a factory , the headquarters of the Showerings brewing business , and then the headquarters of a leather @-@ goods manufacturer , Mulberry . Behind are the Kilver Court Gardens , originally built by Showerings for the recreation of their staff and set against the backdrop of part of the Charlton Viaduct . The gardens are now open to the public . On the eastern edge of the town is Charlton where there are former breweries and mills , now converted into a trading estate , and right on the edge of the town is to be found Charlton House , a luxury hotel and spa . 
 On the southern side of the town , on a triangle of land bounded on the east by the A37 , on the north by the line of the former East Somerset Railway , and on the west by Cannard 's Grave Road , is Tadley Acres , a modern housing development built on land partly belonging to the Duchy of Cornwall . The development has been praised for the quality of its design and the use of locally sourced natural building materials . North of the former railway line is Collett Park . Across Cannard 's Grave Road from Tadley Acres is the Mid @-@ Somerset Showground . Immediately to the south @-@ west of the town centre , on a site which at the start of the 20th century had been the grounds of the former <unk> House and then a shoe @-@ factory , is the Townsend Retail Park , built in 2006 – 7 . 
 West Shepton , which forms the south @-@ west corner of the town , is dominated by the former Shepton Mallet Union Workhouse , a Grade II listed building originally constructed in 1848 . It later became the Norah Fry mental hospital and is now a housing development . Nearby , on the western edge of the town , is the modern community hospital . Moving northwards , back down into the river valley , are two hamlets : Darshill , once the site of a number of mills , and Bowlish , which contains several grand clothiers ' houses . The steeply @-@ sloping fields adjoining the river between Bowlish and the rest of the Shepton Mallet are known locally as The Meadows . To their east is <unk> , a council housing estate built in the 1960s . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Shepton Mallet has a temperate climate that is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England . The annual mean temperature is about 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) with seasonal and diurnal variations , but due to the modifying effect of the sea , the range is less than in most other parts of the United Kingdom . January is the coldest month with mean minimum temperatures between 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) and 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) . July and August are the warmest months in the region , with mean daily maxima around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . In general , December is the dullest month and June the sunniest . South @-@ west England enjoys a favoured location , particularly in summer , when the Azores High extends its influence north @-@ eastwards towards the UK . 
 Cloud often forms inland , especially near hills , and reduces exposure to sunshine . The average annual sunshine totals around 1600 hours . Rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection . In summer , convection caused by solar surface heating sometimes forms shower clouds and a large proportion of the annual precipitation falls from showers and thunderstorms at this time of year . Average rainfall is around 800 – 900 mm ( 31 – 35 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , with June to August having the lightest . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Demography = = 
 In the 2001 census , the population was 8 @,@ 981 , comprising 4 @,@ 482 ( 49 @.@ 9 % ) males and 4 @,@ 499 ( 50 @.@ 1 % ) females ; 1 @,@ 976 ( 22 % ) residents were aged 16 or below , 5 @,@ 781 ( 64 @.@ 4 % ) between 16 and 65 , and 1 @,@ 224 ( 13 @.@ 6 % ) aged 65 or over . 
 Of the population aged between 16 and 74 , 4 @,@ 200 ( 66 % ) were in employment , with only 224 ( 3 @.@ 5 % ) unemployed , with the remainder being economically inactive . About 69 % of those in employment were in service industries , with the remainder in manufacturing , while 1 @,@ 459 people were employed in managerial or professional occupations , 522 were self @-@ employed , and 1 @,@ 888 worked in routine and semi @-@ routine occupations . 
 A total of 3 @,@ 714 households were recorded in the town , of which 2 @,@ 621 ( 70 @.@ 6 % ) were owner @-@ occupied , 515 ( 13 @.@ 9 % ) rented from private landlords , and 578 ( 15 @.@ 6 % ) rented from the local authority or other social landlord ; 3 @,@ 688 ( 99 @.@ 3 % ) heads of households were white . 
 In late 2008 , Mendip District Council 's estimate of the town 's population was 9 @,@ 700 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 There is a local perception that Shepton Mallet has been in economic decline for some time . Some 350 manufacturing jobs were lost in the late 1990s and early years of the 21st century . However , the District Council asserts that , despite the loss of the manufacturing jobs on which Shepton Mallet has been historically dependent , more jobs in distribution , business services and public administration , health , education , quarrying , construction and hi @-@ tech services ( from companies such as the ISP <unk> ) have been created , thereby creating a more balanced economy . In 2001 , there were slightly more jobs in the town than economically active people , resulting in a small in @-@ flow of workers . 
 The town centre is fairly small with a high proportion of empty premises in Market Place and the north end of High Street adjacent to Market Place . However , the pedestrianised Town Street which runs north from the Market Place to Waterloo Bridge has had significant investment in its heritage in the last five years and now enjoys almost full occupancy of its shops . Since 2010 an ' artisan quarter ' of independent shops is starting to emerge in Town Street and Market Place . 
 Since 2004 , Shepton Mallet 's town centre buildings have benefited from two conservation schemes , the Heritage Economic Regeneration Scheme and the Townscape Heritage Initiative Scheme , which provided grants for the repair of buildings , reinstatement of architectural features and enhancement of public spaces , as well as community involvement , education and training . As the body which made the bid for the funding , Mendip District Council has administrated both schemes , but all decisions are made by a steering group comprising the main stakeholders in the town . 
 For centuries there has been a general market held each Friday in the Market Place . The market has been in decline for some years and in 2010 attempts were made to revitalise it . However , after initial interest , the number of stallholders slowly decreased . In recent months a number of suitcase traders have been supporting the market on a regular basis and this has attracted local interest . 
 The furniture store Haskins , which originated in Shepton Mallet in 1938 , has its principal showroom in the High Street within Haskins Retail Centre , which also includes a number of others shops including Aldi supermarket , Edinburgh Woollen Mill , <unk> Home , <unk> Shoes and an outlet clothing store . Retail jobs in the town increased in number in 2006 – 7 when a new shopping development , including a large Tesco supermarket , a clothes store and other retailers , was constructed on a site just south of the town centre , which had once been a factory making Clarks shoes and later Doc Martens boots . This development attracted national media attention when protesters occupied the site to try to prevent the felling of an avenue of trees dating back to the 19th century . It has also divided opinion in the town , between those who hoped it would help to revitalise the town , and others who feared that local traders would be unable to compete , leading to a further decline of Shepton Mallet 's High Street . There is also the Mulberry Factory Shop located on Kilver Street , near to the former Mulberry headquarters . 
 Shepton Mallet is home to three international alcoholic drinks producers . The Gaymer Cider Company , a subsidiary of C & C Group , produces Blackthorn and Gaymer 's Olde English cider . Constellation Brands , former owners of <unk> , produces Babycham . Family @-@ run Brothers Drinks produces Brothers Cider and runs a contract bottling operation for many other drinks companies . 
 As well as the annual Royal Bath and West Show and other agricultural shows , the Royal Bath & West Showground near Evercreech , 2 @.@ 5 mi ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) south @-@ east of the town , hosts events such as the New Wine and Soul Survivor Christian festivals and the National Adventure Sports Show , fairs and markets including the Shepton Mallet International Antiques & Collectors ' Fair , and exhibitions and trade shows such as the National Amateur Gardening Show . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The A37 road runs north and south through Shepton Mallet , along the line of the Fosse Way between the south of the town and Ilchester . The A361 from Frome skirts the eastern edge of Shepton Mallet on its way to Glastonbury , and the A371 from Castle Cary passes through the town on its way west to Wells ; for some distance , both routes follow the line of the A37 . 
 Shepton Mallet had railway stations on two lines , both now closed . The first station , called Shepton Mallet ( High Street ) in British Railways days , was on the East Somerset Railway branch line from Witham and opened in 1859 . The line was extended to Wells in 1862 and later connected to the Cheddar Valley line branch of the Bristol and Exeter Railway from Yatton to Wells via Cheddar . Through services between Yatton and Witham started in 1870 . The line was absorbed into the Great Western Railway in the 1870s . 
 A second station , later called Shepton Mallet ( Charlton Road ) , opened in 1874 with the building of the Bath extension of the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway . This station was some distance east of the centre of the town and was approached on the Charlton Viaduct . 
 Both stations closed in the 1960s as part of the Beeching Axe . Shepton Mallet ( High Street ) closed with the withdrawal of passenger services on the Yatton to Witham line in 1963 , though part of the former East Somerset line remains open for freight and as a heritage railway . Shepton Mallet ( Charlton Road ) closed in 1966 with the closure of the Somerset and Dorset line . Nowadays , the nearest Network Rail station is Castle Cary , some eight miles south of Shepton Mallet . However , the nearest station on the East Somerset Railway is Mendip Vale , which is a mile and a half away . 
 A bus service to the town is provided by First Somerset & Avon . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 There are 218 listed buildings in Shepton Mallet and the town is in receipt of funding for the restoration of chosen town @-@ centre historic buildings from the English Heritage Heritage Economic Regeneration Scheme and the National Lottery Townscape Heritage Initiative . The town centre , and the Bowlish , Darshill and Charlton areas , form a conservation area . 
 The hexagonal market cross in the town centre , 50 ft ( 15 m ) tall , dates back to a bequest of £ 20 by Walter Buckland in 1520 , and was rebuilt in 1841 . Also in the market place is The Shambles , a medieval market stall , although it has been much restored . Former HM Prison Shepton Mallet sometimes known as Cornhill , was built in 1610 , is located close to the town centre , adjacent to the parish church . On 10 January 2013 , Justice Secretary Chris Grayling announced that it was one of seven prisons in England to close . On 24 December 2014 it was announced that the prison had been sold to Town & Country and public consultations are taking place to seek agreement on its future use . 
 There are a number of fine houses in the older parts of the town around Lower Lane and Leg Square , as well as in the outlying suburbs such as Charlton and Bowlish . Old Bowlish House , which now houses a contemporary art gallery , dates from the first half of the 17th century and was remodelled in about 1720 in the Palladian style . Bowlish House , also in the Palladian style and now a hotel and restaurant , was built in 1732 by a prosperous local clothier ; a spring is reported to rise in the cellar . Park House in Forum Lane dates to about 1700 and was modified about 1750 . Others among the 19 grade II listed buildings in Bowlish include Coombe House , which was built c . 1820 ; 14 , 15 and 16 Combe Lane , which were built around 1700 with 18th @-@ century alterations ; 26 to 29 Combe Lane , which is a former mill built around 1700 and enlarged in 1850 ; and 30 and 31 Combe Lane , which are two weaver 's cottages dating to about 1850 . What is now a stained glass studio in Ham Lane was formerly a coal store attached to a stable which belonged to the public house next door , The Butcher 's Arms , which ceased trading in 1860 . The studio has provided stained glass for , among others , the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Ghost , Midsomer Norton . As a consequence of its historic nature , Bowlish is included within Shepton Mallet 's conservation area and is a site of special archaeological interest . 
 In the hamlet of Darshill , on the road from Shepton Mallet to Wells , there is a silk drying shed , known locally as a handle house , three walls of which are full of holes to allow the passage of air to aid in the process of drying <unk> heads , which were used to raise the nap on cloth in the textile process . 
 The Anglo @-@ Bavarian Brewery was built in the 1860s and still dominates the western parts of Shepton Mallet ; fairly nearby is a former workhouse and then hospital , the Norah Fry Hospital , which was built in 1848 and has now been converted into housing . Two now @-@ disused railway viaducts are to be found in the town , including the Charlton Viaduct which has 27 arches , each spanning 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) . It is on a curve of 30 chains radius falling at 1 in 55 from each end to the midpoint . 
 The market cross , the prison and prison wall , The Merchants House ( 8 Market Place ) , Anglo @-@ Bavarian Brewery , Charlton Viaduct , the former St Michael 's Roman Catholic Church at Townsend , and Bowlish House , Old Bowlish House and Park House in Bowlish are the town 's nine grade II * listed buildings . 
 The town centre was extensively remodelled in the 1970s , a scheme financed by the Showerings family who owned the town 's cider manufactories . The scheme included a new library ( in a faithful copy of a former inn , The Bunch of Grapes , which had been demolished ) , and a new entertainment complex called The Centre , entirely in concrete , on the eastern side of the market square . When the allegedly Roman Chi Rho amulet was found in the Fosse Lane excavations in the 1990s , the complex was renamed The Amulet in honour of the find . It has recently been renamed again as The Academy . 
 Shepton benefits from a sizeable park , a gift of land from a local man , John Kyte Collett . As a boy he was thrown out of the grounds of local estates for trespass so in later life he purchased and gave land to the town to provide a public space ; this park , which opened in 1906 , is called Collett Park in his honour . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 The Grade I listed parish church of St Peter and St Paul dates from the 12th century , but the current building is largely from the 15th century , with further rebuilding in 1836 . The oak wagon roof , made up of 350 panels of different designs , separated by 396 carved foliage bosses ( supposedly every one different ) and with 36 carved angels along the sides , was described by British historian Nikolaus Pevsner as " the finest 15th century carved oak wagon @-@ roof in England " . It was restored , at a cost of £ 5 @,@ 000 , in 1953 – 54 . 
 The former St Michael 's Roman Catholic Church , which was built in 1804 , is now a warehouse . A modern Catholic Church , built in 1966 , is located in Park Road . There was also , between 1810 and 1831 , a convent of the Order of the Visitation of Holy Mary ( also known as the Salesian Sisters ) based in a mansion in Draycott Road . The building , which is now known as Sales House , was subsequently used as a Lodge by Shepton Mallet 's freemasons , and is now used as social housing . 
 The Salvation Army has meeting rooms in the town , whilst the local Methodists , who previously worshipped in their own Chapel in Paul Street ( built in 1810 ; it is now a community centre ) , have an agreement to share the parish church with the Anglican congregation . The Baptist Chapel in Commercial Road was built in 1801 as a Congregational Church . There were previously a number of other non @-@ conformist chapels in Shepton , the most notable of which is the Unitarian Chapel on Cowl Street which was built in 1692 and enlarged in 1758 ; it is now a private dwelling . 
 = = Education = = 
 There are three primary schools within Shepton Mallet . Shepton Mallet Infants School on Waterloo Road was rated as good by Ofsted in 2013 . St Paul 's Junior School on Commercial Road was assessed as good in 2008 , as was Bowlish Primary School when it was last inspected in 2007 . 
 Education for 11- to 16 @-@ year @-@ olds is provided by <unk> School , which is a Technology College . In 2013 , it was assessed by Ofsted as good . For post @-@ 16 education , students travel to colleges in other local towns , for example Frome Community College , Strode College in Street or Norton Radstock College in Midsomer Norton . 
 = = Culture = = 
 During the summer of 2010 , the television production company Wall to Wall filmed a series for BBC One in the town centre which was broadcast from 2 November 2010 . Called Turn Back Time – The High Street , the series features a number of families running traditional bakers , butchers , grocers , and <unk> shops , as well as a tea room , as they would have been during the Victorian and Edwardian eras , during World War II , and in the 1960s and 1970s . 
 A town fete called Collett Day is held in June in the town 's Collett Park . A free one @-@ day agricultural show , the Mid @-@ Somerset Show , is held on fields on Shepton Mallet 's southern edge in August . 
 The Glastonbury Festival , the largest music festival in Europe , is held slightly west of the village of Pilton , approximately 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) south @-@ west of Shepton . The Bath Festival of Blues and Progressive Music was held at Shepton Mallet in 1970 . The town also hosts the annual Shepton Mallet Digital Arts Festival which was founded in 2009 . 
 In 2007 , The Amulet complex in the town centre became the base for the Bristol Academy of Performing Arts ( <unk> ) , and the complex was renamed The Academy . In 2009 , <unk> went into administration and was briefly replaced by the Musical Theatre School , before that also failed . The complex 's auditorium has the only suspended seating system in the United Kingdom . 
 The town 's weekly newspaper , part of the Mid Somerset Series , is called the Shepton Mallet Journal . The town is also covered by the Fosse Way Magazine and Mendip Times . 
 In 2007 , Shepton Mallet came to international attention when Westcountry Farmhouse Cheesemakers broadcast the maturation of a round of Cheddar cheese called <unk> , an event that attracted more than 1 @.@ 5 million viewers . 
 = = Sport and leisure = = 
 Shepton Mallet has a Non @-@ League football club Shepton Mallet F.C. who play at The Playing Fields . 
 Shepton Mallet has a hockey club who play at the leisure centre 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Edmund Adams ( 1915 – 2005 ) , cricketer , was born in Shepton Mallet . 
 Simon Browne ( 1680 – 1732 ) , a dissenting preacher and theologian , born in Shepton Mallet . He preached at Old Jewry in London and in Portsmouth . 
 Christopher Cazenove ( 1945 – 2010 ) , cinema , television and stage actor , lived at Ham Manor in Bowlish , near Shepton Mallet , as a child . 
 William Henry Coombes ( 1767 – 1850 ) , Catholic theologian , was a priest in Shepton Mallet from 1810 to 1849 and then retired to nearby Downside Abbey . 
 Herbert <unk> ( 1849 – 1936 ) , economist , was born in Shepton Mallet on 17 June 1849 . 
 Sir Ronald Gould ( 1904 – 1986 ) , general secretary of the National Union of Teachers from 1947 to 1970 , was educated at Shepton Mallet Grammar School . 
 Racey Helps ( 1913 – 1970 ) , children 's writer and illustrator , lived in the town in the 1940s . 
 Hugh Inge or <unk> ( died 1528 ) , Archbishop of Dublin and Lord Chancellor of Ireland , was a native of Shepton Mallet . 
 John Lewis ( 1836 – 1928 ) , founder of the British department store John Lewis , was born in Town Street in Shepton Mallet on 24 February 1836 . 
 Frank Tuohy ( 1925 – 1999 ) , novelist and short @-@ story writer , lived in Shepton Mallet following his retirement , and died in the town 's hospital on 11 April 1999 . 
 = = Twin towns = = 
 Shepton Mallet is twinned with : <unk> in Germany ; <unk> in <unk> County , Sweden ; and <unk> sur Seine in Haute @-@ Normandie , France . 
 = M @-@ 68 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 68 is an east – west state trunkline highway located in the northern part of the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . The western terminus of the highway begins four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) east of the Little Traverse Bay of Lake Michigan and ends a few blocks from Lake Huron in Rogers City . M @-@ 68 skirts just south of Indian River and Burt Lake . 
 The first incarnation of M @-@ 68 existed in the Upper Peninsula before being absorbed into M @-@ 35 . The current designation was created in 1936 . A segment of highway once used by US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) was incorporated into the trunkline as a discontinuous section in the early 1940s until it was later connected in 1946 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 68 starts in the community of Alanson 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) east of Little Traverse Bay in Emmet County . US 31 runs along Burr Avenue parallel to the former Grand Rapids and Indiana Railroad line and depot in town . M @-@ 68 starts at an intersection between Chicago Street and Burr Avenue . The trunkline runs southeasterly from this intersection and on a bridge over the Crooked River . After leaving town , the highway curves to run due east through hilly terrain . After crossing the Cheboygan County line , the roadway meets the community of Burt Lake . It curves southeasterly along the shoreline of the lake of the same name . The roadway rounds the south end of Burt Lake and approaches the community of Indian River . South of Burt Lake State Park , the trunkline meets Straits Highway , the former routing of US 27 through Indian River . M @-@ 68 turns north along Straits Highway through downtown and then turns east toward Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) . It is along this section of M @-@ 68 that the roadway crosses the Sturgeon River . The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) measured the highest annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) figures for M @-@ 68 along the section of highway west of Indian River . AADT is a measure of the average number of vehicles using a segment of roadway on any given day of the year , and for 2007 , MDOT measured it at 9 @,@ 200 vehicles daily . 
 After crossing I @-@ 75 at exit 310 , M @-@ 68 heads southeasterly , parallel to the Crumley Creek , out of town . The roadway continues through hilly terrain and crosses the Pigeon River on the route to Afton . M @-@ 68 merges with M @-@ 33 east of Afton . M @-@ 33 curves from the north toward the east . There is a small connector in this intersection to allow southbound M @-@ 33 traffic to turn west along M @-@ 68 instead of merging into the combined eastbound M @-@ 33 / M @-@ 68 traffic . The two highways continue together in a concurrency through the wooded , hilly terrain to the unincorporated community of Tower , where they cross the Black River . It is east of this river crossing where the highway meets the southern end of F @-@ 05 , a County @-@ Designated Highway that runs along Black River Road . 
 M @-@ 33 / M @-@ 68 cross into Presque Isle County just west of Onaway . M @-@ 68 turns northwest along Washington Avenue , and M @-@ 33 turns south along Michigan Street . M @-@ 68 turns east on State Street through downtown and runs out of town to cross the Rainy River in rural Presque Isle County . East of the Ocqueoc River crossing , M @-@ 68 turns north along Millersburg Road . The highway later curves back to the east near Ocqueoc Falls Highway , home of a bridge that carried the highway before 1954 . M @-@ 68 continues to follow Hutchinson Road eastward over the Little Ocqueoc River and on to the Rogers City area . This section of highway had the lowest AADT levels in 2007 at 1 @,@ 400 vehicles daily . The highway turns northeasterly after intersecting Airport Highway on the outskirts of town . Renamed as Erie Street , M @-@ 68 meets US 23 southwest of downtown . The highway continues along Erie Street until meeting Bus . US 23 , which runs along Third Street . This intersection marks the end of M @-@ 68 , four blocks from Lake Huron , 53 @.@ 390 miles ( 85 @.@ 923 km ) from its start in Alanson . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous incarnation = = = 
 The first highway to bear the M @-@ 68 designation was located in the western Upper Peninsula . It ran north from Rockland to Ontonagon and then westerly toward Silver City in 1919 . This roadway was redesignated by 1927 as a segment of M @-@ 35 . 
 = = = Current incarnation = = = 
 M @-@ 68 was designated along a segment of its current roadway in 1936 . The roadway connecting Alanson and Indian River was given the M @-@ 68 designation , while US 23 was routed between Rogers City and Afton . When US 23 was moved to its current lakeshore routing between Rogers City and Cheboygan in 1940 , M @-@ 33 was extended westerly from Onaway to Afton and north to Cheboygan over the former US 23 roadway . The Afton – Onaway segment of M @-@ 33 and the remainder of the former US 23 east of Onaway was designated as a second segment of M @-@ 68 as well . The gap between these two segments was eliminated by July 1946 . 
 Two realignments were made to the highways routing . The first bypassed a bridge over the Ocqueoc River in Presque Isle County in 1954 . This 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) bridge was built in 1920 at a cost of $ 8 @,@ 849 ( equivalent to $ 588 @,@ 744 in 2015 ) in the filled spandrel arch style . A second change in the routing between 1961 and 1962 moved the trunkline to a more direct connection between Indian River and Afton . This change also bypassed the last remaining gravel section of the highway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = History of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth ( 1569 – 1648 ) = 
 History of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth ( 1569 – 1648 ) covers a period in the history of Poland and Lithuania , before their joint state was subjected to devastating wars in the middle of the 17th century . The Union of Lublin of 1569 established the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , a more closely unified federal state , replacing the previously existing personal union of the two countries . The Union was largely run by the Polish and increasingly Polonized Lithuanian and Ruthenian nobility , through the system of the central parliament and local assemblies , but from 1573 led by elected kings . The formal rule of the proportionally more numerous than in other European countries nobility constituted a sophisticated early democratic system , in contrast to the absolute monarchies prevalent at that time in the rest of Europe . 
 The Polish – Lithuanian Union had become an influential player in Europe and a vital cultural entity , spreading Western culture eastward . In the second half of the 16th and the first half of the 17th century , the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth was a huge state in central @-@ eastern Europe , with an area approaching one million square kilometers . 
 Following the Reformation gains ( the Warsaw Confederation of 1573 was the culmination of the unique in Europe religious toleration processes ) , the Catholic Church embarked on an ideological counter @-@ offensive and Counter @-@ Reformation claimed many converts from Protestant circles . Disagreements over and difficulties with the assimilation of the eastern Ruthenian populations of the Commonwealth had become clearly discernible . At an earlier stage ( from the late 16th century ) , they manifested themselves in the religious Union of Brest , which split the Eastern Christians of the Commonwealth , and on the military front , in a series of Cossack uprisings . 
 The Commonwealth , assertive militarily under King Stephen Báthory , suffered from dynastic distractions during the reigns of the Vasa kings Sigismund III and Władysław IV . It had also become a playground of internal conflicts , in which the kings , powerful <unk> and factions of nobility were the main actors . The Commonwealth fought wars with Russia , Sweden and the Ottoman Empire . At the Commonwealth 's height , some of its powerful neighbors experienced difficulties of their own and the Polish – Lithuanian state sought domination in Eastern Europe , in particular over Russia . Allied with the Habsburg Monarchy , it did not directly participate in the Thirty Years ' War . 
 Tsar Ivan IV of Russia undertook in 1577 hostilities in the Livonian region , which resulted in his takeover of most of the area and caused the Polish – Lithuanian involvement in the Livonian War . The successful counter @-@ offensive led by King Báthory and Jan Zamoyski resulted in the peace of 1582 and the retaking of much of the territory contested with Russia , with the Swedish forces establishing themselves in the far north ( Estonia ) . Estonia was declared a part of the Commonwealth by Sigismund III in 1600 , which gave rise to a war with Sweden over Livonia ; the war lasted until 1611 without producing a definite outcome . 
 In 1600 , as Russia was entering a period of instability , the Commonwealth proposed a union with the Russian state . This failed move was followed by many other similarly unsuccessful , often adventurous attempts , some involving military invasions , other dynastic and diplomatic manipulations and scheming . While the differences between the two societies and empires proved in the end too formidable to overcome , the Polish – Lithuanian state ended up in 1619 , after the Truce of Deulino , with the greatest ever expansion of its territory . At the same time it was weakened by the huge military effort made . 
 In 1620 the Ottoman Empire under Sultan Osman II declared a war against the Commonwealth . At the disastrous Battle of Ţuţora Hetman Stanisław Żółkiewski was killed and the Commonwealth 's situation in respect to the Turkish @-@ Tatar invasion forces became very precarious . A mobilization in Poland @-@ Lithuania followed and when Hetman Jan Karol Chodkiewicz 's army withstood fierce enemy assaults at the Battle of Khotyn ( 1621 ) , the situation improved on the southeastern front . More warfare with the Ottomans followed in 1633 – 1634 and vast expanses of the Commonwealth had been subjected to Tatar incursions and slave @-@ taking expeditions throughout the period . 
 War with Sweden , now under Gustavus Adolphus , resumed in 1621 with his attack on Riga , followed by the Swedish occupation of much of Livonia , control of Baltic Sea coast up to Puck and the blockade of Danzig . The Commonwealth , exhausted by the warfare that had taken place elsewhere , in 1626 – 1627 mustered a response , utilizing the military talents of Hetman Stanisław Koniecpolski and help from Austria . Under pressure from several European powers , the campaign was stopped and ended in the Truce of Altmark , leaving in Swedish hands much of what Gustavus Adolphus had conquered . 
 Another war with Russia followed in 1632 and was concluded without much change in the status quo . King Władysław IV then proceeded to recover the lands lost to Sweden . At the conclusion of the hostilities , Sweden evacuated the cities and ports of Royal Prussia but kept most of Livonia . Courland , which had remained with the Commonwealth , assumed the servicing of Lithuania 's Baltic trade . After Frederick William 's last Prussian homage before the Polish king in 1641 , the Commonwealth 's position in regard to Prussia and its Hohenzollern rulers kept getting weaker . 
 = = Elective monarchy and republic of nobility = = 
 At the outset of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , in the second half of the 16th century , Poland – Lithuania became an elective monarchy , in which the king was elected by the hereditary nobility . This king would serve as the monarch until he died , at which time the country would have another election . This monarchy has been commonly referred to as a <unk> or republic , because of the high degree of influence wielded by the noble classes , often seen as a single non @-@ homogenous class . 
 In 1572 , Sigismund II Augustus , the last king of the Jagiellonian dynasty , died without any heirs . The political system was not prepared for this eventuality , as there was no method of choosing a new king . After much debate it was determined that the entire nobility of Poland and Lithuania would decide who the king was to be . The nobility were to gather at Wola , near Warsaw , to vote in the royal election . 
 The election of Polish kings lasted until the Partitions of Poland . The elected kings in chronological order were : Henry of Valois , Anna Jagiellon , Stephen Báthory , Sigismund III Vasa , Władysław IV , John II Casimir , Michael Korybut Wiśniowiecki , John III Sobieski , Augustus II the Strong , Stanisław Leszczyński , Augustus III and Stanisław August Poniatowski . 
 The first Polish royal election was held in 1573 . The four men running for the office were Henry of Valois , who was the brother of King Charles IX of France , Tsar Ivan IV of Russia , Archduke Ernest of Austria , and King John III of Sweden . Henry of Valois ended up a winner . But after serving as the Polish king for only four months , he received the news that his brother , the King of France , had died . Henry of Valois then abandoned his Polish post and went back to France , where he succeeded to the throne as Henry III of France . 
 A few of the elected kings left a lasting mark in the Commonwealth . Stephen Báthory was determined to reassert the deteriorated royal prerogative , at the cost of alienating the powerful noble families . Sigismund III , Władysław IV and John Casimir were all of the Swedish House of Vasa ; preoccupation with foreign and dynastic affairs prevented them from making a major contribution to the stability of Poland @-@ Lithuania . John III Sobieski commanded the allied Relief of Vienna operation in 1683 , which turned out to be the last great victory of the " Republic of Both Nations " . Stanisław August Poniatowski , the last of the Polish kings , was a controversial figure . On the one hand he was a driving force behind the substantial and constructive reforms belatedly undertaken by the Commonwealth . On the other , by his weakness and lack of resolve , especially in dealing with imperial Russia , he doomed the reforms together with the country they were supposed to help . 
 The Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , following the Union of Lublin , became a counterpoint to the absolute monarchies gaining power in Europe . Its quasi @-@ democratic political system of Golden Liberty , albeit limited to nobility , was mostly unprecedented in the history of Europe . In itself , it constituted a fundamental precedent for the later development of European constitutional monarchies . 
 However the series of power struggles between the lesser nobility ( szlachta ) , the higher nobility ( magnates ) , and elected kings , undermined citizenship values and gradually eroded the government 's authority , ability to function and provide for national defense . The infamous liberum veto procedure was used to paralyze parliamentary proceedings beginning in the second half of the 17th century . After the series of devastating wars in the middle of the 17th century ( most notably the Chmielnicki Uprising and the Deluge ) , Poland @-@ Lithuania stopped being an influential player in the politics of Europe . During the wars the Commonwealth lost an estimated 1 / 3 of its population ( higher losses than during World War II ) . Its economy and growth were further damaged by the nobility 's reliance on agriculture and serfdom , which , combined with the weakness of the urban burgher class , delayed the industrialization of the country . 
 By the beginning of the 18th century , the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , one of the largest and most populous European states , was little more than a pawn of its neighbors ( the Russian Empire , Prussia and Austria ) , who interfered in its domestic politics almost at will . In the second half of the 18th century , the Commonwealth was repeatedly partitioned by the neighboring powers and ceased to exist . 
 = = Economic and social developments = = 
 The agricultural trade boom in Eastern Europe showed the first signs of the approaching crisis in the 1580s , when food prices stopped increasing . It was followed by a gradual decline in agricultural products prices , a price depression , initially present in Western Europe . The negative consequences of this process on folwark economies of the East had reached its culmination in the second half of the 17th century . Further economic aggravation resulted from Europe @-@ wide devaluation of the currency around 1620 , caused by the influx of silver from the Western Hemisphere . At that time however massive amounts of Polish grain were still exported through Danzig ( Gdańsk ) . The Commonwealth nobility took a variety of steps to combat the crisis and keep up high production levels , burdening in particular the serfs with further heavy obligations . The nobles were also forcibly buying or taking over properties of the more affluent thus far peasant categories , a phenomenon especially pronounced from the mid 17th century . 
 Capital and energy of urban <unk> affected the development of mining and metallurgy during the earlier Commonwealth period . There were several hundred <unk> shops at the turn of the 17th century . Great ironworks furnaces were built in the first half of that century . Mining and metallurgy of silver , copper and lead had also been developed . Expansion of salt production was taking place in Wieliczka , Bochnia and elsewhere . After about 1700 some of the industrial enterprises were increasingly being taken over by land owners who used serf labor , which led to their neglect and decline in the second half of the 17th century . 
 Danzig had remained practically autonomous and adamant about protecting its status and foreign trade monopoly . The Karnkowski Statutes of 1570 gave Polish kings the control over maritime commerce , but not even Stephen Báthory , who resorted to an armed intervention against the city , was able to enforce them . Other Polish cities held steady and prosperous through the first half of the 17th century . War disasters in the middle of that century devastated the urban classes . 
 A rigid social separation legal system , intended to prevent any inter @-@ class mobility , matured around the first half of the 17th century . But the nobility 's goal of becoming self @-@ contained and impermeable to newcomers had never been fully realized , as in practice even peasants on occasions acquired the noble status . Later numerous Polish szlachta clans had had such " illegitimate " beginnings . Szlachta found justification for their self @-@ appointed dominant role in a peculiar set of attitudes , known as sarmatism , that they had adopted . 
 The Union of Lublin accelerated the process of massive Polonization of Lithuanian and Rus ' elites and general nobility in Lithuania and the eastern borderlands , the process that retarded national development of local populations there . In 1563 , Sigismund Augustus belatedly allowed the Eastern Orthodox Lithuanian nobility access to highest offices in the Duchy , but by that time the act was of little practical consequence , as there were few Orthodox nobles of any standing left and the encroaching Catholic Counter @-@ Reformation would soon nullify the gains . Many magnate families of the east were of Ruthenian origin ; their inclusion in the enlarged Crown made the magnate class much stronger politically and economically . Regular szlachta , increasingly dominated by the great land owners , lacked the will to align themselves with Cossack settlers in Ukraine to counterbalance the magnate power , and in the area of Cossack acceptance , integration and rights resorted to delayed and ineffective half @-@ measures . The peasantry was being subjected to heavier burdens and more oppression . For those reasons , the way in which the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth expansion took place and developed had caused an aggravation of both the social and national tensions , introduced a fundamental instability into the system , and ultimately resulted in the future crises of the " Republic of Nobles " . 
 = = Western and Eastern Christianity : Counter @-@ Reformation , Union of Brest = = 
 The increasingly uniform and polonized ( in the case of ethnic minorities ) szlachta of the Commonwealth for the most part returned to the Roman Catholic religion , or if already Catholic remained Catholic , in the course of the 17th century . 
 Already the Sandomierz Agreement of 1570 , which was an early expression of Protestant <unk> later prominent in Europe and Poland , had a self @-@ defensive character , because of the intensification of Counter @-@ Reformation pressure at that time . The agreement strengthened the Protestant position and made the Warsaw Confederation religious freedom guarantees in 1573 possible . 
 At the heyday of Reformation in the Commonwealth , at the end of the 16th century , there were about one thousand Protestant congregations , nearly half of them Calvinist . Half a century later , only 50 % of them had survived , with the burgher Lutheranism suffering lesser losses , the szlachta dominated Calvinism and <unk> ( Polish Brethren ) the greatest . The closing of the Brethren <unk> Academy and a printing facility in <unk> on charges of blasphemy in 1638 forewarned of more trouble to come . 
 This Counter @-@ Reformation offensive happened somewhat mysteriously in a country , where there were no religious wars and the state had not cooperated with the Catholic Church in eradicating or limiting competing denominations . Among the factors responsible , low Protestant involvement among the masses , especially of peasantry , pro @-@ Catholic position of the kings , low level of involvement of the nobility once the religious emancipation had been accomplished , internal divisions within the Protestant movement , and the rising intensity of the Catholic Church propaganda , have been listed . 
 The ideological war between the Protestant and Catholic camps at first enriched the intellectual life of the Commonwealth . The Catholic Church responded to the challenges with internal reform , following the directions of the Council of Trent , officially accepted by the Polish Church in 1577 , but implemented not until after 1589 and throughout the 17th century . There were earlier efforts of reform , originating from the lower clergy , and from about 1551 by Bishop Stanislaus <unk> ( Stanisław <unk> ) of Warmia , a lone at that time among the Church hierarchy , but ardent reformer . At the turn of the 17th century , a number of Rome educated bishops took over the Church administration at the diocese level , clergy discipline was implemented and rapid intensification of Counter @-@ Reformation activities took place . 
 <unk> brought to Poland the Jesuits and founded for them a college in Braniewo in 1564 . Numerous Jesuit educational institutions and residencies were established in the following decades , most often in the vicinity of centers of Protestant activity . Jesuit priests were carefully selected , well educated , of both noble and urban origins . They had soon become highly influential with the royal court , while working hard within all segments of the society . The Jesuit educational programs and Counter @-@ Reformation propaganda utilized many innovative media techniques , often custom @-@ tailored for a particular audience on hand , as well as time @-@ tried methods of humanist instruction . Preacher Piotr Skarga and Bible translator Jakub Wujek count among prominent Jesuit personalities . 
 Catholic efforts to win the population countered the Protestant idea of a national church with Polonization , or nationalization of the Catholic Church in the Commonwealth , introducing a variety of native elements to make it more accessible and attractive to the masses . The Church hierarchy went along with the notion . The changes that took place during the 17th century defined the character of Polish Catholicism for centuries to come . 
 The apex of the Counter @-@ Reformation activity had fallen on the turn of the 17th century , the earlier years of the reign of Sigismund III Vasa ( Zygmunt III Waza ) , who in cooperation with the Jesuits and some other Church circles attempted to strengthen the power of his monarchy . The King tried to limit access to higher offices to Catholics . Anti @-@ Protestant riots took place in some cities . During the Sandomierz Rebellion of 1606 the Protestants supported the anti @-@ King opposition in large numbers . Nevertheless , the massive wave of szlachta 's return to Catholicism could not have been stopped . 
 Although attempts were made during the common Protestant @-@ Orthodox congregations in Toruń in 1595 and in Vilnius in 1599 , the failure of the Protestant movement to form an alliance with the Eastern Orthodox Christians , the inhabitants of the eastern portion of the Commonwealth , contributed to the Protestants ' downfall . The Polish Catholic establishment would not miss the opportunity to form a union with the Orthodox , although their goal was rather the subjugation of the Eastern Rite Christians to the pope ( the papacy solicited help in bringing the " schism " under control ) and the Commonwealth 's Catholic centers of power . The Orthodox establishment was perceived as a security threat , because of the Eastern Rite bishops dependence on the Patriarchate of Constantinople at the time of an aggravating conflict with the Ottoman Empire , and because of the recent development , the establishment in 1589 of the Moscow Patriarchate . The Patriarchate of Moscow then claimed ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the Orthodox Christians of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , which to many of them was a worrisome development , motivating them to accept the alternate option of union with the West . The union idea had the support of King Sigismund III and the Polish nobility in the east ; opinions were divided among the church and lay leaders of the Eastern Orthodox faith . 
 The Union of Brest act was negotiated and solemnly concluded in 1595 – 1596 . It had not merged the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox denominations , but led to the establishment of the Slavic language liturgy Uniate Church , which was to become an Eastern Catholic Church , one of the Greek Catholic Churches ( presently Ukrainian Greek Catholic and Belarusian Greek Catholic ) . The new church , of the Byzantine Rite , accepted papal supremacy , while it retained in most respects its Eastern Rite character . The compromise union was flawed from the beginning , because despite the initial agreement , the Greek @-@ Catholic bishops were not , like their Roman Catholic counterparts , seated in the Senate , and the Eastern Rite participants of the union had not been granted full general equality they expected . 
 The Union of Brest increased antagonisms among the Belarusian and Ukrainian communities of the Commonwealth , within which the Orthodox Church had remained the most potent religious force . It added to the already prominent ethnic and class fragmentation and became one more reason for internal infighting that was to impair the Republic . The Eastern Orthodox nobility , branded " <unk> " and deprived of legal standing , led by Konstanty Ostrogski commenced a fight for their rights . Prince Ostrogski had been a leader of an Orthodox intellectual revival in Polish Ukraine . In 1576 , he founded an elite liberal arts secondary and academic school , the <unk> Academy , with trilingual instruction . In 1581 , he and his academy were instrumental in the publication of the <unk> Bible , the Bible 's first scholarly Orthodox Church Slavonic edition . As a result of the efforts , parliamentary statutes of 1607 , 1609 and 1635 recognized the Orthodox religion again , as one of the two equal Eastern churches . The restoration of Orthodox hierarchy and administrative structure proved difficult ( most bishops had become <unk> , and their Orthodox replacements of 1620 and 1621 were not recognized by the Commonwealth ) and was officially done only during the reign of Władysław IV . Władysław , facing the Cossack rebellions , put an end to decades of efforts aimed at using the Uniate Church as an instrument of attempted elimination of the Orthodox religion . By that time many of the Orthodox nobles had become Catholics , and the Orthodox leadership fell into the hands of townspeople and lesser nobility organized into church brotherhoods , and the new power in the east , the Cossack warrior class . Metropolitan Peter Mogila of Kiev , who organized an influential academy there , contributed greatly to the rebuilding and reform of the Orthodox Church . 
 The Uniate Church , created for the Ruthenian population of the Commonwealth , in its administrative dealings gradually switched to the Polish language use . From about 1650 , the majority of the Church 's archival documents generated were in the Polish , rather than in the otherwise used Ruthenian ( its Chancery Slavonic variety ) , language . 
 = = Culture of Early Baroque = = 
 The Baroque style dominated the Polish culture from the 1580s , building on the achievements of the Renaissance and for a while coexisting with it , to the mid 18th century . Initially Baroque artists and intellectuals , torn between the two competing views of the world , enjoyed wide latitude and freedom of expression . Soon however the Counter @-@ Reformation instituted a binding point of view that invoked the medieval tradition , imposed censorship in education and elsewhere ( the index of prohibited books in Poland from 1617 ) , and straightened out their convoluted ways . By the middle of the 17th century the doctrine had been firmly reestablished , sarmatism and religious zealotry had become the norm . Artistic tastes of the epoch were often acquiring an increasingly Oriental character . In contrast with the integrative tendencies of the previous period , the burgher and nobility cultural spheres went their separate ways . Renaissance publicist Stanisław <unk> had already provided the foundations for Baroque szlachta 's political thinking . 
 At that time there were about forty Jesuit colleges ( secondary schools ) scattered throughout the Commonwealth . They were educating mostly szlachta , burgher sons to a lesser degree . Jan Zamoyski , Chancellor of the Crown , who built the town of Zamość , established an academy there in 1594 ; it had functioned as a gymnasium only after Zamoyski 's death . The first two Vasa kings were well known for patronizing both the arts and sciences . After that the Commonwealth 's science experienced general decline , which paralleled the wartime decline of the burgher class . 
 By the mid 16th century Poland 's university , the Academy of Kraków , entered a crisis stage , and by the early 17th century regressed into Counter @-@ <unk> conformism . The Jesuits took advantage of the infighting and established in 1579 a university college in Vilnius , but their efforts aimed at taking over the Academy were unsuccessful . Under the circumstances many elected to pursue their studies abroad . Jan <unk> , a rector of the Kraków University , was a multidisciplinary scholar who worked on number theory and promoted Copernicus ' work . He was banned by the Church in 1616 and his anti @-@ Jesuit pamphlet was publicly burned . <unk> 's co @-@ worker , Stanisław <unk> , worked on a system of measurements based on physical phenomena . 
 Michał <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) was a famous in Europe alchemist , who wrote a number of treatises in several languages , beginning with Novum Lumen <unk> ( 1604 , with over fifty editions and translations in the 17th and 18th centuries ) . A member of Emperor Rudolph II 's circle of scientists and sages , he is believed by some authorities to have been a pioneer chemist and a discoverer of oxygen , long before Lavoisier ( <unk> ' works were studied by leading scientists , including Isaac Newton ) . 
 The early Baroque period produced a number of noted poets . Sebastian <unk> wrote metaphysical and mystical religious poetry representing the passive current of <unk> . Another szlachta poet Samuel Twardowski participated in military and other historic events ; among the genres he pursued was epic poetry . Urban poetry was quite vital until the middle of the 17th century ; the plebeian poets criticized the existing social order and continued within the ambiance of elements of the Renaissance style . The creations of John of <unk> contained a hearty dose of social radicalism . The moralist Sebastian <unk> wrote a symbolic poem <unk> using the setting of Vistula river craft floating work . Szymon <unk> in his <unk> portrayed , without embellishments , the hardships of serf life . Maciej <unk> , a Jesuit , was highly appreciated throughout Europe for the Latin poetry he wrote . 
 The preeminent prose of the period was written by Piotr Skarga , the preacher @-@ orator . In his Sejm Sermons Skarga severely criticized the nobility and the state , while expressing his support for a system based on strong monarchy . Writing of memoirs had become most highly developed in the 17th century . <unk> to the Holy Land by Mikołaj Radziwiłł and Beginning and Progress of the Muscovy War written by Stanisław Żółkiewski , one of the greatest Polish military commanders , are the best known examples . 
 One form of art particularly apt for Baroque purposes was the theater . Various theatrical shows were most often staged in conjunction with religious occasions and moralizing , and commonly utilized folk stylization . School theaters had become common among both the Protestant and Catholic secondary schools . A permanent court theater with an orchestra was established by Władysław IV at the Royal Castle in Warsaw in 1637 ; the actor troupe , dominated by Italians , performed primarily Italian opera and ballet repertoire . 
 Music , both sacral and secular , kept developing during the Baroque period . High quality church pipe organs were built in churches from the 17th century ; a fine specimen has been preserved in <unk> . Sigismund III supported an internationally renowned ensemble of sixty musicians . Working with that orchestra were Adam <unk> and his contemporary Marcin <unk> , chief composers of the courts of Sigismund III and Władysław IV . Jan Aleksander <unk> , a royal secretary , published in 1647 a popular music tutorial for beginners . 
 Martin Kober , a court painter from Wrocław , worked for Stephen Báthory and Sigismund III ; he produced a number of well @-@ known royal portraits . 
 Between 1580 and 1600 Jan Zamoyski commissioned the Venetian architect Bernardo <unk> to build the city of Zamość . The town and its fortifications were designed to consistently implement the Renaissance and Mannerism aesthetic paradigms . 
 Mannerism is the name sometimes given to the period in art history during which the late Renaissance coexisted with the early Baroque , in Poland the last quarter of the 16th century and the first quarter of the 17th century . Polish art remained influenced by the Italian centers , increasingly Rome , and increasingly by the art of the Netherlands . As a fusion of imported and local elements , it evolved into an original Polish form of the Baroque . 
 The Baroque art was developing to a great extent under the patronage of the Catholic Church , which utilized the art to facilitate religious influence , allocating for this purpose the very substantial financial resources at its disposal . The most important in this context art form was architecture , with features rather austere at first , accompanied in due time by progressively more elaborate and lavish facade and interior design concepts . 
 Beginning in the 1580s , a number of churches patterned after the Church of the Gesù in Rome had been built . Gothic and other older churches were increasingly being supplemented with Baroque style architectural additions , sculptures , wall paintings and other ornaments , which is conspicuous in many Polish churches today . The Royal Castle in Warsaw , after 1596 the main residence of the monarchs , was enlarged and rebuilt around 1611 . The Ujazdów Castle ( 1620s ) of the Polish kings turned out to be architecturally more influential , its design having been followed by a number of Baroque magnate residencies . 
 The role of Baroque sculpture was usually subordinate , as decorative elements of exteriors and interiors , and on tombstones . A famous exception is the Sigismund 's Column of Sigismund III Vasa ( 1644 ) in front of Warsaw 's Royal Castle . 
 Realistic religious painting , sometimes entire series of related works , served its didactic purpose . Nudity and mythological themes were banned , but other than that fancy collection of Western paintings were in vogue . Sigismund III brought from Venice Tommaso <unk> . A prolific painter , he was to spend the rest of his life in Kraków and give rise to a school of Polish painters working under his influence . Danzig ( Gdańsk ) was also a center for graphic arts ; painters Herman Han and Bartholomäus Strobel worked there , and so did Willem Hondius and Jeremias Falck , who were engravers . As compared with the previous century , even wider circles of the society participated in cultural activities , but Catholic Counter @-@ Reformation pressure resulted in diminished diversity . Catastrophic wars in the middle of the century greatly weakened the Commonwealth 's cultural development and influence in the region . 
 = = Sejm and sejmiks = = 
 After the Union of Lublin , the Senate of general sejm of the Commonwealth became augmented by Lithuanian high officials ; the position of the lay and ecclesiastical lords , who served for life as members of the Senate was strengthened , as the already outnumbered middle szlachta high office holders had now proportionally fewer representatives in the upper chamber . The Senate could also be convened separately by the king in its traditional capacity of the royal council , apart from any sejm 's formal deliberations , and szlachta 's attempts to limit the upper chamber 's role had not been successful . After the formal union and the addition of deputies from the Grand Duchy , and Royal Prussia , also more fully integrated with the Crown in 1569 , there were about 170 regional deputies in the lower chamber ( referred to as the Sejm ) and 140 senators . 
 Sejm deputies doing legislative work were generally not able to act as they pleased . Regional szlachta assemblies , the sejmiks , were summoned before sessions of general sejm ; there the local nobility provided their representatives with copious instructions on how to proceed and protect the interests of the area involved . Another sejmik was called after the Sejm 's conclusion . At that time the deputies would report to their constituency on what had been accomplished . 
 Sejmiks had become an important part of the Commonwealth 's parliamentary life , complementing the role of general sejm . They sometimes provided detailed implementations for general proclamations of sejms , or made legislative decisions during periods when the Sejm was not in session , at times communicating directly with the monarch . 
 There was little significant parliamentary representation for the burgher class , and none for the peasants . The Jewish communities sent representatives to their own Va 'ad , or Council of Four Lands . The narrow social base of the Commonwealth 's parliamentary system was detrimental to its future development and the future of the Polish – Lithuanian statehood . 
 From 1573 an " ordinary " general sejm was to be convened every two years , for a period of six weeks . A king could summon an " extraordinary " sejm for two weeks , as necessitated by circumstances ; an extraordinary sejm could be prolonged if the parliamentarians assented . After the Union the Sejm of the Republic deliberated in more centrally located Warsaw , except that Kraków had remained the location of coronation sejms . The turn of the 17th century brought also a permanent migration of the royal court from Kraków to Warsaw . 
 The order of sejm proceedings was formalized in the 17th century . The lower chamber would do most of the statute preparation work . The last several days were spent working together with the Senate and the king , when the final versions were agreed upon and decisions made ; the finished legislative product had to have the consent of all three legislating estates of the realm , the Sejm , the Senate , and the monarch . The lower chamber 's rule of unanimity had not been rigorously enforced during the first half of the 17th century . 
 General sejm was the highest organ of collective and consensus @-@ based state power . The Sejm 's supreme court , presided over by the king , decided the most serious of legal cases . During the second half of the 17th century , for a variety of reasons , including abuse of the unanimity rule ( liberum veto ) , sejm 's effectiveness had declined , and the void was being increasingly filled by sejmiks , where in practice the bulk of government 's work was getting done . 
 = = Nobility rule , first royal election = = 
 The system of noble democracy became more firmly rooted during the first interregnum , after the death of Sigismund II Augustus , who following the Union of Lublin wanted to reassert his personal power , rather than become an executor of szlachta 's will . A lack of agreement concerning the method and timing of the election of his successor was one of the casualties of the situation , and the conflict strengthened the Senate @-@ magnate camp . After the monarch 's 1572 death , to protect its common interests , szlachta moved to establish territorial confederations ( <unk> ) as provincial governments , through which public order was protected and basic court system provided . The magnates were able to push through their candidacy for the interrex or regent to hold the office until a new king is sworn , in the person of the primate , Jakub Uchański . The Senate took over the election preparations . The establishment 's proposition of universal szlachta participation ( rather than election by the Sejm ) appeared at that time to be the right idea to most szlachta factions ; in reality , during this first as well as subsequent elections , the magnates subordinated and directed , especially the poorer of szlachta . 
 During the interregnum the szlachta prepared a set of rules and limitations for the future monarch to obey as a safeguard to ensure that the new king , who was going to be a foreigner , complied with the peculiarities of the Commonwealth 's political system and respected the privileges of the nobility . As Henry of Valois was the first one to sign the rules , they became known as the Henrician Articles . The articles also specified the <unk> <unk> ( free election ) as the only way for any monarch 's successor to assume the office , thus precluding any possibility of hereditary monarchy in the future . The Henrician Articles summarized the accumulated rights of Polish nobility , including religious freedom guarantees , and introduced further restrictions on the elective king ; as if that were not enough , Henry also signed the so @-@ called pacta conventa , through which he accepted additional specific obligations . Newly crowned Henry soon embarked on a course of action intended to free him from all the encumbrances imposed , but the outcome of this power struggle was never to be determined . One year after the election , in June 1574 , upon learning of his brother 's death , Henry secretly left for France . 
 = = Stephen Báthory = = 
 In 1575 the nobility commenced a new election process . The magnates tried to force the candidacy of Emperor Maximilian II , and on 12 December Archbishop Uchański even announced his election . This effort was thwarted by the execution movement szlachta party led by Mikołaj Sienicki and Jan Zamoyski ; their choice was Stephen Báthory , Prince of Transylvania . Sienicki quickly arranged for a 15 December proclamation of Anna Jagiellon , sister of Sigismund Augustus , as the reigning queen , with Stefan Batory added as her husband and king jure uxoris . Szlachta 's pospolite ruszenie supported the selection with their arms . Batory took over Kraków , where the couple 's crowning ceremony took place on 1 May 1576 . 
 Stephen Báthory 's reign marks the end of szlachta 's reform movement . The foreign king was skeptical of the Polish parliamentary system and had little appreciation for what the execution movement activists had been trying to accomplish . Batory 's relations with Sienicki soon deteriorated , while other szlachta leaders had advanced within the nobility ranks , becoming senators or being otherwise preoccupied with their own careers . The reformers managed to move in 1578 in Poland and in 1581 in Lithuania the out @-@ of @-@ date appellate court system from the monarch 's domain to the Crown and Lithuanian Tribunals run by the nobility . The cumbersome sejm and sejmiks system , the ad hoc confederations , and the lack of efficient mechanisms for the implementation of the laws escaped the reformers ' attention or will to persevere . Many thought that the glorified nobility rule had approached perfection . 
 Jan Zamoyski , one of the most distinguished personalities of the period , became the king 's principal adviser and manager . A highly educated and cultivated individual , talented military chief and accomplished politician , he had often promoted himself as a tribune of his fellow szlachta . In fact in a typical magnate manner , Zamoyski accumulated multiple offices and royal land grants , removing himself far from the reform movement ideals he professed earlier . 
 The king himself was a great military leader and far @-@ sighted politician . Of Batory 's confrontations with members of the nobility , the famous case involved the Zborowski brothers : Samuel was executed on Zamoyski 's orders , Krzysztof was sentenced to banishment and property confiscation by the sejm court . A Hungarian , like other foreign rulers of Poland , Batory was concerned with the affairs of the country of his origin . Batory failed to enforce the Karnkowski 's Statutes and therefore was unable to control the foreign trade through Danzig ( Gdańsk ) , which was to have highly negative economic and political consequences for the Republic . In cooperation with his chancellor and later hetman Jan Zamoyski , he was largely successful in the Livonian war . At that time the Commonwealth was able to increase the magnitude of its military effort : The combined for a campaign armed forces from several sources available could be up to 60 @,@ 000 men strong . King Batory initiated the creation of piechota <unk> , an important peasant infantry military formation . 
 In 1577 Batory agreed to George Frederick of Brandenburg becoming a custodian for the mentally ill Albert Frederick , Duke of Prussia , which brought the two German polities closer together , to the detriment of the Commonwealth 's long @-@ term interests . 
 = = War with Russia over Livonia = = 
 King Sigismund Augustus ' <unk> Maris <unk> program , aimed at securing Poland 's access to and control over the portion of the Baltic region and ports that the country had vital interests in protecting , led to the Commonwealth 's participation in the Livonian conflict , which had also become another stage in the series of Lithuania 's and Poland 's confrontations with Russia . In 1563 Ivan IV took Polotsk . After the Stettin peace of 1570 ( which involved several powers , including Sweden and Denmark ) the Commonwealth remained in control of the main part of Livonia , including Riga and Pernau . In 1577 Ivan undertook a great expedition , taking over for himself , or his vassal Magnus , Duke of Holstein most of Livonia , except for the coastal areas of Riga and Reval . A success of the Polish – Lithuanian counter @-@ offensive became possible as Batory was able to secure the necessary funding from the nobility . 
 The Polish forces recovered Dünaburg and most of middle Livonia . The King and Zamoyski then opted for attacking directly the inland Russian territory necessary for keeping Russian communication lines to Livonia open and functioning . Polotsk was retaken in 1579 and the Velikiye <unk> fortress fell in 1580 . The take @-@ over of Pskov was attempted in 1581 , but Ivan Petrovich <unk> was able to defend the city despite a several months long siege . An armistice was arranged in Jam Zapolski in 1582 by the papal legate Antonio Possevino . The Russians evacuated all the Livonian castles they had captured , gave up the Polotsk area and left Velizh in Lithuanian hands . The Swedish forces , which took over Narva and most of Estonia , contributed to the victory . The Commonwealth ended up with the possession of the continuous Baltic coast from Puck to Pernau . 
 = = Sigismund III Vasa 's reign = = 
 There were several candidates for the Commonwealth crown considered after the death of Stephen Báthory , including Archduke Maximilian of Austria . Anna Jagiellon proposed and pushed for the election of her nephew Sigismund Vasa , son of John III , King of Sweden and Catherine <unk> and the Swedish heir apparent . The Zamoyski faction supported Sigismund , the faction led by the Zborowski family wanted Maximilian ; two separate elections took place and a civil war resulted . The Habsburg 's army entered Poland and attacked Kraków , but was repulsed there and then , while retreating in Silesia , crushed by the forces organized by Jan Zamoyski at the Battle of Byczyna ( 1588 ) , where Maximilian was taken prisoner . 
 In the meantime Sigismund also arrived and was crowned in Kraków , which initiated his long in the Commonwealth ( 1587 – 1632 ) reign as Zygmunt III Waza . The prospect of a personal union with Sweden raised for the Polish and Lithuanian ruling circles political and economic hopes , including favorable Baltic trade conditions and a common front against Russia 's expansion . However concerning the latter , the control of Estonia had soon become the bone of contention . Sigismund 's ultra @-@ Catholicism appeared threatening to the Swedish Protestant establishment and contributed to his dethronement in Sweden in 1599 . 
