 Inclined to form an alliance with the Habsburgs ( and even give up the Polish crown to pursue his ambitions in Sweden ) , Sigismund conducted secret negotiations with them and married Archduchess Anna . Accused by Zamoyski of breaking his covenants , Sigismund III was humiliated during the sejm of 1592 , which deepened his resentment of szlachta . Sigismund was bent on strengthening the power of the monarchy and Counter @-@ <unk> promotion of the Catholic Church ( Piotr Skarga was among his supporters ) . Indifferent to the increasingly common breaches of the Warsaw Confederation religious protections and instances of violence against the Protestants , the King was opposed by religious minorities . 
 1605 – 1607 brought fruitless confrontation between King Sigismund with his supporters and the coalition of opposition nobility . During the sejm of 1605 the royal court proposed a fundamental reform of the body itself , an adoption of the majority rule instead of the traditional practice of unanimous acclamation by all deputies present . Jan Zamoyski in his last public address reduced himself to a defense of szlachta prerogatives , thus setting the stage for the demagoguery that was to dominate the Commonwealth 's political culture for many decades . 
 For the sejm of 1606 the royal faction , hoping to take advantage of the glorious Battle of Kircholm victory and other successes , submitted a more comprehensive constructive reform program . Instead the sejm had become preoccupied with the dissident postulate of prosecuting instigators of religious disturbances directed against non @-@ Catholics ; advised by Skarga , the King refused his assent to the proposed statute . 
 The nobility opposition , suspecting an attempt against their liberties , called for a rokosz , or an armed confederation . Tens of thousands of disaffected szlachta , led by the ultra @-@ Catholic Mikołaj Zebrzydowski and Calvinist Janusz Radziwiłł , congregated in August near Sandomierz , giving rise to the so @-@ called Zebrzydowski Rebellion . 
 The Sandomierz articles produced by the rebels were concerned mostly with placing further limitations on the monarch 's power . Threatened by royal forces under Stanisław Żółkiewski , the confederates entered into an agreement with Sigismund , but then backed out of it and demanded the King 's deposition . The ensuing civil war was resolved at the Battle of Guzów , where the szlachta was defeated in 1607 . Afterwards however magnate leaders of the pro @-@ King faction made sure that Sigismund 's position would remain precarious , leaving arbitration powers within the Senate 's competence . Whatever was left of the execution movement had become thwarted together with the obstructionist szlachta elements , and a compromise solution to the crisis of authority was arrived at . But the victorious lords of the council had at their disposal no effective political machinery necessary to propagate the well @-@ being of the Commonwealth , still in its Golden Age ( or as some prefer Silver Age now ) , much further . 
 In 1611 John Sigismund , Elector of Brandenburg was allowed by the Commonwealth sejm to inherit the Duchy of Prussia fief , after the death of Albert Frederick , the last duke of the Prussian Hohenzollern line . The Brandenburg Hohenzollern branch led the Duchy from 1618 . 
 The reforms of the execution movement had clearly established the Sejm as the central and dominant organ of state power . But this situation in reality had not lasted very long , as various destructive decentralizing tendencies , steps taken by the szlachta and the kings , were progressively undermining and eroding the functionality and primacy of the central legislative organ . The resulting void was being filled during the late 16th and 17th centuries by the increasingly active and assertive territorial sejmiks , which provided a more accessible and direct forum for szlachta activists to promote their narrowly conceived local interests . Sejmiks established effective controls , in practice limiting the Sejm 's authority ; themselves they were taking on an ever broader range of state matters and local issues . 
 In addition to the destabilizing to the central authority role of the over 70 sejmiks , during the same period , the often unpaid army had begun establishing their own " confederations " , or rebellions . By plunder and terror they attempted to recover their compensation and pursue other , sometimes political aims . 
 Some reforms were being pursued by the more enlightened szlachta , who wanted to expand the role of the Sejm at the monarch 's and magnate faction 's expense , and by the elected kings . Sigismund III during the later part of his rule constructively cooperated with the Sejm , making sure that between 1616 and 1632 each session of the body produced the badly needed statutes . The increased efforts in the areas of taxation and maintenance of the military forces made possible the positive outcomes of some of the armed conflicts that took place during Sigismund 's reign . 
 = = Cossacks and Cossack rebellions = = 
 There weren 't very many Cossacks in the mid 16th century in the south @-@ eastern borderlands of Lithuania and Poland yet , but the first companies of Cossack light cavalry had become incorporated into the Polish armed forces already around that time . During the reign of Sigismund III Vasa , the Cossack problem was beginning to play its role as Rzeczpospolita 's preeminent internal challenge of the 17th century . 
 Conscious and planned colonization of the fertile , but underdeveloped region was pioneered in the 1580s and 1590s by the Ruthenian dukes of Volhynia . Of the Poles , only Jan Zamoyski , who penetrated the Bracław area , was economically active by the end of the 16th century . There and in the Kiev area Polish fortunes also began to develop , often through intermarriage with Ruthenian clans . In 1630 , the great Ukrainian latifundia were dominated by Ruthenian families , such as the Ostrogski , Zbaraski and Zasławski . At the outset of the great civil war of 1648 , the Polish settlers comprised barely 10 % of the middle and petty nobility , for example in the well @-@ researched Bracław Voivodeship and Kiev Voivodeship . The early Cossack rebellions were , therefore , instants of social uprising , rather than national anti @-@ Polish movements . As class warfare they were ruthlessly stamped out by the state , which would sometimes take their leaders to Warsaw for execution . 
 Cossacks were first semi @-@ nomadic , then also settled East Slavic people of the Dnieper River area , who practiced brigandage and plunder , and , renowned for their fighting prowess , early in their history assumed a military organization . Many of them were , or originated from run @-@ away peasants from the eastern and other areas of the Commonwealth or from Russia ; other significant elements were townspeople and even nobility , who came from the region or migrated into Ukraine . Cossacks considered themselves free and independent of any bondage and followed their own elected leaders , who originated from the more affluent strata of their society . There were tens of thousands of Cossacks already early in the 17th century . They had frequently clashed with the neighboring Turks and Tatars and raided their Black Sea coastal settlements . Such excursions , executed by formal subjects of the Polish king , were intolerable from the point of view of foreign relations of the Commonwealth , because they violated peace or interfered with the state 's current policy toward the Ottoman Empire . 
 During this earlier period of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , the separate Ukrainian national consciousness was being formed , influenced in part by the context and heroes of the Cossack uprisings . The legacy of Kievan Rus ' was recognized , as was the heritage of the East Slavic Ruthenian language . Cossacks felt being members of the " Rus ' Orthodox nation " ( the Uniate Church was practically eliminated in the Dnieper region in 1633 ) . But seeing themselves also as members of the ( Polish ) " Republic @-@ Fatherland " , they dealt with sejms and kings as its subjects . Cossacks and the Ruthenian nobility , until recently subjects of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania , were not formally or otherwise connected to the Tsardom of Russia . 
 Besides the leaders of the uprisings , Ukrainian personalities of the period included Dmytro <unk> , Samuel Zborowski , Konstanty <unk> Ostrogski and Petro Konashevych @-@ Sahaidachny . 
 Many Cossacks were being hired to participate in wars waged by the Commonwealth . This status resulted in privileges and often constituted a form of social upward mobility ; the Cossacks resented the periodic reductions in their enrollment . Cossack rebellions or uprisings typically assumed the form of huge plebeian social movements . 
 The Ottoman Empire demanded a total liquidation of the Cossack power . The Commonwealth , however , needed the Cossacks in the south @-@ east , where they provided an effective buffer against Crimean Tatars incursions . The other way to quell the Cossack unrest would be to grant the nobility status to a substantial portion of their population and thus assimilate them into the Commonwealth 's power structure , which was what Cossacks aspired to . This solution was being rejected by the magnates and szlachta for political , economic and cultural reasons when there was still time for reform , before disasters struck . The Polish – Lithuanian establishment had instead shifted unsteadily between compromising with the Cossacks , allowing limited varying numbers , the so @-@ called Cossack register ( 500 in 1582 , 8000 in the 1630s ) , to serve with the Commonwealth army ( the rest were to be converted into serfdom , to help the magnates in colonizing the Dnieper area ) , and brutally using military force in an attempt to subdue them . 
 <unk> efforts , often led by Poles , including Crown tenants or their Jewish <unk> , Ruthenian nobles of the Commonwealth and even upper @-@ rank Cossack officers , to subjugate and exploit economically the Cossack territories and population in Zaporizhia region , resulted in a series of Cossack uprisings , of which the early ones could have served as a warning for szlachta legislators . While Ukraine was undergoing substantial economic development , Cossacks and peasants were by and large not among the beneficiaries of the process . 
 In 1591 the bloodily suppressed Kosiński Uprising was led by Krzysztof Kosiński . New fighting took place already in 1594 , when the Nalyvaiko Uprising engulfed large portions of Ukraine and Belarus . Hetman Stanisław Żółkiewski defeated the Cossack units in 1596 and Severyn Nalyvaiko was executed . A temporary pacification of relations followed in the early 17th century , when the many wars fought by the Commonwealth necessitated greater involvement by registered Cossacks . But the Union of Brest resulted in new tensions , as the Cossacks had become dedicated adherents and defenders of the Eastern Orthodoxy . 
 The Time of Troubles period in Russia resulted in peasant rebellions , such as the one led by Ivan <unk> , which contributed also to peasant unrest in the Commonwealth and to further insurgency by the Cossacks there . 
 The uprising of Marek Zhmaylo of 1625 was confronted by Stanisław Koniecpolski and concluded with Mykhailo Doroshenko signing the Treaty of Kurukove . More fighting soon erupted and culminated in the " Taras night " of 1630 , when the Cossack rebels under Taras Fedorovych turned against army units and noble estates . The Fedorovych Uprising was put under control by Hetman Koniecpolski . These events were followed by an increase in the Cossack registry ( Treaty of Pereyaslav ) , but then a rejection of demands by Cossack elders during the convocation sejm of 1632 . Cossacks wanted to participate in free elections as members of the Commonwealth and have religious rights of the " <unk> " Eastern Christians restored . The 1635 sejm voted instead further restrictions and authorized the construction of the Dnieper Kodak Fortress , to facilitate more effective control over the Cossack territories . Another round of fighting , the <unk> Uprising , followed in 1637 – 1638 . It was defeated and its leader Pavel <unk> executed . Upon new anti @-@ Cossack limitations and sejm statutes imposing serfdom on most Cossacks , the Cossacks rose up again in 1638 under <unk> <unk> and Dmytro <unk> . The uprising was cruelly suppressed and the existing Cossack land properties were taken over by the magnates . 
 The Commonwealth 's struggles with the Cossacks were being paid attention to at Moscow 's Kremlin , which from the late 1620s began regarding Cossacks as a potent source of fundamental instability in the Polish – Lithuanian rival and neighbor . Russian efforts to destabilize the Polish Kingdom using Cossacks in the 1630s were not yet successful , even though the Cossack elders themselves often raised the possibility of a union with the Tsardom to pressure Poland 's ruling elites . The borderlands with Russia had become a place of refuge for Cossacks persecuted after their failed uprisings ; regiments of Russian @-@ registered Cossacks , following the Commonwealth example , were eventually established there . 
 The harsh measures restored relative calm for a decade , until 1648 . Seen by the establishment as the " golden peace " , for the Cossacks and peasants the period brought the worst oppression . During that time the private dukedoms of Ukrainian potentates , such as the families of Kalinowski , <unk> and Wiśniowiecki , rapidly expanded and the folwark – serfdom economy , only then ( much later than in other parts of the Polish Crown ) being introduced in Ukraine , caused still unprecedented levels of exploitation . The Cossack affair , perceived as a weak spot of the Commonwealth , was increasingly becoming an issue in international politics . 
 = = Władysław IV = = 
 Władysław IV Vasa , son of Sigismund III , ruled the Commonwealth during 1632 – 1648 . Born and raised in Poland , prepared for the office from the early years , popular , educated , free of his father 's religious prejudices , he seemed a promising chief executive candidate . Władysław however , like his father , had the life ambition of attaining the Swedish throne by using his royal status and power in Poland and Lithuania , which , to serve his purpose , he attempted to strengthen . Władysław ruled with the help of several prominent magnates , among them Jerzy Ossoliński , Chancellor of the Crown , Hetman Stanisław Koniecpolski , and Jakub Sobieski , the middle szlachta leader . Władysław IV was unable to attract a wider szlachta following , and many of his plans had foundered because of lack of support in the increasingly ineffectual sejm . Because of his tolerance for non @-@ Catholics , Władysław was also opposed by the Catholic clergy and the papacy . 
 Toward the last years of his reign Władysław IV sought to enhance his position and assure his son 's succession by waging a war on the Ottoman Empire , for which he prepared , despite the lack of nobility support . To secure this end the King worked on forming an alliance with the Cossacks , whom he encouraged to improve their military readiness and intended to use against the Turks , moving in that direction of cooperation further than his predecessors . The war never took place , and the King had to explain his offensive war designs during the " inquisition " sejm of 1646 . Władysław 's son Zygmunt Kazimierz died in 1647 , and the King , weakened , resigned and disappointed , in 1648 . 
 = = Seeking preponderance in Eastern Europe = = 
 The turn of the 16th and 17th centuries brought changes that , for the time being , weakened the Commonwealth 's powerful neighbors ( The Tsardom of Russia , The Austrian Habsburg Monarchy and the Ottoman Empire ) . The resulting opportunity for the Polish – Lithuanian state to improve its position depended on its ability to overcome internal distractions , such as the isolationist and pacifist tendencies that prevailed among the szlachta ruling class , or the rivalry between nobility leaders and elected kings , often intent on circumventing restrictions on their authority , such as the Henrician Articles . 
 The nearly continuous wars of the first three decades of the new century resulted in modernization , if not ( because of the treasury limitations ) enlargement , of the Commonwealth 's army . The total military forces available ranged from a few thousands at the Battle of Kircholm , to the over fifty thousands plus pospolite ruszenie mobilized for the Khotyn ( Chocim ) campaign of 1621 . The remarkable during the first half of the 17th century development of artillery resulted in the 1650 publication in Amsterdam of the Artis <unk> <unk> pars prima book by Kazimierz <unk> , a pioneer also in the science of rocketry . Despite the superior quality of the Commonwealth 's heavy ( hussar ) and light ( Cossack ) cavalry , the increasing proportions of the infantry ( peasant , mercenary and Cossack formations ) and of the contingent of foreign troops resulted in an army , in which these respective components were heavily represented . During the reigns of the first two Vasas a war fleet was developed and fought successful naval battles ( 1609 against Sweden ) . As usual , fiscal difficulties impaired the effectiveness of the military , and the treasury 's ability to pay the soldiers . 
 = = Moldavia = = 
 As a continuation of the earlier plans for an anti @-@ Turkish offensive , that had not materialized because of the death of Stefan Batory , Jan Zamoyski intervened in Moldavia in 1595 . With the backing of the Commonwealth army Ieremia Movilă assumed the hospodar 's throne as the Commonwealth 's vassal . Zamoyski 's army repelled the subsequent assault by the Ottoman Empire forces at Ţuţora . The next confrontation in the area took place in 1600 , when Zamoyski and Stanisław Żółkiewski acted against Michael the Brave , hospodar of Wallachia and Transylvania . First Ieremia Movilă , who in the meantime had been removed by Michael in Moldavia , was reimposed , and then Michael was defeated in Wallachia at the Battle of <unk> . Ieremia 's brother Simion Movilă became the new hospodar there and for a brief period the entire region up to the Danube had become the Commonwealth 's dependency . Turkey soon reasserted its role , in 1601 in Wallachia and in 1606 in Transylvania . Zamoyski 's politics and actions , which constituted the earlier stage of the Moldavian magnate wars , only prolonged Poland 's influence in Moldavia and interfered effectively with the simultaneous Habsburg plans and ambitions in this part of Europe . Further military involvement at the southern frontiers ceased being feasible , as the forces were needed more urgently in the north . 
 = = War with Sweden = = 
 Sigismund III 's crowning in Sweden took place in 1594 amid tensions and instability caused by religious controversies . As Sigismund returned to Poland , his uncle Charles , the regent , took the lead of the anti @-@ Sigismund Swedish opposition . In 1598 Sigismund attempted to resolve the matter militarily , but the expedition to the country of his origin was defeated at the Battle of Linköping ; Sigismund was taken prisoner and had to agree to the harsh conditions imposed . After his return to Poland , in 1599 the Riksdag of the Estates deposed him in Sweden , and Charles led the Swedish forces into Estonia . Sigismund in 1600 proclaimed the incorporation of Estonia into the Commonwealth , which was tantamount to a declaration of war on Sweden , at the height of Rzeczpospolita 's involvement in Moldavia region . 
 Jürgen von <unk> , given the command of the Commonwealth forces , was overpowered by the much larger army brought to the area by Charles , whose quick offensive resulted in the 1600 take @-@ over of most of Livonia up to the Daugava River , except for Riga . The Swedes were welcomed by much of the local population , by that time increasingly dissatisfied with the Polish – Lithuanian <unk> in 1601 Krzysztof Radziwiłł succeeded at the Battle of Kokenhausen , but the Swedish advances had been reversed up to ( not including ) Reval , only after Jan Zamoyski brought in a more substantial force . Much of this army , having been unpaid , returned to Poland . The clearing action was continued by Jan Karol Chodkiewicz , who , with a small contingent of troops left , defeated the Swedish incursion at <unk> ( Biały Kamień ) in 1604 . 
 In 1605 Charles , now Charles IX , the King of Sweden , launched a new offensive , but his efforts were crossed by Chodkiewicz 's victories at Kircholm and elsewhere and the Polish naval successes , while the war continued without a decisive resolution being produced . In the armistice of 1611 the Commonwealth was able to keep the majority of the contested areas , as a variety of internal and foreign difficulties , including the inability to pay the mercenary soldiers and the Union 's new involvement in Russia , precluded a comprehensive victory . 
 = = Attempts to subordinate Russia = = 
 After the deaths of Ivan IV and in 1598 of his son Feodor , the last tsars of the Rurik Dynasty , Russia entered a period of severe dynastic , economic and social crisis and instability . As Boris Godunov encountered resistance from both the peasant masses and the boyar opposition , in the Commonwealth the ideas of turning Russia into a subordinated ally , either through a union , or an imposition of a ruler dependent on the Polish – Lithuanian establishment , were rapidly coming into play . 
 In 1600 Lew Sapieha led a Commonwealth mission to Moscow to propose a union with the Russian state , patterned after the Polish – Lithuanian Union , with the boyars granted rights comparable with those of the Commonwealth 's nobility . A decision on a single monarch was to be postponed until the death of the current king or tsar . Boris Godunov , at that time also engaged in negotiations with Charles of Sweden , wasn 't interested in that close a relationship and only a twenty @-@ year truce was agreed upon in 1602 . 
 In order to continue their efforts , the magnates took advantage of the earlier death of Tsarevich Dmitry ( 1591 ) under mysterious circumstances and of the appearance of False Dmitriy I , a pretender @-@ impostor claiming to be the <unk> . False Dmitriy was able to secure the cooperation and help of the Wiśniowiecki family and of Jerzy Mniszech , Voivode of Sandomierz , whom he promised vast Russian estates and a marriage with the voivode 's daughter Marina . Dmitriy became a Catholic and leading an army of adventurers raised in the Commonwealth , with the tacit support of Sigismund III entered in 1604 the Russian state . After the death of Boris Godunov and the murder of his son Feodor , False Dmitriy I became the Tsar of Russia , and remained in that capacity until killed during a popular turmoil in 1606 , which also eliminated the Polish presence in Moscow . 
 Russia under the new tsar Vasili <unk> remained unstable . A new false Dmitriy materialized and Tsaritsa Marina had even " recognized " in him her thought @-@ to @-@ be @-@ dead husband . With a new army provided largely by the magnates of the Commonwealth , False Dmitriy II approached Moscow and made futile attempts to take the city . Tsar Vasili IV , seeking help from King Charles IX of Sweden , agreed to territorial concessions in Sweden 's favor and in 1609 the Russo @-@ Swedish anti @-@ Dmitriy and anti @-@ Commonwealth alliance was able to remove the threat from Moscow and strengthen Vasili . The alliance and the Swedish involvement in Russian affairs caused a direct military intervention on the part of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , instigated and led by King Sigismund III , with the support of the Roman Curia . 
 The Polish army commenced a siege of Smolensk and the Russo @-@ Swedish relief expedition was defeated in 1610 by Hetman Żółkiewski at the Battle of Klushino . The victory strengthened the position of the compromise @-@ oriented faction of Russian boyars , which had already been interested in offering the Moscow throne to Władysław Vasa , son of Sigismund III . Fyodor <unk> Romanov , the Patriarch of Moscow , was one of the leaders of the boyars . Under arrangements negotiated by Żółkiewski , the boyars deposed Tsar Vasili and accepted Władysław in return for peace , no annexation of Russia into the Commonwealth , the Prince 's conversion to the Orthodox religion , and privileges , including exclusive rights to high offices in the Tsardom granted to the Russian nobility . After the agreement was signed and Władysław declared tsar , the Commonwealth forces entered the Kremlin ( 1610 ) . 
 Sigismund III subsequently rejected the compromise solution and demanded the tsar 's throne for himself , which would mean complete subjugation of Russia , and as such was rejected by the bulk of the Russian society . Sigismund 's refusal and demands only intensified the chaos , as the Swedes proposed their own candidate and took over Veliki Novgorod . The result of this situation and of the ruthless Commonwealth occupation in Moscow and elsewhere in Russia was the 1611 popular Russian anti @-@ Polish uprising , heavy fighting in Moscow and a siege of the Polish garrison occupying the Kremlin . 
 In the meantime , the Commonwealth forces after a long siege stormed and took Smolensk in 1611 . At the Kremlin the situation of the Poles had been worsening despite occasional reinforcements , and the massive national and religious uprising was spreading all over Russia . Prince Dmitry Pozharsky and Kuzma <unk> effectively led the Russians , a new rescue operation attempted by Hetman Chodkiewicz had failed and a capitulation of the Polish and Lithuanian forces at the Kremlin terminated in 1612 their involvement there . Mikhail Romanov , son of the imprisoned in Poland ( since his rejection of Sigismund III 's demand for the Russian throne ) Patriarch Filaret , became the new tsar in 1613 . 
 The war effort , debilitated by a rebellious confederation established by the unpaid military , was continued . Turkey , threatened by the Polish territorial gains became involved at the frontiers , and a peace between Russia and Sweden was agreed to in 1617 . Fearing the new alliance the Commonwealth undertook one more major expedition , which took over Vyazma and arrived at the walls of Moscow , in an attempt to impose the rule of Władysław Vasa again . The city would not open its gates and not enough military strength was brought in to attempt a forced take @-@ over . 
 Despite the disappointment , the Commonwealth was able to take advantage of the Russian weakness and through the territorial advances accomplished to reverse the eastern losses suffered in the earlier decades . In the Truce of Deulino of 1619 the Rzeczpospolita was granted the Smolensk , Chernihiv and <unk> @-@ <unk> regions . 
 The Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth attained its greatest geographic extent , but the attempted union with Russia could not have been achieved , as the systemic , cultural and religious incompatibilities between the two empires proved to be insurmountable . The territorial annexations and the ruthlessly conducted wars left a legacy of injustice suffered and desire for revenge on the part of the Russian ruling classes and people . The huge military effort weakened the Commonwealth and the painful consequences of the adventurous policies of the Vasa court and its allied magnates were soon to be felt . 
 = = The Commonwealth and Silesia during Thirty Years ' War = = 
 In 1613 Sigismund III Vasa reached an understanding with Matthias , Holy Roman Emperor , based on which both sides agreed to cooperate and mutually provide assistance in suppressing internal rebellions . The pact neutralized the Habsburg Monarchy in regard to the Commonwealth 's war with Russia , but had resulted in more serious consequences after the Bohemian Revolt gave rise to the Thirty Years ' War in 1618 . 
 The Czech events weakened the position of the Habsburgs in Silesia , where there were large concentrations of ethnically Polish inhabitants , whose ties and interests at that time placed them within the Protestant camp . Numerous Polish Lutheran parishes , with schools and centers of cultural activity , had been established in the heavily Polish areas around Opole and Cieszyn in eastern Silesia , as well as in numerous cities and towns throughout the region and beyond , including Breslau ( Wrocław ) and Grünberg ( <unk> Góra ) . The threat posed by a potentially resurgent Habsburg monarchy to the situation of Polish Silesians was keenly felt , and there were voices within King Sigismund 's circle , including Stanisław Łubieński and Jerzy Zbaraski , who brought to his attention Poland 's historic rights and options in the area . The King , an ardent Catholic , advised by many not to involve the Commonwealth on the Catholic @-@ Habsburg side , decided in the end to act in their support , but unofficially . 
 The ten thousand men strong Lisowczycy mercenary division , a highly effective military force , had just returned from the Moscow campaign , and having become a major nuisance for the szlachta , was available for another assignment abroad ; Sigismund sent them south to assist Emperor Ferdinand II . Sigismund court 's intervention greatly influenced the first phase of the war , helping save the position of the Habsburg Monarchy at a critical moment . 
 The Lisowczycy entered northern Hungary ( now Slovakia ) and in 1619 defeated the Transylvanian forces at the Battle of <unk> . Prince Bethlen Gábor of Transylvania , who together with the Czechs had laid siege to Vienna , had to hurry back to his country and make peace with Ferdinand , which seriously compromised the situation of the Czech insurgents , crushed in the course and in the aftermath of the Battle of White Mountain . Afterwards the Lisowczycy ruthlessly fought to suppress the Emperor 's opponents in Glatz ( <unk> ) region and elsewhere in Silesia , in Bohemia and Germany . 
 After the breakdown of the Bohemian Revolt the residents of Silesia , including the Polish gentry in Upper Silesia , were subjected to severe repressions and Counter @-@ <unk> activities , including forced expulsions of thousands of Silesians , many of whom ended up in Poland . Later during the war years the province was repeatedly ravaged in the course of military campaigns crossing its territory , and at one point a Protestant leader , Piast Duke John Christian of Brieg , appealed to Władysław IV Vasa for assuming supremacy over Silesia . King Władysław , although a tolerant ruler including in matters of religion , was like his father disinclined to involve the Commonwealth in the Thirty Years ' War . He ended up getting as fiefs from the Emperor the duchies of Opole and Racibórz in 1646 , twenty years later reclaimed by the Empire . The Peace of Westphalia allowed the Habsburgs to do as they pleased in Silesia , already completely ruined by the war , which had resulted in intense persecution of Protestants , including the Polish Lower Silesia communities , forced to emigrate or subjected to Germanization . 
 = = Conflicts with the Ottoman Empire and Crimean Khanate = = 
 Although the Rzeczpospolita had not formally participated directly in the Thirty Years ' War , the alliance with the Habsburg Monarchy contributed to getting Poland involved in new wars with the Ottoman Empire , Sweden and Russia , and therefore led to significant Commonwealth influence over the course of the Thirty Years ' War . The Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth also had its own intrinsic reasons for the continuation of struggles with the above powers . 
 From the 16th century the Commonwealth suffered a series of Tatar invasions . In the 16th century Cossack raids began descending on the Black Sea area Turkish settlements and Tatar lands . In retaliation the Ottoman Empire directed their vassal Tatar forces , based in Crimea or Budjak areas , against the Commonwealth regions of Podolia and Red Ruthenia . The borderland area to the south @-@ east was in a state of semi @-@ permanent warfare until the 18th century . Some researchers estimate that altogether more than 3 million people had been captured and enslaved during the time of the Crimean Khanate . 
 The greatest intensity of Cossack raids , reaching as far as Sinop in Turkey , fell on the 1613 – 1620 period . The Ukrainian magnates on their part continued their traditional involvement in Moldavia , where they kept trying to install their relatives ( the <unk> family ) on the hospodar 's throne ( Stefan Potocki in 1607 and 1612 , Samuel Korecki and Michał Wiśniowiecki in 1615 ) . Ottoman chief Iskender Pasha destroyed the magnate forces in Moldavia and compelled Stanisław Żółkiewski in 1617 to consent to the Treaty of Busza at Poland 's border , in which the Commonwealth obliged not to get involved in matters concerning Wallachia and Transylvania . 
 Turkish unease about Poland 's influence in Russia , the consequences of the Lisowczycy expedition against Transylvania , an Ottoman fief in 1619 and the burning of Varna by the Cossacks in 1620 caused the Empire under the young Sultan Osman II to declare a war against the Commonwealth , with the aim of breaking and conquering the Polish – Lithuanian state . 
 The actual hostilities , which were to bring the demise of Stanisław Żółkiewski , were initiated by the old Polish hetman . Żółkiewski with Koniecpolski and a rather small force entered Moldavia , hoping for military reinforcements from Moldavian <unk> Gaspar Graziani and the Cossacks . The aid had not materialized and the hetmans faced a superior Turkish and Tatar force led by Iskender Pasha . In the aftermath of the failed Battle of Ţuţora ( 1620 ) Żółkiewski was killed , Koniecpolski captured , and the Commonwealth left opened defenseless , but disagreements between the Turkish and Tatar commanders prevented the Ottoman army from immediately waging an effective follow @-@ up . 
 The Sejm was convened in Warsaw , the royal court was blamed for endangering the country , but high taxes for a sixty thousand men army were agreed to and the number of registered Cossacks was allowed to reach forty thousand . The Commonwealth forces , led by Jan Karol Chodkiewicz , were helped by Petro Konashevych @-@ Sahaidachny and his Cossacks , who raised against the Turks and Tatars and participated in the upcoming campaign . In practice about 30 @,@ 000 regular army and 25 @,@ 000 Cossacks faced at Khotyn a much larger Ottoman force under Osman II . Fierce Turkish attacks against the fortified Commonwealth positions lasted throughout September 1621 and were repelled . The exhaustion and depletion of its forces made the Ottoman Empire sign the Treaty of Khotyn , which had kept the old territorial status quo of Sigismund II ( Dniester River border between the Commonwealth and Ottoman combatants ) , a favorable for the Polish side outcome . After Osman II was killed in a coup , ratification of the treaty was obtained from his successor Mustafa I. 
 In response to further Cossack attacks Tatar incursions continued as well , in 1623 and 1624 reaching almost as far west as the Vistula , with the attendant plunder and taking of captives . More effective defense was put together by the freed Koniecpolski and Stefan <unk> , who defeated the Tatars on several occasions between 1624 and 1633 , using the quarter army supported by the Cossacks and general population . More warfare with the Ottomans took place in 1633 – 1634 and ended with a peace treaty . In 1644 Koniecpolski defeated Tugay Bey 's army at <unk> and before his death planned an invasion against the Crimean Khanate . King Władysław IV 's ideas of a grand international war @-@ crusade against the Ottoman Empire were thwarted by the inquisition sejm in 1646 . The state 's inability to control the activities of the magnates and the Cossacks had contributed to the semi @-@ permanent instability and danger at the Commonwealth 's south @-@ eastern frontiers . 
 = = Baltic area territorial and maritime access losses = = 
 More acute threat to the Polish – Lithuanian state came from Sweden . The balance of power in the north had shifted in Sweden 's favor , as the Baltic neighbor was led by King Gustavus Adolphus , a highly able and aggressive military leader , who greatly improved the effectiveness of the Swedish armed forces , while also taking advantage of Protestant zealotry . The Commonwealth , exhausted by the wars with Russia and the Ottoman Empire and lacking allies , was poorly prepared to face this new challenge . Continuous diplomatic maneuvering by Sigismund III made the whole situation look to szlachta like another stage in the King 's Swedish dynastic affairs ; in reality the Swedish power resolved to take hold of the entire Polish @-@ controlled Baltic coast , and thereby profit from the Commonwealth 's maritime trade intermediary control , endangering its basis for independent existence . 
 Gustavus Adolphus chose to attack Riga , the Grand Duchy 's foremost trade center , in late August 1621 , just as the Ottoman army was approaching Khotyn , tying @-@ up the Polish forces there . The city , stormed several times , had to surrender a month later . Moving inland to the south the Swedes next entered Courland . With Riga the Commonwealth lost the most important Baltic seaport in the region and an entry to northern Livonia , the Daugava River crossing . The 1622 Truce of <unk> gave Poland the possession of Courland and eastern Livonia , but the Swedes were to take over most of Livonia north of the Daugava . The Lithuanian forces were able to keep <unk> , but suffered a heavy defeat at the Battle of <unk> . 
 The losses impacted severely the trade and customs income of the Great Duchy of Lithuania . The Crown lands were to be also affected , as in July 1626 the Swedes took Pillau and forced Duke George William , Elector of Brandenburg and vassal of the Commonwealth in the attacked Ducal Prussia , to assume a neutrality stance . The Swedish advance resulted in the take @-@ over of the Baltic coastline up to Puck . Danzig ( Gdańsk ) , which had remained loyal to the Commonwealth , was subjected to a naval blockade . 
 The Poles , completely surprised by the Swedish invasion , in September attempted a counter @-@ offensive , but were defeated by Gustavus Adolphus at the Battle of Gniew . The forces required serious modernization . The Sejm passed high taxation for the defense , but collections lagged behind . The situation was partially saved by the City of Danzig , which hurriedly embarked on the construction of modern fortifications , and by Hetman Stanisław Koniecpolski . The accomplished commander of the eastern borderlands fighting quickly learned the maritime affairs and contemporary methods of European warfare . Koniecpolski promoted the necessary enlargement of the naval fleet , modernization of the army , and became a fitting counterbalance for the military abilities of Gustavus Adolphus . 
 Koniecpolski led a spring 1627 military campaign , trying to keep the Swedish army in the Duchy of Prussia from moving toward Danzig , while also intending to block their reinforcements arriving from the Holy Roman Empire . Moving quickly the Hetman recovered Puck , and then destroyed at the Battle of Czarne ( Hammerstein ) the forces intended for Gustavus . The Swedes themselves Koniecpolski 's forces kept near Tczew , shielding the access to Danzig and preventing Gustavus Adolphus from reaching his main objective . At the Battle of Oliva the Polish ships defeated a Swedish naval squadron . 
 Danzig was saved , but the next year the strengthened in the Ducal Prussia Swedish army took <unk> , and early in 1629 defeated the Polish units at <unk> . Gustavus Adolphus from his Baltic coast position laid an economic siege against the Commonwealth and ravaged what he had conquered . At this point allied forces under Albrecht von Wallenstein were brought in to help keep the Swedes in check . Forced by the combined Polish @-@ Austrian action Gustavus had to withdraw from <unk> to Malbork , in process being defeated and almost taken prisoner by Koniecpolski at the Battle of <unk> . 
 But in addition to being militarily exhausted , the Commonwealth was now pressured by several European <unk> to suspend further military activities , to allow Gustavus Adolphus to intervene in the Holy Roman Empire . The Truce of Altmark left Livonia north of the Daugava and all Prussian and Livonian seaports except for Danzig , Puck , Königsberg , and Libau in hands of the Swedes , who were also allowed to charge duty on trade through Danzig . 
 = = Compromised power = = 
 As Władysław IV was assuming the Commonwealth crown , Gustavus Adolphus , who had been working on organizing an anti @-@ Polish coalition including Sweden , Russia , Transylvania and Turkey , died . The Russians then undertook an action of their own , attempting to recover lands lost in the Truce of Deulino . 
 In the fall of 1632 a well @-@ prepared Russian army took a number of strongholds on the Lithuanian side of the border and commenced a siege of Smolensk . The well @-@ fortified city was able to withstand a general onslaught followed by a ten @-@ month encirclement by an overwhelming force led by Mikhail Shein . At that time a Commonwealth rescue expedition of comparable strength arrived , under the highly effective military command of Władysław IV . After months of fierce fighting , in February 1634 Shein capitulated . The Treaty of Polyanovka confirmed the Deulino territorial arrangements with small adjustments in favor of the Tsardom . Władysław had relinquished , upon monetary compensation , his claims to the Russian throne . 
 Having secured the eastern front , the King was able to concentrate on the recovery of Baltic areas lost by his father to Sweden . Władysław IV wanted to take advantage of the Swedish defeat at Nördlingen and fight for both the territories and his Swedish dynastic claims . The Poles were suspicious of his designs and war preparations and the King was able to proceed with negotiations only , where his unwillingness to give up the dynastic claim weakened the Commonwealth 's position . According to the Treaty of Stuhmsdorf of 1635 the Swedes evacuated Royal Prussia 's cities and ports , which meant a return of the Crown 's lower Vistula possessions , and stopped collecting custom duties there . Sweden retained most of Livonia , while the Rzeczpospolita kept Courland , which having assumed the servicing of Lithuania 's Baltic trade entered a period of prosperity . 
 The position of the Commonwealth with respect to the Duchy of Prussia kept getting weaker , as the power in the Duchy was being taken over by the Electors of Brandenburg . Under the electors , the Duchy had become ever more closely linked to Brandenburg , which was harmful to the political interests of the Commonwealth . <unk> III left the Duchy 's administration in the hands of Joachim Frederick , and then John Sigismund , who in 1611 acquired the right to Hohenzollern succession in the Duchy by the consent of the King and the Sejm . He actually became the Duke of Prussia in 1618 , after the death of Albert Frederick , and was followed by George William and then Frederick William , who in 1641 in Warsaw for the last time paid a Prussian homage to a Polish king . The successive Brandenburg dukes would make nominal concessions , to satisfy the Commonwealth 's expediencies and justify the granting of privileges , but an irreversible shift in relations was taking place . 
 In 1637 Bogislaw XIV , Duke of Pomerania died . He was the last of the Slavic Griffins Dynasty of the Duchy of Pomerania . Sweden acquired the Pomeranian rule , while the Commonwealth was only able to get back its fiefs , Bytów Land and <unk> Land . Słupsk Land was also sought by Władysław IV at the peace conference , but it ended up a part of Brandenburg , which after the Peace of Westphalia controlled all of Pomerania adjacent to the border of the Commonwealth , extending south to where it met with Habsburg lands . Portions of Pomerania were populated by the Slavic <unk> and <unk> . 
 The Thirty Years ' War period brought the Commonwealth a mixed legacy , rather more losses than gains , with the Polish – Lithuanian state retaining its status as one of the few great powers in central @-@ eastern Europe . From 1635 the country enjoyed a period of peace , during which internal bickering and progressively dysfunctional legislative processes prevented any substantial reforms from taking place . The Commonwealth was unprepared to deal with grave challenges that materialized in the middle of the century . 
 = The Fear ( Lily Allen song ) = 
 " The Fear " is a song by British recording artist Lily Allen from her second studio album , It 's Not Me , It 's You ( 2009 ) . Written by Allen and Greg Kurstin , the song was released as the lead single of the album . Initially , " Everyone 's at It " was announced to be the first single from the album . However , it was ultimately decided on " The Fear " to be released on 26 January 2009 by Regal Recordings , while the demo ( which was then titled " I Don 't Know " ) leaked onto the Internet in April 2008 . The song incorporates electropop music as the lyrics articulate problems with celebrity lifestyles and include metaphors for recognised tabloid national newspapers such as The Sun . " The Fear " also references , albeit indirectly , the Great Depression of the 1930s . 
 Contemporary critics complimented the song and its themes of consumerism and the postmodern condition . " The Fear " peaked at number one on the UK Singles Chart , where it remained for four weeks . The single peaked also inside the top 20 of the charts of some European countries and Australia . It is also Allen 's second chart entry in the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 . 
 The accompanying music video portrayed a fantasy theme , with Allen dancing with giant wrapped gifts and balloons . It was shot at <unk> Park in Bedfordshire and also featured dancers dressed as butlers ; the locations were initially in a caravan in a park , and then in a giant colourful mansion , surrounded by contrasting grey clouds . The song was performed live for the first time via The Scott Mills Show on BBC Radio 1 and during Allen 's 2009 concert tour . " The Fear " was awarded with Best Track prize at the 2009 Q Awards , and also won Allen two Ivor Novello Awards in 2010 , for best song musically and lyrically , and most performed work . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Initially , the song " Everyone 's At It " was announced to be released as the lead single from the album , but it was ultimately decided on " The Fear " . While discussing It 's Not Me , It 's You , Allen stated that her intention was to make " bigger sounding , more ethereal songs , real songs . [ ... ] I think I 've grown up a bit as a person and I hope it reflects that . " She released a demo version of the song , which was then called " I Don 't Know " , onto her MySpace account , along with another song , " I Could Say " , in April 2008 . The singer declared about the inspiration for the song , which has to do with materialism and the pressures of being rich and famous : 
 [ I 'll ] tell you where the inspiration for it came from . I was walking down this street , in this village in the middle of the countryside in the U.K. , and there was this little girl who must have been eight or nine , walking down the street with her mum in , like , high @-@ waisted hot pants and a little crop top . And I just thought , ' That 's not really right . ' And I could tell she was the kind of girl that would be trying out for Pop Idol in five years time , and wants to be famous when she grows up . And there 's definitely the whole culture of that where I come from , and it 's not necessarily a culture that I think is particularly healthy . But at the same time , I 'm very aware that I am a part of that culture — but it 's not something that I feel particularly comfortable with . 
 Musically , Allen adopts a more mature electropop groove for the song , which has been described to have " a pulsing , sleekly modern electro dance backing " , while coming through a " flood of soft synths " and being " eminently danceable and slightly trancey " . It is set in common time and in the key of F major and has a metronome of 134 beats per minute . Allen 's voice spans from F3 to A4 . Lyrically , the song is a satire of materialism " sung in the voice of a would @-@ be starlet " , and tackles societal consumerism and overnight @-@ fame @-@ hunting . It also makes reference , through the line " I 'll look at The Sun and I 'll look in The Mirror " , at the daily British tabloid national newspapers The Sun and Daily Mirror , which often report on Allen . The synthesiser parts were written by Greg Kurstin using Apple 's Logic Studio , using its built @-@ in instruments . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Michael Menachem from Billboard commented on the song , saying it " packs another lyrical punch " , while complimenting Allen 's vocals . The BBC interpreted the song , in which Allen " apologises for her avarice , confidently blaming the system " , but also complimented the " exquisite " production . Neil McCormick from The Daily Telegraph suggested that the song confirms that the singer 's " pithy observational skills and sweet musicality " remain intact , as she has been a bit bruised by her encounter with 21st @-@ century fame . Clash reporter Natasha <unk> concluded that " The Fear " is somewhat trite , though " sickeningly catchy and dance friendly " , while Rolling Stone magazine failed to detect the song 's sarcasm and criticized the song for being a " cliché " delivered by Allen " with sneer " . James Montgomery of MTV gave a good review , saying it is a relatively scathing indictment of today 's glossy , " celeb @-@ ified culture " . Ryan Dombal from Pitchfork Media described the song to have a " part admission , part brag , part apocalyptic vision " and suggested that " for almost any other artist , the lines would be barbed , sarcastic , and , ultimately , uppity and bland indictments . But not for the loudmouth [ Allen ] " . 
 Other reviews were also positive ; Sal Cinquemani form Slant Magazine suggested that " The Fear " is proof of the pop singer 's self @-@ awareness , but , given her own personal tabloid history , the song possesses a trail of irony : " I 'll look at The Sun and I 'll look in The Mirror / I 'm on the right track , yeah , we 're onto a winner . " Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly liked the song , in which Allen makes fun of her own material @-@ girl ID and went on to say that it is in fact " a tale of two <unk> : the naughty <unk> in the rearview mirror , and the fully realized female coming around the bend . " Chris Buckle from The Skinny gave " The Fear " three stars , commenting that it " is a potent reminder that she ’ s more than just gobby gossip @-@ fodder " , but also disliked a few lyrics , which " in particular [ are ] a clumsy attempt to inject politics amongst the celeb @-@ woe naval @-@ gazing " , while About.com praised the song for being a " pop masterpiece " , Allen 's " witty intelligent lyrics " and compared it to Pink 's " Stupid Girls " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United Kingdom , " The Fear " debuted at number 168 on the UK Singles Chart on 25 January 2009 ― for the week ending dated 31 January 2009 . The following week , the song climbed 167 places to reach number one , thwarting Lady Gaga 's " Just Dance " from the summit of the chart . Gaga commented on this , saying " I 'm very familiar with Lily 's music and good job Lily for knocking me off . There always deserves to be a female on top and I don 't want to be the only one to do it . I think generally that pop music is making an enormous comeback and I 'm actually very pleased with Lily Allen 's new record as it 's decidedly pop " . The song managed to remain on top for four weeks , throughout the whole of February , until it was dethroned by Kelly Clarkson 's " My Life Would Suck Without You " . It thus earned Allen 's second chart @-@ topper , since her debut single , " Smile " , achieved the feat in July 2006 . " The Fear " also became the single which spent more weeks atop the chart of 2009 in the UK . On the single 's third week stay at number one , its parent album , It 's Not Me , It 's You topped the UK Albums Chart , having a chart double , to which Allen said : " It 's great being at the top of both charts , especially in the same week as the Brit Awards are once again celebrating the best of British music . " 
 The song shared similar success in Australia , where it peaked at number three on the ARIA Singles Chart and stayed eight consecutive weeks in the top ten , and was certified Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association . In Ireland , " The Fear " entered at thirty nine on the Irish Singles Chart , making a slow rise to number five , where it remained for one week after descending the chart . The song became a success in Europe , having entered the top 20 in most of its countries , which resulted in a peak of three on the European Hot 100 . Also , in New Zealand , Allen scored her fourth top 40 hit with the song placing itself at a peak of fourteen on the New Zealand Singles Chart . 
 In North America , " The Fear " shared moderate success , charting at number 80 on the Billboard Hot 100 , making it Allen 's only second entry in the U.S. Despite low positions in the main chart , the single managed to become the singer 's first Hot Dance Club Play number @-@ one single , topping it for one week . In Canada , it debuted at 57 in late 2008 , afterwards leaving the chart for seven weeks ; it returned in 2009 , peaking at 33 . It was certified Gold by the Canadian Recording Industry Association for shipments of over 20 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was principally at shot at <unk> Park in Bedfordshire and directed by Nez . It premiered on Channel 4 on 4 December 2008 . It starts off with Allen singing from a caravan window , while a clothes line on the right has underwear and a <unk> hanging from it . As she exits , her clothes are revealed to be a smock dress with a big bow and high heels ; upon returning through the caravan door , the interior changes to that of a luxurious mansion , in reality an English country estate . The chorus starts and she walks down the hall , surrounded by butlers , all making synchronized moves and starting a choreography with Allen . Afterwards , she climbs the stairs and the camera cuts to the next scene , where she is sitting down in front of the mirror in an extravagant bedroom , with dresses , lamps , toys and cupcakes . The scene changes once again , with Allen walking into a room with giant , brightly coloured presents . They suddenly stand up , having two human legs , and begin to spin around , with the singer joining them . After descending the stairs and walking through the same hall she entered , she exits the estate , and the video takes down a darker , more serious tone , while the verse " Forget about guns and forget ammunition / ' Cause I 'm killing them all on my own little mission / Now I ’ m not a saint but I ’ m not a sinner / Now everything is cool as long as I ’ m getting thinner " is sung . The euphoric visual effects appear once again soon after , as the chorus takes place . Allen walks down the estate stairs , being surrounded by dancing balloons , hopping butlers and coloured fog . The camera zooms out showing the estate tied in a giant ribbon , but also grey , melancholic clouds , which contrast the cheerful party from before . Allen stated that she hoped the music video would convey parts of the song 's sarcasm . 
 The video reportedly cost £ 50 @,@ 000 . During the shoot , the video was documented by MTV ; in the interview , Allen declared : 
 I wanted to do a dance routine , even though I 'm not really doing a dance routine , other people are doing it , but I 'm part of it . I think people are quite used to girls in this industry really being able to move in front of the camera , but I 'm just rubbish at that kind of thing . I find it quite nerve @-@ racking performing , actually . Because when you write songs , you don 't really think about performing in a video . I think it 's quite fun . Lots of colour and dancing , and it 's about doing something that 's in keeping with the song , actually . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 While being invited to the BBC show hosted by Scott Mills , Allen talked about her struggles with the paparazzi and also premiered the song by performing it live . Other live performances of the song include the Sound on BBC 2 with Nick Grimshaw and Annie Mac , Friday Night with Jonathan Ross , the Orange <unk> , and The Sunday Night Project . In February 2009 , she was invited at The Today Show with Matt Lauer , where she performed the song after an interview . The same month , she made an appearance on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , and while she was singing , DeGeneres freely dispensed copies of It 's Not Me , It 's You to the audience . Afterwards , both Allen and DeGeneres performed a rendition of the song " Womanizer " by American singer Britney Spears . Allen included the song on her 2009 concert tour setlist , as part of the encore . " The Fear " was also performed at the 2010 BRIT Awards , as the opening song . Allen arrived on stage sitting on a rocket hoisted in the air , while wearing a black corset dress . She was later joined on stage by paratroopers dressed in pink military camouflage and women with Silver Cross prams . 
 = = Media appearances = = 
 The song was featured in the fourth episode of series three of the TV drama Skins , and , also , an instrumental version is used as accompanying music by Match of the Day 2 during the review segment showing the goals . " The Fear " was parodied by the character playing Kevin Rudd on the TV show Double Take , in which the lyrics are altered to deal with the voting campaign for Prime Minister in Australia . The song was covered by JLS for BBC Radio 1 's " Live Lounge " segment of Jo Whiley 's show on 15 September 2009 , featuring an interpolation of the Beyoncé hit " Halo " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lead vocals — Lily Allen 
 Written by — Lily Allen and Greg Kurstin 
 Produced by — Greg Kurstin 
 Assistant engineer – Alex Dromgode 
 Audio mixing — Greg Kurstin 
 Mastered by Geoff <unk> 
 Other management — Todd Interland 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = The Tale of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle = 
 The Tale of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle is a children 's book written and illustrated by Beatrix Potter . It was published by Frederick Warne & Co. in October 1905 . Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle is a hedgehog washerwoman who lives in a tiny cottage in the fells of the Lake District . A child named Lucie happens upon the cottage and stays for tea . The two deliver freshly laundered clothing to the animals and birds in the neighbourhood . Potter thought the book would be best enjoyed by girls , and , like most girls ' books of the period , it is set indoors with a focus on housework . 
 Potter 's pet hedgehog , Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle , and Kitty MacDonald , a Scottish washerwoman , were the inspirations for the eponymous heroine . Lucie Carr , a child friend of Potter 's , was the model for the fictional Lucie . Potter 's Peter Rabbit and Benjamin Bunny make cameo appearances in the illustrations . The Newlands Valley and the surrounding fells are the sources for the backgrounds in the illustrations . 
 Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle has been described as one of Potter 's most positive creations , but critics consider Lucie an artistic failure . Although Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle is set in an identifiable place and time period , the tale is mythologized by reaching back to an age when household chores were performed manually and without the aid of modern mechanical inventions . The simple dwellings , rustic pathways , and stone fences enhance the tale 's timeless aspect and suggest an unchanging countryside and its way of life . 
 Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle became a popular character and the subject of considerable merchandise over the decades including nursery ware and porcelain figurines . The tale has been published in braille and the Initial Teaching Alphabet , and has been translated into French , German , and Dutch . In 1971 , Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle became a character performed by Sir Frederick Ashton in the Royal Ballet film , The Tales of Beatrix Potter . In 1993 , the tale was adapted to animation and telecast as an episode of the BBC series , The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A little girl named Lucie lives on a farm called Little @-@ town . She is a good little girl , but has lost three pocket handkerchiefs and a pinafore . She questions Tabby Kitten and Sally Henny @-@ penny about them , but they know nothing ( especially since Tabby Kitten licks her paw , and Sally Henny @-@ penny flaps back into the barn clucking , " I go barefoot , barefoot , barefoot ! " neither of which is very helpful ) . Lucie mounts a stile and spies some white cloths lying in the grass high on a hill behind the farm . She scrambles up the hill along a steep path @-@ way which ends under a big rock . She finds a little door in the hillside , and hears someone singing behind it : 
 Lily @-@ white and clean , oh ! 
 With little frills between , oh ! 
 Smooth and hot – red rusty spot 
 Never here be seen , oh ! 
 She knocks . A frightened voice cries out , " Who 's that ? " Lucie opens the door , and discovers a low @-@ ceilinged kitchen . Everything is tiny , even the pots and pans . At the table stands a short , stout person wearing a tucked @-@ up print gown , an apron , and a striped petticoat . She is ironing . Her little black nose goes sniffle , sniffle , <unk> , and her eyes go twinkle , twinkle , and beneath her little white cap are prickles ! She is Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle , the animals ' laundress and " an excellent clear @-@ <unk> " . She keeps busy with her work . She has found Lucy 's lost things , and <unk> them for her . She also shows Lucie items belonging to Mrs. Tiggywinkle 's animal customers . They have tea together though Lucie keeps away from Mrs. Tiggywinkle due to the prickles . 
 The laundered clothing is tied up in bundles and Lucie 's handkerchiefs are neatly folded into her clean pinafore . They set off together down the path to return the fresh laundry to the little animals and birds in the neighbourhood . At the bottom of the hill , Lucie mounts the stile and turns to thank Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle . " But what a very odd thing ! " Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle is " running running running up the hill " . Her cap , shawl , and print gown are nowhere to be seen . How small and brown she has grown – and covered with prickles ! " Why ! Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle [ is ] nothing but a <unk> ! " 
 The narrator tells the reader that some thought Lucie had fallen asleep on the stile and dreamed the encounter , but if so , then how could she have three clean handkerchiefs and a laundered pinafore ? " Besides , " the narrator assures the reader , " I have seen that door into the back of the hill called <unk> – and besides I am very well acquainted with dear Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle ! " 
 = = Background = = 
 The story of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle was inspired by Kitty MacDonald , a Scottish washerwoman the Potters employed over the course of eleven summers at <unk> House on the River Tay in Perthshire , writes Leslie Linder . Potter was 26 when , in 1892 , she visited MacDonald while staying at Heath Park , Birnam . She wrote in her journal : " Went out with the pony ... to see Kitty MacDonald , our old washerwoman ... Kitty is eighty @-@ three but waken , and delightfully merry ... She is a comical , round little woman , as brown as a berry and wears a multitude of petticoats and a white <unk> . Her memory goes back for seventy years , and I really believe she is prepared to enumerate the articles of her first wash in the year ' 71 " . 
 In 1942 , the year before she died , Potter 's thoughts returned to Kitty MacDonald when she wrote about a piece of crockery : 
 Seventy eighty years ago it belonged to another old woman , old Katie MacDonald , the Highland washerwoman . She was a tiny body , brown as a berry , beady black eyes and much wrinkled , against an incongruously white frilled <unk> . She wore a small plaid crossed over shawl pinned with a silver brooch , a bed jacket , and a full kilted petticoat . She dropped bob <unk> , but she was outspoken and very independent , proud and proper ... The joy of converse with old Katie was to draw her out to talk of the days when she was a wee bit lassie — herding the <unk> . The days when ' Boney ' was a terror ... the old woman wouldn 't dwell upon hard weather and storms ; she spoke of the sunshine and clouds , and shadows , the heather bells , the ... " the broom of the Cowden <unk> " , the sun and wind on the hills where she played , and knitted , and herded cattle and sheep . A bonny life it was , but it never came back ... " 
 Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle may have been conceived as early as 1886 , it was not until 1901 Potter began elaborating it while on holiday at Lingholm west of Derwentwater where she met young Kathleen and Lucie Carr , daughters of the local vicar . In 1902 , it was put to paper . The Carr family lived at Skelghyl , but Potter took some artistic liberty and moved the house 's location to Little Town in the text . The family came to tea at Lingholm often with Potter delighted by the one @-@ year @-@ child 's behaviour . On one occasion , Lucie left her gloves behind at Lingholm , and Potter transformed the incident into the fictional Lucie 's propensity for losing her pocket handkerchiefs . A small copy book contains what is believed to be the earliest manuscript of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle . Its title page is inscribed : " Made at Lingholm , Sept . 01 told to cousin Stephanie at Melford Nov. 01 — written down Nov. 02 . There are no pictures , it is a good one to tell — " 
 Potter used her cousin 's daughter , Stephanie Hyde Parker , as audience for the draft of the story . She likely meant to dedicate the book to Stephanie , writing in the manuscript , " Now Stephanie , this is a story about a little girl called Lucie ; she was smaller than you and could not speak quite plain . " . In the end however , the book was dedicated to Lucie Carr . Stephanie would receive the dedication to The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher in 1906 . 
 Early in 1904 , Potter was putting the finishing touches on Benjamin Bunny and Two Bad Mice . At the same time , she began giving serious thought to developing the tale about Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle and Lucie . She had been working on backgrounds and had been carrying her pet hedgehog with her when travelling . On March 15 , she wrote her editor Norman Warne , " I have been drawing the stump of a hollow tree for another hedgehog drawing " . 
 Potter and Warne agreed volume of nursery rhymes would be created in 1905 but she also brought his attention to a story she had previously written , writing to him , " I think ' Mrs. Tiggy ' would be all right ; it is a girl 's book ... there must be a large audience of little girls . I think they would like the different clothes . " She began the illustrations in the summer once he agreed to the concept . 
 = = Illustrations and production = = 
 Potter biographer Linda Lear writes that Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle , unlike Potter 's earlier work , was " a story set in a real place , about a real washerwoman , a real hedge @-@ hog named Tiggy @-@ winkle , and a child Lucie , from Little @-@ town in the Newlands valley " . In the summer of 1904 , Potter again took her holiday at Lingholm , and drew pen and ink illustrations for the hedgehog book based on in watercolours made of the area the previous year . After returning to London in October , family matters prevented her from continuing work on the tale ; she returned to Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle in late November 1904 . The sketchbook scenes of the path above Little Town , the Newlands Valley , the fells , and Skiddaw were reproduced in the published book almost exactly as found in the sketchbook , except for the inclusion of the figures and some minor artistic liberties . Potter included in her illustrations a depiction a small door used to close abandoned mine shafts in the fells . During her explorations of the area she visited farms at Skelghyl and sheep farms in the fells . 
 The model for the preliminary illustrations of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle was Potter 's own pet hedgehog . Potter wrote to Warne on 12 November , " Mrs. Tiggy as a model is comical ; so long as she can go to sleep on my knee she is delighted , but if she is propped up on end for half an hour , she first begins to yawn pathetically , and then she does bite ! Nevertheless , she is a dear person ; just like a very fat rather stupid little dog . I think the book will go all right when once started . " Three weeks later , she wrote , " The hedgehog drawings are turning out very comical . I have dressed up a <unk> dummy for convenience of drawing the clothes . It is such a figure of fun . " The dummy terrified her rabbit and her pet mouse pulled out the stuffing . " I think it should make a good book , " she wrote , " When I have learnt to draw the child . " 
 Although Potter had little difficulty with the landscapes , the kitchen , and the birds and animals , Lucie presented a serious problem . Potter recognized and admitted the human form eluded her and confessed she faced a worrisome challenge whenever it was absolutely necessary to bring a human into an illustration . She made a number of preliminary sketches of Lucie , changed the colour of her cloak , and enlisted a real child as a model . 
 Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle 's kitchen is typical of those seen by Potter in Lakeland and Sawrey , and presented no artistic difficulties . She had been sketching interiors for years . 
 By February 1905 , the drawings for the book sent to be converted to blocks , and , in late March , she began The Pie and the Patty @-@ Pan , the companion piece to Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle . Potter continued to fuss with the tale 's text and illustrations . The proofs of the text arrived in the beginning of June , and Potter laboured over them . She reconsidered the rhyme writing to Warne , 
 I do not think that rhyme is right grammar ; it is the " no " that throws it out . If it were 
 " Smooth and hot — red rusty spot 
 never here be seen — oh ! " 
 that would be all right . She is supposed to be exorcising spots and iron stains , same as Lady MacBeth ( ! ) . The verb is imperative , and apparently it is not reasonable to use " no " with a vocative noun . It is a contradiction to address " no spot ! " I am afraid this is rather muddled ; I used to know my Latin grammar but it has faded ... I wish another book could be planned out before the summer , if we are going on with them , I always feel very much lost when they are finished . 
 She had enjoyed developing the book with Warne , and , on July 2 , sent him the remainder of the book , expressing her regret that its production was over . On July 25 , proofs sent to her from the publisher showed <unk> that may have been caused by the summer heat affecting the chemicals used in the engraving process ; the plates were re @-@ engraved in September . 
 = = Publication history and adaptations = = 
 Twenty thousand copies of the book were released in a 139 by 104 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 in × 4 @.@ 1 in ) format in October 1905 with The Pie and the Patty @-@ Pan . Another 10 @,@ 000 copies were released in November 1905 , and another 8 @,@ 000 in January 1906 . The dedication reads , " For the real little Lucie of Newlands " ; Lucie 's copy of the book was inscribed , " For little Lucie with much love from Beatrix Potter and from dear ' Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle ' Sept . 24 . 05 . " 
 Soon after the book 's publication , Potter 's ageing Mrs. Tiggy began showing signs of failing health . She wrote a friend on February 1 , 1906 , " I am sorry to say I am upset about poor Mrs. Tiggy . She hasn 't seemed well the last fortnight , and has begun to be sick , and she is so thin . I am going to try some physic but I am a little afraid that the long course of unnatural diet and indoor life is beginning to tell on her . It is a wonder she has lasted so long . One gets very fond of a little animal . I hope she will either get well or go quickly . " A few weeks later Potter chloroformed her beloved hedgehog and laid her to rest in the garden at the Potter family home at 2 Bolton Gardens , Kensington . 
 The tale has had two dramatic adaptations . In 1971 , Sir Frederick Ashton performed the role of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle in the Royal Ballet film The Tales of Beatrix Potter , which he also choreographed . In 1993 , the tale was adapted ( with The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher ) as one of six episodes of the animated BBC anthology series The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends . 
 = = Miniature letters = = 
 Potter created a series of miniature letters for child fans between 1907 and 1912 . These letters were written as from her characters and intended to shed light on their doings outside their tales and to tell the recipient more about them . Each letter was folded to represent an envelope , and addressed to the child recipient . There was a tiny stamp in the corner drawn with a red crayon . They were sent to the children in a miniature post bag marked G.P.O. that Potter had made herself or in a toy tin mail box enamelled bright red . " Some of the letters were very funny , " Potter wrote , " The defect was that inquiries and answers were all mixed up . " 
 Potter sent miniature letters to the Moore children , to the Warne children , Lucie Carr and her older sister Kathleen , Master Drew Fayle , and to Master John and Miss Margaret Hough . Seven letters about Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle are extant . Mrs. Josephine Rabbit writes to complain of starch in her handkerchiefs , Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle responds with apologies , Mrs. Rabbit then writes to compliment Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle on the " getting up of the children 's muslin frocks " and promises not to seek another laundress . Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle writes Master Fayle warning him that " [ e ] verything has got all mixed up in wrong bundles " and wondering if he has received Mr. Jeremy Fisher 's shirt or Mrs. Flopsy Bunny 's apron ? Mrs. Bunny writes Master Drew that she is looking for her apron . She has received a shirt marked J.F. that is 3 @-@ inches long . Jeremy writes twice to Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle . Once , to complain that he has received an apron marked F.B. and then to complain in a letter dated January 22 , 1910 : 
 Mr. J. Fisher regrets to have to complain again about the washing . Mrs. T. Winkle has sent home an enormous handkerchief marked ' D. Fayle ' instead of the tablecloth marked J.F. If this continues every week , Mr. J. Fisher will have to get married , so as to have the washing done at home . 
 = = Scholarly commentaries = = 
 Ruth K. MacDonald , Professor of English at New Mexico State University , past president of the Children 's Literature Association , and author of Beatrix Potter ( 1986 ) , views the plot of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle as " thin " and lacking the complications of Potter 's previously published The Tale of Two Bad Mice ( 1905 ) and later books . The tale is held together , she asserts , by its attractive central character , and points out that , like many girls ' books of the period , it is set indoors and revolves around household chores and duties . Unlike Two Bad Mice however , there is no ironic commentary on housekeeping ; Potter gives her tacit approval to Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle 's <unk> and span cottage and her housekeeping practices . MacDonald points out that Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle is the first of Potter 's books to depict a countryside of simple dwellings , pathways , stone fences , and the timeless , unchanging ways of rural life . Actual place names in the tale such as Skelghyl , <unk> , and Little @-@ town ground the tale in a real world locality yet the tale is mythologized by suggesting a remote time before mechanical means of doing laundry had been invented . She notes that Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle has become " synonymous for female hedgehogs and for fastidious housekeepers " . 
 M. Daphne Kutzer , Professor of English at the State University of New York at Plattsburgh and author of Beatrix Potter : Writing in Code ( 2003 ) indicates Potter was venturing into new territory in creating a tale with a large human presence ( Lucie ) . Potter 's artistic uncertainty is evident in her attempt to establish a relationship between clothes and the social and animal selves of humans and animals . Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle wears human clothing while the neighbourhood animals wear and shed only their skins . Logically , Kutzer points out , all the animals should wear either human clothing or only their skins . She believes Peter Rabbit 's blue jacket is used in the tale as a gimmick to remind the reader that other Potter books exist for purchase , and a gimmick that disrupts Potter 's artistic intent . If Peter wears human clothing then why do the other animals wear only their skins ? The issue of animal clothing versus human clothing is further confused when Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle sheds her human clothing at the end of the tale to reveal herself a hedgehog who may or may not be able to shed her skin as well . If she can shed her skin , then why is she wearing human clothes ? Kutzer believes these questions remain unanswered and erode the tale 's logic . 
 <unk> one 's clothes , Kutzer observes , is a symbol of shedding the social self and its constraints to then embrace the freedom of the animal self , but Lucie , who sets off for an adventure after shedding her pinafore and handkerchiefs , fails to embrace her animal self and learns nothing new about herself . True , she learns something about the animal world – hens shed their stockings and robins their red vests – but Lucie began her adventure as a well @-@ behaved , proper young Victorian child and remains so at tale 's end , taking delight in the <unk> pinafore and the laundered handkerchiefs that confine and define such a child . Having not learned something new about herself , Lucie 's success as a literary heroine is moot . 
 By inserting her authorial voice in the tale 's epilogue , Potter reveals her uncertainty about the believability of her fantasy , and her uncertainty mars the narrative line which , Kutzer remarks , is analogous to a " comedy sketch that should have stayed at joke length , but is unwisely stretched into ten minutes of tepid comedy . " The notion of having animals shed their skins for laundering provides opportunities for amusing illustrations , but the tale does not have a strong narrative line to hold it together or to grip the reader 's attention . The tale is held together solely by the quaint language and work of the charming central character . 
 Literary scholar Humphrey Carpenter writes in Secret Gardens The Golden Age of Children 's Literature that Potter 's work shows thematic shifts , seeing in The Tale of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle a utopian theme of nature @-@ as @-@ redemption in which the background represents a return to Arcadia of sorts . Young Lucy finds in Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle 's kitchen a place of refuge , and although unlike Potter 's previous stories the main character is unthreatened by other characters or external circumstances , Carpenter writes " while no external threat enters this most utopian of Potter 's books , there is none the less something faintly sinister about Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle herself " . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 Potter asserted her tales would one day be nursery classics , and part of the " longevity of her books comes from strategy " , writes her biographer Ruth MacDonald . Potter was the first to exploit the commercial possibilities of her characters and tales ; between 1903 and 1905 these included a Peter Rabbit stuffed toy , an unpublished board game , and nursery wallpaper . Similar " side @-@ shows " ( as she termed the ancillary merchandise ) were produced throughout her life . Upon publication of the book , Norman Warne suggested a Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle pin cushion doll as a merchandising gimmick . 
 Potter died on December 22 , 1943 , and left her home and the original illustrations for almost all of her books , including Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle , to the National Trust . Hilltop was opened to visitors in 1946 , and displayed her original artwork there until 1985 . In 1947 , Frederick Warne & Co. granted Beswick Pottery of Longton , Staffordshire " rights and licences to produce " the Potter characters in porcelain . The next year , Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle was one of the first set of ten porcelain figurines released . Between 1985 and 1999 Beswick produced five more porcelain collectibles featuring the hedgehog , including her head as a mug in 1988 , a larger version of the first figurine in 1996 , and a limited edition tableau showing Lucie and Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle in 1999 . Beswick Pottery was eventually acquired by Royal Doulton , which continued to issue the figurines under the " Royal Albert " brand until it was discontinued in 2002 . 
 Stuffed toy manufacturers requested licensing for Potter 's figures as early as 1909 ; however she refused to grant permission , having been disappointed with the quality of the proposed toys . In the early 1970s Frederick Warne & Co. granted a license for plush toys to an English firm , House of Nesbit Ltd . , which produced seven characters , including Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle . Their finely detailed products were labour @-@ intensive and unprofitable , and were discontinued after a short time . In 1973 , Eden Toys of Jersey City , New Jersey received a license to manufacture stuffed animals based on Potter 's characters . Eden produced a plush Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle in 1974 , and made at least three other versions of the hedgehog over the years , including an 18 @-@ inch ( 46 cm ) " Giant " model , originally intended for display in stores . All of these were discontinued by 2001 , when Eden Toys went out of business . 
 Potter 's illustrations of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle were featured on biscuit tins made by Huntley & Palmer between 1974 and 1978 , and on a series of enamel items made by Crummles of Poole , Dorset from 1974 to 1995 . These included five different images on four different @-@ sized enamel boxes , as well as an enamel thimble , needle case , and pin cushion . From 1977 to 1995 ( when it went out of business ) , Schmid & Co. of Toronto and Randolph , Massachusetts made or distributed a series of items featuring the hedgehog washerwoman . These included one of the first ten Potter music boxes the company released in 1977 . Schmid distributed two Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle Christmas ornaments ( 3 and 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 76 and 38 mm ) tall ) and another music box , all made by the Italian firm ANRI , as well as a figurine made by Border Fine Arts , a Scottish firm , showing Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle and other Potter characters around a Christmas tree . 
 In 1979 , Wedgewood produced a 16 @-@ piece Queen 's Ware nursery set ; each piece was decorated with artwork and accompanying text from The Tale of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle . Wedgwood retired the items , which were similar in style to its Peter Rabbit nursery ware , in 1995 . In 1982 , Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle was featured on Wedgwood 's Happy Birthday plate , " the only year that a character other than Peter Rabbit was used on the annual plate " . 
 = = Reprints and translations = = 
 In 1913 , Warnes considered publishing some of Potter 's little books in French and thought it best to remove any wording in English from the pictures . Potter redrew the illustration of the spring bubbling out of the hillside to omit the words " How Keld " ( Norse for Hill Well ) . Potter noted in a letter that the words occasionally brought inquiries about their meaning . 
 As of 2010 , all 23 of Potter 's small format books remain in print , and are available as complete sets in presentation boxes . A 400 @-@ page omnibus edition is also available . Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle is available in Kindle format . First editions and early reprints are occasionally offered by antiquarian booksellers . 
 The English language editions of the tales still bore the Frederick Warne imprint in 2010 though the company was bought by Penguin Books in 1983 . Penguin remade the printing plates from new photographs of the original drawings in 1985 , and all 23 volumes were released in 1987 as The Original and Authorized Edition . 
 Potter 's small format books have been translated into nearly thirty languages , including Greek and Russian . Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle was released in braille in 1921 , and in the Initial Teaching Alphabet in 1965 . The tale was translated into French in 1922 as <unk> @-@ à @-@ L <unk> , and in Dutch as Het <unk> van <unk> <unk> in 1969 . In 1932 , it was translated into Welsh as Hanes <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> , and into German in 1948 as Die Geschichte von Frau Tiggy @-@ Winkle . In 1986 , MacDonald observed that the Potter books had become a " traditional part of childhood in most only English @-@ speaking countries and in many of the countries into whose languages Potter 's books have been translated " . 
 = Houston Rockets = 
 The Houston Rockets are an American professional basketball team based in Houston , Texas . The Rockets compete in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , as a member club of the league 's Western Conference Southwest Division . The team plays its home games at the Toyota Center , located in downtown Houston . The Rockets have won two NBA championships and four Western Conference titles . The team was established as the San Diego Rockets , an expansion team originally based in San Diego , in 1967 . In 1971 , the Rockets moved to Houston . 
 The Rockets won only 15 games in their debut season as a franchise in 1967 . In the 1969 NBA draft , the Rockets selected power forward Elvin Hayes first overall , who would lead the team to its first playoff appearance in his rookie season . The Rockets did not finish a season with a winning record until the 1976 – 77 season , when they traded for center Moses Malone . Malone went on to win the NBA Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) award twice and lead Houston to the conference finals in his first year with the team . He also led the Rockets to the NBA Finals in 1981 where they were defeated in six games by the Boston Celtics , led by Larry Bird and future Rockets coach Kevin McHale . 
 In 1984 , the Rockets drafted center Hakeem Olajuwon , who would be paired with 7 feet 4 inches ( 2 @.@ 24 m ) Ralph Sampson , forming one of the tallest front courts in the NBA . Nicknamed the " Twin Towers " , they led the team to the 1986 NBA Finals — the second NBA Finals berth in franchise history — where Houston was again defeated by the Boston Celtics . The Rockets continued to reach the playoffs throughout the 1980s , but failed to advance past the second round for the rest of the decade . Rudy Tomjanovich took over as head coach midway through the 1991 – 92 season , ushering in the most successful period in franchise history . The Rockets would reach the 1994 NBA Finals , where Olajuwon led the team to the franchise 's first championship against Patrick Ewing and the New York Knicks . The team repeated as champions in 1995 as the sixth seed in the West and swept the favored Orlando Magic , who were led by a young Shaquille O 'Neal and Penny Hardaway . Houston became the lowest @-@ seeded team in NBA history to win the title . 
 The Rockets acquired all @-@ star forward Charles Barkley in 1996 , but the presence of three of the NBA 's 50 greatest players of all @-@ time ( Olajuwon , Drexler , and Barkley ) was not enough to propel Houston past the Western Conference Finals . Each one of the aging trio had left the team by 2001 , and the Rockets of the early 21st century , led by superstars Tracy McGrady and Yao Ming , followed the trend of consistent regular @-@ season respectability followed by playoff underachievement as both players struggled with injuries . After Yao 's early retirement in 2011 , the Rockets entered a period of rebuilding , completely dismantling and retooling their roster . The acquisitions of franchise players James Harden and Dwight Howard have launched the Rockets back into championship contention in the mid @-@ 2010s . The Rockets , under general manager Daryl Morey , are notable for popularizing the use of advanced statistical analytics ( similar to sabermetrics in baseball ) in player acquisitions and style of play . 
 = = Franchise history = = 
 = = = 1967 – 1971 : San Diego Rockets = = = 
 The Rockets were founded in 1967 in San Diego by Robert Breitbard , who paid an entry fee of US $ 1 @.@ 75 million to join the NBA as an expansion team for the 1967 – 68 NBA season . The NBA wanted to add more teams in the Western United States , and chose San Diego based on the city 's strong economic and population growths , along with the local success of an ice hockey team owned by Breitbard , the San Diego Gulls . The resulting contest to name the franchise chose the name " Rockets " , which paid homage to San Diego 's theme of " a city in motion " and the local arm of General Dynamics developing the Atlas missile and booster rocket program . Breitbard brought in Jack McMahon , then coach of the Cincinnati Royals , to serve as the Rockets ' coach and general manager . The team , that would join the league along with the Seattle SuperSonics , then built its roster with both veteran players at an expansion draft , and college players from the 1967 NBA draft , where San Diego 's first ever draft pick was Pat Riley . The Rockets lost 67 games in their inaugural season , which was an NBA record for losses in a season at the time . 
 In 1968 , after the Rockets won a coin toss against the Baltimore Bullets to determine who would have the first overall pick in the 1968 NBA draft , they selected Elvin Hayes from the University of Houston . Hayes improved the Rockets ' record to 37 wins and 45 losses , enough for the franchise 's first ever playoff appearance in 1969 , but the Rockets lost in the semi @-@ finals of the Western Division to the Atlanta Hawks , four games to two . Despite the additions of Calvin Murphy and Rudy Tomjanovich and the management of Hall of Fame coach Alex Hannum , the Rockets tallied a 57 – 97 record in the following two seasons and did not make the playoffs in either season . Because of the low performance and attendance , Breitbard looked to sell the team , and in 1971 , Texas Sports Investments bought the franchise for $ 5 @.@ 6 million , and moved the team to Houston . The franchise became the first NBA team in Texas , and the nickname " Rockets " took on even greater relevance after the move , given Houston 's long connection to the space industry . 
 = = = 1971 – 1976 : Improving in Houston with Murphy and Rudy @-@ T = = = 
 Before the start of the 1971 – 72 NBA season , Hannum left for the Denver Rockets of the American Basketball Association – later renamed Denver Nuggets , who joined the NBA in 1976 – and Tex Winter was hired in his place . However , Winter 's clashes with Hayes , due to a system that contrasted with the offensive style to which Hayes was accustomed , made Hayes ask for a trade , leaving for the Baltimore Bullets at the end of the 1971 – 72 season . 
 It was also around this time that the Rockets would unveil their classic yellow and red logo and accompanying uniforms used until the end of the 1994 – 95 season . Winter left soon after , being fired in January 1973 following a ten @-@ game losing streak , and was replaced by Johnny Egan . Egan led the Rockets back to the playoffs in 1975 , where the franchise also managed to win their first round against the New York Knicks , subsequently losing to the veteran Boston Celtics in 5 games . At that time the Rockets gained popularity in Houston , selling out several home games during the regular season as the Rockets battled for a playoff spot and then selling out all of their home playoff games . 
 = = = 1976 – 1982 : The Moses Malone era = = = 
 In the 1975 – 76 NBA season the Rockets finally had a permanent home in Houston as they moved into The Summit , which they would call home for the next 29 years . During the period , the franchise was owned by Kenneth Schnitzer , developer of the Greenway Plaza which included The Summit . After missing the 1976 playoffs , Tom Nissalke was hired as a coach , and pressed the team to add a play @-@ making guard in college standout John Lucas and a rebounding center through Moses Malone , who he had coached in the ABA . The additions had an immediate impact , with the 1976 – 77 Rockets winning the Central Division and going all the way to the Eastern Conference Finals , losing to the Julius Erving 's Philadelphia 76ers 4 games to 2 . The following season had the team regressing to just 28 wins due to an injury to captain Tomjanovich , who got numerous facial fractures after being punched by Kermit Washington of the Los Angeles Lakers and wound up spending five months in rehabilitation . After trading Lucas to the Golden State Warriors in exchange for Rick Barry , the Rockets returned to the playoffs in 1978 – 79 , with " The Chairman Of The Boards " Moses Malone receiving the 1979 MVP Award , but the team was swept 2 – 0 by Atlanta in the first round . Nissalke was let go , and assistant Del Harris was promoted to head coach . 
 In 1979 George Maloof , a businessperson from Albuquerque , New Mexico , bought the Rockets for $ 9 million . He died the following year , and while the Maloof family expressed interest in selling the team , George 's 24 @-@ year @-@ old son Gavin took over the Rockets . A buyer was eventually found in 1982 as businessman Charlie Thomas purchased the franchise for $ 11 million . The Maloof period of ownership marked the first dominant period of the Rockets , highlighted by the team 's first NBA Finals appearance in 1981 . Prior to the 1980 – 81 season , the arrival of the Dallas Mavericks led to an NBA realignment that sent the Rockets back to the Western Conference . Houston qualified for the playoffs only in the final game of the season with a 40 – 42 record . The post @-@ season had the Rockets beat the Lakers , in @-@ state rivals San Antonio Spurs , and the equally underdog Kansas City Kings to become only the second team in NBA history ( after the 1959 Minneapolis Lakers ) to have advanced to the Finals after achieving a losing record in the regular season . In the final round facing Larry Bird 's Boston Celtics in the finals round , the Rockets blew a late lead in Game 1 and won Game 2 at the Boston Garden . However , afterwards the team failed to capitalize on the early success against the favored Celtics , and eventually lost in six games . 
 While new owner Charlie Thomas expressed interest in renewing with Moses Malone , which had been again chosen as MVP in 1981 – 82 , the Rockets traded him to the Philadelphia 76ers for Caldwell Jones , as a declining regional economy made the Rockets unable to pay Malone 's salary . When the Rockets finished a league worst 14 – 68 , Celtics coach Bill Fitch was hired to replace outgoing Del Harris , and the team won the first pick of the 1983 NBA draft , used to select Ralph Sampson from the University of Virginia . Sampson had good numbers and was awarded the NBA Rookie of the Year award , but the Rockets still finished last overall , again getting the top pick at the upcoming 1984 NBA draft , used to select Hakeem Olajuwon from the University of Houston . 
 = = = 1984 – 2001 : The Hakeem Olajuwon era = = = 
 = = = = 1984 – 1987 : The Twin Towers era = = = = 
 In his first season , Olajuwon finished second to Michael Jordan in NBA Rookie of the Year balloting , and the Rockets record improved by 19 games , good enough for a return to the playoffs as the third best team in the West , where they were upset by the sixth @-@ seeded Utah Jazz . The Olajuwon and Sampson duo earned much praise , and was nicknamed " Twin Towers " . In the following season , Houston won the Midwest Division title with a 51 – 31 record . The subsequent playoffs had the Rockets sweeping the Sacramento Kings , having a hard @-@ fought six @-@ game series with Alex English 's Denver Nuggets , and then facing defending champion Lakers , losing the first game but eventually managing to win the series – the only Western Playoffs defeat of the Showtime Lakers – to get to the franchise 's second Finals appearance . The NBA Finals once again matched the Rockets up against the Celtics , a contrast to Houston 's young front challenging the playoff @-@ hardened Celtics front court of Larry Bird , Kevin McHale and Robert Parish . The Celtics won the first two games in Boston , gave the Rockets their only home playoff defeat that season in game 4 , and clinched the title as Bird scored a triple @-@ double on Game 6 . 
 After the Finals , Boston coach K.C. Jones called the Rockets " the new monsters on the block " feeling they had a bright future . But the team had a poor start to the following season amidst players getting injured or suspended for cocaine usage , and during the playoffs were defeated in the second round by Seattle SuperSonics . Early in the 1987 – 88 season , Sampson , who had signed a new contract , was traded to the Golden State Warriors , bringing the Twin Towers era to an end just 18 months after their Finals appearance . Sampson 's once @-@ promising career was shortened due to chronic knee injuries , which forced his retirement in 1991 . Jones ' prophecy of a Rockets dynasty never materialized until the early 90 's . 
 = = = = 1987 – 1992 : Lean years = = = = 
 In the next five seasons , the Rockets either failed to qualify for the playoffs or were eliminated in the first round . The first elimination in 1988 led to Fitch 's dismissal , with Don Chaney replacing him as head coach . Chaney , also a former Celtic , had his best season during 1990 – 91 , where he was named the Coach of the Year after leading the Rockets to a 52 @-@ 30 record despite Olajuwon 's absence due to injury for 25 games . Despite Olajuwon 's usual strong numbers , the underwhelming roster could not be lifted out of mediocrity . However , the attempts to rebuild the team nucleus incorporated players that would later make an impact in the years to come , such as Kenny Smith , Vernon Maxwell , Robert Horry , Mario Elie , Sam Cassell and Otis Thorpe . 
 Midway through the 1991 – 92 season , with the Rockets ' record only 26 – 26 , Chaney was fired and replaced by his assistant Rudy Tomjanovich , a former Houston player himself . While the Rockets did not make the playoffs , Tomjanovich 's arrival was considered a step forward . In the next year , the Rockets improved their record by 13 games , getting the Midwest Division title , and winning their first playoff series in 5 years by defeating the Los Angeles Clippers , before an elimination by the SuperSonics during a game 7 overtime loss . 
 = = = = 1993 – 1995 : Clutch City championships = = = = 
 On July 30 , 1993 , Leslie Alexander purchased the Rockets for $ 85 million . In Tomjanovich 's second full year as head coach , the Rockets began the 1993 – 94 season by tying an NBA record with a start of 15 – 0 . Led by Olajuwon , who was named the MVP and Defensive Player of the Year , the Rockets won a franchise @-@ record 58 games . Aside from the second round which went through seven games against the Phoenix Suns , the Rockets easily beat their Western Conference contestants during the playoffs to advance to their third finals . The New York Knicks opened a 3 @-@ 2 advantage , but the Rockets managed to win the last two games on their home court and claimed their first championship in franchise history . Olajuwon was awarded the Finals MVP , after averaging 27 points , nine rebounds and four blocked shots a game . 
 The Rockets initially struggled in the first half of the 1994 – 95 season , which they fixed by sending Otis Thorpe to the Portland Trail Blazers in exchange for Olajuwon 's former college teammate Clyde Drexler . With only 47 wins , the Rockets entered the playoffs as the sixth seed in the Western Conference . Still , a strong playoff run that earned Houston the nickname " Clutch City " had the Rockets defeating the West 's top three seeds – the Jazz , Suns and Spurs – to reach back @-@ to @-@ back finals , this time against the Orlando Magic , led by Shaquille O 'Neal and <unk> " Penny " Hardaway . When Houston swept the series in four straight games , they became the first team in NBA history to win the championship as a sixth seed , and the first to beat four 50 @-@ win teams in a single postseason en route to the championship . Olajuwon was again the Finals MVP , only the second player after Michael Jordan to win the award two years in a row . 
 = = = = 1995 – 2002 : Post @-@ Championship and rebuilding = = = = 
 During the offseason , the Rockets went for a change of visual identity , making navy blue and silver the new primary colors while adopting a new cartoon @-@ inspired logo and pinstriped jerseys . The Rockets won 48 games in the 1995 – 96 campaign , in which Olajuwon became the NBA 's all @-@ time leader in blocked shots . The playoffs had the Rockets beating the Lakers before a sweep by the SuperSonics . 
 Before the start of the succeeding season , the Rockets sent four players to Phoenix in exchange for Charles Barkley . The resulting " Big Three " of Olajuwon , Drexler , and Barkley had a strong debut season with a 57 – 25 record , going all the way to the Western Conference finals before losing to the Utah Jazz 4 – 2 on a dramatic last @-@ second shot by John Stockton . The following season was marked by injuries , and Houston finished 41 – 41 and the 8th seed , leading to another elimination by the top @-@ seeded Jazz . 
 Drexler retired after the season , and the Rockets traded to bring in Scottie Pippen to take his place . In the strike @-@ shortened 1998 – 99 season , the Rockets lost to the Lakers in the first round of the playoffs . After the 1999 draft , the Rockets traded for the second overall pick Steve Francis from the Vancouver Grizzlies , in exchange for four players and a first @-@ round draft pick . However , after Houston traded a discontented Pippen to Portland , and Barkley suffered a career @-@ ending injury , the rebuilt Rockets went 34 – 48 and missed the playoffs , for only the second time in 15 years . 
 In the 2000 – 01 season , the Rockets worked their way to a 45 – 37 record . However , in a competitive Western Conference where seven teams won 50 games , this left the Rockets two games out of the playoffs . In the following offseason , a 38 @-@ year @-@ old Olajuwon requested a trade , and , despite stating their desire to keep him , the Rockets reached a sign @-@ and @-@ trade agreement , sending him to the Toronto Raptors . The ensuing 2001 – 02 season — the first without Hakeem in two decades — was unremarkable , and the Rockets finished with only 28 wins . 
 = = = 2002 – 2009 : Return to Relevance = = = 
 = = = = 2002 – 2004 : Yao Ming arrives = = = = 
 After Houston was awarded the first overall pick in the 2002 NBA draft , they selected Yao Ming , a 7 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 29 m ) Chinese center . The Rockets missed the 2003 playoffs by one game , improving their record by 15 victories . 
 The 2003 – 04 season marked the Rockets ' arrival to a new arena , the Toyota Center , a redesign of their uniforms and logo , and their first season without Rudy Tomjanovich , who resigned as head coach after being diagnosed with bladder cancer . Led by former Knicks coach Jeff Van Gundy , the Rockets finished the regular season with a record of 45 – 37 , earning their first playoff berth since 1999 , again losing to the Lakers in the first round . 
 = = = = 2004 – 2009 : Yao & McGrady duo = = = = 
 In the offseason , Houston saw major changes in the roster as the Rockets acquired Tracy McGrady in a seven @-@ player deal with the Orlando Magic . The scoring champion McGrady and the strong rebounder Yao formed a well @-@ regarded pair that helped the Rockets win 22 consecutive games in the 2007 – 08 NBA season , which was at the time the 3rd longest winning streak in NBA history . Still , the duo was plagued with injuries – of the 463 regular season games for which they were teammates , Yao missed 146 and McGrady 160 – and did not win any playoff series , despite gathering leads over the Dallas Mavericks in 2005 and the Jazz in 2007 . After the 2007 elimination , Van Gundy was fired , and the Rockets hired Rick Adelman to replace him . 
 For the 2008 – 09 season , the Rockets signed forward Ron Artest . While McGrady wound up playing only half the games before enduring a season @-@ ending microfracture surgery , the Rockets ended the season 53 – 29 , enough for the Western Conference 's fifth seed . During the playoffs , the Rockets beat the Portland Trail Blazers four games to two , winning their first round since 1997 . During the series , Dikembe Mutombo injured his knee , which forced him to retire after 18 seasons in the NBA . However , the second round against the Lakers had the Rockets losing 4 @-@ 3 and Yao Ming suffering yet another season @-@ ending injury , this time a hairline fracture in his left foot . 
 = = = 2009 – 2012 : " Competitive Rebuilding " = = = 
 During the 2009 – 10 season , the Rockets saw the departures of Artest in the offseason and McGrady , Joey Dorsey and Carl Landry during mid @-@ season trades . Despite great play by Kevin Martin , who arrived from the Kings , and Aaron Brooks , who would eventually be chosen as the Most Improved Player of the season , the Rockets could not make it to the playoffs , finishing 42 – 40 , 3rd in the Southwest Division . At that time , the Rockets set an NBA record for best record by a team with no All @-@ Stars . The Rockets would also finish ninth in the Western Conference for the following two seasons , with Yao Ming getting a season @-@ ending injury seven games into the 2010 – 11 season and deciding to retire during the 2011 offseason . Said offseason , which saw the NBA going through a lockout , had Adelman dismissed , and general manager Daryl Morey deciding to start a revamp of the Rockets based on advanced statistical analytics ( similar to sabermetrics in baseball ) in player acquisitions and style of play . Kevin McHale was named head coach , and the roster saw significant changes . 
 = = = 2012 – present : The James Harden era ; resurgence and inconsistency = = = 
 After the roster moves made by Morey during the 2012 NBA offseason , only four players were left from the 2011 – 12 Rockets roster : Chandler Parsons , Greg Smith , Marcus Morris and Patrick Patterson , with the latter two leaving through trades during the 2012 – 13 NBA season . The most important acquisition was reigning sixth man of the year James Harden , who Morey called a " foundational " player which he expected to be Houston 's featured player after a supporting role in the Oklahoma City Thunder . Harden caused an immediate impact as part of the starting lineup for the Rockets , with 37 points , 12 assists , 6 rebounds , 4 steals , and a block in the season opener against the Detroit Pistons , and an average of 25 @.@ 9 points a game through the season . Combining Harden 's performance and McHale 's up @-@ tempo offense , the Rockets became one of the highest scoring offenses in the NBA , leading the league in scoring for the majority of the season . In the post @-@ season , the Rockets fell to the Oklahoma City Thunder in the first round , losing the series 4 – 2 . 
 Eager to add another franchise player to their team , the Rockets heavily pursued free agent center Dwight Howard in the 2013 offseason . He officially signed with the Rockets on July 13 , 2013 . Led by the new inside @-@ out combination of Howard and James Harden , and with a strong supporting cast including Chandler Parsons , Jeremy Lin , and Ömer Aşık , the Rockets were expected to jump into title contention in the upcoming season . However , in the post @-@ season , the Rockets were defeated in the first round by the Portland Trail Blazers , losing the series 4 – 2 . Still , in the 2014 – 15 season , without Lin and Parsons but reinforced by Trevor Ariza , the Rockets started the season well , winning the first four games of the season for the first time since 1996 – 97 , and winning each of their first six games by 10 points or more , the first team to accomplish this feat since the 1985 – 86 Denver Nuggets . While the Rockets had many key players miss time throughout the entire season , James Harden took it upon himself to keep the Rockets near the top of the conference , turning him into an MVP front @-@ runner . He became the first Rocket to score 50 points in a game since Hakeem Olajuwon , as well as the only player in franchise history to record multiple 50 point games in a season . On April 15 , 2015 , the Rockets beat the Jazz to claim their first ever Southwest Division title and first Division crown since 1994 , and by completing 56 wins finished with the third @-@ best regular season record in franchise history . During the playoffs , the Rockets beat the Mavericks 4 – 1 in the first round , and overcame a 3 – 1 deficit against the Los Angeles Clippers to win the Western Semifinals and return to the Conference Finals for the first time in 18 years . In the Conference Finals , the Rockets were defeated by the Golden State Warriors 4 – 1 . 
 The 2015 – 16 season saw Kevin McHale fired after a bad start where the team only won 4 of its first 11 games , and assistant J. B. Bickerstaff took over coaching duties . Inconsistent play led to the Rockets struggling to remain in the playoff qualifying zone , and surrounded by trade rumors . Houston only clinched its 2016 playoffs spot by winning its last game , finishing the season 41 – 41 to earn an eight seed and a match @-@ up against the Warriors . Like in the previous year , the Rockets were once again defeated by the Golden State Warriors in 5 games . 
 On June 1 , 2016 , the Rockets named Mike D 'Antoni as their new head coach . 
 = = Season @-@ by @-@ season record = = 
 List of the last five seasons completed by the Rockets . For the full season @-@ by @-@ season history , see List of Houston Rockets seasons . 
 Note : GP 
 = Games played , W = 
 Wins , L 
 = Losses , % = 
 Winning Percentage 
 = = Home arenas = = 
 During the four years the Rockets were in San Diego , they played their games in the San Diego Sports Arena , which had a seating capacity of 14 @,@ 400 . In their first season after moving to Houston , the Rockets did not have their own arena , and they played their first two years at various venues in the city , including the Astrodome , <unk> , Sam Houston Coliseum and Hofheinz Pavilion , the latter eventually being adopted as their home arena until 1975 . They also had to play " home " games in other cities such as San Antonio , Waco , Albuquerque , and even San Diego in efforts to extend the fan @-@ base . During their first season , the Rockets averaged less than 5 @,@ 000 fans per game ( roughly half full ) , and in one game in Waco , there were only 759 fans in attendance . 
 Their first permanent arena in Houston was the 10 @,@ 000 seat Hofheinz Pavilion on the campus of the University of Houston , which they moved into starting in their second season . They played in the arena for four years , before occupying The Summit in 1975 . The arena , which could hold 16 @,@ 611 spectators , was their home for the next 28 years . It was renamed the Compaq Center from 1998 to 2003 . Following the 1994 title , the Rockets had a sellout streak of 176 consecutive home games , including the playoffs , which lasted until 1999 . However , the struggling 2000 – 01 and 2001 – 02 seasons saw Houston having the worst attendance average in the league , with less than 12 @,@ 000 spectators each season . 
 For the 2003 – 04 season , the Rockets moved into their new arena , the Toyota Center , with a seating capacity of 18 @,@ 500 . During the 2007 – 08 NBA season where the team achieved a 22 @-@ game winning streak , the Rockets got their best numbers to date , averaging 17 @,@ 379 spectators . These were exceeded once James Harden joined the team in 2013 . The Rockets averaged 18 @,@ 123 spectators during the 2013 – 14 season , selling out 39 out of the 41 home games . 2014 – 15 had even better numbers , with 40 sellouts and an average of 18 @,@ 230 tickets sold . 
 = = Team identity = = 
 = = = Uniforms and logos = = = 
 When the Rockets debuted in San Diego , their colors were green and gold . Road uniforms featured the city name , while the home uniforms feature the team name , both in a serifed block lettering . This was the only uniform design the Rockets would use throughout their years in San Diego . The Rockets ' first logo featured a rocket streaking with a basketball surrounded by the team name . 
 Upon moving to Houston in 1971 , the Rockets replaced green with red . They kept the same design from their San Diego days , save for the change of color and city name . The logo used is of a player with a spinning basketball launching upward , with boosters on his back , leaving a trail of red and gold flames and the words " Houston Rockets " below it . 
 For the 1972 – 73 season , the Rockets introduced the famous " mustard and ketchup " logo , so dubbed by fans , featuring a gold basketball surrounded by two red trails , with " Houston " atop the first red trail and " Rockets " ( all capitalized save for the lowercase ' E ' and ' T ' ) in black surrounding the basketball . The initial home uniforms , used until the 1975 – 76 season , features the city name , numbers and serifed player name in red with gold trim , while the away uniforms feature the city name ( all capitalized except for the lower case ' T ' and ' N ' ) , numbers and serifed player name in gold with white trim . 
 In the 1976 – 77 season , the Rockets modified their uniforms , featuring a monotone look on the Cooper Black fonts and white lettering on the road uniforms . On the home shorts , the team logo is located on the right leg , while the away shorts feature the team name wordmark on the same location . With minor modifications in the number font , this version was used in all four of their NBA Finals appearances , including their 1994 and 1995 championships . 
 Following the 1995 title , the Rockets opted to modernize their look . After a fan contest with over 5 @,@ 000 entries , the team went with the idea of Missouri City artist Thomas Nash of a rocket orbiting a basketball , which was then reworked by Houston designer Chris Hill . Nash would later sue the Rockets for breach of contract , given they were using his idea despite not having paid the contest prizes . The NBA suggested that should go with the cartoon @-@ inspired imagery that other teams adopted during the 1990s , leading to a rocket painted with <unk> nose art orbiting a basketball . Red was retained , but navy blue and silver became the uniform 's primary colors . Both the home white and away navy uniforms featured gradient @-@ fading pinstripes and futuristic number fonts , with side stripes of navy fading to red . This was used until the 2002 – 03 season . 
 The Rockets ' current logos and uniforms were introduced in the 2003 – 04 season , created by New York @-@ based agency <unk> Studio in association with Japanese designer Eiko Ishioka . The logo is a stylized ' R ' in the shape of a rocket during takeoff , surrounded by a red orbit streak that can be interpreted as the central circle of a basketball court . Said " R " inspired the team 's new custom typeface , designed so that every single digit could be read well from a distance , whether in the arena or on television . Red once again became the dominant color , with silver and black as secondary . In 2009 , the Rockets invoked the championship years with an alternate red uniform , featuring gold numbers and side stripes . The Rockets had two sleeved alternate jerseys for the 2015 @-@ 16 season , an alternate silver @-@ colored uniform whose design referenced the design of NASA 's Gemini @-@ Titan rocket , and a red and gold jersey featuring the nickname " Clutch City " . 
 = = = Mascots = = = 
 The mascot of the Houston Rockets in the 1980s was called Booster . From 1993 to 1995 , the mascot was Turbo , a costumed man that performed acrobatic dunks and other maneuvers . In 1995 , the Rockets debuted Clutch the Bear as a second mascot , a large teddy bear @-@ like mascot that performs a variety of acts during the games . After eight years of serving as dual mascots , the performer playing Turbo retired , making Clutch the sole mascot for the team . 
 = = = Rivalries = = = 
 The Rockets have developed many rivalries within the Western Conference ever since the team returned there in 1980 . Two are interstate rivalries , with the San Antonio Spurs , who moved along with the Rockets after four years with them in the Eastern Conference , and the Dallas Mavericks , introduced that very season . Houston faced both Texas teams thrice since 1980 , beating the Spurs on all occasions and losing twice to the Mavericks . Other famed rivalries were with the Los Angeles Lakers , that in the 1980s Showtime era only missed the NBA Finals when beaten by the Rockets , and the Utah Jazz , who the Rockets beat in both championship seasons but were defeated by Utah in five other occasions . 
 = = Honors and statistics = = 
 = = = Individual honors = = = 
 = = = Statistics and records = = = 
 = = = Franchise leaders = = = 
 Bold denotes still active with team . Italics denotes still active but not with team . 
 Points scored ( regular season ) ( as of the end of the 2015 – 16 season ) 
 Other Statistics ( regular season ) ( as of the end of the 2015 – 16 season ) 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current roster = = = 
 For the complete list of Houston Rockets players see : Houston Rockets all @-@ time roster 
 For the players drafted by Houston Rockets , see : List of Houston Rockets first and second round draft picks . 
 = = = Retained draft rights = = = 
 The Rockets hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA . A drafted player , either an international draftee or a college draftee who is not signed by the team that drafted him , is allowed to sign with any non @-@ NBA teams . In this case , the team retains the player 's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player 's contract with the non @-@ NBA team ends . This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams . 
 = = = Notable former players = = = 
 = = = = Retired numbers = = = = 
 1 Also served as head coach from 1991 to 2003 . 
 2 As Dawson did not play for the Rockets , the team used his initials . 
 = = = = Unassigned numbers = = = = 
 11 – Yao Ming , C , ( 2002 – 11 ) The number has not been issued since Yao announced his retirement on July 20 , 2011 and will " probably " be retired , according to owner Leslie Alexander . 
 = = = Basketball Hall of Famers = = = 
 On April 4 , 2016 , Ming was elected into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame . He will be inducted in September 2016 . 
 Notes : 
 1 All three players were also inducted to the Hall of Fame as members of the 1992 Olympic team . 
 = = = FIBA Hall of Famers = = = 
 = = Management = = 
 = = = Coaches = = = 
 San Diego Rockets 
 Jack McMahon ( 1968 – 70 ) 
 Alex Hannum ( 1970 – 71 ) 
 Houston Rockets 
 Tex Winter ( 1971 – 1973 ) 
 Johnny Egan ( 1973 – 1976 ) 
 Tom Nissalke ( 1976 – 1979 ) 
 Del Harris ( 1979 – 1983 ) 
 Bill Fitch ( 1983 – 1988 ) 
 Don Chaney ( 1988 – 1992 ) 
 Rudy Tomjanovich ( 1992 – 2003 ) 
 Jeff Van Gundy ( 2003 – 2007 ) 
 Rick Adelman ( 2007 – 2011 ) 
 Kevin McHale ( 2011 – 2015 ) 
 J. B. Bickerstaff ( interim ) ( 2015 – 2016 ) 
 Mike D 'Antoni ( 2016 – present ) 
 = Requiem ( Reger ) = 
 Max Reger 's 1915 Requiem ( or the Hebbel Requiem ) , Op. 144b , is a late Romantic setting of Friedrich Hebbel 's poem " Requiem " for alto or baritone solo , chorus and orchestra . It is Reger 's last completed work for chorus and orchestra , dedicated in the autograph as Dem <unk> der im Kriege 1914 / 15 gefallenen deutschen Helden ( To the memory of the German heroes who fell in the 1914 / 15 War ) . 
 Reger had composed Requiem settings before : his 1912 motet for male chorus , published as the final part of his Op. 83 , uses the same poem , and in 1914 he set out to compose a choral work in memory of the victims of the Great War . The setting is of the Latin Requiem , the Catholic service for the dead , but the work remained a fragment and was eventually designated the Lateinisches Requiem ( Latin Requiem ) , Op. 145 . 
 The Hebbel Requiem was published by N. Simrock in 1916 , after the composer 's death , with another choral composition , Der Einsiedler ( The Hermit ) , Op. 144a , to a poem by Joseph von Eichendorff . That publication was titled Zwei Gesänge für gemischten Chor mit Orchester ( Two songs for mixed chorus with orchestra ) , Op. 144 . Reger provided a piano transcription of the orchestral parts . Max Beckschäfer arranged the work for voice , chorus and organ in 1985 . The Hebbel Requiem was first performed in Heidelberg on 16 July 1916 as part of a memorial concert for Reger , conducted by Philipp <unk> . 
 Reger thought the Hebbel Requiem was " among the most beautiful things " he ever wrote . It has been described as of " lyrical beauty , a dramatic compactness , and [ of ] economy of musical means " in which the composer 's " mastery of impulse , technique , and material is apparent " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Reger was a German composer , born in Brand in 1873 and raised in Weiden in der <unk> . He studied music theory from April to July 1890 with Hugo Riemann at the royal conservatory in <unk> and continued his studies , in piano and theory , at the Wiesbaden Conservatory beginning in September of that year . He established himself as a keyboard composer , performer , and teacher of piano and organ . The first compositions to which he assigned opus numbers were chamber music . In 1891 he composed his Op. 4 , a collection of songs . The first , " <unk> " ( Prayer ) , was on a text by Friedrich Hebbel , who also wrote the poem on which two of Reger 's Requiem settings are based . 
 Reger returned to his parental home in 1898 , where he composed his first work for choir and orchestra , Hymne an den Gesang ( Hymn to song ) , Op. 21 . He moved to Munich in 1901 . Income from publishers , concerts and private teaching enabled him to marry in 1902 . His wife , Elsa von <unk> , was a divorced Protestant , and as a result he was excommunicated from the Catholic Church . In 1907 he was appointed musical director at Leipzig University and professor at the Royal Conservatory in Leipzig . 
 In 1911 Reger was appointed <unk> ( music director ) at the court of Duke Georg II of Saxe @-@ Meiningen , while retaining his professorial duties at the Leipzig conservatory . In 1912 he set Hebbel 's poem " Requiem " as a motet for unaccompanied male choir , which was published as No. 10 of his collection Op. 83 . In 1913 he composed four tone poems on paintings by Arnold Böcklin ( Vier <unk> nach A. Böcklin ) , including the painting Die <unk> ( Isle of the Dead ) , as his Op. 128 . He gave up the court position in 1914 for health reasons . That year , in response to the World War , he set out to compose a choral work to commemorate the soldiers who had died or were mortally wounded . He began to set the Latin Requiem but abandoned the work as a fragment . In 1915 he moved to Jena but continued teaching in Leipzig . In Jena , he composed the Hebbel Requiem for soloist , choir and orchestra , Op. 144b , again on Hebbel 's poem , as in the setting for men 's chorus . Following a full day of teaching in Leipzig , Reger died of a heart attack while staying at a hotel there on 11 May 1916 . 
 = = Hebbel 's poem = = 
 In 1840 the playwright Friedrich Hebbel wrote a poem in German titled " Requiem " , its Latin title alluding to " Requiem aeternam " ( eternal rest ) , the first words of the Mass for the Dead . The poem opens with an apostrophe to a " soul " in a plea , " Seele , vergiß sie nicht , Seele , vergiß nicht die Toten " ( Soul , forget them not , soul , forget not the dead ) . These words appear to echo various psalms , such as Psalm 103 , " Bless the Lord , O my soul " . Hebbel , however , evokes an " eternal rest " that is distinctly non @-@ religious : the poem offers no metaphysical reference , Christian or otherwise , but calls for remembrance as the only way to keep the dead alive . The first lines , in which the speaker calls upon the soul not to forget the dead , are repeated in the centre of the poem and again at its conclusion , as a refrain that sets apart two longer sections of verse . The first of these sections describes how the dead , nurtured by love , enjoy a final glow of life . In contrast , the latter section portrays a different fate for souls that have been forsaken : who are relegated to an unending , desolate struggle for renewed existence . The musicologist Katherine FitzGibbon notes that the speaker of this narrative is not identified , but may be " a poetic narrator , divine voice , or even the dead " . 
 The poem was published in 1857 . Separately , Peter Cornelius set the same poem in 1863 , as a funeral motet for a six @-@ part chorus , in response to the author 's death . 
 = = Motet = = 
 Reger composed his first setting of Hebbel 's poem as a motet for unaccompanied male choir in 1912 in Meiningen , where he had worked from 1911 . He composed it for the Basler Liedertafel , conducted by Hermann Suter , who performed it on 18 May 1912 to celebrate their 60th anniversary before giving the official premiere at the national Schweizer <unk> Sängerfest ( Swiss federal song festival ) in Neuchâtel on 22 July 1912 . 
 In accordance with the poem 's structure , Reger used the same material for each of the refrains , in a homophonic setting . The words " ihr <unk> Leben " ( their dimming life ) are illustrated by " a sequence of chromatically descending sixth chords " . Similar descending chords are often found in Reger 's works as a musical expression of " pain , fear , death , and suffering — common associations with chromaticism since the sixteenth century " , according to FitzGibbon . Both the recurring refrain and the descending chords reappear in the later setting of the poem in the Hebbel Requiem . 
 The motet was published under the title Requiem as the closing part of <unk> Lieder für Männerchor ( Ten songs for men 's chorus ) , Op. 83 , with earlier compositions from 1904 . 
 = = Lateinisches Requiem = = 
 After the outbreak of war , Reger intended to compose a work commemorating the soldiers who had died or were mortally wounded , a choral work of " <unk> <unk> " ( in great style ) . By the autumn of 1914 , he was in discussion with a theologian in Giessen about a composition tentatively " Die letzten Dinge ( <unk> Gericht u . <unk> ) " " ( The Last Things [ Final Judgment and Resurrection ] ) " . The organist Karl Straube , who had premiered several of Reger 's organ works , recommended that Reger compose the traditional Latin Requiem instead , because Die letzten Dinge would only be a variation on Ein deutsches Requiem by Johannes Brahms . Following his advice , Reger managed the composition of the introit and Kyrie , combining both texts into one movement . He announced the project , a composition for soloists , chorus , orchestra and organ , to his publisher on 3 October 1914 . The Dies irae remained unfinished . Reger wrote to Fritz Stein , his friend and later biographer , that he was in the middle of its composition , but had been interrupted after the line " <unk> in parte <unk> " . 
 The Lateinisches Requiem is scored for soloists ( soprano , alto , tenor , bass ) , a four @-@ part ( SATB ) choir , three flutes ( also piccolo ) , two oboes , cor anglais , two clarinets , two bassoons , contrabassoon , four horns , three trumpets , three trombones , tuba , three percussionists and strings . It is Reger 's only choral composition to use four soloists . The four " <unk> " are used like the several choirs in compositions by Heinrich Schütz . The first movement opens with a long organ pedal point , which has been compared to the beginning of Wagner 's Das Rheingold and the Brahms Requiem . 
 The work remained unfinished at Reger 's death , and his publisher named the first movement the Lateinisches Requiem , Op. 145a . The music was first performed by Stein in Berlin on 28 May 1938 with four soloists and the enlarged choir of the <unk> Berlin . For this performance , the liturgical Latin text was replaced by a German text , adapted to suit Nazi ideology . Hellmut von Hase titled his text <unk> ( Rite of the Dead ) and managed to serve " the Nazi adulation of the fallen war hero " ( as FitzGibbon said ) , dropping references to the bible . He replaced for example " exaudi <unk> meam , ad te omnis caro <unk> " ( Hear my prayer ; to you shall all flesh come ) by " In sorrow we <unk> lower the flags , for into the grave sunk what was dear to us . " This version was published in 1939 by the Max Reger Society . 
 The unfinished Dies irae was published in 1974 and first performed in Hamburg 's St. Jakobi on 3 November 1979 by Yoko <unk> , Marga <unk> , Hans @-@ Dieter Bader , Nikolaus Hillebrand , the NDR Chor and NDR <unk> , conducted by Roland Bader . 
 The Lateinisches Requiem is officially catalogued as <unk> V / 9 . 
 = = Hebbel Requiem = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 Johannes Brahms , in his Ein deutsches Requiem ( A German Requiem ) , had already opened the way for the composition of a non @-@ liturgical Requiem , written in a language other than Latin while still addressing the traditional theme of rest ( <unk> ) for the dead . In this tradition , Reger 's 1915 Requiem , Op. 144b , is also not a setting of the Requiem in Latin , but of Hebbel 's poem . He composed it in Jena , a year before his own death , this time for a solo voice ( alto or baritone ) , chorus and orchestra . The Requiem , Op. 144b , was combined with Der Einsiedler ( The Hermit ) , Op. 144a , a setting of a poem by Joseph von Eichendorff , as Zwei Gesänge für gemischten Chor mit Orchester ( Two songs for mixed chorus with orchestra ) , Op. 144 . Reger titled the autograph of the piano version : Zwei Gesänge / für / gemischten Chor / mit Orchester / <unk> ) Requiem / ( Hebbel ) , and he wrote the dedication : " Dem <unk> der im / Kriege 1914 / 15 gefallenen / deutschen Helden . " ( To the memory of the German heroes who fell in the War 1914 / 15 ) . 
 Reger completed the composition on 25 August 1915 . He wrote to the publisher N. Simrock on 8 September : " I 've finished two choral works ( Der Einsiedler and Requiem ) . I think I can safely say that they 're both among the most beautiful things I 've ever written . " ( Ich habe nun zwei <unk> ( Der Einsiedler und Requiem ) <unk> . Ich <unk> sagen zu <unk> , daß diese beiden <unk> mit das <unk> sind , was ich je <unk> habe . ) Requiem was first published by N. Simrock in 1916 , edited by Ulrich <unk> , with the dedication Dem <unk> der im Kriege gefallenen deutschen Helden ( To the memory of the German heroes who fell in the War ) . Simrock also published a vocal score as prepared by Reger himself . 
 The Hebbel Requiem was first performed , together with Der Einsiedler , in Heidelberg on 16 July 1916 , after the composer 's death , as part of a memorial concert for Reger , featuring Eva Katharina <unk> , the choirs <unk> and Akademischer Gesangverein , and the enlarged <unk> Orchester ( Municipal Orchestra ) , conducted by Philipp <unk> . 
 In 1925 the Requiem was published in Vienna as a pocket score , Philharmonia @-@ <unk> No. 284 . Edition Peters published it in 1928 , stating the performance duration as 25 minutes , although the duration implied by the metronome marking is 14 minutes . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 = = = = Structure = = = = 
 Reger 's Hebbel Requiem is in one movement . It follows the overall form of the narrated poem , but with variations , resulting in a structure of different moods . The beginning is recalled in the middle and at the end . The following table is based on the score and on an analysis by Katherine FitzGibbon . The translation of the incipits is given as in the liner notes of the 2009 recording in the translation by Richard Stokes . The four @-@ part SATB chorus is often divided . The work is in D minor and common time . The tempo marking is Molto sostenuto , and is sustained with only slight modifications ( <unk> and <unk> ) until the most dramatic section , marked <unk> <unk> ( faster ) and later Allegro , returning to the initial tempo for the conclusion . 
 = = = = Sections = = = = 
 = = = = = A = = = = = 
 The short instrumental introduction is based on a pedal point sustained for several measures , reminiscent of pedal points in funeral music by Schütz and Bach , in Mozart 's Requiem in the same key of D minor , and in Reger 's previous Latin Requiem . In a pattern similar to the beginning of A German Requiem , the bass notes are repeated , here on a low D ( D1 ) . 
 The soloist alone sings the intimate appellation " Seele , vergiß sie nicht " ( Soul , forget them not ) on a simple melody and repeating the first line after the second . Throughout the piece the soloist sings only these words , in the beginning and in the repeats . The chorus , here divided in eight parts , evokes the start of the spiritual ascent , " <unk> , sie <unk> dich , <unk> <unk> " ( See , they hover around you , shuddering , abandoned ) , in mostly homophonic chords , marked ppp , in a fashion reminiscent of Schütz . 
 = = = = = B = = = = = 
 In section B , " und in den <unk> Gluten " ( and in the holy glowing ) , the pedal point ends . The chorus is divided in four to six parts , in more independent motion . As in works by Schütz , two or three voices often introduce new text . 
 = = = = = A ' = = = = = 
 The soloist sings the recapitulation of the beginning similar to the first time , again on the pedal point , but repeats the second line one more time , while the chorus sings about the hovering , as before . 
 = = = = = C = = = = = 
 In section C , " und wenn du dich <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( and if you coldly close yourself to them , they stiffen ) , Reger uses word painting , by means of downward lines and a final <unk> for the line <unk> sie bis <unk> in das <unk> ( they stiffen , up to the deepest ) . On the word <unk> ( stiffens ) , the chorus settles on a dissonant 5 @-@ part chord , held for two measures , suddenly fortissimo with a crescendo at the end , then repeated pianissimo , an octave lower , motionless . 
 In great contrast , in " Dann <unk> sie der Sturm der Nacht " ( The storm of night then grips them ) , a storm is depicted in dense motion of four parts imitating a theme in triplets . 
 = = = = = A ' ' = = = = = 
 In the conclusion , the soloist repeats the earlier phrase , but this time the chorus finally joins in the words of the appellation . The soloist introduces a new wording <unk> sie nicht , die Toten ( Forget them not , the dead ) . The chorus repeats this phrase , marked <unk> , <unk> , on the melody of the chorale O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden , five stanzas of which Bach used in his St Matthew Passion . The melody is not repeated as in the original , but continued for half a line . Reger is known for quoting chorales in general and this one in particular , most often referring to its last stanza Wenn ich einmal soll scheiden , which Bach included in the Passion right after the death of Jesus . The corresponding text would then be Wenn ich einmal soll scheiden , so <unk> nicht von mir . Wenn mir am <unk> ... ( When I must depart one day , do not part from me then . When the greatest anxiety ... ) . 
 Reger completes the chorale setting for the chorus , without further reference to the chorale melody , while the solo voice repeats at the same time Seele , vergiß nicht die Toten , concluding with descending tones of more than an octave . 
 = = = = Scoring and performances = = = = 
 The Requiem employs an orchestra of two flutes , piccolo , two oboes , cor anglais , two clarinets , two bassoons , four horns , three trumpets , three trombones , tuba , three percussionists and strings . It requires a chorus to match . Reger himself wrote a version for piano . 
 To make the music more accessible , the composer and organist Max Beckschäfer arranged the work for voice , chorus and organ in 1985 . The organ version was premiered in the Marktkirche in Wiesbaden , where Reger had played the organ himself when he studied there in the 1890s . Gabriel Dessauer conducted a project choir , later known as the Reger @-@ Chor . Beckschäfer was the organist , Ulrike <unk> the vocal soloist . The choir , expanded into the Reger @-@ Chor @-@ International by singers from Belgium , performed the work again in 2001 with organist Ignace Michiels from St. Salvator 's Cathedral , Bruges , both there and in St. Bonifatius , Wiesbaden ( recorded live ) . They performed it a third time in 2010 to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Reger @-@ Chor . 
 The Hebbel Requiem was performed as part of the Ouverture <unk> of the 2014 Salzburg Festival , along with Bruckner 's Fourth Symphony , with Plácido Domingo as baritone soloist and the Vienna Philharmonic conducted by Daniel Barenboim . 
 = = = 2016 = = = 
 To mark the centenary of Reger 's death in 2016 , the broadcaster Bayerischer Rundfunk staged a concert of the Hebbel Requiem in early May , conducted by Karl @-@ Heinz Steffens . The Bachfest Leipzig 2016 programmed several works by Reger , including the Latin Requiem fragment in the opening concert at the Thomaskirche on 10 June , and the Hebbel Requiem there on 17 June , along with Der Mensch <unk> und <unk> and O Tod , wie bitter bist du . 
 = = = Evaluation = = = 
 In a review of a recording of choral works by Reger , Gavin Dixon said that the Requiem is " almost mystical in its use of widely spaced chords , unusual harmonic shifts and dreamy arpeggios in the accompaniment " . The program notes for the recording say that in the " anguished , expressionistic evocation of the ' shuddering ' , ' forsaken ' , ' cold ' souls , the piece seems determined to expose death in all its grim horror " . 
 Debra <unk> wrote in her 2002 thesis about Reger 's Op. 144 : 
 As their composer 's final completed works for chorus and orchestra , Der Einsiedler and Requiem , Op. 144a and 144b , demonstrate Max Reger 's mature ability when setting poems of recognized literary merit . These powerful single @-@ movement works from 1915 defy many stereotypes associated with their composer . They manifest a lyrical beauty , a dramatic compactness , and an economy of musical means . The central theme of both is mortality and death . In these challenging works , his mastery of impulse , technique , and material is apparent . Op. 144 constitutes both a continuation of Reger 's choral / orchestral style in earlier works and , by dint of the composer 's death as a mid @-@ aged man , the culmination of it . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 = = = Scores = = = 
 10 Gesänge , <unk> ( Reger , Max ) : Scores at the International Music Score Library Project 
 <unk> , <unk> : Scores at the International Music Score Library Project 
 Requiem , <unk> : Scores at the International Music Score Library Project 
 Zwei Gesänge für gemischten Chor mit Orchester / 2 / Requiem ( Hebbel ) . Edition Peters . 2010 . 
 = = = Max @-@ Reger @-@ Institute = = = 
 " Curriculum vitae " . Max @-@ Reger @-@ Institute . Retrieved 3 April 2010 . 
 " Sechs Lieder Op. 4 " ( in German ) . Max @-@ Reger @-@ Institute . Retrieved 17 April 2016 . 
 " <unk> Gesänge für Männerchor Op. 83 " ( in German ) . Max @-@ Reger @-@ Institute . Retrieved 3 April 2016 . 
 " Zwei Gesänge Op. 144 / für <unk> , <unk> Chor und Orchester " ( in German ) . Max @-@ Reger @-@ Institute . Retrieved 3 April 2016 . 
 " Requiem Op. 144b " ( in German ) . Max @-@ Reger @-@ Institute . Retrieved 4 April 2016 . 
 " Requiem <unk> V / 9 " ( in German ) . Max @-@ Reger @-@ Institute . Retrieved 3 April 2016 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Grim , William ( 2005 ) . Lateinisches Requiem für Soli , Chor und Orchester , Op. 145a . <unk> <unk> . 
 <unk> , Debra ( 2002 ) . " Max Reger 's final choral / orchestral work : a study of opus 144 as culmination within continuity " . University of Cincinnati . Retrieved 10 July 2010 . 
 McDermott , Pamela ( 2010 ) . " The Requiem Reinvented : Brahms ‘ s Ein deutsches Requiem and the Transformation from Literal to Symbolic " ( PDF ) . p . 201 of 226 , 1 @.@ 3 MB . Retrieved 12 July 2010 . 
 <unk> , Rolf ( 2002 ) . 7 . Max Reger – Das Geistliche Lied als <unk> – eine Gattung <unk> ( in German ) . Hochschule für <unk> Herford . Im <unk> <unk> der <unk> den c.f. O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden original , ohne <unk> bis zur ersten <unk> nach dem Stollen , ... <unk> <unk> <unk> war für Reger wohl <unk> die 9 . <unk> Wenn ich einmal soll scheiden ... , was aus einem <unk> an Arthur Seidl 1913 als <unk> <unk> : ' <unk> Sie nicht <unk> , wie durch alle meine <unk> der Choral <unk> : Wenn ich einmal soll scheiden ? ' 
 <unk> , Friedrich ( 2014 ) . Und die Toten werden die Stimme Gottes hören ... ( PDF ) ( in German ) . <unk> . Retrieved 14 March 2015 . 
 Werke von Max Reger . Internationale <unk> Wiesbaden ( in German ) ( Marktkirche , Wiesbaden ) . 1985 . 
 = = = Journals = = = 
 FitzGibbon , Katherine ( 2014 ) . " Historicism and German Nationalism in Max Reger 's <unk> " ( PDF ) . The Choral Scholar ( National Collegiate Choral Organization ) 4 . Retrieved 14 March 2015 . 
 = = = Newspapers = = = 
 <unk> , Richard ( 2001 ) . " Wenn Freunde <unk> " . <unk> Tagblatt ( in German ) . 
 <unk> , Richard ( 31 August 2010 ) . " <unk> Finale der <unk> " . Allgemeine Zeitung ( in German ) . 
 = = = Online sources = = = 
 <unk> , Pamela ( 2016 ) . " BWV 244 – Matthäus @-@ Passion " . Emmanuel Music . Retrieved 11 April 2016 . 
 Dixon , Gavin ( 2010 ) . " Max Reger ( 1873 @-@ 1916 ) / Choral Works " . <unk> @-@ <unk> Retrieved 14 March 2015 . 
 Downes , Michael ( 2010 ) . " Requiem , Op 144b " . Hyperion Records . Retrieved 14 March 2015 . 
 <unk> , Georg @-@ Albrecht ( 2014 ) . " Nur eine kleine Zeit / Max Reger 's " Requiem " " ( in German ) . Gesellschaft der <unk> in Wien . Retrieved 14 March 2015 . 
 <unk> , Georg @-@ Albrecht ( 29 April 2016 ) . " Aus dem Reich der Toten / Max Reger und " sein " Requiem " ( in German ) . Bayerischer Rundfunk . Retrieved 7 June 2016 . 
 Farr , Robert J ( 2004 ) . " Peter Cornelius ( 1824 – 1874 ) Seele , <unk> sie nicht Requiem " . <unk> @-@ <unk> Retrieved 13 July 2010 . 
 <unk> , Christian . " Max Reger ( 1873 – 1916 ) Requiem , Op. 144b ( Hebbel ) " ( in German ) . <unk> Retrieved 10 July 2010 . 
 " Max Reger : Der 100 . Psalm ; Der Einsiedler ; Requiem ( Hebbel ) " . AllMusic . 2000 . Retrieved 8 April 2016 . 
 " Max Reger / Requiem " Seele , vergiß sie nicht " op . 144b " ( PDF ) . <unk> <unk> . 2005 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 . 
 Requiem , song for alto or baritone , chorus & orchestra , Op. 144b at AllMusic 
 " Friedrich Hebbel / Requiem " . Freiburger Anthologie ( in German ) . Freiburg University . 2016 . Retrieved 4 April 2016 . 
 " Max Reger ( 1873 – 1916 ) Requiem , Op. 144b / Op. 145a / Dies irae " . classics @-@ <unk> . 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2010 . 
 " Max Reger : Requiem , Op. 83 / 10 " . Boosey & Hawkes . 2010 . Retrieved 10 July 2010 . 
 " Werke von Max Reger im Bachfest 2016 " ( in German ) . Bachfest Leipzig . Retrieved 16 June 2010 . 
 " Max Reger , <unk> ( 1969 ) " . Junge Kantorei . Retrieved 12 April 2016 . 
 " # 2 Gabriel Dessauer , Ignace Michiels " ( in French ) . France <unk> . Retrieved 10 July 2010 . 
 " Reger , Max Requiem <unk> " . Edition Peters . 2010 . Retrieved 3 January 2011 . 
 " Reger : Requiem " . <unk> 2010 . Retrieved 10 July 2010 . 
 " Max Reger <unk> " ( in German ) . <unk> 2010 . Retrieved 10 July 2010 . 
 " <unk> 2014 " ( PDF ) . Salzburg Festival . Retrieved 10 April 2016 . 
 = Vauxhall Gardens = 
 Vauxhall Gardens / <unk> / was a pleasure garden in Kennington on the south bank of the River Thames and accessed by boat from London until the erection of Vauxhall Bridge in the 1810s . The wider area was absorbed into the metropolis as the city expanded in the early to mid @-@ 19th century . 
 It was one of the leading venues for public entertainment in London , from the mid @-@ 17th century to the mid @-@ 19th century . Originally known as ' New Spring Gardens ' , the site is believed to have opened before the Restoration of 1660 , the first known mention being made by Samuel Pepys in 1662 . The Gardens consisted of several acres of trees and shrubs with attractive walks . Initially entrance was free , with food and drink being sold to support the venture . 
 The site became Vauxhall Gardens in 1785 and admission was charged for its many attractions . The Gardens drew all manner of people and supported enormous crowds , with its paths being noted for romantic assignations . Tightrope walkers , hot @-@ air balloon ascents , concerts and fireworks provided entertainment . The rococo " Turkish tent " became one of the Gardens ' structures , the interior of the Rotunda became one of Vauxhall 's most viewed attractions , and the chinoiserie style was a feature of several buildings . A statue depicting George Frederic Handel , erected in the Gardens , later found its way to Westminster Abbey . In 1817 the Battle of Waterloo was re @-@ enacted , with 1 @,@ 000 soldiers participating . 
 It closed in 1840 after its owners suffered bankruptcy , but re @-@ opened in 1841 . It changed hands in 1842 , and was permanently closed in 1859 . The land was redeveloped in the following decades , but slum clearance in the late 20th century saw part of the original site opened up as a public park . This was initially called Spring Gardens and renamed in 2012 as Vauxhall Pleasure Gardens . It is managed as a public park by the London Borough of Lambeth . Vauxhall Gardens is depicted in a tile motif at Vauxhall tube station , done in about 1971 by George Smith . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 Eminent 18th @-@ century scholar John Barrell , writing in the Times Literary Supplement , brings out Vauxhall 's significance . " Vauxhall pleasure gardens , on the south bank of the Thames , entertained Londoners and visitors to London for 200 years . From 1729 , under the management of Jonathan Tyers , property developer , impresario , patron of the arts , the gardens grew into an extraordinary business , a cradle of modern painting and architecture , and ... music .... A pioneer of mass entertainment , Tyers had to become also a pioneer of mass catering , of outdoor lighting , of advertising , and of all the logistics involved in running one of the most complex and profitable business ventures of the eighteenth century in Britain . " References to Vauxhall are , for 150 years , as ubiquitous as references to " Broadway " later would be . 
 = = History = = 
 The Gardens are believed to have opened just before the Restoration of 1660 , on property formerly owned by Jane <unk> , or Vaux , widow , in 1615 . Whereas John Nichols in his History of Lambeth Parish conjectures that she was the widow of Guy Fawkes , executed in 1606 , John Timbs in his 1867 Curiosities of London states for a fact that there was no such connection , and that the Vaux name derives from one Falkes de Breauté , a mercenary working for King John who acquired the land by marriage . Jane is stated to be the widow of John , a vintner . Perhaps the earliest record is Samuel Pepys ' description of a visit he made to the New Spring Gardens on 29 May 1662 . The then name distinguished the gardens from the Old Spring Gardens at Charing Cross ; however Pepys implies that there were both Old and New Spring Gardens at Vauxhall ; and indeed Spring Gardens appears to have been a longstanding appellation for a variety of entertainment enterprises . 
 The Gardens consisted of several acres laid out with walks . Initially admission was free , the proprietors making money by selling food and drink . John Evelyn described " the New Spring Garden at Lambeth " as a " very pretty contrived plantation " in 1661 . John Aubrey , in his Antiquities of Surrey gives the following account : 
 At Vauxhall , Sir Samuel Morland built a fine room , anno 1667 , the inside all of looking @-@ glass , and fountains very pleasant to behold , which is much visited by strangers : it stands in the middle of the garden , covered with Cornish slate , on the point of which he placed a <unk> , very well carved , which held a dial , but the winds have demolished it . 
 A plan of 1681 shows the circular central feature planted with trees and shrubs , and the formal allées that were to remain a feature as long as the Gardens lasted . 
 Sir John Hawkins , in his General History of Music ( 1776 ) , says : 
 The house seems to have been rebuilt since the time that Sir Samuel Morland dwelt in it . About the year 1730 , Mr. Jonathan Tyers became the occupier of it , and , there being a large garden belonging to it , planted with a great number of stately trees , and laid out in shady walks , it obtained the name of Spring Gardens ; and the house being converted into a tavern , or place of entertainment , was much frequented by the votaries of pleasure . Mr. Tyers opened it with an advertisement of a <unk> al Fresco , a term which the people of this country had till that time been strangers to . These entertainments were repeated in the course of the summer , and numbers resorted to partake of them . This encouraged the proprietor to make his garden a place of musical entertainment , for every evening during the summer season . To this end he was at great expense in decorating the gardens with paintings ; he engaged a band of excellent musicians ; he issued silver tickets at one guinea each for admission , and receiving great encouragement , he set up an organ in the orchestra , and , in a conspicuous part of the garden , erected a fine statue of Mr. Handel . 
 The ' supposed ' last night of the gardens was on 5 September 1839 when it attracted 1089 people . Vauxhall was sold at auction on 9 September 1841 for £ 20 @,@ 000 , following bankruptcy of the owners , after which it re @-@ opened , but it was permanently closed in 1859 , and most of the land sold for building purposes . 
 = = The Spring Gardens and the Rococo in England = = 
 The Spring Gardens were the most prominent vehicle in England for the public display of the new Rococo style . The earliest pictorial representation of Tyers ' Spring Gardens , Vauxhall , is the " Vauxhall fan " ( 1736 ) , an etching printed in blue designed to be pasted to a fan ; it shows the earliest groups of pavilions , in a sober classical taste , but the interiors of the supper boxes were painted by members of Hogarth 's St. Martin 's Lane Academy , prominent among them Francis Hayman . Hayman provided most of the subjects , which were rapidly executed by students and assistants ; Hubert <unk> provided designs for two others , and Hogarth 's designs were pressed into service in hastily dashed @-@ off copies that filled the back of every box . At a certain hour , all the paintings were let down at once , to offer some security to the companies at supper and a suitable backdrop , one observer thought , for the live beauties of London . Frederick , Prince of Wales , who had come to England with his father George II in 1728 and who was a prominent patron of the Rococo , took sufficient interest in the Gardens to have his own pavilion built from the very first . 
 The first fully Rococo structure erected at the Spring Gardens , Vauxhall , was the " Turkish Tent " that was still a novelty in 1744 ; " this fantastic structure introduced that element of frivolous impermanence which became so characteristic of Vauxhall , " David Coke has remarked . In the course of the 1740s it was joined by other examples of Rococo chinoiserie and above all by the Rotunda , with the most @-@ viewed Rococo interior decoration in England , designed by George Michael Moser , another member of the St. Martin 's Lane Academy ; the ornaments were " Executed by French and Italians " George Vertue noted . 
 = = The experience = = 
 Enormous crowds could be accommodated at Spring Gardens , Vauxhall . In 1749 a rehearsal of Handel 's Music for the Royal Fireworks attracted an audience of 12 @,@ 000 , and in 1786 a fancy @-@ dress jubilee to celebrate the proprietor 's long ownership was thronged with 61 @,@ 000 revellers . Many of the best known musicians and singers of the day performed at the Gardens , for example Sophia Baddeley . In 1732 , their fashionable status was confirmed by a fancy dress ball attended by Frederick , Prince of Wales . At that time access from the West End was by water , but the opening of Westminster Bridge in the 1740s made access easier though less charming . 
 The main walks were lit at night by hundreds of lamps . Over time more features and <unk> were added : additional supper boxes , a music room , a Chinese pavilion , a gothic orchestra that accommodated fifty musicians , and ruins , arches , statues and a cascade . An admission charge was introduced from the beginning and later James Boswell wrote : 
 Vauxhall Gardens is peculiarly adapted to the taste of the English nation ; there being a mixture of curious show , — gay exhibition , <unk> , vocal and instrumental , not too refined for the general ear ; — for all of which only a shilling is paid ; and , though last , not least , good eating and drinking for those who choose to purchase that regale . 
 The <unk> ' dark walks ' or ' close walks ' were known as a place for amorous adventures . Thomas Brown in " Works Serious and Comical in Prose and Verse " ( 1760 ) says : 
 The ladies that have an inclination to be private , take delight in the close walks of Spring @-@ Gardens , where both sexes meet , and mutually serve one another as guides to lose their way ; and the windings and turnings in the little wildernesses are so intricate , that the most experienced mothers have often lost themselves in looking for their daughters . " 
 A great part of the entertainment was offered by the well @-@ dressed company itself . <unk> between pieces of music were intentionally long enough to give the crowd time to circulate the Gardens anew . M. <unk> , in his Tour to London ( 1772 ) says , relating to Ranelagh Gardens and Vauxhall : 
 These entertainments , which begin in the month of May , are continued every night . They bring together persons of all ranks and conditions ; and amongst these , a considerable number of females , whose charms want only that cheerful air , which is the flower and quintessence of beauty . These places serve equally as a rendezvous either for business or intrigue . They form , as it were , private coteries ; there you see fathers and mothers , with their children , enjoying domestic happiness in the midst of public diversions . The English assert , that such entertainments as these can never subsist in France , on account of the levity of the people . Certain it is , that those of Vauxhall and Ranelagh , which are guarded only by outward decency , are conducted without tumult and disorder , which often disturb the public diversions of France . I do not know whether the English are <unk> thereby ; the joy which they seem in search of at those places does not beam through their countenances ; they look as grave at Vauxhall and Ranelagh as at the Bank , at church , or a private club . All persons there seem to say , what a young English nobleman said to his governor , Am I as joyous as I should be ? 
 The new name Vauxhall Gardens , long in popular use , was made official in 1785 . After Boswell 's time the admission charge rose steadily : to two shillings in 1792 , three @-@ and @-@ sixpence in the early 19th century , and 4 / 6 in the 1820s . Season tickets were also sold . Entertainment in this period included hot @-@ air balloon ascents , fireworks , and tightrope walkers . In 1813 there was a fête to celebrate victory at the Battle of Vitoria , and in 1827 the Battle of Waterloo was re @-@ enacted by 1 @,@ 000 soldiers . 
 The contributor to the Edinburgh Encyclopedia ( 1830 edition ) comments that : 
 the garden 's great attraction arises from their being splendidly illuminated at night with about 15 @,@ 000 glass lamps . These being tastefully hung among the trees , which line the walks , produce an impression similar to that which is called up on reading some of the stories in the Arabian Nights Entertainments . On some occasions there have been upwards of 19 @,@ 000 persons in them , and this immense concourse , most of whom are well dressed , seen in connection with the illuminated walks , add not a little to the brilliant and astonishing effect of the whole scene . 
 Charles Dickens wrote of a daylight visit to Vauxhall Gardens , in Sketches by Boz , published in 1836 : 
 We paid our shilling at the gate , and then we saw for the first time , that the entrance , if there had been any magic about it at all , was now decidedly disenchanted , being , in fact , nothing more nor less than a combination of very roughly @-@ painted boards and sawdust . We glanced at the orchestra and supper @-@ room as we hurried past — we just recognised them , and that was all . We bent our steps to the firework @-@ ground ; there , at least , we should not be disappointed . We reached it , and stood rooted to the spot with mortification and astonishment . That the Moorish tower — that wooden shed with a door in the centre , and daubs of crimson and yellow all round , like a gigantic watch @-@ case ! That the place where night after night we had beheld the undaunted Mr. Blackmore make his terrific ascent , surrounded by flames of fire , and peals of artillery , and where the white garments of Madame Somebody ( we forget even her name now ) , who nobly devoted her life to the manufacture of fireworks , had so often been seen fluttering in the wind , as she called up a red , blue , or party @-@ coloured light to <unk> her temple ! 
 The Gardens feature in a number of other works of literature . They are the scene of a brief but pivotal turning point in the fortunes of anti @-@ heroine Becky Sharp in Thackeray 's 19th @-@ century novel Vanity Fair , as well as a setting in his novel Pendennis . Thomas Hardy sets scenes in his The <unk> in the Gardens . In Cecilia by Frances Burney the Gardens are where the character Mr Harrell commits suicide . 
 The Gardens passed through several hands . In 1840 , the owners went bankrupt and the Gardens closed . They were revived the following year , and again in 1842 under new management , but in 1859 they closed for good . 
 = Frederick Delius = 
 Frederick Theodore Albert Delius , CH ( / <unk> / 29 January 1862 – 10 June 1934 ) was an English composer . Born in the north of England to a prosperous mercantile family , he resisted attempts to recruit him to commerce . He was sent to Florida in the United States in 1884 to manage an orange plantation . There he soon neglected his managerial duties , and in 1886 returned to Europe . Having been influenced by African @-@ American music during his short stay in Florida , he began composing . After a brief period of formal musical study in Germany beginning in 1886 , he embarked on a full @-@ time career as a composer in Paris and then in nearby Grez @-@ sur @-@ Loing , where he and his wife Jelka lived for the rest of their lives , except during the First World War . 
 Delius 's first successes came in Germany , where Hans Haym and other conductors promoted his music from the late 1890s . In Delius 's native Britain , it was 1907 before his music made regular appearances in concert programmes , after Thomas Beecham took it up . Beecham conducted the full premiere of A Mass of Life in London in 1909 ( he had premiered Part II in Germany in 1908 ) ; he staged the opera A Village Romeo and Juliet at Covent Garden in 1910 ; and he mounted a six @-@ day Delius festival in London in 1929 , as well as making gramophone recordings of many of Delius 's works . After 1918 Delius began to suffer the effects of syphilis , contracted during his earlier years in Paris . He became paralysed and blind , but completed some late compositions between 1928 and 1932 with the aid of an amanuensis , Eric Fenby . 
 The lyricism in Delius 's early compositions reflected the music he had heard in America and the influences of European composers such as Edvard Grieg and Richard Wagner . As his skills matured , he developed a style uniquely his own , characterised by his individual orchestration and his uses of chromatic harmony . Delius 's music has been only intermittently popular , and often subject to critical attacks . The Delius Society , formed in 1962 by his more dedicated followers , continues to promote knowledge of the composer 's life and works , and sponsors the annual Delius Prize competition for young musicians . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Delius was born in Bradford in Yorkshire . He was baptised as " Fritz Theodore Albert Delius " , and used the forename Fritz until he was about 40 . He was the second of four sons ( there were also ten daughters ) born to Julius Delius ( 1822 – 1901 ) and his wife Elise Pauline , née <unk> ( 1838 – 1929 ) . Delius 's parents were born in Bielefeld , Westphalia , of Dutch origin ; the family had for some generations been settled in German lands near the Rhine . Julius 's father , Ernst Friedrich Delius , had served under Blücher in the Napoleonic Wars . Julius moved to England to further his career as a wool merchant , and became a naturalised British subject in 1850 . He married Elise in 1856 . 
 The Delius household was musical ; famous musicians such as Joseph Joachim and Carlo Alfredo Piatti were guests , and played for the family . Despite his German parentage , the young Fritz was drawn to the music of Chopin and Grieg rather than the Austro @-@ German music of Mozart and Beethoven , a preference that endured all his life . The young Delius was first taught the violin by a Mr. <unk> of the Hallé Orchestra , and had more advanced studies under Mr. George Haddock of Leeds . Although he achieved enough skill as a violinist to set up as a violin teacher in later years , his chief musical joy was to improvise at the piano , and it was a piano piece , a waltz by Chopin , that gave him his first ecstatic encounter with music . From 1874 to 1878 , Delius was educated at Bradford Grammar School , where the singer John Coates was his slightly older contemporary . He then attended the International College at Isleworth between 1878 and 1880 . As a pupil he was neither especially quick nor diligent , but the college was conveniently close to London for Delius to attend concerts and opera . 
 Julius Delius assumed that his son would play a part in the family wool business , and for the next three years he tried hard to persuade him to do so . Delius 's first job was as the firm 's representative in Stroud in Gloucestershire , where he did moderately well . After being sent in a similar capacity to Chemnitz , he neglected his duties in favour of trips to the major musical centres of Germany , and musical studies with Hans Sitt . His father sent him to Sweden , where he again put his artistic interests ahead of commerce , coming under the influence of the Norwegian dramatists Henrik Ibsen and Gunnar Heiberg . Ibsen 's denunciations of social conventions further alienated Delius from his commercial background . Delius was then sent to represent the firm in France , but he frequently absented himself from business for excursions to the French Riviera . After this , Julius Delius recognised that there was no prospect that his son would succeed in the family business , but he remained opposed to music as a profession , and instead sent him to America to manage an orange plantation . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Whether the move to America was Julius 's idea or his son 's is unknown . A leading Florida property firm had branches in several English cities including Bradford ; in an article on Delius 's time in Florida , William Randel conjectures that either Julius Delius visited the Bradford office and conceived the notion of sending his wayward son to grow oranges in Florida , or that Fritz himself saw it as a way to escape the hated family wool business and suggested the idea to his father . Delius was in Florida from the spring of 1884 to the autumn of 1885 , living on a plantation at Solano Grove on the Saint Johns River , about 35 miles ( 55 kilometers ) south of Jacksonville . He continued to be engrossed in music , and in Jacksonville he met Thomas Ward , who became his teacher in counterpoint and composition . Delius later said that Ward 's teaching was the only useful music instruction he ever had . 
 Delius later liked to represent his house at Solano Grove as " a shanty " , but it was a substantial cottage of four rooms , with plenty of space for Delius to entertain guests . Ward sometimes stayed there , as did an old Bradford friend , Charles Douglas , and Delius 's brother Ernest . Protected from excessive summer heat by river breezes and a canopy of oak trees , the house was an agreeable place to live in . Delius paid little attention to the business of growing oranges , and continued to pursue his musical interests . Jacksonville had a rich , though to a European , unorthodox musical life . Randel notes that in local hotels , the African @-@ American waiters doubled as singers , with daily vocal concerts for patrons and passers @-@ by , giving Delius his introduction to spirituals . Additionally , ship owners encouraged their deckhands to sing as they worked . " Delius never forgot the singing as he heard it , day or night , carried sweet and clear across the water to his verandah at Solano Grove , whenever a steam @-@ ship passed ; it is hard to imagine conditions less conducive to cultivating oranges — or more conducive to composing . " 
 While in Florida , Delius had his first composition published , a polka for piano called Zum Carnival . In late 1885 he left a caretaker in charge of Solano Grove and moved to Danville , Virginia . Thereafter he pursued a wholly musical career . An advertisement in the local paper announced , " Fritz Delius will begin at once giving instruction in Piano , Violin , Theory and Composition . He will give lessons at the residences of his pupils . Terms reasonable . " Delius also offered lessons in French and German . Danville had a thriving musical life , and early works of his were publicly performed there . 
 = = = Leipzig and Paris = = = 
 In 1886 Julius Delius finally agreed to allow his son to pursue a musical career , and paid for him to study music formally . Delius left Danville and returned to Europe via New York , where he paused briefly to give a few lessons . Back in Europe he enrolled at the conservatoire in Leipzig , Germany . Leipzig was a major musical centre , where Nikisch and Mahler were conductors at the Opera House , and Brahms and Tchaikovsky conducted their works at the Gewandhaus . At the conservatoire , Delius made little progress in his piano studies under Carl Reinecke , but Salomon <unk> praised his hard work and grasp of counterpoint ; Delius also resumed studies under Hans Sitt . Delius 's early biographer , the composer Patrick Hadley , observed that no trace of his academic tuition can be found in Delius 's mature music " except in certain of the weaker passages " . Much more important to Delius 's development was meeting the composer Edvard Grieg in Leipzig . Grieg , like Ward before him , recognised Delius 's potential . In the spring of 1888 , Sitt conducted Delius 's Florida Suite for an audience of three : Grieg , Christian <unk> and the composer . Grieg and <unk> were enthusiastic and became warm supporters of Delius . At a dinner party in London in April 1888 , Grieg finally convinced Julius Delius that his son 's future lay in music . 
 After leaving Leipzig in 1888 , Delius moved to Paris where his uncle , Theodore , took him under his wing and looked after him socially and financially . Over the next eight years , Delius befriended many writers and artists , including August Strindberg , Edvard Munch and Paul Gauguin . He mixed very little with French musicians , although Florent Schmitt arranged the piano scores of Delius 's first two operas , Irmelin and The Magic Fountain ( Ravel later did the same for his verismo opera Margot la rouge ) . As a result , his music never became widely known in France . Delius 's biographer Diana McVeagh says of these years that Delius " was found to be attractive , warm @-@ hearted , spontaneous , and amorous . " It is generally believed that during this period he contracted the syphilis that caused the collapse of his health in later years . 
 Delius 's Paris years were musically productive . His symphonic poem Paa <unk> was performed in Christiania in 1891 and in Monte Carlo in 1894 ; Gunnar Heiberg commissioned Delius to provide incidental music for his play <unk> in 1897 ; and Delius 's second opera , The Magic Fountain , was accepted for staging at Prague , but the project fell through for unknown reasons . Other works of the period were the fantasy overture Over the Hills and Far Away ( 1895 – 97 ) and orchestral variations , Appalachia ( 1896 , rewritten in 1904 for voices and orchestra ) . 
 = = = First successes = = = 
 In 1897 , Delius met the German artist Jelka Rosen , who later became his wife . She was a professional painter , a friend of Auguste Rodin , and a regular exhibitor at the Salon des Indépendants . Jelka quickly declared her admiration for the young composer 's music , and the couple were drawn closer together by a shared passion for the works of the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche and the music of Grieg . Jelka bought a house in Grez @-@ sur @-@ Loing , a village 40 miles ( 64 km ) outside Paris on the edge of Fontainebleau . Delius visited her there , and after a brief return visit to Florida , he moved in with her . In 1903 they married , and , apart from a short period when the area was threatened by the advancing German army during the First World War , Delius lived in Grez for the rest of his life . The marriage was not conventional : Jelka was , at first , the principal earner ; there were no children ; and Delius was not a faithful husband . Jelka was often distressed by his affairs , but her devotion did not waver . 
 In the same year , Delius began a fruitful association with German supporters of his music , the conductors Hans Haym , Fritz Cassirer and Alfred Hertz at Elberfeld , and Julius <unk> at Düsseldorf . Haym conducted Over the Hills and Far Away , which he gave under its German title Über die Berge in die Ferne on 13 November 1897 , believed to be the first time Delius 's music was heard in Germany . In 1899 Hertz gave a Delius concert in St. James 's Hall in London , which included Over the Hills and Far Away , a choral piece , <unk> , and excerpts from the opera Koanga . This occasion was an unusual opportunity for an unknown composer at a time when any sort of orchestral concert was a rare event in London . In spite of encouraging reviews , Delius 's orchestral music was not heard again in an English concert hall until 1907 . 
 The orchestral work Paris : The Song of a Great City was composed in 1899 and dedicated to Haym . He gave the premiere at Elberfeld on 14 December 1901 . It provoked some critical comment from the local newspaper , which complained that the composer put his listeners on a bus and shuttled them from one Parisian night @-@ spot to another , " but he does not let us hear the tuneful gypsy melodies in the boulevard cafés , always just cymbals and tambourine and mostly from two cabarets at the same time at that " . The work was given under Busoni in Berlin less than a year later . 
 Most of Delius 's premieres of this period were given by Haym and his fellow German conductors . In 1904 Cassirer premiered Koanga , and in the same year the Piano Concerto was given in Elberfeld , and Lebenstanz in Düsseldorf . Appalachia ( choral orchestral variations on an old slave song , also inspired by Florida ) followed there in 1905 . Sea Drift ( a cantata with words taken from a poem by Walt Whitman ) was premiered at Essen in 1906 , and A Village Romeo and Juliet in Berlin in 1907 . Delius 's reputation in Germany remained high until the First World War ; in 1910 his rhapsody Brigg Fair was given by 36 different German orchestras . 
 = = = Growing reputation = = = 
 By 1907 , thanks to performances of his works in many German cities , Delius was , as Thomas Beecham said , " floating safely on a wave of prosperity which increased as the year went on " . Henry Wood premiered the revised version of Delius 's Piano Concerto that year . Also in 1907 Cassirer conducted some concerts in London , at one of which , with Beecham 's New Symphony Orchestra , he presented Appalachia . Beecham , who had until then heard not a note of Delius 's music , expressed his " wonderment " and became a lifelong devotee of the composer 's works . In January 1908 he conducted the British premiere of Paris : The Song of a Great City . Later that year , Beecham introduced Brigg Fair to London audiences , and Fernández <unk> presented Lebenstanz . 
 In 1909 , Beecham conducted the first complete performance of A Mass of Life , the largest and most ambitious of Delius 's concert works , written for four soloists , a double choir , and a large orchestra . Although the work was based on the same Nietzsche work as Richard Strauss 's Also sprach Zarathustra , Delius distanced himself from the Strauss work , which he considered a complete failure . Nor was Strauss an admirer of Delius , as he was of Elgar ; he told Delius that he did not wish to conduct Paris : " the symphonic development seems to me to be too scant , and it seems moreover to be an imitation of Charpentier " . 
 In early years of the 20th century , Delius composed some of his most popular works , including Brigg Fair ( 1907 ) , In a Summer Garden ( 1908 , revised 1911 ) , Summer Night on the River ( 1911 ) , and On Hearing the First Cuckoo in Spring ( 1912 ) , of which McVeagh comments , " These exquisite idylls , for all their composer 's German descent and French domicile , spell ' England ' for most listeners . " In 1910 , Beecham put on an opera season at the Royal Opera House in London . Having access to the Beecham family 's considerable fortune , he ignored commercial considerations and programmed several works of limited box @-@ office appeal , including A Village Romeo and Juliet . The reviews were polite , but The Times , having praised the orchestral aspects of the score , commented , " Mr. Delius seems to have remarkably little sense of dramatic writing for the voice " . Other reviewers agreed that the score contained passages of great beauty , but was ineffective as drama . 
 = = = War and post @-@ war = = = 
 During the First World War , Delius and Jelka moved from Grez to avoid the hostilities . They took up temporary residence in the south of England , where Delius continued to compose . In 1915 , The Musical Times published a profile of him by his admirer , the composer Philip Heseltine ( known as " Peter Warlock " ) , who commented : 
 [ H ] e holds no official position in the musical life of the country [ i.e. Britain ] ; he does not teach in any of the academies , he is not even an honorary professor or doctor of music . He never gives concerts or makes propaganda for his music ; he never conducts an orchestra , or plays an instrument in public ( even Berlioz played the tambourine ! ) 
 Heseltine depicted Delius as a composer uncompromisingly focused on his own music . " There can be no superficial view of Delius 's music : either one feels it in the very depths of one 's being , or not at all . This may be a part of the reason why one so seldom hears a really first @-@ rate performance of Delius 's work , save under Mr. Beecham " . 
 One of Delius 's major wartime works was his Requiem , dedicated " to the memory of all young Artists fallen in the war " . The work owes nothing to the traditional Christian liturgy , eschewing notions of an afterlife and celebrating instead a pantheistic renewal of Nature . When Albert Coates presented the work in London in 1922 , its atheism offended some believers . This attitude persisted long after Delius 's death , as the Requiem did not receive another performance in the UK until 1965 , and by 1980 had still had only seven performances world @-@ wide . In Germany , the regular presentation of Delius 's works ceased at the outbreak of the war , and never resumed . Nevertheless , his standing with some continental musicians was unaffected ; Beecham records that Bartók and Kodály were admirers of Delius , and the former grew into the habit of sending his compositions to Delius for comment and tried to interest him in both Hungarian and Romanian popular music . 
 By the end of the war , Delius and Jelka had returned to Grez . He had begun to show symptoms of syphilis that he had probably contracted in the 1880s . He took treatment at clinics across Europe , but by 1922 he was walking with two sticks , and by 1928 he was paralysed and blind . There was no return to the prosperity of pre @-@ war years : Delius 's medical treatment was an additional expense , his blindness prevented him from composing , and his royalties were curtailed by the lack of continental performances of his music . Beecham gave discreet financial help , and the composer and musical benefactor H. Balfour Gardiner bought the house at Grez and allowed Delius and Jelka to live there rent @-@ free . 
 Beecham was temporarily absent from the concert hall and opera house between 1920 and 1923 , but Coates gave the first performance of A Song of the High Hills in 1920 , and Henry Wood and Hamilton Harty programmed Delius 's music with the Queen 's Hall and Hallé Orchestras . Wood gave the British première of the Double Concerto for violin and cello in 1920 , and of A Song Before Sunrise and the Dance Rhapsody No. 2 in 1923 . Delius had a financial and artistic success with his incidental music for James Elroy Flecker 's play Hassan ( 1923 ) with 281 performances at His Majesty 's Theatre . With Beecham 's return the composer became , in Hadley 's words , " what his most fervent admirers had never envisaged — a genuine popular success . " Hadley cites , in particular , the six @-@ day Delius festival at the Queen 's Hall in 1929 under Beecham 's general direction , in the presence of the composer in his bath @-@ chair . " [ T ] he cream of his orchestral output with and without soli and chorus was included , " and the hall was filled . Beecham was assisted in the organisation of the festival by Philip Heseltine , who wrote the detailed programme notes for three of the six concerts . The festival included chamber music and songs , an excerpt from A Village Romeo and Juliet , the Piano and Violin Concertos , and premières of Cynara and A Late Lark , concluding with A Mass of Life . The Manchester Guardian 's music critic , Neville Cardus , met Delius during the festival . He describes the wreck of the composer 's physique , yet " there was nothing pitiable about him ... his face was strong and disdainful , every line graven on it by intrepid living " . Delius , Cardus says , spoke with a noticeable Yorkshire accent as he dismissed most English music as paper music that should never be heard , written by people " afraid of their feelin 's " . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 A young English admirer , Eric Fenby , learning that Delius was trying to compose by dictating to Jelka , volunteered his services as an unpaid amanuensis . For five years , from 1928 , he worked with Delius , taking down his new compositions from dictation , and helping him revise earlier works . Together they produced Cynara ( a setting of words by Ernest Dowson ) , A Late Lark ( a setting of W. E. Henley ) , A Song of Summer , a third violin sonata , the Irmelin prelude , and Idyll ( 1932 ) , which reused music from Delius 's short opera Margot la rouge , composed thirty years earlier . McVeagh rates their greatest joint production as The Songs of Farewell , settings of Whitman poems for chorus and orchestra , which were dedicated to Jelka . Other works produced in this period include a Caprice and Elegy for cello and orchestra written for the distinguished British cellist Beatrice Harrison , and a short orchestral piece , Fantastic Dance , which Delius dedicated to Fenby . The violin sonata incorporates the first , incomprehensible , melody that Delius had attempted to dictate to Fenby before their modus operandi had been worked out . Fenby 's initial failure to pick up the tune led Delius to the view that " [ the ] boy is no good ... he cannot even take down a simple melody " . Fenby later wrote a book about his experiences of working with Delius . Among other details , Fenby reveals Delius 's love of cricket . The pair followed the 1930 Test series between England and Australia with great interest , and regaled a bemused Jelka with accounts of their boyhood exploits in the game . 
 In 1933 , the year before both composers died , Elgar , who had flown to Paris to conduct a performance of his Violin Concerto , visited Delius at Grez . Delius was not on the whole an admirer of Elgar 's music , but the two men took to each other , and there followed a warm correspondence until Elgar 's death in February 1934 . Elgar described Delius as " a poet and a visionary " . 
 Delius died at Grez on 10 June 1934 , aged 72 . He had wished to be buried in his own garden , but the French authorities forbade it . His alternative wish , despite his atheism , was to be buried " in some country churchyard in the south of England , where people could place wild flowers " . At this time Jelka was too ill to make the journey across the Channel , and Delius was temporarily buried in the local cemetery at Grez . 
 By May 1935 , Jelka felt she had enough strength to undertake the crossing to attend a reburial in England . She chose St Peter 's Church , Limpsfield , Surrey as the site for the grave . She sailed to England for the service , but became ill en route , and on arrival was taken to hospital in Dover and then Kensington in London , missing the reburial on 26 May . The ceremony took place at midnight ; the headline in the Sunday Dispatch was " Sixty People Under Flickering Lamps In A Surrey Churchyard " . The vicar offered a prayer : " May the souls of the departed through the mercy of God rest in peace . " Jelka died two days later , on 28 May . She was buried in the same grave as Delius . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 After the 1929 London festival The Times music critic wrote that Delius " belongs to no school , follows no tradition and is like no other composer in the form , content or style of his music " . This " extremely individual and personal idiom " was , however , the product of a long musical apprenticeship , during which the composer absorbed many influences . The earliest significant experiences in his artistic development came , Delius later asserted , from the sounds of the plantation songs carried down the river to him at Solano Grove . It was this singing , he told Fenby , that first gave him the urge to express himself in music ; thus , writes Fenby , many of Delius 's early works are " redolent of Negro <unk> and folk @-@ song " , a sound " not heard before in the orchestra , and seldom since " . Delius 's familiarity with " black " music possibly predates his American adventures ; during the 1870s a popular singing group , the Fisk Jubilee Singers from Nashville , Tennessee , toured Britain and Europe , giving several well @-@ received concerts in Bradford . When Delius wrote to Elgar in 1933 of the " beautiful four @-@ part harmonies " of the black plantation workers , he may have been unconsciously alluding to the spirituals sung by the Fisk group . 
 At Leipzig , Delius became a fervent disciple of Wagner , whose technique of continuous music he sought to master . An ability to construct long musical paragraphs is , according to the Delius scholar Christopher Palmer , Delius 's lasting debt to Wagner , from whom he also acquired a knowledge of chromatic harmonic technique , " an endlessly proliferating sensuousness of sound " . Grieg , however , was perhaps the composer who influenced him more than any other . The Norwegian composer , like Delius , found his primary inspiration in nature and in folk @-@ melodies , and was the stimulus for the Norwegian flavour that characterises much of Delius 's early music . The music writer Anthony Payne observes that Grieg 's " airy texture and non @-@ developing use of chromaticism showed [ Delius ] how to lighten the Wagnerian load " . Early in his career Delius drew inspiration from Chopin , later from his own contemporaries Ravel and Richard Strauss , and from the much younger Percy Grainger , who first brought the tune of Brigg Fair to Delius 's notice . 
 According to Palmer , it is arguable that Delius gained his sense of direction as a composer from his French contemporary Claude Debussy . Palmer identifies aesthetic similarities between the two , and points to several parallel characteristics and enthusiasms . Both were inspired early in their careers by Grieg , both admired Chopin ; they are also linked in their musical depictions of the sea , and in their uses of the wordless voice . The opening of Brigg Fair is described by Palmer as " perhaps the most Debussian moment in Delius " . Debussy , in a review of Delius 's Two Danish Songs for soprano and orchestra given in a concert on 16 March 1901 , wrote : " They are very sweet , very pale — music to soothe convalescents in well @-@ to @-@ do neighbourhoods " . Delius admired the French composer 's orchestration , but thought his works lacking in melody — the latter a comment frequently directed against Delius 's own music . Fenby , however , draws attention to Delius 's " flights of melodic poetic @-@ prose " , while conceding that the composer was contemptuous of public taste , of " giving the public what they wanted " in the form of pretty tunes . 
 = = = Stylistic development = = = 
 From the conventional forms of his early music , over the course of his creative career Delius developed a style easily recognisable and " unlike the work of any other " , according to Payne . As he gradually found his voice , Delius replaced the methods developed during his creative infancy with a more mature style in which Payne discerns " an increasing richness of chord structure , bearing with it its own subtle means of contrast and development " . Hubert Foss , the Oxford University Press 's musical editor during the 1920s and 1930s , writes that rather than creating his music from the known possibilities of instruments , Delius " thought the sounds first " and then sought the means for producing these particular sounds . Delius 's full stylistic maturity dates from around 1907 , when he began to write the series of works on which his main reputation rests . In the more mature works Foss observes Delius 's increasing rejection of conventional forms such as sonata or concerto ; Delius 's music , he comments , is " certainly not architectural ; nearer to painting , especially to the <unk> style of design " . The painting analogy is echoed by Cardus . 
 = = = = Towards recognition = = = = 
 Delius 's first orchestral compositions were , in Christopher Palmer 's words , the work of " an insipid if charming water @-@ colourist " . The Florida Suite ( 1887 , revised 1889 ) is " an expertly crafted synthesis of Grieg and Negroid Americana " , while Delius 's first opera Irmelin ( 1890 – 92 ) lacks any identifiably Delian passages . Its harmony and modulation are conventional , and the work bears the clear fingerprints of Wagner and Grieg . Payne asserts that none of the works prior to 1895 are of lasting interest . The first noticeable stylistic advance is evident in Koanga ( 1895 – 97 ) , with richer chords and faster harmonic rhythms ; here we find Delius " feeling his way towards the vein that he was soon to tap so surely " . In Paris ( 1899 ) , the orchestration owes a debt to Richard Strauss ; its passages of quiet beauty , says Payne , nevertheless lack the deep personal involvement of the later works . Paris , the final work of Delius 's apprentice years , is described by Foss as " one of the most complete , if not the greatest , of Delius 's musical paintings " . 
 In each of the major works written in the years after Paris , Delius combined orchestral and vocal forces . The first of these works was A Village Romeo and Juliet , a music drama which departs from the normal operatic structure of acts and scenes and tells its story of tragic love in a series of tableaux . Musically it shows a considerable advance in style from the early operas of the apprentice years . The entr 'acte known as " The Walk to the Paradise Garden " is described by Heseltine as showing " all the tragic beauty of mortality ... concentrated and poured forth in music of overwhelming , almost intolerable poignancy " . In this work Delius begins to achieve the texture of sound that characterised all his later compositions . Delius 's music is often assumed to lack melody and form . Cardus argues that melody , while not a primary factor , is there abundantly , " floating and weaving itself into the texture of shifting harmony " – a characteristic which Cardus believes is shared only by Debussy . 
 Delius 's next work , Appalachia , introduces a further feature that recurred in later pieces — the use of the voice instrumentally in wordless singing , in this case depicting the distant plantation songs that had inspired Delius at Solano Grove . Although Payne argues that Appalachia shows only a limited advance in technique , Fenby identifies one orchestral passage as the first expression of Delius 's idea of " the transitoriness of all mortal things mirrored in nature " . Hereafter , whole works rather than brief passages would be informed by this idea . The transitional phase of the composer 's career concludes with three further vocal pieces : Sea Drift ( 1903 ) , A Mass of Life ( 1904 – 05 ) , and Songs of Sunset ( 1906 – 07 ) . Payne salutes each of these as masterpieces , in which the Delian style struggles to emerge in its full ripeness . Fenby describes A Mass of Life as standing outside the general progression of Delius 's work , " a vast parenthesis " , unlike anything else he wrote , but nevertheless an essential ingredient in his development . 
 = = = = Full flowering = = = = 
 Brigg Fair ( 1907 ) announced the composer 's full stylistic maturity , the first of the pieces for small orchestra that confirm Delius 's status as a musical poet , with the influences of Wagner and Grieg almost entirely absent . The work was followed in the next few years by In a Summer Garden ( 1908 ) , Life 's Dance ( 1911 ) , Summer Night on the River ( 1911 ) and On Hearing the First Cuckoo in Spring ( 1912 ) . The critic <unk> <unk> described this sequence as " exquisite nature studies " , with a unity and shape lacking in the earlier formal tone poems . These works became part of the standard English concert repertory , and helped to establish the character of Delius 's music in the English concert @-@ goer 's mind , although according to Ernest Newman , the concentration on these works to the neglect of his wider output may have done Delius as much harm as good . The typical mature Delian orchestral sound is apparent in these works , through the division of the strings into ten or more sections , punctuated by woodwind comments and decorations . In the North Country Sketches of 1913 – 14 , Delius divides the strings into 12 parts , and harps , horns , clarinets and bassoons evoke a lifeless winter scene . In Payne 's view , the Sketches are the high water mark of Delius 's compositional skill , although Fenby awards the accolade to the later Eventyr ( Once Upon a Time ) ( 1917 ) . 
 During this period Delius did not confine himself to purely orchestral works ; he produced his final opera , Fennimore and Gerda ( 1908 – 10 ) , like A Village Romeo and Juliet written in tableau form , but in his mature style . His choral works of the period , notably An Arabesque ( 1911 ) and A Song of the High Hills ( 1911 ) are among the most radical of Delius 's writings in their juxtapositions of unrelated chords . The latter work , entirely wordless , contains some of the most difficult choral music in existence , according to Heseltine . After 1915 , Delius turned his attention to traditional sonata , chamber and concerto forms , which he had largely left alone since his apprentice days . Of these pieces Payne highlights two : the Violin Concerto ( 1916 ) , as an example of how , writing in unfamiliar genres , Delius remained stylistically true to himself ; and the Cello Sonata of 1917 , which , lacking the familiarity of an orchestral palate , becomes a melodic triumph . Cardus 's verdict , however , is that Delius 's chamber and concerto works are largely failures . After 1917 , according to Payne , there was a general deterioration in the quantity and quality of Delius 's output as illness took hold , although Payne exempts the incidental music to Hassan ( 1920 – 23 ) from condemnation , believing it to contain some of Delius 's best work . 
 = = = = Final phase = = = = 
 The four @-@ year association with Fenby from 1929 produced two major works , and several smaller pieces often drawn from unpublished music from Delius 's early career . The first of the major works was the orchestral A Song of Summer , based on sketches that Delius had previously collected under the title of A Poem of Life and Love . In dictating the new beginning of this work , Delius asked Fenby to " imagine that we are sitting on the cliffs in the heather , looking out over the sea " . This does not , says Fenby , indicate that the dictation process was calm and leisurely ; the mood was usually frenzied and nerve @-@ wracking . The other major work , a setting of Walt Whitman poems with the title Songs of Farewell , was an even more alarming prospect to Fenby : " the complexity of thinking in so many strands , often all at once ; the problems of orchestral and vocal balance ; the wider area of possible misunderstandings ... " combined to leave Delius and his helper exhausted after each session of work — yet both these works were ready for performance in 1932 . Of the music in this final choral work , Beecham wrote of its " hard , masculine vigour , reminiscent in mood and fibre of some of the great choral passages in A Mass of Life " . Payne describes the work as " bracing and exultant , with in places an almost Holstian clarity " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Recognition came late to Delius ; before 1899 , when he was already 37 , his works were largely unpublished and unknown to the public . When the symphonic poem Paa <unk> was performed at Monte Carlo on 25 February 1894 in a programme of works from British composers , The Musical Times listed the composers as " ... Balfe , Mackenzie , Oakeley , Sullivan ... and one Delius , whoever he may be " . The work was well received in Monte Carlo , and brought the composer a congratulatory letter from Princess Alice of Monaco , but this did not lead to demands for further performances of this or other Delius works . Some of his individual songs ( he wrote more than 60 ) were occasionally included in vocal recitals ; referring to " the strange songs of Fritz Delius " , The Times critic expressed regret " that the powers the composer undoubtedly possesses should not be turned to better account or undergo proper development at the hands of some musician competent to train them " . 
 Of the May 1899 concert at St. James 's Hall , London , The Musical Times reviewer remarked on the rawness of some of the music , but praised the " boldness of conception and virile strength that command and hold attention . " Beecham , however , records that despite this " fair show of acclaim " , for all the impetus it gave to future performances of Delius 's work the event might never have happened ; none of the music was heard again in England for many years . Delius was much better received in Germany , where a series of successful performances of his works led to what Beecham describes as a Delius vogue there , " second only to that of Richard Strauss " . 
 In England , a performance of the Piano Concerto on 22 October 1907 at the Queen 's Hall was praised for the brilliance of the soloist , Theodor <unk> , and for the power of the music itself . From that point onwards the music of Delius became increasingly familiar to both British and European audiences , as performances of his works proliferated . Beecham 's presentation of A Mass of Life at the Queen 's Hall in June 1909 did not inspire Hans Haym , who had come from Elberfeld for the concert , though Beecham says that many professional and amateur musicians thought it " the most impressive and original achievement of its genre written in the last fifty years " Some reviewers continued to doubt the popular appeal of Delius 's music , while others were more specifically hostile . 
 From 1910 , Delius 's works began to be heard in America : Brigg Fair and In a Summer Garden were performed in 1910 – 11 by the New York Philharmonic Orchestra under Walter Damrosch . In November 1915 Grainger gave the first American performance of the Piano Concerto , again with the New York Philharmonic . The New York Times critic described the work as uneven ; richly harmonious , but combining colour and beauty with effects " of an almost crass <unk> and ugliness " . 
 For the rest of his lifetime Delius 's more popular pieces were performed in England and abroad , often under the sponsorship of Beecham , who was primarily responsible for the Delius festival in October – November 1929 . In a retrospective comment on the festival The Times critic wrote of full houses and an apparent enthusiasm for " music which hitherto has enjoyed no exceptional vogue " , but wondered whether this new acceptance was based on a solid foundation . After Delius 's death Beecham continued to promote his works ; a second festival was held in 1946 , and a third ( after Beecham 's death ) at Bradford in 1962 , to celebrate the centenary of Delius 's birth . These occasions were in the face of a general indifference to the music ; writing in the centenary year , the musicologist Deryck Cooke opined that at that time , " to declare oneself a confirmed Delian is hardly less self @-@ defamatory than to admit to being an addict of cocaine and <unk> " . 
 Beecham had died in 1961 , and Fenby writes that it " seemed to many then that nothing could save Delius 's music from extinction " , such was the conductor 's unique mastery over the music . However , other conductors have continued to advocate Delius , and since the centenary year , the Delius Society has pursued the aim of " develop [ ing ] a greater knowledge of the life and works of Delius " . The music has never become fashionable , a fact often acknowledged by promoters and critics . To suggestions that Delius 's music is an " acquired taste " , Fenby answers : " The music of Delius is not an acquired taste . One either likes it the moment one first hears it , or the sound of it is once and for ever distasteful to one . It is an art which will never enjoy an appeal to the many , but one which will always be loved , and dearly loved , by the few . " Writing in 2004 on the 70th anniversary of Delius 's death , the Guardian journalist Martin Kettle recalls Cardus arguing in 1934 that Delius as a composer was unique , both in his technique and in his emotionalism . Although he eschewed classical formalism , it was wrong , Cardus believed , to regard Delius merely as " a tone @-@ painter , an impressionist or a maker of programme music " . His music 's abiding feature is , Cardus wrote , that it " recollects emotion in tranquillity ... Delius is always reminding us that beauty is born by contemplation after the event " . 
 = = Memorials and legacy = = 
 Just before his death , Delius prepared a codicil to his will whereby the royalties on future performances of his music would be used to support an annual concert of works by young composers . Delius died before this provision could be legally effected ; Fenby says that Beecham then persuaded Jelka in her own will to abandon the concerts idea and apply the royalties towards the editing and recording of Delius 's main works . After Jelka 's death in 1935 the Delius Trust was established , to supervise this task . As stipulated in Jelka 's will , the Trust operated largely under Beecham 's direction . After Beecham 's death in 1961 advisers were appointed to assist the trustees , and in 1979 the administration of the Trust was taken over by the Musicians ' Benevolent Fund . Over the years the Trust 's objectives have been extended so that it can promote the music of other composers who were Delius 's contemporaries . The Trust is a co @-@ sponsor of the Royal Philharmonic Society 's Composition Prize for young composers . 
 In 1962 , enthusiasts for Delius 's music who had gone to Bradford for the centenary festival formed the Delius Society ; Fenby became its first president . With around 400 members , the Society is independent from the Trust , but works closely with it . Its general objectives are the furtherance of knowledge of Delius 's life and works , and the encouragement of performances and recordings . In 2004 , as a stimulus for young musicians to study and perform Delius 's music , the Society established an annual Delius Prize competition , with a prize of £ 1 @,@ 000 to the winner . In June 1984 , at the Grand Theatre , Leeds , the Delius Trust sponsored a commemorative production of A Village Romeo and Juliet by Opera North , to mark the 50th anniversary of Delius 's death . 
 Public interest in Delius 's life was stimulated in the UK in 1968 , with the showing of the Ken Russell film Song of Summer on BBC Television . The film depicted the years of the Delius – Fenby collaboration ; Fenby co @-@ scripted with Russell . Max Adrian played Delius , with Christopher Gable as Fenby and Maureen Pryor as Jelka . 
 In America , a small memorial to Delius stands in Solano Grove . The Delius Association of Florida has for many years organised an annual festival at Jacksonville , to mark the composer 's birthday . At Jacksonville University , the Music Faculty awards an annual Delius Composition Prize . In February 2012 Delius was one of ten prominent Britons honoured by the Royal Mail in the " Britons of Distinction " stamps set . 
 Beecham stresses Delius 's role as an innovator : " The best of Delius is undoubtedly to be found in those works where he disregarded classical traditions and created his own forms " . Fenby echoes this : " the people who really count are those who discover new ways of making our lives more beautiful . Frederick Delius was such a man " . Palmer writes that Delius 's true legacy is the ability of his music to inspire the creative urge in its listeners and to enhance their awareness of the wonders of life . Palmer concludes by invoking George Eliot 's poem The Choir Invisible : " Frederick Delius ... belongs to the company of those true artists for whose life and work the world is a better place to live in , and of whom surely is composed , in a literal sense , ' the choir invisible / Whose music is the gladness of the world ' " . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 The first recordings of Delius 's works , in 1927 , were conducted by Beecham for the Columbia label : the " Walk to the Paradise Garden " interlude from A Village Romeo and Juliet , and On Hearing the First Cuckoo in Spring , performed by the orchestra of the Royal Philharmonic Society . These began a long series of Delius recordings under Beecham that continued for the rest of the conductor 's life . He was not alone , however ; Geoffrey Toye in 1929 – 30 recorded Brigg Fair , In a Summer Garden , Summer Night on the River and the " Walk to the Paradise Garden " . Fenby recounts that on his first day in Grez , Jelka played Beecham 's First Cuckoo recording . In May 1934 , when Delius was close to death , Fenby played him Toye 's In a Summer Garden , the last music , Fenby says , that Delius ever heard . By the end of the 1930s Beecham had issued versions for Columbia of most of the main orchestral and choral works , together with several songs in which he accompanied the soprano Dora <unk> on the piano . By 1936 Columbia and HMV had issued recordings of Violin Sonatas 1 and 2 , the Elegy and Caprice , and of some of the shorter works . 
 Full recordings of the operas were not available until after the Second World War . Once again Beecham , now with the HMV label , led the way , with A Village Romeo and Juliet in 1948 , performed by the new Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus . Later versions of this work include those of Meredith Davies for EMI in 1971 , Charles Mackerras for Argo in 1989 , and a German @-@ language version conducted by <unk> <unk> in 1995 . Beecham 's former protégé Norman Del Mar recorded a complete Irmelin for BBC Digital in 1985 . In 1997 EMI reissued Meredith Davies 's 1976 recording of Fennimore and Gerda , which Richard Hickox conducted in German the same year for Chandos . Recordings of all the major works , and of many of the individual songs , have been issued at regular intervals since the Second World War . Many of these recordings have been issued in conjunction with the Delius Society , which has prepared various discographies of Delius 's recorded music . 
 = Origin and use of the term metalloid = 
 The origin and usage of the term metalloid is convoluted . Its origin lies in attempts , dating from antiquity , to describe metals and to distinguish between typical and less typical forms . It was first applied to metals that floated on water ( lithium , sodium and potassium ) , and then more popularly to nonmetals . Only recently , since the mid @-@ 20th century , has it been widely used to refer to elements with intermediate or borderline properties between metals and nonmetals . 
 = = Pre @-@ 1800 = = 
 Ancient conceptions of metals as solid , fusible and malleable substances can be found in Plato 's Timaeus ( c . 360 BCE ) and Aristotle 's Meteorology . 
 More sophisticated classification arrangements were proposed by Pseudo @-@ Geber ( in the Geber corpus , c . 1310 ) , Paracelsus ( De Natura Rerum libri <unk> , 1525 – 6 ; and later works ) , Basil Valentine ( <unk> , 1624 ) , and Boerhaave ( <unk> <unk> , 1733 ) . They attempted to separate the more characteristic metals from substances having those characteristics to a lesser degree . Such substances included zinc , antimony , bismuth , stibnite , pyrite and galena . These were all then called semimetals or bastard metals . 
 In 1735 Brandt proposed to make the presence or absence of malleability the principle of this classification . On that basis he separated mercury from the metals . The same view was adopted by Vogel ( 1755 , Institutiones <unk> ) and Buffon ( 1785 , Histoire Naturelle des Minéraux ) . In the interim , Braun had observed the solidification of mercury by cold in 1759 – 60 . This was confirmed by Hutchins and Cavendish in 1783 . The malleability of mercury then became known , and it was included amongst the metals . 
 In 1789 Fourcroy highlighted the weakness of this distinction between metals and semimetals . He said it was evident from the fact that 
 between the extreme malleability of gold and the singular fragility of arsenic , other metals presented only imperceptible gradations of this character , and because there was probably no greater difference between the malleability of gold and that of lead , which was considered to be a metal , than there was between lead and zinc , which was classed among semi @-@ metals , while in the substances intermediate between zinc and arsenic the differences were slight . 
 This idea of a semimetal , as a brittle ( and thereby imperfect ) metal , was gradually discarded after 1789 with the publication of Lavoisier 's ' revolutionary ' Elementary Treatise on Chemistry . 
 = = 1800 – 1959 = = 
 In 1800 , Pinkerton used the word metalloid , in its literal sense , to describe a mineral variety of pyroxene ' with metallic <unk> 
 In 1808 , Erman and Simon suggested using the term metalloid to refer to the newly discovered elements sodium and potassium . These elements were lighter than water and many chemists did not regard them as proper metals . Erman and Simon 's proposal may have been made ' [ in ] an attempt to revive this old distinction between metals and substances resembling metals ' . Their suggestion was ignored by the chemical community . 
 In 1811 , Berzelius referred to nonmetallic elements as metalloids , in reference to their ability to form oxyanions . A common oxyanion of sulfur , for example , is the sulfate ion SO2 − 
 4 . Many metals can do the same . Chromium , for instance , can form the chromate ion CrO2 − 
 4 . Berzelius ' terminology was widely adopted although it was subsequently regarded by some commentators as counterintuitive , misapplied , incorrect or invalid . In 1825 , in a revised German edition of his Textbook of Chemistry , Berzelius subdivided the metalloids into three classes . These were : constantly gaseous ' <unk> ' ( hydrogen , nitrogen , oxygen ) ; real metalloids ( sulfur , phosphorus , carbon , boron , silicon ) ; and salt @-@ forming ' <unk> ' ( fluorine , chlorine , bromine , iodine ) . 
 In 1844 , Jackson gave the meaning of ' metalloid ' as ' like metals , but wanting some of their properties . ' In 1845 , in A dictionary of science , literature and art , Berzelius ' classification of the elementary bodies was represented as : I. <unk> ; II. halogens ; III. metalloids ( ' resemble the metals in certain aspects , but are in others widely different ' ) ; and IV. metals . 
 In 1864 , calling nonmetals ' metalloids ' was still sanctioned ' by the best authorities ' even though this did not always seem appropriate . The greater propriety of applying the word metalloid to other elements , such as arsenic , had been considered . 
 By as early as 1866 some authors were instead using the term nonmetal , rather than metalloid , to refer to nonmetallic elements . In 1875 , <unk> observed that the elements had been subdivided into two classes — ' non @-@ metals or metalloids , and metals . ' He added that ' [ t ] he former term , although not so convenient , because a compound word , is more correct , and is now universally <unk> 
 In 1876 , Tilden protested against , ' the [ still ] too common though illogical practice of giving the name metalloid to such bodies as oxygen , chlorine or fluorine ' . He instead divided the elements into ( ' <unk> ' ) true metals , metalloids ( ' imperfect metals ' ) and ( ' <unk> ' ) nonmetals . 
 As late as 1888 , classifying the elements into metals , metalloids , and nonmetals , rather than metals and metalloids , was still regarded as peculiar and potentially confusing . 
 Beach , writing in 1911 , explained it this way : 
 <unk> ( Gr . " metal @-@ like " ) , in chemistry , any nonmetallic element . There are 13 , namely , sulfur , phosphorus , <unk> [ e ] , <unk> [ e ] , iodine , bromine , silicon , boron , carbon , nitrogen , hydrogen , oxygen , and selenium . The distinction between the metalloids and the metals is slight . The former , excepting selenium and phosphorus , do not have a " metallic " lustre ; they are poorer conductors of heat and electricity , are generally not reflectors of light and not electropositive ; that is , no metalloid fails of all these tests . The term seems to have been introduced into modern usage instead of nonmetals for the very reason that there is no hard and fast line between metals and nonmetals , so that " metal @-@ like " or " resembling metals " is a better description of the class than the purely negative " nonmetals " . Originally it was applied to the nonmetals which are solid at ordinary temperature . 
 In or around 1917 , the Missouri Board of Pharmacy wrote that : 
 A metal may be said to differ from a metalloid [ that is , a nonmetal ] in being an excellent conductor of heat and electricity , in reflecting light more or less powerfully and in being electropositive . A metalloid may possess one or more of these characters , but not all of them ... Iodine is most commonly given as an example of a metalloid because of its metallic appearance . 
 During the 1920s the two meanings of the word metalloid appeared to be undergoing a transition in popularity . Writing in A Dictionary of Chemical Terms , Couch defined ' metalloid ' as an old , obsolescent term for ' nonmetal . ' In contrast , Webster 's New International Dictionary noted that use of the term metalloid to refer to nonmetals was the norm . Its application to elements resembling the typical metals in some way only , such as arsenic , antimony and tellurium , was recorded merely on a ' sometimes ' basis . 
 Use of the term metalloid subsequently underwent a period of great flux up to 1940 . Consensus as to its application to intermediate or borderline elements did not occur until the ensuing years , between 1940 and 1960 . 
 In 1947 , Pauling included a reference to metalloids in his classic and influential textbook , General chemistry : An introduction to descriptive chemistry and modern chemical theory . He described them as ' elements with intermediate properties ... occupy [ ing ] a diagonal region [ on the periodic table ] , which includes boron , silicon , germanium , arsenic , antimony , tellurium , and <unk> 
 In 1959 the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) recommended that ' [ t ] he word metalloid should not be used to denote nonmetals ' although it was still being used in this sense ( around that time ) by , for example , the French . 
 = = 1960 – present = = 
 In 1969 the classic and authoritative <unk> 's Chemical Dictionary included entries for both ' metalloid ' and ' semimetal ' . The latter term was described as obsolete . 
 In 1970 IUPAC recommended abandoning the term metalloid because of its continuing inconsistent use in different languages . They suggested using the terms metal , semimetal and nonmetal instead . Despite this recommendation , use of the term ' metalloid ' increased dramatically . Google <unk> Viewer showed a fourfold increase in the use of the word ' metalloid ' ( as compared to ' semimetal ' ) in the American English corpus from 1972 to 1983 . There was a sixfold increase in the British English corpus from 1976 to 1983 . As at 2011 , the difference in usage across the English corpus was around 4 : 1 in favour of ' metalloid ' . 
 The most recent IUPAC publications on chemical nomenclature ( the " Red Book " , 2005 ) and terminology ( the " Gold Book " , 2006 – ) do not include any recommendations as to the usage or non @-@ usage of the terms metalloid or semimetal . 
 Use of the term semimetal , rather than metalloid , has recently been discouraged . This is because the former term ' has a well defined and quite distinct meaning in physics ' . In physics , a semimetal is an element or a compound in which the valence band marginally ( rather than substantially ) overlaps the conduction band . This results in only a small number of effective charge carriers . Thus , the densities of charge carriers in the elemental semimetals carbon ( as graphite , in the direction of its planes ) , arsenic , antimony and bismuth are 3 × 1018 cm − 3 , 2 × 1020 cm − 3 , 5 × 1019 cm − 3 and 3 × 1017 cm − 3 respectively . In contrast , the room @-@ temperature concentration of electrons in metals usually exceeds 1022 cm − 3 . 
 References to the term ' metalloid ' as being outdated have also been described as ' nonsense ' noting that ' it accurately describes these weird in @-@ between elements ' . 
 = Action of 1 January 1800 = 
 The Action of 1 January 1800 was a naval battle of the Quasi @-@ War that took place off the coast of present @-@ day Haiti , near the island of Gonâve in the Bight of Léogâne . The battle was fought between an American convoy of four merchant vessels escorted by the United States naval schooner USS Experiment , and a squadron of armed barges manned by Haitians known as picaroons . 
 A French @-@ aligned Haitian general , André Rigaud , had instructed his forces to attack all foreign shipping within their range of operations . Accordingly , once Experiment and her convoy of merchant ships neared Gonâve , the picaroons attacked them , capturing two of the American merchant ships before withdrawing . Experiment managed to save the other two ships in her convoy , and escorted them to a friendly port . On the American side , only the captain of the schooner Mary was killed . Though the picaroons took heavy losses during this engagement , they remained strong enough to continue wreaking havoc among American shipping in the region . Only after Rigaud was forced out of power by the forces of Toussaint L 'Ouverture , leader of the 1791 Haitian Revolution , did the <unk> attacks cease . 
 = = Background = = 
 With the dawn of the Haitian Revolution in 1791 , a successful slave rebellion on the French colony , then known as Saint @-@ Domingue , allowed the local population to gain control over the government . Despite their success in removing the French colonial authorities , the various political factions that had seized control of the colony were fractious , and fighting soon broke out among them . By 1800 , the War of Knives between the pro @-@ French André Rigaud and the pro @-@ autonomy Toussaint L 'Ouverture was in full swing and Saint @-@ Domingue was divided in two . Rigaud controlled part of the southern portion of Saint @-@ Domingue while L 'Ouverture controlled the rest of the French colony . In need of supplies and materiel , Rigaud 's forces attacked any non @-@ French ship that passed them . 
 Concurrently with the War of Knives , the United States and France were engaged in a bout of limited naval warfare in the Caribbean as part of the Quasi @-@ War . In late December 1799 the American armed schooner Experiment was escorting under convoy the brig Daniel and Mary and the schooners Sea Flower , Mary , and Washington to prevent their capture by French privateers . On 1 January 1800 , the convoy was caught in a dead calm off the north side of the present @-@ day Haitian island of Gonâve , in the Bight of <unk> . Seeing the convoy becalmed , Rigaud sent eleven armed barges out to attack and seize the American vessels . 
 The crews of the American merchant vessels possessed only small arms , but their escort , Experiment , was a much more powerful vessel . Commanded by William Maley , the 135 @-@ ton Experiment was armed with 12 six @-@ pounder guns and had a complement of 70 men . In comparison , Rigaud 's initial attack force consisted of eleven barges crewed by 40 to 50 men each in the smaller ones , and 60 or 70 in the larger vessels . These barges were primarily propelled by oars , with 26 per vessel . The Haitian craft were each equipped with a mix of swivel guns and four @-@ pounder cannon , with most vessels armed with two or three guns as well as small arms . In addition to the vessels that set out to attack the convoy , there were more barges and men nearby that the Haitians could call upon if reinforcements were needed . In total some 37 barges and 1500 men were at Rigaud 's immediate disposal , though the Americans did not know this during the attack . Individually the Haitian barges presented only a small threat to the convoy , but when attacking en masse they could easily overwhelm and capture the American ships if they managed to board them . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Experiment kept her gunports closed and passed herself off as a merchantman , while the Haitians sailed closer to the convoy with the intent of boarding and capturing all five vessels . Once the Haitians were in musket range of the American vessels they opened fire on them , and Experiment returned the fire . Grapeshot from the Americans wreaked havoc among the Haitian barges and they were forced to withdraw . They stood off the American convoy for thirty minutes before beaching at the nearby island of Gonâve to land their wounded and gather reinforcements . With three more barges and fresh crews , the picaroons set off to assault the American convoy once more . They divided themselves into three squadrons of four barges each and set course to attack Experiment . The lead and <unk> divisions attacked the sides of the American warship while the rear division assaulted the stern . During the lull in fighting Experiment had readied herself for the picaroons ' next assault by positioning musketeers in defensive positions , loading her main guns , and raising boarding nets . Thus , when the Haitians attacked the American warship again she was well prepared to repulse any attempt at boarding her . 
 For three hours , Experiment battled the barges , sinking two and killing a great many of the picaroons . During this time two of the barges left the warship and attacked the merchant ships . These barges managed to protect themselves from Experiment by sailing behind the schooner Mary , which was between the two barges and the warship . The Haitians boarded Mary and killed her captain . Many of the crew jumped into the sea , and the rest hid in the hold . The second barge attempted to take Daniel and Mary but was sunk by fire from Experiment . Once the Haitians had boarded Mary , Experiment opened fire upon her with grapeshot , driving the picaroons off . 
 The entire flotilla of Haitians once more retired to Gonâve and replaced their wounded crewmembers with fresh ones . Seeing that Daniel and Mary and Washington had drifted away from the convoy , the Haitians set out to attack them . The two civilian vessels , having drifted too far from the protection of Experiment 's guns , were abandoned by their crews and passengers who fled to the American warship . The Haitians boarded and plundered these two vessels , carrying them further away from Experiment . Experiment managed to get close enough to the barges to attack them with her cannon but could not pursue them , as two barges had broken away from the main flotilla and were positioned to take Mary and Sea Flower if Experiment left them . Eventually the remnants of the convoy managed to make it to Léogâne , where they were looked after by the American consul . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 USS Experiment had succeeded in protecting two of the convoy , but the other two ships were taken by the picaroons . On the American side , only the captain of the schooner Mary had been killed . The Americans also suffered two wounded : one civilian , and Experiment 's second in command David Porter , who had been shot in the arm during the action . In exchange the Haitians had lost two of their barges and a great many casualties . Rigaud 's picaroons attacked another American convoy later in the year and continued to harass American shipping until Rigaud was ousted from Saint @-@ Domingue at the end of the War of Knives . After fleeing to Guadeloupe , he left for France on the schooner Diane , but was captured and taken to Saint Kitts when Experiment intercepted her on 1 October 1800 . 
 The action would prove controversial in the United States as several officers ' reports suggested that Lieutenant Maley , commander of Experiment , had shown cowardice during the engagement . Lieutenant Porter stated that Maley had tried to insist on surrendering to the picaroons immediately upon their arrival . It was alleged that Maley thought the situation was hopeless due to the sheer number of pro @-@ French Haitians who were attacking the convoy , and he had attempted to strike the colors . 
 The officers ' reports also commended Porter , stating that he had saved Experiment and her convoy by acting on his own initiative to ignore Maley 's defeatism , urging the crew to fight . Other American officials , such as the American consul at <unk> , disagreed with Porter 's accusations and instead lauded Maley for his bravery . Threats of court @-@ martial were made against Maley , but no formal charges regarding the incident were ever brought . On 16 July 1800 he was replaced as commander of Experiment by Charles Stewart . The incident haunted his career until his retirement . 
 = Abra Durant = 
 Percival " Abra " Durant is a fictional character from the BBC medical drama Holby City , portrayed by actor Adrian Edmondson . The character first appeared on @-@ screen on 5 July 2005 in the episode " Tuesday 's Child " , episode 38 of the show 's seventh series . Initially making a one @-@ off , guest @-@ appearance , Edmondson has since reprised the role of Abra numerous times , stating that he has loved the show since its 1999 conception . He departed from the show for the final time on 9 December 2008 , in episode " Sweet Bitter Love " . 
 Abra 's initial role in the show was that of Third World rights champion and humorous surgical maverick , whose major storylines centered on serious rule breaking ( including stealing returned anti @-@ retroviral drugs to send to African countries in need , performing an experimental xenotransplantation without authorisation , and secretly using Holby City Hospital 's theatres at night to perform charity operations on African children ) as well as his relationship with colleague nurse Kyla Tyson . Upon returning to the show in April 2008 , the character took a darker turn , resorting to self @-@ harm as a symptom of post @-@ traumatic stress , following a harrowing experience in the war torn Congo . 
 Well received by the show 's fans , writers and directors , Abra has established an enduring popularity which has seen Edmondson invited back to the programme regularly . TV critics have proved almost entirely favourable to the character , even when commenting on the unrealistic quality of many of his storylines . 
 = = Creation = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 It was first announced on 4 May 2005 that comedian Adrian Edmondson would be making a guest appearance in Holby City in July of that year , although the character he would be playing was not disclosed . The storyline running at the time saw established character , General Surgical Consultant Ric Griffin ( Hugh Quarshie ) , depart from Holby to work in his brother 's hospital in Ghana , with Registrar Diane Lloyd ( Patricia Potter ) following on in an attempt to persuade him home . Edmondson 's character , Abra Durant , was introduced as a new friend and colleague of Ric 's , also working in his brother 's clinic . Although the character 's given name is actually Percival , it was explained within the episode that he goes by Abra , short for the Ghanaian name ' <unk> ' , meaning ' troublemaker ' . The episode was shot on location in Ghana , and formed part of the BBC 's ' Africa Lives ' series , aiming " to give the viewers a more rounded portrayal of African life and culture through special editions of favourite shows as well as new commissions . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Edmondson has discussed the surprised reaction he encountered upon assuming the role of Abra , stating : " I 'm sure people are surprised I 'm in it , but I don 't give a toss . I have always liked it . It 's like any soap - if you watch it , you get stuck in . I love working on it . " He has mentioned that he is the only cast member to have been a fan of the show since its 1999 conception , that both he and his youngest daughter Freya often watch it together " as a bonding exercise " , and going as far as to describe the role as " a dream " . Commenting on his decision only ever to reprise the role of Abra on short term contracts , Edmondson has stated that : " I don 't think I could handle any longer . The regulars on the show work very , very hard . Basically I don 't think I could do what they do and still be alive . " 
 Several of Edmondson 's Holby City co @-@ stars have described feeling intimidated by the prospect of working alongside him for the first time , stemming from his already well established fame . Rakie Ayola explained : " I thought it was going to be difficult at the beginning because he wasn 't speaking to me . But he was initially just a little shy and sussing things out . He 's a lot quieter than you would expect but then suddenly he 'll say something that has everybody doubled up in laughter . You won 't find anyone who doesn 't like him . " Edmondson himself has added that he gets along well with the cast , although finds that the distance of Elstree Studios from most of their London homes makes them " weirdly unsociable " . 
 Edmondson 's casting in the role followed a trend remarked upon by television critic Jim Shelley , who noted a tendency of Holby City producers toward hiring already well established actors , including Jesus of Nazareth star Robert Powell and actress Patsy Kensit . When asked in November 2007 whether she actively sought out well @-@ known names to fill new roles in the show , series producer Diana Kyle responded : " It 's lovely when we have a new member of the cast come in and bring an audience with them . But we want the best actors , and the star names we cast are always the best - which is why we go for them ! " 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Describing the character following his October 2007 departure from the show , the BBC attested : " Rebellious surgeon Abra was an anti @-@ authoritarian and would always fight for what he believed in , even if it broke the rules . He worked hard and played hard and wasn 't afraid to push the boundaries . " The character has often been referred to as a " maverick " , with editorials also mentioning his " heavy @-@ drinking " tendencies . Edmondson has described his alter @-@ ego as " a great character - he 's a maverick and can do things the others would not be able to get away with . " , while the Daily Mirror have discussed the personality trait whereby " Abra finds it hard to conform to bureaucracy and is a risk taker . He is not afraid to fight for what he believes in - which , inevitably , lands him in all sorts of trouble . " 
 The character 's return in April 2008 saw drastic changes to his personality . Edmondson attested that Abra returned in " a fragile state " following a traumatic incident in the Congo , and had become " genuinely horrible " . He said of the transformation : " He 's not as humorous as he used to be . I used to like that , that sardonic wit that he used to have and it 's kind of gone out of the window . But you can be quite funny when you 're feeling everything 's pointless . He does some things that are so cruel and cold that they 're actually quite funny . " While the character had once been known for his brash taste in bright , flamboyant shirts , The Sun noted that Abra 's return saw him a " shadow of his former self " , wearing far less colourful apparell as a reflection of his more subdued state of mind . Edmondson agreed that Abra 's new wardrobe of shirts " aren 't quite as bright and dazzling - but that suits his current mood . " 
 = = = Early appearances = = = 
 Abra first appeared in episode " Tuesday 's Child " as an ex @-@ pat colleague of longstanding character Ric Griffin , now living in Ghana . The storyline saw Ric eventually decide to return to Holby , leaving both Abra and Ghana behind . Abra returned to the show later in the series , in episode " Great Expectations " , when he accompanied an African patient to the UK for an operation . He displayed his maverick tendencies by transplanting a third @-@ hand heart , despite having been expressly forbidden to do so by the hospital chairman , Michael Beauchamp ( Anthony Calf ) . He also proved instrumental in convincing recently demoted Matron Lisa Fox ( Luisa Bradshaw @-@ White ) to leave Holby to practice medicine in Ghana . Bradshaw @-@ White said of the storyline : " I 'm pleased it 's a positive ending for her as she 's been so miserable ! " 
 Abra returned again in episode " Prometheus Unbound " , when his ' nephew ' Kyle was brought into Holby for a live liver transplant . It was revealed that Abra was actually Kyle 's father , and that he and Kyle 's mother , Jenny , had brought the child up believing Abra to be his uncle , and his father to be Abra 's fictitious brother Harry — supposedly a war hero living abroad with a family of his own . Discussing the storyline , Edmondson commented of his character : " Typically he has been drinking and hasn 't warned Ric of his arrival . Abra tells Ric that the surgeon lined up to carry out the op has pulled out . He wants Ric to do it . " Abra proved able to convince Ric to go ahead with the operation , even talking him into allowing him to perform part of the surgery himself , despite being under the influence of alcohol . As Kyle recovered , Abra came close to admitting his paternity , however lost his nerve at the last minute and departed from the show once more , despite Jenny 's confession that she still loved him . 
 The character returned on a more permanent basis from June 2006 . Abra confessed to old friend Diane he had been run out of Ghana by the father of a woman he had a fling with . He was offered a permanent position at Holby by Christopher Sutherland , however this was almost immediately retracted when Abra defied new protocol by utilising the designated emergency theatre for a minor gall stone operation . Edmondson explained of the storyline : " Abra promises a patient he 'll operate on her immediately , but the hospital rules say he can 't book the operating theatre for the same day . So Abra decides to do it anyway . He has a knee @-@ jerk reaction to any kind of authority . " Initially this plot strand was set to crossover with Holby 's sister show , Casualty , with Sutherland 's role instead filled by Casualty manager Nathan Spence , however this was abandoned prior to broadcast . After clashing with colleague Nick Jordan in the following episode , " Invasion " , Abra made a favourable impression on Lord Byrne , an old family friend . He then left Holby again briefly for a research project recommended by Lord Byrne . 
 It was revealed at this point that Edmondson would be returning as Abra for six months from the autumn . Series producer Emma Turner stated : " We are delighted that Adrian has agreed to come back . He made a huge impact in the few episodes that he was involved in and there are some explosive and controversial storylines in store for his character when he returns to film with us . " 
 = = = Xenotransplantation ; anti @-@ <unk> = = = 
 Abra arrived back in Holby towards the end of series 8 , immediately becoming embroiled in an illegal porcine kidney transplantation on renal patient Pete Golding . When Ric discovered what he had done , the deception strained their friendship , and Abra came close to losing his job . Eventually , Ric decided the pressure of covering up their <unk> was too great to bear , and after making up with Abra , departed once more for Africa on sabbatical . 
 Around this time , Abra began a relationship with Acting Sister Kyla Tyson . When Ric departed for Uganda , Abra confessed the xenotransplantation secret to Kyla , who helped cover for him upon the arrival of new General Surgical Consultant Daniel Clifford . It was revealed that Abra had been stealing returned anti @-@ retroviral drugs from the hospital pharmacy to ship to African countries in need for some weeks . When Kyla discovered a small supply in his desk drawer , she assumed he was HIV positive , and after failing to extract a confession from Abra , terminated their relationship . The misunderstanding was resolved several episodes later , when Abra was able to win her back by serenading her in a grand romantic gesture in the hospital car park . 
 Soon after , the investigation into the suspected corruption within the General Surgical department was stepped up . After some weeks of intense investigation , Clifford managed extract a confession from Abra . He revealed an admiration for Abra 's maverick ways , and instead of turning him in , instructed Abra to leave Holby immediately with his record intact . Abra penned a post @-@ it note bearing a brief message of goodbye to Kyla , and fled the country , leaving her devastated . 
 = = = Night operations = = = 
 Abra returned yet again to Holby in episode " The Human Jungle " . Initially , Kyla was furious with him , and resisted his attempts to win her back — blaming him for the death of her ex @-@ husband , which occurred in his absence and resulted in her son being taken into foster care . However , Abra persisted , and was able to convince her to resume their relationship , and move in with him . Ayola said of the relationship at the time : " It 's love ! Well , she loves him but I think he loves moving around the world more . He 's a drifter . I wouldn 't put any money on a happy ending for them . He 's such a rolling stone and she 's so emotionally wrong that I don 't think it 's going to work . On the plus side , I think this pair probably have a fantastic sex life and a great time down the pub . " 
 It was revealed that his return to Holby was part of a deal made with hospital manager , Christopher Sutherland . Abra had agreed to turn around the hospital 's struggling Acute Assessment Unit , and in return , Sutherland would allow him to use the hospital 's theatres at night to operate on African children through a charity scheme Abra was involved in . The plan fell through when Sutherland was fired after the Board of Directors took a vote of no confidence in him . He was replaced by Jayne Grayson , who refused Abra 's proposal , citing budget constraints . 
 Abra , aided by a returned Ric , decided to go ahead with the operations anyway , and secured the use of <unk> theatre at night from Clifford . However , events come to a head when they received a charity patient in episode " Duty of Care " chaperoned by Abra 's father , Cecil . Having previously told Kyla his father was dead , Abra attempted to hide his identity from her , but she was furious to discover the truth . He placated her briefly , but was so worried when his father collapsed with ill @-@ health that he ruined a social services meeting to decide whether her son may be returned from foster care . They rowed bitterly , and soon thereafter Abra 's father died . He decided to take over the running of the charity in his father 's place , and once more departed from Holby , again leaving Kyla behind . When asked whether the two characters would ever get back together , following Abra 's second <unk> , Ayola responded : " He treated Kyla like dirt , so I don ’ t know if she ’ ll forgive him , but I love working with Ade – he ’ s a gorgeous man . " 
 = = = Post @-@ traumatic stress = = = 
 It was announced on 7 November 2007 that Abra would again be returning to Holby City , in spring 2008 . Edmondson revealed that " Abra comes back as a patient because some trauma has happened in Africa and he will be sponging off Ric . " Expanding on this , he explained : " Abra ’ s in a very fragile state , as he ’ s suffering from post @-@ traumatic stress . He keeps hurting himself , but no one knows why . Ric ’ s pretty off with Abra at first , but he agrees to let him stay at his place for a week . Abra used to be a nice guy , but he ’ s horrible now . Something happened to him on his travels , though even I haven ’ t been told what it is yet . What I do know is that Abra has a huge machete scar on his back ... I imagine he ’ s been though some horror . " He has stated that this appearance in the show will last four or five months , and that he doesn 't yet know how the character will be written out this time , beyond there being " some kind of mental @-@ health issue . " It emerged that Abra had borne witness to a violent attack on the hospital he was working in the Congo , eventually leading to him checking into a psychiatric unit . After being discovered being treated by his own mother , Kyla and Lola Griffin convinced him to discharge himself and return to Ghana . He returned briefly to Holby in December 2008 , when he convinced Kyla to move to Ghana with him , proposing marriage to her . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The light @-@ hearted , comedic quality the character of Abra brought to Holby City was a focal point of early reviews . Daily Mirror TV critic Jane Simon wrote of Abra 's second Holby appearance : 
 The laughing gas has been in desperately short supply at Holby of late . [ ... ] What they really need is for someone to come along and prove that heart transplants can be fun . It 's a job for comedy cardiac specialist Percy Durant ( guest star Ade Edmondson ) , who we last saw working out in Ghana with consultant Ric . You could easily imagine Percy driving around in a van with a big , red , plastic heart on top of it , or cracking open someone 's chest and pulling out a bunch of flowers . And when it comes to Lisa ( Luisa Bradshaw @-@ White ) , he magically comes up with the answer to all her problems . 
 This particular episode garnered 7 @.@ 4 million viewers and a 33 percent audience share , with both The Guardian and Digital Spy mentioning Edmondson 's guest @-@ appearance as Abra as a decisive factor in the high rating . 
 In early 2006 , the character 's " wacky " personality was deemed to have " proved such a hit , that Holby bosses got him back for two more episodes , shown in September and December ( 2005 ) . And now they want to make Abra a permanent fixture in the show . " Series producer Emma Turner said at the time that " ( Abra ) made a huge impact in the few episodes that he was involved in " and expressed her delight that Edmondson had agreed to reprise the role . TV critic Jim Shelley satirised the unrealistic storyline given to the character upon his return , deeming Abra 's line " Essentially , it 's an experiment and illegal . " when explaining to the sister of a patient that he intended to transplant a pig 's kidney into her brother 's body , his televisual ' Bad news of the week ' . However , Digital Spy 's Dek Hogan was more positive about the plot strand , and especially the role of Abra therein , stating : " It ’ s been a cracking take this , another example of the excellent form that medical drama has been in this year , thanks in no small part to Adrian Edmondson marvellous turn as maverick surgeon Abra . " 
 Jim Shelley again commented on the outlandishness of the character 's storylines following Abra 's next return to the show , in 2007 . He wrote : " Ric and Ade Edmondson had been conducting secret operations on orphans smuggled in from Africa ( as you do ) . [ ... ] It 's TV crack — instant , mind @-@ altering , utterly addictive . " He also dubbed the line " I don 't know why people complain about the NHS . " his ' Naive statement of the week ' , with the explanation : " <unk> let 's see . Abra covering up that he was operating on his arms @-@ dealer father . Maddy hiding the fact she killed her junkie sister 's daughter . And secret <unk> Jesus Of Nazareth ( Robert Powell ) keeping quiet about counselling Elliot 's son for heroin addiction . Oh yeah , and in Casualty , in Holby 's A & E department , nurse Ruth Winters secretly fixed her dad 's breathalyser test . Anyone detect a theme emerging ? " 
 Abra proved a popular character amongst fans of the show , and in the 2007 official fans awards , was voted fifth favourite male character of series 9 , and his relationship with Kyla voted fifth favourite coupling of the series . When Edmondson took time out from Holby City to work on his ITV sitcom Teenage Kicks , Mark Wright of The Stage reviewed the show poorly , urging him to " go back to Holby City , you were good in that " . Announcing that the role of Abra was indeed going to be reprised a sixth time , the Mirror described his return storyline as " sizzling " . 
 = Roystonea regia = 
 Roystonea regia , commonly known as the Cuban royal palm , Florida royal palm , or simply the royal palm is a species of palm which is native to southern Florida , Mexico and parts of Central America and the Caribbean . A large and attractive palm , it has been planted throughout the tropics and subtropics as an ornamental tree . Although it is sometimes called R. elata , the conserved name R. regia is now the correct name for the species . Populations in Cuba and Florida were long seen as separate species , but are now considered to belong to a single species . 
 Best known as an ornamental , R. regia is also used as a source of thatch , construction timber , and as a medicinal plant . The fruit is eaten by birds and bats ( which disperse the seeds ) and fed to livestock . Its flowers are visited by birds and bats , and it serves as a roosting site and food source for a variety of animals . Roystonea regia is the national tree of Cuba , and has a religious role both in Santería and Christianity , where it is used in Palm Sunday observances . 
 = = Description = = 
 Roystonea regia is a large palm which reaches a height of 20 – 30 metres ( 66 – 98 ft ) tall , ( with heights up to 34 @.@ 5 m ( 113 ft ) reported ) and a stem diameter of about 47 centimetres ( 19 in ) . ( K. F. Connor reports a maximum stem diameter of 61 cm ( 24 in ) . ) The trunk is stout , very smooth and grey @-@ white in colour with a characteristic bulge below a distinctive green <unk> . Trees have about 15 leaves which can be up to 4 m ( 13 ft ) long . The flowers are white with pinkish anthers . The fruit are spheroid to ellipsoid in shape , 8 @.@ 9 – 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 35 – 0 @.@ 59 in ) long and 7 – 10 @.@ 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 28 – 0 @.@ 43 in ) wide . They are green when immature , turning red and eventually purplish @-@ black as they mature . 
 Root nodules containing <unk> bacteria have been found on R. regia trees in India . The presence of rhizobia @-@ containing root nodules is usually associated with nitrogen fixation in legumes ; this was the first record of root nodules in a monocotyledonous tree . Further evidence of nitrogen fixation was provided by the presence of nitrogenase ( an enzyme used in nitrogen fixation ) and <unk> , a compound which allows nitrogenase to function by reducing the oxygen concentration in the root nodule . In addition to evidence of nitrogen fixation , the nodules were also found to be producing indole acetic acid , an important plant hormone . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Roystonea is placed in the subfamily Arecoideae and the tribe <unk> . The placement Roystonea within the Arecoideae is uncertain ; a phylogeny based on plastid DNA failed to resolve the position of the genus within the Arecoideae . As of 2008 , there appear to be no molecular phylogenetic studies of Roystonea and the relationship between R. regia and the rest of the genus is uncertain . 
 The species was first described by American naturalist William Bartram in 1791 as Palma elata based on trees growing in central Florida . In 1816 German botanist Carl Sigismund Kunth described the species Oreodoxa regia based on collections made by Alexander von Humboldt and Aimé Bonpland in Cuba . In 1825 German botanist Curt Polycarp Joachim Sprengel moved it to the genus <unk> and renamed it O. <unk> . 
 The genus Oreodoxa was proposed by German botanist Carl Ludwig Willdenow in 1807 and applied by him to two species , O. acuminata ( now known as <unk> acuminata ) and O. praemorsa ( now <unk> praemorsa ) . Although these species were transferred to other genera , the genus Oreodoxa continued to be applied to a variety of superficially similar species which were not , in fact , closely related . To address this problem , American botanist Orator F. Cook created the genus Roystonea , which he named in honour of American general Roy Stone , and renamed Kunth 's species Roystonea regia . 
 Cook considered Floridian populations to be distinct from both the Cuba R. regia and the Puerto Rican R. borinquena , and he placed them in a new species , R. floridana , which is now considered a synonym of R. regia . In 1906 Charles Henry Wright described two new species based on collections from Georgetown , British Guiana ( now Guyana ) which he placed in the genus Euterpe — E. <unk> and E. <unk> . Both species are now considered synonyms of R. regia . The name R. regia var. <unk> was applied by Paul H. Allen to Central American populations of the species . However , Scott Zona determined that they did not differ enough from Cuban populations to be considered a separate variety . 
 Based on the rules of botanical nomenclature , the oldest properly published name for a species has priority over newer names . Bartram applied the Linnaean binomial Palma elata to a " large , solitary palm with an ashen white trunk topped by a green leaf sheath [ the <unk> ] and pinnate leaves " growing in central Florida . While no type collection is known , there are no other native palms that would fit Bartram 's description . In 1946 Francis Harper pointed out that Bartram 's name was valid and proposed a new combination , Roystonea elata . Liberty Hyde Bailey 's use of the name in his 1949 revision of the genus , established its usage . 
 Harper 's new combination immediately supplanted Cook 's R. floridana , but there was disagreement as to whether Cuban and Floridian populations represented a single species or two species . Zona 's revision of the genus concluded that they both belonged to the same species . According to the rules of botanical nomenclature , the correct name of the species should have been Roystonea elata . Zona pointed out , however , that the name R. regia ( or Oreodoxa regia ) has a history of use in horticulture that dated from at least 1838 , and that the species had been propagated around the world under that name . Roystonea elata , on the other hand , had only been used since 1949 , and was used much less widely . On that basis , Zona proposed that the name Roystonea regia should be conserved . 
 = = = Common names = = = 
 In cultivation , Roystonea regia is called the Cuban royal palm or simply the royal palm . Populations native to Florida are called Florida royal palms . In Cuba , the tree is called the palma real or palma criolla . In India , where it is widely cultivated , it is called <unk> . 
 = = Reproduction and growth = = 
 Roystonea regia produces unisexual flowers that are pollinated by animals . European honey bees and bats are reported pollinators . Seeds are dispersed by birds and bats that feed upon the fruit . 
 Seed germination is adjacent <unk> — during germination , as the cotyledon expands it only pushes a portion of the embryo out of the seed . As a result , the seedling develops adjacent to the seed . The embryo forms a <unk> , and the <unk> protrudes from this . Seedlings in cultivation are reported to begin producing a stem two years after germination , at the point where they produce their thirteenth leaf . Growth rates of seedlings averaged 4 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 @.@ 7 in ) per year in Florida . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Roystonea regia is found in southern Florida , Mexico ( Veracruz , Campeche , Quintana Roo , Yucatán ) , Central America , Cuba , Puerto Rico , the Cayman Islands , Hispaniola , the Lesser Antilles and The Bahamas . William Bartram described the species from Lake Dexter , along the St. Johns River in the area of modern Lake and Volusia Counties in central Florida , an area well north of its modern range . 
 Today Roystonea is cultivated in tropical and subtropical climates in the United States , Australia , Brazil , and parts of southern Asia as a landscape palm . In the United States it grows mostly in central and southern Florida and in some areas of southern California . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The leaves of Roystonea regia are used as roosting sites by <unk> floridanus , the Florida <unk> bat , and is used as a retreat for Cuban tree frogs ( Osteopilus <unk> ) , a non @-@ native species , in Florida . In Panama ( where R. regia is introduced ) , its trunks are used as nesting sites by yellow @-@ crowned parrots ( Amazona <unk> panamensis ) . The flowers of R. regia are visited by pollen @-@ collecting bees and are considered a good source of nectar . Its pollen was also found in the stomachs of <unk> <unk> , the Cuban flower bat ( a pollen @-@ feeder ) and Monophyllus <unk> , Leach 's single leaf bat ( a nectar @-@ feeder ) . Artibeus jamaicensis , the Jamaican fruit bat , and <unk> similis , the social flycatcher , feed on the fruit . 
 Roystonea regia is the host plant for the royal palm bug , <unk> <unk> , in Florida . It also serves as a larval host plant for the butterflies <unk> antiqua orientis and <unk> capucinus in Cuba , and <unk> <unk> and B. <unk> in Brazil . It is susceptible to bud rot caused by the oomycete Phytophthora <unk> and by the fungus <unk> <unk> . 
 The species is considered an invasive species in secondary forest in Panama . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Roystonea regia has been planted throughout the tropics and subtropics as an ornamental . The seed is used as a source of oil and for livestock feed . Leaves are used for thatching and the wood for construction . The roots are used as a diuretic , and for that reason they are added to <unk> , a Haitian drink , by Cubans of Haitian origin . They are also used as a treatment for diabetes . 
 Fibres extracted from the leaf sheath of R. regia have been found to be comparable with sisal and banana fibres , but lower in density , making it a potentially useful source for the use in lightweight composite materials . An extract from R. regia fruit known as D @-@ 004 reduces benign prostate hyperplasia ( <unk> ) in rodents . D @-@ 004 , is a mixture of fatty acids , is being studied as a potential alternative to <unk> for the treatment of <unk> . 
 = = = Religious significance = = = 
 Roystonea regia plays an important role in popular religion in Cuba . In Santería it is associated primarily with Shango or with his father <unk> . It also has symbolic importance in the Palo faiths and the <unk> fraternity . In Roman Catholicism , R. regia plays an important role in Palm Sunday observances . 
 = Superfinalen = 
 Superfinalen ( " The Super Final " ) is a former Norwegian association football competition contested between the previous season 's champions of the Norwegian Premier League and the Norwegian Football Cup . The super cup was incorporated as part of a charity @-@ themed television show broadcast on TV2 , with the profits from the matches going to UNICEF . The competition was held twice , in 2009 and 2010 . The first competition saw Stabæk , reigning league winners , beat Vålerenga 3 – 1 . The following year , league winners Rosenborg beat cup winners Aalesund 3 – 1 . The competition was then deemed commercially unprofitable and abandoned . 
 = = History = = 
 There have previously been attempts at pre @-@ season friendlies between the reigning league and cup champions . For instance , the 2002 pre @-@ season match between Rosenborg and Viking was played between the reigning league and cup champions , although it had no official status . Superfinalen was the first attempt to make an official tournament . Such a super cup is common between the domestic league and cup winners in many European countries , such as the English Charity Shield . Superfinalen also introduced philanthropy into such a match : the game was to be baked into a larger television event which would include concerts and entertainment in an attempt to generate revenue for charity . The matchday profits from the inaugural season were , along with the television fundraising , given to UNICEF , who used the revenue to fund part of a school project in Africa , which had been fronted by Ole Gunnar Solskjær . 
 The first season was organized as a trial project by the Football Association of Norway ( NFF ) , Norsk Toppfotball ( NTF ) , the clubs Stabæk and Vålerenga , and broadcaster TV2 . The 2009 edition was regarded as a success by NFF and it was decided to continue with a new edition for 2010 , which was held between Rosenborg and Aalesund . 
 Ahead of the 2011 season , NFF and NTF stated that Superfinalen would be discontinued , stating that the championship was interesting neither from a sports nor from a commercial aspect . However , the two would @-@ be qualified teams , league winner Rosenborg and cup winner Strømsgodset , were free to play a pre @-@ season friendly , although it would not be regarded as an official match . Rosenborg has traditionally played its final pre @-@ season game against Viking and stated that they intended to take up that tradition following the abandoning of Superfinalen . 
 = = Rules = = 
 The date and location of the match was decided through an agreement between the two involved teams in cooperation with NFF and NTF . The assignment of referees was done by NFF . The match was not regulated as part of the NFF 's laws , and is played using the regulations regarding a regular Premier League match . If the game was a draw at the end of full @-@ time , the game was determined with a penalty shootout without an intermediate extra time . A caution ( yellow card ) would not be registered for determining disqualification in later matches , and a player sent off ( red card ) would not be disqualified if normally given one match quarantine . If a player was disqualified for more than one match because of a direct red card , he had to serve the number of matches minus one . Yellow and red cards still qualified to send off a player for the remaining of the game . 
 = = Editions = = 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 The first edition was contested between Stabæk and Vålerenga at Telenor Arena in Bærum on 8 March 2009 . It was the first official match to take place at Stabæk 's new home ground . Stabæk qualified as winners of the 2008 Norwegian Premier League , where they finished six points ahead of Fredrikstad . Vålerenga qualified as winners of the 2008 Norwegian Football Cup , where they had won the final 4 – 1 against Stabæk . As such , Superfinalen became a replay of the previous year 's cup final . Stabæk won the match 3 – 1 after goals by Daniel <unk> , Daigo Kobayashi and <unk> Rafn <unk> . Mohammed Abdellaoue scored for the losing side . Martin <unk> , playing coach for Vålerenga , received two yellow cards . 
 Match details 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 The 2010 edition was contested between Rosenborg BK and Aalesund FK at Color Line Stadion in Ålesund on 7 March 2010 . Rosenborg qualified as winners of the 2009 Norwegian Premier League , where they finished 13 points ahead of Molde . Aalesund qualified as winners of the 2009 Norwegian Football Cup , where they beat Molde in a penalty shootout in the final . Rosenborg won the match 3 – 1 after leading 2 – 0 at halftime . Kris <unk> and Rade Prica scored the goals in the first half , and Trond Olsen increased Rosenborg 's lead to 3 – 0 before Aalesund pulled one back , courtesy of Peter Orry Larsen . 
 Match details 
 = = Performances = = 
 = = = Performance by club = = = 
 = = = Total cup wins by city = = = 
 = The Bubble ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " The Bubble " is the fifteenth episode of the third season of the American television series 30 Rock . It was written by series ' creator Tina Fey and directed by Tricia Brock . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on March 19 , 2009 . Jon Hamm and Bobb 'e J. Thompson guest star in this episode , and there are cameo appearances by Calvin Klein and Meredith Vieira . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Fey ) discovers that her boyfriend Drew ( Hamm ) lives in a " bubble " because of his good looks , and has never experienced many of the unpleasant phenomena in life . At the same time , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) decides to leave the fictitious sketch comedy show The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) because he no longer needs the money , and Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) decides to cut her hair as a publicity stunt . 
 " The Bubble " received generally positive reviews . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it was watched by 7 million households during its original broadcast . For their performances in this episode , Hamm and Jack McBrayer – the latter playing Kenneth Parcell – received Primetime Emmy Award nominations in the categories for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series and Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series , respectively . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) noticing that people treat her boyfriend , Drew Baird ( Jon Hamm ) , differently because of his good looks . After watching a traffic cop , ( Frank Ridley ) rip up a ticket for Drew , and fashion designer Calvin Klein offering him a job as an underwear model , Liz brings the matter up with her boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , who tells her that Drew is in " the bubble " . Jack tells Liz that she should stay with Drew and enjoy the perks of the bubble , but Liz begins to realize that living in the bubble has left Drew without some essential skills . After discovering that Drew cannot perform the Heimlich maneuver , even though he is a doctor , and cannot play tennis , despite the fact that he worked as a tennis coach , Liz decides that she has to leave Drew , and ends their relationship . 
 Meanwhile , at TGS , it is time to renew Tracy Jordan 's ( Tracy Morgan ) contract , and Jack decides to approach the matter carefully as Tracy does not need the money he makes on the show . While negotiating Tracy 's new contract , Jack mentions this fact , which comes as a shock to Tracy , who had never realized that he could survive financially without the income . After realizing that Tracy has quit the show , Jack must find a way to bring him back , after Tracy 's son , Tracy Jr . ( Bobb 'e J. Thompson ) , complains to Jack about how unbearable his father is to have around the house . Meanwhile , in order to get attention for herself , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) decides to cut her hair for charity as a publicity stunt . Jenna makes an appearance on NBC 's Today Show , where her haircut will be broadcast . Meredith Vieira asks Jenna 's opinion on the news that Tracy has left TGS . At learning this , Jenna bails out on her haircut . 
 After discovering that Tracy is still in contact with NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) , Jack realizes that their relationship is the key to bringing Tracy back to TGS . Jack , therefore , orders Kenneth to break off all contact with Tracy , although this fails because of Kenneth 's relationship with Tracy . Seeing an opportunity , Jack states that since Kenneth 's duties were primarily taking care of Tracy , and Tracy no longer works at NBC , Kenneth is no longer needed . Not wanting Kenneth to lose his job , Tracy agrees to return on the stipulation that Kenneth keeps his job . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Bubble " was written by series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey . The director of this episode was Tricia Brock . This was Fey 's sixteenth writing credit , and Brock 's first directed episode . " The Bubble " originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 19 , 2009 . 
 When actor Jon Hamm hosted the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) in October 2008 , negotiations took place with the show 's producers for him to guest star on 30 Rock . In December 2008 , it was confirmed Hamm would appear as a love interest for Fey 's character , Liz Lemon . It was also announced by NBC that Hamm would star in a three @-@ episode arc ; he made his debut in the February 5 , 2009 , episode " Generalissimo " , and made a second appearance in " St. Valentine 's Day " . " The Bubble " was the completion of Hamm 's three episode arc , though Hamm made appearances on the show 's fourth season episodes " Anna Howard Shaw Day " and " Emanuelle Goes to Dinosaur Land " . 
 In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Fey said that when the writing staff is developing a script , " We 'll have an actor in mind and we 'll keep referring to them . Like for this we said , ' Then Hamm comes in , blah blah blah . ' " She believed that there was no possibility of getting Hamm though : " we were lucky with the timing because Mad Men was on hiatus and he was hosting SNL . So I called over there and asked them [ whispering ] , ' Hey , is that guy funny ? Tell me the truth . ' And they were like , ' Yes , he 's really funny . ' By Saturday I knew they were right . " 
 All of Liz and Drew 's scenes were filmed on January 15 , 2009 , in the Upper West Side . Fashion designer Calvin Klein , playing himself , made a cameo in this episode . Klein is the father of Marci Klein , an executive producer on 30 Rock . This episode was actor Bobb 'e J. Thompson 's second appearance as Tracy 's son , Tracy Jr . , on the show . Thompson first guest starred in the episode " Gavin Volure " . " The Bubble " was Today show co @-@ host Meredith Vieira 's third guest appearance as herself , having appeared in the episodes " Greenzo " and " Larry King " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 After Kenneth buys Tracy 's food , Tracy calls Kenneth his Radar O 'Reilly , a character from M * A * S * H. He also tells him , " Now get in here and rub my feet until you hear a chopper coming . " Drew tells Liz that Prince Eric was based on pictures of him in his younger days , a reference to the animated character from the movie The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) . Jenna talks about the Rachel haircut , made famous by actress Jennifer Aniston , as the character Rachel Green on the show Friends . Later , Jenna says she does not want to make the wrong choice with her hair explaining she does not want to end up like actress Keri Russell from Felicity season two . 
 Kenneth tells Jack that when he and Tracy watch the show Lost he always holds Tracy 's hand , due to the show 's mysterious plots . After learning that Tracy has quit the show , Liz mocks Jack , in a deep voice , saying " Be a manager . Control your people . Buy better clothes . " Jack explains his plans to her on how he will get Tracy to return , with Liz once again mocking Jack , this time in a deep raspy voice , " Just get it done . Nope . I lost it . That was Batman " , a reference to actor Christian Bale 's voice as the superhero in the Batman films . 
 During the scenes where Liz and Drew are together , the music piece " Theme from A Summer Place " is played . 
 The fifteenth episode of the third season of Parks and Recreation is also entitled " The Bubble " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , an average of 7 million viewers watched " The Bubble " during its original United States broadcast , placing it in fourth place for its timeslot . The show also claimed a share of 3 @.@ 2 / 8 among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 3 @.@ 2 % of all people in that group , and 8 % of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . For their performances in this episode , Jon Hamm and Jack McBrayer received Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series and Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series , respectively . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews , although most reviewers found some of the storylines more effective than others . Robert Canning of IGN wrote that " the main portion of this episode was quite funny , even if the ending lacked bite . " Similarly , Margaret Lyons of Entertainment Weekly found that the episode was " another strong showing for 30 Rock ... although Jenna 's plotline was pretty tired . " TV Squad 's Bob Sassone was similarly positive about " The Bubble " , calling it " another good episode . " James Poniewozik of Time , also responded favorably to the episode with the exception of the Jenna storyline , writing that it " was the first one in a long time that I enjoyed almost completely without reservation ( Jenna 's subplot was off , but it was barely a blip ) . " Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger disliked the bubble concept , reporting , " [ t ] he idea that attractive people get away with things that the more average @-@ looking can 't is an old joke , even on 30 Rock ( with Cerie ) " , but nonetheless enjoyed the " variations " of the joke saying they were " well @-@ conceived " . Sepinwall concluded , " this was one of the funniest 30 Rock 's of the season . Zap2it 's Rick Porter was also favorable to " The Bubble " in his recap , opining that 30 Rock " gave us a very well @-@ done episode " . As with Lyons and Poniewozik , Porter felt Jenna 's story " didn 't really click " , but liked the scene with Jenna and her stylist team firing off words to describe Jenna 's beauty as " scathingly funny . " 
 The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin enjoyed Hamm 's role as Drew , reporting that his character " initially seemed too good to be true but the show gradually revealed him to be imperfect and even fucked up enough to be plausible . [ ... ] The Hamm subplot was very funny and well @-@ executed " . Sepinwall also praised Hamm , writing , " Finally ! It took three episodes ... but Tina Fey ( who wrote this one ) let Jon Hamm be funny on his way out the door . " 
 Not all reviews were positive . Matt Mitovich of TV Guide wrote , " I must be honest ... This A @-@ story was ridiculous , and not in the hysterical way . When I first read the <unk> about Drew ' getting by on his good looks , ' I thought we 'd witness the occasional favoritism . But horrid doctor skills and flailing at the very public sport of tennis , and his obliviousness to it all ? Hamm got a turkey of an exit story , sorry . " 
 = Swords and Sorcery ( video game ) = 
 Swords and Sorcery is a fantasy role playing video game developed and published by Personal Software Services . It was released exclusively in the United Kingdom for the ZX Spectrum in 1985 and the Amstrad CPC in 1986 . The game contains elements of dungeon crawling and revolves around a customisable player @-@ character navigating through catacombs in order to secure a large wealth of treasure , whilst simultaneously collecting seven pieces of sacred armour . 
 The game was released with dedicated t @-@ shirts , badges and posters . It suffered from several delays throughout 1985 due to the complexity of programming . Swords and Sorcery received positive reviews from critics upon release ; prominent praise included the graphics , colours , animation and its menu interface . It also won the " Game of the Month " award from Computer and Video Games in January 1986 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Swords and Sorcery is presented in a first person top @-@ down perspective and contains elements of dungeon crawling , a common trait of role playing video games . The game is set in a fictional land called <unk> , in which he main objective is to explore its catacombs and discover a large wealth of treasure , alongside collecting seven pieces of sacred <unk> armour . The game begins with allowing the player to choose their player @-@ character ; the default protagonist is called <unk> the Dull , however there is an option to allow the player to create and <unk> their own character . Once a character has been created , a 14 in @-@ game day training scheme will commence which gives the player an opportunity to improve their abilities such as lock picking , sword fighting and thieving . An in @-@ game armoury is also accessible at any time , which includes utilities such as body armour and various weaponry . The form of currency in the game is dragon 's teeth , which can be used to purchase items and equipment . 
 Movement through the catacombs is controlled by command inputs and keywords , which is referred to in @-@ game as <unk> . For example , entering in the word " hit " will bring down a menu which will display various forms of attacking techniques . The left side of the screen displays an animated first person perspective of the respective tunnel or room the player is in , whereas the right side of the interface displays a general top @-@ down view of the catacombs . The bottom of the screen features a command box and announces available options or hints to the player ; flashing arrows indicate where movement is possible throughout the catacombs . During the game , enemies such as gargoyles , <unk> and warriors will appear at random and attack the player if confronted . Magic spells such as poison and fire are able to defeat enemies , alongside weaponry such as swords and axes . The player @-@ character has both a health and magic bar , which will slowly deplete once attacked by an enemy or by using magic spells , respectively . Items in the game include treasure and artefacts which may have a chance of giving the player negative effects , such as draining life and paralysing movement . 
 = = Background = = 
 Personal Software Services was founded in Coventry , England , by Gary Mays and Richard Cockayne in November 1981 . The company was known for creating games that revolved around historic war battles and conflicts , such as Theatre Europe , Bismarck and Falklands ' 82 . The company had a partnership with French video game developer ERE Informatique , and published localised versions of their products to the United Kingdom . The Strategic Wargames series was conceptualised by software designer Alan Steel in 1984 . During development of these titles , Steel would often research the topic of the upcoming game and pass on the findings to other associates in Coventry and London . Some games of the series were met with controversy upon release , such as Theatre Europe . In 1983 , the company received recognition for being " one of the top software houses " in the United Kingdom , and was a finalist for BBC Radio 4 's New Business Enterprise Award for that year . 
 In 1986 , Cockayne took a decision to alter their products for release on 16 @-@ bit consoles , as he found that smaller 8 @-@ bit consoles , such as the ZX Spectrum , lacked the processing power for larger strategy games . The decision was falsely interpreted as " pulling out " from the Spectrum market by video game journalist Phillipa Irving . Following years of successful sales throughout the mid 1980s , Personal Software Services experienced financial difficulties , in what Cockayne admitted in a retrospective interview that " he took his eye off the ball " . The company was acquired by Mirrorsoft in February 1987 , and was later dispossessed by the company due to strains of debt . 
 The game was announced in summer of 1984 , but was delayed several times for over a year . Before its announcement , Swords and Sorcery had been in development from nearly two years prior to 1985 . PSS explained the delays as due to game 's complexity that required a lot programming man @-@ hours . The game was PSS 's biggest launch to date . Upon release , Swords and Sorcery came with t @-@ shirts , badges and posters . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received positive reviews upon release . Rachael Smith of Your Sinclair praised the imaginative atmosphere the game offered , stating that developers drew the players into a " convincing world " and speculated that the game would become a " cult of sorts " . Philippa Irving of Crash praised the presentation as " super " and the graphics as " rare for this type of game " , adding that it also offered " brilliant " animation which shows the detail in the " best way possible " . Gary Rook of Sinclair User opinionated that Swords and Sorcery was aimed at " Rambo @-@ style " dungeon explorers . Regarding the graphics , Rook stated that they were " not staggering " , but felt that they served a purpose and would have been " deadly dull " if the game was text @-@ based only . 
 A reviewer of ZX Computing called it the best Dungeons and Dragons version " ever produced on a computer " , and stated that it was " worth the wait " . A reviewer of Computer and Video Games stated that the game was " unique " and could not be classified . However , the reviewer did criticise the speed of in @-@ game combat , calling it " frustrating " at times . Despite this , Computer and Video Games awarded it their " Game of the Month " award for January 1986 . Robert Fripp of German magazine <unk> Software Markt concluded that the game presented a " successful " adventure . Bob Wade of Amstrad Action praised the game 's presentation , depth and atmosphere but criticized initial complexity and required time commitment . Computer Gamer received the game highly positively , calling it complex , difficult and immersive , giving particularly high points to atmosphere . 
 In a later retrospect of role @-@ playing games , Advanced Computer Entertainment noted that common criticism of the game was similar to " exploring a car park " , however the reviewer praised the game 's ability to portray a " complex " world . 
 = Wii Sports = 
 Wii Sports ( Wii <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a sports game developed and published by Nintendo as a launch title for the Wii video game console . The game was first released in North America along with the Wii on November 19 , 2006 , and was released in Japan , Australia , and Europe the following month . It was included as a pack @-@ in game with the Wii console in all territories except Japan and South Korea , making it the first game included with the launch of a Nintendo system since Mario 's Tennis for the Virtual Boy in 1995 . Wii Sports is now available on its own as part of the Nintendo Selects collection of games and is no longer a pack @-@ in game for the Wii . 
 The game is a collection of five sports simulations , designed to demonstrate the motion @-@ sensing capabilities of the Wii Remote to new players . The five sports included are tennis , baseball , bowling , golf , and boxing . Players use the Wii Remote to mimic actions performed in real life sports , such as swinging a tennis racket . The rules for each game are simplified to make them more accessible to new players . The game also features training and fitness modes that monitor players ' progress in the sports . 
 Overall , Wii Sports has been well received by critics and received awards from the gaming press and entertainment community . It is the third best @-@ selling video game of all time , behind Tetris and Minecraft , and is the best @-@ selling game of all time for a single platform as of April 2013 , having outsold the previous best @-@ seller , Super Mario Bros. , also published by Nintendo . As of March 31 , 2016 , 82 @.@ 78 million copies in total had been sold worldwide . Wii Sports has been featured on television in Wii commercials , news reports , and other programming . The game has become a popular means for social gatherings and competitions among players of varying ages . A sequel , Wii Sports Resort , was released in 2009 , featuring Wii MotionPlus support , while a high @-@ definition remake , Wii Sports Club , was released in 2013 for Wii U. 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Wii Sports consists of five separate sports games — tennis , baseball , bowling , golf , and boxing — accessed from the main menu . The games use the motion sensor capabilities of the Wii Remote and Nunchuk attachment to control the actions of the on @-@ screen ball pit . The player moves the remote in a similar manner to how the separate games are played in real life ; for example , holding and swinging the Wii Remote like a golf club , baseball bat or bowling ball . Some aspects of the gameplay are computer controlled . In tennis , player movement is controlled by the Wii , while the swinging of the racket is controlled by the player . Baseball consists of batting and pitching , with all of the fielding and baserunning handled by the Wii . 
 The in @-@ game characters are taken from the Wii 's Mii Channel , which allows the user to create a Mii ( a customized avatar ) that can be imported into games that support the feature . Wii Sports is the first Wii title to use this feature . Miis saved on the Wii will appear in the crowd during bowling games and as members of human @-@ controlled teams in baseball . The non @-@ player characters in the game were also created using the Mii Channel toolset . Miis created on one Wii can be transferred onto the internal memory of a Wii Remote for use on another Wii with different save data . 
 After a game , a player is awarded or penalized skill points based on performance relative to the computer 's skill level , though some games do not calculate points during multiplayer sessions . The game keeps track of these points by charting them on a graph , as well as increasing the size of the crowd in Tennis and Boxing single @-@ player modes . After obtaining 1000 skill points in a sport , a player is awarded " pro " level , along with a cosmetic feature for their Mii in Bowling and Boxing . A Mii newly turned pro will receive a message on the Wii Message Board notifying them . Wii Sports also features a fitness test that calculates a player 's fitness age ( ranging from 20 to 80 years old , 20 being the best possible ) . The test gauges the player 's performance in three randomly chosen challenges in each test from the training mode that have been played at least once , and can only be taken once a day per Mii . Calculating the fitness age takes into account a player 's balance , speed , and stamina . Fitness age results are graphed over one , two , or three months , with daily results posted on the Wii Message Board . 
 = = Development = = 
 Katsuya Eguchi , who managed Software Development Group 2 at Nintendo Entertainment Analysis and Development , produced Wii Sports . With the Wii , Nintendo desired to reach people who had not played video games before . To do this they needed software that allowed both long time and first time players to interact together in a fun way . Nintendo also wanted players to use the system daily and intended Wii Sports to be the console 's flagship title to help accomplish this . Wii Sports was designed as a simple introductory line meant to offer something for both gamers and non @-@ gamers . Sports were chosen as the theme because of the widespread familiarity with them . Rather than feature professional athletes or have realistic graphics , the game was designed to be simple so that anyone could play . Gameplay like running towards a ball in tennis was excluded to maintain simplicity . At one point in development , Mario characters were used , but were removed because of feedback from players who preferred Miis . The game supports a 16 : 9 widescreen ratio and progressive scan , runs at 60 frames per second , and makes use of the Wii Remote 's accelerometer to interpret the player 's motion . Motion @-@ sensing actions , like pitching and hitting , were prioritized to make them as realistic as possible . Because Nintendo did not expect players to purchase the Wii solely to play Wii Sports , they bundled the game with the console ; Nintendo believed players would be more likely to play Wii Sports through this distribution method . They also felt players that enjoyed the game would increase its popularity by word of mouth . 
 Before the Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) Media and Business Summit of 2006 , the first sport in the game was announced as Wii Sports : Tennis . It was later announced , at Nintendo 's press conference prior to E3 2006 , it would be part of a sports package . Satoru Iwata introduced this package as Wii Sports , and stated it would include tennis , golf , and baseball . The game was featured as both a video demonstration and an on @-@ stage playable demo . The demo featured Iwata and Reggie Fils @-@ Aime in a doubles tennis match against Shigeru Miyamoto and Scott Dyer , a contest winner . The other sports titles were on display at E3 and shared a similar naming convention to the tennis game such as , Wii Sports : Baseball , Wii Sports : Golf , and Wii Sports : Airplane . At the time , baseball only featured a batting simulation . The airplane title was similar to Pilotwings and required the player to maneuver an airplane through rings within a time frame . It was not included in the final game , but was later incorporated into Wii Sports Resort . At the Nintendo World event on September 14 , 2006 , Reggie Fils @-@ Aime announced that Wii Sports would be included free with the Wii . The bowling and boxing titles were also introduced . 
 = = Reception = = 
