 = = = Sales = = = 
 Wii Sports was immensely successful commercially . At the end of 2007 , it was the best @-@ selling Wii game . In Japan , where the game was not included with the system , the game sold 176 @,@ 167 copies in the first two days of release , a record for a seventh generation console game in Japan . By February 2007 , it had sold over a million copies . In early May 2007 , game @-@ industry research firm Media Create placed Wii Sports third in their list of top @-@ 20 games in Japan . It was the best @-@ selling game of 2007 in Japan with 1 @,@ 911 @,@ 520 copies sold . It was the tenth best @-@ selling game in Japan in 2008 , selling 841 @,@ 736 copies in that year . The game sold 45 @.@ 71 million copies — including bundled copies — worldwide by March 2009 . By January 28 , 2011 , worldwide sales increased to 75 @.@ 66 million , which has increased to 82 @.@ 78 million as of March 31 , 2016 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Wii Sports received mostly positive reviews from critics . It received a score of 76 % on GameRankings and 76 / 100 on Metacritic . GameTrailers called it a good complement to the Wii system and referred to all five games as a " nice total package " . They commented that the games provided enough gameplay for long time gamers without making it inaccessible to novices . GameTrailers stated , however , that the lack of a tournament mode was a detractor , and did not recommend paying for the game if it did not come bundled with the system . GamePro also commented that the free addition of Wii Sports with the Wii was a positive . Matt Casamassina of IGN called it a " successful showpiece for Nintendo 's new hardware " and enjoyed the ability to import Miis . GameSpot editor Ryan Davis complimented the multiplayer aspect and the fitness test . Reviewers praised the game 's controls and ease of use . Casamassina referred to the controls as " revolutionary " and described them as intuitive . GamePro echoed similar comments , praising the ease of play and realistic motion controls , while Davis commented that the motion controls were sometimes erratic . Common criticism focused on the graphics and lack of depth in the separate games . Casamassina stated that the game " comes up short in depth and visuals " , and called the graphics " generic " and " archaic " . Other reviewers said the graphics were on par with Nintendo 's older gaming systems , the Nintendo GameCube and Nintendo 64 . Davis criticized the oversimplified nature of the games , and GamePro stated that the separate games offered less depth than regular console sports games . Nintendo Power listed Wii Sports along with its sequel Wii Sports Resort as two of the greatest multi @-@ player experiences in Nintendo 's history , stating that everyone from young children to grandparents can enjoy the games . The magazine praised the grouping of sports and the game 's longevity . 
 The separate games garnered their own reception among critics . Casamassina called bowling , tennis , and baseball " fun and addictive " , while Tom Bramwell of Eurogamer said baseball , golf , and boxing were lacking in gameplay depth when compared to tennis and bowling . PC Magazine columnist John C. Dvorak , an avid bowler , praised the realistic physics used in bowling and stated , " Nintendo did a stupendous job of coding . " He complimented the addition of physical activity to video gaming , but complained that long term use caused his wrist and shoulder to become sore . Casamassina ranked bowling as the best experience of the five . Before its release , IGN 's Craig Harris commented on an exploit allowing easy strikes in the bowling game that removed the challenge and replay value . After the release , he stated that the exploit was not fixed . GameTrailers called golf the most in @-@ depth , but criticized the lack of multiple courses and unpredictable controls when trying to slice or hook a shot . GamePro said golf offered the most content and was the best looking of all the games , but commented that its controls were the most difficult to use . GameTrailers called tennis the most accessible and easy to play , but criticized the difficulty of putting spin on a shot . Casamassina stated that tennis was one of the more enjoyable games , but the lack of movement control was a detractor . GameTrailers called baseball the most " worthless " because of the luck factor associated with the computer @-@ controlled fielding . They called boxing the best workout on Wii Sports , but criticized the difficult timing needed to punch properly . Casamassina criticized boxing for being " like a chore " and ranked it as the worst experience of the five sports . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Wii Sports 's debut at 2006 E3 garnered it several awards . At the event , it won the Game Critics Award for " Best Sports Game " . 1UP.com listed it as the " Best Wii Game " and " Most Original Game " in their " Best of E3 2006 " feature . Following its release , Wii Sports received multiple awards from various organizations , websites , and magazines . IGN awarded it " Best Sports Game of 2006 " and second best game of 2006 . Time magazine listed the game as the number one game of 2006 in their list of " Top 10 Video Games of 2006 " . Wii Sports won Famitsu 's 2006 " Innovation Award " . Electronic Gaming Monthly awarded it " Best Multiplayer Experience " in their 2006 " <unk> Network Awards " . At the 2007 Interactive Achievement Awards , Wii Sports won " Outstanding Achievement in Game Play Engineering " , " Outstanding Achievement in Game Design " , and " Outstanding Innovation in Gaming " . In 2007 , the game won the " Innovation Award " and " Best Game Design " at the Game Developers Choice Awards , and won " Grand Prize " in the entertainment division of the Japan Media Arts Festival . At the 2007 British Academy Video Games Awards , Wii Sports won six out of seven award nominations : Sports , Innovation , Gameplay , Multiplayer , Casual , and Strategy and Simulation . The New York Times named <unk> sports as the Game of the year , also The gaming website Gamasutra said that Wii sports was the most important game of 2006 . In 2010 , the game was included as one of the titles in the book 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Wii Sports , a major factor in the Wii 's worldwide success , was the first release among a number of core Wii games being developed at the same time , with the same philosophy ; others were released as Wii Play , Wii Fit , and Wii Music . A direct sequel to Wii Sports , titled Wii Sports Resort , was released in 2009 . The game , along with Wii Fit , has been credited with attracting more casual , female , and elderly gamers . It has also been cited as a game that can provide a bonding experience among family members , and as a means of exercising and losing weight when played regularly . A study involving 13- to 15 ‑ year @-@ old teenagers was conducted by the Liverpool John Moores University and concluded that players used 2 % more energy than by playing on other consoles . They stated that it was no substitute for playing a real sport , but could contribute to weight management . Wii Sports has been used to aid in the physical therapy of a boxer at the <unk> Rehabilitation Hospital in Canada , stroke victims in Minneapolis , Minnesota and Raleigh , North Carolina , and injured soldiers in Prescott , Arizona ; Washington , D.C. ; and Landstuhl , Germany . Wired included the game in its list of " The 15 Most Influential Games of the Decade " at # 8 , for its role in popularizing motion controls and having a major impact on the " videogame landscape . " 
 After the Wii 's release , players began incurring injuries while playing Wii Sports , among other games , when they accidentally hit other players or objects while swinging the Wii Remote . This string of accidents , and others related to players throwing the Wii Remote while playing Wii Sports , prompted Nintendo president Satoru Iwata to develop a campaign to reduce such incidents . In regard to the issue , Nintendo spokesman Yasuhiro Minagawa commented , " People tended to get a bit excited , especially while playing Wii Sports , and in some cases the remote would come loose from their hands . " Nintendo responded by offering replacement Wii Remote wrist straps that were almost twice as thick . Other injuries include muscle , tendon , and ligament injuries from excess playing of simulated sports on the Wii — dubbed " Wii @-@ itis " . 
 Wii Sports has become a popular means for social gatherings and competitions . Residents at senior centers and retirement homes have formed leagues using Wii Sports bowling . After its Australian release , Nintendo and Myer , an Australian department store chain , held a Wii Sports tennis tournament in January 2007 in Melbourne , Australia . The winners competed against professional tennis players Pat Cash and Mark Woodforde , and were awarded new Wiis . An unofficial Wii Sports tennis tournament titled " <unk> " was held in the Brooklyn , New York bar <unk> on June 23 , 2007 . It featured 128 competitors , many of whom were dressed in costumes . 
 Wii Sports has been featured on television multiple times . The game was featured in commercials for the Wii system , and in news features on ABC and NBC . The game has appeared on various comedy shows . An episode of Late Night with Conan O 'Brien featured host Conan O 'Brien competing against his guest , tennis star Serena Williams , in a match of Wii Sports tennis . On an episode of the Rick Mercer Report , former Canadian prime minister Jean Chrétien beat Rick Mercer in a game of Wii Sports boxing . The boxing game also appeared on an episode of The Colbert Report where a clip featured Mii versions of Stephen Colbert and Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi boxing . At the 80th Academy Awards Show , host Jon Stewart and Jamia Simone Nash were caught playing Wii Sports tennis on one of the event 's gigantic projection screens after a commercial break as part of a joke . Wii Sports has also been featured in mainstream movies such as Tropic Thunder and in commercials for products such as Kellogg 's Smart Start . 
 = = Series continuation = = 
 = = = Wii Sports Resort = = = 
 A sequel , Wii Sports Resort , was first revealed at Nintendo 's E3 2008 presentation . Development moved forward after the extent of the Wii MotionPlus was realized , though the idea for a sequel existed sooner . The game was released in Japan on June 25 , 2009 before releasing in other markets in July 2009 . 
 = = = Wii Sports Club = = = 
 On September 18 , 2013 , Nintendo announced Wii Sports Club for the Wii U Nintendo eShop . The game features the five games of Wii Sports remade in high @-@ definition graphics , with support for the Wii MotionPlus ( similar to Wii Sports Resort ) and online multiplayer . The game uses a ' Club ' system , in which players are registered to regional or national clubs , communicating with each other via Miiverse , and compete against other clubs for rankings . After a 24 @-@ hour free trial period , players can purchase a day pass to access all of the games , or purchase full access to the individual games . Tennis and Bowling was released on November 7 , 2013 , with the other games to follow at later dates . 
 = My Old Kentucky Home State Park = 
 My Old Kentucky Home State Park is a state park located in Bardstown , Kentucky . The park 's centerpiece is Federal Hill , a farm owned by United States Senator John Rowan in 1795 . During the Rowan family 's occupation , the mansion became a meeting place for local politicians and hosted several visiting dignitaries . The farm is best known for its association with American composer Stephen Foster 's anti @-@ slavery ballad " My Old Kentucky Home , Good Night " . Foster was a cousin of the Rowan family , and was likely inspired to write the ballad both by Harriet Beecher Stowe 's anti @-@ slavery novel Uncle Tom 's Cabin and through imagery seen on visits to Federal Hill . After popularity of the song increased throughout the United States , Federal Hill was purchased by the Commonwealth of Kentucky , dedicated as a historic site , and renamed " My Old Kentucky Home " on July 4 , 1923 . Foster 's song by the same name was made the state song of Kentucky in 1928 . The Federal Hill mansion was featured on a U.S. postage stamp in 1992 , and it is one of the symbols featured on the reverse of the Kentucky state quarter issued in 2001 . 
 = = Federal Hill = = 
 Federal Hill , commonly known as " My Old Kentucky Home " , is a historic mansion that was planned and commissioned by Judge John Rowan and his wife Ann Lytle . The mansion 's original surrounding 1 @,@ 200 acres were also known as " Federal Hill . " The rear portion of the mansion was constructed in 1795 , additional space from 1799 – 1802 , and was completed in the form of a five @-@ bay , three @-@ story mansion from 1808 to 1818 , using slave labor . With Rowan in residence , Federal Hill was a local power center in the realms of legal , political , and social events . Prominent visitors to the home included Marquis de Lafayette , Stephen Foster , Andrew Jackson , and Henry Clay . Judge Rowan occupied a Louisville residence during the majority of his later years and was rarely in residence at Federal Hill near the end of his life . 
 In 1839 , the house suffered fire damage to the third story and roof . Carpenter Alexander Moore was hired to repair the damage , as he had worked on the design elements and woodwork in 1818 . John Rowan , Jr. occupied Federal Hill after the death of his father . When John , Jr. died in 1855 , his widow , Rebecca Carnes Rowan , occupied Federal Hill until 1897 . The house then passed to their daughter , Madge ( Rowan ) Frost . 
 The imagery of Federal Hill and Harriet Beecher Stowe 's anti @-@ slavery novel " Uncle Tom 's Cabin " are cited as the inspiration for Stephen Foster 's anti @-@ slavery ballad known as " My Old Kentucky Home . " According to Morrison Foster , Stephen Foster 's brother , Stephen was an occasional visitor to Federal Hill . Stephen 's sister Charlotte also visited Federal Hill and courted Atkinson Hill Rowan who unsuccessfully proposed to Charlotte . In 1922 , the " My Old Kentucky Home Commission " purchased Federal Hill from Madge Rowan Frost , the last heir of Federal Hill farm . The Commission renovated the property and gave the farm to the Commonwealth of Kentucky for use as a state park , with the official dedication on July 4 , 1923 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Federal Hill is made primarily of brick fired on @-@ site and laid in the Flemish bond pattern . The mansion possesses a foundation crafted of limestone native to the surrounding countryside . The windowsills and mantels were finely carved by a free black craftsman . The mansion is designed in the Federal Style . Federal Hill has three floors traversed by a staircase located within a central hallway on each floor and an English basement . The first floor 's main rooms are a dining room , parlor , and library . The second floor consists of three bedrooms similarly spaced to the rooms below . 
 Auxiliary farm buildings associated with the mansion include the original <unk> . To the rear of the home the oldest section of residence can be seen . The ell consists of four rooms as well as the kitchen and smokehouse . The smokehouse was built as part of the existing structure , and not free standing as is most often seen . The rear ell structure served as the first residence for the family while the primary residence was constructed . To the east of the house is the family burial ground . Behind the house is a flower garden . The slave cemetery lies beyond the flower garden . Documented but no longer existing buildings include multiple slave houses , a large stable due @-@ west of the mansion , an ash house , and a garden house . 
 = = State Park = = 
 The property was originally a State Historic Site , but it was passed to the Division of State Parks in 1936 with intentions to increase the amount of activities surrounding the historic mansion . Today , the tour focuses on the career of Stephen Foster , the life of enslaved servants at Federal Hill , Kentucky traditions , and information regarding 19th century daily life on a Kentucky farm . 85 % of the furniture exhibited inside the mansion was owned by the Rowan family . The Judge Rowan family coin silver is also exhibited there . 
 The mansion was renovated in 1977 , and again in 2006 . The 2006 renovation was funded by an anonymous donor . New floor coverings , elaborate wallpapers , and period window treatments were used to interpret the mansion to the period in which John Rowan Jr. occupied the mansion . The use of family letters , photos from the 1920s , and 1950s , assisted in the renovation . The 2006 renovation cost nearly $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Tour guides dress in period costumes and as of 2015 , the tour has been altered to include the singing of " My Old Kentucky Home " by tour guides who also play in The Stephen Foster Story , a musical that typically is performed daily at the park from May until August of every year . Throughout the year , various events are held at My Old Kentucky Home State Park . Special Christmas candlelight tours are offered during the holiday season each year in which the mansion is decorated for the holiday and is lit by candlelight . 
 A new visitors center was added to the park in the 1990s , and houses a conference and wedding space , a <unk> , and kitchen . The gift shop contains Items concerning the park and the state of Kentucky , especially books by Kentucky authors and Kentucky Derby items . The park also features the Kenny Rapier Golf Course , a regulation 18 @-@ hole golf course named for a previous Kentucky Commissioner of Parks and Bardstown native , that also features a fully equipped pro shop . The 39 @-@ site campground is available mid @-@ March to mid @-@ November . 
 = = State Quarter = = 
 On June 1 , 1992 , a 29 @-@ cent stamp was issued honoring the park . The Federal Hill mansion was also chosen to be one of the icons featured on the Kentucky State Quarter . To the right of the stately mansion , an inscription on the coin reads " My Old Kentucky Home . " It was the 15th state quarter , released on October 18 , 2001 , denoting the fact that Kentucky was the 15th state to join the United States . The official ceremony revealing the quarter was held in the park , and was said by then @-@ governor Paul E. Patton that the mansion and the accompanying thoroughbred were : " ... the two most visible , beloved symbols in Kentucky . " 
 = = The Stephen Foster Story and other outdoor productions = = 
 The park features an amphitheater that is home to the long @-@ running outdoor musical , The Stephen Foster Story , which is staged during the summer . It is the longest running outdoor drama in the state of Kentucky , having started in 1959 . It was written by playwright Paul Green . <unk> are performed in an indoor theater with air conditioning . Many Foster songs are performed , with the actors dancing in antebellum period costume , in a retelling of Foster 's life . 
 Recently , the amphitheater has incorporated new musicals into its performance schedule , in addition to The Stephen Foster Story . In 2008 , the amphitheater produced The Civil War in celebration of the Lincoln Bicentennial . In 2009 , a second musical , Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat , was staged . Other musicals have included The Wizard of Oz , and All Shook Up . In addition , the amphitheater hosts a summer concert series . 
 = Mermaid = 
 A mermaid is a legendary aquatic creature with the head and upper body of a female human and the tail of a fish . Mermaids appear in the folklore of many cultures worldwide , including the Near East , Europe , Africa and Asia . The first stories appeared in ancient Assyria , in which the goddess Atargatis transformed herself into a mermaid out of shame for accidentally killing her human lover . Mermaids are sometimes associated with perilous events such as floods , storms , shipwrecks and drownings . In other folk traditions ( or sometimes within the same tradition ) , they can be benevolent or beneficent , bestowing boons or falling in love with humans . 
 The male equivalent of the mermaid is the merman , also a familiar figure in folklore and heraldry . Although traditions about and sightings of mermen are less common than those of mermaids , they are generally assumed to co @-@ exist with their female counterparts . 
 Some of the attributes of mermaids may have been influenced by the Sirens of Greek mythology . Historical accounts of mermaids , such as those reported by Christopher Columbus during his exploration of the Caribbean , may have been inspired by manatees and similar aquatic mammals . While there is no evidence that mermaids exist outside of folklore , reports of mermaid sightings continue to the present day , including 21st century examples from Israel and Zimbabwe . 
 Mermaids have been a popular subject of art and literature in recent centuries , such as in Hans Christian Andersen 's well @-@ known fairy tale " The Little Mermaid " ( 1836 ) . They have subsequently been depicted in operas , paintings , books , films and comics . 
 = = Etymology and related terms = = 
 The word mermaid is a compound of the Old English mere ( sea ) , and maid ( a girl or young woman ) . The equivalent term in Old English was <unk> . They are conventionally depicted as beautiful with long flowing hair . As cited above , they are sometimes equated with the sirens of Greek mythology ( especially the Odyssey ) , half @-@ bird femmes fatales whose enchanting voices would lure soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ shipwrecked sailors to nearby rocks , sandbars or shoals . 
 = = = Sirenia = = = 
 Sirenia is an order of fully aquatic , herbivorous mammals that inhabit rivers , estuaries , coastal marine waters , swamps and marine wetlands . <unk> , including manatees and dugongs , possess major aquatic adaptations : arms used for steering , a paddle used for propulsion , and remnants of hind limbs ( legs ) in the form of two small bones floating deep in the muscle . They look ponderous and clumsy but are actually fusiform , hydrodynamic and highly muscular , and mariners before the mid @-@ nineteenth century referred to them as mermaids . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> , also called " mermaid syndrome " , is a rare congenital disorder in which a child is born with his or her legs fused together and small genitalia . This condition is about as rare as conjoined twins , affecting one out of every 100 @,@ 000 live births and is usually fatal within a day or two of birth because of kidney and bladder complications . Four survivors were known as of July 2003 . 
 = = Folklore = = 
 As the anthropologist A. Asbjørn Jøn noted : " these ' marine beasts ' have featured in folk tradition for many centuries now , and until relatively recently they have maintained a reasonably standard set of characteristics . Many folklorists and mythographers deem that the origin of the mythic mermaid is the dugong , posing a theory that <unk> tales have been constructed around early sightings of dugongs by sailors . " 
 = = = Near East , Ancient Greece = = = 
 The first known mermaid stories appeared in Assyria c . 1000 BC . The goddess Atargatis , mother of Assyrian queen Semiramis , loved a mortal ( a shepherd ) and unintentionally killed him . Ashamed , she jumped into a lake and took the form of a fish , but the waters would not conceal her divine beauty . Thereafter , she took the form of a mermaid — human above the waist , fish below — although the earliest representations of Atargatis showed her as a fish with a human head and arm , similar to the Babylonian god Ea . The Greeks recognized Atargatis under the name Derketo . Sometime before 546 BC , Milesian philosopher Anaximander postulated that mankind had sprung from an aquatic animal species . He thought that humans , who begin life with prolonged infancy , could not have survived otherwise . 
 A popular Greek legend turned Alexander the Great 's sister , <unk> , into a mermaid after her death , living in the Aegean . She would ask the sailors on any ship she would encounter only one question : " Is King Alexander alive ? " ( Greek : " <unk> ο Βασιλεύς <unk> ; " ) , to which the correct answer was : " He lives and reigns and conquers the world " ( Greek : " <unk> και <unk> και τον <unk> <unk> " ) . This answer would please her , and she would accordingly calm the waters and bid the ship farewell . Any other answer would enrage her , and she would stir up a terrible storm , dooming the ship and every sailor on board . 
 Lucian of Samosata in Syria ( 2nd century A.D. ) , in De Dea Syria ( About the Syrian Goddess ) wrote of the Syrian temples he had visited : 
 " Among them – Now that is the traditional story among them concerning the temple . But other men swear that Semiramis of Babylonia , whose deeds are many in Asia , also founded this site , and not for Hera but for her own mother , whose name was Derketo . " 
 " I saw Derketo 's likeness in Phoenicia , a strange marvel . It is woman for half its length ; but the other half , from thighs to feet , stretched out in a fish 's tail . But the image in the Holy City is entirely a woman , and the grounds for their account are not very clear . They consider fish to be sacred , and they never eat them ; and though they eat all other fowls they do not eat the dove , for they believe it is holy . And these things are done , they believe , because of Derketo and Semiramis , the first because Derketo has the shape of a fish , and the other because ultimately Semiramis turned into a dove . Well , I may grant that the temple was a work of Semiramis perhaps ; but that it belongs to Derketo I do not believe in any way . For among the Egyptians some people do not eat fish , and that is not done to honor Derketo . " 
 = = = One Thousand and One Nights = = = 
 The One Thousand and One Nights collection includes several tales featuring " sea people " , such as " <unk> the Sea @-@ girl " . Unlike depictions of mermaids in other mythologies , these are anatomically identical to land @-@ bound humans , differing only in their ability to breathe and live underwater . They can ( and do ) interbreed with land humans , and the children of such unions have the ability to live underwater . In the tale " Abdullah the Fisherman and Abdullah the Merman " , the protagonist Abdullah the Fisherman gains the ability to breathe underwater and discovers an underwater society that is portrayed as an inverted reflection of society on land . The underwater society follows a form of primitive communism where concepts like money and clothing do not exist . In " The Adventures of <unk> " , the protagonist <unk> 's quest for the herb of immortality leads him to explore the seas , where he encounters societies of mermaids . 
 Due to their vaguely anthropomorphic shape , dried skates have long been described as mermaids . Often their appearance is deliberately modified to make them look even more human . In Europe , dried skates , sometimes called devil fish , ( not to be confused with devil fish or devil rays , two species of ray native to the north Atlantic ) were displayed as mermaids , angels , demons , or <unk> . In Britain they are known as Jenny <unk> , perhaps in reference to Antwerp , where they were made by sailors . Dried skates are also known in Mexico , where they are believed to have magical powers , and are used in healing rituals . 
 = = = British Isles = = = 
 The Norman chapel in Durham Castle , built around 1078 by Saxon stonemasons , has what is probably the earliest surviving artistic depiction of a mermaid in England . It can be seen on a south @-@ facing capital above one of the original Norman stone pillars . 
 Mermaids appear in British folklore as unlucky omens , both foretelling disaster and provoking it . Several variants of the ballad Sir Patrick Spens depict a mermaid speaking to the doomed ships . In some versions , she tells them they will never see land again ; in others , she claims they are near shore , which they are wise enough to know means the same thing . Mermaids can also be a sign of approaching rough weather , and some have been described as monstrous in size , up to 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) . 
 Mermaids have also been described as able to swim up rivers to freshwater lakes . In one story , the Laird of <unk> went to aid a woman he thought was drowning in a lake near his house ; a servant of his pulled him back , warning that it was a mermaid , and the mermaid screamed at them that she would have killed him if it were not for his servant . But mermaids could occasionally be more beneficent ; e.g. , teaching humans cures for certain diseases . Mermen have been described as wilder and uglier than mermaids , with little interest in humans . 
 According to legend , a mermaid came to the Cornish village of Zennor where she used to listen to the singing of a chorister , Matthew Trewhella . The two fell in love , and Matthew went with the mermaid to her home at Pendour Cove . On summer nights , the lovers can be heard singing together . At the Church of Saint Senara in Zennor , there is a famous chair decorated by a mermaid carving which is probably six hundred years old . 
 Some tales raised the question of whether mermaids had immortal souls , answering in the negative . The figure of Lí Ban appears as a sanctified mermaid , but she was a human being transformed into a mermaid . After three centuries , when Christianity had come to Ireland , she was baptized . The Irish mermaid is called <unk> in tales such as " Lady of <unk> " published in the 19th century . In Scottish mythology , a <unk> is a fresh @-@ water mermaid , though little beside the term has been preserved in folklore . 
 Mermaids from the Isle of Man , known as ben @-@ <unk> , are considered more favorable toward humans than those of other regions , with various accounts of assistance , gifts and rewards . One story tells of a fisherman who carried a stranded mermaid back into the sea and was rewarded with the location of treasure . Another recounts the tale of a baby mermaid who stole a doll from a human little girl , but was rebuked by her mother and sent back to the girl with a gift of a pearl necklace to atone for the theft . A third story tells of a fishing family that made regular gifts of apples to a mermaid and was rewarded with prosperity . 
 = = = Western Europe = = = 
 A freshwater mermaid @-@ like creature from European folklore is Melusine . She is sometimes depicted with two fish tails , or with the lower body of a serpent . 
 The best @-@ known example of mermaids in literature is probably Hans Christian Andersen 's fairy tale , The Little Mermaid , first published in 1837 . In the original story , a young mermaid falls in love with a human prince whom she saves from drowning when his ship is wrecked in a storm . Although her grandmother tells her not to envy humans , who live much shorter lives than mermaids , and whose only consolation is an immortal soul , the mermaid chooses to risk her life in order to be with the prince . She trades her tongue and her beautiful voice to the sea @-@ witch in exchange for a draught that will make her human and allow her to live on land . She will have to rely on her beauty and charm to win the prince 's love , as she will be entirely mute . 
 The sea @-@ witch warns the mermaid that , although she will be graceful , each step will feel as though she is stepping on knives ; and that if she does not earn the prince 's love , she will die of a broken heart after he weds another . The spell is worked , and the mermaid is found by the prince , who sees the resemblance between her and the one who rescued him from drowning , although he does not realize that they are the same person . Although the prince cares deeply for the mermaid , he is betrothed to the daughter of a neighboring king , and the mermaid cannot prevent their marriage . 
 The mermaid 's sisters trade their beautiful hair to the sea @-@ witch for a knife that the mermaid can use to break the spell and return to the sea . She must kill the prince before dawn on the day after his wedding . But the mermaid still loves the prince and cannot harm him . She flings the knife into the sea and jumps in after it , then begins to dissolve into foam . Then she is transformed into one of the daughters of the air , ethereal beings who strive to earn an immortal soul by doing good deeds in the world of men . 
 A world @-@ famous statue of the Little Mermaid , based on Andersen 's fairy tale , has been in Copenhagen , Denmark since August 1913 , with copies in 13 other locations around the world – almost half of them in North America . 
 In 1989 , Walt Disney Studios released a full @-@ length animated film based on the Andersen fairy tale . Featuring an Academy Award @-@ winning soundtrack with songs by Alan Menken and Howard Ashman , the film garnered glowing reviews , and was credited with revitalizing both the studio and the concept of animated feature films . Notable changes to the plot of Andersen 's story include the elimination of the grandmother character and the religious aspects of the fairy tale , including the mermaid 's quest to obtain an immortal soul . The sea @-@ witch herself replaces the princess to whom the prince becomes engaged , using the mermaid 's voice to prevent her from obtaining the prince 's love . However , on their wedding day the plot is revealed , and the sea @-@ witch is vanquished . The knife motif is not used in the film , which ends with the mermaid and the prince marrying . Among other things , the film was praised for portraying the mermaid as an independent and even rebellious young woman , rather than a passive actor content to let others determine her destiny . 
 = = = Eastern Europe = = = 
 <unk> are the Slavic counterpart of the Greek sirens and naiads . The nature of <unk> varies among folk traditions , but according to ethnologist D.K. Zelenin they all share a common element : they are the restless spirits of the unclean dead . They are usually the ghosts of young women who died a violent or untimely death , perhaps by murder or suicide , before their wedding and especially by drowning . <unk> are said to inhabit lakes and rivers . They appear as beautiful young women with long pale green hair and pale skin , suggesting a connection with floating weeds and days spent underwater in faint sunlight . They can be seen after dark , dancing together under the moon and calling out to young men by name , luring them to the water and drowning them . The characterization of <unk> as both desirable and treacherous is prevalent in southern Russia , the Ukraine and Belarus , and was emphasized by 19th @-@ century Russian authors . The best @-@ known of the great Czech nationalist composer Antonín Dvořák 's operas is Rusalka . 
 In Sadko ( Russian : <unk> ) , a Russian medieval epic , the title character — an adventurer , merchant and <unk> musician from Novgorod — lives for some time in the underwater court of the " Sea Tsar " and marries his daughter before finally returning home . The tale inspired such works as the poem " Sadko " by Alexei Tolstoy ( 1817 – 75 ) , the opera Sadko composed by Nikolai Rimsky @-@ Korsakov and the painting by Ilya <unk> . 
 = = = China = = = 
 Mermaids are included in the <unk> ( Classic of Mountains and Seas ) compilation of Chinese geography and mythology , dating from the 4th century BC . A 15th @-@ century compilation of quotations from Chinese literature tells of a mermaid who " wept tears which became pearls " . An early 19th @-@ century book entitled Jottings on the South of China contains two stories about mermaids . In the first , a man captures a mermaid on the shore of <unk> island . She looks human in every respect except that her body is covered with fine hair of many colors . She can 't talk , but he takes her home and marries her . After his death , the mermaid returns to the sea where she was found . In the second story , a man sees a woman lying on the beach while his ship was anchored offshore . On closer inspection , her feet and hands appear to be webbed . She is carried to the water , and expresses her gratitude toward the sailors before swimming away . 
 = = = Hinduism = = = 
 <unk> ( lit. golden mermaid ) is a daughter of Ravana that appears in the Cambodian and Thai versions of the Ramayana . She is a mermaid princess who tries to spoil Hanuman 's plans to build a bridge to Lanka but falls in love with him instead . She is a popular figure of Thai folklore . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 Mami Water ( Lit . " Mother of the Water " ) are water spirits venerated in west , central and southern Africa , and in the African diaspora in the Caribbean and parts of North and South America . They are usually female , but are sometimes male . They are regarded as diabolical beings , and are often femme fatale , luring men to their deaths . The Persian word " <unk> <unk> " or " <unk> " means both " mermaid " and " stay with me " . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 The Neo @-@ Taíno nations of the Caribbean identify a mermaid called <unk> with attributes of the goddess <unk> and the hibiscus flower of the <unk> tree Hibiscus <unk> . In modern Caribbean culture , there is a mermaid recognized as a Haitian <unk> loa called La Sirene ( lit . " the mermaid " ) , representing wealth , beauty and the <unk> <unk> . 
 Examples from other cultures are the <unk> of Cameroon , the <unk> of Brazil and the Greek <unk> , <unk> and naiads . The <unk> is a fishlike creature from Japanese folklore , and consuming its flesh bestows amazing longevity . Mermaids and mermen are also characters of Philippine folklore , where they are locally known as <unk> and <unk> respectively . The Javanese people believe that the southern beach in Java is a home of Javanese mermaid queen Nyi Roro Kidul . The myth of " <unk> of the Reef " , a well known tale of Māori mythology , has many parallels with stories of sea @-@ people in other parts of the world . 
 = = Reported sightings = = 
 In 1493 , sailing off the coast of Hispaniola , Columbus reported seeing three " female forms " which " rose high out of the sea , but were not as beautiful as they are represented " . The logbook of Blackbeard , an English pirate , records that he instructed his crew on several voyages to steer away from charted waters which he called " enchanted " for fear of merfolk or mermaids , which Blackbeard himself and members of his crew reported seeing . These sightings were often recounted and shared by sailors and pirates who believed that mermaids brought bad luck and would bewitch them into giving up their gold and dragging them to the bottom of the sea . Two sightings were reported in Canada near Vancouver and Victoria , one from sometime between 1870 and 1890 , the other from 1967 . A Pennsylvania fisherman reported five sightings of a mermaid in the Susquehanna River near Marietta in June 1881 . 
 In August 2009 , after dozens of people reported seeing a mermaid leaping out of Haifa Bay waters and doing aerial tricks , the Israeli coastal town of Kiryat Yam offered a $ 1 million award for proof of its existence . In February 2012 , work on two reservoirs near <unk> and Mutare in Zimbabwe stopped when workers refused to continue , stating that mermaids had hounded them away from the sites . It was reported by Samuel <unk> Nkomo , the water resources minister . 
 = = = Animal Planet broadcasts = = = 
 In May 2012 , a Mermaids : The Body Found , a television docufiction aired on Animal Planet which centered on the experiences of former National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientists , showing a CGI recreation of amateur sound and video of a beached mermaid and discussing scientific theories involving the existence of mermaids . In July 2012 in response to public inquiries , and the possibility that some viewers may have mistaken the programme for a documentary , the National Ocean Service ( a branch of NOAA ) made the unusual declaration that " no evidence of aquatic humanoids has ever been found " . 
 A year later in May 2013 , Animal Planet aired another docu @-@ fiction titled Mermaids : The New Evidence featuring " previously unreleased video evidence " , including what a former Iceland <unk> scientist witnessed while diving off the coast of Greenland in an underwater submersible . The videos provide two different shots of what appears to be a humanoid creature approaching and touching their vehicle . NOAA once again released a statement saying " The person identified as a NOAA scientist was an actor . " The actor is separately identified as David Evans of Ontario , Canada . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In the middle of the 17th century , John Tradescant the elder created a <unk> ( called Tradescant 's Ark ) in which he displayed , among other things , a " mermaid 's hand " . P. T. Barnum 's 19th century <unk> hoax called the Fiji mermaid has been mentioned above . Others have perpetrated similar hoaxes , which are usually papier @-@ mâché fabrications or parts of deceased creatures , usually monkeys and fish , stitched together for the appearance of a grotesque mermaid . In the wake of the 2004 tsunami , pictures of Fiji " mermaids " circulated on the Internet as supposed examples of items that had washed up amid the devastation , though they were no more real than Barnum 's exhibit . 
 = = Symbolism = = 
 According to Dorothy <unk> ’ s book The Mermaid and the Minotaur , human @-@ animal hybrids such as mermaids and minotaurs convey the emergent understanding of the ancients that human beings were both one with and different from animals : 
 [ Human ] nature is internally inconsistent , that our continuities with , and our differences from , the earth 's other animals are mysterious and profound ; and in these continuities , and these differences , lie both a sense of strangeness on earth and the possible key to a way of feeling at home here . " 
 = = Art and literature = = 
 Famous in more recent centuries is the fairy tale The Little Mermaid ( 1836 ) by Hans Christian Andersen , whose works have been translated into over 100 languages . The mermaid ( as conceived by Andersen ) is similar to an <unk> , a water nymph in German folklore who could only obtain an immortal soul by marrying a human being . Andersen 's heroine inspired a bronze sculpture in Copenhagen harbour and influenced Western literary works such as Oscar Wilde 's The Fisherman and His Soul and H.G. Wells ' The Sea Lady . Sue Monk Kidd wrote a book called The Mermaid Chair loosely based on the legends of Saint Senara and the mermaid of Zennor . 
 Sculptures and statues of mermaids can be found in many countries and cultures , with over 130 public art mermaid statues across the world . Countries with public art mermaid sculptures include Russia , Finland , Lithuania , Poland , Romania , Denmark , Norway , England , Scotland , Ireland , Germany , Netherlands , Belgium , France , Spain , Italy , Austria , Switzerland , Greece , Turkey , India , China , Thailand , South Korea , Japan , Guam , Australia , New Zealand , Brazil , Ecuador , Colombia , Mexico , Cayman Islands , Mexico , Saudi Arabia ( Jeddah ) , the United States ( including Hawaii and Virgin Islands ) and Canada . Some of these mermaid statues have become icons of their city or country , and have become major tourist attractions in themselves . The Little Mermaid ( statue ) in Copenhagen is an icon of that city as well as of Denmark . The <unk> Amanda statue symbolizes the rebirth of the city of Helsinki , capital of Finland . The <unk> ( mermaid ) is part of the Coat of Arms of Warsaw , and is considered a protector of Warsaw , capital of Poland , which publicly displays statues of their mermaid . 
 Musical depictions of mermaids include those by Felix Mendelssohn in his Fair <unk> overture and the three " Rhine daughters " in Richard Wagner 's Der Ring des Nibelungen . Lorelei , the name of a Rhine mermaid immortalized in the Heinrich Heine poem of that name , has become a synonym for a siren . The Weeping Mermaid is an orchestral piece by Taiwanese composer Fan @-@ Long Ko . 
 An influential image was created by John William Waterhouse , from 1895 to 1905 , entitled A Mermaid . An example of late British Academy style artwork , the piece debuted to considerable acclaim ( and secured Waterhouse 's place as a member of the Royal Academy ) , but disappeared into a private collection and did not resurface until the 1970s . It is currently once again in the Royal Academy 's collection . Mermaids were a favorite subject of John Reinhard <unk> , a contemporary of Waterhouse . He painted an image of the mermaid of Zennor as well as several other depictions of mermaids in watercolour . 
 Film depictions include the romantic comedy Splash ( 1984 ) and Aquamarine ( 2006 ) . A 1963 episode of the television series Route 66 entitled " The Cruelest Sea " featured a mermaid performance artist working at <unk> <unk> aquatic park . Mermaids also appeared in the popular supernatural drama television series Charmed , and were the basis of its spin @-@ off series Mermaid . In She Creature ( 2001 ) , two carnival workers abduct a mermaid in Ireland c . 1900 and attempt to transport her to America . The film Pirates of the Caribbean : On Stranger Tides mixes old and new myths about mermaids : singing to sailors to lure them to their death , growing legs when taken onto dry land , and bestowing kisses with magical healing properties . Animated films include Disney 's musical version of Andersen 's tale , The Little Mermaid , and Hayao Miyazaki 's Ponyo . The Australian teen dramedy H2O : Just Add Water chronicles the adventures of three modern @-@ day mermaids along the Gold Coast of Australia . 
 = = = Heraldry = = = 
 In heraldry , the charge of a mermaid is commonly represented with a comb and a mirror , and blazoned as a " mermaid in her vanity " . In addition to vanity , mermaids are also a symbol of eloquence . 
 A shield and sword @-@ wielding mermaid ( <unk> ) is on the official coat of arms of Warsaw . Images of a mermaid have symbolized Warsaw on its arms since the middle of the 14th century . Several legends associate Triton of Greek mythology with the city , which may have been the origin of the mermaid 's association . 
 The city of Norfolk , Virginia , also uses a mermaid as a symbol . The personal coat of arms of Michaëlle Jean , a former Governor General of Canada , features two mermaids as supporters . 
 = = Mermaid fandom = = 
 Interest in mermaid costuming has grown alongside the popularity of fantasy cosplay as well as the availability of inexpensive <unk> used in the construction of mermaid costumes . These costumes are typically designed to be used while swimming , in an activity known as <unk> . Mermaid fandom conventions have also been held . 
 = = Human divers = = 
 The Ama are Japanese skin divers , predominantly women , who traditionally dive for shellfish and seaweed wearing only a loincloth and who have been in action for at least 2 @,@ 000 years . Starting in the twentieth century , they have increasingly been regarded as a tourist attraction . They operate off reefs near the shore , and some perform for sightseers instead of diving to collect a harvest . They have been romanticized as mermaids . 
 Professional female divers have performed as mermaids at Florida 's <unk> <unk> Springs since 1947 . The state park calls itself " The Only City of Live Mermaids " and was extremely popular in the 1960s , drawing almost one million tourists per year . Most of the current performers work part @-@ time while attending college , and all are certified Scuba divers . They wear fabric tails and perform aquatic ballet ( while holding their breath ) for an audience in an underwater stage with glass walls . Children often ask if the " mermaids " are real . The park 's PR director says " Just like with Santa Claus or any other mythical character , we always say yes . We 're not going to tell them they 're not real " . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Lu Gambino = 
 Lucien Anthony " Lu " Gambino ( September 21 , 1923 – July 16 , 2003 ) was an American football running back . He played college football for Indiana University , and after military service in the Second World War , the University of Maryland . While playing for Maryland , he set the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) season scoring high for 1947 with 16 touchdowns and 96 points and was named the 1948 Gator Bowl most valuable player . Gambino played professional football for two years with the Baltimore Colts in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) , an early competitor of the National Football League ( NFL ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gambino was born in Berwyn , Illinois on September 21 , 1923 . He attended J.S. Morton High School in Cicero , Illinois , where he was a football and track & field standout . Gambino enrolled at Indiana University in 1941 , and he played football for the Hoosiers on the freshman team in 1941 and on the varsity team in 1942 season . That season , head coach Bo McMillin led Indiana to a 7 – 3 record , and the Hoosiers recorded six defensive shutouts and outscored their opponents 256 points to 79 . At Indiana , Gambino played alongside consensus All @-@ America back , and future Colts teammate , Billy Hillenbrand . Shortly thereafter , Gambino dropped out of school to join the United States Army Air Forces and serve during the Second World War . 
 = = College career = = 
 Gambino was selected in the 1945 NFL Draft by the Chicago Bears in the 26th round as the 271st overall pick . In 1946 , he was discharged from the Army and enrolled at the University of Maryland . He considered Indiana to be a far superior football program and called Maryland a " cow school , " but it was located relatively close to his mother , who was widowed and living alone in Baltimore . During the 1946 season , Gambino saw limited playing time for a mediocre Terrapins football team directed by head coach Clark Shaughnessy . The following year , head coach Jim Tatum was hired , and he engineered a reversal of the team 's fortunes . Tatum took the mentorship of Gambino as a personal project and aimed to develop him into the team 's featured back . 
 As a senior in 1947 , Gambino set the NCAA season scoring high with 16 touchdowns for 96 points . In the fifth meeting against rival West Virginia , Gambino scored three touchdowns to help Maryland take away its first victory of the series , 27 – 0 . He also scored three touchdowns against Delaware and Duquesne , and two against Vanderbilt where he also passed for a third . During the season , Gambino rushed for a total of 904 yards on 125 attempts , and as of 2009 , he was Maryland 's third @-@ leading rusher in terms of single @-@ season yards per carry ( 7 @.@ 23 ) . He was also Maryland 's season kickoff return leader , and returned seven kicks for 174 yards , an average of 24 @.@ 85 yards . 
 Maryland finished the regular season 7 – 2 – 1 and secured the school 's first @-@ ever bowl game appearance . In the 1948 Gator Bowl against Georgia , he was honored as the Most Valuable Player . During the 20 – 20 tie , Gambino rushed to score all three of the Terrapins ' touchdowns on one- , 24- , and 35 @-@ yard runs . He compiled 165 rushing yards , a school bowl rushing record that stood for 60 years until finally broken by Da 'Rel Scott in the 2008 Humanitarian Bowl . In 1992 , for his achievement as the bowl game 's " first superb running back , " Gambino was inducted into the Gator Bowl Hall of Fame . 
 At season 's end , he was named a first @-@ team All @-@ Southern Conference player , an All @-@ America Catholic player , and an Associated Press honorable mention All @-@ American . The Touchdown Club awarded Gambino the Arch McDonald Trophy as the best player in the Washington , D.C. area . Prior to the start of the 1948 season , the Southern Conference ruled that his college eligibility was exhausted and that he would be unable to play another year of college football . Gambino called the decision " crooked " and asserted that the standing rules did not count returning veterans ' pre @-@ war playing career against their eligibility . Geary Eppley , a Maryland athletics official and member of the Southern Conference executive committee , filed a request for a special session to consider a rule change , but it failed to garner support from the two @-@ thirds of the member schools required to call such a meeting . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 As the issue of his college eligibility was playing out , Gambino was being courted by several professional football teams . The Chicago Bears of the NFL , which had drafted him during the war , still had a strong interest in him , as did the Baltimore Colts of the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) . Baltimore eventually acquired Gambino , and to do so , they traded their first @-@ round 1948 draft selection to the Cleveland Browns , who held Gambino 's AAFC draft rights . 
 He played two seasons for the Colts from 1948 to 1949 . During his first year , he saw action in nine games including one as a starter . On 54 carries , he rushed for a total of 194 yards and a touchdown . Gambino also recorded six receptions for 28 yards and made three kickoff returns for 57 yards . The following season , he played in ten games and started in six . He made 56 carries for 208 yards and ten receptions for 67 yards and a touchdown . At the time , Gambino was one of four Colts players who were bald . The Baltimore Sun published an article that explored the unusual occurrence and concluded that it had " nothing to do with wearing a helmet . " In When the Colts <unk> to Baltimore , author William Gildea described Gambino : " In street clothes he looked like Robert Mitchum — wide @-@ brimmed hat , long overcoat , baggy but creased trousers , a cigarette between his fingers , a craggy smile . Yesteryear 's running back . " 
 Baltimore released him during the summer of 1950 . In the winter , Gambino had knee surgery to correct a bone spur . He was then picked up by the New York Giants and placed on the reserve list in July 1951 . His professional playing career , however , was ultimately cut short by his knee . Gambino married Vivian née Senese and lived in North Riverside , Illinois . He died of heart disease on July 16 , 2003 at Loyola University Medical Center in Maywood , Illinois . Gambino was 79 years old . 
 = Vulture Street ( album ) = 
 Vulture Street is the fifth studio album by Australian alternative rock band by Powderfinger , released on 29 July 2003 by Universal Music . It won the 2003 ARIA Music Award for Best Rock Album . Produced by Nick DiDia , Vulture Street was certified platinum , and spent 47 weeks on the ARIA Charts and peaked at # 1 . Singles from the album included " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " , " Since You 've Been Gone " , " Love Your Way " and " Sunsets " . 
 The album received nominations for ARIA Awards in five different categories in 2003 , which included " Album of the Year " , " Best Group " and " Best Rock Album " . Vulture Street also received the award for " Best Cover Art " , which featured Czech supermodel Eva Herzigová . 
 Vulture Street was described by certain critics as " a rawer , louder , but by no means unrefined " album . The title of the album was taken from an iconic street in the inner southern suburbs of Brisbane , Queensland , the city in which all Powderfinger members grew up . 
 = = Background , recording and production = = 
 Following their last record , the highly successful Odyssey Number Five , the band agreed that they wanted to continue in their musical careers , but wanted to have more fun with it . They were no longer dole reliant , as they had been when they made their debut album , Parables for Wooden Ears . Drummer Jon Coghill told The Sydney Morning Herald " we wanted to have more fun and enjoy that we were a band , rather than chase what you 're supposed to do " , and guitarist Ian Haug said " We all found that this is really important to us , but we wanted to make it more fun " . 
 Powderfinger did not enter the recording studio with a specific plan on what they wanted Vulture Street to be , but that they " felt that [ they ] wanted to write a rock album " . In the end , the album became " stuff that makes you want to jump around and feel good about yourself " — guitarist Darren Middleton said this had not been the band 's intention . Coghill said the band wanted to make an album that was fun to perform live and listen to — most of the songs on the album were performed and released live on These Days : Live in Concert . 
 Like Powderfinger 's two previous albums , Vulture Street was produced by Nick DiDia . It was mixed by Brendan O 'Brien , who had worked with Powderfinger inspiration Neil Young . The album was recorded over a seven @-@ week period in Sydney . Prior to recording , the band had written about 50 songs , which was trimmed to the final 11 . A significant number of songs on the album were producing during jam sessions , with DiDia giving the band additional space to move in . Middleton said in an interview that the band " always start things spontaneously , because that 's when you 're thinking less and just playing . " 
 In producing Vulture Street , Powderfinger moved in a different direction to their previous works , especially Odyssey Number Five , starting with opening song " Rockin ' Rocks " , which was written according to Middleton after " a couple of months trying really hard to write this new rock album " but not making anything they really liked . He also said the band could easily have written lots of " The Metre " -like songs , but didn 't do that " for our own interest in the band and music " . 
 In an interview with <unk> , lead singer Bernard Fanning said the band " tapped more into that energetic rock thing and made it really different from our other albums " when creating Vulture Street . He also said the band were a lot more serious when making this album , and this was partly due to " the way we 've matured as musicians " . 
 = = Album and single releases = = 
 Vulture Street was released on 29 July 2003 in Australia , with the band launching the album at the Tivoli nightclub on Vulture Street , West End , Brisbane . A special edition DVD was included with selected early copies of Vulture Street . The DVD included a documentary with all of the albums ' songs and several music videos . Vulture Street entered the ARIA Charts in Australia at # 1 , and the RIANZ Charts in New Zealand at # 17 . 
 Vulture Street 's first single , " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " , was released on 10 November 2003 . It entered the ARIA charts at # 9 on 29 June 2003 , and spent 13 weeks in the top 50 . The song was nominated for " Song of the Year " and " Best Video " at the 2003 ARIA Awards , but won neither . The second single , " Since You 've Been Gone " , was released on 22 March 2004 . It wasn 't as successful as its predecessors , and failed to make the ARIA top 50 . " Since You 've Been Gone " was written by Fanning as a tribute to his brother . 
 " Love Your Way " was released as the third single on 25 May 2004 from Vulture Street , and spent two weeks on the ARIA charts , entering at # 37 . The fourth single , " Sunsets " , was released on 4 June 2004 . It earned the band a nomination for " Best Group " at the 2004 ARIA Awards , but again was unsuccessful . " Sunsets " charted better than most of its predecessors , reaching # 11 on the ARIA Chart , and entering the RIANZ Chart in New Zealand at # 38 , the first single from Vulture Street to do so . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The music on Vulture Street was more rock orientated than Powderfinger 's past work , especially Odyssey Number Five . The opening track , " Rockin ' Rocks " , was described by Harp as " far too cheesy to open this record — or any record , for that matter " . The song became the band 's opening track for live performances , though . The first single , " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " , was one of the heavier songs on the album ; varying reviewers <unk> it to AC / DC , Bad Company , and Stereophonics , and musicOMH called it " an unashamed full @-@ tilt rocker " . dB magazine said the title of " Stumblin ' " , released as a single from These Days : Live in Concert after appearing on Vulture Street , was representative of the " classic rock clichés " on the album . 
 Second single " Since You 've Been Gone " contained similar lyrical features to " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " , but with a more mellow sound . Fanning wrote it following the death of his brother , to help deal with the event . " Sunsets " also dealt with this theme ; Fanning told MTV Scene " we write unashamedly about that emotional attachment " . " Love Your Way " saw an acoustic opening followed by a loud chorus for which Universal Music Canada recommended the air <unk> musicOMH 's Simon Evans <unk> the song to Roy Harper , while David Welsh praised the three main aspects of the song — the acoustic introduction , " affected vocal delivery " , and guitar solo . On live performances , Fanning plays " Love Your Way " with an acoustic guitar to give the loud second phase of the song more " oomph " . 
 = = Response = = 
 Vulture Street was generally received well by critics . Allmusic 's Jason MacNeil gave the album four stars , stating the opening notes of the album had a " great rock flavor to them " . He described " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " as reminiscent of " Stereophonics rehashing old @-@ school rock for a contemporary feeling " , and said " Since You 've Been Gone " was an " uplifting gospel @-@ tinged effort " . MacNeil 's main criticism was for " Roll Right By You " , a song he described as " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill " . However , MacNeil said that overall the album was " an outstanding piece of work " . 
 The Sydney Morning Herald 's Bernard Zuel approved of the album , giving it four stars , and calling Vulture Street a " rawer , louder , but by no means unrefined , album " . He said that throughout the album , guitarists Darren Middleton and Ian Haug " dominated in a way they haven 't since their 1994 debut , Parables for Wooden Ears " . Zuel drew several connections to Powderfinger 's early work , but noted " a superior intellect " in this album . Zuel summarised by saying it was easy to " just enjoy Vulture Street 's power and passion . And the rock . " 
 Ty Burr of Entertainment Weekly reviewed the album positively , writing of a return to Powderfinger 's " bar @-@ band roots " , while still featuring some " sharp pop hooks under the riffs " . He drew references to early Radiohead and Bad Company , whom he argued Fanning was inspired by on " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " . The review was summarised by Burr describing Vulture Street as " good company " . 
 MusicOMH reviewer Simon Evans said Powderfinger added " a real punch to songs ... far removed from your standard rock and roll fare " in Vulture Street , praising the emotion and seriousness of " Since You 've Been Gone " and " How Far Have We Really Come ? " , and the " fun " in " Don 't Panic " . Evans praised producer Nick DiDia for his work on the album , which he summarised as " a quantum leap from its rather passionless predecessor , Odyssey Number Five " . 
 = = ARIA Award nominations = = 
 Vulture Street received numerous nominations for ARIA Music Awards from the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) in 2003 and 2004 . To date , the album has received eight nominations in six categories , four of which they had won the award for . 
 = = Charts = = 
 In December 2003 Triple J listeners voted this as their favourite album for 2003 . 
 In Triple J 's Hottest 100 Australian Albums of All Time , 2011 . This album was voted # 14 Powderfinger 's second entry on the list . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = CD = = = 
 " Rockin ' Rocks " – 3 : 04 
 " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " – 3 : 20 
 " Since You 've Been Gone " – 4 : 12 
 " Love Your Way " – 4 : 31 
 " Sunsets " – 3 : 49 
 " Don 't Panic " – 3 : 09 
 " Stumblin ' " – 3 : 46 
 " Roll Right by You " – 4 : 15 
 " How Far Have We Really Come ? " – 4 : 00 
 " Pockets " – 5 : 46 
 " A Song Called Everything " – 4 : 23 
 = = = Vulture Street Blues = = = 
 A special edition DVD was included with selected early copies of Vulture Street . The DVD included a documentary with all of the albums ' songs , with the song " Sunsets " featuring twice . The DVD also included the music videos for " On My Mind " , the acoustic version of " Sunsets " and as hidden bonus features , the videos for the song " Pockets " and the keyboard version of " These Days " . 
 Documentary 
 " Sunsets " 
 " Rockin Rocks " 
 " Stumblin ' " 
 " Pockets " 
 " On My Mind " 
 " Since You 've Been Gone " 
 " Sunsets " 
 " Love Your Way " 
 " Don 't Panic " 
 " How Far Have We Really Come ? " 
 " Rita " 
 " On My Mind " ( video ) 
 " Sunsets " ( acoustic video ) 
 Hidden extras : 
 " Pockets " ( video ) 
 " These Days " ( keyboard version ) 
 = = Release history = = 
 = España @-@ class battleship = 
 The España class was a series of three dreadnought battleships built for the Spanish Navy between 1909 and 1921 . The construction of the ships , particularly the third vessel , were significantly delayed due to shortages of materiel supplied by Great Britain during World War I , particularly armament . The class comprised España ( Spain ) , Alfonso XIII , and Jaime I. The three ships were the only Spanish dreadnoughts ever built . They were also the smallest battleships of the type constructed , owing to the weak Spanish economy . The ships were armed with eight 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns , but their small displacement — only 15 @,@ 700 metric tons ( 15 @,@ 500 long tons ; 17 @,@ 300 short tons ) — forced the designers to compromise on armor protection and speed . 
 España , Alfonso XIII , and Jaime I served in the 1st Squadron of the Spanish Fleet , which became the Training Squadron in the 1920s . They all saw action during the Rif War in the early 1920s supporting Spanish ground forces in North Africa . España ran aground in August 1923 and the Navy could not salvage her ; she instead broke up under tidal forces . Alfonso XIII was renamed España in 1931 after her namesake , King Alfonso XIII was forced into exile . The two surviving ships served on opposite sides of the Spanish Civil War , and both were destroyed during the conflict . España struck a naval mine laid by her own side in on 30 April 1937 and sank , and Jaime I was destroyed by an internal explosion in June 1937 . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Spanish public blamed the disastrous losses in the Spanish – American War of 1898 on the Navy , but recognized the need to modernize and rebuild it . The first attempt to rebuild the Navy came in the Fleet Plan of 1903 , which called for a fleet centered on seven 15 @,@ 000 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 15 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ) battleships and three 10 @,@ 000 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 9 @,@ 800 @-@ long @-@ ton ) cruisers . This plan proved to be far too ambitious for the weak Spanish economy , and an unstable Spanish parliament proved unable to provide funding . It was followed by the Fleet Plan of 1905 , which proposed a fleet of eight 14 @,@ 000 t ( 14 @,@ 000 long tons ) battleships along with a number of torpedo boats and submarines . It too fell victim to the weaknesses of the Spanish government . It was not until early 1907 that a strong cabinet led by Antonio Maura came to power that the question of naval construction was settled . The Fleet Plan of 1907 proposed three 15 @,@ 000 MT battleships along with several destroyers , torpedo boats , and other craft . The construction plan was to last for eight years . Debates over the plan took place in the Cortes Generales ( General Courts — the Spanish legislature ) through November , with a final approval vote on 2 December . The Fleet Plan was formally signed into law on 7 January 1908 . 
 The delay enabled Spain to take advantage of experience gained by Britain with the world 's first commissioned all @-@ big @-@ gun battleship , HMS Dreadnought , and by the United States with its own new battleship , USS South Carolina . The Spanish Navy was principally concerned with defending its three main naval bases : Ferrol , Cádiz , and Cartagena . Of secondary importance was the need to keep the new battleship design tightly constrained due to the frail Spanish economy and industrial sector . A third constraint was the need to build ships small enough to fit in existing dockyard facilities , since there were insufficient funds to both build larger battleships and to enlarge the navy 's dockyards . As a result , the design requirements called for relatively heavy offensive power with minimal range and armor protection . The Navy began discussing the design requirements with Armstrong Whitworth and Vickers in 1907 well before the law was actually passed . On 5 September 1907 , Vickers provided a proposed design for a 15 @,@ 000 @-@ ton battleship armed with eight 12 @-@ inch guns . This design was the basis for the requirements for the design competition , which was issued on 21 April 1908 . 
 Four shipbuilders submitted bids : the Italian Gio . Ansaldo & C. led a group that also included the Austro @-@ Hungarian Škoda Works and the French Marrel Freres Forges de La Loire et du Midi ; the French Schneider @-@ Creusot firm partnered with Société Nouvelle des Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée and Forges et Chantiers de la Gironde ; the Spanish Sociedad Española de Construcción Naval ( SECN ) , which was formed by Vickers , Armstrong Whitworth , and John Brown & Company ; and a group of Spanish industrialists backed by Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company and William Beardmore and Company . Only the first three proposals were seriously considered , as the fourth was considered to be too vague . The Junta Superior de la Armada ( the Navy Staff ) and the Navy Minister were responsible for reviewing the three proposals . Ansaldo prepared two design variants ; the first called for four twin gun turrets for the main battery , with one forward , one aft , and two offset amidships . The second proposal had two triple turrets , fore and aft , with a twin turret on the centerline amidships . Artillery experts in the Navy rejected the second variant . The SECN and Schneider designs also featured the same arrangement as the first Ansaldo proposal . 
 In October 1908 , the Artillery Committee met to make its recommendations to the Junta Superior . The Committee concluded the SECN and Schneider proposals were superior to the Ansaldo version , but neither had a marked advantage over the other . The following month , the Naval Construction Committee met to evaluate the proposals . It recommended the SECN design first , followed by Schneider , with Ansaldo last . The Office of the Navy Controller also evaluated the proposals in November , and advised the Junta Superior that only the SECN bid met the design requirements without any legal , administrative , or cost problems . In February 1909 , the Navy requested a revised design from SECN to incorporate several alterations , including an increased freeboard to improve seakeeping , an increased height and length of the main belt armor , and the addition of individual rangefinders for each gun turret . SECN agreed to make the changes on 20 March , and the company received the contract on 14 April . Due to the constraints imposed by the Spanish economy , the resulting design produced the smallest dreadnought @-@ type battleships ever built . They were also obsolescent before completion due to rapid technological change — most significantly the rise of the superdreadnought battleships — and lengthy delays in completion of the later units of the class . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the class were 132 @.@ 6 m ( 435 ft ) long at the waterline and 140 m ( 460 ft ) long overall . They had a beam of 24 m ( 79 ft ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 8 m ( 26 ft ) ; their freeboard was 4 @.@ 6 m ( 15 ft ) amidships , much lower than was normal for battleships of the period . They displaced 15 @,@ 700 metric tons ( 15 @,@ 500 long tons ) as designed and up to 16 @,@ 450 t ( 16 @,@ 190 long tons ) at combat load . The vessels had two tripod masts and a small superstructure . They were equipped with six 75 cm ( 30 in ) searchlights . The ships were reasonably stable compared to foreign designs , but they had a low metacentric height of 1 @.@ 56 m ( 5 ft 1 in ) at full loading . This caused them to have very low stability when damaged . 
 Each ship had a crew of 854 officers and enlisted men . The enlisted crew spaces were located forward in the upper deck , and were cramped and unhygienic . The cabins for non @-@ commissioned officers were also located here . The superstructure included several cabins for senior officers . The ships were initially painted black but in the 1920s they were repainted gray . Alfonso XIII wore a white identification band on her funnel and Jaime I wore two , though both ships had them removed after the start of the Civil War . Jaime I was also repainted dark gray at this time . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Their propulsion system consisted of four @-@ shaft Parsons steam turbines and twelve coal @-@ fired water @-@ tube Yarrow boilers . The turbines drove three @-@ bladed screw propellers that were 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 ft 10 in ) wide in diameter . Two spare screws were kept aboard each ship . The boilers were trunked into a single funnel that was placed amidships ; the location of the funnel , far from the foremast , kept the latter 's spotting top free from smoke interference , but still rendered the spotting top on the mainmast essentially useless . 
 The engines were rated at 15 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 11 @,@ 600 kW ) and produced a top speed of 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) . According to the design contract , the engines were to be capable of a normal maximum of 22 @,@ 000 shp ( 16 @,@ 000 kW ) with a top speed of 19 @.@ 9 knots ( 36 @.@ 9 km / h ; 22 @.@ 9 mph ) and up to 26 @,@ 000 shp ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) and 20 @.@ 2 knots ( 37 @.@ 4 km / h ; 23 @.@ 2 mph ) at forced draft . All three ships exceeded 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) on speed trials . Each ship could store up to 1 @,@ 900 t ( 1 @,@ 900 long tons ) of coal , which permitted a cruising radius of 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Their main armament consisted of eight 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber guns manufactured by Vickers . Each weighed 65 @.@ 646 metric tons ( 64 @.@ 609 long tons ) and fired an 850 @-@ pound ( 385 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 3 @,@ 000 ft / s ( 914 m / s ) . The guns had a maximum range of 23 @,@ 500 yards ( 21 @,@ 500 m ) and a rate of fire of one round per minute . These guns were housed in four twin turrets , arranged with two on the centerline fore and aft , the others en echelon on the wings . The turrets were hydraulically operated , and could be loaded at any angle of elevation . The en echelon arrangement was chosen over superfiring turrets — such as those used in the American dreadnoughts — to save weight and cost . All four turrets could in theory fire on the broadside , and three could fire ahead or astern . However , blast effects from the wing turrets generally prohibited firing them across the deck or directly ahead and astern . 
 The secondary battery comprised twenty 4 in ( 102 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber guns mounted individually in casemates along the length of the hull . They fired a 31 @-@ pound ( 14 kg ) shell . The guns were too close to the waterline , however , and were unusable in heavy seas ; they also suffered from insufficient elevation , which limited their range . The guns were also too weak to be effective against contemporary destroyers , which were becoming increasingly powerful . The ships also carried four 3 @-@ pounder guns , two machine guns , and two landing guns that could be taken ashore . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The armor layout for the España class was essentially a scaled down version of that used in the British Bellerophon class . The reductions were due primarily to the heavy armament in a vessel of such limited displacement . The main belt armor was only 8 in ( 203 mm ) thick , and tapered to 4 in ( 102 mm ) on either end of the central citadel . The upper belt that protected the casemate guns was 6 in ( 152 mm ) thick . Each turret , which had 8 in sides , sat on a barbette that was protected with 10 in ( 254 mm ) thick plating . The conning tower also had 10 @-@ inch thick sides . Both the armored deck and the torpedo bulkhead were 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . The ships ' heavy armor plating consisted of Krupp cemented steel , with Krupp homogeneous steel used for armor thinner than 4 in ( 100 mm ) ; both types were manufactured in Britain . 
 Though the ships were poorly armored compared to foreign designs in general , the ships ' underwater protection was the greatest weakness in the armor scheme . The torpedo bulkhead was placed too close to the outer hull , which reduced its ability to absorb damage . This weakness played a central role in the loss of both España to grounding in 1923 and the sinking of Alfonso XIII by a single mine in 1937 . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 Only limited modifications were possible due to technical constraints imposed by the need to keep displacement low and insufficient funds to effect a major reconstruction to free up tonnage for other uses . The Navy considered proposals to modernize the three battleships in the early 1920s , but the Spanish military budget was being consumed by the costs of the Rif War in North Africa and so nothing came of the proposed modernization . These plans called for installing new fire control equipment with more effective rangefinders , along with additional , newer anti @-@ aircraft guns , and building anti @-@ torpedo bulges into the hull to improve underwater protection for a loss of one knot of speed . Deck armor was also to be strengthened . 
 Ultimately , only minor modifications were possible . In 1926 , both Jaime I and Alfonso XII had a pair of Vickers 76 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 00 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns installed , one each on top of turret numbers 1 and 2 . And in the 1930s , the foremast was reduced slightly on the two surviving ships . After she was seized by the Nationalists in 1936 , España ( ex @-@ Alfonso XIII ) had these two guns removed for use ashore . They were replaced with four German 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK C / 30 flak guns and two 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) C / 30 anti @-@ aircraft guns . Jaime I , which remained with the Republicans , was reequipped with two Vickers 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) 50 @-@ caliber anti @-@ aircraft guns and a twin 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) Hotchkiss mounting . 
 = = Construction = = 
 A new 184 by 35 m ( 604 by 115 ft ) drydock and two 180 by 35 m ( 591 by 115 ft ) slipways were built at Ferrol to accommodate the construction of the three battleships . All material , save the armor plate , heavy guns , and fire control equipment , was manufactured in Spain . The contract specified a build time of four years for the first ship , five years for the second , and seven years for the third . Despite the allowance for longer construction times for the later units , their completion , and particularly the third unit , Jaime I , was held up by a lack of materials from Britain as a result of the outbreak of World War I. Most importantly , the main guns for Jaime I were not delivered until 1919 . 
 = = History = = 
 España was the only member of the class completed by the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , though she did not see action , as Spain remained neutral for the duration of the war . In August 1914 , she participated in the opening ceremonies for the Panama Canal . Alfonso XIII joined her in August 1915 in the 1st Squadron of the Spanish fleet . In late 1921 , Jaime I was finally completed . Throughout the early 1920s , the three ships served in the Training Squadron . During this period , Spain became involved in the Rif War in Morocco ; all three ships saw action during the conflict , primarily by providing artillery support to Spanish ground forces engaging the Rif rebels . In August 1923 , while bombarding Rif positions , España ran aground off Cape Tres Forcas . A lengthy salvage operation failed to free the ship , and in November 1924 , the stress of repeated tidal battering broke the wreck in half . 
 In 1931 , after the overthrow of King Alfonso XIII , his namesake battleship was renamed España . In the mid @-@ 1930s , the Spanish Navy considered modernization programs for the two surviving battleships , but none came to fruition , primarily as a result of the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936 . The two ships found themselves on opposite sides during the conflict ; España served on the side of Francisco Franco 's Nationalists , and Jaime I fought for the Republicans . España was used for coastal bombardment and to enforce the blockade of Republican ports , while Jaime I unsuccessfully attempted to disrupt the blockade , though neither ship engaged the other . In August 1936 , Jaime I was attacked and moderately damaged by Nationalist bombers ; while undergoing repairs in Cartagena , she was destroyed by an internal explosion in June 1937 . España was sunk on 30 April 1937 after striking a mine laid by her own side off the coast of Santander in northern Spain . 
 Many of the guns from the first España were recovered and employed in coastal fortifications , some of which remained in service until 1999 . Six of Jaime I 's 12 @-@ inch guns were also salvaged and similarly employed after she was broken up in the 1940s — they too remained in service until they were decommissioned in the mid @-@ 1990s . The second España was never raised , and her wreck was discovered in the early 1980s . Several expeditions to survey the wreck took place between February and May 1984 . 
 = The Boat Race 1973 = 
 The 119th Boat Race took place on 7 March 1973 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . It was won by Cambridge who passed the finishing post thirteen lengths ahead of Oxford , the largest winning margin since the 1955 race . Despite being pre @-@ race favourites , Oxford 's warm @-@ up saw them take on board a large amount of water in rough conditions . 
 In the reserve race , Goldie beat Isis , and in the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge were victorious . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Oxford by a nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in the previous year 's race . Cambridge held the overall lead , with 66 victories to Oxford 's 51 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . The race was umpired by former Oxford Blue Ronnie Howard who had rowed in the 1957 and 1959 races . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 It was the first year since 1927 that the main race was not covered in full on any of the BBC 's national radio networks . Its <unk> start coincided with the conclusion of the FA Cup semi @-@ finals , and it had been decided that the rowing would be broadcast in full on the BBC World Service and BBC Radio Oxford only . Commentator John Snagge who had described every race since 1931 was disappointed : " I do not want to be unreasonable but I am a little surprised that for an event like the Boat Race , with its tradition and history , the BBC cannot find 20 minutes on one of its four networks to carry it in full . " 
 Oxford 's preparations for the race including coming second only to Leander Club in the Head of the River Race . Both crews had to cope with strong winds in their outings , with large pieces of driftwood providing additional hazards to the boats . Cambridge 's number four , Chris Baillieu , recovered from a back injury while his cox , Mike Williams , spent time before the race recuperating from an upset stomach . Their number seven , Steven Tourek , was also forced from the boat with illness , missing several days training . Cambridge were coxed by Lou Barry . Oxford 's boat , built by Swiss manufacturer <unk> was considered suitable for " placid Continental lakes " while Cambridge 's boat , while 30 pounds ( 14 kg ) lighter than their previous year 's craft , had a deeper hull and was " better equipped " for inclement conditions . In an interview with Barry Norman writing for The Observer , Oxford 's stroke Sawyier had prophetically suggested : " if we do lose , I hope we 're not disgraced ... it would be a kind of tawdry end of the year to be in a crew that was beaten out of sight . " 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed over 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 3 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford saw four former Blues return , Magarey , Hall , Payne and the cox Yalouris , while Cambridge welcomed back Chris Baillieu for his fourth race and Michael Hart . Oxford 's crew contained three non @-@ British competitors , Australian Magarey , and Americans Yalouris and Sawyier ( who had rowed for Harvard University and the United States Olympic team in the 1972 Summer Olympics ) , while Cambridge featured just one foreign participant , the American rower Tourek . 
 = = Race = = 
 Following good performances in practice in the buildup , Oxford were considered pre @-@ race favourites . They won the toss and elected to start on the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . In the warm @-@ up to the race , the Light Blues opted for calm waters in Wandsworth Reach while Oxford rowed part of the course , in rough conditions , up to the Mile Post and back . Arriving back at the stake boat , the Dark Blues spent considerable time attempting to alleviate their boat of large amounts of water , using their tracksuits as makeshift sponges . 
 Oxford made a fast start , rating over 40 strokes per minute , but in the rough conditions it resulted in more water being drawn into their boat . Cambridge " slowly but surely " took control with a lead of just under three lengths within three minutes of the start . A ten @-@ second lead at the Mile Post was extended to sixteen seconds by Hammersmith Bridge with Oxford still taking on more water in their pursuit of the Light Blues . Oxford were 26 seconds behind at Chiswick Steps and despite a last push from Oxford to reduce the deficit , Cambridge passed the finishing post in 19 minutes 21 seconds , 13 lengths and 48 seconds ahead of their opponents . It was Cambridge 's sixth consecutive victory , and their 67th overall to Oxford 's 51 wins . 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis by five lengths , their seventh consecutive victory . In the 28th running of the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge triumphed , their eleventh consecutive victory . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 The Oxford boat club president Andy Hall said " the water was round our ankles ... we made a mistake in doing that warm @-@ up over part of the course ... there was so much water on board that I thought ' God , we 're going to sink . ' It was really hopeless after that . " In losing the race , Hall became the first Oxonian to lose four Boat Races in the 20th century . Jim Railton , writing in The Times summarised the race : " Cambridge beat the Tideway and the Tideway beat Oxford . " According to Dickie Burnell , " to say that the race was soon over would be a mis @-@ statement . It never really began . " 
 = Something / Anything ? = 
 Something / Anything ? is a double album by Todd Rundgren , released in February 1972 . It was Rundgren 's third solo release , and was recorded in late 1971 in Los Angeles , New York City and Bearsville Studios , Woodstock . Three quarters of the album was recorded in the studio with Rundgren playing all instruments and singing all vocals , as well as being the producer . The final quarter of the album consisted of a number of tracks recorded live in the studio without any overdubs , save for a short snippet of archive recordings from the 1960s . 
 Rundgren had become confident enough at other instruments beyond his standard guitar and keyboards that he had tackled in earlier releases , and this , coupled with a general dissatisfaction with other studio musicians , led him to temporarily relocate to Los Angeles in an attempt to record an entire album single @-@ handedly . After he had created significantly more material than would fit on a standard LP , an earthquake struck LA . He decided to head back to New York for some live sessions , with the help of <unk> Klingman , to lighten the mood . The final sessions were in Bearsville , where the remainder of the recording and mixing took place , and this created enough material for a double album . 
 The album peaked at number 29 on the Billboard 200 and was certified gold three years after its release . It remains the singer @-@ songwriter 's best @-@ selling album . A single taken from the album , " Hello It 's Me " , was a top @-@ five hit in the US in late 1972 . Something / Anything ? has also continued to attract critical acclaim and has been praised for being Rundgren 's best work , particularly since Rundgren moved away from the straightforward pop ballads present on this album to more experimental territory and progressive rock in later releases , beginning with the following A Wizard , A True Star and his band Utopia . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 173 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Recording = = 
 = = = Sides 1 @-@ 3 = = = 
 By the time Rundgren started recording the album , he had already achieved commercial success as a solo artist , and a producer , and this increased his self @-@ confidence . He had also become dissatisfied with other musicians playing on his recordings , recalling , " I 'd never played drums or bass before , though I would <unk> those that did . " This led him to decide to record the entire album by himself using multi @-@ tracking . 
 Rundgren wrote the material for the album at a prolific rate . He attributed his productivity to Ritalin and cannabis , stating that the drugs " caused me to crank out songs at an incredible pace . ' I Saw the Light ' took me all of 20 minutes . " He found some of the other songs quick to write , too , noting " they were all basically starting out with C Major 7th , and I 'd start moving my hand around in predictable patterns until a song came out . " 
 The majority of backing tracks on the first three sides of the album were recorded at I.D. Sound Studios , Los Angeles , engineered by James Lowe with assistance from John Lee . The studio was one of the first independent units in LA , and Lowe believes Rundgren chose it due to the ability to work hands @-@ on without record company interference and having all the latest technology and equipment . Rundgren played every instrument in turn , starting with the drums , noting it " was the logical place to start , " with each instrument laid down on top . While recording the drums , Rundgren would try and hum the song in his head to remember where he was , but " if I would screw up , then I would change the song afterwards , to fit the mistake that I had made , because it was easier than going back and fixing it . " In retrospect , Rundgren felt he might have performed better with a click track , being a novice drummer at the time , but concluded that the end result " sound [ s ] like a band " . He didn 't think his lack of technical proficiency on the instrument was a particular handicap , saying that " people comprehend what you 're playing , and it has a greater impact . " Engineering the album , Lowe recalled he was " mostly working in the dark " , and that Rundgren would leave spaces for instruments during recording , spontaneously developing a song as it was being recorded . " I was never sure exactly where the song was going until we 'd put down about four or five tracks . " 
 In addition to recording at I.D. Sound , Rundgren took an 8 @-@ track recorder and some studio equipment , installing it at his rented home on Astral Drive , Nichols Canyon . ' Intro ' and ' Breathless ' were recorded here , along with various guitar and keyboard overdubs . A version of ' Torch Song ' was also recorded , but was scrapped due to excessive background noise . Rundgren recalled that recording at home meant he could spend time working on pieces of technology or production , such as programming a VCS3 synthesizer , at his leisure without wasting anyone else 's time . The artwork on the original gatefold sleeve was also shot in this apartment . Despite working long hours each day in both I.D and at home , with minimum breaks for sleeping and eating , Rundgren said he enjoyed the recording experience , and " wouldn 't have had it any other way . " 
 = = = Side 4 = = = 
 Rundgren contemplated recording more tracks to make up a double album in a similar manner , but following an earthquake , he decided to relocate to New York City and hold a live recording session at the Record Plant with session players . The basic idea was to create songs with sing @-@ along choruses . Rundgren did not pre @-@ plan who would play on the sessions , but simply wanted anyone who happened to be in or near the studio to turn up and learn the material . 
 Rundgren contacted <unk> Klingman , who would appear on several tracks and later co @-@ found Utopia with Rundgren . Rundgren instructed Klingman to find the best session players possible for the recording . Klingman recalled getting a phone call from Rundgren late on a Friday evening asking him to find a full band by Sunday morning : " He wanted horns , singers , everything , so I made a ton of phone calls . " Klingman said that not everyone could make the entire session , so a variety of musicians , particularly guitarists and bassists , needed to be used . The performers , including Rundgren himself , only rehearsed the songs a few times before committing the performance to tape , in order to sound spontaneous , and some of the banter between takes appears on the finished album . 
 Three songs were recorded at the Record Plant , including one of Klingman 's own , " Dust in the Wind " . Guitarist Rick Derringer appeared on one track , and would collaborate with Rundgren in the future . Trumpeter Randy Brecker had been a founding member of Blood , Sweat & Tears and , along with his brother Michael , who also played on the Record Plant sessions , went on to find commercial success with the Brecker Brothers . Trombonist Barry Rogers , who completed the brass section on the Record Plant recordings , had also collaborated with the Brecker brothers in the band Dreams . 
 A further live session was held at Bearsville Studios in Woodstock , which used some of the members of the Paul Butterfield blues band , resulting in two other tracks . The final track on side four , " Slut " , was recorded earlier at a live session in I.D. Sound Studios , and featured previous collaborators Tony and Hunt Sales , and guitarist Rick Vito . 
 = = = Vocals and post production = = = 
 The majority of vocals for the existing studio tracks were also recorded at the Record Plant , with additional recording at Bearsville , where the album was mixed . As in LA , Lowe helped out with the engineering . " We 'd just put up a Neumann <unk> and he 'd sing right there in the control room using the monitors for the playback . " 
 In addition to the live sessions , the fourth side was completed by two small extracts of archive recordings featuring Rundgren in the 1960s . The first was a performance of Barrett Strong 's " Money ( That 's What I Want ) " by a group of the same name ' Money ' , recorded around 1966 , while the second was a clip of " Messin ' with the Kid " performed by Woody 's Truck Stop in Philadelphia , late 1966 . 
 In the liner notes , the first side of the album is described as " a bouquet of ear @-@ catching melodies " , the second as " the cerebral side " , the third as " The kid gets heavy " , and the fourth is titled " Baby Needs a New Pair of Snakeskin Boots ( A Pop Operetta ) " . Rundgren wrote the sleeve notes , and included a small operetta that described a narrative between live tracks . White @-@ labeled promotional DJ issues of the LP were pressed on colored vinyl — the first record on red vinyl , the second on blue . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 " I Saw the Light " was placed at the start of album , as it was felt to be the most likely hit . The song was influenced by Carole King . 
 " Hello It 's Me " had been recorded by Rundgren 's old band , Nazz . As with the rest of the live tracks on side four , little preparation was done for the track . Rundgren later claimed the entire song was rehearsed and recorded in under two hours , and the horn lines and backing vocals at the end of the track were completely improvised . It was released as a single late in 1973 , and reached # 5 on the Billboard Hot 100 the following year . 
 " Couldn 't I Just Tell You " has had a major influence on artists in the power pop musical genre , with music critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine of the All Music Guide calling it one of " the great songs that provided power pop with its foundation " . The song was covered , for example , by Game Theory , and included as a bonus track on the CD release of Real Nighttime ( 1985 ) . The 2010 book Music : What Happened ? called the song " likely the greatest power pop recording ever made , " with lyrics " somehow both desperate and lighthearted at the same time , " and a guitar solo having " truly amazing dexterity and inflection . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviewing the original release of the album , Billboard said that Rundgren 's songs " have an aura of being irreverent , irrelevant little ditties , while in reality they are penetratingly strident observations " , and that he seemed to have had fun making the album . 
 Retrospective reviews of the album have been overwhelmingly positive . Allmusic especially praised the album 's endearing tone and often adventurous variety of styles , commenting that " Listening to Something / Anything ? is a mind @-@ altering trip in itself , no matter how many instantly memorable , shamelessly accessible pop songs are scattered throughout the album . " Robert Christgau also applauded the strong variety : " The many good songs span styles and subjects in a virtuoso display ... And the many ordinary ones are saved by Todd 's confidence and verve . " Rolling Stone said the album " demonstrates his command of the studio , unfurling his falsetto over a kaleidoscope of rock genres " . Axl Rose declared in a 1989 Rolling Stone interview that " Today , my favorite record is Todd Rundgren 's Something / Anything " . 
 Rundgren himself has been more ambivalent about the album 's success and critical acclaim . He has stated several times that since he had already become successful as a producer , he was not as interested in straight commercial pop success as other artists . In particular , he rejected a tag of being " a male Carole King " . " With all due respect , " he later stated , " I took no comfort in merely being labeled a ' singer / songwriter ' . " Subsequent albums , beginning with the follow @-@ up A Wizard , A True Star and the spin @-@ off group Utopia , would see a radical shift away from straightforward three @-@ minute pop . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Todd Rundgren except as indicated . 
 = = = Side one : A Bouquet of Ear @-@ catching Melodies = = = 
 " I Saw the Light " – 2 : 56 
 " It Wouldn 't Have Made Any Difference " – 3 : 50 
 " Wolfman Jack " – 2 : 54 
 " Cold Morning Light " – 3 : 55 
 " It Takes Two to Tango ( This Is for the Girls ) " – 2 : 41 
 " Sweeter Memories " – 3 : 36 
 Total Length : 20 : 52 
 = = = Side two : The Cerebral Side = = = 
 " Intro " – 1 : 11 
 " Breathless " – 3 : 15 
 " The Night the Carousel Burnt Down " – 4 : 29 
 " Saving Grace " – 4 : 12 
 " Marlene " – 3 : 54 
 " Song of the Viking " – 2 : 35 
 " I Went to the Mirror " – 4 : 05 
 Total Length : 23 : 41 
 = = = Side three : The Kid Gets Heavy = = = 
 " Black Maria " – 5 : 20 
 " One More Day ( No Word ) " – 3 : 43 
 " Couldn 't I Just Tell You " – 3 : 34 
 " Torch Song " – 2 : 52 
 " Little Red Lights " – 4 : 53 
 Total Length : 20 : 22 
 = = = Side four : Baby Needs a New Pair of Snakeskin Boots ( A Pop Operetta ) = = = 
 " Overture – My Roots : Money ( That 's What I Want ) / Messin ' with the Kid " ( Janie Bradford , Berry Gordy , Jr . , Mel London ) – 2 : 29 
 " Dust in the Wind " ( Mark Klingman ) – 3 : 49 
 " Piss Aaron " – 3 : 26 
 " Hello It 's Me " – 4 : 42 
 " Some Folks Is Even Whiter Than Me " – 3 : 56 
 " You Left Me Sore " – 3 : 13 
 " Slut " – 4 : 03 
 Total Length : 25 : 38 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Sides 1 - 3 = = = 
 Todd Rundgren – all instruments and vocals 
 = = = Side 4 = = = 
 " Money ( That 's What I Want ) ” 
 Todd Rundgren – lead guitar 
 Rick Valente – lead vocals 
 Randy Read – rhythm guitar 
 Collie Read – bass 
 Stockman – drums 
 " Messin ' with the Kid ” 
 No personnel credited 
 " Dust in the Wind " ( Recorded at the Record Plant , New York ) 
 Todd Rundgren – lead vocals , piano 
 Mark Klingman – organ 
 Rick Derringer – guitar 
 John Siegler – bass 
 John Siomos – drums 
 Randy Brecker – trumpet 
 Mike Brecker – tenor sax 
 Barry Rogers – trombone 
 Hope Ruff , Richard Corey , Vicki Robinson , Dennis Cooley , Cecilia Norfleet – backing vocals 
 " Piss Aaron ” ( Recorded at Bearsville Studios , Woodstock ) 
 Todd Rundgren – lead vocals , electric piano 
 Amos Garrett – guitar 
 Ben Keith – pedal steel 
 Jim Colgrove – bass 
 Billy Mundi – drums 
 " Hello It 's Me ” ( Recorded at the Record Plant , New York ) 
 Todd Rundgren – lead vocals , piano 
 Mark Klingman – organ 
 Robbie <unk> – guitar 
 Stu Woods – bass 
 John Siomos – drums 
 Randy Brecker – trumpet 
 Mike Brecker – tenor sax 
 Barry Rogers – trombone 
 Hope Ruff , Richard Corey , Vicki Robinson , Dennis Cooley , Cecilia Norfleet – backing vocals 
 " Some Folks Is Even Whiter Than Me ” ( Recorded at Bearsville Studios , Woodstock ) 
 Todd Rundgren – lead vocals , guitar 
 Mark Klingman – piano 
 Ralph Walsh – guitar 
 Bugsy <unk> – bass 
 Billy Mundi – drums 
 Serge <unk> – conga 
 Gene Dinwiddle – tenor sax 
 " You Left Me Sore ” ( Recorded at the Record Plant , New York ) 
 Todd Rundgren – lead vocals , piano 
 Mark Klingman – organ 
 Robbie <unk> – guitar 
 Stu Woods – bass 
 John Siomos – drums 
 Hope Ruff , Richard Corey – backing vocals 
 " Slut ” ( Recorded at I.D. Sound Studios , Los Angeles ) 
 Todd Rundgren – lead vocals , guitar 
 Rick Vito – guitar 
 Charlie <unk> – piano 
 Tony Sales – bass 
 Hunt Sales – drums 
 Jim Horn – tenor sax 
 John Kelson – tenor sax 
 Brook <unk> , Anthony <unk> , Henry <unk> , Edward Olmos – backing vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 Album 
 Single 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Cyclone Arthur ( 2007 ) = 
 Cyclone Arthur ( RSMC Nadi designation : 08F , JTWC designation : <unk> ) was the eighth tropical depression and fourth tropical cyclone of the 2006 – 07 South Pacific cyclone season . Forming as tropical depression on January 25 , Arthur rapidly intensified into a strong Category 2 cyclone on the Australian intensity scale according to the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre in Nadi , Fiji . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center assessed the storm to have peaked as a minimal Category 1 cyclone . Shortly after peaking in intensity , the cyclone began to deteriorate due to unfavorable conditions . Quickly moving towards the east @-@ southeast , the Arthur began to undergo an extratropical transition . After turning towards the southeast , the center of circulation was almost fully exposed due to strong wind shear . However , Arthur briefly re @-@ strengthened late on January 26 before becoming extratropical the next day . Tropical Cyclone Arthur affected several small islands during its existence . French Polynesia observed the most noteworthy effects from the storm , where several landslides damaged a few homes . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On January 21 , 2007 , the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre in Nadi , Fiji identified a tropical depression , which was given the number 08F , about 435 km ( 270 mi ) west @-@ northwest of <unk> 'i island in Samoa . The depression slowly traveled towards the east @-@ southeast for several days as the overall structure of the storm fluctuated due to diurnal variations and strong wind shear . Around 1700 UTC on January 22 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert for the depression . The system developed a large banding feature in the northern portion of the circulation and deep convection formed around the center of circulation . The depression had moved into an area of weak to moderate wind shear with favorable diffulence aloft . Later that day , gale warnings were issued for the northeastern quadrant of the system . Tropical Depression 08F continued to develop as an anticyclone developed above the system , enhancing the environment around it . A mid @-@ latitude trough located north of the depression was steering it towards the east . 
 Early on January 24 , the system became better organized and strengthened into a cyclone at 0600 UTC . The storm , which was named Arthur by the RSMC Nadi , began to undergo rapid intensification as the structure improved significantly . Deep convection developed around the center with strong outflow towards the north . Several hours after becoming a cyclone , the JTWC issued their first advisory on Tropical Cyclone <unk> as it traveled quickly towards the east @-@ southeast . The quick movement was due to the influences of subtropical ridge to the north and a trough to the south . Later that day , a banding eye feature began to develop as the storm intensified into a Category 2 cyclone on the Australian intensity scale . At 1800 UTC , the JTWC assessed Arthur to have reached its peak intensity with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph 1 @-@ minute winds ) , the equivalent of a minimal Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Early on January 25 , Arthur reached its peak intensity with winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) with a minimum pressure of 975 hPa ( mbar ) while located about 635 km ( 350 mi ) north @-@ northwest of Rarotonga . Shortly after peaking in intensity , Arthur began to undergo an extratropical transition and rapidly deteriorated due to strong wind shear . 
 The storm also began to merge with a low @-@ level frontal boundary associated with the remnants of Tropical Cyclone Zita . The strong shear left the center of circulation partially exposed , with deep convection persisting in only the southeastern quadrant . In addition to the shear , dry air began to enter the system , causing it to weaken further . While continuing to move at a quick pace , the storm began to turn towards the southeast along a baroclinic zone . Early on January 26 , the JTWC issued their final advisory on the cyclone as it lost most of its tropical characteristics . Arthur re @-@ intensified shortly after and the JTWC reissued advisories on the storm around 2100 UTC . The brief re @-@ strengthening was the result of a breakdown in the baroclinic zone which allowed convection to redevelop around the center . Around the same time , Arthur left RSMC Nadi 's area of responsibility ( <unk> ) and entered the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centre Wellington 's <unk> . The storm completed its extratropical transition around 1200 UTC on January 27 , leading to the final advisory being issued on the storm . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On January 21 , a gale watch was issued for Tutuila , American Samoa , Manu 'a , and Swains Island as Tropical Depression 08F approached the islands . Winds of up to 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) , with gusts up to 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) , were expected . Small craft advisories were issued for the Cook Islands due to large swells produced by the storm . All of the watches were cancelled late on January 23 as the depression was no longer forecast to impact the islands . On January 24 , an Orange Alert was issued for the Austral Islands . As the storm neared the region , the alert was upgraded to a Red Alert for Rurutu and Tubuai . Arthur produced minor damages in the Cook Islands — primarily consisting of beach erosion — on January 24 . Heavy rains throughout French Polynesia resulted in several landslides which damaged several homes on Tahiti and Moorea . Waves near the islands ranged from 1 @.@ 5 to 2 m ( 4 @.@ 9 to 6 @.@ 5 ft ) . Winds in Tubuai reached 85 km / h ( 50 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) with gusts up to 115 km / h ( 71 mph ) . Several homes were damaged and roads were blocked by fallen trees throughout the island . Minor coastal flooding also occurred due to the large swells . 
 = M @-@ 13 Connector ( Michigan highway ) = 
 Connector M @-@ 13 ( Conn . M @-@ 13 ) is a state trunkline highway running 2 @.@ 41 miles ( 3 @.@ 88 km ) connecting Interstate 75 / US Highway 23 ( I @-@ 75 / US 23 ) to M @-@ 13 near the community of Kawkawlin , just north of Bay City . The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) internally calls the road Connector 13 . The freeway was once the northern end of the US 23 freeway in the area before I @-@ 75 was built to the northwest and US 23 was rerouted to follow it . When these changes were made in 1967 , Conn . M @-@ 13 was designated for the freeway stub . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Conn . M @-@ 13 starts at exit 164 along I @-@ 75 / US 23 north of Bay City . At the interchange that marks its southern terminus , the connector route continues to the north while the main I @-@ 75 freeway turns northwesterly . About three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) north , there is an interchange for Wilder Road . Traffic running southbound on the connector that wishes to continue northbound on I @-@ 75 / US 23 has to use Wilder Road to connect to the latter freeway . The connector route is bordered by fields and residential subdivisions as it continues north to the community of Kawkawlin . The freeway ends at an at @-@ grade intersection with M @-@ 13 . 
 Conn . M @-@ 13 is maintained by MDOT like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that the traffic levels along Conn . M @-@ 13 were 13 @,@ 939 vehicles daily south of the Wilder Road and 7 @,@ 031 vehicles per day north of that interchange . The only section of the freeway that has been listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) is from the southern terminus to the Wilder Road interchange . The NHS is a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 This short freeway was opened in late 1960 or early 1961 as the north end of a new US 23 freeway around Bay City . The freeway was extended farther north to the Standish area in 1967 ; M @-@ 13 was extended north to replace the US 23 designation along the latter 's former routing through Pinconning . At that time , the freeway stub north of Bay City became Conn . M @-@ 13 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire highway is in Monitor Township , Bay County . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = All Through the Night ( Cyndi Lauper song ) = 
 " All Through the Night " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Cyndi Lauper , released from her debut album She 's So Unusual . It was written by Jules Shear for his album Watch Dog , as a mid @-@ tempo folk @-@ rock song . After The Cars recorded their own version , which they did not use on any of their albums , Lauper decided to cover it . Although she initially intended to do a straight cover of Shear 's version , she turned it into a pop ballad instead . 
 The song was the only single released worldwide by Lauper that did not have a music video . It peaked at number five on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Lauper 's fourth top five single in the U.S. Lauper became the first woman in the 26 @-@ year history of Billboard to take four singles from the same album to Top 5 on the Hot 100 . The song was mostly positively received by critics . An acoustic version was sung by Lauper on her 2005 album , The Body Acoustic . In this version , Shaggy provided backing vocals . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Writing and development = = = 
 The song was originally written by Jules Shear , and included on his 1983 debut solo album , Watch Dog . Shear later recalled in an interview , " [ it 's ] like a big bonus really . Cyndi Lauper does a song ( ' All Through the Night ' ) that 's on a solo record of mine . I just thought , ' No one 's really going to hear this . ' Then she does it , and it becomes a Top 5 song . " " I 'm just glad people know the songs , really . I think they 're really good . The only problem is with people who don 't know I wrote them . I do them and they think , ' God , he 's doing that Cyndi Lauper song . ' " 
 Before Lauper covered the song , the band The Cars produced an early version of it that was not released . ( Elliot Easton of the Cars had played guitar on Shear 's original recording , which is most likely where the Cars heard the original tune . ) Shear 's version was originally a folk @-@ rock song , but Lauper instead turned it into a pop ballad for her album , with a heavy emphasis on a synthesizer . According to Lauper , she wanted it to be just like Shear 's version , with a bit more of an acoustic sound . However , she changed her mind , saying that she wanted to sing it like herself . Unlike her other singles from the album , this one did not have a music video released with it . 
 = = = Music and lyrics = = = 
 Shear 's original version of " All Through the Night " is set in the key of F major , and proceeds at a tempo of approximately 96 beats per minute . For her cover version , Lauper transposed the key up a minor third to A @-@ flat major , and kept the tempo at the same 96 beats per minute as the original . The song is set in common time . Lauper 's voice spans an octave and a fourth between G3 and D ♭ 5 . Jules Shear himself makes a guest appearance on Lauper 's version , singing a wordless falsetto melody near the end , as well as the lower harmony in the choruses . The chorus was unintentionally altered by Lauper from the Shear version when she heard the upper harmony vocal and thought it was the lead vocal . Lyrically , " All Through the Night " addresses the same concept of love and its tug at heart @-@ strings as was emphasized by Lauper 's previous single , " Time After Time . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Reception for the song was mostly positive . Don McLeese of Chicago Sun @-@ Times said that the song was the one that " showed her impressive range to best advantage . " The Philadelphia Inquirer said that she had a " strong voice " in the song . However , another Philadelphia Inquirer review said that the song was " a not terribly good version of Jules Shear 's terribly good [ song ] . " Richard Harrington of The Washington Post believed that it was her most reflective song . Kevin East of Sensible Sound said that the song was " a heavy , melancholy tune . " Leslie Gray Streeter of the Palm Beach Post said that the song was " lovely " and " delicate . " Even Shear himself was a fan of Lauper 's version , saying " The Cyndi Lauper thing where she did ' All Through the Night , ' that was great because she did it so differently than the way I did . I liked that , too . " However , the St. Petersburg Times did not like the song , saying that it was a " pedestrian filler number " on the album . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said that the song was a part of the side that he calls the very best of the album . He also says that the side is " so strong that it makes the remaining tracks — all enjoyable , but rather pedestrian — charming by their association with songs so brilliantly alive " , and that it was " astonishing it is consistency . " Kurt Loder of Rolling Stone said that Lauper " does an almost tasteful reading " of the song . Sal Cinquemani of Slant magazine said that the song emerged as one of " the greatest pop masterpieces of the ' 80s . " 
 The song was later re @-@ recorded by Lauper , for her album The Body Acoustic , an album in which she recorded acoustic versions of her favorite songs . This version included vocals by Shaggy . Charles Andrews of Audio / Video Revolution said of this version , " Acoustic guitar strumming continues into " All Through the Night " and then – whoa ! – who 's that toaster ? It 's Shaggy , ducking in and out with his own rapid @-@ fire lyric take , an inspired bit of casting that turns the romantic ballad on its head . " The song is also one of her more popular songs that she performs in live concerts . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " All Through The Night " was released in the United States in September 1984 . It debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number forty @-@ nine , and reached a peak position of five in its tenth week , becoming Lauper 's fourth consecutive top five in the U.S. The song achieved some crossover success , peaking at number four on the Adult Contemporary chart for three weeks , and reaching a peak position of thirty @-@ eight on the Mainstream Rock Chart . " All Through the Night " made Lauper the first female singer to generate four top 10 hits in the Hot 100 from a debut album . The week ending January 19 , 1985 , while it was moving down the Hot 100 , it was the biggest free @-@ <unk> , falling to # 64 from # 33 . In Canada , the single peaked at number seven on the RPM singles chart in December 1984 , and was certified gold by the Music Canada in January 1985 . 
 In the United Kingdom the song did not perform as well as Lauper 's previous releases . It debuted at number eighty @-@ two on the UK Singles Chart in November 1984 , peaking at number sixty @-@ four , staying only six weeks on the chart . The single performed similarly throughout the rest of Europe , peaking at number sixteen in Switzerland , and at number thirty @-@ five in Germany . It was more successful in Austria , where it peaked at number five , becoming her fourth consecutive top five in the country . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 7 " Single 
 " All Through the Night " – 4 : 33 
 " Witness " – 3 : 40 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Cyndi Lauper – Vocals 
 Jules Shear - songwriter , backing vocals 
 Rick Chertoff – producer 
 Lennie <unk> – executive producer 
 Caroline <unk> – photography 
 Janet <unk> – design / artwork 
 Credits adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 In 1984 , Marie Fredriksson ( who would achieve international success later as Roxette 's female lead vocalist ) recorded it in Swedish as " Natt efter <unk> " ( Night after night ) , and was released as a B @-@ side . 
 In 1985 , famous Greek singer and worldwide chanson star Nana Mouskouri recorded a German version of the song called " Ich hab <unk> , ich hab <unk> " ( <unk> der Nacht ) . That same year , she recorded a French version entitled " <unk> la nuit . " She recorded the original English version in 1987 . 
 In 2005 , a cover by Tori Amos appeared on her set of live albums , The Original Bootlegs . 
 In 2006 , by German dance project <unk> . 
 In 2008 , <unk> released a live album , Somewhere Different Now , featuring a version of the song . 
 In 2008 , a cover by Tommy <unk> appeared on the tribute album , We Love Cyndi - Tribute to Cyndi Lauper . 
 In 2011 , Sam <unk> did a version of the song on his second solo record 4 A.M. 
 In 2012 , collaborative project U.S. Elevator ( Sarah Lee Guthrie & Johnny Irion and Rondo Brothers ) did a beat folk version on single , Moons and Junes 
 In 2014 , a cover by Sleeping at Last was heard on episode 1014 of Grey 's Anatomy and on episode 2 in season 6 of The Vampire Diaries . 
 In 2015 , the song was sung by Stevie <unk> , a contestant on The Voice UK ( BBC ) in the quarter finals . Stevie later went on to win the competition . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Saints Row : The Third = 
 Saints Row : The Third is a 2011 open world action @-@ adventure video game developed by Volition and published by THQ . It is the third title in the Saints Row series . As in the previous games , the player @-@ character leads the Third Streets Saints gang in a turf war against three rival gangs using a variety of weapons and vehicles in single @-@ player and cooperative play . The series , and especially this title , is known for its crazy scenarios and lighthearted gameplay . It was released on November 15 , 2011 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 , and later abroad . 
 Game development began by late 2008 . There was high staff turnover from the previous Saints Row team with one @-@ fifth of the final 100 @-@ person staff having worked on a previous title in the series . They aimed to improve on the series by giving the game a coherent tone , and found it in films such as Hot Fuzz and the game 's signature sex toy bat . Saints Row : The Third was built using the Havok physics engine . 
 The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers noted its general zaniness and praised its customization options . Critics thought the setting was insipid and that its humor occasionally fell flat , and others thought the game perfected the Saints Row formula . It was a nominee for Best Narrative at the 2012 Game Developers Conference , an IGN Editor 's Choice , and a recipient of perfect scores from GamesRadar and G4 . A complete edition including the three downloadable content packs was released a year after the original release , and its planned Enter the Dominatrix expansion became the game 's sequel , Saints Row IV . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Saints Row : The Third is an action @-@ adventure game played from the third @-@ person perspective in an open world , such that players explore an unrestricted environment . Similar to the premise of the previous Saints Row games , the player 's goal is to lead the Third Street Saints gang to overtake its rival gangs in the city turf war . While the protagonist is the same , the game introduces a new setting , the city of Steelport , with its new gangs : the Morningstar , Luchadores , and Deckers , together known as the Syndicate . Once The Syndicate is defeated , the government 's Special Tactical Anti @-@ Gang unit ( STAG ) is summoned to quell the Saints . The Third is the first in the series to intertwine the narratives of its three @-@ gang structures , and also presents the player with story @-@ altering decisions . 
 The series has historically been considered a clone of Grand Theft Auto that later positioned itself as more " gleefully silly " in comparison . In combat , players select weapons from a weapon selection wheel , including regular pistols , submachine guns , shotguns , and rocket launchers alongside special weapons such as UAV drones and a fart @-@ in @-@ a @-@ jar stun grenade . Player melee attacks include running attacks such as <unk> and a purple dildo bat . Players may use vehicles to navigate the city , including a hover jet ( known as the F @-@ 69 VTOL ) and a pixelated <unk> tank that are unlocked through story missions . Once special vehicles are unlocked , they are in unlimited supply and can be delivered directly to the player @-@ character 's location . Player actions are intensified with what Volition calls the " awesome button " , where for example the player will <unk> through the windshield into the driver 's seat of a car . The main story campaign missions can be played alone , or cooperatively either online or via System Link offline . Some elements are added to the campaign for the second player . There is no competitive multiplayer , but a " wave @-@ based survival mode " called <unk> Mode that supports up to two players . 
 Players customize their characters after the introductory mission . Player @-@ character bodies , dress , and vehicles can be customized , as well as home properties . Players can additionally share their character designs in a Saints Row online community . Apart from the main story missions , there are optional diversions to make money and earn reputation , such as Insurance Fraud , where players hurt themselves in traffic to maximize self @-@ injury before a timer expires , or Mayhem , where players maximize property destruction before a time expires . Some of these diversions were introduced in previous Saints Row games . Activities serve the plot and are positioned as training the player @-@ character or damaging the Syndicate . They can also be repeated . Outside of structured diversions , players are free to make their own fun by purchasing property , shopping for items , finding hidden sex doll and money cache collectibles , and wreaking unsolicited havoc . There are also " flashpoint " gang operations that grant respect when disrupted . Attacking others increases the player 's notoriety level , as depicted with stars . 
 Saints Row : The Third introduced experience levels and weapon upgrades to the series . Most actions in the game come with incentives in the form of money and respect ( reputation ) . Money buys land , weapons , and other upgrades , and respect is a kind of experience point that can unlock player abilities like " no damage from falling " or " infinite sprint " , as well as upgrades to the player 's computer @-@ controlled gang member support . In turn , players receive further incentive to nearly miss car collisions , streak naked through the streets , shoot others in the groin , blow up Smart cars , and kill mascots in ambient challenges to earn more respect . Lack of respect does not hinder story progress , as it has in previous games . Player progress and unlocks are managed by an in @-@ game cell phone menu that also lets the player call for vehicle deliveries and non @-@ player character backup . The computer @-@ controlled support will also dialogue with each other . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Three years after the destruction of Ultor Corporation , the 3rd Street Saints street gang have become a media empire with their own energy drink , Japanese commercials , toys and large fanbase , with a movie in the works . However , when the Saints ' leader , The Boss , and two lieutenants , Shaundi and Johnny Gat , attempt to rob a bank as a publicity stunt , the bank tellers unexpectedly start shooting back . The police , who they had paid off beforehand , intervene and arrest the Saints . They are shortly released to the man who owned the bank , Phillipe Loren , the leader of a criminal organization known as " the Syndicate ; " on his private jet . Loren offers to let the Saints live if they turn over most of their earnings . The Saints ' leaders refuse and break out , but Gat is seemingly killed as the Boss and Shaundi escape via parachute . 
 Upon landing , the Boss and Shaundi find themselves in Steelport , a dystopian criminal city controlled by the Syndicate 's three gangs : The Morningstar , a gang controlled by Loren with advanced technology equipment ; The Luchadores , a Mexican gang led by the killer wrestler Eddie " Killbane " Pryor ; and the Deckers , a hacker @-@ based gang led by Matt Miller . The Boss quickly calls in Saints lieutenant Pierce Washington and begins attacking the Morningstar 's businesses , culminating with an attack on Loren 's headquarters . After rescuing and recruiting the giant superhuman Oleg <unk> , the basis of the cloned " brutes " the Syndicate uses , The Boss kills Loren . 
 The Saints return to their hometown of Stilwater for Gat 's funeral at the Hughes Memorial Bridge , but Killbane attacks the Saints and destroys the bridge . To retaliate , the Boss seeks out anti @-@ Syndicate talent , recruiting ex @-@ FBI hacker Kinzie Kensington ; Zimos , the oldest pimp in Steelport ; and Angel de la Muerte , Killbane 's vengeful former tag @-@ team partner . With Zimos ' help , The Boss clears out the Morningstar , during which Viola <unk> , one of Loren 's twin lieutenants , joins the Saints after Killbane kills her twin sister Kiki out of rage due to a failed assassination attempt on the Boss . Her defection , however , coincides with the arrival of paramilitary Special Tactical Anti @-@ Gang ( <unk> ) forces in Steelport , led by Cyrus Temple and created by Senator Monica Hughes to end gang violence once and for all . The Saints take on STAG whilst also dealing with the Syndicate , resulting in Steelport going under martial law . 
 The Boss works with Kinzie and Angel to eliminate The Deckers and The Luchadores , providing Kinzie with technology to enter the Deckers mainframe and killing the other wrestlers in Killbane 's <unk> XXXI pay @-@ per @-@ view to gain entrance . The Boss defeats Matt Miller 's avatar in a virtual reality fight to drive the Deckers out of town , and defeats Killbane at <unk> with Angel 's help . Following his humiliating defeat , Killbane instigates several attacks throughout Steelport to cause chaos . Whilst quelling the fighting between the Luchadores and STAG , the Boss is simultaneously informed by Angel that Killbane is escaping the city , while STAG second @-@ in @-@ command Kia is holding Shaundi , Viola , and Mayor Burt Reynolds hostage at a Steelport monument rigged to blow to frame the Saints . The Boss is given the choice to kill Killbane or save Shaundi . 
 In the canon ending , the Boss chooses to save Shaundi , disarming the explosives to save the monument and killing Kia to save Shaundi . The Saints are then held as heroes and STAG are kicked out of Steelport for their brutality . The ending shows the Boss tracking Killbane down to Mars and killing him , but it is revealed to be a scene from the Saints sci @-@ fi film Gangstas in Space , which the Boss and several members are acting in . If the Boss kills Killbane , The Saints are framed as terrorists and the monument 's destruction is used as a pretext by STAG to attack Steelport with the airborne aircraft carrier Daedalus . The Boss destroys the Daedalus , killing Cyrus Temple in the process , and declares Steelport an independent city @-@ state under the Saints ' control . 
 = = Development = = 
 Saints Row 2 's design philosophy was to " put everything ... into the game " , which made for a disjointed title with varied tone . Design director Scott Phillips said the series ' legacy of lightheartedness made the sequel 's tone hard to define . The development team withstood a high turnover between the two releases , with only a fifth of the final 100 @-@ person team having worked on a title in the series before . Saints Row : The Third was in development by September 2008 . For its first six months of development , the team tested a choice @-@ based adventure concept featuring an undercover agent infiltrating the Saints , which was dropped for not aligning with the spirit of the series . Now without a vision , the team made a " tone video " with film segments and songs that would define the new title . The final version featured bits from Bad Boys II , Shoot ' Em Up , Hot Fuzz , and Mötley Crüe 's " <unk> My Heart " . The team worked in this direction to find a personality for Saints Row : The Third , which it found in its signature " dildo bat " . The idea started as one @-@ off mission @-@ specific weapon and the artists ran with the concept . Their design mantra became " Embrace the Crazy ; Fun Trumps All " . 
 They came to the conclusion that " everything had to be ' over the top this time around ' " so as to distinguish Saints Row : The Third from other open world titles and to make the franchise into a AAA title . The team increased playtesting to check for the action 's pacing and " setpiece moments " within its overall flow . Producer Greg Donovan considered Saints Row : The Third a reboot of the franchise , " cohesive " in a way the prior two " semi @-@ serious " entries were not . Other than " over the top " themes , the team wanted " holy shit " " water cooler moments " that players would remember forever and want to share . Phillips also " didn 't want the player to be a dick " . 
 The city of Steelport was designed such that the player could identify locations without needing a minimap , with a spatially recognizable skyline and iconic gang vehicles in specific regions . 
 The title was not shown at the 2010 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) with the explanation that the company had spent the year " rebuilding the technology " , but a tie @-@ in movie was mentioned as in production and a Saints Row 3 announcement was expected at the December Spike <unk> . Saints Row : The Third was finally announced officially in March 2011 . The team wanted to include many different features and items , so scoping the final product became an issue . They laid out their ideas on a schedule and began to cut until over " 4000 man @-@ days of scheduled work " were removed , including features such as free @-@ running ( called " <unk> " ) and a cover system . Competitive multiplayer was removed due to its lack of popularity in the previous series entries . In retrospect , Phillips said he wanted to remove more . The studio borrowed people from other parts of the company to finish the project . Writer Drew Holmes expressed the difficulty in determining what was too risqué for the game . In keeping with series advertising , Saints Row : The Third included a porn star , Sasha Grey , in the production as a character voice . Other celebrity voice actors include Hulk Hogan and Daniel Dae Kim . 
 The development team also pre @-@ visualized rough drafts to sketch ideas for others to advance . For example , the introductory airplane level was pre @-@ visualized two years prior to its creation as a demonstration for the development team and publisher . Levels were built in Volition 's Core Technology Group ( <unk> ) editor , which was continually built in the four years preceding release . Like the other two titles , Saints Row : The Third was built in the Havok physics engine with customizations . The engine let the team build vehicle drifting physics and the VTOL aircraft . The studio considered the Red Faction series ' Geo @-@ Mod 2 engine but chose against it due to the implementation 's difficulty and not wanting that degree of destruction . Phillips gave a game development postmortem at the 2012 Game Developers Conference , where he advised studios to let development team members run with their ideas . Volition began to add modding support to the title and series in mid 2013 . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Saints Row : The Third has a licensed soundtrack available as radio stations when driving in vehicles . Players can switch between the playlists , which range from classical to electronic to hip @-@ hop , rock , or customize their own station based on their preferences . The original soundtrack was composed by Malcolm Kirby Jr . , who had previously worked on The Love Guru 's soundtrack . It was released through Sumthing Else Music Works alongside the game via compact disc and digital download . Kirby said the series ' over @-@ the @-@ top nature influenced the score , and that he was a huge fan of the series before he received the opportunity . In his composition , each gang has a theme and specific characteristics that range from " menacing orchestral to gangster hip hop to heavy metal " . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 The game was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 simultaneously on November 15 , 2011 , in the United States and Australia , and three days later in the United Kingdom . The November 17 , 2011 , Japan release had the veins removed from the Penetrator weapon ( the three @-@ foot long phallus bat ) due to regulatory restrictions on depictions of genitalia . In lieu of exclusive game content scheduled for the PlayStation 3 version that did not ship with the game , early North American and European players who purchased that version received a complimentary download code for Saints Row 2 . The summer before Saints Row : The Third 's release , THQ pledged to support it with a year 's worth of downloadable content . Around the time of release , Danny Bilson of THQ announced that Saints Row IV was already in planning . 
 Those who preordered the game received Professor Genki 's Hyper Ordinary <unk> Pack , which included Genki @-@ themed downloadable content ( a costume , a vehicle , and a weapon ) . A North American limited edition box set release called the Platinum Pack included the preorder content , the soundtrack , and a custom headset . Australia and New Zealand received two limited editions : the Smooth Criminal pack from EB Games and the Maximum Pleasure bundle from JB Hi @-@ Fi , each of which included tie @-@ in items along with the game and preorder content . 
 Though the game wasn 't shown at E3 2010 , THQ spoke of extensive tie @-@ in merchandising ( collectible card game , books ) and a Saints Row film in production as part of a " robust transmedia play " . Instead , THQ announced Saints Row : Drive By , a tie @-@ in game for the Nintendo 3DS and Xbox Live Arcade that would unlock content in Saints Row 3 . After the game was announced in March 2011 , it was featured on the cover of Game Informer 's April issue . Closer to release , THQ sent rap group the Broken Pixels a development kit with a pre @-@ release version of the game and asked them to record track about " all the wacky things " to do in the game . The group wrote the rap in a day and later produced a YouTube video set to clips from the game . THQ hosted an event in Redfern , Australia where women in skintight clothes pumped free gas for three hours , which generated an estimated 35 times return on investment . Eurogamer recalled that the game was " marketed almost exclusively on the basis of all the wacky stuff it will let you do " from the costumes to the sex toy weapons , and Edge described Saints Row : The Third as " marketed by sex toys and porn stars " . 
 Two weeks before the game 's release , Saints Row : The Third had four times the preorder count of Saints Row 2 at its comparable point . By January 2012 , the game had shipped 3 @.@ 8 million units worldwide , which THQ cited as an example for its business model change to focus on the big franchises . THQ President and CEO Brian Farrell expected to ship five to six million copies of the game in its lifetime . It had reached four million by April , and 5 @.@ 5 million by the end of the year . Saints Row : The Third was an unexpected continued success for the company . It was featured in the Humble THQ Bundle in November 2012 , the PlayStation Plus program in June 2013 , the Humble Deep Silver Bundle in July 2013 , and the Xbox Live Games with Gold program in May 2014 . 
 In April 2016 , Volition released a Linux port of the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers said the game did not try to be more than a good time , and described it as a variant of " ridiculous " , " zany " , or " absurd " . In another way , others called it " juvenile " . Critics praised the degree of customization options , and had mixed views of the array of activities , but found Professor Genki 's Super Ethical Reality Climax a high point . Some found the game 's ironic sexism to verge on misogyny , and that its other humor sometimes fell flat . Several critics referred to the game as the perfection of the Saints Row formula It was a nominee for Best Narrative at the 2012 Game Developers Conference , an IGN Editor 's Choice , and a recipient of perfect scores from GamesRadar and G4 . 
 Edge said that the series " wants to be the WarioWare of open @-@ city games " , " a cartoon <unk> of anything @-@ goes extremity " to Grand Theft Auto 's " ostentatious crime drama " . They wrote that the game 's " single @-@ minded " " puerile imagination " demanded respect and noted the game 's escalation of video game tropes and cultural references from Japanese game shows to text adventures to zombie apocalypses to lucha libre . Famitsu described the game as " ' pop ' crime action " , and IGN 's Daemon Hatfield called the game " an open world adult theme park " . He said that calling it " a good time would be a severe understatement " and praised its method of incentivizing almost every action in the game as " fantastic game design " . Hatfield was " addicted " to efficiently expanding his in @-@ game hourly income . GamesRadar 's Michael Grimm wrote Saints Row : The Third was nearly surreal , and praised the player @-@ character 's running attacks . 
 Referring to the historical comparison between the Saints Row and Grand Theft Auto series , Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer wrote that Grand Theft Auto IV 's serious turn let the Saints Row series be a " gleeful silly sandbox game " , and noted that Saints Row : The Third was " marketed almost exclusively " based on its wackiness , from the costumes to the sex toy weapons . He felt that the " wacky hijinks " quickly became " predictable and repetitive " and the activities felt " sanitized and generic " . Edge wrote that they were " one @-@ off gags " . Eurogamer 's Whitehead added that the tiger escort Guardian Angel missions appeared to draw from Will Ferrell 's Talladega Nights , and that the Prof. Genki 's Super Ethical Reality Climax shooting gallery drew from Bizarre Creations ' The Club shooter . Eurogamer and PC Gamer both found the game easy . 
 Ryan McCaffrey of Official Xbox Magazine thought that the game resolved some of the problems of open world design and thus allowed for an experience with good times and no filler , such as Burnout @-@ style arrows on the streets instead of hidden in the minimap GPS . He added that this was the game Volition " was born to make " . Grimm from GamesRadar similarly praised Volition for their " http : / / <unk> " mission , which was " so insanely creative and funny that it single handedly makes the game worth playing " . He added that the game 's unrealistic driving made the game more fun . IGN 's Hatfield was " really won ... over " by his character and both was convinced she cared about her friends and impressed by her voice actress . Whitehead of Eurogamer found Zimos , the pimp who speaks in <unk> , to be the game 's best character . Edge found some of the writing " sharp " and executed well by the voice actors . PC Gamer 's Tom Senior found the major story missions to be a highlight . Hatfield of IGN thought the single @-@ player game fell apart at the end and called the two endings either " a super downer " or nonsense . He found the cooperative mode easy to set up , but felt like the game 's missions were not designed well for multiple players , and that the visiting player became a " third wheel " . On the other hand , CBS News 's Christina Santiago called the cooperative mode " near perfect " and exemplary . 
 IGN 's Hatfield considered the game 's graphics average for the age . He " loved the neon @-@ lit towering skyscrapers of Steelport " but thought the streets were sometimes " lifeless " , as the game may be " open world " but not a " living world " . Edge added that the city was easy enough to navigate , but that it was missing character . Grimm of GamesRadar said it didn 't look bad , but wasn 't interesting . Multiple reviewers complained of " pop @-@ in " , or of graphical errors . 1UP.com reported the PC version 's graphics to be more stable , and Eurogamer 's Digital Foundry face @-@ off recommended the PlayStation 3 release for its lack of screen tearing . 
 Eurogamer 's Whitehead felt that the game crept closer " from ironic sexism to outright misogyny " in missions such as " Trojan Whores " and set pieces like " Tits n ' Grits " and " <unk> Inn " , even in the series ' " gloriously lowbrow standards " . Edge added that intent of humor in the sex trafficking @-@ related mission " The Ho Boat " did not come across well , and seemed to be included only for shock value . Hatfield of IGN related that some of the game 's more juvenile aspects made him cringe , and Edge wrote that the game felt " largely meaningless " in response to the desensitizing barrage of " context @-@ free <unk> " . PC Gamer 's Tom Senior said he was almost offended during much of the game but stayed more happy than disgusted , adding that while the game has a " huge purple dildo " , it doesn 't have the prostitute @-@ killing liberties or " other moments of nastiness " associated with the Grand Theft Auto franchise . 
 Whitehead of Eurogamer wrote in conclusion that the game doesn 't propose " anything particularly inventive " and instead ends up with a toy box of gadgets . Edge felt that the game was weakest where it leaned on Grand Theft Auto 's precedent without adding a social commentary . Eurogamer 's Whitehead added that Saints Row : The Third missed an opportunity to separate from " the GTA formula " , which Edge thought was done well in the last third of the game . IGN , however , felt the game was explicitly not a Grand Theft Auto clone , and G4 called it " a knockoff no more " . 
 Speaking to the future of THQ in June 2012 , its president , Jason Rubin , said that there is no place in the company " for a game that features a purple dildo " and that Volition chose that route because of the limited options and their " environment at the time " . 
 = = Downloadable content = = 
 Downloadable content for Saints Row : The Third has included additional story missions , weapons , and characters . A " definitive edition " , Saints Row : The Third – The Full Package , contains all post @-@ release downloadable content — including all three mission packs ( " Genkibowl VII " , " Gangstas in Space " , and " The Trouble with Clones " ) and bonus items ( clothes , vehicles , and weapons ) — in addition to the main game . The Full Package was announced in September 2012 for release two months later on PC , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 . 
 THQ announced an Enter the Dominatrix standalone expansion as an April Fool 's joke in 2012 . It was confirmed as in development the next month . In Enter the Dominatrix , the alien commander Zinyak imprisons the Saints ' leader in a simulation of Steelport called The Dominatrix so as to prevent interference when he takes over the planet . The expansion also added superpowers for the player @-@ character . In June , THQ said the expansion would be wrapped into a full sequel , tentatively titled " The Next Great Sequel in the Saints Row Franchise " and scheduled for a 2013 release . Parts of Enter the Dominatrix that weren 't incorporated into the sequel , Saints Row IV , were later released as downloadable content for the new title , under the same name . 
 = Chester A. Arthur = 
 Chester Alan Arthur ( October 5 , 1829 – November 18 , 1886 ) was an American attorney and politician who served as the 21st President of the United States ( 1881 – 85 ) ; he succeeded James A. Garfield upon the latter 's assassination . At the outset , Arthur struggled to overcome a slightly negative reputation , which stemmed from his early career in politics as part of New York 's Republican political machine . He succeeded by embracing the cause of civil service reform . His advocacy for , and subsequent enforcement of , the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act was the centerpiece of his administration . 
 Arthur was born in Fairfield , Vermont , grew up in upstate New York , and practiced law in New York City . He served as quartermaster general in the New York Militia during the American Civil War . Following the war , he devoted more time to Republican politics and quickly rose in the political machine run by New York Senator Roscoe Conkling . Appointed by President Ulysses S. Grant to the lucrative and politically powerful post of Collector of the Port of New York in 1871 , Arthur was an important supporter of Conkling and the Stalwart faction of the Republican Party . In 1878 the new president , Rutherford B. Hayes , fired Arthur as part of a plan to reform the federal patronage system in New York . When Garfield won the Republican nomination for president in 1880 , Arthur , an eastern Stalwart , was nominated for vice president to balance the ticket . 
 After just half a year as vice president , Arthur found himself in the executive mansion due to the assassination of his predecessor . To the surprise of reformers , Arthur took up the cause of reform , though it had once led to his expulsion from office . He signed the Pendleton Act into law and strongly enforced its provisions . He gained praise for his veto of a Rivers and Harbors Act that would have appropriated federal funds in a manner he thought excessive . He presided over the rebirth of the United States Navy , but was criticized for failing to alleviate the federal budget surplus , which had been accumulating since the end of the Civil War . 
 Suffering from poor health , Arthur made only a limited effort to secure the Republican Party 's nomination in 1884 ; he retired at the close of his term . Journalist Alexander McClure later wrote , " No man ever entered the Presidency so profoundly and widely distrusted as Chester Alan Arthur , and no one ever retired ... more generally respected , alike by political friend and foe . " Although his failing health and political temperament combined to make his administration less active than a modern presidency , he earned praise among contemporaries for his solid performance in office . The New York World summed up Arthur 's presidency at his death in 1886 : " No duty was neglected in his administration , and no adventurous project alarmed the nation . " Mark Twain wrote of him , " [ I ] t would be hard indeed to better President Arthur 's administration . " Over the 20th and 21st centuries , however , Arthur 's reputation mostly faded among the public . Although some have praised his economic policies , present @-@ day historians and scholars list him among the bottom half when ranking the American presidents . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Birth and family = = = 
 Chester Alan Arthur was born October 5 , 1829 , in Fairfield , Vermont . Arthur 's mother , Malvina Stone , was born in Vermont , the daughter of George Washington Stone and Judith Stevens . Malvina 's family was primarily of English descent , and her grandfather , Uriah Stone , fought in the Continental Army during the American Revolution . His father , William Arthur , was born in <unk> , <unk> , County Antrim , in what is now Northern Ireland ; he graduated from college in Belfast and emigrated to Canada in 1819 or 1820 . Arthur 's mother met his father while William Arthur was teaching at a school in Dunham , Quebec , just over the border from her native Vermont . The two married in Dunham on April 12 , 1821 , soon after meeting . After their first child , Regina , was born , the Arthurs moved to Vermont . They quickly moved from Burlington to Jericho , and finally to Waterville , as William received positions teaching at different schools . William Arthur also spent a brief time working to join the legal profession . While still in Waterville , William departed from his legal studies , as well as his Presbyterian upbringing , to join the Free Will Baptists , spending the rest of his life as a minister in that sect . William became an outspoken abolitionist , which often made him unpopular with members of his congregations and contributed to the family 's frequent moves . In 1828 , the family moved again , to Fairfield , where Chester Alan Arthur was born the following year ; he was the fifth of nine children . He was named " Chester " after Chester Abell , the physician and family friend who assisted in his birth , and " Alan " for his paternal grandfather . The family remained in Fairfield until 1832 , when William 's profession took them on the road again , to several towns in Vermont and upstate New York . The family finally settled in the Schenectady , New York , area . 
 The family 's frequent moves later spawned accusations that Chester Arthur was not a native @-@ born citizen of the United States . When Arthur was nominated for vice president in 1880 , a New York attorney and political opponent , Arthur P. Hinman , initially speculated that Arthur was born in Ireland and did not come to the United States until he was fourteen years old . Had that been true , opponents might have argued that Arthur was constitutionally ineligible for the vice presidency under the United States Constitution 's natural @-@ born @-@ citizen clause . When Hinman 's original story did not take root , he spread a new rumor that Arthur was born in Canada . This claim , too , failed to gain credence . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Arthur spent some of his childhood years living in the New York towns of York , Perry , Greenwich , Lansingburgh , Schenectady , and Hoosick . One of his first teachers said Arthur was a boy " frank and open in manners and genial in disposition . " During his time at school , he gained his first political inclinations and supported the Whig Party . He joined other young Whigs in support of Henry Clay , even participating in a brawl against students who supported James K. Polk . Arthur also supported the Fenian Brotherhood , an Irish republican organization founded in America ; he showed this support by wearing a green coat . Arthur enrolled at Union College , in Schenectady , New York , in 1845 , where he studied the traditional classical curriculum . As a senior , he was president of the debate society and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa . During his winter breaks , Arthur served as a teacher at a school in Schaghticoke . 
 After graduating , Arthur returned to Schaghticoke and became a full @-@ time teacher , and soon began to pursue an education in the law . While studying law , he continued teaching , moving closer to home by taking a job at a school in North Pownal , Vermont . Coincidentally , future president James A. Garfield taught penmanship at the same school three years later , but the two did not cross paths during their teaching careers . In 1852 , Arthur moved again , to Cohoes , New York , to become the principal of a school at which his sister , Malvina , was a teacher . In 1853 , after studying at State and National Law School in Ballston Spa , New York , and then saving enough money to relocate , Arthur moved to New York City to read law at the law office of Erastus D. Culver , an abolitionist lawyer and family friend . When Arthur was admitted to the bar in 1854 , he joined Culver 's firm , which was subsequently renamed Culver , Parker , and Arthur . 
 = = Early career = = 
 = = = New York lawyer = = = 
 When Arthur joined the firm , Culver and New York attorney John Jay ( the grandson of the Founding Father of the same name ) were pursuing a habeas corpus action against Jonathan Lemmon , a Virginia slaveholder who was passing through New York with his eight slaves . In Lemmon v. New York , Culver argued that , as New York law did not permit slavery , any slave arriving in New York was automatically freed . The argument was successful , and after several appeals was upheld by the New York Court of Appeals in 1860 . Campaign biographers would later give Arthur much of the credit for the victory ; in fact his role was minor , although he was certainly an active participant in the case . In another civil rights case in 1854 , Arthur was the lead attorney representing Elizabeth Jennings Graham after she was denied a seat on a streetcar because she was black . He won the case , and the verdict led to the desegregation of the New York City streetcar lines . 
 In 1856 , Arthur courted Ellen Herndon , the daughter of William Lewis Herndon , a Virginia naval officer . The two were soon engaged to be married . Later that year , he started a new law partnership with a friend , Henry D. Gardiner , and traveled with him to Kansas to consider purchasing land and setting up a law practice there . At that time , the state was the scene of a brutal struggle between pro @-@ slavery and anti @-@ slavery forces , and Arthur lined up firmly with the latter . The rough frontier life did not agree with the genteel New Yorkers ; after three or four months the two young lawyers returned to New York City , where Arthur comforted his fiancée after her father was lost at sea in the wreck of the SS Central America . In 1859 , they were married at Calvary Episcopal Church in Manhattan . After his marriage , Arthur devoted his efforts to building his law practice , but also found time to engage in Republican party politics . In addition , he indulged his military interest by becoming Judge Advocate General for the Second Brigade of the New York Militia . 
 = = = Civil War = = = 
 In 1861 , Arthur was appointed to the military staff of Governor Edwin D. Morgan as engineer @-@ in @-@ chief . The office was a patronage appointment of minor importance until the outbreak of the Civil War in April 1861 , when New York and the other northern states were faced with raising and equipping armies of a size never before seen in American history . Arthur was commissioned as a brigadier general and assigned to the state militia 's quartermaster department . He was so efficient at housing and outfitting the troops that poured into New York City that he was promoted to inspector general of the state militia in April 1862 , and then to quartermaster general that July . He had an opportunity to serve at the front when the 9th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment elected him colonel early in the war , but at Governor Morgan 's request , he turned it down to remain at his post in New York . He also turned down command of four New York City regiments organized as the Metropolitan Brigade , again at Morgan 's request . The closest Arthur came to the front was when he traveled south to inspect New York troops near Fredericksburg , Virginia , in May 1862 , shortly after forces under Major General Irvin McDowell seized the town during the Peninsula Campaign . That summer , he and other representatives of northern governors met with Secretary of State William H. Seward in New York to coordinate the raising of additional troops , and spent the next few months enlisting New York 's quota of 120 @,@ 000 men . Arthur received plaudits for his work , but his post was a political appointment , and he was relieved of his militia duties in January 1863 when Governor Horatio Seymour , a Democrat , took office . When Reuben Fenton won the 1864 election for governor , Arthur requested reappointment ; Fenton and Arthur were from different factions of the Republican Party , and Fenton had already committed to appointing another candidate , so Arthur did not return to military service . 
 Arthur later joined the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States ( MOLLUS ) as a Third Class Companion , the honorary membership category for militia officers and civilians who made significant contributions to the war effort . In addition , Grand Army of the Republic posts in Ogdensburg , Wisconsin and Medford , Oregon were named in his honor . 
 Arthur returned to being a lawyer with the help of additional contacts made in the military , he and the firm of Arthur & Gardiner flourished . Even as his professional life improved , however , Arthur and his wife experienced a personal tragedy as their only child , William , died suddenly that year at the age of three . The couple took their son 's death hard , and when they had another son , Chester Alan Jr . , in 1864 , they lavished attention on him . They also had a daughter , Ellen , in 1871 . Both children survived to adulthood . 
 Arthur 's political prospects improved along with his law practice when his patron , ex @-@ Governor Morgan , was elected to the United States Senate . He was hired by Thomas Murphy , a Republican politician , but also a friend of William M. Tweed , the boss of the Tammany Hall Democratic organization . Murphy was also a hatter who sold goods to the Union Army , and Arthur represented him in Washington . The two became associates within New York Republican party circles , eventually rising in the ranks of the conservative branch of the party dominated by Thurlow Weed . In the presidential election of 1864 , Arthur and Murphy raised funds from Republicans in New York and attended Abraham Lincoln 's inauguration in 1865 . 
 = = New York politician = = 
 = = = Conkling 's machine = = = 
 The end of the Civil War meant new opportunities for the men in Morgan 's Republican machine , including Arthur . Morgan leaned toward the conservative wing of the New York Republican party , as did the men who worked with him in the organization , including Weed , Seward ( who continued in office under President Andrew Johnson ) , and Roscoe Conkling ( an eloquent Utica Congressman and rising star in the party ) . Arthur rarely articulated his own political ideas during his time as a part of the machine ; as was common at the time , loyalty and hard work on the machine 's behalf was more important than actual political positions . 
 At the time , U.S. Custom Houses were managed by political appointees who served as Collector , Naval Officer and Surveyor . In 1866 , Arthur unsuccessfully attempted to secure the position of Naval Officer at the New York Custom House , a lucrative job subordinate only to the Collector . He continued his law practice ( now a solo practice after Gardiner 's death ) and his role in politics , becoming a member of the prestigious Century Club in 1867 . Conkling , elected in 1867 to the United States Senate , noticed Arthur and facilitated his rise in the party , and Arthur became chairman of the New York City Republican executive committee in 1868 . His ascent in the party hierarchy kept him busy most nights , and his wife resented his continual absence from the family home on party business . 
 Conkling succeeded to leadership of the conservative wing of New York 's Republicans by 1868 as Morgan concentrated more time and effort on national politics , including serving as chairman of the Republican National Committee . The Conkling machine was solidly behind General Ulysses S. Grant 's candidacy for president , and Arthur raised funds for Grant 's election in 1868 . The opposing Democratic machine in New York City , known as Tammany Hall , worked for Grant 's opponent , former New York Governor Horatio Seymour ; while Grant was victorious in the national vote , Seymour narrowly carried the state of New York . Arthur began to devote more of his time to politics and less to law , and in 1869 he became counsel to the New York City tax commission , appointed when Republicans controlled the state legislature . He remained at the job until 1870 at a salary of $ 10 @,@ 000 a year . Arthur resigned after Democrats controlled by William M. Tweed of Tammany Hall won a legislative majority , which meant they could name their own appointee . In 1871 Grant offered to name Arthur as Commissioner of Internal Revenue , replacing Alfred Pleasonton ; Arthur declined the appointment . 
 Shortly thereafter , President Grant gave Conkling control over New York patronage , including the Customs House at the Port of New York . Having become friendly with Murphy over their shared love of horses during summer vacations on the Jersey Shore , Grant appointed him to the Collector 's position . Murphy 's reputation as a war profiteer and his association with Tammany Hall made him unacceptable to many of his own party , but Conkling convinced the Senate to confirm him . The Collector was responsible for hiring hundreds of workers to collect the tariffs due at the United States ' busiest port . Typically , these jobs were dispensed to adherents of the political machine responsible for appointing the Collector . Employees were required to make political contributions ( known as " assessments " ) back to the machine , which made the job a highly coveted political plum . Murphy 's unpopularity only increased as he replaced workers loyal to Senator Reuben Fenton 's faction of the Republican party with those loyal to Conkling 's . Eventually , the pressure to replace Murphy grew too great , and Grant asked for his resignation in 1871 . Grant offered the position to John Augustus Griswold and William Orton , each of whom declined and recommended Arthur . Grant then nominated Arthur , with the New York Times commenting , " his name very seldom rises to the surface of metropolitan life and yet moving like a mighty undercurrent this man during the last 10 years has done more to mold the course of the Republican Party in this state than any other one man in the country . " 
 The Senate confirmed Arthur 's appointment ; as Collector he controlled nearly a thousand jobs and received compensation as great as any federal officeholder . Arthur 's salary was initially $ 6 @,@ 500 , but senior customs employees were compensated additionally by the " moiety " system , which awarded them a percentage of the cargoes seized and fines levied on importers who attempted to evade the tariff . In total , his income came to more than $ 50 @,@ 000 — more than the president 's salary , and more than enough for him to enjoy fashionable clothes and a lavish lifestyle . Among those who dealt with the Custom House , Arthur was one of the era 's more popular collectors . He got along with his subordinates and , since Murphy had already filled the staff with Conkling 's adherents , he had few occasions to fire anyone . He was also popular within the Republican party as he efficiently collected campaign assessments from the staff and placed party leaders ' friends in jobs as positions became available . Arthur had a better reputation than Murphy , but reformers still criticized the patronage structure and the moiety system as corrupt . A rising tide of reform within the party caused Arthur to rename the financial extractions from employees as " voluntary contributions " in 1872 , but the concept remained , and the party reaped the benefit of controlling government jobs . In that year , reform @-@ minded Republicans formed the Liberal Republican party and voted against Grant , but he was re @-@ elected in spite of their opposition . Nevertheless , the movement for civil service reform continued to chip away at Conkling 's patronage machine ; in 1874 Custom House employees were found to have improperly assessed fines against an importing company as a way to increase their own incomes , and Congress reacted , repealing the moiety system and putting the staff , including Arthur , on regular salaries . As a result , his income dropped to $ 12 @,@ 000 a year — more than his nominal boss , the Secretary of the Treasury , but far less than what Arthur had previously received . 
 = = = Clash with Hayes = = = 
 Arthur 's four @-@ year term as Collector expired on December 10 , 1875 , and Conkling , then among the most powerful politicians in Washington , arranged his protégé 's reappointment by President Grant . By 1876 , Conkling was considering a run for the presidency himself , but the selection of reformer Rutherford B. Hayes by the 1876 Republican National Convention preempted the machine boss . Arthur and the machine gathered campaign funds with their usual zeal , but Conkling limited his own campaign activities to a few speeches . Hayes 's opponent , New York Governor Samuel J. Tilden , carried New York and won the popular vote nationwide , but after the resolution of several months of disputes over twenty electoral votes ( from the states of Florida , Louisiana , Oregon , and South Carolina ) , he lost the presidency . 
 Hayes entered office with a pledge to reform the patronage system ; in 1877 , he and Treasury Secretary John Sherman made Conkling 's machine the primary target . Sherman ordered a commission led by John Jay to investigate the New York Custom House . Jay , with whom Arthur had collaborated in the Lemmon case two decades earlier , suggested that the Custom House was overstaffed with political appointments , and that 20 % of the employees were expendable . Sherman was less enthusiastic about the reforms than Hayes and Jay , but he approved the commission 's report and ordered Arthur to make the personnel reductions . Arthur appointed a committee of Custom House workers to determine where the cuts were to be made and , after a written protest , carried them out . Notwithstanding his cooperation , the Jay Commission issued a second report critical of Arthur and other Custom House employees , and subsequent reports urging a complete reorganization . 
 Hayes further struck at the heart of the spoils system by issuing an executive order that forbade assessments and barred federal office holders from " tak [ ing ] part in the management of political organizations , caucuses , conventions , or election campaigns " . Arthur and his subordinates , Naval Officer Alonzo B. Cornell and Surveyor George H. Sharpe , refused to obey the president 's order ; Sherman encouraged Arthur to resign , offering him appointment by Hayes to the consulship in Paris in exchange , but Arthur refused . In September 1877 , Hayes demanded the three men 's resignations , which they refused to give . Hayes then submitted the appointment of Theodore Roosevelt , Sr. , L. Bradford Prince , and Edwin Merritt ( all supporters of Conkling 's rival William M. Evarts ) to the Senate for confirmation as their replacements . The Senate 's Commerce Committee , chaired by Conkling , unanimously rejected all the nominees ; the full Senate rejected Roosevelt and Prince by a vote of 31 – 25 , and confirmed Merritt only because Sharpe 's term had expired . 
 Arthur 's job was only spared until July 1878 , when Hayes took advantage of a Congressional recess to fire him and Cornell , replacing them with the recess appointment of Merritt and Silas W. Burt . Hayes again offered Arthur the position of consul general in Paris as a face @-@ saving consolation ; Arthur again declined , as Hayes knew he probably would . Conkling opposed the confirmation of Merritt and Burt when the Senate reconvened in February 1879 , but Merritt was approved by a vote of 31 – 25 , as was Burt by 31 – 19 , giving Hayes his most significant civil service reform victory . Arthur immediately took advantage of the resulting free time to work for the election of Edward Cooper as New York City 's next mayor . In September 1879 Arthur became Chairman of the New York State Republican Executive Committee , a post in which he served until October 1881 . In the state elections of 1879 , he and Conkling worked to ensure that the Republican nominees for state offices would be men of Conkling 's faction , who had become known as Stalwarts . They were successful , but narrowly , as Cornell was nominated for governor by a vote of 234 – 216 . Arthur and Conkling campaigned vigorously for the Stalwart ticket and , owing partly to a splintering of the Democratic vote , were victorious . Arthur and the machine had rebuked Hayes and their intra @-@ party rivals , but Arthur had only a few days to enjoy his triumph when , on January 12 , 1880 , his wife died suddenly while he was in Albany organizing the political agenda for the coming year . Arthur felt devastated , and perhaps guilty , and never remarried . 
 = = Election of 1880 = = 
 Conkling and his fellow Stalwarts , including Arthur , wished to follow up their 1879 success at the 1880 Republican National Convention by securing the nomination for their ally , ex @-@ President Grant . Their opponents in the Republican party , known as Half @-@ Breeds , concentrated their efforts on James G. Blaine , a Senator from Maine who was more amenable to civil service reform . Neither candidate commanded a majority of delegates and , deadlocked after thirty @-@ six ballots , the convention turned to a dark horse , James A. Garfield , an Ohio Congressman and Civil War General who was neither Stalwart nor Half @-@ Breed . 
 Garfield and his supporters knew they would face a difficult election without the support of the New York Stalwarts and decided to offer one of them the vice presidential nomination . Levi P. Morton , the first choice of Garfield 's supporters , consulted with Conkling , who advised him to decline , which he did . They next approached Arthur , and Conkling advised him to also reject the nomination , believing the Republicans would lose . Arthur thought otherwise and accepted . According to a purported eyewitness account by journalist William C. Hudson , Conkling and Arthur argued , with Arthur telling Conkling , " The office of the Vice @-@ President is a greater honor than I ever dreamed of attaining . " Conkling eventually relented , and campaigned for the ticket . 
 As expected , the election was close . The Democratic nominee , General Winfield Scott Hancock , was popular and , having avoided taking definitive positions on most issues of the day , he had not offended any pivotal constituencies . As Republicans had done since the end of the Civil War , Garfield and Arthur initially focused their campaign on the " bloody shirt " — the idea that returning Democrats to office would undo the victory of the Civil War and reward secessionists . With the war fifteen years in the past and Union generals at the head of both tickets , the tactic was less effective than the Republicans hoped . Realizing this , they adjusted their approach to claim that Democrats would lower the country 's protective tariff , which would allow cheaper manufactured goods to be imported from Europe , and thereby put thousands out of work . This argument struck home in the swing states of New York and Indiana , where many were employed in manufacturing . Hancock did not help his own cause when , in an attempt to remain neutral on the tariff , he said that " [ t ] he tariff question is a local question " , which only served to make him appear uninformed about an important issue . Candidates for high office did not personally campaign in those days , but as state Republican chairman , Arthur played a part in the campaign in his usual fashion : overseeing the effort in New York and raising money . The funds were crucial in the close election , and winning his home state of New York was critical . The Republicans carried New York by 20 @,@ 000 votes and , in an election with the largest turnout of qualified voters ever recorded — 78 @.@ 4 % — they won the nationwide popular vote by just 7 @,@ 018 votes . The electoral college result was more decisive — 214 to 155 — and Garfield and Arthur were elected . 
 = = Vice presidency = = 
 After the election , Arthur worked in vain to persuade Garfield to fill certain positions with his fellow New York Stalwarts — especially that of the Secretary of the Treasury ; the Stalwart machine received a further rebuke when Garfield appointed Blaine , Conkling 's arch @-@ enemy , as Secretary of State . The running mates , never close , detached as Garfield continued to freeze out the Stalwarts from his patronage . Arthur 's status in the administration diminished when , a month before inauguration day , he gave a speech before reporters suggesting the election in Indiana , a swing state , had been won by Republicans through illegal machinations . Garfield ultimately appointed a Stalwart , Thomas Lemuel James , to be Postmaster General , but the cabinet fight and Arthur 's ill @-@ considered speech left the President and Vice President clearly estranged when they took office on March 4 , 1881 . 
 The Senate in the 47th United States Congress was divided among 37 Republicans , 37 Democrats , one independent ( David Davis ) who caucused with the Democrats , one Readjuster ( William Mahone ) , and four vacancies . Immediately , the Democrats attempted to organize the Senate , knowing that the vacancies would soon be filled by Republicans . As vice president , Arthur cast tie @-@ breaking votes in favor of the Republicans when Mahone opted to join their caucus . Even so , the Senate remained deadlocked for two months over Garfield 's nominations because of Conkling 's opposition to some of them . Just before going into recess in May 1881 , the situation became more complicated when Conkling and the other Senator from New York , Thomas C. Platt , resigned in protest of Garfield 's continuing opposition to their faction . 
 With the Senate in recess , Arthur had no duties in Washington and returned to New York City . Once there , he traveled with Conkling to Albany , where the former Senator hoped for a quick re @-@ election to the Senate , and with it , a defeat for the Garfield administration . The Republican majority in the state legislature was divided on the question , to Conkling and Platt 's surprise , and an intense campaign in the state house ensued . 
 While in Albany on July 2 , Arthur learned that Garfield had been shot . The assassin , Charles J. Guiteau , was a deranged office @-@ seeker who believed that Garfield 's successor would appoint him to a patronage job . He proclaimed to onlookers : " I am a Stalwart , and Arthur will be President ! " Guiteau was found to be mentally unstable , and despite his claims to be a Stalwart supporter of Arthur , they had only a tenuous connection that dated from the 1880 campaign . 
 More troubling was the lack of legal guidance on presidential succession : as Garfield lingered near death , no one was sure who , if anyone , could exercise presidential authority . Also , after Conkling 's resignation , the Senate had adjourned without electing a president pro tempore , who would normally follow Arthur in the succession . Arthur was reluctant to be seen acting as president while Garfield lived , and for the next two months there was a void of authority in the executive office , with Garfield too weak to carry out his duties , and Arthur reluctant to assume them . Through the summer , Arthur refused to travel to Washington and was at his Lexington Avenue home when , on the night of September 19 , he learned that Garfield had died . Judge John R. Brady of the New York Supreme Court administered the oath of office in Arthur 's home at 2 : 15 a.m. on September 20 . Later that day he took a train to Long Branch to pay his respects to Garfield and to leave a card of sympathy for his wife , afterwards returning to New York City . On the 21st , he returned to Long Branch to take part in Garfield 's funeral , and then joined the funeral train to Washington . Before leaving New York , he ensured the presidential line of succession by preparing and mailing to the White House a proclamation calling for a Senate special session . This step ensured that the Senate had legal authority to convene immediately and choose a Senate president pro tempore , who would be able to assume the presidency if Arthur died . Once in Washington he destroyed the mailed proclamation and issued a formal call for a special session . 
 = = Presidency 1881 – 85 = = 
 = = = Taking office = = = 
 Arthur arrived in Washington , D.C. on September 21 . On September 22 he re @-@ took the oath of office , this time before Chief Justice Morrison R. Waite . Arthur took this step to ensure procedural compliance ; there had been a lingering question about whether a state court judge ( Brady ) could administer a federal oath of office . He initially took up residence at the home of Senator John P. Jones , while White House remodeling he ordered was carried out , including the addition of an elaborate fifty @-@ foot glass screen made by Louis Comfort Tiffany , which remained in a White House corridor until it was dismantled in 1902 . 
 Arthur 's sister , Mary Arthur McElroy , served as White House hostess for her widowed brother ; Arthur became Washington 's most eligible bachelor and his social life became the subject of rumors , though romantically , he remained singularly devoted to the memory of his late wife . His son , Chester Jr . , was then a freshman at Princeton University and his daughter , Nell , stayed in New York with a governess until 1882 ; when she arrived , Arthur shielded her from the intrusive press as much as he could . 
 Arthur quickly came into conflict with Garfield 's cabinet , most of whom represented his opposition within the party . He asked the cabinet members to remain until December , when Congress would reconvene , but Treasury Secretary William Windom submitted his resignation in October to enter a Senate race in his home state of Minnesota . Arthur then selected Charles J. Folger , his friend and fellow New York Stalwart as Windom 's replacement . Attorney General Wayne MacVeagh was next to resign , believing that , as a reformer , he had no place in an Arthur cabinet . Despite Arthur 's personal appeal to remain , MacVeagh resigned in December 1881 and Arthur replaced him with Benjamin H. Brewster , a Philadelphia lawyer and machine politician reputed to have reformist leanings . Blaine , nemesis of the Stalwart faction , remained Secretary of State until Congress reconvened , then departed immediately . Conkling expected Arthur to appoint him in Blaine 's place , but the President chose Frederick T. Frelinghuysen of New Jersey , a Stalwart recommended by ex @-@ President Grant . Frelinghuysen advised Arthur not to fill any future vacancies with Stalwarts , but when Postmaster General James resigned in January 1882 , Arthur selected Timothy O. Howe , a Wisconsin Stalwart . Navy Secretary William H. Hunt was next to resign , in April 1882 , and Arthur attempted a more balanced approach by appointing William E. Chandler to the post , on Blaine 's recommendation . Finally , when Interior Secretary Samuel J. Kirkwood resigned that same month , Arthur appointed Henry M. Teller , a Colorado Stalwart to the office . Of the Cabinet members Arthur had inherited from Garfield , only Secretary of War Robert Todd Lincoln remained for the entirety of Arthur 's term . 
 = = = Civil service reform = = = 
 In the 1870s , a scandal was exposed , in which contractors for star postal routes were greatly overpaid for their services with the connivance of government officials ( including Second Assistant Postal Secretary Thomas J. Brady and former Senator Stephen Wallace Dorsey ) . Reformers feared Arthur , as a former supporter of the spoils system , would not commit to continuing the investigation into the scandal . But Arthur 's Attorney General , Brewster , did in fact continue the investigations begun by <unk> , and hired notable Democratic lawyers William W. Ker and Richard T. Merrick to strengthen the prosecution team and forestall the skeptics . Although Arthur had worked closely with Dorsey before his presidency , once in office he supported the investigation and forced the resignation of officials suspected in the scandal . An 1882 trial of the ringleaders resulted in convictions for two minor conspirators and a hung jury for the rest . After a juror came forward with allegations that the defendants attempted to bribe him , the judge set aside the guilty verdicts and granted a new trial . Before the second trial began , Arthur removed five federal office holders who were sympathetic with the defense , including a former Senator . The second trial began in December 1882 and lasted until July 1883 and , again , did not result in a guilty verdict . Failure to obtain a conviction tarnished the administration 's image , but Arthur did succeed in putting a stop to the fraud . 
 Garfield 's assassination by a deranged office seeker amplified the public demand for civil service reform . Both Democratic and Republican leaders realized that they could attract the votes of reformers by turning against the spoils system and , by 1882 , a bipartisan effort began in favor of reform . In 1880 , Democratic Senator George H. Pendleton of Ohio introduced legislation that required selection of civil servants based on merit as determined by an examination . In his first annual presidential address to Congress in 1881 , Arthur requested civil service reform legislation and Pendleton again introduced his bill , but Congress did not pass it . Republicans lost seats in the 1882 congressional elections , in which Democrats campaigned on the reform issue . As a result , the lame @-@ duck session of Congress was more amenable to civil service reform ; the Senate approved Pendleton 's bill 38 – 5 and the House soon concurred by a vote of 155 – 47 . Arthur signed the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act into law on January 16 , 1883 . In just two years ' time , an unrepentant Stalwart had become the president who ushered in long @-@ awaited civil service reform . 
 At first , the act applied only to 10 % of federal jobs and , without proper implementation by the president , it could have gone no further . Even after he signed the act into law , its proponents doubted Arthur 's commitment to reform . To their surprise , he acted quickly to appoint the members of the Civil Service Commission that the law created , naming reformers Dorman Bridgman Eaton , John Milton Gregory , and Leroy D. Thoman as commissioners . The chief examiner , Silas W. Burt , was a long @-@ time reformer who had been Arthur 's opponent when the two men worked at the New York Customs House . The commission issued its first rules in May 1883 ; by 1884 , half of all postal officials and three @-@ quarters of the Customs Service jobs were to be awarded by merit . That year , Arthur expressed satisfaction with the new system , praising its effectiveness " in securing competent and faithful public servants and in protecting the appointing officers of the Government from the pressure of personal importunity and from the labor of examining the claims and pretensions of rival candidates for public employment . " 
 = = = Surplus and the tariff = = = 
 With high revenue held over from wartime taxes , the federal government had collected more than it spent since 1866 ; by 1882 the surplus reached $ 145 million . Opinions varied on how to balance the budget ; the Democrats wished to lower tariffs , in order to reduce revenues and the cost of imported goods , while Republicans believed that high tariffs ensured high wages in manufacturing and mining . They preferred the government spend more on internal improvements and reduce excise taxes . Arthur agreed with his party , and in 1882 called for the abolition of excise taxes on everything except liquor , as well as a simplification of the complex tariff structure . In May of that year , Representative William D. Kelley of Pennsylvania introduced a bill to establish a tariff commission ; the bill passed and Arthur signed it into law but appointed mostly protectionists to the committee . Republicans were pleased with the committee 's make @-@ up but were surprised when , in December 1882 , they submitted a report to Congress calling for tariff cuts averaging between 20 and 25 % . The commission 's recommendations were ignored , however , as the House Ways and Means Committee , dominated by protectionists , provided a 10 % reduction . After conference with the Senate , the bill that emerged only reduced tariffs by an average of 1 @.@ 47 % . The bill passed both houses narrowly on March 3 , 1883 , the last full day of the 47th Congress ; Arthur signed the measure into law , with no effect on the surplus . 
 Congress attempted to balance the budget from the other side of the ledger , with increased spending on the 1882 Rivers and Harbors Act in the unprecedented amount of $ 19 million . While Arthur was not opposed to internal improvements , the scale of the bill disturbed him , as did its narrow focus on " particular localities , " rather than projects that benefited a larger part of the nation . On August 1 , 1882 , Arthur vetoed the bill to widespread popular acclaim ; in his veto message , his principal objection was that it appropriated funds for purposes " not for the common defense or general welfare , and which do not promote commerce among the States . " Congress overrode his veto the next day and the new law reduced the surplus by $ 19 million . Republicans considered the law a success at the time , but later concluded that it contributed to their loss of seats in the elections of 1882 . 
 = = = Foreign affairs and immigration = = = 
 During the Garfield administration , Secretary of State James G. Blaine attempted to invigorate United States diplomacy in Latin America , urging reciprocal trade agreements and offering to mediate disputes among the Latin American nations . Blaine , venturing a greater involvement in affairs south of the Rio Grande , proposed a Pan @-@ American conference in 1882 to discuss trade and an end to the War of the Pacific being fought by Bolivia , Chile , and Peru . Blaine did not remain in office long enough to see the effort through , and when Frederick T. Frelinghuysen replaced him at the end of 1881 , the conference efforts lapsed . Frelinghuysen also discontinued Blaine 's peace efforts in the War of the Pacific , fearing that the United States might be drawn into the conflict . Arthur and Frelinghuysen continued Blaine 's efforts to encourage trade among the nations of the Western Hemisphere ; a treaty with Mexico providing for reciprocal tariff reductions was signed in 1882 and approved by the Senate in 1884 . Legislation required to bring the treaty into force failed in the House , however , rendering it a dead letter . Similar efforts at reciprocal trade treaties with Santo Domingo and Spain 's American colonies were defeated by February 1885 , and an existing reciprocity treaty with the Kingdom of Hawaii was allowed to lapse . 
 The 47th Congress spent a great deal of time on immigration , and at times was in accord with Arthur . In July 1882 Congress easily passed a bill regulating steamships that carried immigrants to the United States . To their surprise , Arthur vetoed it and requested revisions , which they made and which Arthur then approved . He also signed in August of that year the Immigration Act of 1882 , which levied a 50 @-@ cent tax on immigrants to the United States , and excluded from entry the mentally ill , the intellectually disabled , criminals , or any other person potentially dependent upon public assistance . 
 A more contentious debate materialized over the status of Chinese immigrants ; in January 1868 , the Senate had ratified the Burlingame Treaty with China , allowing an unrestricted flow of Chinese into the country . As the economy soured after the Panic of 1873 , Chinese immigrants were blamed for depressing workmen 's wages ; in reaction Congress in 1879 attempted to abrogate the 1868 treaty by passing the Chinese Exclusion Act , but President Hayes vetoed it . Three years later , after China had agreed to treaty revisions , Congress tried again to exclude Chinese immigrants ; Senator John F. Miller of California introduced another Chinese Exclusion Act that denied Chinese immigrants United States citizenship and banned their immigration for a twenty @-@ year period . The bill passed the Senate and House by overwhelming margins , but this as well was vetoed by Arthur , who concluded the 20 @-@ year ban to be a breach of the renegotiated treaty of 1880 . That treaty allowed only a " reasonable " suspension of immigration . Eastern newspapers praised the veto , while it was condemned in the Western states . Congress was unable to override the veto , but passed a new bill reducing the immigration ban to ten years . Although he still objected to this denial of citizenship to Chinese immigrants , Arthur acceded to the compromise measure , signing the Chinese Exclusion Act into law on May 6 , 1882 . 
 = = = Naval reform = = = 
 In the years following the Civil War , American naval power declined precipitously , shrinking from nearly 700 vessels to just 52 , most of which were obsolete . The nation 's military focus over the fifteen years before Garfield and Arthur 's election had been on the Indian wars in the West , rather than the high seas , but as the region was increasingly pacified , many in Congress grew concerned at the poor state of the Navy . Garfield 's Secretary of the Navy , William H. Hunt , advocated reform of the Navy and his successor , William E. Chandler , appointed an advisory board to prepare a report on modernization . Based on the suggestions in the report , Congress appropriated funds for the construction of three steel protected cruisers ( Atlanta , Boston , and Chicago ) and an armed dispatch @-@ steamer ( Dolphin ) , collectively known as the " ABCD Ships " or the " Squadron of Evolution " . Congress also approved funds to rebuild four monitors ( Puritan , Amphitrite , Monadnock , and Terror , ) which had lain uncompleted since 1877 . The contracts to build the ABCD ships were all awarded to the low bidder , John Roach & Sons of Chester , Pennsylvania , even though Roach once employed Secretary Chandler as a lobbyist . Democrats turned against the " New Navy " projects and , when they won control of the 48th Congress , refused to appropriate funds for seven more steel warships . Even without the additional ships , the state of the Navy improved when , after several construction delays , the last of the new ships entered service in 1889 . 
 = = = Civil rights = = = 
 Like his Republican predecessors , Arthur struggled with the question of how his party was to challenge the Democrats in the South and how , if at all , to protect the civil rights of black southerners . Since the end of Reconstruction , conservative white Democrats ( or " Bourbon Democrats " ) had regained power in the South , and the Republican party dwindled rapidly as their primary supporters in the region , blacks , were disenfranchised . One crack in the solidly Democratic South emerged with the growth of a new party , the Readjusters , in Virginia . Having won an election in that state on a platform of more education funding ( for black and white schools alike ) and abolition of the poll tax and the whipping post , many northern Republicans saw the Readjusters as a more viable ally in the South than the moribund southern Republican party . Arthur agreed , and directed the federal patronage in Virginia through the Readjusters rather than the Republicans . He followed the same pattern in other Southern states , forging coalitions with independents and Greenback Party members . Some black Republicans felt betrayed by the pragmatic gambit , but others ( including Frederick Douglass and ex @-@ Senator Blanche K. Bruce ) endorsed the administration 's actions , as the Southern independents had more liberal racial policies than the Democrats . Arthur 's coalition policy was only successful in Virginia , however , and by 1885 the Readjuster movement began to collapse with the election of a Democratic president . 
 Other federal action on behalf of blacks was equally ineffective : when the Supreme Court struck down the Civil Rights Act of 1875 in an 1883 decision , Arthur expressed his disagreement with the decision in a message to Congress , but was unable to persuade Congress to pass any new legislation in its place . Arthur did , however , effectively intervene to overturn a court @-@ martial ruling against a black West Point cadet , Johnson Whittaker , after the Judge Advocate General of the Army , David G. <unk> , found the prosecution 's case against Whittaker to be illegal and based on racism . The administration faced a different challenge in the West , where the LDS Church was under government pressure to stop the practice of polygamy in Utah Territory . Garfield had believed polygamy was criminal behavior and was morally detrimental to family values , and Arthur 's views were , for once , in line with his predecessor 's . In 1882 , he signed the Edmunds Act into law ; the legislation made polygamy a federal crime , barring polygamists both from public office and the right to vote . 
 = = = Native American policy = = = 
 The Arthur administration was challenged by changing relations with western American Indian tribes . The Indian Wars were winding down , and public sentiment was shifting toward more favorable treatment of Native Americans . Arthur urged Congress to increase funding for Indian education , which it did in 1884 , although not to the extent he wished . He also favored a move to the allotment system , under which individual Native Americans , rather than tribes , would own land . Arthur was unable to convince Congress to adopt the idea during his administration but , in 1887 , the Dawes Act changed the law to favor such a system . The allotment system was favored by liberal reformers at the time , but eventually proved detrimental to Native Americans as most of their land was resold at low prices to white speculators . During Arthur 's presidency , settlers and cattle ranchers continued to encroach on Indian territory . Arthur initially resisted their efforts , but after Secretary of the Interior Henry M. Teller , an opponent of allotment , assured him that the lands were not protected , Arthur opened up the Crow Creek Reservation in the Dakota Territory to settlers by executive order in 1885 . Arthur 's successor , Grover Cleveland , finding that title belonged to the Indians , revoked Arthur 's order a few months later . 
 = = = Health , travel , and 1884 election = = = 
 Shortly after becoming president , Arthur was diagnosed with Bright 's disease , a kidney ailment now referred to as nephritis . He attempted to keep his condition private , but by 1883 rumors of his illness began to circulate ; he had become thinner and more aged in appearance , and struggled to keep the pace of the presidency . To rejuvenate his health outside the confines of Washington , Arthur and some political friends traveled to Florida in April 1883 . The vacation had the opposite effect , and Arthur suffered from intense pain before returning to Washington . Later that year , on the advice of Missouri Senator George Graham Vest , he visited Yellowstone National Park . Reporters accompanied the presidential party , helping to publicize the new National Park system . The Yellowstone trip was more beneficial to Arthur 's health than his Florida excursion , and he returned to Washington refreshed after two months of travel . 
 As the 1884 presidential election approached , James G. Blaine was considered the favorite for the Republican nomination , but Arthur , too , contemplated a run for a full term as president . In the months leading up to the 1884 Republican National Convention , however , Arthur began to realize that neither faction of the Republican party was prepared to give him their full support : the Half @-@ Breeds were again solidly behind Blaine , while Stalwarts were undecided ; some backed Arthur , with others considering Senator John A. Logan of Illinois . Reform @-@ minded Republicans , friendlier to Arthur after he endorsed civil service reform , were still not certain enough of his reform credentials to back him over Senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont , who had long favored their cause . Business leaders supported him , as did Southern Republicans who owed their jobs to his control of the patronage , but by the time they began to rally around him , Arthur had decided against a serious campaign for the nomination . He kept up a token effort , believing that to drop out would cast doubt on his actions in office and raise questions about his health , but by the time the convention began in June , his defeat was assured . Blaine led on the first ballot , and by the fourth ballot he had a majority . Arthur telegraphed his congratulations to Blaine and accepted his defeat with equanimity . He played no role in the 1884 campaign , which Blaine would later blame for his loss that November to the Democratic nominee , Grover Cleveland . 
 = = = Administration and cabinet = = = 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 Arthur made appointments to fill two vacancies on the United States Supreme Court . The first vacancy arose in July 1881 with the death of Associate Justice Nathan Clifford , a Democrat who had been a member of the Court since before the Civil War . Arthur nominated Horace Gray , a distinguished jurist from the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court to replace him , and the nomination was easily confirmed . The second vacancy occurred when Associate Justice Ward Hunt retired in January 1882 . Arthur first nominated his old political boss , Roscoe Conkling ; he doubted that Conkling would accept , but felt obligated to offer a high office to his former patron . The Senate confirmed the nomination but , as expected , Conkling declined it , the last time a confirmed nominee declined an appointment . Senator George Edmunds was Arthur 's next choice , but he declined to be considered . Instead , Arthur nominated Samuel Blatchford , who had been a judge on the Second Circuit Court of Appeals for the prior four years . Blatchford accepted , and his nomination was approved by the Senate within two weeks . Blatchford served on the Court until his death in 1893 . 
 = = Retirement , death , and memorials = = 
 Arthur left office in 1885 and returned to his New York City home . Two months before the end of his term , several New York Stalwarts approached him to request that he run for United States Senate , but he declined , preferring to return to his old law practice at Arthur , <unk> & Ransom . His health limited his activity with the firm , and Arthur served only of counsel . He took on few assignments with the firm and was often too ill to leave his house . He managed a few public appearances , until the end of 1885 . 
 After spending the summer of 1886 in New London , Connecticut , he returned home , and became seriously ill and , on November 16 , ordered nearly all of his papers , both personal and official , burned . The next morning , Arthur suffered a cerebral hemorrhage and never regained consciousness ; he died the following day at the age of 57 . On November 22 , a private funeral was held at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York City , attended by President Cleveland and ex @-@ President Hayes , among other notables . Arthur was buried with his family members and ancestors in the Albany Rural Cemetery in Menands , New York . He was laid beside his wife in a sarcophagus on a large corner of the plot . In 1889 , a monument was placed on Arthur 's burial plot by sculptor Ephraim Keyser of New York , consisting of a giant bronze female angel figure placing a bronze palm leaf on a granite sarcophagus . 
 In 1898 , the Arthur memorial statue — a fifteen @-@ foot , bronze figure of Arthur standing on a Barre Granite pedestal — was created by sculptor George Edwin Bissell and installed at Madison Square , in New York City . The statue was dedicated in 1899 and unveiled by Arthur 's sister , Mary Arthur McElroy . At the dedication , Secretary of War Elihu Root described Arthur as " wise in statesmanship and firm and effective in administration " , while acknowledging that Arthur was isolated in office and unloved by his own party . 
 Arthur 's unpopularity in life carried over into his assessment by historians , and his reputation after leaving office disappeared . By 1935 , historian George F. Howe said that Arthur had achieved " an obscurity in strange contrast to his significant part in American history . " By 1975 , however , Thomas C. Reeves would write that Arthur 's " appointments , if unspectacular , were unusually sound ; the corruption and scandal that dominated business and politics of the period did not tarnish his administration . " As 2004 biographer Zachary <unk> wrote , although Arthur was " physically stretched and emotionally strained , he strove to do what was right for the country . " Indeed , Howe had earlier surmised , " Arthur adopted [ a code ] for his own political behavior but subject to three restraints : he remained to everyone a man of his word ; he kept scrupulously free from corrupt graft ; he maintained a personal dignity , affable and genial though he might be . These restraints ... distinguished him sharply from the stereotype politician . " 
 = Walter Gilbert ( cricketer ) = 
 Walter Raleigh Gilbert ( 16 September 1853 – 26 July 1924 ) was an amateur English cricketer who played first @-@ class cricket for Middlesex and Gloucestershire between 1873 and 1886 . A cousin of W. G. Grace , he played for Gloucestershire when , dominated by the Grace family , it was the leading county . Gilbert 's best season was 1876 , when he scored 205 not out for the county , but he was subsequently less successful . Closely connected with the United South of England Eleven , a professional touring team of which he eventually became secretary , Gilbert was financially affected by a declining interest in such teams . With insufficient income to continue as an amateur he became a professional in 1886 , but played only one match before he was caught stealing from team @-@ mates in a minor match , ending his first @-@ class career . After serving a 28 @-@ day prison sentence Gilbert moved to Canada , where he worked for the Land Titles Office in Calgary while remaining a prominent cricketer . He died aged 70 in 1924 , but for nearly 60 years after his death , there seemed to be a conspiracy of silence over his fate . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Walter Gilbert was born in London on 16 September 1853 . He spent some time living in <unk> with his maternal aunt , Martha Grace , the mother of W. G. Grace , as a result of which he became friendly with Grace and his brothers . Between 1869 and 1871 Gilbert made several appearances in minor cricket for teams representing Worcestershire and went on to play for the United South of England Eleven , one of several fully professional teams that toured the country playing mainly minor matches . In 1871 he made his first @-@ class debut , playing as an amateur in a team chosen by W. G. Grace for a match against Kent . He scored 13 and 1 , kept wicket in at least the first innings , held two catches , and achieved a stumping . By virtue of his London birth , Gilbert was qualified to play cricket for Middlesex . He made nine appearances for the county during the 1873 and 1874 seasons , achieving a highest score of 49 , averaging 17 @.@ 40 with the bat and taking two wickets . His first score of over fifty runs in first @-@ class matches came for the United South of England XI , for whom he continued to play regularly , against the United North of England XI in 1874 . He also achieved some success as a bowler , taking five wickets for W. G. Grace 's team against Kent in 1873 . 
 = = Achieving prominence = = 
 In the English winter of 1873 – 74 , Gilbert was chosen by W. G. Grace to accompany his touring team to Australia . Gilbert had a string of single @-@ figure scores and a highest score of 33 not out . Nevertheless he and Grace got on well , and he was a popular member of the touring party . Grace enjoyed his company to the extent of hunting kangaroos with him . During the 1874 season Gilbert made a double century in minor cricket , scoring 254 not out for Thornbury against Sneyd Park . Later in the season he made a further representative appearance , playing for the Gentlemen against the Players at Prince 's Cricket Ground and opening the batting with W. G. Grace ; he scored 14 and 16 and took four wickets in the Players ' first innings . He also played in the corresponding fixture the following year . 
 By 1876 Gilbert had qualified to play for Gloucestershire , as he had lived in the county for the length of time required by the rules . In his first season for the club he finished fifth in the first @-@ class batting averages , scoring 907 runs at an average of 36 @.@ 28 . His highest score was 205 not out for an England XI against Cambridge University , the third @-@ highest score of the season after W. G. Grace 's two triple centuries . His innings lasted about seven hours , and he batted on each of the three days of the match . This was his maiden first @-@ class century ; he scored another hundred later in the season when he made 143 runs for a combined Kent and Gloucestershire side against a team representing England . In the same season he took 28 wickets at an average of 19 @.@ 64 , including seven wickets for 65 runs in the match between the United South of England XI and the United North of England XI . 
 = = Decline and disgrace = = 
 Over the next few seasons Gilbert was not as successful with the bat ; in 1877 he failed to exceed 47 in any innings , he scored about half the number of runs that he had during the previous year , and his average dropped to 15 @.@ 70 . His average remained below 20 in four of the next five seasons and never passed 23 . In six seasons , he scored only six fifties . On the other hand , he took 56 wickets in both 1877 and 1878 , averaging under 17 with the ball . He achieved some notable performances as a bowler , including bowling unchanged throughout a game in partnership with W. G. Grace . But from 1879 he bowled less frequently , and never passed 23 wickets in a season again . Even so , Gilbert represented the Gentlemen against the Players twice in 1877 , his final appearances in the fixture ; in four games , he scored just 43 runs and took 16 wickets . 
 By this time Gilbert faced financial difficulty as an amateur cricketer . Most amateurs were from privileged backgrounds , whereas professionals mainly came from the working class . It was almost unthinkable for an amateur to become a professional , although many did receive financial inducements such as generous expenses and sinecure positions within county organisations . Unlike the Grace brothers , Gilbert did not have a profession outside cricket to provide a supplementary income allowing him to live comfortably . A solution seemed to arrive in 1880 , when Fred Grace , the manager of the United South of England XI touring side and one of W. G. Grace 's brothers , died and Gilbert took over his paid job as secretary . But the popularity of professional touring teams was already in decline , and the increasing number of matches between county teams attracted more interest . An indication of trouble came in 1882 when a professional cricketer took Gilbert to court over unpaid fees for an appearance in a match . 
 In three seasons between 1883 and 1885 Gilbert 's batting form improved somewhat . Appearing mainly for Gloucestershire , Gilbert increased his first @-@ class batting average beyond 20 , and in 1885 he hit his third first @-@ class century when he scored 102 against Yorkshire . At the start of the 1886 season Gilbert was featured in the popular biographical article in the weekly magazine Cricket , a significant accolade suggesting that he was highly regarded . A few days after the article 's appearance Gilbert announced that he would in future play for Gloucestershire as a professional , but after only one appearance for the county he disappeared from first @-@ class cricket . Official sources , including Cricket magazine in which Gilbert had recently been featured , James Lillywhite 's Cricketers ' Annual and Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack offered no explanation . Wisden ended its match report on Gilbert 's only professional appearance : " ... about [ Gilbert 's ] subsequent disappearance from cricket there is no need to speak " . 
 Gilbert had also been engaged by a club called East Gloucestershire , based in Cheltenham , which played minor cricket . The explanation for Gilbert 's disappearance was to be found in a match he played for the club on 4 and 5 June 1886 . Before the second day 's play , Gilbert arrived early at the ground and went into the pavilion . Because several sums of money had recently gone missing from the pavilion , a policeman was hidden in the team 's dressing room and he saw Gilbert searching clothes and stealing money . On being confronted , Gilbert produced the coins , one of which had been marked so that it could be identified . The East Gloucestershire match continued , but Gilbert 's name was omitted from the published scorecard ; the wickets he had taken on the first day were credited to " Smith " , and either only ten players were listed or Gilbert 's position in the batting order was taken by " Mr E. L. Even " , who did not bat . Gilbert had been selected for Gloucestershire 's first @-@ class match against Sussex on 7 June , but he was dropped from the side and his place taken by a player making his only appearance in the side . Gilbert was in Police Court while the match was taking place , charged with theft . He admitted stealing from two men and expressed remorse . According to the report in The Times , he stated that if he were forgiven , he would move to Australia ; his solicitor argued that Gilbert had been " harassed and worried " for some time and was suffering from erysipelas and could barely control his own behaviour . His solicitor requested that any punishment should allow Gilbert to go overseas , but Gilbert was sentenced to 28 days imprisonment . Gilbert 's family then arranged for him to move to Canada ; at the time it was common for families to send disgraced members to distant parts of the British Empire to minimise scandal . 
 In first @-@ class cricket , Gilbert scored 5 @,@ 290 runs at an average of 19 @.@ 16 with three hundreds . With the ball , he took 295 wickets at an average of 17 @.@ 93 . His Wisden obituary stated : " His fielding at deep @-@ leg to W. G. Grace 's bowling was always excellent , for he covered much ground and was a sure catch . Although overshadowed by his famous cricketing cousins , he played a prominent part in the victories gained during Gloucestershire 's greatest years . " 
 = = Final years = = 
 In Canada Gilbert found employment with the Land Titles Office in Calgary , for whom he worked for 17 years . Cricket historian Benny Green wrote : " No breath of scandal or disgrace ever attached to Gilbert 's thirty @-@ eight years of exile , nor was there found to be even one square inch missing from the Land Titles Office when Gilbert finally retired from it . " 
 Gilbert had four children from his marriage to the daughter of cricketer James Lillywhite senior . His son was killed in the First World War , flying with the Royal Flying Corps , and his three daughters joined the Royal Army Medical Corps . He continued to play cricket and became one of Canada 's leading cricketers . Gilbert died in Calgary on 24 April 1924 , aged 70 . 
 = = Continued controversy = = 
 After Gilbert 's retirement , and even following his death , controversy remained attached to his name ; there seemed to be a conspiracy of silence surrounding his fate . Cricket historians rarely mentioned him , despite his varied career . W. G. Grace , although including Gilbert in an appendix of leading batsmen in his 1891 book Cricket , did not include him in the text at all , despite the book 's more than 400 pages ; in his Cricketers I Have Met , Grace described 121 cricketers but did not mention his cousin . Further evidence of Gilbert 's disgrace came in the pages of Wisden . Although Gilbert began as an amateur cricketer , which entitled him to have " Mr. " before his name in the " Births and Deaths " section , he was referred to until his death as " Gilbert , W. R. " , which denoted a professional . However , in his Wisden obituary he received the title " Mr. W. R. Gilbert " , even though the " Births and Deaths " still listed him as a professional , and in 1935 he was once again restored to amateur status in " Births and Deaths " , for reasons which are unclear . The same obituary glossed over Gilbert 's enforced retirement from cricket , simply observing : " At the beginning of 1886 he became a professional , and the season was not far advanced before his career in first @-@ class cricket ended abruptly . He then left England for Canada . " Even in 1970 , the silence continued ; historian Rowland Bowen wrote about the story but concluded by saying : " Another indication of the recurring instinct for suppression was a suggestion to me that if this story had not appeared in print before ( it has not ) it should not now . " It is not clear who made this suggestion , whether it was descendants of the Grace family , a cricket administrator or someone else . It was not until 1984 that the full story was published by historian Robert Brook . In reviewing what he considered to be the injustice of the case , and reflecting on Gilbert 's success in Canada , Green wrote : " No wonder that those responsible for this act of appalling cruelty went to such fatuous lengths to keep its details a secret . " 
 = Tragic Kingdom = 
 Tragic Kingdom is the third studio album by American rock band No Doubt . It was released on October 10 , 1995 by Trauma Records , a division of Interscope Records , less than 7 months after the release of their previous album The Beacon Street Collection . It is the final album to feature original keyboardist Eric Stefani , who left in 1994 . The album was produced by Matthew Wilder and recorded in eleven studios in the Greater Los Angeles Area between March 1993 and October 1995 . Between 1995 and 1998 , seven singles were released from it , including " Just a Girl " , which charted on the Billboard Hot 100 and the UK Singles Chart ; and " Don 't Speak " , which reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 Airplay and peaked in the top five of many international charts . 
 The album received mostly positive reviews from music critics . At the 39th Annual Grammy Awards , No Doubt earned nominations for Best New Artist and Best Rock Album . It has sold over sixteen million copies worldwide ; and was certified diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in the United States and Canada , platinum in the United Kingdom , and triple platinum in Australia . Tragic Kingdom helped to initiate the ska revival of the 1990s , persuading record labels to sign more ska bands and helping them to attract more mainstream attention . The album was ranked number 441 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 No Doubt embarked on a tour to promote the album . It was designed by Project X and lasted two and a half years . An early 1997 performance at the Arrowhead Pond of Anaheim was filmed and released as Live in the Tragic Kingdom on VHS and later DVD . 
 = = Background = = 
 No Doubt released their self @-@ titled debut album in 1992 , a year after being signed to Interscope . The album 's pop @-@ oriented sound sharply contrasted with grunge music , a genre which was very popular at the time in the United States . The album sold 30 @,@ 000 copies ; in the words of the program director of KROQ , a Los Angeles radio station on which it was one of the band 's driving ambitions to be played , " it would take an act of God for this band to get on the radio . " The band began work on their second album in 1993 , but Interscope rejected most of the material , which was written by Gary Angle , and paired the band with producer Matthew Wilder . Keyboardist Eric Stefani did not want to relinquish creative control to someone outside the band and eventually stopped recording and rehearsing . He encouraged other members of the band to write songs , but sometimes felt threatened when they did . Eric became increasingly depressed , and in September 1994 , he stopped attending rehearsals , though they were usually held at his house . He soon left the band to pursue an animation career on the animated sitcom The Simpsons . Bassist Tony Kanal then ended his seven @-@ year relationship with Gwen Stefani . 
 The band decided to produce their next album independently and recorded their second album , The Beacon Street Collection , in a homemade studio . No Doubt 's first two singles were released for The Beacon Street Collection : " Squeal " and " Doghouse " , under their own record label , Beacon Street Records . Despite limited availability , the album sold 100 @,@ 000 copies in the year of its release . Their independence attracted Interscope 's attention and ensured that the label would fund a third album . 
 = = Production = = 
 Tragic Kingdom was recorded in eleven different studios in Los Angeles , starting in March 1993 and finally being released two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years later in October 1995 . During one of these recording sessions , the band was introduced to Paul Palmer , who had previously worked with Bush and was interested in working on No Doubt 's new album . After mixing the first single with David J. Holman , " Just a Girl " , Palmer and Holman went on to do the same to the rest of the record . He wanted to release the album on his own label , Trauma Records , which was already associated with Interscope , and succeeded in getting the contract . 
 The album is named after the nickname Dumont 's 7th grade teacher had for Disneyland , which is in Anaheim , California , where the band members grew up . It is a pun on the popular nickname for Disneyland — " The Magic Kingdom " . The album photography and portraits were taken by photographer fine artist Daniel <unk> . Gwen is featured in the foreground while the rest of the band members are standing in an orange grove in the background . Gwen pushed for Eric to be included on the album cover — a source of tension for the band — reasoning that although he had left the band , he had still contributed substantially to the album . Eric is seen near the back of the picture , looking away from the camera . The pictures on the cover and in the liner notes were taken on city streets in their native Orange County ( namely Anaheim and City of Orange ) and in orange groves . The red dress Gwen wears on the cover was loaned to the Hard Rock Cafe and was later displayed at the Fullerton Museum Center in an exhibit titled " The Orange Groove : Orange County 's Rock n ' Roll History " . The dress , appraised as high as US $ 5 @,@ 000 , was stolen from the exhibit in January 2005 . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 Tragic Kingdom uses elements of a variety of musical genres . Third wave ska and ska punk ( a fusion of ska and punk rock ) are the genres most prominent on the album . The album also uses elements of new wave , pop , and post @-@ grunge , and dance rhythms influenced by reggae , ska , flamenco , and Tejano , among others . Apart from No Doubt 's instrumentation , the album uses horn sections on several songs . 
 = = = Lyrical content = = = 
 Many of the lyrics on Tragic Kingdom were written by lead vocalist Gwen Stefani , and were about her experiences in life . Those from No Doubt and The Beacon Street Collection were written mainly by Eric Stefani , who left the band after Tragic Kingdom was finished . Therefore , the style of music changed from what the band had previously produced . Guitarist Tom Dumont explained the change in sound in an interview for Backstage Online : 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 The first single released from Tragic Kingdom was " Just a Girl " , which details Gwen Stefani 's exasperation with female stereotypes and her father 's concerned reaction to her driving home late from her boyfriend 's house . It peaked at number twenty @-@ three on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and number ten on the Modern Rock Tracks chart . The song also charted on the UK Singles Chart , where its original release peaked at number thirty @-@ eight and its re @-@ issue at number three . The second single was " Spiderwebs " , written about an uninterested woman who is trying to avoid the constant phone calls of a persistent man . It peaked at number five on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart , at number eleven on the Billboard Top 40 Mainstream chart , and at number sixteen on the UK Singles Chart . 
 The third single was " Don 't Speak " , a ballad about the breakup of Stefani and Kanal 's relationship . It peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 Airplay , and maintained that position for sixteen consecutive weeks , a record at the time , although it was broken in 1998 by the Goo Goo Dolls ' " Iris " with eighteen weeks . The song was not eligible to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 because no commercial single was released , which was a requirement at the time . The song also peaked on Modern Rock Tracks at number two , the Adult Contemporary chart , where it peaked at number six , the Adult Top 40 , where it hit number one and the Rhythmic Top 40 , where it hit number nine . The song also appeared on several international charts , reaching number one in Australia , Belgium , the Netherlands , New Zealand , Norway , Sweden , Switzerland , and the United Kingdom , number two in Austria and Germany , and number four in Finland and France . 
 " Excuse Me Mr. " and " Happy Now ? " were released as the album 's fourth and fifth singles , respectively . " Excuse Me Mr. " reached number seventeen on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart and number eleven in New Zealand , but " Happy Now ? " failed to chart anywhere . " Sunday Morning " was released as the album 's sixth single . It peaked at number thirty @-@ five on the Billboard Top 40 Mainstream chart , number twenty @-@ one in Australia , number forty @-@ two in New Zealand , and number fifty @-@ five in Sweden . Composing the song began when Kanal was having a fight with Stefani , then his girlfriend , through the bathroom door of his parents ' house in Yorba Linda , California . Stefani later changed the lyrics to discuss dealing with her breakup with Kanal . Finally , " Hey You ! " was released as the seventh and final single from Tragic Kingdom ; it peaked at number fifty @-@ one on the Dutch Single Top 100 . Despite being a Dutch @-@ only single , a music video ( directed by Sophie Muller ) was made to promote the single . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Tragic Kingdom was first released by Trauma / Interscope on October 10 , 1995 . The album did not appear on the Billboard 200 chart until the first week of January 1996 . To promote the album , Trauma launched a street campaign that targeted high school students and the skateboarding community . No Doubt performed on the Warped Tour , which was sponsored by several skateboarding companies , and at several skateboarding festivals . The album remained low on the Billboard 200 and did not enter the top hundred until February 1996 , when it jumped twenty @-@ seven positions to number eighty @-@ nine . Palmer attributed the jump to a Channel One News program that Stefani hosted in January 1996 , which was broadcast in twelve thousand classrooms , and the band 's subsequent performance at a Blockbuster store in Fresno , California . 
 In May 1996 , the band worked with HMV , MuchMusic , and the Universal Music Group to put on a global in @-@ store promotion . The band performed and answered questions in MuchMusic 's studios in Toronto , Ontario . The session was broadcast live to HMV stores worldwide and on a webcast so that fans could watch and ask the band questions through MuchMusic 's <unk> . Sales of Tragic Kingdom doubled the week after the event . The event 's sponsors lobbied Guinness World Records to create a category for the largest virtual in @-@ store promotion to recognize the event . 
 No Doubt embarked on the Tragic Kingdom Tour after the release of the album . It chose Project X , headed by Luc <unk> and Michael Keeling , to design the stage . No Doubt suggested decorating the stage as a clearing in a forest . Project X created three anthropomorphic trees with glowing oranges . The show included clear and mylar confetti designed to look like rain . Lighting design was difficult because there were only four rehearsals , so the show was arranged to be flexible to allow for what <unk> referred to as " a very kinetic performance " . The band expected to tour for two months , but the tour ended up lasting two and a half years . 
 An early 1997 performance at the Arrowhead Pond of Anaheim was filmed and was released as Live in the Tragic Kingdom on video cassette on November 11 , 1997 . It was re @-@ released on November 25 , 2003 on DVD as part of the box set Boom Box , which also contained The Singles 1992 – 2003 , Everything in Time , and The Videos 1992 – 2003 ; and again on June 13 , 2006 as a single DVD , containing bonus material of extra songs , a photo gallery , and an alternate version of " Don 't Speak " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Tragic Kingdom eventually reached the top of the Billboard 200 albums chart in December 1996 , and it remained there for eight weeks . It was listed second on the 1997 year @-@ end Billboard 200 , behind the Spice Girls ' Spice . In February 1999 , the Recording Industry Association of America certified the album diamond for shipping ten million copies . By April 2004 , the album had sold a total of sixteen million copies worldwide . The commercial success of Tragic Kingdom prompted record labels to sign ska bands , and more independent labels released ska records and compilations . Save Ferris 's guitarist and vocalist Brian Mashburn stated that No Doubt helped allow bands like his receive attention from the mainstream . Tragic Kingdom topped the Canadian Albums Chart in 1996 , and it was certified diamond by the Canadian Recording Industry Association in August 1997 . In Europe , the album topped the albums chart in Belgium , Finland , and Norway ; reached the top five in Austria , Germany , the Netherlands , Sweden , Switzerland , and the United Kingdom ; and placed in the top twenty in France . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album received mostly positive reviews from critics . David Fricke of Rolling Stone magazine gave a mostly positive review , describing Tragic Kingdom as " ear candy with good beats , not just bludgeon @-@ by @-@ numbers guitars " and its music as " a spry , white @-@ suburban take on ska and <unk> pop " . Fricke however described " Don 't Speak " as " irritating swill " with " high @-@ pitched rippling " from Gwen Stefani . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 441 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . Entertainment Weekly magazine gave the album a C + rating . Reviewer David Browne attributed the album 's sales to Gwen Stefani 's " leggy , bleached @-@ blond calling card " and concluded that " sex still sells " . Browne , however , described the music as " a hefty chunk of new @-@ wave party bounce and Chili Peppers @-@ style white @-@ boy funk , with dashes of reggae , squealing hair @-@ metal guitar , disco , ska @-@ band horns " and the band as sounding like " savvy , lounge @-@ bred pros " . Individual songs were singled out and commented on : " Just a Girl " was described as " a chirpy , ska @-@ tinged <unk> " , " Don 't Speak " as " an old @-@ fangled power ballad " , " Sixteen " as a " song of solidarity with misunderstood teenage girls " , and " Spiderwebs " and " End It on This " as " [ Stefani ] <unk> [ ing ] obsessions with losers and tr [ ying ] to break free . " 
 Calling the album a marked improvement over " the diffuse , rambling songwriting of [ No Doubt 's ] two previous CDs " , Los Angeles Times critic Mike Boehm felt that on the album , " The band is bright , hard @-@ hitting and kinetic , as sharp production captures the core , four @-@ man instrumental team and adjunct horn section at their best " . In a favourable review for The Village Voice , critic Chuck Eddy felt that although " [ the album ] turns pretentious ... No Doubt resurrects the exuberance new @-@ wave guys lost when ' 80s indie labels and college radio conned them into settling for slam @-@ pit fits and wallflower wallpaper " . AllMusic called it " pure fun " and described the music as something " between ' 90s punk , third @-@ wave ska , and pop sensibility " and a mix of " new wave melodicism , post @-@ grunge rock , and West Coast sunshine " , indicating the songs " Spiderwebs " , " Just a Girl " , and " Don 't Speak " as " positively [ ruling ] the airwaves " . Yahoo ! Music reviewer Bill Holdship called the album a " phenomenon " containing " hit after hit " , and describing " Spiderwebs " as " a terrific opener " . Reviewer Robert Christgau gave the album a C + rating , calling Stefani " hebephrenic " and the album " hyped up " and not " as songful as its fun @-@ besotted partisans [ claim ] " . At the 1997 Grammy Awards , No Doubt were nominated for Best New Artist and Best Rock Album . In a retrospective review in April 2009 , Adrienne <unk> of 34th Street Magazine called Tragic Kingdom a " perfect mixture of ska and power ballad , horn sections and deep vibrato vocals , an inclusive pop style with a touch of classic punk " , and described its appeal to young teenagers . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Tragic Kingdom . 
 No Doubt 
 Gwen Stefani – vocals 
 Tom Dumont – guitar 
 Tony Kanal – bass 
 Adrian Young – drums , percussion 
 Eric Stefani – keyboards , piano 
 Phil Jordan – trumpet 
 Additional personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Siege of Porto Ferrajo = 
 The Siege of Porto Ferrajo was a French attempt to force the surrender of the Tuscan fortress town of Porto Ferrajo ( now Portoferraio ) on the island of Elba following the French occupation of mainland Tuscany in 1801 during the French Revolutionary Wars . The Tuscan garrison was heavily outnumbered , but received significant support from British Royal Navy forces who controlled the Mediterranean Sea and ensured that supplies reached the garrison and that French supply convoys were intercepted . The French began the siege with 1 @,@ 500 men in May 1801 , later reinforced to more than 5 @,@ 000 , but could not make an impression on the fortresses defences , instead seeking to starve the defenders into submission with the support of a squadron of French Navy frigates operating off the coast . 
 The presence of a small British naval squadron in the region rendered this plan impractical and additional British reinforcements under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir John Borlase Warren and Lieutenant Colonel George Airey strengthened the defenders to the point that sallies could be made against French offensive positions . The French subsequently lost all of the frigates sent to blockade the port to patrolling British warships in a series of one @-@ sided engagements , giving the British local dominance that allowed them to maintain the fortress . Despite a number of naval actions and one significant land engagement , the siege dragged on inconclusively for the summer and early autumn of 1801 , and when the first articles of the Treaty of Amiens were signed in October , the town was still under Tuscan control , although the provisions of the final agreement , signed in March 1802 , granted the island to France . 
 = = Invasion = = 
 In 1800 , French First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte advanced into Italy , achieving victories against the Austrian Empire at the battles of Marengo and Hohenlinden . After a year of warfare , the French and Austrians signed the Treaty of Lunéville on 9 February 1801 , which divided Northern Italy between the states and awarded the Grand Duchy of Tuscany to the French . Included in this division was the island of Elba in the Ligurian Sea off the Western Italian coast , which at that time was shared between Tuscany and the Kingdom of Naples . On 28 March 1801 , the Treaty of Florence was signed between Naples and France , officially turning the entirety of Elba over to French control , although it had not yet been surrendered by its Neapolitan and Tuscan commanders . 
 Although the Ligurian Sea was by this stage largely French territorial waters , after the Royal Navy had destroyed the French Mediterranean Fleet at the Battle of the Nile off Egypt in 1798 , the British in fact controlled it and the whole Mediterranean Sea . By 1801 British bases at Gibraltar , Minorca and Malta allowed British naval forces to cruise throughout the sea largely unopposed ; their presence forced the remnants of the French fleet based at Toulon to make short journeys between French bases to avoid interception and capture . It was therefore not until a large French squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral Honoré Ganteaume briefly asserted regional naval superiority that a French expeditionary force was able to secure Elba . They sailed from Piombino on 2 May 1801 with 1 @,@ 500 men under General Jean Victor Tharreau , who landed unopposed at the Neapolitan town of Porto Longone . 
 The invasion force rapidly spread across the island , meeting no resistance as the entire Neapolitan portion and almost all of the Tuscan region surrendered before them . Soon , all that remained in Tuscan hands was the fortress port town of Porto Ferrajo on the northern coast . This was a powerful defensive position , and the Tuscan commander Carlo de <unk> rejected Tharreau 's demands that he surrender . The presence of two British frigates , HMS Phoenix and HMS Mermaid , off the port , buttressed de <unk> 's position . Tharreau responded by laying siege to the fortress . The sudden departure of the two frigates in the face of Ganteaume 's squadron , which bombarded the town on 6 May before being forced to retire following the outbreak of typhus on board the squadron , encouraged Tharreau . The small French frigate Badine subsequently blockaded Porto Ferrajo , with the intention of starving the defenders into surrender . Three more frigates Carrère , Bravoure and Succès , under the overall command of Captain Jacques @-@ François @-@ Ignace Bretel , soon arrived to augment Badine 's blockade . 
 = = Reinforcements = = 
 For the next three months the siege continued with little significant activity on either side , until the arrival at the end of July of General François Watrin with 5 @,@ 000 additional men and instructions from General Joachim Murat to prosecute the siege more vigorously . However , the arrival off Porto Ferrajo on 1 August of a powerful British squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir John Borlase Warren in HMS Renown , whose ship chased Bravoure and Succès as far as Leghorn and reopened the sea passage into the port , almost immediately frustrated Watrin 's ambitions . At the same time , a small British force under Captain Gordon landed at Porto Ferrajo to augment the Tuscan garrison . 
 Then at 14 : 30 on 3 August , three of Warren 's patrolling frigates , Phoenix under Captain Lawrence Halsted , HMS Pomone under Captain Edward Leveson @-@ Gower and HMS Pearl under Captain Samuel James Ballard , discovered a sail off the western shore of Elba and gave chase . The ship was the 38 @-@ gun Carrère under Captain Claude @-@ Pascal Morel @-@ Beaulieu , carrying 300 barrels of powder and escorting a convoy of small coastal vessels carrying military supplies from Porto Ercole to Porto Longone . Although Carrère turned away from the British pursuit and actively engaged the lead ship Pomone with her stern @-@ chasers ( cannon mounted in the rear of the frigate ) , Carrère was too laden to escape her opponents . After a ten @-@ minute chase as Pearl cut off the route to Porto Longone and Pomone manoeuvered into a firing position , Captain Morel @-@ Beaulieu surrendered . Losses on Pomone were limited to two killed and four wounded , two of whom subsequently died ; Carrère had suffered " tolerably severe " casualties in the engagement from a complement of 352 . The delay caused by the brief chase however had allowed the coastal ships to disperse and flee so that all of them avoided capture and some even reached Porto Longone . 
 Carrère was a modern ship seized from the Republic of Venice after the Treaty of Campo Formio in 1797 . The Royal Navy took her into service under her existing name , although the Admiralty retired her from active service within a year . 
 = = September = = 
 Although Warren departed soon afterwards leaving just a frigate squadron behind , the siege continued throughout August . French forces dominated Elba but were unable to make an impression on the walls of the fortress while Royal Navy forces controlled access to the island by sea , providing supplies for the defenders and denying them to the French . Halsted and Phoenix maintained a blockade of the port of Piombino on the Italian mainland , ensuring the interception of French supplies . 
 At the end of August , Watrin learned that Phoenix was alone off the port and sent a message to Leghorn , where the remainder of the French squadron still lay at anchor , instructing them to attack the isolated British warship . Succès and Bravoure sailed on 31 August and arrived off Piombino at 06 : 30 on 2 September to discover that the frigates Pomone and HMS Minerve , under Captain George Cockburn , had joined Phoenix . Halsted had received an intelligence report detailing Watrin 's demand that the French ships sail from Leghorn and had summoned reinforcements . 
 Minerve was the closest to the arriving French vessels and immediately gave chase , Cockburn signalling to Halsted and Leveson @-@ Gower to join him . On sighting the British frigates Bretel turned back northwards towards Leghorn , but by 09 : 00 all three British warships were gaining on his small squadron . Unable to escape pursuit and with Minerve rapidly approaching , Bretel drove Succès ashore at Vada beach near <unk> in the hope of luring Minerve away from Bravoure , but Cockburn instead simply fired on the grounded vessel in passing before continuing towards the remaining ship while Bretel surrendered to Pomone . Captain Louis @-@ Auguste Dordelin made desperate attempts to reach Leghorn before he was overtaken , but a northerly wind drove him back repeatedly and eventually he was forced to drive his frigate ashore under the <unk> battery , 4 nautical miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ) south of Leghorn harbour . Waves battered Bravoure , causing all three masts to fall overboard and the ship to become a total wreck . The small British force under Lieutenant William Kelly that boarded Bravoure was only able to bring off a few prisoners before heavy fire from batteries ashore forced them to quit her . Kelly ignored his instructions to burn Bravoure in order to spare the lives of the many French sailors still trapped on the ship . To the south , the British dragged Succès off the <unk> French had captured her in February 1801 , and after repairs she returned to service in the Royal Navy under her former name of HMS Success . 
 = = Counter @-@ attack = = 
 With the French threat by sea eliminated , the Royal Navy was free to go on the offensive , and command of the Porto Ferrajo garrison was placed in the hands of Lieutenant Colonel George Airey while Warren had returned with his powerful squadron . Plans were then drawn up for a force of seamen , Royal Marines and Tuscan auxiliaries to launch an amphibious operation against the French batteries that overlooked the mouth of the harbour . The British assembled a landing party of 449 Marines and 240 seamen from Renown , HMS Gibraltar , HMS Dragon , HMS Alexander , HMS Genereux , HMS Stately , Pomone , Pearl and the brig HMS <unk> , all under the command of Captain George Long of <unk> and Captain John Chambers White of Renown . Approximately 1 @,@ 000 Tuscan troops joined them . Landings took place on the morning of 14 September . The troops then moved inland against the batteries in two columns while Dragon and Genereux bombarded a fortified tower at Marciana . 
 The attack began well as the British destroyed several batteries and took 55 prisoners of war , but soon the greater French numbers began to tell and the landing parties were pushed back to their beachheads in some confusion , having lost 32 killed , including Captain Long , 61 wounded and 105 missing , of which 15 dead , 33 wounded and 77 missing were British troops . General Watrin claimed this as a victory , inflating the numbers engaged and inaccurately claiming to have caused 1 @,@ 200 casualties to the allies as well as having captured 200 men . Watrin also claimed to have dismasted a frigate and destroyed several smaller craft with fire from his batteries ; none of the British warships reported any damage . 
 Although Warren departed the region soon afterwards with most of his squadron , Watrin was still unable to make an impression on the walls of Porto Ferrajo , and Airey held the town against the French for the last few weeks of the war until news arrived of the ceasefire that accompanied the provisional signing of the Treaty of Amiens on 1 October . In March 1802 under Article XI of the final terms of the Treaty , the British turned over the entire island to the French and Elba remained in French hands throughout the Napoleonic Wars . 
 = Holocaust denial = 
 Holocaust denial is the act of denying the genocide of Jews and other groups in the Holocaust during World War II . Holocaust denial often includes the following claims : that Nazi Germany 's Final Solution was aimed only at deporting Jews from the Reich , but that it did not include the extermination of Jews ; that Nazi authorities did not use extermination camps and gas chambers to mass murder Jews ; and that the actual number of Jews killed was significantly ( typically an order of magnitude ) lower than the historically accepted figure of 5 to 6 million . 
 Scholars use the term " denial " to describe the views and methodology of Holocaust deniers in order to distinguish them from legitimate historical revisionists , who challenge orthodox interpretations of history using established historical methodologies . Holocaust deniers generally do not accept the term denial as an appropriate description of their activities , and use the term revisionism instead . The methodologies of Holocaust deniers are often based on a predetermined conclusion that ignores overwhelming historical evidence to the contrary . 
 Most Holocaust denial claims imply , or openly state , that the Holocaust is a hoax arising out of a deliberate Jewish conspiracy to advance the interest of Jews at the expense of other peoples . For this reason , Holocaust denial is generally considered to be an antisemitic conspiracy theory , is frequently criticized , and is illegal in several countries . 
 = = Terminology and etymology = = 
 Holocaust deniers prefer to refer to their work as historical revisionism , and object to being referred to as " deniers " . Scholars consider this misleading , since the methods of Holocaust denial differ from those of legitimate historical revision . Legitimate historical revisionism is explained in a resolution adopted by the Duke University History Department , November 8 , 1991 , and reprinted in Duke Chronicle , November 13 , 1991 in response to an advertisement produced by Bradley R Smith 's Committee for Open Debate on the Holocaust : 
 That historians are constantly engaged in historical revision is certainly correct ; however , what historians do is very different from this advertisement . Historical revision of major events ... is not concerned with the actuality of these events ; rather , it concerns their historical interpretation – their causes and consequences generally . 
 In 1992 Donald L. <unk> gave some examples of how legitimate historical revisionism — the re @-@ examination of accepted history and its updating with newly discovered , more accurate , or less @-@ biased information — may be applied to the study of the Holocaust as new facts emerge to change the historical understanding of it : 
 With the main features of the Holocaust clearly visible to all but the willfully blind , historians have turned their attention to aspects of the story for which the evidence is incomplete or ambiguous . These are not minor matters by any means , but turn on such issues as Hitler 's role in the event , Jewish responses to persecution , and reactions by onlookers both inside and outside Nazi @-@ controlled Europe . 
 In contrast , the Holocaust denial movement bases its approach on the predetermined idea that the Holocaust , as understood by mainstream historiography , did not occur . Sometimes referred to as " <unk> " , from the French term <unk> introduced by Henry Rousso , Holocaust deniers attempt to rewrite history by minimizing , denying or simply ignoring essential facts . <unk> <unk> writes : 
 <unk> means the denial of historical crimes against humanity . It is not a reinterpretation of known facts , but the denial of known facts . The term <unk> has gained currency as the name of a movement to deny a specific crime against humanity , the Nazi genocide on the Jews in 1941 – 45 , also known as the holocaust ( Greek : complete burning ) or the Shoah ( Hebrew : disaster ) . <unk> is mostly identified with the effort at re @-@ writing history in such a way that the fact of the Holocaust is omitted . 
 = = Background : staking a claim on post @-@ war Holocaust historiography = = 
 = = = Efforts to conceal the historical record = = = 
 = = = = German efforts = = = = 
 While the Second World War was still underway , the Nazis had already formed a contingency plan that in case of defeat they would carry out the total destruction of German records . 
 Historians have documented evidence that as Germany 's defeat became imminent and Nazi leaders realized they would most likely be captured and brought to trial , great effort was made to destroy all evidence of mass extermination . Heinrich Himmler instructed his camp commandants to destroy records , crematoria , and other signs of mass extermination . As one of many examples , the bodies of the 25 @,@ 000 mostly Latvian Jews whom Friedrich Jeckeln and the soldiers under his command had shot at Rumbula ( near Riga ) in late 1941 were dug up and burned in 1943 . Similar operations were undertaken at Belzec , Treblinka and other death camps . In the infamous Posen speeches of October 1943 such as the one on October 4 , Himmler explicitly referred to the extermination of the Jews of Europe and further stated that the genocide must be permanently kept secret : 
 I also want to refer here very frankly to a very difficult matter . We can now very openly talk about this among ourselves , and yet we will never discuss this publicly . Just as we did not hesitate on June 30 , 1934 , to perform our duty as ordered and put comrades who had failed up against the wall and execute them , we also never spoke about it , nor will we ever speak about it . Let us thank God that we had within us enough self @-@ evident fortitude never to discuss it among us , and we never talked about it . Every one of us was horrified , and yet every one clearly understood that we would do it next time , when the order is given and when it becomes necessary . 
 I am now referring to the evacuation of the Jews , to the extermination of the Jewish people . 
 = = = = French collaboration in archive destruction = = = = 
 In occupied France , the situation with respect to preserving war records was not much better , partly as a result of French state secrecy rules dating back to well before the war aimed at protecting the French government and the state from embarrassing revelations , and partly to avoid culpability . For example , at Liberation , the Prefecture of Police destroyed nearly all of the massive archive of Jewish arrest and deportation . 
 = = = Efforts to preserve the historical record = = = 
 = = = = During the war = = = = 
 One of the earliest efforts occurred in France during the war , where <unk> internment camp records were carefully preserved and turned over to the new French Bureau of Veterans and War Victims ; which however then held them in secret refusing to release copies later , even to the CDJC . 
 In 1943 , Isaac <unk> , anticipating the need for a center to document and preserve the memory of the persecution for historical reasons and also support claims post @-@ war , gathered together 40 representatives from Jewish organizations in Grenoble which was under Italian occupation at the time in order to form a centre de documentation . Exposure meant the death penalty , and as a result little actually happened before liberation . Serious work began after the center moved to Paris in late 1944 and was renamed the Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation ( CDJC ) . 
 = = = = Immediate post @-@ war period = = = = 
 In 1945 , General Dwight D. Eisenhower , Supreme Allied Commander , anticipated that someday an attempt would be made to <unk> the documentation of Nazi crimes as propaganda and took steps against it : 
 The same day I saw my first horror camp . It was near the town of Gotha . I have never been able to describe my emotional reactions when I first came face to face with indisputable evidence of Nazi brutality and ruthless disregard of every shred of decency . Up to that time I had known about it only generally or through secondary sources . I am certain however , that I have never at any time experienced an equal sense of shock . 
 I visited every nook and cranny of the camp because I felt it my duty to be in a position from then on to testify at first hand about these things in case there ever grew up at home the belief or assumption that " the stories of Nazi brutality were just propaganda " . Some members of the visiting party were unable to go through with the ordeal . I not only did so but as soon as I returned to Patton 's headquarters that evening I sent communications to both Washington and London , urging the two governments to send instantly to Germany a random group of newspaper editors and representative groups from the national legislatures . I felt that the evidence should be immediately placed before the American and the British publics in a fashion that would leave no room for cynical doubt . 
 Eisenhower , upon finding the victims of the death camps , ordered all possible photographs to be taken , and for the German people from surrounding villages to be ushered through the camps and even made to bury the dead . He wrote the following to General Marshall after visiting a German internment camp near Gotha , Germany : 
 The visual evidence and the verbal testimony of starvation , cruelty and bestiality were so overpowering as to leave me a bit sick . In one room , where they [ there ] were piled up twenty or thirty naked men , killed by starvation , George Patton would not even enter . He said that he would get sick if he did so . I made the visit deliberately , in order to be in a position to give first @-@ hand evidence of these things if ever , in the future , there develops a tendency to charge these allegations merely to " propaganda " . 
 = = = = Nuremberg trials = = = = 
 The Nuremberg trials took place in Germany in 1945 @-@ 1946 . The stated aim was to dispense justice in retribution for atrocities of the German government . This Allied intention to administer justice post @-@ war was first announced in 1943 in the Declaration on German Atrocities in Occupied Europe and reiterated at the Yalta Conference and at Berlin in 1945 . While the intention was not specifically to preserve the historical record of the Holocaust , some of the core documents required to prosecute the cases were provided to them by the CDJC , and much of the huge trove of archives were then transferred to the CDJC after the trials and became the core of future Holocaust historiography . 
 The Nuremberg trials were important historically , but the events were still very recent , television was in its infancy and not present , and there was little public impact . There were isolated moments of limited public awareness from Hollywood films such as The Diary of Anne Frank ( 1959 ) or the 1961 Judgment at Nuremberg which had some newsreel footage of actual scenes from liberated Nazi concentration camps including scenes of piles of naked corpses laid out in rows and bulldozed into large pits , which was considered exceptionally graphic for the time . Public awareness changed when the Eichmann trial riveted the world 's attention fifteen years later . 
 = = = = Trial of Adolf Eichmann = = = = 
 In 1961 , the Israeli government captured Adolf Eichmann in Argentina and brought him to Israel to stand trial for war crimes . Chief prosecutor Gideon Hausner 's intentions were not only to demonstrate Eichmann 's guilt personally but to present material about the entire Holocaust , thus producing a comprehensive record . 
 The Israeli government arranged for the trial to have prominent media coverage . Many major newspapers from all over the globe sent reporters and published front @-@ page coverage of the story . Israelis had the opportunity to watch live television broadcasts of the proceedings , and videotape was flown daily to the United States for broadcast the following day . 
