 = = History and development of Holocaust denial after World War II = = 
 = = = Harry Elmer Barnes = = = 
 Harry Elmer Barnes , at one time a mainstream American historian , assumed a Holocaust @-@ denial stance in his later years . Between World War I and World War II , Barnes became an anti @-@ war writer and a leader in the historical revisionism movement . Starting in 1924 , the American worked closely with the Centre for the Study of the Causes of the War , a German government @-@ funded think tank whose sole purpose was to disseminate the official government position that Germany was the victim of Allied aggression in 1914 and that the Versailles Treaty was morally invalid . Headed by Major Alfred von <unk> , a völkisch activist , the organization portrayed itself as a scholarly society , but historians later described it as " a clearinghouse for officially desirable views on the outbreak of the war . " 
 Following World War II , Barnes became convinced that allegations made against Germany and Japan , including the Holocaust , were wartime propaganda used to justify the United States ' involvement in World War II . Barnes claimed there were two false claims made about World War II , namely that Germany started the war in 1939 , and the Holocaust , which Barnes claimed did not happen . 
 In his 1962 pamphlet , Revisionism and Brainwashing , Barnes claimed that there was a " lack of any serious opposition or concerted challenge to the atrocity stories and other modes of defamation of German national character and conduct " . Barnes argued that there was " a failure to point out the atrocities of the Allies were more brutal , painful , mortal and numerous than the most extreme allegations made against the Germans " . He claimed that in order to justify the " horrors and evils of the Second World War " , the Allies made the Nazis the " scapegoat " for their own misdeeds . 
 Barnes cited the French Holocaust denier Paul Rassinier , whom Barnes called a " distinguished French historian " who had exposed the " exaggerations of the atrocity stories " . In a 1964 article , " Zionist Fraud " , published in the American Mercury , Barnes wrote : " The courageous author [ Rassinier ] lays the chief blame for misrepresentation on those whom we must call the swindlers of the crematoria , the Israeli politicians who derive billions of marks from nonexistent , mythical and imaginary cadavers , whose numbers have been reckoned in an unusually distorted and dishonest manner . " Using Rassinier as his source , Barnes claimed that Germany was the victim of aggression in both 1914 and 1939 , and that reports of the Holocaust were propaganda to justify a war of aggression against Germany . 
 = = = Beginnings of the modern denial movement = = = 
 In 1961 , a protégé of Barnes , David Hoggan published Der <unk> Krieg ( The Forced War ) in West Germany , which claimed that Germany had been the victim of an Anglo @-@ Polish conspiracy in 1939 . Though Der <unk> Krieg was primarily concerned with the origins of World War II , it also down @-@ played or justified the effects of Nazi antisemitic measures in the pre @-@ 1939 period . For example , Hoggan justified the huge one billion Reich @-@ mark fine imposed on the entire Jewish community in Germany after the 1938 Kristallnacht as a reasonable measure to prevent what he called " Jewish profiteering " at the expense of German insurance companies and alleged that no Jews were killed in the Kristallnacht ( in fact , 91 German Jews were killed in the Kristallnacht ) . Subsequently , Hoggan explicitly denied the Holocaust in 1969 in a book entitled The Myth of the Six Million , which was published by the <unk> Press , a small Los Angeles publisher specializing in antisemitic literature . 
 In 1964 , French historian Paul Rassinier published The Drama of the European Jews . Rassinier was himself a concentration camp survivor ( he was held in Buchenwald for having helped French Jews escape the Nazis ) , and modern @-@ day deniers continue to cite his works as scholarly research that questions the accepted facts of the Holocaust . Critics argued that Rassinier did not cite evidence for his claims and ignored information that contradicted his assertions ; he nevertheless remains influential in Holocaust denial circles for being one of the first deniers to propose that a vast Zionist / Allied / Soviet conspiracy faked the Holocaust , a theme that would be picked up in later years by other authors . 
 The publication of Arthur Butz 's The Hoax of the Twentieth Century : The case against the presumed extermination of European Jewry in 1976 ; and David Irving 's Hitler 's War in 1977 brought other similarly inclined individuals into the fold . Butz was a tenured associate professor of electrical engineering at Northwestern University . In December 1978 and January 1979 , Robert Faurisson , a French professor of literature at the University of Lyon , wrote two letters to Le Monde claiming that the gas chambers used by the Nazis to exterminate the Jews did not exist . A colleague of Faurisson , Jean @-@ Claude <unk> , who initially shared Faurisson 's views , later became convinced of the Holocaust 's evidence while investigating documents at Auschwitz in 1979 . He published his conclusions along with much of the underlying evidence in his 1989 book , Auschwitz : Technique and operation of the gas chambers . 
 Henry Bienen , the former president of Northwestern University , has described Arthur Butz 's view of the Holocaust as an " embarrassment to Northwestern " . In 2006 , sixty of Butz 's colleagues from the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science faculty signed a censure describing Butz 's Holocaust denial as " an affront to our humanity and our standards as scholars " . The letter also called for Butz to " leave our Department and our University and stop trading on our reputation for academic excellence " . 
 = = = Institute for Historical Review = = = 
 In 1978 Willis Carto founded the Institute for Historical Review ( IHR ) , an organization dedicated to publicly challenging the commonly accepted history of the Holocaust . The IHR sought from the beginning to establish itself within the broad tradition of historical revisionism , by soliciting token supporters who were not from a neo @-@ Nazi background such as James J. Martin and Samuel Edward <unk> III , and by promoting the writings of French socialist Paul Rassinier and American anti @-@ war historian Harry Elmer Barnes , in an attempt to show that Holocaust denial had a base of support beyond neo @-@ Nazis . The IHR republished most of Barnes 's writings , which had been out of print since his death . While it included articles on other topics and sold books by mainstream historians , the majority of material published and distributed by IHR was devoted to questioning the facts surrounding the Holocaust . 
 In 1980 , the IHR promised a $ 50 @,@ 000 reward to anyone who could prove that Jews were gassed at Auschwitz . Mel Mermelstein wrote a letter to the editors of the LA Times and others including The Jerusalem Post . The IHR wrote back , offering him $ 50 @,@ 000 for proof that Jews were , in fact , gassed in the gas chambers at Auschwitz . Mermelstein , in turn , submitted a notarized account of his internment at Auschwitz and how he witnessed Nazi guards ushering his mother and two sisters and others towards ( as he learned later ) gas chamber number five . Despite this , the IHR refused to pay the reward . Represented by public interest attorney William John Cox , Mermelstein subsequently sued the IHR in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County for breach of contract , anticipatory repudiation , libel , injurious denial of established fact , intentional infliction of emotional distress , and declaratory relief ( see case no . C 356 542 ) . On October 9 , 1981 , both parties in the Mermelstein case filed motions for summary judgment in consideration of which Judge Thomas T. Johnson of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County took " judicial notice of the fact that Jews were gassed to death at the Auschwitz Concentration Camp in Poland during the summer of 1944 , " judicial notice meaning that the court treated the gas chambers as common knowledge , and therefore did not require evidence that the gas chambers existed . On August 5 , 1985 , Judge Robert A. <unk> entered a judgment based upon the <unk> for Entry of Judgment agreed upon by the parties on July 22 , 1985 . The judgment required IHR and other defendants to pay $ 90 @,@ 000 to Mermelstein and to issue a letter of apology to " Mr. Mel Mermelstein , a survivor of Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau and Buchenwald , and all other survivors of Auschwitz " for " pain , anguish and suffering " caused to them . 
 In the " About the IHR " statement on their website , the IHR states , " The IHR does not ' deny ' the Holocaust . Indeed , the IHR as such has no ' position ' on any specific event .... [ The ] IHR does not necessarily agree with the content or outlook of posted or distributed [ on the IHR website , and presentations given at IHR meetings and conferences ] . " One example of a Holocaust <unk> 's view that was published by the IHR is the transcript of the speech made by the Lutheran pastor Herman Otten at the Ninth IHR Conference ( 1989 ) , in which he says 
 There is no dispute over the fact that large numbers of Jews were deported to concentration camps and ghettos , or that many Jews died or were killed during World War II . Revisionist scholars have presented evidence , which " <unk> " have not been able to refute , showing that there was no German program to exterminate Europe 's Jews , and that the estimate of six million Jewish wartime dead is an irresponsible exaggeration . The Holocaust – the alleged extermination of some six million Jews ( most of them by gassing ) – is a hoax and should be recognized as such by Christians and all informed , honest and truthful men everywhere . 
 Commentators and historians have noted the misleading nature of statements by the IHR that they are not Holocaust deniers . Paul Rauber writes that : 
 The question [ of whether the IHR denies the Holocaust ] appears to turn on IHR 's Humpty @-@ Dumpty word game with the word Holocaust . According to Mark Weber , associate editor of the IHR 's Journal of Historical Review [ now Director of the IHR ] , " If by the ' Holocaust ' you mean the political persecution of Jews , some scattered killings , if you mean a cruel thing that happened , no one denies that . But if one says that the ' Holocaust ' means the systematic extermination of six to eight million Jews in concentration camps , that 's what we think there 's not evidence for . " That is , IHR doesn 't deny that the Holocaust happened ; they just deny that the word ' Holocaust ' means what people customarily use it for . 
 According to British historian of Germany Richard J. Evans : 
 Like many individual Holocaust deniers , the Institute as a body denied that it was involved in Holocaust denial . It called this a ' smear ' which was ' completely at variance with the facts ' because ' revisionist scholars ' such as Faurisson , Butz ' and bestselling British historian David Irving acknowledge that hundreds of thousands of Jews were killed and otherwise perished during the Second World War as a direct and indirect result of the harsh anti @-@ Jewish policies of Germany and its allies ' . But the concession that a relatively small number of Jews were killed was routinely used by Holocaust deniers to distract attention from the far more important fact of their refusal to admit that the figure ran into the millions , and that a large proportion of these victims were systematically murdered by gassing as well as by shooting . 
 = = = Bradley Smith and the Committee for Open Debate on the Holocaust = = = 
 In 1987 , Bradley R. Smith , a former media director of the Institute for Historical Review , founded the Committee for Open Debate on the Holocaust ( CODOH ) . In the United States , CODOH has repeatedly tried to place advertisements questioning whether the Holocaust happened , especially in college campus newspapers , which have not always been rejected . 
 Bradley Smith has sought other avenues to promote Holocaust denial – with little success . On September 8 , 2009 , the Harvard Crimson school paper ran a paid ad from Bradley R Smith . It was quickly criticized and an apology was issued from the editor , claiming it was a mistake . 
 Smith referred to his tactics as the CODOH campus project . He says , " I don 't want to spend time with adults anymore , I want to go to students . They are superficial . They are empty vessels to be filled . " " What I wanted to do was I wanted to set forth three or four ideas that students might be interested in , that might cause them to think about things or to have questions about things . And I wanted to make it as simple as possible , and to set it up in a way that could not really be debated . " Holocaust deniers have placed " Full page advertisements in college and university newspapers , including those of Brandeis University , Boston College , Pennsylvania State University , and Queens College . Some of these ads arguing that Holocaust never happened ran without comment ; others generated op @-@ ed pieces by professors and students . " 
 = = = James Keegstra = = = 
 In 1984 , James Keegstra , a Canadian high @-@ school teacher , was charged under the Canadian Criminal Code for " promoting hatred against an identifiable group by communicating anti @-@ Semitic statements to his students " . During class , he would describe Jews as a people of profound evil who had " created the Holocaust to gain sympathy . " He also tested his students in exams on his theories and opinion of Jews . 
 Keegstra was charged under s 281 @.@ 2 ( 2 ) of the Criminal Code ( now s 319 ( 2 ) , which provides that " Every one who , by communicating statements , other than in private conversation , wilfully promotes hatred against any identifiable group " commits a criminal offence . He was convicted at trial before the Alberta Court of Queen 's Bench . The court rejected the argument , advanced by Keegstra and his lawyer , Doug Christie , that promoting hatred is a constitutionally protected freedom of expression as per s 2 ( b ) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . Keegstra appealed to the Alberta Court of Appeal . That court agreed with Keegstra , and he was acquitted . The Crown then appealed the case to the Supreme Court of Canada , which rule by a 4 @-@ 3 majority that promoting hatred could be justifiably restricted under s 1 of the Charter . The Supreme Court restored Keegstra 's conviction . He was fired from his teaching position shortly afterwards . 
 = = = Zündel trials = = = 
 The Toronto @-@ based photo <unk> Ernst Zündel operated a small @-@ press called Samisdat Publishers , which published and distributed Holocaust @-@ denial material such as Did Six Million Really Die ? by Richard Harwood ( a pseudonym of Richard <unk> – a British neo @-@ Nazi ) . In 1985 , he was tried in R. v. <unk> and convicted under a " false news " law and sentenced to 15 months imprisonment by an Ontario court for " disseminating and publishing material denying the Holocaust " . The Holocaust historian Raul Hilberg was a witness for the prosecution at the 1985 trial . Zündel 's conviction was overturned in an appeal on a legal technicality , leading to a second trial in 1988 , in which he was again convicted . The 1988 trial included , as witnesses for the defense , Fred A. Leuchter , David Irving and Robert Faurisson . The pseudo @-@ scientific Leuchter report was presented as a defense document and was published in Canada in 1988 by <unk> 's Samisdat Publishers and , in Britain , in 1989 by Irving 's Focal Point Publishing . In both of his trials , Zündel was defended by Douglas Christie and Barbara <unk> . His conviction was overturned in 1992 when the Supreme Court of Canada declared the " false news " law unconstitutional . 
 Zündel has a website , web @-@ mastered by his wife Ingrid , which publicises his viewpoints . In January 2002 , the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal delivered a ruling in a complaint involving his website , in which it was found to be contravening the Canadian Human Rights Act . The court ordered Zündel to cease communicating hate messages . In February 2003 , the American INS arrested him in Tennessee , USA , on an immigration violations matter , and few days later , Zündel was sent back to Canada , where he tried to gain refugee status . Zündel remained in prison until March 1 , 2005 , when he was deported to Germany and prosecuted for disseminating hate propaganda . On February 15 , 2007 , Zündel was convicted on 14 counts of incitement under Germany 's <unk> law , which bans the incitement of hatred against a portion of the population , and given the maximum sentence of five years in prison . 
 = = = Ernst Nolte = = = 
 The German philosopher and historian Ernst Nolte , starting in the 1980s , advanced a set of theories , which though not denying the Holocaust appeared to flirt with Holocaust denial as a serious historical argument . In a letter to the Israeli historian Otto Dov Kulka of December 8 , 1986 , Nolte criticized the work of the French Holocaust denier Robert Faurisson on the ground that the Holocaust did occur , but went on to argue that Faurisson ’ s work was motivated by what Nolte claimed were the admirable motives of sympathy towards the Palestinians and opposition to Israel . In his 1987 book Der <unk> <unk> ( The European Civil War ) , Nolte claimed that the intentions of Holocaust deniers are " often honourable " , and that some of their claims are " not obviously without foundation " . Nolte himself , though he has never denied the occurrence of the Holocaust , has claimed that the Wannsee Conference of 1942 never happened , and that the minutes of the conference were post @-@ war forgeries done by " biased " Jewish historians designed to discredit Germany . 
 The British historian Ian Kershaw has argued that Nolte was operating on the borderlines of Holocaust denial with his implied claim that the " negative myth " of the Third Reich was created by Jewish historians , his allegations of the domination of Holocaust scholarship by " biased " Jewish historians , and his statements that one should withhold judgment on Holocaust deniers , whom Nolte takes considerable pains to stress are not exclusively Germans or fascists . In Kershaw 's opinion , Nolte is attempting to imply that perhaps Holocaust deniers are on to something . 
 In a 1990 interview , Nolte implied that there was something to the Leuchter report : " If the revisionists [ Holocaust deniers ] and Leuchter among them have made it clear to the public that even ' Auschwitz ' must be an object of scientific inquiry and controversy then they should be given credit for this . Even if it finally turned out that the number of victims was even greater and the procedures were even more horrific than has been assumed until now . " In his 1993 book <unk> ( Points of Contention ) , Nolte praised the work of Holocaust deniers as superior to " mainstream scholars " . Nolte wrote that " radical revisionists have presented research which , if one is familiar with the source material and the critique of the sources , is probably superior to that of the established historians of Germany " . In a 1994 interview with Der Spiegel magazine , Nolte stated " I cannot rule out the importance of the investigation of the gas chambers in which they looked for remnants of the [ chemical process engendered by Zyklon B ] " , and that " ' Of course , I am against revisionists , but Fred Leuchter 's ' study ' of the Nazi gas ovens has to be given attention , because one has to stay open to ' other ' ideas . " 
 The British historian Richard J. Evans in his 1989 book In Hitler 's Shadow expressed the view that Nolte ’ s reputation as a scholar was in ruins as a result of these and other controversial statements on his part . The American historian Deborah Lipstadt in a 2003 interview stated : 
 Historians such as the German Ernst Nolte are , in some ways , even more dangerous than the deniers . Nolte is an anti @-@ Semite of the first order , who attempts to rehabilitate Hitler by saying that he was no worse than Stalin ; but he is careful not to deny the Holocaust . Holocaust @-@ deniers make Nolte 's life more comfortable . They have , with their radical argumentation , pulled the center a little more to their side . Consequently , a less radical extremist , such as Nolte , finds himself closer to the middle ground , which makes him more dangerous . 
 = = = Mayer controversy = = = 
 In 1988 , the American historian Arno J. Mayer published a book entitled Why Did the Heavens Not Darken ? , which did not explicitly deny the Holocaust , but lent support to Holocaust denial by stating that most people who died at Auschwitz were the victims of " natural causes " such as disease , not gassing . Mayer also cited the works of Holocaust deniers Arthur Butz and Paul Rassinier in his book 's bibliography . Critics such as Lucy Dawidowicz criticized Mayer 's citation of deniers , and argued that his statements about Auschwitz were factually incorrect . Holocaust expert Robert Jan van Pelt has noted that Mayer 's book is as close as a mainstream historian has ever come to supporting Holocaust denial . Holocaust deniers such as David Irving have often cited Mayer ’ s book as one reason for embracing Holocaust denial . Though Mayer has been often condemned for his statement about the reasons for the Auschwitz death toll , his book does not deny the use of gas chambers at Auschwitz , as Holocaust deniers often claim . 
 Some mainstream Holocaust historians have labeled Mayer a denier . The Israeli historian Yehuda Bauer wrote that Mayer " <unk> the nonsense that the Nazis saw in Marxism and Bolshevism their main enemy , and the Jews unfortunately got caught up in this ; when he links the destruction of the Jews to the ups and downs of German warfare in the Soviet Union , in a book that is so cocksure of itself that it does not need a proper scientific apparatus , he is really engaging in a much more subtle form of Holocaust denial " . 
 Defenders of Mayer argue that his statement that " Sources for the study of the gas chambers at once rare and unreliable " has been taken out of context , particularly by Holocaust deniers . Michael Shermer and Alex Grobman observe that the paragraph from which the statement is taken asserts that the SS destroyed the majority of the <unk> relating to the operation of the gas chambers in the death camps , which is why Mayer feels that sources for the operation of the gas chambers are " rare " and " unreliable " . 
 = = = Ken McVay and <unk> = = = 
 Ken McVay , an American resident in Canada , was disturbed by the efforts of organizations like the Simon Wiesenthal Center to suppress the speech of the Holocaust deniers , feeling that it was better to confront them openly than to try to censor them . On the Usenet newsgroup <unk> he began a campaign of " truth , fact , and evidence " , working with other participants on the newsgroup to uncover factual information about the Holocaust and counter the arguments of the deniers by proving them to be based upon misleading evidence , false statements , and outright lies . He founded the Nizkor Project to expose the activities of the Holocaust deniers , who responded to McVay with personal attacks , slander , and death threats . 
 = = = David Irving and the Lipstadt libel case = = = 
 Deborah Lipstadt 's 1993 book Denying the Holocaust sharply criticized various Holocaust deniers , including British author David Irving , for deliberately misrepresenting evidence to justify their preconceived conclusions . In 1996 Irving filed a libel suit against Lipstadt and her publisher , Penguin Books . American historian Christopher Browning , an expert witness for the defense , wrote a comprehensive essay for the court summarizing the voluminous evidence for the reality of the Holocaust , and under cross @-@ examination , effectively countered all of Irving 's principal arguments to the contrary . Cambridge historian Richard J. Evans , another defense expert witness , spent two years examining Irving 's writings , and confirmed his misrepresentations , including evidence that he had knowingly used forged documents as source material . The judge , Justice Charles Gray , ultimately delivered a long and decisive verdict in favor of Lipstadt that referred to Irving as a " Holocaust denier " and " right @-@ wing pro @-@ Nazi polemicist . " 
 In February 2006 Irving was convicted in Austria , where Holocaust denial is illegal , for a speech he had made in 1989 in which he denied the existence of gas chambers at Auschwitz . Irving was aware of the outstanding arrest warrant , but chose to go to Austria anyway " to give a lecture to a far @-@ right student fraternity " . Although he pleaded guilty to the charge , Irving said he had been " mistaken " , and had changed his opinions on the Holocaust . " I said that then , based on my knowledge at the time , but by 1991 when I came across the Eichmann papers , I wasn 't saying that anymore and I wouldn 't say that now . The Nazis did murder millions of Jews . " Irving served 13 months of a 3 @-@ year sentence in an Austrian prison , including the period between his arrest and conviction , and was deported in early 2007 . The episode sparked intense international debate over the limits of freedom of speech . Upon hearing of Irving 's sentence , Lipstadt said , " I am not happy when censorship wins , and I don 't believe in winning battles via censorship .... The way of fighting Holocaust deniers is with history and with truth . " 
 According to CNN , upon Irving 's return to the UK , he " vow [ ed ] to repeat views denying the Holocaust that led to his conviction " stating he felt " no need any longer to show remorse " for his Holocaust views . 
 = = Recent developments and trends = = 
 In February 1995 a Japanese magazine named Marco Polo , a 250 @,@ 000 @-@ circulation monthly published by Bungei Shunju , ran a Holocaust denial article by physician Masanori Nishioka which stated : 
 The ' Holocaust ' is a fabrication . There were no execution gas chambers in Auschwitz or in any other concentration camp . Today , what are displayed as ' gas chambers ' at the remains of the Auschwitz camp in Poland are a post @-@ war fabrication by the Polish communist regime or by the Soviet Union , which controlled the country . Not once , neither at Auschwitz nor in any territory controlled by the Germans during the Second World War , was there ' mass murder of Jews ' in ' gas <unk> 
 The Los Angeles @-@ based Simon Wiesenthal Center instigated a boycott of Bungei Shunju advertisers , including Volkswagen , Mitsubishi , and Cartier . Within days , Bungei Shunju shut down Marco Polo and its editor , Kazuyoshi Hanada , quit , as did the president of Bungei Shunju , Kengo Tanaka . 
 In Turkey , in 1996 , the Islamic preacher Harun Yahya distributed thousands of copies of a book which was originally published the previous year , entitled <unk> <unk> ( " The Holocaust Lie " ) and mailed unsolicited texts to American and European schools and colleges . The publication of <unk> <unk> sparked much public debate . This book claims , " what is presented as Holocaust is the death of some Jews due to the typhus plague during the war and the famine towards the end of the war caused by the defeat of the Germans . " In March 1996 , a Turkish painter and intellectual , Bedri <unk> , published a strongly worded critique of the book in the Ankara daily newspaper <unk> @-@ Beyaz ( " Black and White " ) . A legal suit for slander was brought against him . During the trial in September , <unk> exposed the real author of the book as Adnan <unk> . The suit was withdrawn in March 1997 . 
 In France , Holocaust denial became more prominent in the 1990s as <unk> , though the movement has existed in ultra @-@ left French politics since at least the 1960s , led by figures such as Pierre Guillaume ( who was involved in the bookshop La <unk> <unk> during the 1960s ) . Recently , elements of the extreme far right in France have begun to build on each other 's <unk> arguments , which often span beyond the Holocaust to cover a range of antisemitic views , incorporating attempts to tie the Holocaust to the Biblical massacre of the Canaanites , critiques of Zionism , and other material fanning what has been called a " conspiratorial Judeo @-@ phobia " designed to legitimize and " <unk> " antisemitism . 
 In Belgium in 2001 , Roeland Raes , the ideologue and vice @-@ president of one of the country 's largest political parties , the Vlaams Belang ( formerly named Vlaams Blok , Flemish Bloc ) , gave an interview on Dutch TV where he cast doubt over the number of Jews murdered by the Nazis during the Holocaust . In the same interview he questioned the scale of the Nazis ' use of gas chambers and the authenticity of Anne Frank 's diary . In response to the media assault following the interview , Raes was forced to resign his position but vowed to remain active within the party . Three years later , the Vlaams Blok was convicted of racism and chose to disband . Immediately afterwards , it legally reformed under the new name Vlaams Belang ( Flemish Interest ) with the same leaders and the same membership . 
 = = = Holocaust denial in the Arab world = = = 
 Denials of the Holocaust have been promoted by various Middle Eastern figures and media . Holocaust denial is sponsored by some Middle Eastern governments , including Iran and Syria . Prominent Arab figures from the Middle East have rarely made publicized visits to Auschwitz — Israel 's Arab community being the exception . In 2010 , <unk> MK Mohammed <unk> visited , following a previous visit of two other Arab @-@ Israeli lawmakers , and a group of about 100 Arab @-@ Israeli writers and clerics in 2003 . Individuals from the Syrian government , the Palestinian Authority , and a number of Palestinian groups have all engaged in various aspects of Holocaust denial . In 2006 Robert <unk> writing in The Washington Post , reported that " A respected Holocaust research institution recently reported that Egypt , Qatar and Saudi Arabia all promote Holocaust denial and protect Holocaust deniers . " Hamas leaders have promoted Holocaust denial ; Abdel Aziz al @-@ <unk> held that the Holocaust never occurred , that Zionists were behind the action of Nazis , and that Zionists funded Nazism . A press release by Hamas in April 2000 decried " the so @-@ called Holocaust , which is an alleged and invented story with no basis " . In August 2009 , Hamas refused to allow Palestinian children to learn about the Holocaust , which it called " a lie invented by the Zionists " and referred to Holocaust education as a " war crime " . Nasser told a German newspaper in 1964 that " no person , not even the most simple one , takes seriously the lie of the six million Jews that were murdered [ in the Holocaust ] . " 
 The thesis of the 1982 doctoral dissertation of Mahmoud Abbas , a co @-@ founder of Fatah and president of the Palestinian National Authority , was " The Secret Connection between the Nazis and the Leaders of the Zionist Movement " . In his 1983 book The Other Side : the Secret Relationship Between Nazism and Zionism based on the dissertation , Abbas denied that that six million Jews had died in the Holocaust ; dismissing it as a " myth " and a " fantastic lie " . At most , he wrote , 890 @,@ 000 Jews were killed by the Germans . Abbas claimed that the number of deaths has been exaggerated for political purposes . " It seems that the interest of the Zionist movement , however , is to inflate this figure [ of Holocaust deaths ] so that their gains will be greater . This led them to emphasize this figure [ six million ] in order to gain the solidarity of international public opinion with Zionism . Many scholars have debated the figure of six million and reached stunning conclusions — fixing the number of Jewish victims at only a few hundred thousand . " In his March 2006 interview with Haaretz , Abbas stated , " I wrote in detail about the Holocaust and said I did not want to discuss numbers . I quoted an argument between historians in which various numbers of casualties were mentioned . One wrote there were 12 million victims and another wrote there were 800 @,@ 000 . I have no desire to argue with the figures . The Holocaust was a terrible , unforgivable crime against the Jewish nation , a crime against humanity that cannot be accepted by humankind . The Holocaust was a terrible thing and nobody can claim I denied it . " While acknowledging the existence of the Holocaust in 2006 and 2014 , Abbas has defended the position that Zionists collaborated with the Nazis to perpetrate it . In 2012 , Abbas told Al <unk> , a Beirut TV station affiliated with Iran and Hezbollah , that he " challenges anyone who can deny that the Zionist movement had ties with the Nazis before World War II " . 
 Surveys conducted by Sammy <unk> of the University of Haifa found that the fraction of Israeli Arabs denying that millions of Jews were murdered by the Nazis increased from 28 % in 2006 to 40 % in 2008 . <unk> commented : 
 In Arab eyes disbelief in the very happening of the Shoah is not hate of Jews ( embedded in the denial of the Shoah in the West ) but rather a form of protest . Arabs not believing in the event of Shoah intend to express strong objection to the portrayal of the Jews as the ultimate victim and to the underrating of the Palestinians as a victim . They deny Israel 's right to exist as a Jewish state that the Shoah gives legitimacy to . Arab disbelief in the Shoah is a component of the Israeli @-@ Palestinian conflict , unlike the ideological and anti @-@ Semitic denial of the Holocaust and the desire to escape guilt in the West . 
 = = = Holocaust denial in Iran = = = 
 Former Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad frequently denied the Holocaust , formally ' questioning ' the reliability of the historical evidence , although he on occasion confirmed belief in it . In a December 2005 speech , Ahmadinejad said that a legend was fabricated and had been promoted to protect Israel . He said : 
 " They have fabricated a legend , under the name of the Massacre of the Jews , and they hold it higher than God himself , religion itself and the prophets themselves .... If somebody in their country questions God , nobody says anything , but if somebody denies the myth of the massacre of Jews , the Zionist loudspeakers and the governments in the pay of Zionism will start to scream . " 
 The remarks immediately provoked international controversy as well as swift condemnation from government officials in Israel , Europe , and the United States . All six political parties in the German parliament signed a joint resolution condemning this Holocaust denial . In contrast , Hamas political leader Khaled <unk> described Ahmadinejad 's comments as " courageous " and stated , " Muslim people will defend Iran because it voices what they have in their hearts , in particular the Palestinian people . " In the United States , the Muslim Public Affairs Council condemned Ahmadinejad 's remarks . In 2005 the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood leader , Mohammed Mahdi <unk> , denounced what he called " the myth of the Holocaust " in defending Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad 's denial of the Holocaust . 
 On December 11 , 2006 , the Iranian state @-@ sponsored " International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust " opened to widespread condemnation . The conference , called for by and held at the behest of Ahmadinejad , was widely described as a " Holocaust denial conference " or a " meeting of Holocaust deniers " , though Iran denied it was a Holocaust denial conference . A few months before it opened , the Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Hamid Reza <unk> stated : " The Holocaust is not a sacred issue that one can 't touch . I have visited the Nazi camps in Eastern Europe . I think it is exaggerated . " 
 In 2013 , in an interview with CNN , newly elected Iranian President Hassan Rouhani was quoted as condemning the Holocaust , stating , " I can tell you that any crime that happens in history against humanity , including the crime the Nazis created towards the Jews as well as non @-@ Jews is reprehensible and condemnable . Whatever criminality they committed against the Jews , we condemn . " Iranian media later accused CNN of fabricating Rouhani ’ s comments . 
 In his official 2013 Nowruz address , Supreme Leader of Iran Grand Ayatollah Ali Khamenei questioned the veracity of the Holocaust , remarking that " The Holocaust is an event whose reality is uncertain and if it has happened , it ’ s uncertain how it has happened . ” This was consistent with Khamenei 's previous comments regarding the holocaust . 
 In 2015 , the House of Cartoon and the <unk> Cultural Complex in Iran organized the International Holocaust Cartoon Competition , a competition in which artists were encouraged to submit cartoons on the theme of Holocaust denial . The winner of the contest will receive $ 12 @,@ 000 . <unk> , a popular Iranian newspaper , held a similar contest in 2006 . 
 = = = Propaganda in the media = = = 
 According to James Najarian , Holocaust deniers working for the Institute for Historical Review are not trained in history and " put out sham scholarly articles in the mock @-@ academic publication , the Journal of Historical Review " . They appeal to " our objectivity , our sense of fair play , and our distrust of figurative language " . Thus , they rely on facts to grab the readers ' attention . These facts , however , are strung by what Najarian calls " fabricated decorum " and are re @-@ interpreted for their use . For example , they pay particular attention to inconsistencies in numbers . 
 Holocaust denial propaganda in all forms has been shown to influence the audiences that it reaches . In fact , even the well @-@ educated — that is , college graduates and current university students alike — are susceptible to such propaganda when it is presented before them . This stems from the growing disbelief that audiences feel after being exposed to such information , especially since Holocaust witnesses themselves are decreasing in number . Studies centered on the psychological effects of Holocaust denial propaganda confirm this assertion . Linda M. Yelland and William F. Stone , in particular , show that Denial essays decrease readers ' belief in the Holocaust , regardless of their prior Holocaust awareness . 
 = = Reactions to Holocaust denial = = 
 = = = Types of reaction = = = 
 Scholarly response to Holocaust denial can be roughly divided into three categories : Some academics refuse to engage Holocaust deniers or their arguments at all , on grounds that doing so lends them unwarranted legitimacy . A second group of scholars , typified by the American historian Deborah Lipstadt , have tried to raise awareness of the methods and motivations of Holocaust denial without legitimizing the deniers themselves . " We need not waste time or effort answering the deniers ' contentions , " Lipstadt wrote . " It would be never @-@ ending .... Their commitment is to an ideology and their ' findings ' are shaped to support it . " A third group , typified by the Nizkor Project , responds to arguments and claims made by Holocaust denial groups by pointing out inaccuracies and errors in their evidence . 
 Even scholarly responses , however , can trigger vigorous rebuttals . In 1996 , the British historian David Irving brought a civil defamation suit against Lipstadt and her publisher , stemming from Lipstadt 's book Denying the Holocaust , in which she named Irving as " one of the more dangerous " Holocaust deniers , because he was a published author , and was viewed by some as a legitimate military historian . He was " familiar with historical evidence " , she wrote , and " bends it until it conforms with his ideological leanings and political agenda " . Irving , who appeared as a defense witness in Ernst Zündel 's trial in Canada , and once declared at a rally of Holocaust deniers that " more women died in the back seat of Edward Kennedy 's car than ever died in a gas chamber at Auschwitz , " claimed that Lipstadt 's allegation damaged his reputation . After a two @-@ month trial in London , the trial judge issued a 333 @-@ page ruling against Irving . 
 In December 1991 the American Historical Association issued the following statement : The American Historical Association Council strongly deplores the publicly reported attempts to deny the fact of the Holocaust . No serious historian questions that the Holocaust took place . This followed a strong reaction by many of its members and commentary in the press against a near @-@ unanimous decision that the AHA had made in May 1991 that studying the significance of the Holocaust should be encouraged . The association 's May 1991 statement was in response to an incident where certain of its members had questioned the reality of the Holocaust . The December 1991 declaration is a reversal of the AHA 's earlier stance that the association should not set a precedent by certifying historical facts . 
 = = = Public figures and scholars = = = 
 A number of public figures and scholars have spoken out against Holocaust denial , with some – such as literary theorist Jean Baudrillard – likening Holocaust denial to " part of the extermination itself " . The American Historical Association , the oldest and largest society of historians and teachers of history in the United States , states that Holocaust denial is " at best , a form of academic fraud " . In 2006 , UN Secretary General Kofi Annan said : " Remembering is a necessary rebuke to those who say the Holocaust never happened or has been exaggerated . Holocaust denial is the work of bigots ; we must reject their false claims whenever , wherever and by whomever they are made . " Holocaust survivor and Nobel Prize winner Elie Wiesel calls the Holocaust " the most documented tragedy in recorded history . Never before has a tragedy elicited so much witness from the killers , from the victims and even from the bystanders — millions of pieces here in the museum what you have , all other museums , archives in the thousands , in the millions . " He made a similar statement on a special edition of The Oprah Winfrey Show after his final trip to Auschwitz , along with host Winfrey . 
 In January 2007 , the United Nations General Assembly condemned " without reservation any denial of the Holocaust " , though Iran disassociated itself from the resolution . In July 2013 , Iran 's then president @-@ elect Hassan Rohani described Ahmadinejad 's remarks about the Holocaust and Israel as " hate rhetoric " and in September 2013 Rohani stated that " The Nazis carried out a massacre that cannot be denied , especially against the Jewish people " and " The massacre by the Nazis was condemnable . We never want to sit by side with the Nazis .. They committed a crime against Jews — which is a crime against .. all of humanity . " While declining to give a specific number of Jewish victims , Iranian analysts suggested that " Rouhani pushed the envelope as far as it could go .. without infuriating the supreme leader , Ayatollah Ali Khamenei , and other conservatives back home . " 
 = = = Former SS members = = = 
 Critics of Holocaust denial also include members of the Auschwitz SS . Camp physician and SS @-@ Untersturmführer Hans Münch considered the facts of Auschwitz " so firmly determined that one cannot have any doubt at all " , and described those who negate what happened at the camp as " malevolent " people who have " personal interest to want to bury in silence things that cannot be buried in silence " . Zyklon B handler and SS @-@ Oberscharführer Josef Klehr has said that anyone who maintains that nobody was gassed at Auschwitz must be " crazy or in the wrong " . SS @-@ Unterscharführer Oswald <unk> has stated that he does not consider those who maintain such a thing as normal people . Hearing about Holocaust denial compelled former SS @-@ Rottenführer Oskar Gröning to publicly speak about what he witnessed at Auschwitz , and denounce Holocaust deniers , stating : 
 I would like you to believe me . I saw the gas chambers . I saw the crematoria . I saw the open fires . I was on the ramp when the selections took place . I would like you to believe that these atrocities happened because I was there . 
 = = = Holocaust denial and antisemitism = = = 
 Holocaust denial is widely considered to be antisemitic . The Encyclopedia of Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity , for example , defines Holocaust denial as " a new form of anti @-@ Semitism , but one that hinges on age @-@ old motifs " . The Anti @-@ Defamation League has stated that " Holocaust denial is a contemporary form of the classic anti @-@ Semitic doctrine of the evil , manipulative and threatening world Jewish conspiracy " and French historian Valérie <unk> has written that " Holocaust denial is a convenient polemical substitute for anti @-@ semitism . " In 2005 , the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia ( now the Fundamental Rights Agency ) published a " working definition " of antisemitism which gave as an example of the way that antisemitism might manifest itself , " denying the fact , scope , mechanisms ( e.g. , gas chambers ) or intentionality of the genocide of the Jewish people at the hands of National Socialist Germany and its supporters and accomplices during World War II ( the Holocaust ) " . 
 Some have argued that not all Holocaust deniers are necessarily antisemitic . 
 In a defense of Holocaust denier Bishop Richard Williamson against the charge of being antisemitic , the journalist and writer Kevin Myers argued " It is not anti @-@ Semitic to make a fool of yourself in public about a historical fact . It is anti @-@ Semitic to preach or promote a dislike of Jews because they are Jews , which is what Bishop Williamson has not done . " 
 According to Walter Reich , psychiatrist and then senior scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars , one @-@ time director of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum , and now professor of international affairs at George Washington University : 
 The primary motivation for most deniers is anti @-@ Semitism , and for them the Holocaust is an infuriatingly inconvenient fact of history . After all , the Holocaust has generally been recognized as one of the most terrible crimes that ever took place , and surely the very emblem of evil in the modern age . If that crime was a direct result of anti @-@ Semitism taken to its logical end , then anti @-@ Semitism itself , even when expressed in private conversation , is inevitably discredited among most people . What better way to rehabilitate anti @-@ Semitism , make anti @-@ Semitic arguments seem once again respectable in civilized discourse and even make it acceptable for governments to pursue anti @-@ Semitic policies than by convincing the world that the great crime for which anti @-@ Semitism was blamed simply never happened — indeed , that it was nothing more than a frame @-@ up invented by the Jews , and propagated by them through their control of the media ? What better way , in short , to make the world safe again for anti @-@ Semitism than by denying the Holocaust ? 
 The French historian Pierre Vidal @-@ Naquet described the motivation of deniers more succinctly : 
 One revives the dead in order the better to strike the living . 
 = = Examination of claims = = 
 The key claims which cause Holocaust denial to differ from established fact are : 
 The Nazis had no official policy or intention of exterminating Jews . 
 Nazis did not use gas chambers to mass murder Jews . 
 The figure of 5 to 6 million Jewish deaths is a gross exaggeration , and the actual number is an order of magnitude lower . 
 Other claims include the following : 
 Stories of the Holocaust were a myth initially created by the Allies of World War II to demonize Germans , Jews having spread this myth as part of a grander plot intended to enable the creation of a Jewish homeland in Palestine , and now to garner continuing support for the state of Israel . 
 Documentary evidence of the Holocaust , from photographs to The Diary of Anne Frank , is fabricated . 
 Survivor testimonies are filled with errors and inconsistencies , and are thus unreliable . 
 <unk> obtained Nazi prisoners ' confessions of war crimes through the use of torture . 
 The Nazi treatment of Jews was no different from what the Allies did to their enemies in World War II . 
 Holocaust denial is widely viewed as failing to adhere to principles for the treatment of evidence that mainstream historians ( as well as scholars in other fields ) regard as basic to rational inquiry . 
 The Holocaust was well documented by the bureaucracy of the Nazi government itself . It was further witnessed by the Allied forces who entered Germany and its associated Axis states towards the end of World War II . It was also witnessed from the inside by non @-@ Jewish captives such as Catholic French Resistance member André <unk> who wrote extensively and testified about his experiences in seven camps including Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau and also produced the oldest contemporary sketch of a camp crematorium . 
 According to researchers Michael Shermer and Alex Grobman , there is a " convergence of evidence " that proves that the Holocaust happened . This evidence includes : 
 Written documents — hundreds of thousands of letters , memos , blueprints , orders , bills , speeches , articles , memoirs , and confessions . 
 Eyewitness testimony — accounts from survivors , Jewish Sonderkommandos ( who helped load bodies from the gas chambers into the crematoria in exchange for a chance of survival ) , SS guards , commandants , local townspeople , and even high @-@ ranking Nazis who spoke openly about the mass murder of the Jews . 
 Photographs — including official military and press photographs , civilian photographs , secret photographs taken by survivors , aerial photographs , German and Allied film footage , and unofficial photographs taken by the German military . 
 The camps themselves — concentration camps , work camps , and extermination camps that still exist in varying degrees of originality and reconstruction . 
 <unk> evidence or argument from silence — population demographics , reconstructed from the pre – World War II era ; if six million Jews were not killed , what happened to them ? 
 Much of the controversy surrounding the claims of Holocaust deniers centers on the methods used to present arguments that the Holocaust allegedly never happened as commonly accepted . Numerous accounts have been given by Holocaust deniers ( including evidence presented in court cases ) of claimed facts and evidence ; however , independent research has shown these claims to be based upon flawed research , biased statements , or even deliberately falsified evidence . Opponents of Holocaust denial have documented numerous instances in which such evidence was altered or manufactured ( see Nizkor Project and David Irving ) . According to Pierre Vidal @-@ Naquet , " in our society of image and spectacle , extermination on paper leads to extermination in reality . " 
 = = Laws against Holocaust denial = = 
 Holocaust denial is explicitly or implicitly illegal in 16 countries : Austria , Belgium , Czech Republic , France , Germany , Hungary , Israel , Liechtenstein , Lithuania , Luxembourg , Netherlands , Poland , Portugal , Romania , Slovakia , and Switzerland . Romania officially denied the Holocaust occurred on its territory up until the Wiesel Commission in 2004 . The European Union 's Framework decision on Racism and Xenophobia states that denying or grossly trivializing " crimes of genocide " should be made " punishable in all EU Member States " . Slovakia criminalized denial of fascist crimes in general in late 2001 ; in May 2005 , the term " Holocaust " was explicitly adopted by the penal code and in 2009 , it became illegal to deny any act regarded by an international criminal court as genocide . In 2010 the Parliament of Hungary adopted legislation punishing the denial of the genocides committed by National Socialist or Communist systems , without mentioning the word " Holocaust " . 
 Such legislation remains controversial . In October 2007 , a tribunal declared Spain 's Holocaust denial law unconstitutional . In 2007 Italy rejected a denial law proposing a prison sentence of up to four years . In 2006 the Netherlands rejected a draft law proposing a maximum sentence of one year on denial of genocidal acts in general , although specifically denying the Holocaust remains a criminal offense there . The United Kingdom has twice rejected Holocaust denial laws . Denmark and Sweden have also rejected such legislation . 
 A number of deniers have been prosecuted under various countries ' denial laws . French literature professor Robert Faurisson , for example , was convicted and punished under the <unk> Act in 1990 . Some historians oppose such laws , among them Pierre Vidal @-@ Naquet , an outspoken critic of Faurisson , on the grounds that denial legislation imposes " historical truth as legal truth " . Other academics favor criminalization . Holocaust denial , they contend , is " the worst form of racism and its most respectable version because it pretends to be a research " . 
 = = Focus on Allied war crimes in Holocaust denial literature = = 
 The focus on supposed Allied atrocities during the war has also been a theme in Holocaust denial literature , particularly in countries where outright denial of the Holocaust is illegal . According to historian Deborah Lipstadt , the concept of " comparable Allied wrongs " , such as the expulsion of Germans after World War II and the bombing of Dresden , is at the center of , and a continuously repeated theme of , contemporary Holocaust denial ; phenomenon she calls " immoral <unk> " . Pierre Vidal @-@ Naquet pointed out the same phenomenon in the earlier version of Les Assassins de la mémoire under the title Auschwitz et le tiers monde ( Les Assassins de la mémoire , Paris , 2005 , pp. 170 – 180 ) , and accurately about the declarations of Klaus Barbie 's lawyer Jacques <unk> . In 1977 , Martin <unk> , in a review of David Irving 's book Hitler 's War , maintained that the picture of World War II drawn by Irving was done in a such way to imply moral equivalence between the actions of the Axis and Allied states with both sides equally guilty of terrible crimes , leading to Hitler 's " fanatical , destructive will to annihilate " being downgraded to being " no longer an exceptional phenomenon " . 
 = = Other genocide denials = = 
 Other acts of genocide have met similar attempts to deny and minimize . Gregory H. Stanton , formerly of the US State Department and the founder of Genocide Watch , lists denial as the final stage of a genocide development : " Denial is the eighth stage that always follows a genocide . It is among the surest indicators of further genocidal massacres . The perpetrators of genocide dig up the mass graves , burn the bodies , try to cover up the evidence and intimidate the witnesses . They deny that they committed any crimes , and often blame what happened on the victims . " 
 = = Notable Holocaust deniers = = 
 = Interstate 495 ( Delaware ) = 
 Interstate 495 ( I @-@ 495 ) is a 11 @.@ 47 @-@ mile ( 18 @.@ 46 km ) long Interstate highway in the U.S. state of Delaware . The highway serves as a six @-@ lane bypass of I @-@ 95 around the city of Wilmington . I @-@ 495 begins at an interchange with I @-@ 95 and I @-@ 295 near Newport to the southwest of Wilmington . From here , the road heads east to the Port of Wilmington , where it turns northeast and crosses the Christina River as it heads to the east of downtown Wilmington . Upon reaching Edgemoor , I @-@ 495 runs between the Delaware River to the east and U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) to the west , continuing to Claymont . In Claymont , I @-@ 495 turns north and merges into northbound I @-@ 95 at an interchange with Delaware Route 92 ( DE 92 ) just south of the Pennsylvania state line . 
 Plans for a bypass of Wilmington to the east date back to 1948 and was incorporated into the Interstate Highway System in 1956 . This interstate bypass was numbered I @-@ 495 in the 1960s . Construction on building I @-@ 495 took place during the course of the 1970s , with the entire length of the highway completed and opened to traffic in 1977 . Between 1978 and 1980 , I @-@ 95 was designated along the I @-@ 495 alignment while the South Wilmington Viaduct along I @-@ 95 was reconstructed ; during this time the route through Wilmington was known as I @-@ 895 . The US 13 / DE 3 interchange in Edgemoor opened in 1988 . In 2014 , the bridge over the Christina River was closed due to tilting support columns until repairs were completed . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 495 begins at an interchange with I @-@ 95 / US 202 and I @-@ 295 near Newport , heading to the east on a six @-@ lane freeway . At the southern terminus , southbound I @-@ 495 also has a ramp that provides easier access to the DE 141 interchange along I @-@ 95 . The route runs between the Christina River to the north and a landfill to the south prior to reaching an interchange with US 13 and the southern terminus of US 13 Bus. to the north of Wilmington Manor . Past this , the highway enters industrial areas and reaches the DE 9A exit near the Port of Wilmington , turning to the northeast . I @-@ 495 crosses over the Christina River into the eastern part of Wilmington and passes near another landfill as it comes to the 12th Street exit . 
 The road runs through some marshland before coming to an interchange in industrial Edgemoor that connects to the southern terminus of DE 3 as well as to US 13 . Following this interchange , I @-@ 495 runs between US 13 and suburban areas to the west and Amtrak ’ s Northeast Corridor and the Delaware River to the east . I @-@ 495 continues along this configuration until it reaches Claymont . US 13 heads farther west from the freeway and I @-@ 495 makes a turn to the north away from the railroad tracks and the river near the Claymont station along SEPTA 's Wilmington / Newark Line that uses the Northeast Corridor . The road comes to another exit for US 13 before merging into I @-@ 95 at the DE 92 interchange near the Tri @-@ State Mall and the Pennsylvania border . Southbound , the I @-@ 495 <unk> from I @-@ 95 actually starts in Pennsylvania , but crosses into Delaware 220 feet ( 67 m ) later before the exit to DE 92 . 
 I @-@ 495 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 90 @,@ 379 vehicles at the south end of Wilmington near the Christina River to a low of 19 @,@ 234 vehicles at the ramp to I @-@ 95 at the southern terminus . As part of the Interstate Highway System , the entire length of I @-@ 495 is a part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1948 , the Wilmington Transportation Study proposed two new roads running between the southern end of Wilmington and the Pennsylvania border to improve traffic flow in the Wilmington area . Route A followed the current alignment of I @-@ 95 through the city while Route B bypassed the city to the east along the current alignment of I @-@ 495 . In 1956 , the Interstate Highway System was created , with FAI @-@ 3 proposed along the current alignment of I @-@ 495 . In 1960 , design work on FAI @-@ 3 was underway . The route of FAI @-@ 3 was numbered as I @-@ 495 in 1962 . In 1968 , structural design for bridges along I @-@ 495 was underway . The same year , the first construction contracts began with three demolition contracts , the building of a culvert under the Penn Central line at Holly Oak Creek , and the relocation of a section of US 13 to the west to allow for room to build I @-@ 495 . In 1970 , work continued on relocating US 13 along with the construction of bridges carrying the interstate over Stoney Creek . A contract was awarded to build I @-@ 495 between Edgemoor and I @-@ 95 in Claymont in 1971 . The same year , work was underway on building the bridge over the Christina River . Design work on the interstate was completed at this time . The following year , construction contracts were awarded to build I @-@ 495 south of the Christina River and to stabilize the road near Cherry Island . Paving was also underway between the Christina River and Edgemoor . In 1973 , contracts were let to build structures along the freeway between the Christina River and Edgemoor . Work on the highway between New Castle Avenue and the Christina River bridge was finished in 1975 . In 1976 , the first section of I @-@ 495 was opened between US 13 and I @-@ 95 in Claymont . The same year , the bridge carrying the highway over Edgemoor Road was completed . In June 1977 , the remainder of I @-@ 495 was completed and opened to traffic . 
 On June 28 , 1978 , the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ( AASHTO ) approved rerouting I @-@ 95 along the I @-@ 495 alignment . However , AASHTO disapproved renumbering the alignment of I @-@ 95 through Wilmington as I @-@ 595 . On October 27 of that year , AASHTO gave conditional approval for I @-@ 95 through Wilmington to be designated as I @-@ 195 from I @-@ 95 near Newport north to US 202 while the route from US 202 to I @-@ 95 in Claymont would become I @-@ 395 . I @-@ 895 was designated along the conditionally approved route of I @-@ 195 and I @-@ 395 on June 25 , 1979 . In 1980 , the South Wilmington Viaduct along I @-@ 895 was reconstructed . On November 14 , 1980 , I @-@ 95 and I @-@ 495 were returned to their original alignments , with I @-@ 895 decommissioned . In 1988 , an interchange was built at US 13 and DE 3 in Edgemoor . This interchange was numbered as exit 4 , which resulted in the US 13 interchange in Claymont being renumbered from exit 4 to exit 5 . In February 1988 , a tanker drove off the Christina River bridge and exploded , with the truck driver killed . The accident forced the closure of I @-@ 495 in order to repair the heat damage to the bridge structure . In 2000 , through traffic from I @-@ 95 was detoured onto I @-@ 495 while I @-@ 95 was rebuilt between Wilmington and the Pennsylvania border . 
 On June 2 , 2014 , the bridge over the Christina River was closed after it was discovered that four support columns were tilting . I @-@ 495 was closed to traffic between the DE 9A and 12th Street interchanges . DelDOT officials at first said that the bridge would remain closed indefinitely . They later announced plans to have the southbound side of the bridge reopen by Labor Day , with the northbound side to follow by late September . The southbound lanes reopened on July 31 , a month earlier than expected , and the northbound lanes reopened on August 23 . During the closure , traffic was detoured onto I @-@ 95 , and several major roads in the Wilmington area experienced increased traffic congestion . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Mayawati = 
 Mayawati ( pronunciation ) ( full name : Mayawati Prabhu Das , commonly known as Kumari Mayawati ( Miss Mayawati ) , born 15 January 1956 ) or the Iron Lady Mayawati is an Indian politician who served four terms as Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh ( UP ) as national president of the Bahujan Samaj Party ( BSP ) , which focuses on a platform of social change to improve the welfare of the weakest strata of Indian society — the <unk> or Dalits , Other Backward Classes , and religious minorities . She was Chief Minister briefly in 1995 and again in 1997 , then from 2002 to 2003 and from 2007 to 2012 . 
 Mayawati 's rise from humble beginnings has been called a " miracle of democracy " by P. V. Narasimha Rao , former Prime Minister of India . In 1993 Kanshi Ram formed a coalition with the Samajwadi Party and Mayawati became the youngest Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh in 1995 . She was the first female Dalit Chief Minister in India . In 1997 and in 2002 she was Chief Minister in outside support of the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) , the second time only for a year up to 26 August 2003 due to BJP withdrawing support . 
 Mayawati 's tenure has attracted praise and controversy . Millions of Dalits view her as an icon , and refer to her as Behen @-@ ji ( sister ) . She has been praised for her fundraising efforts on behalf of her party and her birthdays have been widely celebrated by her supporters . The rise in her personal wealth and that of her party have been criticised as indicative of corruption . 
 In 2008 , Forbes added Mayawati in the 59th place on its list of the 100 most powerful women in the world . She appeared in Newsweek 's top woman achievers list in 2007 . Newsweek also described her as the Barack Obama of India , and a potential candidate for Prime Minister . Time magazine included Mayawati in India 's 15 Most Influential list for 2007 . 
 After losing the 2012 legislative assembly elections to the rival Samajwadi Party , she resigned from her post as party leader on 7 March 2012 . Later that month she was elected by acclamation to a seat in the Rajya Sabha ( upper house of Parliament ) . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Mayawati was born on 15 January 1956 at Shrimati <unk> <unk> Hospital , New Delhi in a Hindu Dalit family . Her father , Prabhu Das , was a post office employee at <unk> , Gautam Buddha Nagar . The sons in the family were sent to private schools , while the daughters went to " low @-@ performing government schools " . 
 Mayawati studied for her B.A. in 1975 at the <unk> Women 's College and obtained her LLB from the Campus Law Centre , part of the University of Delhi . She completed a <unk> from <unk> College , Ghaziabad , in 1976 . She was working as a teacher in <unk> JJ Colony , Delhi , and studying for the Indian Administrative Services exams , when Dalit politician Kanshi Ram visited her family home in 1977 . According to biographer <unk> Bose , Ram told her : " I can make you such a big leader one day that not one but a whole row of IAS officers will line up for your orders . " In 1983 , Mayawati was awarded her LL.B from Delhi University . Impressed by her speaking skills and ideas , Kanshi Ram included her as a member of his team when he founded the Bahujan Samaj Party ( BSP ) in 1984 . Mayawati was first elected to Parliament in 1989 . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Kanshi Ram founded the BSP in 1984 . Influenced by Dr. B. R. Ambedkar , the chief architect of the Constitution of India , the party 's primary focus is to improve the situation of Dalits and other disadvantaged groups through police reform , affirmative action on hiring of members of scheduled castes for government posts , and providing rural development programmes . Reservation in India is a system whereby a percentage of government positions and seats at universities are reserved for persons of backward classes and scheduled castes and tribes . Throughout her political career , Mayawati supported reservation in both government and private sectors for backward classes , with an increase in quotas and inclusion of more communities such as religious minorities and economically weak upper castes . In August 2012 a bill was cleared that starts the process of amending the constitution so that the reservation system can be expanded to promotions in state jobs . Mayawati 's career has been called a " miracle of democracy " by former Prime Minister of India P. V. Narasimha Rao . Millions of Dalit supporters view her as an icon and refer to her as " Behen @-@ ji " ( sister ) . Her public meetings have been attended by large audiences , who use slogans such as " Kanshi Ram ka mission <unk> ; <unk> Behen Mayawati <unk> " ( Kanshi Ram 's unfulfilled mission will be completed by Mayawati ) and " <unk> tum <unk> karo ; hum <unk> <unk> hain " ( Sister , go ahead with your struggle ; we are with you ) . 
 In its first election campaign in 1984 , BSP fielded Mayawati for the Lok Sabha ( Lower House ) seat of <unk> in the Muzaffarnagar district , for Bijnor in 1985 , and for Haridwar in 1987 . In 1989 she was elected as the representative for Bijnor , with 183 @,@ 189 votes , winning by 8 @,@ 879 votes . Although BSP did not win control of the house , the electoral experience led to considerable activity for Mayawati over the next five years , as she worked with <unk> Ahmed and other organisers . The party won three seats in the 1989 national election and two seats 1991 . 
 Mayawati was first elected to the Rajya Sabha ( Upper House ) of Uttar Pradesh ( UP ) in 1994 . In 1995 she became , as head of her party , Chief Minister in a short @-@ lived coalition government , the youngest Chief Minister in the history of the state up until that point , and the first female Dalit Chief Minister in India . She won election to the Lok Sabha in two different constituencies in 1996 and chose to serve for <unk> . She became Chief Minister again for a short period in 1997 and then from 2002 to 2003 in coalition with the Bharatiya Janata Party . In 2001 Ram named her as his successor to the party leadership . 
 = = = BSP <unk> = = = 
 On 15 December 2001 , in an address during a rally in Lucknow , Kanshi Ram named Mayawati as his successor . She was elected national president of the BSP for her first term on 18 September 2003 . She was elected unopposed for a second consecutive term on 27 August 2006 , and for a third term on 30 August 2014 . 
 = = Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh = = 
 As the Chief Minister , Mayawati gained a reputation for efficient governance and promoting law and order , winning praise even from opposition parties and others . In 2007 , MLA <unk> Yadav of her own political party accused in a land grabbing case , was arrested near her dwelling on her orders . During September – October 2010 , at the time of the Ayodhya verdict , her government maintained law and order and the state remain peaceful . Several high profile criminals and mafia dons were jailed during her terms in office . She called for strong anti @-@ rape laws . Fewer riots , rapes , and corruption occurred during her tenure as compared to previous or successive governments . In the 2007 @-@ 2012 assembly , only 124 MLAs were <unk> as compared to 271 <unk> in successive assembly elected in 2012 . 
 = = = First term , 1995 = = = 
 Mayawati first served as Chief Minister from 3 June 1995 to 18 October 1995 . During this term , the new districts of Ambedkar Nagar district and <unk> Singh Nagar district were created . 
 = = = Second term , 1997 = = = 
 Her second term was from 21 March 1997 to 20 September 1997 . A drive under her government allotted pattas or gram sabha lands on lease to thousands of landless residents . In April 1997 , she created Gautam Budh Nagar district from the district of Ghaziabad , Kaushambi district was separated from Allahabad district , and <unk> Phule Nagar district from Moradabad district . In May 1997 , Mahamaya Nagar district was created out of Aligarh district and Banda district was split into Banda and Chatrapati Shahuji Maharaj Nagar . Mayawati carried out review meetings with bureaucrats and suspended 127 officers . 
 = = = Third term , 2002 – 03 = = = 
 Her third term was from 3 May 2002 to 26 August 2003 . More than 900 officers of IAS , IPS , and PCS cadres were shifted when Mayawati took over as the Chief Minister . This impacted the Chief Secretary , Secretaries , Commissioners , District Magistrates , and police officials . She suspended 12 IAS officers for laxity in carrying out development projects in their regions , including Divisional Commissioners and District Magistrates . Six IPS officers were suspended for failing to maintain law and order , while 24 officers were warned to improve . She started Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj Medical University and 511 acre Gautam Buddha University . She suspended three senior officials after review in a couple of administrative divisions . 
 = = = = 2007 State and 2009 general election = = = = 
 Uttar Pradesh , India 's most populous state and one of its poorest , is considered pivotal in the politics of India because of its large number of voters . BSP won a majority in the 2007 Uttar Pradesh Assembly elections , fielding candidates from a variety of castes and religions . The campaign was accompanied by a colourful slogan : <unk> <unk> , Ganesh hain , Brahma , Vishnu Mahesh Hain : " The elephant ( the BSP logo ) is really the Lord Ganesha , the trinity of gods rolled into one " . The new slogan invited everyone , including the higher castes , to " come ride the elephant " , her party 's election symbol . 
 The BSP won 20 seats in Lok Sabha from the state of Uttar Pradesh in the 2009 elections , obtaining the highest percentage ( 27 @.@ 42 % ) of votes for any political party in the state . The party placed third in terms of national polling percentage ( 6 @.@ 17 % ) . 
 = = = Fourth term , 2007 – 12 : BSP absolute majority = = = 
 Mayawati was sworn in as Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh for the fourth time on 13 May 2007 . She announced an agenda that focused on providing social justice to the weaker sections of society and providing employment instead of distributing money to the unemployed . Her slogan was to make " Uttar Pradesh " ( " Northern Province " ) into " Uttam Pradesh " ( " Excellent Province " ) . Her government began a major crackdown on irregularities in the recruitment process of police officers recruited during the previous Mulayam Singh government . Over 18 @,@ 000 policemen lost their jobs for irregularities in their hiring , and 25 Indian Police Service officers were suspended for their involvement in corruption while recruiting the constables . Mayawati instituted reforms to introduce transparency into the recruiting process , including posting the results of selection exams online . 
 On 10 August 2007 , the Mayawati government introduced 30 per cent reservation in jobs in the private sector . A quota for promotions was also introduced , but was later quashed by the Supreme Court of India . 
 In September 2007 , Bhimrao Ambedkar Rural Integrated Development Programme was started for the integrated development of over 17 @,@ 000 gram <unk> across the State . The Dr Ambedkar Gram Vikas Yojana scheme was launched for provisioning of essential services like water , electricity , and roads in Dalit @-@ dominated villages . Under this scheme , 24 @,@ 716 villages received improvements during her four tenures . 2000 villages were chosen in the first phase during 2009 @-@ 10 for intensive development work ₹ 800 crore ( US $ 120 million ) were sanctioned for the development of roads , ₹ 260 crore ( US $ 39 million ) to construct community centres and 10 @,@ 000 Dalit villages were provided solar sodium street lights . Government reserved 21 percent quota for Scheduled Castes and two percent for Scheduled Tribes in contracts for construction work worth up to ₹ 5 lakh ( US $ 7 @,@ 400 ) each of various authorities and corporations in the state . 
 In 2008 , Mayawati launched , Manyawar Shri Kanshiram Ji <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , a scheme for building low @-@ cost housing colonies for urban poor with 90 @,@ 000 low @-@ cost homes under the first round of construction in different towns and cities across the state while a second and a third round were still underway when government ended in 2012 and next government scrapped the scheme including cutting down electricity of these colonies . 
 Mayawati government started efforts to set up grid @-@ based solar power plants with the help of private sector and first 5 MW solar power plant located in Naini of Allahabad district started functioning on March 2012 and was developed by EMC Limited . UP government signed a MoU with <unk> Limited for 1 @,@ 320 @-@ MW power plant . In December 2007 , Chief Minister Mayawati dedicated a 210 @-@ megawatt Unit No. 4 of Parichha thermal power station in Jhansi district built at a cost of ₹ 1 @,@ 750 crore ( US $ 260 million ) , Four 132 kV and 33 kV power transmission sub @-@ stations built in Faizabad , <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( Saharanpur ) while she also laid the foundation stones for the 500 @-@ MW ( <unk> MW ) Parichha thermal power project and 500 @-@ MW ( <unk> MW ) <unk> power station in <unk> district to be built at a combined cost of ₹ 3 @,@ 800 crore ( US $ 560 million ) and of eight transmission sub @-@ stations of 132 kV and 220 kV capacity which would be constructed at Noida , Greater Noida , Varanasi , Jhansi and Saharanpur at cost of ₹ 600 crore ( US $ 89 million ) . She also aimed for 500 MW units of Parichha and <unk> to begin production by 2010 so that there <unk> be no scarcity of electricity . 
 Mayawati 's dream project of 165 km six lane Yamuna Expressway connected Delhi to Agra through Noida – Greater Noida Expressway , touching 1 @,@ 182 villages in the state . Later , Indian Air Force fighter jet Dassault Mirage 2000 test @-@ Landed on Yamuna Expressway as Part of Trials . On 15 January 2008 , Mayawati laid the foundation stone 1 @,@ 047 km Ganga Expressway at the cost of ₹ 30 @,@ 000 crore ( US $ 4 @.@ 5 billion ) for joining Ballia in the far east of the state to Greater Noida . 
 In November 2009 , Mayawati dedicated Noida Metro constructed at the cost of ₹ 557 crore ( US $ 83 million ) . She had vigorously proposed for construction of <unk> airport near Noida . 
 In October 2011 , Mayawati government under public @-@ private partnership with <unk> Group successfully executed and delivered First F1 Indian Grand Prix , an international event at Buddh International Circuit , Greater Noida constructed by <unk> Group . The event was hailed as flawlessly conducted salvaging some of India 's prestige when compared to minor embarrassments in 2010 Commonwealth Games ( Before opening ceremony ) conducted in Delhi . Mayawati presented the winning trophy to winner Sebastian Vettel . Foreigners found the track as ' impressive ' and 3 Indian teenagers picked by a F1 panel to train them as future Formula One drivers in Europe . 
 Mayawati has seen through to completion of several memorials dedicated to icons of Bahujan Samaj build first time in India , including the Manyawar Shri Kanshiram Ji Green Eco Garden ( inaugurated March 2011 ) , the Rashtriya Dalit <unk> Sthal and Green Garden ( inaugurated October 2011 ) , and the Dr Bhimrao Ambedkar <unk> <unk> Prateek Sthal ( opened November 2012 ) . 
 Mayawati during her tenure directed the all the Commissioners and the District Magistrates to distribute 3 acre land pieces or pattas to weaker sections of society by launching special drive for illegal possesses of pattas be dispossessed of them and the eligible poor be identified by regular monitoring of pattas and strict action against the mafias and <unk> through spot verification of different development and public welfare programmes . She also took steps to ensure possession of land to the genuine people taking strong view on encroachment of land allotted to members of scheduled castes and tribes . In 2010 , <unk> people belonging to the SC and ST communities were allotted 1054 @.@ 879 hectares of agriculture land . In a special drive 74 FIRs were filed and 88 people were arrested for illegal occupation from agricultural land . 
 Sugar Information Service a model website supported by SMS and <unk> facility was developed and adopted by all 116 operational sugar mills was started by the government as the largest rural information technology platform in the country providing a password protected webpage for each of the 30 lakh odd farmers . 
 Mayawati as her dream project constructed four ' affordable ' institutions Mahamaya Balika Inter College in Sector 44 Noida , <unk> Balak Inter College in Sector 91 of Noida , Savitri Bai Phule Balika Inter College in <unk> ( Greater Noida ) and Gautam Budh Balak Inter College at Knowledge Park 5 in Greater Noida at a total cost of ₹ 600 crore ( US $ 89 million ) having high @-@ tech classrooms with facilities like projectors and electronic screens , laboratories , well @-@ equipped libraries , air @-@ conditioned blocks , elevators , hostels , staff housing complexes , auditoriums and sport complexes . These charge very nominal tuition fees at ₹ 290 for Classes I to VIII , ₹ 490 for Classes IX and X and ₹ 700 for classes XI and XII and registered a 100 % pass percentage with a number of 10 <unk> in the CBSE Class X results . In 2008 , Her government established Dr. Shakuntala Misra National Rehabilitation University for the Physically challenged students . 
 Mayawati dedicated the ₹ 63 @.@ 5 crore ( US $ 9 @.@ 4 million ) 286 @-@ bed super @-@ specialty Centenary hospital in Lucknow and 50 @-@ bed critical care unit at <unk> . Mayawati , in 2007 , launched ₹ 500 crore ( US $ 74 million ) Manyawar Kanshiram Multi @-@ speciality Hospital in Greater Noida which started its OPD services in April 2013 . Mayawati government also spent ₹ 510 crore ( US $ 76 million ) on Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Multi Speciality Hospital in Sector 30 of Noida . 
 Mayawati government started food tracking system to track mid @-@ day meal scheme to cross @-@ check if children get their hot meal in schools . There is a software based SMS system , where the school principal and a few parents received an automatic message the day less than 50 percent or a large number of school children were served mid @-@ day meal . And this SMS was generated on basis of information on mid @-@ day meal feed by teacher in @-@ charge of the scheme into an online monitoring system . Though principal was required to give an explanation through SMS and parents to verify the claim . This system inspired UPA led center government for starting it nationwide . 
 Her government also instituted Sant Ravidas Kala Samman Award in an effort to promote cultural activities in the field of art with a cash prize of ₹ 1 @.@ 25 lakh ( US $ 1 @,@ 900 ) . 
 Under Savitri Bai Phule Balika Shiksha <unk> <unk> , Mayawati distributed over 10 lakh bicycles among Muslim and poor school girls from 2008 to 2011 . 
 The nominal gross domestic product ( GDP ) of Uttar Pradesh grew at an annual rate of 8 to 12 percent between 2002 – 03 and 2006 @-@ 07 . When Mayawati began her five @-@ year tenure as chief minister from May 2007 , the average annual state GDP growth rate between 2007 – 08 and 2010 @-@ 11 shot up to 17 percent . In financial year 2011 , UP ’ s state GDP was predicted to grow by 11 per cent . Thus , UP ’ s nominal GDP growth in these four years ( 2007 – 11 ) was almost the same as what the entire country clocked in that period . State ’ s per capita income went up by 136 per cent from about Rs 11 @,@ 000 in 2007 to Rs 26 @,@ 000 in 2011 . UP continued to be one of the few states with a revenue surplus and Mayawati has used this surplus to reduce the state ’ s fiscal deficit from 4 percent of state GDP in 2007 @-@ 08 to a budgeted figure of 2 @.@ 97 per cent for the financial year 2011 . Mayawati also ensured that the state ’ s indebtedness came down from 43 percent of state GDP in 2007 @-@ 08 to 32 percent in 2011 @-@ 12 . Mayawati in her five years added about 4 @,@ 000 MW of generation capacity to the state ’ s power sector . Mayawati also planned to create 7 @,@ 000 MW more generation capacity by the end of 2012 for achieving her target is to make state a power @-@ surplus state by 2017 for which the state is already executing power projects with a total capacity of 10 @,@ 000 MW . 
 After coming to power in 2007 , Mayawati wrote letters to the Prime Minister regarding partitioning of Uttar Pradesh into four different states in 2007 , in March 2008 and December 2009 . Finally on 15 November 2011 , Mayawati 's cabinet approved partitioning Uttar Pradesh into four different states ( <unk> Pradesh , Awadh Pradesh , Bundelkhand and Purvanchal ) for better administration and governance . 
 On 6 March 2012 the Bahujan Samaj Party lost its majority to the Samajwadi Party and Mayawati tendered her resignation to the governor of Uttar Pradesh the next day , thereby becoming the first CM to complete full five years in office . On 13 March 2012 she filed nomination papers for the Rajya Sabha , and she was declared elected unopposed on 22 March . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Mayawati is self @-@ made woman politician that started at cost of her own struggle , hard work and capabilities unlike many women politicians in India like Indira Gandhi and Sonia Gandhi that rise to the top due to dynastic politics . Mayawati chose to remain unmarried for whole life to serve people from the weaker sections of society so that nobody could accuse her of nepotism . 
 Kanshi Ram praised Mayawati at her 47th birthday celebrations for her fundraising activities on behalf of the party . He stated that the party 's eventual goal is to gain power at the national level , and that Mayawati 's efforts help in that quest . Her birthdays have since become major media events at which she has appeared laden with diamonds . Her supporters have declared her birthday as Jan <unk> <unk> ( People 's Welfare Day ) . In 2009 the day was marked by the announcement of welfare schemes targeted towards poor and downtrodden people of the state and in 2010 by the launch of programmes with a value of over ₹ 7 @,@ 312 crore . 
 In 2007 @-@ 08 , Mayawati paid ₹ 26 @.@ 26 crore ( US $ 3 @.@ 9 million ) as income tax . She was at number 20 in I @-@ T department 's compilation of the top 200 taxpayers ' list with names like Shah Rukh Khan and Sachin Tendulkar as they top the list in their respective fields . Most of her income comes as " gifts " from her faithfull supporters of Bahujan Movement started by Kanshi Ram . She paid ₹ 15 crore ( US $ 2 @.@ 2 million ) in advance tax in April – December , 2007 . 
 When BSP workers garlanded Mayawati with currency notes on the occasion of the silver jubilee celebrations coinciding with the BSP founder Kanshi Ram ’ s birth anniversary on March 15 , 2010 , All the news channels and newspapers were trying to expose the ‘ scandal ’ behind that act as these presumed that it was an act of corruption that was being flaunted openly declaring that the garland of currency notes was made from money through corrupt means and not from donations of Bahujan Samaj Party supporters as Mayawati , her Ministers and supporters claimed . Media Channels kept daring her to disclose the source of the money but gave her hardly any time to do so propagating their own belief of ill gotten money . Each reporter or channel was having its own estimate of the amount of cash woven into the garland in the ranged from ₹ 2 crore ( US $ 300 @,@ 000 ) to ₹ 51 crore ( US $ 7 @.@ 6 million ) even when Mayawati ’ s supporters kept claiming that it was worth ₹ 21 lakh ( US $ 31 @,@ 000 ) . None of the channels accepted that making clear that they were not interested in the issue but only in Mayawati baiting . This all went on viral till next day Mayawati came out and wore another garland made from currency notes offered by her supporters and this acted as a ' shock treatment ' and thus this <unk> began to be ending . Media channels never lost an opportunity to bash Mayawati as this most of the Indian middle and upper classes enjoy . 
 At Kanshi Ram 's funeral ceremonies in 2006 , Mayawati stated that both Kanshi Ram and herself had been , and she would continue to be , observant of Buddhist traditions and customs . She has stated her intention to formally convert to Buddhism when the political conditions enable her to become Prime Minister of India . Her act of performing the last rites ( traditionally done by a male heir ) was an expression of their views against gender discrimination . When she was Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh , she publicly called <unk> to prayer . 
 = = Political and legal issues = = 
 Mayawati 's political career has attracted praise and controversy . She has been praised for her fundraising efforts on behalf of her party , and her birthdays were major media events as well as a symbol for her supporters . The increase in her personal wealth and that of her party have been viewed by critics as signs of corruption . 
 = = = Taj corridor case = = = 
 In 2002 , the government of Uttar Pradesh began improvements of the infrastructure in the Taj Heritage Corridor , the important tourist area in Agra that includes the Taj Mahal . The project was soon riddled with problems , including funds being released for the project without the submission of the required detailed project reports to the environmental authorities . Suspecting there were financial irregularities as well , the Central Bureau of Investigation ( CBI ) raided twelve residences , including Mayawati 's . It had filed a First Information Report against her and seven others two days earlier . The raid uncovered evidence of assets disproportionate to her known income . 
 In June 2007 , Governor T. V. <unk> said that there was insufficient evidence to prosecute her . In his 23 @-@ page order , he said : " the fact that the Mission Management Board , consisting of officers of both the State and the Central Government , regularly met and discussed the project and the fact that even a sum of ₹ 17 crores was spent through the Central Government public sector undertaking , NPCC , all go to show that the serious offences with which Mayawati and the Minister were charged do not stand scrutiny . " Advocates unsuccessfully challenged the governor 's decision in court . The Supreme Court rejected the plea of the CBI and refused to direct the governor to prosecute her . The Taj corridor case was effectively ended before going to trial . 
 = = = <unk> assets case = = = 
 Mayawati 's assets run into millions of dollars , with several properties to her name . In the 2007 – 08 assessment year , Mayawati paid an income tax of ₹ 26 crore , ranking among the top 20 taxpayers in the country . Earlier the CBI filed a case against her for owning assets disproportionate to her known sources of income . Mayawati described the CBI investigation against her as illegal . Her party asserted that her income comes from gifts and small contributions made by party workers and supporters . 
 On 3 August 2011 the Delhi High court dismissed the central government 's appeal against Mayawati , stating that " she has fully discharged her obligations by disclosing the identities of all of her donors , the gifts had been donated by her supporters " . The central government decided not to file an appeal in the Supreme Court . On 13 March 2012 Mayawati revealed assets worth ₹ 111 @.@ 26 crore in an affidavit filed with her nomination papers for the Rajya Sabha . The disproportionate assets case was finally quashed on 6 July 2012 — nine years later — by a Supreme Court bench of Justice P <unk> and <unk> Misra ; the court found that the case was unwarranted . Based on an opinion received from the Directorate of Prosecution , the CBI decided not to file an appeal . On 4 October 2012 a review petition was filed by Kamlesh Verma , contending that the case had been dismissed merely on technical grounds , and that the evidence had not been adequately reviewed . On 8 August 2013 the Supreme Court declined a request to re @-@ open the case . After seeking legal advice , the CBI finally closed their file on 8 October 2013 . 
 = = = Statues = = = 
 In her tenures as a Chief Minister , Mayawati commissioned the production and public display of several statues representing Buddhist , Hindu , and Dalit icons like Gautama Buddha , Gadge Maharaj , Sant Ravidas , Sant Kabir , Narayana Guru , <unk> Phule , Chatrapati Shahuji Maharaj , Babasaheb Ambedkar , BSP party founder Kanshi Ram , and of herself . She claims that the expenditure was required because the past governments did not show respect towards Dalit leaders , in whose memory nothing had ever been built . She spent somewhere between ₹ 25 and 60 billion rupees ( about US $ 500 million to US $ 1 @.@ 3 billion ) on projects in five parks and at memorials such as Dr. B.R. Ambedkar <unk> <unk> Sthal and <unk> Kanshiram <unk> Sthal , built in the name of B.R. Ambedkar , Ramabai Ambedkar , and Kanshi Ram in Lucknow between 2007 and 2009 . In June 2009 the Supreme Court issued a stay against further building on the projects , until the Public Interest Litigation ( <unk> ) questioning these expenditures was settled . The Comptroller and Auditor General of India reported that ₹ 66 crore ( about US $ 12 million ) in excessive costs had been incurred on the construction of the memorials . In February 2010 Mayawati 's government approved a plan for a special police force to protect the statues , as she feared that her political opponents might demolish them . In December 2010 , her government received permission to continue part of the plan , namely maintenance and completion of Ambedkar Memorial Park . 
 Despite the existing Supreme Court stay , in October 2011 Mayawati inaugurated the Rashtriya Dalit <unk> Sthal and Green Garden , built at a cost of ₹ 685 crore . Since the memorial also features her own statues , Mayawati was accused by the Indian National Congress of wasting the taxpayers ' money . The BSP dismissed the allegations , stating that her statues were erected because Kanshi Ram 's will requested that his statues should be constructed next to those of the current President of BSP . Mayawati accused the Congress of being " anti @-@ Dalit " . 
 In January 2012 , the Election Commission ordered that all of the statues of Mayawati as well as recent statues of elephants ( the symbol of the Bahujan Samaj Party ) should be covered up until after February 's Uttar Pradesh election . On 26 July 2012 the statue in Lucknow was damaged by members of a group calling themselves " Uttar Pradesh <unk> Sena " . A replacement statue was re @-@ installed overnight by the Lucknow city administration . Following the Lucknow vandalism , there were similar such incidents in other parts of Uttar Pradesh . 
 In 2015 , the Supreme Court continued hearings on the <unk> case about the statues . The BSP had still not provided evidence about where the monies expended on such monuments came from , whether it was all from appropriation bills passed by the legislature or also included party funds spent for the purpose . 
 = = = World Bank criticism = = = 
 The World Bank loaned India funds for development , and Mayawati was to manage projects with this money in UP . The projects were preplanned and on schedule , but the Mayawati government made changes which put the projects behind schedule , including rapidly transferring high @-@ caste managers in and out of rural posts . The World Bank sent a letter of complaint on 1 August 2002 to India 's central government stating , " We have now learnt that project managers have been replaced within three weeks of assuming office . The project coordinator of the Diversified Agriculture Support Project has been changed twice in quick succession and at the moment there is no project coordinator . In the forestry project , numerous changes have been made over the past six months ... Such developments do not augur well for these time @-@ bound projects that require consistently good leadership . " Mayawati initially responded by saying the letter was a fake and later said there had been a misunderstanding . She then decreased the number of transfers , stopped creating new posts , and temporarily reduced the level of government spending on furniture and vehicles in response to the allegations . The World Bank continued to criticise the level of corruption even after these measures had been implemented . 
 = = = WikiLeaks allegations = = = 
 Diplomatic cables published in 2011 through WikiLeaks detailing the opinions of American civil servants asserted that Mayawati ran all governmental decisions through her small group of advisors and that she employed food tasters for security . The leaked messages also allege that she had sent a private jet to Mumbai to retrieve a pair of sandals . Mayawati responded by saying the statements were baseless . 
 = = Books on Mayawati = = 
 Studies have been done on Mayawati and books have been published , including her autobiographies . One of the first works was journalist Mohammad Jamil Akhter 's book , Iron Lady Kumari Mayawati . Her autobiographies are Mere <unk> Jeevan <unk> Bahujan Movement Ka <unk> in three volumes in Hindi and A Travelogue of My Struggle @-@ ridden Life and of Bahujan Samaj , in two volumes in English . <unk> : A Political Biography of Mayawati is a biography by veteran journalist <unk> Bose . 
 = Trevor Kincaid = 
 Trevor Kincaid ( December 21 , 1872 – July 1 , 1970 ) was a Canadian @-@ American scientist and professor at the University of Washington who achieved national acclaim for his scientific achievements while an undergraduate student . Kincaid 's interests ranged from insect life to marine biology to mollusks , though he once described himself as an " <unk> " ( one who studies everything ) . He is best known for introducing the gypsy moth parasite to the United States , for helping establish the Washington state oyster industry , and as the driving force behind the creation of the Friday Harbor Laboratories . Kincaid is responsible for the identification and naming of hundreds of species ; at least 47 plant and animal species were , in turn , named after him . In 1938 he was designated Alumnus Summa Laude <unk> of the University of Washington , that school 's highest honor for its alumni . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 = = = Family and childhood = = = 
 Trevor Kincaid was born in Peterborough , Ontario , in 1872 . He was the son of Robert Kincaid , a first generation Canadian whose own father had immigrated from Ireland in the early 19th century . Robert Kincaid received his medical degree from Queen 's University and undertook his internship at Bellevue Hospital in New York . In 1861 , Kincaid found himself caught up in the war hysteria that followed the capitulation of Fort Sumter and volunteered to join the United States Army , serving during the American Civil War first as a field surgeon and , later , as a member of the medical staff at Armory Square Hospital in Washington , DC . After the war he returned to Peterborough and took up private medical practice , eventually marrying Mary Bell , who gave birth to Trevor . 
 In his youth , Kincaid was inquisitive about nature and enjoyed playing lacrosse with friends . A series of bad investments by Robert Kincaid , however , led to the family 's bankruptcy , and the <unk> left Peterborough for Olympia , Washington , in 1889 . A paucity of family funds led Kincaid to work a variety of odd jobs for several years following high school , but a chance encounter with University of Washington ( UW ) biology professor Orson " Bugs " Johnson and the Young Naturalists Society led him to resolve to spend his meager savings to relocate to Seattle and enroll at the university . 
 = = = University and national acclaim = = = 
 As a student , Kincaid showed exceptional aptitude for the natural sciences and achieved national attention for his scientific achievements . In 1897 , while still an undergraduate , he accompanied David Starr Jordan to the Pribilof Islands as part of a study of seals undertaken by the American Fur Seal Commission . Back in Washington , Kincaid 's interests focused more on insect life , and a report that year in the Boston Evening Transcript noted that he had discovered 41 new species of bees , including 22 of the genus <unk> . Theodore Dru Alison Cockerell , at the time one of America 's leading entomologists , directed a portion of the sizable Kincaid bee collection to the Smithsonian Institution . 
 Kincaid missed commencement exercises at the University of Washington due to his appointment as the entomologist attached to the Harriman Alaska Expedition . During that trip , completed before his 27th birthday , he collected about 8 @,@ 000 specimens of insect , resulting in the discovery and naming of more than 240 new species , including <unk> <unk> , which he named after the expedition 's patron , E. H. Harriman . 
 Following his graduation from the University of Washington , Kincaid went on to earn a master 's degree . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Teaching and research career = = = 
 In 1901 Kincaid was hired as a lecturer in biology at the University of Washington . The following year he was promoted to assistant professor and made chairman of the university 's newly created zoology department , a position he would continue to hold until his retirement 35 years later . 
 In his new position , Kincaid began scouting the Puget Sound region for a suitable site at which the university could establish a marine research field station . After evaluating Port Townsend and Rocky Bay , he chose Friday Harbor as the location for what is now known as Friday Harbor Laboratories , concluding that the " great wealth of life in that area " made up for its extremely remote location . After running a laboratory at temporary sites near Friday Harbor for several years , Kincaid personally petitioned for the transfer to the university of the 484 @-@ acre Point Caution site ( an area of San Juan Island that had been set aside as a military reserve to be used in the event of war with the United Kingdom ) . In 1921 the U.S. government finally ceded Point Caution to the university . 
 Kincaid was dispatched to Japan in 1908 by the United States Department of Agriculture to identify and collect a natural parasite for the gypsy moth , which , at the time , was creating havoc in Massachusetts . His continued research on that parasite , the Chalcid wasp , took him to Russia the following year . The parasite that he discovered was bred by the US Department of Agriculture as a gypsy moth repellent for many years thereafter . His later work on oyster breeding earned him the nickname the " father of the Northwest oyster industry " . During his years at the UW , he was also credited with helping to establish the university 's College of Fisheries . 
 = = = Later studies = = = 
 Kincaid was compelled to retire in 1937 due to the University of Washington 's mandatory retirement age . He continued research as a professor emeritus into his 80s , purchasing a hand printing press that he used to self @-@ publish a series of reports based on previous research he had made of snails . These papers were published under the name " <unk> Press " . <unk> by his wife Louise , they were known for being virtually free of typographic errors . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kincaid married Louise Pennell on August 23 , 1917 . Pennell had received her master 's degree in zoology from the University of Washington the preceding June . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Kincaid died in 1970 . Kincaid Hall at the University of Washington , constructed in 1971 , is named after him . 
 At least 47 plant and animal species have also been named after Kincaid . 
 In 1938 Kincaid became the first person to be recognized by the University of Washington as Alumnus Summa Laude <unk> ( " Alumnus Worthy of Highest Praise " ) , the university 's highest honor for its past graduates . 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 Kincaid , T. ( 1966 ) . " A Problematic Sense @-@ Organ Found upon the <unk> of Intertidal <unk> Beetles " . Transactions of the American Microscopical Society , Vol . 85 , No. 2 , pp. 275 – 278 . 
 Kincaid , T. ( 1964 ) . " A <unk> Parasitic on the <unk> , <unk> californicus ( Stimpson ) " . Transactions of the American Microscopical Society , Vol . 83 , No. 4 , pp. 373 – 376 . 
 Kincaid , T. ( 1963 ) . " The ant @-@ plant , <unk> pusillus , Bentham " . Transactions of the American Microscopical Society , Vol . 82 , No. 1 , 101 – 105 . 
 Kincaid , T. ( 1930 ) . " Control of the European Brown Scale by Chalcid Parasites " . Journal of Economic Entomology , Vol . 23 , No. 5 , pp. 809 – 809 . 
 Kincaid , T. B. ( 1928 ) . " Development of Oyster Industry of the Pacific " . Transactions of the American Fisheries Society , Vol . 58 , No. 1 , pp. 117 – 122 . 
 Smith , E. V. , and Kincaid , T. ( 1920 ) . " A report on the taking of immature salmon in the coastal waters of the state of Washington " . Twenty @-@ Eighth and Twenty @-@ Ninth Annual Reports of the State Fish Commissioner . State of Washington Department of Fish and Game . Olympia , <unk> pp. 39 – 46 . 
 Kincaid , T. ( 1900 ) . " The <unk> " . Proceedings of the Washington Academy of Sciences , Vol . 2 , pp. 341 – 365 . 
 Kincaid , T. ( 1899 ) . " The <unk> of the Pacific Coast " . Entomological News , Vol . 10 , pp. 30 – 37 . 
 = Iowa Highway 150 = 
 Iowa Highway 150 ( Iowa 150 ) is an 85 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 137 km ) state highway in eastern and northeastern Iowa . It begins at U.S. Route 218 ( US 218 ) in Vinton and ends at US 52 and Iowa 24 in Calmar . From Vinton , it heads north and east towards Urbana where it meets Interstate 380 ( I @-@ 380 ) and Iowa 27 , the Avenue of the Saints highway . At Independence , it intersects US 20 on the south side of town . Further north , it converges with Iowa 3 in Oelwein . 
 As it traverses through the east @-@ central part of the state , Iowa 150 mostly passes through farmland where acreages and farmsteads dot the landscape . Through the towns along the route , the highway generally brings traffic through the central business districts of each town . In Fayette however , the highway bypasses the downtown area . Between Fayette and West Union , part of the route forms the western leg of the River Bluffs Scenic Byway , which passes through Iowa 's " Little Switzerland " region . 
 The Iowa 150 designation has been a part of the primary highway system since its inception in 1920 . The current route was formed in 1941 . The route extended from Calmar to Davenport , by way of Cedar Rapids . In 1969 , the route was truncated at Cedar Rapids , with part of the old route becoming Iowa 130 . In 1984 , it took its current form when the southern part of the route was shifted over the former Iowa 101 . Most of the abandoned part of Iowa 150 became Iowa 920 until July 1 , 2003 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Iowa 150 begins at a T intersection with US 218 on the southern side of Vinton . US 218 comes up from the south and turns west at the intersection while Iowa 150 begins heading north along C Street . Near downtown , the highway turns to the east for a few blocks . At the Benton County Courthouse , it turns north once again and almost immediately crosses the Cedar River . North of Vinton , the highway passes a small airport surrounded by fields and then curves to the east for a few miles . West of Urbana , it heads back to the north and intersects Interstate 380 ( I @-@ 380 ) . 
 North of I @-@ 380 , Iowa 150 intersects 51st Street . Prior to 1984 , Iowa 150 came from the north along its current route and turned east onto 51st Street and Iowa 101 followed the current path of Iowa 150 to Vinton . The highway heads due north , only passing a few houses until it reaches US 20 south of Independence . Once in Independence , it crosses the Wapsipinicon River over a concrete arch bridge . At 1st Street , the route turns east for two blocks before returning northward . On the north side of town , Iowa 150 passes the Independence Motor Speedway . 
 North of Independence , Iowa 150 continues north through the farmland of rural Buchanan County . It passes through Hazleton a few miles before it meets Iowa 281 south of Oelwein . North of Iowa 281 , which runs along the Buchanan – Fayette county line , Iowa 150 enters Oelwein along Rock Island Road , which eases into 1st Avenue . A block east of downtown , at Charles Street , Iowa 3 approaches from the east and turns north onto Iowa 150 . The two routes head through Oelwein along Frederick Avenue and split a couple miles north of town . The highway turns east very briefly and returns heading north until it reaches Fayette County Road C33 ( CR C33 ) . There , it turns east to go through Maynard and continues east until an intersection with Iowa 187 . Iowa 187 comes from the south and ends at the intersection , while Iowa 150 turns north and continues towards Fayette . 
 At Fayette , the home of Upper Iowa University , Iowa 150 intersects Iowa 93 and crosses the Volga River on the north side of town . Between Fayette and West Union , the highway forms the western leg of the River Bluffs Scenic Byway , through the area known locally as " Little Switzerland " . In West Union , the route meets the western end of Iowa 56 on the south side and then US 18 in the heart of town . North of West Union , the route gradually eases to the west through a series of curves . South of the unincorporated community of <unk> , the route straightens out on its way to Calmar . As Iowa 150 comes up from the south , the route ends in Calmar at an intersection with US 52 , which comes in from the east and turns north , and Iowa 24 , which comes in from the west . 
 = = History = = 
 There have been three iterations of Iowa 150 that have been shown on maps since the primary highway system was created in 1920 . The first , designated in 1925 , was a short connector route between US 32 in Homestead and US 30 in Cedar Rapids . This route that later became part of Iowa 149 is currently part of US 151 . 
 The second version first appeared on state maps in 1932 . At first , the route went south from Jefferson to Iowa 46 between Jamaica and Herndon . Iowa 271 , a spur route from <unk> north to Yale , was designated in 1935 . Three years later , Iowa 150 was extended southward along Iowa 271 , leaving only the short east – west portion of the supplanted highway with the 271 designation . By 1942 , all of Iowa 150 had been overtaken by Iowa 17 , which was relocated south of Jefferson . 
 = = = Current route = = = 
 The current Iowa 150 was created shortly after Iowa 17 supplanted the former Iowa 150 in the west @-@ central part of the state . The new Iowa 150 replaced Iowa 11 , which stretched from Calmar to Cedar Rapids via Independence , in its entirety . Through Cedar Rapids , the highway entered from the north along Center Point Road NE . It turned west onto US 151 and Iowa 64 along 1st Avenue E near Coe College . It turned south onto 10th Street SE on which it traveled for a few blocks to the corner of Mount Vernon Road and 8th Avenue SE , which carried US 30 east and west , respectively . 
 From Cedar Rapids , the route continued south and east by overlapping US 30 and Iowa 38 to Tipton . It also entirely replaced Iowa 74 , which stretched from Tipton to Davenport . Through Davenport , the highway entered from the northwest along the aptly named Northwest Boulevard . Further into town , it intersected Kimberly Road and then transitioned onto Harrison Street . In downtown , the highway overlapped US 61 and US 67 along 4th Street , briefly along Gaines Street , and then along 2nd Street . Iowa 150 followed US 67 onto the Centennial Bridge where it ended at the state line over the Mississippi River . On the Illinois side of the bridge , US 150 began at the state line . 
 During the 1950s , as today 's highway system was beginning to take shape , Iowa 150 was rerouted a couple times in Cedar Rapids . The first adjustment happened in 1954 , when US 30 was taken off of Mount Vernon Road and put onto a new road on the south side of town . Iowa 150 was moved west through downtown and across the Cedar River . It turned south onto 6th Street SW , on which US 30 and US 218 joined at 18th Avenue SW . The three routes turned east onto the new road , but US 218 turned south at Bowling Street SW . Within five years , Iowa 150 moved to the northeast side of Cedar Rapids and into Marion . Instead of continuing south to Coe College , it turned east at Collins Road and connected with US 151 and Iowa 64 near the eastern city limits . It then followed those two routes to downtown Marion , where it turned south onto a road which headed southeast towards Mount Vernon . East of Mount Vernon , it followed US 30 to Iowa 38 and continued towards Davenport . Within a few years , Iowa 150 was rerouted onto the newly extended Iowa 13 , which was extended south to US 30 near Bertram . At its longest extent , the route was 180 @.@ 52 miles ( 290 @.@ 52 km ) long . 
 That all changed on January 1 , 1969 , when the Iowa State Highway Commission reorganized its primary highway system . The commission reassigned sections of highway with new numbers and removed duplicate numbers where they were unnecessary . In Iowa 150 's case , the route was truncated at US 151 in Cedar Rapids . The duplications along US 151 , Iowa 13 , US 30 , and Iowa 38 were removed and the remaining segment from Tipton to Davenport was renumbered Iowa 130 . The route 's new length was 97 @.@ 96 miles ( 157 @.@ 65 km ) . 
 The southern end of Iowa 150 changed again in 1984 . After I @-@ 380 , which was constructed parallel to Iowa 150 between Cedar Rapids and Center Point , was opened to traffic , Iowa 150 's routing south of Iowa 101 was essentially redundant to the new interstate . As a result , Iowa 150 was rerouted over Iowa 101 south to Vinton . The vacated section of Iowa 150 was renumbered Iowa 920 from old Iowa 101 's north end to Center Point and Iowa 921 from Center Point to Cedar Rapids . 
 In the 1980s , Iowa 150 near Oelwein was rerouted onto a new section of highway along the former right @-@ of @-@ way of the recently liquidated Rock Island Railroad . Originally proposed as a four @-@ lane highway , pressure from Oelwein residents caused the Iowa Transportation Commission to approve a three @-@ lane highway instead . The new section of highway was open by 1986 . The old section of Iowa 150 remained on the primary highway system as the unsigned Iowa 916 until July 1 , 2003 . 
 Construction is currently underway to realign the curves 4 @.@ 5 miles north of Independence . The project has been under discussion since the release of a road safety audit in December 2009 . 
 = = = Flooding in 2008 = = = 
 On June 11 , 2008 , about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of Iowa 150 north of Vinton closed for a few months after flood waters from the Cedar River destroyed the roadway . North of the intersection with County Road E16 ( CR E16 ) , a 400 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 120 m ) section of roadbed was completely washed away . By the end of the month , one lane the bridge over the Cedar River had reopened to local traffic and farmers . Reopening the bridge saved drivers from having to use a 22 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 35 km ) detour . By August , Iowa 150 was reopened to all traffic from Vinton to CR E16 . The washed @-@ out section of highway was rebuilt , repaved , and reopened on September 10 , almost three months after it closed . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Related routes = = 
 = = = Iowa Highway 101 = = = 
 Iowa Highway 101 ( Iowa 101 ) was a highway in Benton and Buchanan counties . It was an original primary highway designated in 1920 from Primary Road No. 40 in Vinton to Primary Road No. 5 in Independence . The northern half of the route was overlapped by Primary Route No. 11 , which would become Iowa 150 . By 1924 , Primary Road No. 101 was truncated to an intersection with Primary Road No. 11 west of Walker . The 15 @.@ 6 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 25 @.@ 1 km ) highway would largely remain the same for the next sixty years . In 1984 , Iowa 150 was rerouted over the highway and the Iowa 101 designation was removed . The former section of Iowa 150 became Iowa 920 and Iowa 921 . 
 = = = Iowa Highway 920 = = = 
 Iowa Highway 920 ( Iowa 920 ) was the northern half of the section of Iowa 150 that was vacated when it was rerouted over Iowa 101 . It began at the same intersection in Benton County west of Walker where Iowa 101 ended . Iowa 920 headed east towards Walker , where the highway skirted the edge of town by curving to the south . The route headed due south along Center Point Road for a few miles until it curved southwest and back to the southeast into Center Point . Through Center Point , the highway was known as Franklin Street . In the southern part of town , where Center Point Road turned south , Iowa 920 ended . 
 In 2002 , the Road Use Tax Fund Committee , a mix of city , county , and state transportation officials , met to review and recommend changes to Iowa 's public road system . The report was necessitated by increasing costs to maintain the highway system and a level of funding that was not keeping up with the rising costs . The committee identified over 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) of state highways , including Iowa 920 , which could be turned over to local jurisdictions . Most of the committee 's recommendations were accepted and on July 1 , 2003 , Iowa 920 and over 600 miles ( 970 km ) of state highways were turned over to the counties or local jurisdictions . The east – west portion near Walker was replaced by CR <unk> , while the north – south portion became CR <unk> . 
 The portion of Center Point Road south of Center Point was known as Iowa 921 for about a year . The 12 @.@ 5 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 20 @.@ 1 km ) route extended south to Hiawatha . It was turned over to Linn County by 1986 as sections of I @-@ 380 , which was being built adjacent to Center Point Road , opened to traffic . The rural parts of Center Point Road became known as CR <unk> , while the parts in Hiawatha are simply known as Center Point Road . 
 = Inari Ōkami = 
 Inari Ōkami ( <unk> , also <unk> ) is the Japanese kami of foxes , of fertility , rice , tea and Sake , of agriculture and industry , of general prosperity and worldly success , and one of the principal kami of Shinto . In earlier Japan , Inari was also the patron of <unk> and merchants . Represented as male , female , or androgynous , Inari is sometimes seen as a collective of three or five individual kami . Inari appears to have been worshipped since the founding of a shrine at Inari Mountain in 711 AD , although some scholars believe that worship started in the late 5th century . 
 Worship of Inari spread across Japan in the Edo period , and by the 16th century Inari had become the patron of blacksmiths and the protector of warriors . Inari is a popular figure in both Shinto and Buddhist beliefs in Japan . More than one @-@ third ( 32 @,@ 000 ) of the Shinto shrines in Japan are dedicated to Inari . Modern corporations , such as cosmetic company Shiseido , continue to revere Inari as a patron kami , with shrines atop their corporate headquarters . 
 Inari 's foxes , or kitsune , are pure white and act as their messengers . 
 = = Depiction = = 
 Inari has been depicted both as male and as female . The most popular representations of Inari , according to scholar Karen Ann Smyers , are a young female food goddess , an old man carrying rice , and an androgynous bodhisattva . No one view is correct ; the preferred gender of depiction varies according to regional traditions and individual beliefs . Because of their close association with kitsune , Inari is often believed to be a fox ; though this belief is widespread , both Shinto and Buddhist priests discourage it . Inari also appears in the form of a snake or dragon , and one folktale has Inari appear to a wicked man in the shape of a monstrous spider as a way of teaching him a lesson . 
 Inari is sometimes identified with other mythological figures . Some scholars suggest that Inari is the figure known in classical Japanese mythology as Ukanomitama or the Kojiki 's <unk> @-@ Hime ; others suggest Inari is the same figure as <unk> . Some take Inari to be identical to any grain kami . 
 Inari 's female aspect is often identified or conflated with Dakiniten , a Buddhist deity who is a Japanese transformation of the Indian <unk> , or with <unk> of the Seven Lucky Gods . Dakiniten is portrayed as a female or androgynous bodhisattva riding a flying white fox . Inari 's association with Buddhism may have begun in the 8th century , when Shingon Buddhist monk and founder , Kūkai , took over administration of the temple of Tōji , and chose Inari as a protector of the temple . Thus , Inari is still closely associated with Shingon Buddhism to this day . 
 Inari is often venerated as a collective of three deities ( Inari <unk> ) ; since the Kamakura period , this number has sometimes increased to five kami ( Inari <unk> ) . However , the identification of these kami has varied over time . According to records of Fushimi Inari , the oldest and perhaps most prominent Inari shrine , these kami have included Izanagi , Izanami , <unk> , and <unk> , in addition to the food deities previously mentioned . The five kami today identified with Inari at Fushimi Inari are Ukanomitama , Sarutahiko , <unk> , Tanaka , and Shi . However , at <unk> Inari , the second @-@ oldest Inari shrine in Japan , the three enshrined deities are Ukanomitama , <unk> , and <unk> . According to the <unk> <unk> , the three kami are <unk> no mikoto ( water , ) Ukanomitama no mikoto ( grain , ) and Sarutahiko no <unk> ( land . ) 
 The fox and the wish @-@ fulfilling jewel are prominent symbols of Inari . Other common elements in depictions of Inari , and sometimes of their kitsune , include a sickle , a sheaf or sack of rice , and a sword . Another belonging was their whip — although they were hardly known to use it , it was a powerful weapon that was used to burn people 's crops of rice . 
 = = History = = 
 The origin of Inari worship is not entirely clear . The first recorded use of the present @-@ day kanji ( characters ) of Inari 's name , which mean " carrying rice " , ( literally " rice load " ) was in the <unk> <unk> in 892 AD . Other sets of kanji with the same phonetic readings , most of which contained a reference to rice , were in use earlier , and most scholars agree that the name Inari is derived from ine @-@ nari ( growing rice ) ( <unk> ) . The worship of Inari is known to have existed as of 711 AD , the official founding date of the shrine at Inari Mountain in Fushimi , Kyoto . Scholars such as Kazuo Higo believe worship was conducted for centuries before that date ; they suggest that the Hata clan began the formal worship of Inari as an agriculture kami in the late fifth century . The name Inari does not appear in classical Japanese mythology . 
 By the Heian period , Inari worship began to spread . In 823 AD , after Emperor Saga presented the <unk> @-@ ji temple to Kūkai , the founder of the Shingon Buddhist sect , the latter designated Inari as its resident protector kami . In 827 , the court granted Inari the lower fifth rank , which further increased the deity 's popularity in the capital . Inari 's rank was subsequently increased , and by 942 , Emperor Suzaku granted Inari the top rank in thanks for overcoming rebellions . At this time , the Fushimi Inari @-@ <unk> shrine was among the twenty @-@ two shrines chosen by the court to receive imperial patronage , a high honor . The second Inari shrine , <unk> Inari , was established in the late ninth century . 
 Inari 's popularity continued to grow . The Fushimi shrine , already a popular pilgrimage site , gained wide renown when it became an imperial pilgrimage site in 1072 . By 1338 , the shrine 's festival was said to rival the <unk> Festival in splendor . 
 In 1468 , during the Ōnin War , the entire Fushimi shrine complex was burned . Rebuilding took about thirty years ; the new building was consecrated in 1499 . While the old complex had enshrined three kami in separate buildings , the new one enshrined five kami in a single building . The new shrine also included a Buddhist temple building for the first time , and the hereditary priesthood was expanded to include the <unk> clan . 
 During the Edo period , Inari worship spread across Japan ; it became especially prominent in Edo . Smyers attributes this spread to the movement of daimyo ( feudal lords ) . Inari had by the sixteenth century become the patron of blacksmiths and the protector of warriors — for this reason , many castle compounds in Japan contain Inari shrines — and the daimyo took their belief in their protector kami with them when they relocated to a new domain . Inari 's divine role continued to expand ; on the coast , they became a protector of fishermen ; in Edo , they were invoked to prevent fires . They became the patron of actors and of prostitutes , since their shrines were often found near the pleasure quarters where these individuals lived . They began to be worshipped as the Desire @-@ Fulfilling Inari , a deity of luck and prosperity ; a common saying in Osaka was Byō Kōbō , <unk> Inari ( For sickness [ pray to ] Kōbō , for desires [ pray to ] Inari ) . Ironically , Inari also began to be petitioned for good health ; they are credited with curing such diverse afflictions as coughs , <unk> , broken bones , and syphilis . Women prayed to Inari to grant them children . 
 After a government decree mandated the separation of Buddhist and Shinto beliefs , many Inari shrines underwent changes . At Fushimi Inari , for instance , structures that were obviously Buddhist were torn down . Among the populace , however , the blended form of worship continued . Some Buddhist temples , such as <unk> Inari , maintained Inari worship by arguing that they had always been devoted to a Buddhist deity ( often Dakiniten ) , which the common folk had mistaken as Inari . 
 In the Tokugawa period , when money replaced rice as the measure of wealth in Japan , Inari 's role as a kami of worldly prosperity was expanded to include all aspects of finance , business , and industry . At the beginning of the eighteenth century , followers of Inari at the Ginza mint struck coins meant for offerings to Inari , which featured pictures of two foxes and a jewel or the characters for long life and good luck . 
 = = Shrines and offerings = = 
 Inari is a popular deity with shrines and temples located throughout most of Japan . According to a 1985 survey by the National Association of Shinto Shrines , 32 @,@ 000 shrines — more than one @-@ third of Shinto shrines in Japan — are dedicated to Inari . This number includes only Shinto shrines with full @-@ time resident priests ; if small roadside or field shrines , shrines kept in a home or corporate office , smaller shrines without full @-@ time resident priests , and Buddhist temples were included , the number would increase by at least an order of magnitude . 
 The entrance to an Inari shrine is usually marked by one or more vermilion torii and some statues of kitsune , which are often adorned with red <unk> ( votive bibs ) by worshippers out of respect . This red color has come to be identified with Inari , because of the prevalence of its use among Inari shrines and their torii . The main shrine is the Fushimi Inari Shrine in Fushimi , Kyoto , Japan , where the paths up the shrine hill are marked in this fashion . The kitsune statues are at times taken for a form of Inari , and they typically come in pairs , representing a male and a female . These fox statues hold a symbolic item in their mouths or beneath a front paw — most often a jewel and a key , but a sheaf of rice , a scroll , or a fox cub are all common . Almost all Inari shrines , no matter how small , will feature at least a pair of these statues , usually flanking or on the altar or in front of the main sanctuary . The statues are rarely realistic ; they are typically stylized , portraying a seated animal with its tail in the air looking forward . Despite these common characteristics , the statues are highly individual in nature ; no two are quite the same . 
 Offerings of rice , sake , and other food are given at the shrine to appease and please these kitsune messengers , who are then expected to plead with Inari on the worshipper 's behalf . Inari @-@ zushi , a Japanese sushi roll of packaged fried tofu , is another popular offering . Fried tofu is believed to be a favorite food of Japanese foxes , and an Inari @-@ zushi roll has pointed corners that resemble fox ears , thus reinforcing the association . Priests do not normally offer these foods to the deity , but it is common for shops that line the approach to an Inari shrine to sell fried tofu for devotees to offer . Fox statues are often offered to Inari shrines by worshippers , and on occasion a stuffed and mounted fox is presented to a temple . At one time , some temples were home to live foxes that were venerated , but this is not current practice . 
 = = Festival = = 
 Inari 's traditional festival day was the first horse day ( the sixth day ) of the second month ( <unk> no <unk> ) of the lunisolar calendar . 
 In some parts of Kyūshū , a festival or praying period begins five days before the full moon in November ; occasionally it is extended to a full week . This is accompanied by bringing offerings of rice products to a shrine to Inari each day and receiving o @-@ <unk> ( protection charms ) . 
 = Haraldr Guðrøðarson = 
 Haraldr Guðrøðarson was a mid thirteenth @-@ century King of the Isles . He was the son of Guðrøðr Rögnvaldsson , King of the Isles , son of Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson , King of the Isles . Haraldr Guðrøðarson and his predecessors were members of the Crovan dynasty , and ruled an island @-@ kingdom that encompassed the Mann and portions of the Hebrides , variously known as the Kingdom of the Isles or the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles . 
 In the early thirteenth century , Haraldr Guðrøðarson 's paternal grandfather , Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson , fought over the kingship with his younger half @-@ brother , Óláfr Guðrøðarson . The kin @-@ strife between the two was continued by their descendants , and in time included Haraldr Guðrøðarson himself . Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson was slain in 1229 , whereupon Óláfr took up the kingship . In 1231 , Óláfr co @-@ ruled a split kingdom with Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson 's son aforesaid son , Guðrøðr Rögnvaldsson . On the latter 's death in the same year , Óláfr ruled the entire kingdom until his own death in 1237 , whereupon he was succeeded by his son , Haraldr Óláfsson , who was in turn succeeded by another son of Óláfr , Rögnvaldr Óláfsson . 
 In 1249 , Rögnvaldr Óláfsson was slain by a knight who appears to have been an accomplice of Haraldr Guðrøðarson . Immediately following the assassination , Haraldr Guðrøðarson first appears in the mediaeval Chronicle of Mann , the main historical source for the Crovan dynasty , when it records that he took control of the island @-@ kingdom and replaced the chieftains of the old regime with followers of his own choosing . Although he was recognised as the legitimate ruler of the kingdom by Henry III , King of England at first , he was later summoned to Norway by Hákon Hákonarson , King of Norway , for his seizure of the kingdom . Upon his removal from Mann , Haraldr Guðrøðarson is not heard from again . In his absence , Magnús Óláfsson , yet another son of Óláfr , unsuccessfully attempted to seize Mann with Hebridean and Norwegian military support . The leadership of the Manx defenders in this action may have been adherents to Haraldr Guðrøðarson 's cause . Even so , Magnús returned two years later and succeeded to the kingship , becoming the last of the sea @-@ kings of the Crovan dynasty . 
 = = Background = = 
 Haraldr Guðrøðarson was a member of the Crovan dynasty , a family of sea @-@ kings who ruled the Mann and parts of the Hebrides from the late eleventh century to the mid thirteenth century . He was the son of Guðrøðr Rögnvaldsson , King of the Isles ( died 1231 ) , who was in turn a son of Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson , King of the Isles ( died 1229 ) . Although the latter monarch may have managed to rule a somewhat independent kingdom , surrounded by formidable Norwegian , Scottish , and English monarchs , his successors fell under the shadow of Hákon Hákonarson , King of Norway ( died 1263 ) , and rendered tribute to the latter in recognition of Norwegian overlordship . 
 Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson and his younger half @-@ brother , Óláfr Guðrøðarson ( died 1237 ) , warred over the dynasty 's island @-@ kingdom in the early thirteenth century , until the former was slain battling Óláfr in 1229 . Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson 's aforesaid son , Guðrøðr Rögnvaldsson , took up his father 's claim to the throne , and at his height co @-@ ruled the kingdom with Óláfr in 1231 . Guðrøðr Rögnvaldsson was slain in 1231 , however , and Óláfr ruled the entire island @-@ kingdom peacefully afterwards until his own death in 1237 . Óláfr was succeeded by his son , Haraldr Óláfsson , King of Mann and the Isles , who later travelled to Norway and married a daughter of Hákon , but lost his life at sea on his return voyage in 1248 . 
 In the year of Haraldr Óláfsson 's drowning , two prominent members of Clann Somairle , Eógan mac Donnchada , Lord of Argyll ( died in or after 1268 ) and his second cousin Dubgall mac Ruaidrí ( died 1268 ) , travelled to Hákon in Norway and requested the title of king in the Hebrides . Hákon subsequently bestowed the title upon Eógan , and in 1249 , upon learning of Haraldr Óláfsson 's death , Hákon sent Eógan westward to take control of the Hebrides . In May 1249 , Haraldr Óláfsson 's brother , Rögnvaldr Óláfsson ( died 1249 ) , formally succeeded to the kingship . 
 = = Haraldr Guðrøðarson 's ascension = = 
 The mid thirteenth @-@ century Chronicle of Mann records that , on 30 May 1249 , Rögnvaldr Óláfsson was slain in a meadow near the Church of the Holy Trinity at Rushen , and later buried at the Church of St Mary at Rushen . The chronicle names one of Rögnvaldr 's killers as a certain knight named Ívarr , and identifies the others as the latter 's followers . Immediately following Rögnvaldr 's death , Haraldr Guðrøðarson makes his first appearance in the chronicle , as it records that he then seized the kingship . 
 The chronology of events surrounding Rögnvaldr 's death suggests that Haraldr Guðrøðarson and Ívarr were allies . Moreover , a letter of Henry III , King of England ( died 1272 ) , dated April 1256 , further supports the likelihood of an alliance , as the letter commands Henry 's men not to receive the Haraldr Guðrøðarson and Ívarr who " wickedly slew " Rögnvaldr . The identity of Ívarr is uncertain . His designation as a knight may indicate that he was an élite of some sort . One suggestion is that he may have been a member of the Crovan dynasty . One man of the name is known to have been a son of Guðrøðr Óláfsson , although nothing more is known of him , and it is unlikely that a man born before 1187 would have been active in 1249 . The chronicle makes no mention of the knight 's ancestry , and this may be evidence that he was not related to the Crovan dynasty in any meaningful way . It is likely that he is identical to the " domino <unk> ' de Mann " ( " Lord Ívarr of Mann " ) who is recorded in one of Haraldr Óláfsson 's charters of 1246 . 
 Following Haraldr Guðrøðarson 's takeover , the chronicle records that he then drove out all of the chiefs and nobles of the old regime who had been supporters of the deceased Haraldr Óláfsson , and then replaced them with men whom the latter had previously exiled . 
 An example of the chronicle 's bias against the descendants of Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson is one of the two miracle narratives preserved by this source . The story in question is about a miracle attributed to St Mary , which may have been incorporated into the chronicle in order to discredit the reign of Haraldr Guðrøðarson . Whatever the case , the story deals with an aged chieftain named Domnall , who is described as a close friend of Haraldr Óláfsson , and regarded by the latter as worthier than others . The chronicle relates how Domnall and his young son were forced to flee from Haraldr Guðrøðarson to the sanctuary of the Church of St Mary at Rushen . The latter , however , is stated to have tricked them into leaving the church @-@ grounds , whereupon they were immediately seized . It was in this time of need , so the story says , that Domnall 's prayers to St Mary were answered , and that it was through her divine intervention that he and his son escaped from their imprisonment . The chronicle states that Domnall himself recounted the story to the chronicle 's compilers . The account itself seems to have been used as means to portray Haraldr Guðrøðarson as a distrustful oath @-@ breaker , and thereby further discredit the line of Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson ; conversely , the connection between Haraldr Óláfsson and the divinely favoured Domnall may have been intended to imply legitimacy in regards to Óláfr 's line . Although the identities of Domnall and his son are uncertain , there is reason to suspect that they are identical to Domhnall mac Raghnaill , the eponym of Clann Domhnaill , and his son , Aonghas . 
 Haraldr Guðrøðarson may have attempted to strengthen his hold on the kingdom by entering into negotiations with Henry ; and was , for a time at least , regarded as a legitimate ruler by that English king , as a license of safe @-@ passage granted by him , valid from 28 December 1249 to 29 September 1250 , acknowledges Haraldr Guðrøðarson 's kingship , and gives him free pass to travel to the English court . 
 = = Forced exile = = 
 Haraldr Guðrøðarson 's reign was not a long one . In 1250 , the chronicle records that he was summoned by letter to the Norwegian royal court because Hákon was displeased at how Haraldr Guðrøðarson had wrongfully seized the kingship which was not his by right . The chronicle notes that the Norwegian king intended that Haraldr Guðrøðarson should never return to Mann , and he was consequently kept from returning to the island @-@ kingdom . Nothing further is heard from him . 
 In the same year , the chronicle records that Magnús Óláfsson ( died 1265 ) — yet another son of Óláfr — and Eógan arrived on Mann with a force of Norwegians . The exact intentions of the invaders are unknown for certain . It is possible that they may have intended to install Magnús as king . At the very least , Eógan was likely looking for some form of compensation , as he had previously been forcefully dispossessed of his mainland Scottish lordship by Alexander II , King of Scots ( died 1249 ) for his refusal to renounce his allegiance to Hákon . The chronicle states that the invaders made landfall at Ronaldsway , and entered into negotiations with the Manx people ; although , when it was learned that Eógan styled himself " King of the Isles " the Manxmen took offence and broke off all dialogue . The chronicle describes how Eógan had his men form @-@ up on St Michael 's Isle , an island that was attached to Mann by a tidal causeway , and that the Manxmen formed @-@ up on the mainland , on the beach opposite the island . When the tide began to recede , the chronicle states that Eógan and those men closest to him boarded their ships , although much of his force remained stationed on the island . As evening drew near , the chronicle records that an accomplice of Ívarr led an attack upon the island and routed Eógan 's forces there . The next day , the chronicle states that the invading forces left the shores of Mann . 
 Ívarr 's connection to the Manx attack on the invading forces of Eógan and Magnús may suggest that there was still considerable opposition on Mann by adherents of Haraldr Guðrøðarson to the prospect of Magnús ' kingship there . Two years later , the Chronicle of Mann and the Chronicle of Lanercost record that Magnús returned to Mann and with the consent of the Manxmen began his reign . There are indications that opposition to Magnús , and thus possibly support of Haraldr Guðrøðarson , continued into the mid 1250s . For example , the chronicle records that Hákon bestowed upon Magnús the title of king in 1254 ; and further notes that , when Magnús ' opponents heard of this <unk> , they became dismayed and their hopes of overthrowing him gradually faded away . Furthermore , Henry 's 1256 letter , which orders his men not to receive Haraldr Guðrøðarson and Ívarr , may indicate that the two were still alive and active at the time . Whatever the case , Magnús , the last reigning king of the Crovan dynasty , ruled unchallenged as King of Mann and the Isles until his death in 1265 . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Thorpe affair = 
 The Thorpe affair of the 1970s was a British political and sex scandal that ended the career of Jeremy Thorpe , the leader of the Liberal Party and Member of Parliament ( MP ) for North Devon . The scandal arose from allegations by Norman Josiffe ( otherwise known as Norman Scott ) , that he and Thorpe had shared a homosexual relationship in the early 1960s , at a time when such relationships were illegal in the United Kingdom . 
 Thorpe denied any such relationship , while admitting that the two had been friends . With the help of political colleagues and a compliant press , he was able to ensure that rumours of misconduct were unreported for more than a decade . Scott 's allegations were a persistent threat , however , and by the mid @-@ 1970s he was perceived as a danger both to Thorpe and to the Liberal Party , which was then enjoying a resurgence of popularity and was close to a place in government . Attempts to buy or frighten Scott into silence were unsuccessful , and the problem mounted , until the fallout following the shooting of his dog by a hired gunman brought the matter into the open . After further newspaper revelations Thorpe was forced to resign the Liberal leadership , and subsequent police investigations led to his being charged , with three others , with conspiracy to murder Scott . Before the case came to trial , Thorpe lost his parliamentary seat in the May 1979 general election . 
 At the trial , the prosecution 's case depended heavily on the evidence of Scott , of Thorpe 's former parliamentary colleague Peter Bessell , and of the hired gunman , Andrew Newton . None of these witnesses impressed the court ; Bessell 's credibility was undermined by the revelations of his financial arrangements with The Sunday Telegraph . In his summing @-@ up the judge was scathing about the prosecution 's evidence , and all four defendants were acquitted . Nevertheless , Thorpe 's public reputation was damaged irreparably by the case . He had chosen not to testify at the trial , which left a number of matters unexplained amid public disquiet . 
 Thorpe 's retirement into private life was hastened by the onset of Parkinson 's disease in the mid @-@ 1980s , and he made few public statements afterwards . He achieved a reconciliation with the North Devon Liberal Democrat party , of which he was honorary president from 1988 until his death in 2014 . Allegations of suppression of evidence by the police before the trial were under investigation in 2015 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Homosexuality and UK law = = = 
 Before the passage of the Sexual Offences Act 1967 , which decriminalised most homosexual acts in England and Wales ( but did not apply to Scotland or Northern Ireland ) , all sexual activity between men was illegal throughout the United Kingdom , and carried heavy criminal penalties . Antony Grey , a secretary of the Homosexual Law Reform Society , wrote of " a hideous aura of criminality and degeneracy and abnormality surrounding the matter " . 
 Political figures were particularly vulnerable to exposure ; William Field , the Labour MP for Paddington North , was forced to resign his seat in 1953 after a conviction for soliciting in a public lavatory . In the following year Lord Montagu of Beaulieu , the youngest peer in the House of Lords , was imprisoned for a year after being convicted , with several others , of " gross indecency " , victim of a virulent " drive against male vice " led by the Home Secretary , Sir David Maxwell @-@ Fyfe . 
 Four years later public attitudes had changed little . When Ian Harvey , a junior Foreign Office minister in Harold Macmillan 's government , was found guilty of indecent behaviour with a Coldstream Guardsman in November 1958 , he lost both his ministerial job and his parliamentary seat at Harrow East . He was ostracised by the Conservative Party and by most of his former friends , and never again held a position in public life . Thus , anyone entering politics at that time knew that revelations of homosexual activity would likely bring such a career to a swift end . 
 = = = Thorpe = = = 
 John Jeremy Thorpe was born in 1929 , the son and grandson of Conservative MPs . After school at Eton , he studied law at Trinity College , Oxford , where , having decided on a political career , he devoted his main energies to making a personal impact rather than to his studies . Rejecting his Conservative background , he joined the small , centrist Liberal Party , by the late 1940s a declining force in British politics but offering a national platform and a challenge to an ambitious young politician . He became secretary , and eventually president , of the university 's Liberal Club , and met many of the party 's leading figures . In the Hilary term of 1950 – 51 Thorpe served as president of the Oxford Union . 
 In 1952 , while studying at the Inner Temple prior to his call to the bar , Thorpe was adopted as prospective Liberal parliamentary candidate by the North Devon constituency , a Conservative @-@ held seat where , in the 1951 general election , the Liberals had finished in third place behind Labour . Thorpe campaigned tirelessly , using the slogan " A Vote for the Liberals is a Vote for Freedom " , and in the 1955 general election halved his Conservative opponent 's majority in North Devon . Four years later , in October 1959 , he captured the seat with a majority of 362 , one of six successful Liberals in what was generally an electoral triumph for the Conservative Macmillan government . 
 The writer and former MP Matthew Parris describes Thorpe as one of the more dashing among the new MPs elected in 1959 . Thorpe 's chief political interest lay in the field of human rights , and his speeches criticising apartheid in South Africa attracted the attention of the South African Bureau of State Security ( BOSS ) , who took note of this rising Liberal star . Thorpe was briefly considered as best man at the 1960 wedding of his Eton contemporary Antony Armstrong @-@ Jones to Princess Margaret , but was rejected when vetting checks indicated that he might have homosexual tendencies . The security agency MI5 , which routinely keeps records on all members of parliament , added this information to Thorpe 's file . 
 = = = Josiffe , later Scott = = = 
 Norman Josiffe was born in Sidcup , Kent , on 12 February 1940 — he did not assume the name Scott until 1967 . His mother was Ena Josiffe , née Lynch ; Albert Josiffe , her second husband , abandoned the family home soon after Norman 's birth . Norman 's early childhood was relatively happy and stable , but as he entered puberty he became confused by his emergent sexuality ; his homosexual inclinations were at odds with his strict Catholic upbringing . After leaving school at 15 with no qualifications , he acquired a pony by means of an animal charity , and became a competent rider . When he was 16 he was prosecuted for the theft of a saddle and some pony feed , and was put on probation . With the encouragement of his probation officer he took lessons at <unk> Riding School at Oxted in Surrey , and eventually found work at a stable in Altrincham in Cheshire . After moving there he chose to cut all links with his family , and began to call himself " <unk> @-@ Josiffe " ( " <unk> " being a stylised version of " Lynch " ) . He also hinted at an aristocratic background , and of family tragedies that had left him orphaned and alone . 
 In 1959 Josiffe moved to the <unk> Stables in Chipping Norton , Oxfordshire , where he learned dressage while working as a groom . The stables were owned by Norman Vater , the self @-@ made son of a coalminer who , like Josiffe , had inflated his name and was known as " Brecht Van de Vater " . In the course of his rise , Vater had made numerous friends in higher social circles , among them Thorpe . Initially , Josiffe was settled and happy at the stables , but his relationship with Vater deteriorated in the face of the latter 's assertive and demanding manner , and he was unable to form good relationships with his fellow @-@ workers . He began to evidence the kind of behaviour which a journalist would later summarise as his " extraordinary talent for <unk> his way into people 's sympathy before turning their lives to misery with his hysterical temper @-@ tantrums . " 
 = = = Bessell = = = 
 Peter Bessell , eight years older than Thorpe , had a successful business career before entering Liberal politics in the 1950s . He came to the party 's attention in 1955 when , as the Liberal candidate in the Torquay by @-@ election , he substantially increased his party 's vote in the first of a series of impressive Liberal results during the 1955 – 59 parliament . He was subsequently selected as candidate for the more winnable constituency of Bodmin , and became both an admirer and personal friend of Thorpe , who in turn was impressed by Bessell 's apparent business acumen . At Bodmin in the 1959 general election , Bessell reduced the Conservative majority , and he followed this in the October 1964 election with victory by over 3 @,@ 000 votes . With the prestige of the letters " MP " after his name , Bessell set out in pursuit of serious money @-@ making , while staying close to Thorpe whom he considered the likely next leader of the Liberal Party . 
 Bessell noted that Thorpe , for all his gregariousness and warmth , appeared to have no female friends and lacked any interest in girls . The former Liberal MP Frank Owen confided to Bessell his suspicions that Thorpe was a homosexual ; other West Country Liberals had formed the same opinion . Aware that exposure as a homosexual would end Thorpe 's career , Bessell became his self @-@ appointed protector , even to the extent , he later said , of falsely claiming to be bisexual , as a means of acquiring his friend 's confidence . 
 = = Origins = = 
 = = = Disputed friendship = = = 
 In late 1960 or early 1961 , Thorpe visited Vater at the <unk> Stables , and briefly met Josiffe . He was sufficiently taken with the young man to suggest that , should Josiffe ever need help , he should call at the House of Commons . Soon after this , Josiffe left the stables after a serious disagreement with Vater . He then suffered a mental breakdown , and for much of 1961 was under psychiatric care . On 8 November 1961 , a week after discharging himself from the Ashurst clinic , Josiffe went to the House of Commons to see Thorpe . He was penniless , homeless and , worse , had left Vater 's employment without the National Insurance card which , at that time , was essential for obtaining regular work and access to social and unemployment benefits . Thorpe promised he would help . 
 According to Josiffe 's account , a homosexual liaison with Thorpe began that same evening , at Thorpe 's mother 's home in Oxted , and continued for several years . Thorpe , while acknowledging that a friendship developed , denied any sexual dimension in the relationship . He organised accommodation for Josiffe in London , and a longer @-@ term stay with a family in Barnstaple , within the North Devon constituency . He paid for advertisements in Country Life magazine , in an effort to find work with horses for his friend , arranged various temporary jobs , and promised to help Josiffe to realise an ambition to study dressage in France . On the basis of Josiffe 's claim that his father had died in an air crash , Thorpe 's solicitors investigated whether any money was due , but found that Albert Josiffe was alive and well in Orpington . 
 When early in 1962 , the police questioned Josiffe about the alleged theft of a suede jacket , Thorpe persuaded the investigating officer that Josiffe was recovering from mental illness , and was under his care . No further action was taken . In April 1962 Josiffe obtained a replacement National Insurance card which , he later said , was retained by Thorpe who had assumed the role of his employer . This was denied by Thorpe , and the " missing card " remained an ongoing source of grievance for Josiffe . He began to feel marginalised by Thorpe , and in December 1962 , in a fit of depression , confided to a friend his intention to shoot the MP and commit suicide . The friend alerted the police , to whom Josiffe gave a detailed statement of his sexual relations with Thorpe , and produced letters to support his story . None of this evidence impressed the police sufficiently for them to take action , although a report on the matter was added to Thorpe 's MI5 file . 
 In 1963 , a relatively calm period in Josiffe 's life as a riding instructor in Northern Ireland ended after he was seriously hurt in an accident at the Dublin Horse Show . He moved back to England , and eventually found a job at a riding school in Wolverhampton , where he stayed for several months before his erratic behaviour proved too much , and he was asked to leave . After a period of aimlessness in London , Josiffe saw an advertisement for a groom 's post in Porrentruy in Switzerland . Thorpe used his influence to secure him the job . Josiffe left for Switzerland in December 1964 , but returned to England almost immediately with complaints that conditions were impossible . In his hurry to depart he left his suitcase behind , which contained letters and other documents that , he believed , supported his claims to a sexual relationship with Thorpe . 
 = = = Threats and counter @-@ measures = = = 
 Thorpe proved to be a lively and witty performer in the cut and thrust of parliamentary debates , and his presence in the House of Commons was soon noticed . In July 1962 , in the wake of some disastrous Conservative by @-@ election performances , Macmillan sacked seven cabinet ministers in what was known as the " Night of the Long Knives " . Thorpe 's comment — " Greater love hath no man than this , that he lay down his friends for his life " — was widely regarded in the press as the most apt verdict on the prime minister . Thorpe raised his political profile with effective attacks on government bureaucracy , and in the October 1964 general election was returned in North Devon with an increased majority . A year later he secured the office of Liberal Party treasurer , a significant step towards his ambition to become the next party leader . 
 By early 1965 Josiffe was in Dublin , where he worked at various horse @-@ related jobs while continuing to badger Thorpe by letter about his missing luggage and the continuing National Insurance card issue . However , Thorpe rejected any responsibility for these matters . In mid @-@ March 1965 Josiffe wrote a long letter to Thorpe 's mother , which began : " For the last five years , as you probably know , Jeremy and I have had a homosexual relationship . " The letter blamed Thorpe for awakening " this vice that lies latent in every man " , and accused him of callousness and disloyalty . Ursula Thorpe gave the letter to her son , who drafted a quasi @-@ legal statement rejecting the " damaging and groundless accusations " and accusing Josiffe of attempting to blackmail him . The document was never sent ; instead , Thorpe turned to Bessell for advice . 
 Bessell , anxious to be of service to his party 's highest @-@ profile figure , flew to Dublin in April 1965 . He found that Josiffe was being advised by a sympathetic Jesuit priest , Father Sweetman , who believed that at least some of Josiffe 's allegations might be true ; otherwise , he asked Bessell , why had he flown all the way from London to deal with them ? Bessell warned Josiffe of the consequences of attempting to blackmail a public figure , but in a more conciliatory vein promised to help recover the missing luggage and insurance card . He also hinted at the possibility of an equestrian job in America . Bessell 's intervention appeared to contain the problem , particularly as Josiffe 's suitcase was recovered shortly afterwards — although , according to Josiffe , letters implicating Thorpe had been removed . For most of the following two years Josiffe remained largely quiescent in Ireland , attempting to establish himself in various careers ; part of this time was spent in a monastery . It was during this period that he formally adopted the name of Scott . 
 In April 1967 Scott wrote to Bessell from Ireland , asking for help in obtaining a passport in his changed name so that he could begin a new life in America . A second , less positive letter , dated July , indicated that Scott had returned to England and was once again in difficulties , with medical bills and other debts . His lack of an insurance card prevented him from claiming benefits . By this time , Thorpe had succeeded Jo Grimond as leader of the Liberal Party . To resolve Scott 's immediate problems , and to prevent a resumption of his tirades against the new party leader , Bessell began paying him a " retainer " of between £ 5 and £ 10 a week , ostensibly in lieu of lost national insurance benefits . Bessell also arranged Scott 's new passport , but by this time Scott had abandoned his American plans and wished to establish a career as a model . He asked Bessell for £ 200 to set him up ; Bessell refused , but in May 1968 gave him £ 75 , on the understanding there would be no further demands for a year . 
 = = Developments = = 
 = = = Incitement = = = 
 Thorpe 's leadership of the Liberals was not , initially , an unqualified success ; his local campaigning skills did not readily transfer to set speeches on national or international issues , and some sections of the party became restless . His engagement to Caroline <unk> , announced in April 1968 , reassured those in the party who had reservations about his private life ; others were shocked by Thorpe 's emphasis on the political motivation for the marriage — worth five points in the polls , he opined to Mike Steele , the party 's press officer . For much of 1968 Thorpe was untroubled by Scott , who had acquired new friends and , according to Bessell , had burned his Thorpe letters . His reappearance in November 1968 , again penniless and without prospect of work , was particularly unwelcome to Thorpe , as he fought to establish his leadership credentials . Bessell provided immediate relief by resuming the weekly cash retainer , but this was a short @-@ term respite . 
 Early in December 1968 Bessell was summoned to Thorpe 's office in the House of Commons . According to Bessell , Thorpe said of Scott : " We 've got to get rid of him " , and later : " It is no worse than shooting a sick dog . " Bessell said later that he was unsure whether Thorpe was serious , but decided to play along , by discussing various ways of getting rid of Scott 's body . Thorpe supposedly thought that disposal down one of Cornwall 's many disused tin mines offered the best option , and also suggested his friend David Holmes as an appropriate assassin . Holmes , one of four assistant treasurers of the Liberal Party appointed by Thorpe in 1965 , had been best man at Thorpe 's wedding , and was completely loyal to him . 
 Bessell further maintained that in January 1969 , Thorpe called him to a meeting together with Holmes , and that again Thorpe put forward suggestions for eliminating Scott . These were dismissed as impractical or ridiculous by Bessell and Holmes , who nevertheless agreed to give the matter further consideration . They hoped , said Bessell , that if they stalled , Thorpe would see the absurdity of his murder scheme and abandon it . Holmes , who largely confirmed Bessell 's account of the meeting , later justified this decision on the grounds that " if we had simply said no , he might have gone elsewhere — and that might have led to an even greater disaster . " According to Bessell and Holmes , discussions of the plan ended in May 1969 , after the surprising news of Scott 's wedding that month . 
 = = = Party enquiry = = = 
 By the spring of 1971 , Thorpe 's political career had stalled . He had led the party to a disastrous performance in the United Kingdom general election of June 1970 ; in an unexpected victory for the Conservatives under Edward Heath , the Liberals lost seven of their thirteen parliamentary seats , and Thorpe 's majority in North Devon fell to below 400 . Bessell , with mounting business worries , did not stand for re @-@ election in Bodmin . Thorpe faced censure for his conduct of a campaign during which he had spent extravagantly and left the party on the verge of bankruptcy , but the matter was put aside in a wave of sympathy when , 10 days after the election , his wife Caroline was killed in a road accident . Thorpe was devastated ; he continued as leader , but for the next year performed little beyond routine party duties . 
 Meanwhile , Bessell 's efforts ensured that for the time being the Scott threat was kept at bay . The missing insurance card meant that Scott 's wife , who was pregnant , could not claim maternity benefits . Scott threatened to talk to newspapers , but the matter was resolved by the issue of an emergency card , after Bessell 's intervention at the Department of Health and Social Security . In 1970 Scott 's marriage collapsed ; he blamed Thorpe , and again threatened exposure . Bessell successfully prevented Thorpe 's name being mentioned in court during the divorce proceedings , and arranged that Thorpe , anonymously , would pay the legal costs . Early in 1971 Scott moved to a cottage in the village of Talybont in North Wales , where he befriended a widow , Gwen Parry @-@ Jones . He convinced her of his mistreatment at the hands of Thorpe sufficiently for her to contact the Liberal MP for the adjoining constituency of Montgomeryshire — Emlyn Hooson , on the right wing of the party and no friend of either Thorpe or Bessell . Hooson suggested a meeting at the House of Commons . 
 On 26 and 27 May 1971 Scott told his story to Hooson and David Steel , the Liberals ' Chief Whip . Neither was fully convinced , but felt the matter warranted further investigation . Against Thorpe 's wishes a confidential party enquiry was arranged for 9 June , to be chaired by Lord Byers , the leader of the Liberals in the House of Lords . At the enquiry Byers took a tough line against Scott , failing to offer him a chair and treating him , Scott said , " like a boy at school up before the headmaster . " Byers 's unsympathetic manner quickly unsettled Scott , who changed the details of his story several times and frequently broke down in tears . Byers suggested that Scott was a common blackmailer who needed psychiatric help . Declaring that Byers was a " pontificating old sod " , Scott fled the room . The enquiry then questioned police officers about letters which Scott had shown to the police in 1962 , but were told that these were inconclusive . Thorpe persuaded the Home Secretary , Reginald Maudling , and the Metropolitan Police Commissioner , Sir John Waldron , to inform Byers that there was no police interest in Thorpe 's activities , and no evidence of wrongdoing on his part . As a result , the enquiry dismissed Scott 's allegations . 
 = = = Further threats = = = 
 Angry at his treatment by the Byers enquiry , Scott sought other means of pursuing his vendetta against Thorpe . In June 1971 he met Gordon Winter , a South African journalist who was also an agent for the South African intelligence agency BOSS . Scott provided details of his supposed seduction by Thorpe , a story which Winter assured his BOSS masters would destroy Thorpe and the Liberal Party . He found that no newspaper would print the story on largely uncorroborated and unreliable evidence . In March 1972 Scott 's friend Gwen Parry @-@ Jones died ; Scott used the inquest to denounce Thorpe for ruining his life and driving Parry @-@ Jones to her death . None of these accusations was published . Depressed , Scott retreated into a state of torpor , assisted by <unk> , and for a while presented no threat to Thorpe . 
 In 1972 and 1973 Thorpe 's political fortunes , and those of the Liberals , revived . Thorpe 's personal standing was enhanced when , on 14 March 1973 , he married Marion , Countess of Harewood , whose former husband was a first cousin to the Queen . After a series of by @-@ election victories and local government gains , an electoral breakthrough for the party looked plausible when Heath called a general election in February 1974 . In that election , with more than six million votes ( 19 @.@ 3 % of votes cast ) , the Liberals achieved by far their best election result since the Second World War , but under the first @-@ past @-@ the @-@ post voting system this large vote translated into only 14 seats . However , as neither major party won an overall majority , these seats gave Thorpe ( whose personal majority in North Devon increased to 11 @,@ 072 ) significant leverage . He was briefly in coalition discussions with Heath , who was prepared to give cabinet posts to Thorpe and other senior Liberals . Thorpe later denied that there was any serious prospect of agreement , and in March 1974 Harold Wilson formed a minority Labour government . In the second 1974 general election , in October , Wilson achieved a narrow majority ; the Liberals lost ground , with 5 @.@ 3 million votes and 13 MPs . 
 After Parry @-@ Jones 's death Scott lived quietly for a while in the West Country . In January 1974 he met Tim <unk> , Thorpe 's Conservative opponent in North Devon , and gave his version of his relationship with Thorpe . <unk> was advised by the Conservative leadership that the material should not be used . Scott also confided in his doctor , Ronald Gleadle , who was treating him for depression . He had shown Gleadle his dossier of documents ; the doctor , without Scott 's knowledge or consent , sold the papers to Holmes , who had assumed the role of Thorpe 's protector after Bessell settled permanently in California in January 1974 . Holmes paid £ 2 @,@ 500 for the documents , which were promptly burned in the home of Thorpe 's solicitor . A further cache of papers was discovered in November 1974 , by builders renovating a London office formerly used by Bessell . They found a briefcase containing letters and photographs that apparently compromised Thorpe , among them Scott 's 1965 letter to Ursula Thorpe . <unk> what to do with their find , they took it to the Sunday Mirror newspaper . Sidney Jacobson , the paper 's deputy chairman , decided not to publish the material and passed the briefcase and its content to Thorpe . Copies of the documents were , however , kept in the newspaper 's files . 
 = = = Alleged conspiracy = = = 
 In their analysis of the case , the journalists Simon Freeman and Barry Penrose state that Thorpe probably formed the outline of a plan to silence Scott early in 1974 , after the latter 's re @-@ emergence became a matter of increasing concern . Holmes later said that Thorpe was insistent that Scott be killed : " [ Jeremy felt ] he would never be safe with that man around " . Uncertain how to proceed , late in 1974 Holmes approached a business acquaintance , a carpet salesman named John Le Mesurier ( not to be confused with the actor of that name ) . Le Mesurier introduced Holmes to George Deakin , a fruit machine salesman who , he thought , would have contacts with people who might be prepared to deal with Scott . Holmes and Le Mesurier concocted a story involving a blackmailer who needed to be frightened off ; Deakin agreed to help . In February 1975 Deakin met Andrew Newton , an airline pilot , who said he was willing to deal with Scott for an appropriate fee — between £ 5 @,@ 000 and £ 10 @,@ 000 was suggested . Deakin put Newton in touch with Holmes . Newton always said that he had been hired to kill , not frighten , citing the size of the fee that he was offered — too much , he said , simply to scare someone . 
 While these arrangements proceeded , Thorpe wrote to Sir Jack Hayward , the Bahamas @-@ based millionaire businessman , who had given generously to the Liberal Party in the past . In the wake of the Liberals ' February 1974 election successes , Thorpe asked for £ 50 @,@ 000 to replenish the party 's funds . He further requested that £ 10 @,@ 000 of this sum be paid , not into the party 's regular accounts but to Nadir Dinshaw , an acquaintance of Thorpe 's who was resident in the Channel Islands . Thorpe explained that this subterfuge was necessary to deal with a special category of unspecific election expenses . Hayward trusted Thorpe , and sent the £ 10 @,@ 000 to Dinshaw who , instructed by Thorpe , passed the money to Holmes . After the October 1974 election Thorpe again requested funds from Hayward , and again asked that £ 10 @,@ 000 be sent via the Dinshaw route . Hayward obliged , though this time with more reluctance and after some delay . No accounting of this £ 20 @,@ 000 was ever provided ; Holmes , Le Mesurier and Deakin all said that it was used to finance a " conspiracy to frighten " , although they disagreed as to how much was spent . Thorpe later changed the explanation he had given Hayward , and said he had deposited the sum with accountants " as an iron reserve against any shortage of funds at any subsequent election . " He denied that he had authorised any payment to Newton or to anyone else connected with the case . 
 = = = Shooting = = = 
 Newton met Holmes in October 1975 when , the former claimed , he was given a down payment on a fee of £ 10 @,@ 000 . Holmes denied any such transaction , admitting only an agreement that Newton would carry out a frightening operation . Newton then contacted Scott , calling himself " Peter Keene " and claiming to be hired to protect Scott from a hit man . This seemed plausible to Scott , who had been beaten up a few weeks earlier . On 23 October Newton , driving a hired or borrowed yellow Mazda car , met Scott by arrangement in Combe Martin , just north of Barnstaple . Newton explained that he had to drive to Porlock , about 25 miles away , and suggested that Scott accompany him — he and Scott could talk on the journey . Scott had with him his recently acquired pet dog , a Great Dane called Rinka ; this disconcerted Newton , who was afraid of dogs , but Scott insisted that Rinka stay . At Porlock , Newton left Scott and Rinka at a hotel while he supposedly dealt with his business . He picked them up shortly after 8 pm , and they began the drive back to Combe Martin . 
 On a deserted stretch of road , Newton began to drive erratically , feigning tiredness , and accepted Scott 's suggestion that he take over the driving . They stopped ; Scott got out , followed by Rinka , and ran round to the driver 's side , where he found Newton , gun in hand . Newton shot the dog in the head and , saying " It 's your turn now " , pointed the gun at Scott . The pistol failed to fire several times , apparently jammed ; eventually Newton jumped into the car and drove away , leaving Scott and the dead or dying dog by the roadside . 
 After Scott had been picked up in a distressed state by a passing car , the police were notified , and Newton was identified through the Mazda 's registration number , which a friend of Scott 's in Combe Martin had <unk> noted down . Newton 's story was that Scott was blackmailing him and that the shooting had been intended to frighten him . He made no mention of his deal with Holmes , calculating that by keeping silent he would maximise his chances of payment from that quarter . 
 = = Revelations = = 
 On 12 December 1975 Private Eye included a short piece by Auberon Waugh which ended : " My only hope is that sorrow over his friend 's dog will not cause Mr Thorpe 's premature retirement from public life " . Most newspapers knew of the stories surrounding Thorpe and Scott , but were wary of libel . According to Parris , they were " serving notice on Thorpe that they knew a bigger story must break , and could wait for it " . In January 1976 Scott appeared before magistrates on a minor social security fraud charge , and stated that he was being hounded because of his previous sexual relationship with Thorpe . This claim , made in court and therefore protected from the libel laws , was widely reported . 
 The Daily Mail had meanwhile discovered Bessell 's whereabouts in California , and on 3 February 1976 carried a long interview with the former MP . Bessell 's story that he had been blackmailed by Scott provided Thorpe with temporary cover . On 6 March newspapers reported Holmes 's purchase of Scott 's dossier from Gleadle , and a few days later David Steel discovered from Dinshaw , a personal friend , that £ 20 @,@ 000 of funds intended for the party had been diverted to Holmes and were unaccounted for . Steel told Thorpe that he should resign , but he refused . In an attempt to reassure his wavering parliamentary colleagues , on 14 March Thorpe provided The Sunday Times 's " Insight " team with a detailed rebuttal of Scott 's charges , under the heading " The Lies of Norman Scott " . 
 Newton 's trial took place at Exeter Crown Court from 16 to 19 March 1976 , where Scott repeated his allegations against Thorpe despite the efforts of the prosecution 's lawyers to steer him away . Newton was found guilty and sentenced to two years ' imprisonment , but did not incriminate Thorpe . However , Thorpe 's difficulties increased when Bessell , fearing for his own position and perhaps scenting the possibility of making money , changed his stance and confessed in the Daily Mail on 6 May that he had lied to protect his former friend . A further concern for Thorpe was the danger that newspapers would publish letters he had sent to Scott early in their friendship . In an effort to forestall this , Thorpe arranged for the publication of two of the letters in The Sunday Times , a paper generally sympathetic towards him . In one of these letters Thorpe referred to Scott by the pet name " Bunnies " . The tone of this letter convinced readers and commentators that Thorpe had not been frank about the nature of the relationship . On 10 May 1976 , amid rising criticism , he resigned as Liberal leader , again categorically denying Scott 's allegations but acknowledging the damage that they were inflicting on the party . 
 After Thorpe 's resignation the relative lack of press attention to the story for 18 months disguised the extent to which investigative reporting continued . Barry Penrose and Roger <unk> , collectively known as " Pencourt " , had originally been hired by Wilson after his retirement , to investigate the former prime minister 's theory that Thorpe was a target of South African intelligence agencies . Pencourt 's investigations led them to Bessell , who gave them his account of a conspiracy to murder Scott , and Thorpe 's role in it . Before they could publish , they were scooped ; Newton , released from prison in October 1977 , sold his story to the London Evening News . He said that he had been paid £ 5 @,@ 000 to kill Scott , and provided photographs of him receiving payment from Le Mesurier . A lengthy police inquiry followed , at the end of which Thorpe , Holmes , Le Mesurier and Deakin were charged with conspiracy to murder . Thorpe was additionally charged with incitement to murder , on the basis of his 1969 meetings with Bessell and Holmes . After being released on bail , Thorpe declared : " I am totally innocent of this charge and will vigorously challenge it " . 
 On 2 August 1978 Thorpe participated in a House of Commons debate about the future of Rhodesia , but thereafter played no further active part in parliament , although he remained North Devon 's member . At the Liberals ' 1978 annual assembly in Southport , he embarrassed the leadership by making a theatrical entrance and taking his place on the platform . 
 = = Committal and trial = = 
 The prosecution set out its case at the pre @-@ trial committal hearing , which began in Minehead on 20 November 1978 . At the request of Deakin 's counsel , reporting restrictions were lifted , which meant that newspapers were free to print anything said in court without fear of the libel laws . This move infuriated Thorpe , who had hoped for an in camera hearing which would avoid unfortunate newspaper headlines and perhaps lead to the dismissal of the case . Whatever the outcome , Thorpe knew that the adverse publicity would destroy his career , and that Scott would thus have his revenge . As the hearings began , Bessell described the 1969 meetings where he alleged that Thorpe had suggested that Holmes should kill Scott , including the comment about the shooting of a sick dog . The court learned that Bessell had a contract with The Sunday Telegraph , which was paying him £ 50 @,@ 000 for his story . Dinshaw gave evidence of the £ 20 @,@ 000 he had received from Hayward and passed to Holmes , and of subsequent attempts by Thorpe to obscure the details of these transactions . Newton testified that Holmes had wanted Scott killed : " He would prefer it if [ Scott ] vanished from the face of the earth and was never seen again . It was left to me how to do it " . Scott gave clinical details of his alleged seduction by Thorpe at Thorpe 's mother 's house in November 1961 and on other occasions , and also recounted his ordeal on the moors above Porlock Hill . At the end of the hearing the presiding magistrate committed the four defendants for trial at the Central Criminal Court , commonly known as the Old Bailey . 
 In March 1979 James Callaghan 's Labour government fell , and a general election was called for 3 May , delaying the intended start of the trial . Thorpe , who still had a following among North Devon Liberals , was adopted as their candidate . Largely isolated from his party 's national campaign , he lost the seat to his Conservative opponent by over 8 @,@ 000 votes . 
 The trial began on 8 May , under Sir Joseph Cantley , a relatively obscure High Court judge with limited experience of high @-@ profile cases . To conduct his defence Thorpe engaged George Carman , who had established a criminal law practice on the Northern Circuit in Manchester ; this was his first high @-@ profile national case . Carman undermined Bessell 's credibility by revealing his financial interest in Thorpe 's conviction : his newspaper contract provided that in the event of acquittal , only half the £ 50 @,@ 000 would be paid . The judge left no doubt as to his own low opinion of Bessell 's character ; Auberon Waugh , who was writing a book on the trial , thought that Cantley 's general attitude to other prosecution witnesses became increasingly one @-@ sided . On 7 June Deakin testified that although he had put Newton in touch with Holmes , he had thought that this was to help someone to deal with a blackmailer — he knew nothing of a conspiracy to kill . Deakin was the only defendant to testify ; the others all chose to remain silent and call no witnesses , believing that , based on the testimonies of Bessell , Scott and Newton , the prosecution had failed to make its case . During his closing speech on behalf of Thorpe , Carman raised the possibility that Holmes and others might have organised a conspiracy without Thorpe 's knowledge . 
 On 18 June the judge began his summing @-@ up . He drew the jury 's attention to the previous good character of the defendants — " men of hitherto unblemished reputation . " Thorpe was additionally described as " a national figure with a very distinguished public record " . The judge was scathing about the principal witnesses : Bessell was a " humbug " whose contract with The Sunday Telegraph was " deplorable " ; Scott was a fraud , a sponger , a whiner , a parasite — " but of course he could still be telling the truth . It is a question of belief . " Newton was characterised as a perjurer and a chump , " determined to milk the case as hard as he can . " The mystery surrounding the £ 20 @,@ 000 that Thorpe had obtained from Hayward was dismissed as an irrelevance : " The fact that a man obtains money by deceit does not [ prove ] that the man was a member of a conspiracy . " Waugh felt that the judge 's lack of even @-@ handedness could well provoke a counteraction against the accused from the jury . 
 = = Verdict and aftermath = = 
 The jury retired during the morning of 20 June . They returned just over two days later , and acquitted all four defendants on all charges . The judge awarded costs to Deakin , but not to Holmes or Le Mesurier who he thought had been insufficiently co @-@ operative in the enquiry . Thorpe made no application for costs . In a brief public statement , he said that he considered the verdict as " totally fair , just and a complete vindication . " David Steel , on behalf of the Liberal Party , welcomed the verdict as " a great relief " , and hoped that Thorpe would , " after a suitable period of rest and recuperation ... find many avenues where his great talents may be used . " The North Devon Liberals were more effusive ; Thorpe 's acquittal was celebrated by a thanksgiving service at which the presiding vicar proclaimed of Thorpe : " Countless thousands of people in North Devon rise up and call him Blessed ! " 
 Despite the acquittal , the broader public perception was strong that Thorpe had not behaved well , nor had he adequately explained himself . Prevented by his party from a return to active politics , in 1982 he was appointed by Amnesty International as director of its British section , but after protests from the organisation 's staff , he withdrew . Not long afterwards , Thorpe first showed signs of the Parkinson 's disease that led to his almost complete withdrawal into private life in the mid @-@ 1980s . There was a political reconciliation when , in 1988 , following the merger of the Liberals and the Social Democratic Party , the newly formed North Devon Liberal Democrat association made him their honorary president . When he attended the Liberal Democrat party conference in 1997 he received a standing ovation . In 1999 , Thorpe published his political memoir , In My Own Time , in which he justified his silence at the trial , and stated that he had never doubted the outcome . Nine years later , in January 2008 , Thorpe gave his first press interview in 25 years , to The Guardian . Referring to the affair he said : " If it happened now I think the public would be kinder . Back then they were very troubled by it ... It offended their set of values . " Thorpe died on 4 December 2014 . 
 After the trial Deakin disappeared from public view , as did Le Mesurier after unsuccessful attempts to sell " the real story " to national newspapers . In June 1981 , in a series of articles printed in the News of the World , Holmes reasserted his allegation that Thorpe had asked him to kill Scott : " The incitement charge which Jeremy faced was true , and if I had gone into the witness box I 'd have had to tell the truth . " Holmes , who died in 1990 , had previously admitted his participation in a conspiracy to " frighten " Scott , though not to kill him . Bessell 's account of the affair was published in America in 1980 . He died in 1985 ; his final years were devoted to a campaign to stop the erosion of the San Diego beaches in California . Newton , like Le Mesurier , attempted to cash in on the case , but failed to find a newspaper willing to print his story . Scott 's last recorded comments on the affair , immediately after the trial verdict , were that he was unsurprised by the outcome , but was upset by the aspersions on his character made by the judge from the safety of the bench . In December 2014 , Scott , then aged 74 , was reported to have recently relocated from Devon to Ireland . Sir Joseph Cantley died in 1993 . His summing @-@ up became the subject of a parody by the satirist Peter Cook , delivered shortly after the trial at The Secret Policeman 's Ball in aid of Amnesty International . Cook 's version , according to Freeman and Penrose , was " actually not that different from the original . " 
 In a BBC investigative documentary broadcast in December 2014 , an antique firearms collector named Dennis Meighan claimed that he had been hired by an unidentified senior Liberal to kill Scott , for a fee of £ 13 @,@ 500 . Having initially agreed , Meighan says , he changed his mind , but provided Newton with the gun used in the shooting . After confessing to the police , he was asked to sign a prepared statement which , according to him , " left everything out that was incriminating , but at the same time everything I said about the Liberal Party , Jeremy Thorpe , etcetera , was left out as well . " BBC 's Tom Mangold said that Meighan 's account , if true – and there was no reason to disbelieve him – indicated the existence of " a conspiracy at the very highest level " . 
 = Steve Beshear = 
 Steven Lynn " Steve " Beshear ( born September 21 , 1944 ) is an American attorney and Democratic Party politician who was the 61st Governor of Kentucky from 2007 to 2015 . He served in the Kentucky House of Representatives from 1974 to 1979 , was the state 's Attorney General from 1980 to 1983 , and was the 49th Lieutenant Governor from 1983 to 1987 . 
 After graduating from the University of Kentucky College of Law in 1968 , Beshear briefly practiced law in New York before returning to Kentucky and being elected to the state legislature , where he gained a reputation as a consumer advocate . He parlayed that reputation into a term as attorney general , serving under Governor John Y. Brown , Jr . As attorney general , Beshear issued an opinion that copies of the Ten Commandments would have to be removed from the walls of the state 's classrooms in the wake of the U.S. Supreme Court 's decision in Stone v. Graham . He also clashed with first lady Phyllis George Brown when he opposed the practice of charging an admission fee for visitors to view the renovated governor 's mansion . In 1983 , Beshear was elected lieutenant governor in the administration of Governor Martha Layne Collins . His most significant action in this capacity was the formation of the Kentucky Tomorrow Commission , a panel charged with making recommendations for the future of the state . 
 Beshear 's initial rise to political prominence was interrupted in 1987 when he finished third in a five @-@ candidate Democratic gubernatorial primary election . The Beshear campaign 's sparring with that of former Governor Brown , the second @-@ place finisher in the primary , opened the door for political novice Wallace Wilkinson 's well @-@ financed campaign to achieve a come @-@ from @-@ behind upset in the race . For the next 20 years , Beshear practiced law at a Lexington law firm . His only foray into politics during this period was an unsuccessful challenge to Senator Mitch McConnell in 1996 . In 2007 , however , Beshear was drawn back into politics by the vulnerability of incumbent Republican Governor Ernie Fletcher , whose administration was under extended investigation by then @-@ Attorney General Greg Stumbo , over violations of the state 's merit system . In the 2007 gubernatorial election , Beshear emerged from a six @-@ candidate Democratic primary – largely on the strength of his pledge to expand casino gambling as a means of further funding social programs like education – and defeated Fletcher in the general election . Beshear won re @-@ election in 2011 , defeating Republican David L. Williams and Independent Gatewood Galbraith . He was ineligible for re @-@ election in 2015 due to term limits imposed by the Kentucky Constitution . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Steve Beshear was born on September 21 , 1944 in Hopkins County , Kentucky . He is the third of five children born to Orlando Russell and Mary Elizabeth ( Joiner ) Beshear . He was raised in the small town of Dawson Springs , where his father owned a furniture store , operated a funeral home , and served as mayor . His father , grandfather , and uncle were all Primitive Baptist lay ministers , and in his childhood years , Beshear attended both his father 's church and the Christian Church where his mother was a member . Beshear also accompanied his uncle , Fred Beshear , as he traveled around the county during several races for a seat in the state House of Representatives . 
 Beshear graduated as valedictorian in a class of 28 at Dawson Springs High School in 1962 . He then attended the University of Kentucky where he earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in history in 1966 . He was a member of the Delta Tau Delta social fraternity and the Phi Beta Kappa honor society . He was also elected student body treasurer and from 1964 to 1965 served as student body president . While in college , he attended Lexington Primitive Baptist Church and often had lunch at the home of Harold and Marie Fletcher , whose son Ernie he would eventually challenge for the governorship of Kentucky . In 1968 , Beshear graduated with honors from the University of Kentucky College of Law . 
 The next year , he married Jane <unk> . After the marriage , Beshear joined the Crestwood Christian Church which his wife attended . The couple have two sons , Jeffery Scott Beshear and Andrew Graham Beshear , two grandsons , and one granddaughter . Following their marriage , the <unk> moved to New York , where Steve worked for the Wall Street law firm of White & Case . He also served as an intelligence specialist in the United States Army Reserve , performing some of the duties of a Judge Advocate General . 
 = = Return to Kentucky = = 
 After two and a half years , the family returned to Kentucky , where Beshear had joined the Lexington law firm of Harbison , Kessinger , Lisle and Bush . He went into practice for himself in 1974 . Taking on partners , he formed the law firm of Beshear , Meng , and Green . He led the firm until his election as attorney general in 1979 . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 In 1973 , Beshear began his political career by being elected to represent the 76th District ( Fayette County ) in the Kentucky House of Representatives . During his first term , his colleagues named him the most outstanding freshman legislator . He was re @-@ elected in 1975 and 1977 ; both campaigns featured close Democratic primaries between Beshear and Jerry <unk> . 
 As a legislator , Beshear gained a reputation as a consumer advocate , and sponsored bills to increase environmental protections and end the practice of commercial bail bonding . In 1974 , Beshear voted against a resolution condemning the practice of desegregation busing because it called for changes to the federal constitution . One of his major accomplishments in the House was spearheading legislation to improve neonatal care at the University of Kentucky Medical Center . Although he considered a 1978 bill requiring the posting of the Ten Commandments in Kentucky classrooms to be unconstitutional , he abstained from voting on it rather than voting against it , a move he later claimed he regretted . 
 = = = Attorney General = = = 
 Beshear was the first candidate to announce his bid for the post of Attorney General of Kentucky in the 1979 election . Shortly after declaring his candidacy , he was endorsed by outgoing Attorney General Robert F. Stephens . The central issue of Beshear 's campaign was his pledge to be an advocate of the consumer in cases of proposed utility rate hikes . After winning the Democratic primary , he defeated Republican nominee Ron Snyder by a vote of 471 @,@ 177 to 302 @,@ 951 . When incumbent Attorney General Stephens resigned in December 1979 to accept an appointment to the Kentucky Supreme Court , Beshear was appointed to fill the vacancy until his term officially began in January . As attorney general , Beshear created the state 's first Medicaid fraud division and his office took a leading role in the Leviticus Project , an eight @-@ state coalition committed to prosecuting organized crime in the country 's coal fields . 
 Two minor controversies marked Beshear 's tenure as attorney general . The first came in the aftermath of the U.S. Supreme Court 's ruling in the 1980 case of Stone v. Graham . The ruling struck down the state law requiring the posting of the Ten Commandments in all of the state 's classrooms on grounds that it violated the Establishment Clause of the federal constitution . State Superintendent Raymond Barber asked the Supreme Court to clarify whether its ruling meant that all of the copies of the Commandments already posted had to be taken down or whether it simply invalidated the Kentucky requirement for them to be posted ; the Court refused the request for clarification . Beshear then issued an advisory opinion that displaying the Commandments in classrooms under any circumstances was banned by the Court 's ruling . 
 The second controversy arose as a result of the renovation of the governor 's mansion . Kentucky first lady Phyllis George Brown created the Save the Mansion Fund to help cover the costs of the renovation . When the renovation was complete , she planned a nine @-@ day showcase of the mansion for the general public . Guests were charged $ 10 to take a tour of the mansion . Legislator Eugene P. Stuart objected to taxpayers being charged a fee to view a mansion their tax dollars supported . He asked Beshear to protest the charge , and Beshear requested an injunction against the Save the Mansion Fund . A Lexington judge refused to grant the injunction , and Beshear appealed to the Kentucky Court of Appeals , which upheld the lower court 's decision . Beshear 's actions caused a rift between him and Governor John Y. Brown , Jr . 
 = = = Lieutenant Governor = = = 
 Limited to one term as attorney general by the state constitution , Beshear declared his candidacy for lieutenant governor in 1983 . In a seven @-@ candidate Democratic primary in May , Beshear captured 183 @,@ 662 of the 575 @,@ 022 votes cast to defeat a field that included former state Auditor George L. Atkins , Jefferson County judge executive Todd Hollenbach , Agriculture Commissioner Alben Barkley II , and former Kentucky Wildcats basketball star Bill Spivey . In the general election , Beshear faced Republican Eugene Stuart and Don Wiggins , who became the nominee of the newly formed Consumers Lobby Party after losing in the Republican gubernatorial primary . Stuart categorized Beshear as being too liberal for Kentucky , citing his opinion in the Ten Commandments case , as well as his support for abortion rights and gun control . Beshear denied advocating for gun control and charged that Stuart , a state senator from Jefferson County , had not shown any leadership worthy of election to the lieutenant governor 's office . Beshear easily defeated Stuart by a vote of 568 @,@ 869 to 321 @,@ 352 ; Wiggins captured just 7 @,@ 728 votes . 
 Several changes were proposed to the office of lieutenant governor during Beshear 's tenure . In 1984 , state representative Bobby Richardson proposed a constitutional amendment to abolish the office . When that effort failed , Richardson introduced a bill in the 1986 General Assembly that would have revoked the lieutenant governor 's right to live rent @-@ free in the state 's Old Governor 's Mansion , eliminated his or her police protection , and restricted his or her use of the state 's two executive helicopters . The measure would also have eliminated the lieutenant governor 's salary , paying him or her per diem for days served as acting governor or president of the state senate instead . The measure would further have lifted the ban on the lieutenant governor holding other employment . Although the bill would have exempted Beshear from its provisions , Beshear still opposed it and charged that it was politically motivated . Richardson had expressed interest in running for lieutenant governor in the past , and Beshear claimed that because he was never elected to the office , he " doesn 't want anybody else to have it . " Richardson denied that his efforts were a political ploy ; he claimed the office was largely ceremonial and served only as a stepping stone to the governorship . Three of the previous four lieutenant governors had subsequently been elected governor , including sitting governor Martha Layne Collins . 
 Despite opposing Richardson 's changes to the office , Beshear conceded that the provision of the state constitution that made him acting governor every time Governor Collins left the state was " archaic " . During its 1987 organizational session , the General Assembly relieved the lieutenant governor of his membership on the committees that assigned bills to other committees and that managed the flow of legislation on the Senate floor . Later that year , a subcommittee of the Commission on Constitutional Review proposed requiring the governor and lieutenant governor to run as a ticket and combining the office with that of the secretary of state . These recommendations were not acted on during Beshear 's term . 
 During his service as lieutenant governor , Beshear formed and chaired the Kentucky Tomorrow Commission , a privately financed group assembled to make recommendations for the state 's future growth and development . The 30 @-@ person commission was formed in July 1984 and presented its report – containing more than 100 recommendations – in September 1986 . Among the recommendations in the commission 's report were several changes to the state constitution , adopted in 1891 . The recommended changes included eliminating the offices of state treasurer , secretary of state and superintendent of public instruction , holding elections only in odd @-@ numbered years instead of every year , and raising the term limit for the state 's constitutional officers from one term to two consecutive terms . The state legislature showed little interest in calling a constitutional convention , however , and the commission 's recommendations were not immediately adopted , though several have since been implemented . Other recommendations in the commission 's report included the creation of lifelong learning programs , implementation of criminal justice reforms , and improvements in worker training . The commission was hailed by some as the most substantial undertaking by a lieutenant governor to date , but was panned by others as a move by Beshear to better position himself for a run for governor in 1987 . 
 Among Beshear 's other activities as lieutenant governor was his participation in an investigation of Kentucky Utilities ' coal @-@ buying practices . At issue was whether it was legal and ethical for the company 's coal buyer to accept gifts and other perks from coal suppliers . Beshear had clashed with the company over similar issues during his term as attorney general . The company attempted to block Beshear 's participation in the investigation , but the Kentucky Public Service Commission rejected the attempt . Due to the length of the investigation and the number of appeals filed , the matter was not fully adjudicated until 1992 , well past the end of Beshear 's term . The Kentucky Supreme Court ultimately ruled in favor of Kentucky Utilities . 
 In 1987 , Beshear entered a crowded Democratic gubernatorial primary that included former governor Julian Carroll , millionaire bookstore magnate Wallace Wilkinson , and Eastern Kentucky physician Grady Stumbo . Beshear had the backing of the Collins administration and the endorsement of several labor leaders and the state teachers ' association ; he appeared to be the front @-@ runner in the race until former governor John Y. Brown , Jr. entered late and became the instant favorite . Beshear spent much of the campaign running ads that blasted Brown for his jet @-@ setting lifestyle including , the ads claimed , his " wild nights in Vegas " . Brown countered with ads claiming that Beshear was distorting the facts and could not be trusted . Both Beshear and Brown claimed the other would raise taxes if he were elected . The feud between Beshear and Brown allowed Wilkinson , who was last among the candidates according to polls as late as February 1987 , to launch his own blitz of ads claiming both Beshear and Brown would raise taxes and proposing a state lottery as an alternative means of raising funds for the state . In the final days of the campaign , Wilkinson surged past both Brown and Beshear and captured 221 @,@ 138 votes to win the primary ; Beshear finished third with 114 @,@ 439 , trailing Brown ( 163 @,@ 204 votes ) but leading Stumbo ( 84 @,@ 613 votes ) , Carroll ( 42 @,@ 137 votes ) , and three minor candidates . 
 = = Political interim and 1996 Senate bid = = 
 After his defeat in the 1987 election , Beshear moved to a 35 @-@ acre ( 140 @,@ 000 m2 ) farm in Clark County . He resumed his career as a lawyer , joining the 125 @-@ member Lexington law firm of Stites and Harbison . He handled several high @-@ profile cases such as the bankruptcy of Calumet Farm and the liquidation of the Kentucky Central Insurance Company . He underwent successful surgery to treat prostate cancer in 1994 . 
 Beshear did little in the political arena for almost a decade after his 1987 primary defeat , but in late 1995 , he was encouraged by Democratic leaders – including former governor Ned Breathitt , Senator Wendell H. Ford , and Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee chair Bob Kerrey – to challenge incumbent Republican Senator Mitch McConnell . Beshear entered the primary as a heavy favorite against Tom Barlow , a former one @-@ term Congressman from Kentucky 's First District , and Shelby Lanier , a retired Louisville police officer . During the primary campaign , Beshear virtually ignored Barlow and Lanier and focused his rhetoric on McConnell . Despite Barlow 's tour of all 120 Kentucky counties , Beshear cruised to victory in the primary , garnering 177 @,@ 859 votes ( 66 @.@ 38 % ) to Barlow 's 64 @,@ 235 ( 23 @.@ 97 % ) and Lanier 's 25 @,@ 856 ( 9 @.@ 65 % ) . 
 Beshear faced heavy deficits in polls against McConnell throughout the general election campaign . McConnell also raised twice as much money as Beshear during the campaign . Beshear tried to make McConnell 's fundraising a campaign issue , claiming much of the money came from political action committees that represented interests that lobbied the Senate committees on which McConnell served . McConnell defended his contributors , saying that the right to free speech included the right to donate money . Beshear charged that Republicans , including McConnell , had voted to cut Medicare ; McConnell responded that Republicans had not cut Medicare , but had put forward a plan to curb its growth , a plan that didn 't differ significantly , McConnell said , from the one proposed by Democratic President Bill Clinton . 
 The campaign turned personal during the second of two debates between the two candidates when McConnell charged that the Iroquois Hunt Club , to which Beshear belonged , had no African @-@ American members and was racially discriminatory . Beshear denied that the club was discriminatory and fired back that a prominent McConnell supporter from Louisville was " virulently anti @-@ women . " McConnell countered that Beshear had taken money from a labor union group that was under investigation for links to organized crime . After the debate , it was revealed that the Pendennis Club , of which McConnell had been a member , was under investigation for discriminatory membership practices ; McConnell claimed he had resigned his membership in the club after perceiving that it practiced discrimination , but did not express his reasons for resigning to the club 's membership or leadership . Ultimately , none of Beshear 's arguments gained much traction , and he lost the race by a 724 @,@ 794 votes ( 55 @.@ 5 % ) to 560 @,@ 012 ( 42 @.@ 9 % ) . At the time , it was the largest victory margin of McConnell 's career . In a 2009 biography of McConnell , author John David Dyche wrote that Beshear " had no illusions about his chance of success [ in the race against McConnell ] , but for the sake of his party , and hoping to ride the coattails of President Clinton 's likely re @-@ election , he got in the race . " After the book 's release , Beshear said through a spokesman that Dyche 's assessment " sounds accurate . " 
 Beshear continued his legal practice at Stites and Harbison following his defeat by McConnell . In 2001 , the firm was hired to represent creditors in a bankruptcy case against Wallace Wilkinson , Beshear 's opponent in the 1987 gubernatorial primary . The firm also represented four creditors of Wallace 's Bookstore , the company through which Wilkinson had made his fortune . Wilkinson unsuccessfully sought to have the firm removed from the case , citing a potential conflict of interest stemming from his old political rivalry with Beshear . The case was eventually settled in 2002 , four months after Wilkinson 's death . 
 = = 2007 gubernatorial campaign = = 
 On December 18 , 2006 , Beshear announced that he would enter the 2007 gubernatorial race with Hazard physician and state senator Daniel Mongiardo as his running mate . Beshear promised to return " integrity " to the governor 's office , a slap at sitting governor Ernie Fletcher , who was seeking re @-@ election despite a recently concluded investigation into his administration 's hiring practices conducted by Democratic Attorney General Greg Stumbo . At the time , the only other declared Democratic candidates were state treasurer Jonathan Miller and Harlan contractor Otis Hensley , Jr . , who only ran a limited campaign . By the filing deadline , the list of Democratic challengers had grown to include Louisville millionaire businessman Bruce Lunsford , former lieutenant governor Steve Henry , Speaker of the Kentucky House of Representatives Jody Richards , and perennial candidate Gatewood Galbraith . 
 Early polls showed that Beshear and Henry led the Democratic field in name recognition , but both trailed Fletcher and his Republican primary rival Anne Northup in that area . Early in the campaign , Beshear attempted to set himself apart from the other candidates by supporting a constitutional amendment that would allow expanded casino gambling in the state , which he claimed could generate $ 500 million in new revenue without the need to raise taxes . Observers noted that this strategy was remarkably similar to the one used by Wallace Wilkinson who , in his 1987 primary victory over Beshear and others , trumpeted the revenue a state lottery would generate . Initially , all of the Democratic candidates except Hensley endorsed a casino amendment , but as Beshear made it the centerpiece of his campaign , support from other candidates began to waver ; Richards officially changed his position to oppose the amendment , while several other candidates charged that Beshear was staking too much of his platform on a proposal that was not guaranteed to pass . 
 In April 2007 , Beshear received the endorsement of former Governor Brereton Jones . Just two weeks before the primary , candidate Jonathan Miller dropped out of the race and endorsed Beshear . Miller , who was consistently lagging in the polls , indicated that he was endorsing Beshear in order to prevent an " unelectable " candidate from becoming the Democratic Party 's nominee for the fall campaign . He later admitted that comment was aimed at Lunsford , who dropped out of the 2003 Democratic gubernatorial primary and in the general election endorsed Fletcher over Democratic candidate Ben Chandler , and at Henry , who faced allegations of illegal medical billing and improper campaign financing . Buoyed by these endorsements , Beshear surged ahead and won the primary ; he garnered 40 @.@ 9 percent of the vote , just enough to avoid a costly runoff election with Lunsford , the second @-@ place finisher . 
 Incumbent governor Fletcher emerged from the Republican primary , and Beshear immediately looked to make the investigation against Fletcher the primary issue of the campaign . Fletcher countered by strengthening his opposition to Beshear 's casino expansion plan . In June 2007 , Fletcher backed off an earlier commitment to let Kentuckians vote on casino gambling amendment ; a campaign staffer told reporters that " The voters will have their chance to decide this issue in [ the ] November [ election ] . To put it on the ballot would be redundant . " Fletcher 's choice to make casino gambling the centerpiece of the campaign proved ineffective . After months of campaigning on the issue , a SurveyUSA poll showed that Fletcher had gained only 6 percentage points on Beshear and still trailed him by 16 percentage points . Further , polling showed that more than half of the state 's voters believed Fletcher had acted unethically with regard to the claims in the hiring investigation while 81 % believed the casino gambling amendment should be placed on the ballot . Late in the campaign , eight of Kentucky 's leading newspapers endorsed Beshear . Ultimately , Beshear was elected by a vote of 619 @,@ 567 to 435 @,@ 856 . 
 = = 2011 gubernatorial campaign = = 
 On January 26 , 2009 , Lieutenant Governor Daniel Mongiardo announced that he would seek the Democratic nomination to challenge incumbent Senator Jim Bunning in the 2010 senatorial election . The move effectively prohibited Mongiardo from running for re @-@ election with Beshear in the 2011 gubernatorial contest . On July 19 , 2009 , Beshear announced that Louisville mayor Jerry Abramson would replace Mongiardo as his running mate in his re @-@ election campaign . 
 Beshear faced no opposition in the Democratic gubernatorial primary , held on May 17 , 2011 . In the Republican primary , Senate President David Williams defeated Louisville businessman Phil Moffett , a favorite of the Tea Party Movement , and Bobbie Holsclaw , county clerk of Jefferson County . Perennial candidate Gatewood Galbraith sought the governorship as an Independent after collecting the requisite 5 @,@ 000 signatures from registered voters requesting that his name be added to the ballot . 
 On November 8 , 2011 , Beshear was re @-@ elected as governor of Kentucky with close to 56 % of the vote in a three way race . On the same night Democratic candidates won all but one of the statewide offices . 
 = = Governorship = = 
 Soon after taking office , Beshear ordered $ 78 million in budget cuts , citing a $ 434 million projected deficit in the state budget . Republican Senate President David Williams questioned the legality of the cuts , claiming that the shortfall was only $ 117 @.@ 5 million and that $ 145 million in surplus funds from the previous fiscal year would cover the difference . Beshear countered that the legislature had already authorized $ 138 million in expenditures from the surplus fund and that his reckoning of the deficit also included $ 300 million in " additional spending needs " . Williams stopped short of filing a legal challenge to the cuts , but warned Beshear that the General Assembly would closely monitor the cuts and override any they disagreed with by passing modifications to the 2006 – 2008 budget after the commencement of the legislative session in February . 
 Beshear was dealt the first political setback of his term in the special election to fill the state Senate seat of his lieutenant governor , Daniel Mongiardo . Despite a 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 voter registration advantage in the district for Democratic candidates and the fact that both Beshear and Mongiardo campaigned heavily for Democratic nominee Scott Alexander , Republican Brandon Smith captured the open seat by 401 votes . The loss by Alexander was the most expensive in state legislative history and gave Republicans a 22 – 15 advantage over Democratic members in the state senate ; the chamber also included one Independent . 
 = = = 2008 legislative session and special session = = = 
 Much of the debate in the 2008 legislative session centered on crafting a budget for the 2008 – 2010 biennium , a period when the state was projected to encounter a shortfall of nearly $ 1 billion . Beshear expressed surprise that the budget issues consumed so much of the Assembly 's time during the session , but admitted that the legislature had become much more independent of the governor than it was when he was a legislator two decades earlier . He listed early childhood education and expanded health care for children among the priorities that he was unable to address in the session . 
 On February 15 , 2008 , Beshear unveiled his promised legislation that would allow casino gambling in Kentucky . Beshear 's plan included a constitutional amendment allowing 12 casinos to be licensed in the state – seven at each of the state 's horse racetracks and five additional free @-@ standing casinos – and a companion bill specifying how the increased revenues would be spent . After the plan encountered initial resistance , House leadership reduced the number of casinos that would have been allowed to by the amendment to nine . One proposal , authored by House Speaker Jody Richards , would have guaranteed five casino licenses to the state 's racetracks and allowed the other four to go to free @-@ standing casinos . A competing measure , drafted by House Majority Whip Rob <unk> and Speaker Pro Tem Larry Clark , would have allowed all nine licenses to be awarded competitively , with none specifically reserved for racetracks . In late February , the House Elections , Constitutional Amendments , and Intergovernmental Affairs committee failed to advance either proposal to the full floor of the House of Representatives . The following day , Speaker Richards removed Representative Dottie Sims from the committee ; Sims claimed Richards retaliated against her for voting against the proposals , but Richards said he removed Sims because she told him she would vote for the proposals and then voted against them . Following Sims ' removal the committee passed the amendment . 
 The casino legislation was not called to a vote in the Democratic controlled Kentucky House of Representatives , where 60 votes out of 100 would have been required for passage . Beshear announced that his proposal for a constitutional amendment to allow for casinos was dead for the regular session on March 27 , 2008 . Among the other proposals favored by Beshear that failed to pass in the session were an ethics reform measure Beshear proposed in the wake of the investigation of the Fletcher administration , a plan to reduce the projected shortfall in the state 's pension system , and a proposed 70 @-@ cent @-@ per @-@ pack tax increase on cigarettes . Besides the state budget , major legislation passed during the session included incentives for homeowners and businesses to utilize energy efficiency measures , anti @-@ bullying legislation , and increased penalties for animal cruelty . 
 In the final hours of the legislative session , both houses of the General Assembly resorted to the controversial practice of stopping the clocks in their respective chambers a few minutes before midnight in order to avoid the constitutionally mandated deadline for the end of the session – midnight on April 15 . The Assembly then passed twelve bills between midnight and 1 o 'clock on April 16 before adjourning . Among those bills was House Bill 79 , which provided funding and direction for the state 's road @-@ building plan for the next six years . The bill was delivered to Beshear later in the day , and he vetoed it on April 26 . With the General Assembly unable to reconvene and override the veto , Senate President David Williams filed suit , claiming Beshear 's veto was invalid because it was not issued within 10 days of the bill 's passage . Williams ' reasoning was based on the fact that , according to the legislative record , the bill was passed on April 15 . Beshear counter @-@ sued , claiming the bill was actually passed on April 16 and thus invalid to begin with . On July 31 , 2008 , a Lexington judge sided with Beshear , invalidating the law and declaring that the General Assembly would no longer be allowed to use the practice of stopping the clocks ; he did not rule on the validity of the other bills passed after the session expired . 
 Dissatisfied that the General Assembly had not acted to shore up the state pension system , Beshear called a special legislative session for July 23 , 2008 , after House and Senate leaders informed him that they had reached an agreement on a plan after the regular legislative session 's end . The session lasted five days , the minimum amount of time required to maneuver the bill through the legislative process . 
 = = = Other matters of 2008 = = = 
 Following the legislative session , Beshear began to address his agenda related to energy production . In April 2008 , he announced that he would divide the state 's Environmental and Public Protection Cabinet to form a new Energy and Environmental Cabinet . The move essentially reversed the consolidation of Environmental , Public Protection , and Labor Cabinets effected under Beshear 's predecessor , Ernie Fletcher . Later in the year , Beshear released what he called the state 's first @-@ ever comprehensive energy plan . The plan called for expansion of solar , wind , and biomass energy generation , as well as more speculative ventures such as coal gasification and carbon capture and sequestration . Although the plan called for an exploration of the use of nuclear power , Beshear stopped short of advocating an end to the state 's ban on the construction of nuclear reactors . 
 Hoping to attract a proposed ZAP electric vehicle manufacturing plant to the city of Franklin , Kentucky , Beshear issued an executive order permitting low @-@ speed vehicles on many Kentucky roads in August 2008 . The state also offered the company $ 48 million in tax incentives , contingent upon its delivering a promised 4 @,@ 000 jobs . Construction of the proposed plant stalled , however , when GE Capital , a primary investor , pulled out of the project . ZAP officials maintained their intention to build the plant , but said they would also consider other states ' proposals if they could not replace the $ 125 million commitment from GE . 
 Beshear clashed with the state Council on Postsecondary Education over its hiring of Brad Cowgill as its president . Beshear said state law required that the Council conduct a national search for its president and that they hire someone with experience and an established reputation in higher education ; he claimed that Cowgill , a Lexington lawyer and state budget director for former Governor Fletcher , was not qualified for the position and that the council hired him without a national search . Democratic Attorney General Jack Conway issued a non @-@ binding opinion that the hiring was illegal under state law , and Cowgill resigned rather than wage a legal battle with Beshear . Beshear , who had considered asking all of the council members to resign or abolishing the council altogether in favor of a new one , praised Cowgill 's decision . Democratic House Budget Committee Chairman Harry Moberly said Cowgill " had the council headed in the right direction " and added " I would have been satisfied if Brad had the permanent position , but I do not criticize the governor for the role he had played [ in Cowgill 's resignation ] . " Senate President David Williams called Beshear 's interference in the matter " unfortunate " . 
 In September 2008 , Beshear 's administration attempted to seize control of 141 gambling @-@ related domain names in an attempt to block Kentucky residents from accessing those websites . Beshear claimed the sites were conducting illegal , unregulated gambling operations in the state and providing untaxed competition to the state 's horse racing industry . Later that year , a Franklin County judge ruled that Beshear had the authority to seize the domain names , but the Kentucky Court of Appeals overturned that ruling on appeal . Beshear appealed to the Kentucky Supreme Court , partially on grounds that the web site owners were being represented by gambling associations and players groups who Beshear said had no legal standing in the case . In 2010 , the Kentucky Supreme Court agreed with Beshear and ordered the web site owners themselves to appear before the court . As of August 2010 , the case was still in adjudication . 
 = = = 2009 legislative session = = = 
 During the organizational session of the 2009 General Assembly , House Speaker Jody Richards was ousted by House Democratic members by a three @-@ vote margin in favor of former Majority Leader and Attorney General Greg Stumbo . Some speculated that Beshear had personally interfered on behalf of Stumbo , a charge he denied . When asked about Beshear 's alleged interference , Richards refused to comment . 
 Due to the state 's worsening economy , the primary issue facing the legislature for the session was a $ 456 million budget shortfall . Expanded gambling was again proposed as a possible source of revenue , and a bill to allow slot machines at the state 's racetracks passed the House Licensing and Occupations Committee , but died in the House Appropriations and Revenue Committee . Speaker Stumbo expressed doubt that he had enough votes to pass the measure even if it were brought to the House floor . Instead , the Assembly passed a series of tax bills to deal with the shortfall . The Assembly also began the process of reforming the state 's system of school accountability testing , a move advocated by Beshear . Other bills passed during the session revised the state road plan to allocate newly available federal stimulus funds , created a program to divert accused substance abusers to treatment before their trials , and created a statewide database for tracking payday loans . 
 The rules of the House of Representatives required that the final two days of the chamber 's session be reserved for overriding any vetoes by the governor . Beshear hoped that the House would suspend the rules , as they had in previous years , in order to consider bills to increase funding to public defenders , create a transportation authority to oversee bridge @-@ building projects in Louisville and Henderson , and provide various economic incentives , including a package intended to lure a NASCAR Sprint Cup Series race to Kentucky Speedway . The House refused to suspend the rules , however , citing its desire to receive legislation in a timely manner in the future . The chamber allowed Beshear 's one veto to stand and adjourned a day early . 
 = = = Other matters of 2009 and special legislative session = = = 
 Following the 2009 legislative session , Attorney General Jack Conway was asked to issue advisory opinions on two gambling @-@ related issues . Republican state senator Damon Thayer asked for an opinion as to whether Instant Racing – allowing individuals to bet on the outcome of previously run horse races – would be allowable under the state constitution . Democratic Representative Jody Richards also asked for an advisory opinion as to whether a constitutional amendment was required to allow video lottery terminals at the state 's racetracks or whether they could be construed as legal under the amendment that allowed a state lottery . Critics charged that Conway had a conflict of interest in the matter because his father was a member of the Kentucky Horse Racing Commission , but Conway denied that a conflict existed , and the state Executive Branch Ethics Board refused to take a position unless an official request for an investigation were made . Conway subsequently opined in June 2009 that video lottery terminals would be legal if governed by the Kentucky Lottery Corporation and in January 2010 that instant racing would be allowable under the state 's parimutuel betting statutes with a few regulatory changes . 
 In an effort to cut costs , the Kentucky State Police announced in May 2009 that it would only offer the state driving test in English beginning June 1 , 2009 . The test had previously been offered in 22 foreign languages , but the state police said that the foreign language versions of the test had not been updated to reflect recent changes to driving laws . Two days later , Beshear announced the reversal of the state police 's new policy , saying he was not informed of it and believed it was the wrong thing to do . He promised the foreign language versions of the test would be updated and would continue to be offered . 
 In April 2009 , Beshear announced a partnership between the University of Kentucky , the University of Louisville , and Chicago @-@ based Argonne National Laboratory to construct a research facility in Lexington to develop advanced battery technologies that could be used to power electric cars . A week later , the National Alliance for Advanced Transportation Battery Cell Manufacture announced they would locate a battery manufacturing plant in Hardin County , citing the nearby research facility as an incentive for choosing Kentucky over competing sites . The venture , however , was predicated upon receiving $ 342 million in federal stimulus funds ; in August 2009 , those funds were denied , and officials conceded it was unlikely that the plant would be built . 
 Beshear called another special legislative session in June 2009 to address another $ 1 billion shortfall in the state budget . Later , Beshear amended the call to include the economic incentives package that was not approved during the regular session and , in light of Attorney General Conway 's opinion on video lottery terminals , a measure to expand gambling in the state by statute . With the threshold lowered from 60 votes for a constitutional amendment to 51 votes for a statute , the House of Representatives passed the expanded gambling bill , but the measure died in the Republican @-@ dominated Senate Appropriations and Revenue Committee by a 10 – 5 vote . The amended budget and the economic incentives bills both passed in the 10 @-@ day session . 
 Again unable to get his expanded gambling proposal past the Senate , Beshear attempted to chip away at the Republican majority in that chamber by appointing some Republican senators to lucrative positions in the executive and judicial branches in advance of the 2010 General Assembly . Shortly after the special session , Beshear named Republican senator Charlie Borders to the state Public Safety Commission . That appointment set up a special election for Borders ' seat , which was won by Democratic senator Robin Webb , reducing the Republican majority to 20 – 17 with one Independent who usually voted with the Republicans . Following Webb 's victory , Beshear appointed Republican senator Dan Kelly to a circuit judgeship , but Republicans held on to that seat in a special election . 
 = = = 2010 legislative and special sessions = = = 
 Early in the 2010 legislative session , Beshear presented his biennial budget proposal to the General Assembly . The state projected a $ 1 @.@ 5 billion shortfall for the biennium , and Beshear once again proposed to make up for the shortfall with revenue generated from expanded gambling . Days after Beshear presented the proposal , both House Speaker Stumbo and Senate President Williams declared all gambling legislation " dead " for the session , saying there was no political will in either chamber to pass such legislation ahead of the legislative elections in November . The process of crafting a budget consumed the vast majority of the Assembly 's time during the session , but legislators reached the constitutionally mandated end of their session with no agreement . Announcing his intent to call a special session to pass a budget and prevent a state government shutdown , Beshear blasted the leadership of both chambers for discarding his budget proposal . " [ W ] <unk> their own budget would be their ' defining moment ' , " Beshear said the legislators had claimed . " Well , it was . A moment of abject failure . " Beshear said expanded gambling would not be on the agenda for the special session unless an agreement were reached before the session date . In May 2010 , legislators reconvened and passed a budget . Beshear utilized his line @-@ item veto on 19 items in the budget , claiming they restricted his ability to implement the reduction in executive expenses mandated by the budget . Legislators were unable to override the vetoes because the special session had already adjourned . 
 In July 2010 , Beshear announced six mandatory , unpaid furlough days for most state employees in order to achieve the savings called for by the budget . Later in the month , Beshear announced exceptions from the furlough for public safety and mental health care workers . The American Federation of County State and Municipal Employees ( <unk> ) Council 62 , which represents about 9 @,@ 000 of Kentucky 's state workers , filed suit to block implementation of the furloughs . A Franklin County Circuit Court Judge refused to issue an injunction in September 2010 , but allowed the lawsuit to proceed . A month later , <unk> agreed to drop the suit and address the furlough issue through Beshear 's Employee Advisory Council . Ultimately , all six furlough days were observed as outlined in Beshear 's plan . 
 = = = 2011 legislative and special sessions = = = 
 In the lead @-@ up to the 2011 legislative session , state senator and former governor Julian Carroll declared , " In all the years I 've been around the Capitol , I can 't recall people expecting so little from a legislative session . " Carroll 's pessimism was the result of Senate President David Williams ' announcement that he would challenge Beshear in the upcoming gubernatorial election , which Carroll believed would <unk> cooperation between the two leaders . 
 Among the items passed in the legislative session were a bill allowing optometrists to perform eye surgery ( a procedure usually reserved for ophthalmologists ) , a ban on the sale of a psychoactive drug marketed as " bath salts " , and a measure allowing community supervision and addiction treatment as jail alternatives for non @-@ violent drug criminals . Measures that did not pass included tougher measures to curb illegal immigration advocated by Williams and raising the legal age for dropping out of high school from sixteen to eighteen , a proposal supported by Beshear . Also , the Assembly was unable to agree on whether to adopt Beshear 's plan to address a shortfall in the state 's Medicaid obligations or an alternative plan proposed by Williams . Beshear 's plan involved moving $ 166 million from the second year of the biennial budget to cover the shortfall and cover the costs in the second year through savings achieved by switching to a managed care plan for Medicaid . Williams ' plan , passed by the Republican majority in the state senate , called for $ 101 million in cuts to state government spending to cover the shortfall . Without a plan in place , Beshear estimated that the state would have to cut Medicaid reimbursements to health care providers by 30 percent . 
 Immediately following the end of the legislative session , Beshear called for a special legislative session to consider a way to meet the state 's Medicaid obligations and whether or not to raise the minimum dropout age . In the special session , legislators also approved raising the minimum dropout age to 18 during the special session . Following the session , the National Education Association honored Beshear with its America 's Greatest Education Governor Award for 2011 , citing his advocacy for raising the minimum dropout age and his consistent refusal to cut education funding . Both houses also approved a plan that allowed Beshear to move the funds from the second year of the budget , but triggered automatic spending cuts if the managed care plans did not generate sufficient savings . The bill also called for the hiring of an independent accounting firm to assess the savings achieved by the managed care plans . Beshear then used his line @-@ item veto to strike the spending cuts and the savings assessment provisions , per a previous arrangement with Democratic lawmakers . By eliminating these provisions , the version of the bill signed by Beshear was essentially the plan he had proposed during the regular session . The House adjourned the session March 24 , but the Senate remained in session until April 6 , voting to override Beshear 's vetoes , but without concurrence from the House , the override votes were ineffective . 
 = Sam & Max Save the World = 
 Sam & Max Save the World is a graphic adventure video game developed by Telltale Games . The game was originally released as Sam & Max : Season One before being renamed in early 2009 . Save the World was developed in episodic fashion , comprising six episodes that were released for Microsoft Windows over the course of late 2006 and early 2007 . The episodes were initially distributed online by GameTap and Telltale Games themselves , although the later retail releases of the game were published by The Adventure Company and <unk> Productions in North America and Europe respectively . A Wii port of the game was published in late 2008 , and an Xbox Live Arcade version was released in mid @-@ 2009 . 
 Based on Steve Purcell 's comic book series Sam & Max , the game follows the title characters Sam and Max — self @-@ styled vigilante private investigators , the former an anthropomorphic dog and the latter a " hyperkinetic rabbity thing " — through several cases involving a hypnotism conspiracy . Each episode features one case with a contained story , with an underlying plot running through the series . The game was announced by Telltale Games in 2005 following the cancellation of Sam & Max : Freelance Police by LucasArts in the preceding year ; many of the employees at Telltale Games were members of the Freelance Police development team . 
 The game received a positive response from critics , with praise bestowed on the game 's humor , graphics and gameplay . However , concerns were voiced over the low difficulty of the puzzles , repetition in design between episodes and the effectiveness of the story . Opinions dissented across the Atlantic ; some British reviewers did not appreciate the writing in the way that American critics did . Nevertheless , the game has won several awards and is often cited by commentators as the first successful application of episodic distribution . The game was accompanied by a number of short machinima videos set between each episode . The game was followed by two episodic sequels : Sam & Max Beyond Time and Space in 2007 and Sam & Max : The Devil 's Playhouse in 2010 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Sam & Max Save the World is a 3D graphic adventure game in which the player controls the character of Sam . The player has Sam explore the environments of the game and solve a series of puzzles using a simple point @-@ and @-@ click interface . The game 's puzzles have logical solutions , although a number of them have far @-@ fetched solutions due to the game 's cartoon setting . Depending on the type of in @-@ game entity a player selects using the cursor , the player can have Sam walk around an area , look at and comment on objects , pick up certain items or otherwise try to use them . Sam may also engage in conversation with non @-@ player characters ; when this occurs , the game presents a dialog tree with several subjects to pick from . Topics of conversation may directly involve the story or provide assistance with the game 's puzzles , while others may be entirely unconnected . In some cases , the player may be able to choose dialog for Max to speak as well . 
 The game implements an inventory system to allow Sam to store any items that the player picks up during the course of the game . The player may select any of the items in the inventory and can then attempt to use them on objects in the game world or give them to other characters simply by clicking on the desired target . Unlike Save the World 's predecessor , Sam & Max Hit the Road , inventory items are context specific , and cannot be used together or combined to create new items . Typically , Sam carries a gun that may be used to solve several puzzles . 
 The characters can travel between a variety of locations in the game using their black and white 1960 DeSoto Adventurer , which , when selected , will present the player with a list of available destinations . The DeSoto is also used for several driving sequences , usually involving pursuing or fleeing criminals in other vehicles . In these driving sequences , the player can use Sam 's gun , the car 's horn , or have Max attempt to communicate with other vehicles via a megaphone . In addition , special inventory items may be used to complete specific puzzles within these sequences . Driving sequences are also used for several minigames , such as pulling innocent drivers over for fabricated felonies . In keeping with the developer 's heritage from the LucasArts adventure games , Sam & Max Save the World is designed so that the player characters cannot die or reach a complete dead @-@ end . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Sam & Max Save the World is set in a universe that parodies American popular culture , and it follows the title characters of Sam and Max , the Freelance Police , a pair of vigilantes and private investigators . Sam is a level @-@ headed but enthusiastic anthropomorphic dog who wears a blue suit and fedora . He is inquisitive , knowledgeable in obscure areas and tends to prefer the logical solution to problems , but he is not above using force . Max is described as " hyperkinetic rabbity thing " ; cunning , uninhibited and reveling in violence and mischief . His reactions to situations usually incorporate force but often with a seeming disregard for his own personal safety . Together , the Freelance Police operate out of a dilapidated office block in a dangerous neighborhood in New York City where they receive cases over the telephone from an unseen police commissioner . 
 Several supporting characters consistently appear throughout the episodes . Bosco is the proprietor of the nearby convenience store and supplies the Freelance Police with a number of items across the game . Driven paranoid by repeated shoplifting , Bosco is obsessed with conspiracies , believing that nearly every US government agency , as well as many criminal outfits , are after him . As such , his store is overwhelmed with security devices and contraptions created by Bosco himself . He regularly attempts to disguise himself as a variety of foreign nationals , but to little effect . Further down the neighborhood is Sybil <unk> , who owns a small office across from Sam and Max . Sybil is unable to keep a consistent job and regularly changes her career choices . Introduced as a psychotherapist , she is noted to have worked as a tattoo artist , software tester , tabloid journalist and professional witness . In a hole in Sam and Max 's own office resides Jimmy Two @-@ Teeth , a rat who works as a petty criminal , confidence trickster and fence . He profusely dislikes Sam and Max , who he sees as always interfering with his work . 
 Other characters include the Soda Poppers , a group of three former child stars from the 1970s . The three , each with their own trademark catch @-@ phrase , first appear as victims of hypnosis in the first episode , later acting as the judges on a Pop Idol parody in the second episode . By the fourth episode , they are elected the governors of the Dakotas and plunge the region into civil war over ownership of Mount Rushmore . Also making sporadic appearances is Hugh Bliss , an eccentric magician and leader of the Prismatology cult , a parody of Scientology . He is often seen attempting to promote his self @-@ help guides based on Prismatology . Sam finds Bliss irritating , while Max almost idolizes him . Minor characters include Agent Superball , a US Secret Service agent with a penchant for guarding doors ; Chuckles , the pit manager in a mafia @-@ run casino ; and the Computer Obsolescence Prevention Society ( COPS ) , a group of outdated computers attempting to find purpose in the technologically advanced world . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game opens with Sam and Max lounging in their office , awaiting a new case after a long hiatus . Eventually , the commissioner sends them out to investigate a group of former child stars , the Soda Poppers , who have been causing trouble in the neighborhood . The Soda Poppers are attempting to promote a self @-@ help video called Eye @-@ Bo , which ( when watched ) hypnotizes the viewer . After seeking assistance from Sybil to reverse the hypnotism on the Soda Poppers by knocking them unconscious , the Freelance Police learn that the scheme has been devised by one Brady Culture — another former child star who owes his fall from popularity to the rise of the Soda Poppers . Sam and Max and the Soda Poppers confront Culture , who hypnotizes the Soda Poppers again . However , Sam manages to fool Culture into ordering the Soda Poppers to attack himself , subduing the threat . The next case the Freelance Police gets involves liberating a studio audience held hostage by a deranged TV talk show host , Myra Stump . At the TV station , Sam and Max deduce that Myra has been hypnotized and , after using other shows in the studio to become celebrities , they convince her to let them become guests on her show . Once on the show , Sam notes a strange toy bear on the host 's desk , the source of the hypnotism . Using the studio sound system , Sam electrocutes both Myra and the bear , allowing the audience to leave . 
 The commissioner then tasks Sam and Max with infiltrating the Toy Mafia , a criminal organisation operating from a casino . The commissioner 's mole in the organisation has gone quiet ; he wants the Freelance Police to find out what happened to the mole . Sam and Max quickly discover that the Toy Mafia are responsible for the toy bear that hypnotised Myra . As they gain the Mafia 's trust , they ascertain that the mole has switched sides and is now leading the outfit . After discovering that the casino is a front for a factory producing the hypnotizing bears for mass distribution , the Freelance Police sabotage the factory and destroy the operation . Soon after , the US President starts bringing in bizarre policies ; Max is particularly concerned about the introduction of gun restrictions , while Sam believes the President has been hypnotized . At the White House , Max decapitates the President , revealing him to be a mechanical puppet designed to hypnotize the nation through TV broadcasts . The President 's bodyguard , none other than the now @-@ fallen Toy Mafia 's pit boss , activates a giant robot disguised as the statue at the Lincoln Memorial to run in an emergency election against Max . Sam discredits Lincoln 's campaign , resulting in Max winning the presidential election . Lincoln begins a destructive rampage through Washington D.C. , but is neutralized when Max fires an intercontinental ballistic missile at him . 
 The next case given to Sam and Max involves dealing with a computer crisis that is causing the world economy to collapse . They discover the problem is a virtual reality program called Reality 2 @.@ 0 , powered by the Internet ( which has gained sentience ) , which is hypnotizing people so they never want to leave the program . Sam and Max access the program themselves and introduce a computer virus that crashes Reality 2 @.@ 0 and deletes the digital embodiment of the Internet . Prior to expiring , the Internet reveals that it was following the plans of one Roy G. Biv . Sam eventually deduces that Roy G. Biv is actually Hugh Bliss , a character seemingly in the background of all their previous cases . The Freelance Police travel to Bliss ' Prismatology retreat on the Moon , where Bliss is preparing a device to hypnotize the entire planet . Bliss reveals himself as a colony of sentient bacteria that feeds off of the endorphins produced by human happiness ; by hypnotizing the planet , Bliss assures himself of a permanent supply of nourishment . Bliss activates the device , but is killed when Sam tricks him into a tank of water and boils it using the rocket engine of a lunar lander . Returning to Earth , Max takes great pleasure in reversing the hypnotism by personally knocking everyone on the planet unconscious . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Machinima = = 
 For the release of each episode , Telltale Games released three corresponding machinima shorts . These shorts are set between the episodes ; fifteen were released in total . The first short , " Frank Discussion " , released on November 30 , 2006 , has Sam and Max share a discussion regarding <unk> and their preservative properties in Bosco 's store . The short was followed on December 7 by " Trainspotting " , in which Sam ponders the meaning of life while Max questions the sensibility of being outside , away from the comforts of their office . On December 12 , Telltale released " A <unk> Search " : having misplaced the keys to their office , Sam and Max return to Brady Culture 's hideout in an attempt to retrace their steps . The first short of 2007 , " Reality <unk> " , was released on January 4 and sees Max volunteer the duo to appear on a reality television show , Four Freaks in a Terribly Cramped Office . " <unk> Philosophy Platter " was released seven days later on January 11 and features Sam and Max as host the hosts of television show <unk> <unk> Platter , discussing the philosophers Socrates and Descartes . The final short relating to television shows , " Kitchen Consequential " , was released on January 18 and follows Sam and Max hosting Fun in the Kitchen With Sam and Max where they showcase a few recipes of special effects . 
 " Interrogation " was the game 's third episode on February 1 , in which Sam and Max demonstrate how to properly interrogate a suspect . This was followed by " Coffee " on February 8 ; in the short , Sam and Max experiment with telekinesis on coffee cups . On February 15 , " The Blank Blank Blank " was released , where Sam and Max discuss with Bosco a government agency so secret , the acronym is classified . Following episodes relate to Max 's tenure as US President after " Abe Lincoln Must Die ! " ; " War Games " , released on March 1 , has Sam and Max engage in military activities from the White House 's war room under the pretense that they are mere simulations . It was followed by " The Teapot Drone Scandal " on March 15 , in which Max orders a Secret Service agent to recite " I 'm a Little Teapot " over the telephone . " Saving the Economy " was released on March 22 , showing a broadcast by Max outlining his plans to make the economy more efficient by irrationally extending daylight saving time . On April 5 , " Artichoke " was released , in which Max holds a press conference where he is unwisely questioned about his gun control policies . The penultimate short , " Bosco " , was released on April 12 , 2007 and shows Max starting a negative campaign against Bosco for the presidential election , despite the fact that he is not running . " A Fireside Chat " , the final episode , was released on April 19 , depicting a broadcast by Max to the state of Idaho in the hopes of getting them to vote for him . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Sam & Max Save the World originates from Sam & Max : Freelance Police , a graphic adventure game that was developed by LucasArts from 2002 to 2004 . Freelance Police was a sequel to the 1993 title Sam & Max Hit the Road . However , LucasArts ceased production on Freelance Police in March 2004 . In the subsequent weeks , LucasArts underwent major restructuring ; many of the developers who worked on past LucasArts adventure games were made redundant . Some of the former Freelance Police development team consequently formed Telltale Games in June 2004 to continue developing the sort of adventure games that LucasArts no longer wished to produce . Sam & Max creator Steve Purcell , who described himself as disappointed and frustrated with LucasArts ' decision , took the Sam & Max franchise to Telltale after the LucasArts license expired in mid @-@ 2005 . Telltale Games announced the new series of Sam & Max games in September 2005 . Brendan Q. Ferguson , who worked on Freelance Police as a programmer , designer and writer ; Dave Grossman , one of the project leaders on Maniac Mansion : Day of the Tentacle ; and Purcell primarily led the development of the project . 
 Unlike Freelance Police , Save the World was developed in episodic form , with episodes being released in quick succession , to allow for reduced development time between titles and quicker delivery of content to consumers . Telltale launched a website for Sam & Max in November 2005 to accompany their new series . The following month , Purcell began publishing a Sam & Max webcomic entitled " The Big Sleep " on the site ; the webcomic ran for twelve issues and concluded in April 2007 . Purcell won an Eisner Award in 2007 for the webcomic . In March 2006 , Telltale announced it had acquired US $ 825 @,@ 000 in funding from a group of private investors , to help sustain growth until its next round of equity funding . 
 Telltale released the game 's trailer for the Electronic Entertainment Expo in May 2006 , showing the new voice actors for Sam and Max : David Nowlin and William Kasten respectively . However , Andrew Chaikin voiced Max in the first episode , but was unable to continue in the role due to health reasons . While at the convention , Telltale announced that the first episode was forecast for release towards the end of 2006 , via the distribution service GameTap . Telltale announced a release date of October 17 , 2006 over GameTap in early September , with the note that each episode would be made available from Telltale themselves within fifteen days of release . Development on the first episode was completed on September 25 , and from October 10 , GameTap began hosting the Sam & Max animated series as promotional material for release . The first episode , " Culture Shock " , was released on @-@ time on October 17 . The next five episodes were released over short intervals until the series finale in April 2007 . The series debuted on Steam on June 15 , 2007 . Telltale began shipping a special collectors edition of the game in July 2007 , while the retail version of the game was published in August 2007 . January 2008 saw a significant update to the game , upgrading the game engine and ensuring compatibility with Windows Vista . 
 Three months later , Telltale announced a Wii version of the game . Telltale reported that an email campaign and Internet rumors of a port had stirred up interest within the company for producing a Wii version . They redesigned the game 's point @-@ and @-@ click interface to accommodate the Wii Remote , the primary controller for the console . The game was initially forecast for release in North America on October 7 , 2008 ; however , it was released a week later on October 14 . The European version was published later in December . 
 In February 2009 , Telltale Games renamed the game from its initial release title of Sam & Max : Season One to Sam & Max Save the World . Telltale 's public relations spokeswoman , Emily <unk> , explained that while Season One was thought to communicate the game 's episodic nature to potential consumers , the company felt that it was nondescript in relation to the game 's story . The message accompanied the announcement of an Xbox Live Arcade version of the game , which had been subject to media speculation since February 2007 . Both Windows and Wii versions of the game are to be republished using the new title . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 According to Dave Grossman , the objective for Telltale Games with Sam & Max Save the World was to create a game with a " lot of story and character in it " . Grossman explained that the Sam & Max franchise was therefore most ideally suited to the graphic adventure genre ; while action was thought to be possible with the source material , it " would be kind of wrong " . Still , designers decided to introduce action moments such as car chase scenes , wanting players to " feel like [ they ] are these crazy Freelance Police officers " and " just be involved in all this sort of mayhem " presented in the original comic strips . Like in previous Sam & Max games , Sam & Max Save the World used a point @-@ and @-@ click gameplay system , itself a variation of the control scheme used by Telltale in their preceding adventure game series , Bone ; the action sequences implemented in the game still maintained the point @-@ and @-@ click interface . 
 Very little of the design from Freelance Police was carried over into Save the World ; LucasArts still held onto the assets created for use in Freelance Police , and Telltale was wary of using similar design patterns . While Ferguson and Purcell had both been involved with the canceled LucasArts project , Grossman had not . The team decided to just start from fresh , and pursue a different treatment of the game 's subject . Purcell himself wanted to ensure that the game conveyed the " gritty " feel of the original comics — something he felt was lacking from the LucasArts renditions of the franchise . Grossman stated that " we wanted to get a little bit more of that dirt on the streets , and the paper cups and people being mean and nasty " . This " gritty " feeling also influenced artistic design . For instance , on Purcell 's suggestion , the sky was changed from blue to yellow in the street outside Sam and Max 's office , instantly making the environment feel " filthy and disgusting " . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Bay Area Sound , a company set up by Clint Bajakian , who had worked extensively on composition and sound production on LucasArts games since 1994 , produced the soundtrack . The Save the World soundtrack was composed by Jared Emerson @-@ Johnson , Bajakian 's former protégé , whose previous work included composition and sound editing for LucasArts . Emerson @-@ Johnson 's scores used live performances as opposed to synthesized music often used elsewhere in the video games industry ; a small team of five musicians , including Emerson @-@ Johnson and a recording engineer , produced the soundtrack . The score is primarily grounded in film noir jazz , inspired by the work of Henry Mancini and Charles Mingus . However , Emerson @-@ Johnson noted that as the Sam & Max universe is " open @-@ ended " , he had the chance to explore into other musical genres in some episodes , such as " a song @-@ and @-@ dance Charleston number , faux Philip Glass , an ode to Nina Rota 's music from The Godfather , and even some inspired retro 8 @-@ bit game music " . Several songs were incorporated into the soundtrack , performed by Emerson @-@ Johnson or Peter <unk> , the voice actor for Agent Superball . Purcell later commented that Emerson @-@ Johnson had seamlessly blended a " huge palette of genres and styles " , while Ferguson stated that he believed that it was Emerson @-@ Johnson 's scores that created the vital atmosphere in the games , noting that prior to the implementation of the music , playing the games was an " unrelenting horror " . The soundtrack to Sam & Max Save the World was published in July 2007 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sam & Max Save the World received positive critical reaction from reviewers . Aggregate review scores on GameRankings and Metacritic rank the fifth episode , " Reality 2 @.@ 0 " , as the critical favorite , while the third episode , " The Mole , the Mob , and the Meatball " received the lowest scores . The entire season holds a score of 88 percent on GameRankings . In addition to receiving several editor choice awards , the game has been recipient to publisher awards for the best adventure game of 2006 . As Telltale Games had managed to release a steady stream content with only small time gaps , journalists in the video game industry had considered Sam & Max Save the World to be the first successful application of episodic gaming . Previous unsuccessful implementations of the distribution model included attempts by Valve Software with the Half @-@ Life series , Ritual Entertainment with SiN Episodes and Telltale themselves with Bone . 
 The debut episode , " Culture Shock " , was recipient to a mostly optimistic response from critics . The episode was thought to adequately follow 1993 's Sam & Max Hit the Road , with the introduction of the new 3D engine and gameplay being positively received . Criticisms of " Culture Shock " focused on the story ; while the humor in the writing was praised , the plot was seen as a " thin excuse for the jokes " and the episode 's primary antagonist was described by IGN 's Steve Butts as " a bit of a letdown " . The second episode , " Situation : Comedy " , was thought to produce a better antagonist than " Culture Shock " , with the puzzles linking in well to the story . However , critics described the puzzles as too easy , and expressed disappointment at the reuse of lines from the first episode . The next episode , " The Mole , the Mob , and the Meatball " , was the lowest rated episode amongst reviewers . Although the episode received compliments for its dialogue and humor , it was criticised for its easy puzzles and short length . 
 The fourth episode , " Abe Lincoln Must Die ! " , was held by critics to be one of the series ' best episodes , The episode 's story of political satire was subject to praise , whilst the increased length was also appreciated . Puzzles were felt to be more difficult and satisfying to solve . Detractors of the episode , however , felt that the episode suffered from the need to constantly move between locations and from the reuse of old characters and locations . " Reality 2 @.@ 0 " , the fifth episode , was the critical favorite of the series . The game 's puzzles were cited as stronger than in " Abe Lincoln Must Die ! " , with a fitting tribute to text adventure games towards the end . However , the script was thought to be inferior to the preceding episode . The season finale " Bright Side of the Moon " received a more reserved response than the two previous episodes , with criticisms directed at the length of the game and the depth of character interaction . Nevertheless , reviewers felt that the episode had reasonable puzzle design and that it was a respectable end to the series . 
 Critics gave positive reviews towards the overall gameplay mechanics , although they often presented some reservations . Several reviews praised the simplicity of the game interface . Andre Thomas of <unk> described the game 's learning curve as " incredibly simple " and the gameplay mechanics as logical extension of those from the adventure games of the 1990s , while <unk> reviewer Ron Burke praised Telltale 's " intuitive " point @-@ and @-@ click system . Mark Smith of Game Chronicles , however , stated that the streamlined mechanics eliminated " a lot of the exploration and discovery we normally associate with these types of games " . Some reviews directed criticism towards puzzle design ; according to Smith , the game is " certainly accessible to kids and younger teens " , but the adult audience " will find these games way too easy " . Reviewing for Adventure Gamers , Evan Dickens felt that the puzzles took " a bit of thought and consideration , but never to a point of consternation " , believing that the low difficulty was intended by Telltale to allow players to " proceed through the story with minimum frustration " . Hyper 's Tim Henderson commends the game for being " highly accessible [ and ] almost as funny as the original " . However , he criticises it for its episodic content being a " tease " . 
 In relation to the story and writing , critics felt that the overall plot was ineffectual . Al <unk> of <unk> felt the plot was lacking , while Burke considered the episodic nature to be detrimental to maintaining plot cohesion between the episodes , a point with which Dickens agreed . Despite this , several reviewers thought that the individual episode stories and the presentation and development of the characters were good . Reviewers considered the writing for each episode as one of the best features of the game ; they also praised the level of humor in the game , although Dickens felt that it was not until the fourth episode that the writing properly established itself . In addition , they directed some skepticism towards the reuse of scenes and characters , with critical opinion divided on the degree of success in this regard . A point of contention rose between British and American reviewers over the story and setting , exemplified in PC Gamer ; whilst positive towards the first and fourth episodes , the British edition of the magazine felt this repetition was a severe failing of Save the World , and that the writing did not work well . In contrast , the American edition rated each episode highly , stating that the quality of the series was " excellent " . 
 Critics commended Sam & Max Save the World 's graphics and art direction ; Dickens commented that " the cartoonish , absurdist nature of Steve Purcell 's characters is captured perfectly " within an " enthusiastically colorful world that is at its best the stranger it gets " , while GameZone reviewer Anise Hollingshead praised Telltale for successfully upgrading the characters ' graphics " without losing any of their cartoon appeal " . Kristen Reed , writing for Eurogamer , felt that the graphics reflected a " great degree of care and attention to everything from the locations to the standard of character modelling and animation " . They also praised the game for its sound , voice acting and music . In a review for The Entertainment Depot , Tim McGowan complimented Emerson @-@ Johnson 's soundtrack as " being quite excellent and listenable on its own " , and IGN 's Alex Van <unk> described it as a " breath of fresh air " . However , PC Gamer UK 's Alec Meer felt that the opening theme tune was " so busy trying to hint at [ the theme for Sam & Max Hit the Road ] that it forgets to have a memorable melody of its own " . Nowlin and Kasten 's voicework also received a positive response . 
 The Wii version of the game garnered a more reserved view from critics than the PC version ; GameRankings and Metacritic gave aggregate review scores of 75 percent and 74 percent , respectively . For better or worse , reviewers felt that the game had not changed much from the PC version in terms of gameplay , story or overall content . While Sam & Max was thought to be a " perfect , naturally cartoony fit for the Wii " , the critics noted a number of technical issues with the release . Several critics cited minor issues with using the imprecise Wii Remote for puzzles requiring accuracy , while observations were made that lines of dialogue could be cut short and that the frame rate could slow significantly , especially in action sequences . 
 = Cold Feet ( series 1 ) = 
 The first series of the British comedy @-@ drama television series Cold Feet was first broadcast on the ITV network from 15 November to 20 December 1998 . The six episodes were written by series creator Mike Bullen , produced by Christine Langan , and directed by Declan Lowney , Mark Mylod and Nigel Cole . It follows the award @-@ winning pilot episode , broadcast in 1997 . The storylines focus on three couples : Adam Williams and Rachel Bradley , Pete and Jenny Gifford , and David and Karen Marsden . They are played by James Nesbitt , Helen Baxendale , John Thomson , Fay Ripley , Robert Bathurst and Hermione Norris respectively . 
 The storylines follow the three couples as they try to stay faithful to each other . They are held back by issues such as impotence , infidelity , and unplanned pregnancy . Their lives are further complicated by their jobs , money troubles , and moving in together . Bullen embellished the scripts with events from his own personal life . The directors and producers made additional contributions , with the intent to keep the fiction in the programme as true to life as possible . The series was filmed in Greater Manchester in the first half of 1998 , using Granada Television 's studios , and exterior locations . 
 Critical reaction to the first episodes was negative , with many reviewers not liking the characters and finding the comedy drama format unusual . As the series progressed , critics ' opinions became more positive ; the production values rated highly and the fantasy scenes , which became a hallmark of Cold Feet , were well received . An average of eight million viewers watched the series each week . The following year it won awards from the Royal Television Society , the Broadcasting Press Guild and the British Comedy Awards . It was also nominated for the Rose d 'Or and a Banff Rockie Award . All six episodes have been released on VHS , DVD and internet media formats . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Cold Feet 's pilot episode was intended by Andy Harries , the executive producer and Granada Television 's controller of comedy , to lead to a series commission from the ITV network . Poor ratings on its night of broadcast in March 1997 stalled a commission ; Harries told writer and creator Mike Bullen and producer Christine Langan to " forget it " . ITV 's limited portfolio of comedy meant that although it was a ratings failure , the pilot was selected by default to represent the network at the Montreux Television Festival that year . The pilot won the Silver Rose for Humour and the Rose d 'Or . ITV still did not commission a series , and in the meantime Granada received offers from the BBC and Channel 4 for a six @-@ part series . In August 1997 , David Liddiment , who had chaired the panel of judges at Montreux , became ITV 's director of programming and pledged to rebrand the network 's comedy output . This included six new episodes of Cold Feet , which were announced that August . Production began in January 1998 . Each episode was budgeted at £ 500 @,@ 000 , a small amount for a 50 @-@ minute drama . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 All six main cast members from the pilot returned for the series ; James Nesbitt and Helen Baxendale play Adam Williams and Rachel Bradley , a couple in a fledgling relationship ; John Thomson and Fay Ripley play Pete and Jenny Gifford , a married couple whose first child is born in the first episode ; Robert Bathurst and Hermione Norris play David and Karen Marsden , an upper @-@ middle @-@ class couple who are considering having a second child . Each had mixed feelings about whether there would be a series commission after the poor reception of the pilot ; Ripley did not stop thinking about it , in contrast to Bathurst , who viewed it as just another failed pilot he had done . 
 Following the resolution of Karen and David 's storyline in the pilot , in which David concedes that the couple need to hire a nanny , Jacey Salles was cast as Ramona Ramirez . Salles was a bit @-@ part actress in BBC sitcoms and had previously appeared in the 1998 Granada film The Misadventures of Margaret , which was co @-@ produced by Harries . In her Cold Feet audition she was required to have a loud argument with her boyfriend over the telephone . She embellished this with " a bit of comic <unk> of the English language " and won the part . Initially contracted for only two episodes , Salles assumed the Marsdens would employ a new nanny every few episodes , though she made two more appearances in the first series and eventually appeared in every series . Lennie James made two guest appearances as Kris Bumstead , though his second appearance in Episode 6 was mostly in the form of flashbacks . James was keen to find out the resolution to the " who 's the father ? " cliffhanger , reportedly repeatedly asking the producers whether the baby was Kris 's . Other actors to make appearances were Denis Lawson as Alexander Welch and Sam Kelly as Algernon Gifford . John Thomson was pleased to work with Kelly , as he was a big fan of ' Allo ' Allo ! , a sitcom in which Kelly appeared . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Storylines for a potential series had been drafted by writer Mike Bullen during production of the pilot . When production on the series began , producer Christine Langan worked with him to create detailed plots for all six episodes , also acting as a script editor to redraft Bullen 's work . Many of the plots were drawn from his own life ; Pete and Jenny bringing up their new baby paralleled Bullen and his wife , whose first child was born in late 1997 . The scenes where Pete and Jenny attend the antenatal classes were written from Bullen 's memory , when he and his wife were " given <unk> , forceps and a suction cup to play with " . The conclusion of the fourth episode , in which Pete 's father dies on the way to his grandson 's christening , was suggested by Harries , whose own experience of the death of his father taught him that people rarely have the opportunity to say goodbye to loved ones in real life . Not all storylines were based on real life : For Karen and David 's marriage guidance scenes in Episode 5 , Bullen consulted the relationship support charity <unk> . Actors and directors also had input into the scripts ; Bullen 's original script for the marriage therapy scenes ended with David shouting and apparently using a fire extinguisher as an offensive weapon . Bathurst was not convinced that was something that his character would do , as David is " too much of a coward to do anything overtly " and would not leave himself so " exposed " : 
 " As David grapples with the fire extinguisher to remove the hose from the barrel , we hear running footsteps approaching . The door is suddenly flung open and two male colleagues of the counsellor 's burst open into the room . In a second they take a look at the scene , and we see what they see — the counsellor looking lost , Karen looking shocked , and most significantly , David standing over the counsellor , brandishing a fire extinguisher in an apparently threatening manner . Presuming their colleague to be in danger , the two men hurl themselves at David , knocking him to the ground . He squeals as he goes down , and complains loudly as he 's pinned to the floor . " 
 — Episode 5 's marriage guidance scene as originally scripted . Robert Bathurst believed that the scene left his cowardly character " exposed " , so Mike Bullen rewrote it . 
 When storylining the six episodes , Bullen and Langan planned to split up Adam and Rachel at the series ' climax , as " If [ they ] had just left them all living happily in their homes in Didsbury , there would be a less compelling reason to revisit them [ in the second series ] " . Harries opposed the idea , believing that the audience would want a happy ending for the characters . However , he allowed the writer and producer to proceed with their idea . Langan and Episode 6 director Nigel Cole wanted Adam to leave after finding out about Rachel 's pregnancy . She would have followed him and proven her love to him by singing to him over the PA system of the train — similar to the pilot 's conclusion . Bullen thought that this idea was " atrocious " , so spent the Easter weekend drafting an end to the series . The genesis of Rachel becoming pregnant , possibly by Kris , came during the filming of the second episode . Langan suggested to Bullen that they return to Rachel 's marriage later in the series , using an adage she had learned from working on a soap opera that if the " seeds " of a storyline are sown early on it can pay off later . The Brief Encounter homage was conceived close to filming . Bullen had not seen the film so had to rent it on video before writing the scene . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The directors had twelve days to film two episodes each , equating to approximately five minutes of screen @-@ time per day . Langan asked Father Ted director Declan Lowney to helm the first two episodes after his successful direction of the pilot . Lowney declined in order to shoot a film in Ireland with Terence Stamp ; production on it was scheduled to begin in October 1997 and would have overrun into Cold Feet 's production calendar . Funding for Lowney 's film fell through and he took the two episodes of Cold Feet after Langan offered them to him a second time . The other two directors were Mark Mylod and Nigel Cole . 
 Sets were constructed at Granada 's Blue Shed studios in Salford for interior filming , which ran over 14 weeks from March to May . Exterior filming and location shooting was done in and around the city from February . The climax to the first episode — where Rachel drives her Mini across a golf course to pick up Pete — was filmed at Withington Golf Club in West Didsbury . A long lens was used to film the Mini approaching Thomson and Bathurst , making it appear closer to them than it was and avoiding having to drive it on the green . Filming on Episode 1 came close to overrunning , so Lowney filmed most of Jenny 's birth scene in one uninterrupted take , encouraging the actors to ad @-@ lib . Ripley wore a prosthetic abdomen to simulate the appearance of pregnancy throughout the episode and had a pubic wig applied for the birth scene . The uncredited baby who played Baby Adam in that scene was a two @-@ week @-@ old child who had been born two weeks premature , giving it the appearance of a new @-@ born baby . The conclusion of the first episode was originally scripted to feature Pete and Adam playing crazy golf indoors . Lowney did not like the scene , so made thirty minutes available at the very end of production and directed Nesbitt and Thomson to just " talk " . The scene was used by Bullen and Langan as the basis for an attraction between Adam and Jenny , implied in the sixth episode and developed in the second series . 
 The scenes of Adam and Rachel having sex in a shop window in the third episode , inspired by one of Bullen 's ex @-@ girlfriends , was filmed in an empty shop unit near Piccadilly station . The unit was dressed to look like a charity shop , with various items and the bed added . Mylod and the stunt co @-@ ordinator storyboarded the sequence where the car comes through the shop window before setting it up on location . Nesbitt and Baxendale were switched with stunt doubles and the car was propelled up a ramp through the window . Explosive charges were placed on the glass to achieve a shatter effect . As only one take could be done , Mylod trailed five cameras on the window . Filming ran from 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. the following day . The location was near several clubs and many passers @-@ by inquired what was being filmed . To avoid giving away the plot they were told that Baxendale was filming a bed advertisement , capitalising on her exposure from appearing in Friends . Baxendale selected the lingerie Rachel wears in that episode herself , buying £ 2 @,@ 000 worth from the Janet Reger outlet in Knightsbridge , London . 
 Another stunt scene was filmed for Episode 6 ; the charity ball scene was filmed over two days at a Masonic Lodge and concluded with a fight between Jenny and Natalie ( played by Lorelei King ) . The shots of Jenny spraying Natalie with a fire extinguisher were limited to two takes because it took so long to re @-@ apply King 's make up . The table that Ripley and King 's stunt doubles fall through had its legs weakened , and the glasses on the table were replaced with sugar glass . The Brief Encounter fantasy was filmed at a steam railway near Rochdale . Nigel Cole used the scene as an opportunity to make his mark as a television director . Most of the scene was filmed by Cole and the main crew . Establishing shots were filmed by Langan and the second unit , due to time constraints . The lighting and focus of the fantasy station was intended to be a direct contrast to the harsh modernity of Piccadilly , which appeared in the " real life " scenes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and ratings = = = 
 ITV trailed Cold Feet between 3 and 12 November . The trailer featured clips from the pilot episode , including the scene where Adam sings with a rose clenched between his buttocks . Six people complained to the Independent Television Commission ( ITC ) , the commercial television regulator , about the scene being inappropriate . Their complaints were not upheld ; the ITC ruled that the trailer did not breach the programming code , as " the humour of the piece was apparent from the outset " . A 96 Sheet billboard advertising campaign also preceded broadcast , featuring the strapline " A comedy about life & all that " . The broadcast was sponsored by Cockburn 's Port . 
 The series was broadcast on ITV from 15 November to 20 December 1998 . Harries wanted the series to air in the 9 p.m. timeslot but ITV Network Centre wanted it on at 10 p.m. ( the same time the pilot had been scheduled ) , because the 9 p.m. timeslot was traditionally what was referred to as " the ironing slot " — programmes that can be watched without viewers having to concentrate . David Liddiment compromised with Harries and scheduled Cold Feet for a 9 @.@ 30 p.m. start . The BBC responded by scheduling Andrew Davies ' adaptation of Vanity Fair at the same time . The first five episodes aired from 9 @.@ 30 p.m. but Episode 6 began at 10 p.m. The main target audience was the " upmarket " ABC1 's . 
 Episode 1 averaged 7 @.@ 47 million viewers over its hour , peaking at 9 @.@ 2 million with a low point of 6 @.@ 9 million . The episode ranked as the thirty @-@ fourth most @-@ watched programme of the week and the sixth most @-@ watched drama ( excluding soap @-@ operas ) . The second episode dropped seven places and 1 @.@ 9 % on the previous week with 7 @.@ 33 million viewers . It recovered to 7 @.@ 46 million the following week but still managed only fortieth place in the Top 70 most @-@ watched programmes . The fourth week held steady at 7 @.@ 44 million viewers and fortieth position again . It had its best figures with Episode 5 , which was seen by 7 @.@ 91 million , making thirty @-@ second in the Top 70 . The final episode of the series suffered from its schedule change , dropping to fifty @-@ ninth and 6 @.@ 77 million viewers . Over the six weeks , Cold Feet averaged a 34 % audience share , which was six points below ITV 's Sunday <unk> average . 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 The series was welcomed as " the British Thirtysomething " and there was additional publicity generated off the back of Helen Baxendale 's appearances in Friends . The first two episodes did not impress critics ; The Independent 's Nicholas Barber called Episode 1 " the most depressing programme [ he 'd ] ever seen " . Commenting on the ending , he observed that " in <unk> , the police 's main duty is to taxi expectant fathers to hospital " . Barber concluded his review with positive comments about the rest of the series , singling out Ripley as being " reminiscent of Elaine in Seinfeld " . A.A. Gill also criticised that episode 's conclusion , comparing it to a Norman Wisdom comedy . On The Late Review , Germaine Greer described Nesbitt 's acting as " especially awful " and suggested that the series had been developed by a marketing department . 
 Critical reaction improved with the third episode ; writing in New Statesman , Andrew Billen praised Episode 3 as being " intricately constructed as a farce " , and commented positively on Ripley 's and Nesbitt 's acting . Billen compared the production and fantasy scenes with Thirtysomething and Ally McBeal . In the Evening Standard , following the conclusion of Vanity Fair and prior to the broadcast of Episode 6 , Billen wrote , " The style is light , the narrative frequently inconsequential . The men go to the pub and lust after the barmaid . The women meet in the wine bar and make fun of the men for lusting after the barmaid . The great settings are DIY stores , antenatal classes and sitting rooms . Why should anyone be interested ? If domestic trivia has now been outlawed by the BBC as a subject for sitcoms and if even soap operas rely on murders and armed sieges to keep up their figures , why should the travails of a set of ex @-@ <unk> have become a minor cult ? " He analysed the series in relation to its early @-@ middle @-@ aged viewers being " a forgotten people " , comparing the storylines to real @-@ life issues experienced by friends . He concluded : 
 This is not the world of Ally McBeal . It is not about finding love remedially . This is a world in which too many of us are asking what use is love if you find it too late . Yet somehow , probably because the moral judgments are lightly made , superannuated <unk> such as myself can look on and see an advertisement for , rather than a warning against , that famously honourable estate — just as we do when we gaze at the more benign marriages of our friends . In Vanity Fair , Thackeray deliberately wrote a novel without a hero . We respond to Cold Feet because it , on the contrary , does not despise its characters . 
 Of Episode 6 , The Mirror 's Charlie Catchpole wrote " Although I wouldn 't want to bump into any of these people in a wine bar , I found I really cared about their unravelling relationships , their sad sexual misadventures , their petty jealousies " and concluded by calling the series " <unk> written , stylishly produced , superbly performed . " In The Times , Paul Hoggart summarised all six episodes as " [ walking ] a tightrope between satire and sentimentality , frequently falling off on the sugary side " , but wrote positively of the writing , directing , acting , and editing . He approved of the deliberately unhappy ending , looking forward to seeing how Rachel 's departure would be resolved in the second series . Andy Harries attributed the mixed critical reaction to the unusual timeslot the series was given . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 It won in the Situation Comedy and Comedy Drama category at the Royal Television Society ( RTS ) Awards , the Best Entertainment award at the Broadcasting Press Guild Awards , and the award for Best TV Comedy Drama at the 1999 British Comedy Awards . Edward Mansell received an RTS nomination for Best Tape and Film Editing in Entertainment and Situation Comedy . The third episode was nominated for the Golden Rose of Montreux , though did not win . Ian Johnson , the publicist for the series , believed that the European judges did not understand the farcical humour in the episode , noting that the British delegates to the festival were " helpless with laughter " . The same episode was nominated for the 1999 Banff Rockie Award for Best Comedy — the only non @-@ American series to receive a nomination in that category . It lost to the Ally McBeal episode " Theme of Life " . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The first two episodes were released on a single VHS tape on 11 October 1999 . The other four episodes were scheduled for release over two more videos , to be released on 1 November and 29 November but were cancelled ; the two @-@ tape release of the full series came on 15 November . It was released on 2 @-@ disc region 2 DVD on 25 September 2000 . A re @-@ release , with new packaging and menus , came on 26 March 2006 . The DVD was released in Australia on 4 February 2002 and in the United States on 25 January 2005 . The pilot and first series were made available as free streaming media on ITV 's revamped itv.com website from July 2007 to August 2009 . Additionally , it was one of the first batch of series from ITV 's archives to be made available for purchase on ITV 's iTunes Store shop , introduced in April 2008 . 
 = The Evil Dead = 
 The Evil Dead is a 1981 American black comedy horror film written and directed by Sam Raimi and executive produced by Raimi and Bruce Campbell , who also stars alongside Ellen Sandweiss and Betsy Baker . The film focuses on five college students vacationing in an isolated cabin in a remote wooded area . After they find an audiotape that releases a legion of demons and spirits , members of the group suffer from demonic possession , leading to increasingly gory mayhem . Raimi and the cast produced the short film Within the Woods as a " prototype " to build the interest of potential investors , which secured Raimi US $ 90 @,@ 000 to produce The Evil Dead . The film was shot on location in a remote cabin located in Newport , Tennessee , in a difficult filming process that proved extremely uncomfortable for the majority of the cast and crew . 
 The low @-@ budget horror film attracted the interest of producer Irvin Shapiro , who helped screen the film at the 1982 Cannes Film Festival . Horror author Stephen King gave a rave review of the film , which helped convince New Line Cinema to serve as its distributor . Though a meager commercial success in the United States , the film made its budget back through worldwide distribution , and grossed $ 2 @.@ 4 million during its theatrical run . Both early and later critical reception were universally positive and in the years since its release , The Evil Dead has developed a reputation as one of the largest cult films and has been cited among the greatest horror films of all time . The Evil Dead launched the careers of Campbell and Raimi , who would collaborate on several films together throughout the years , including Raimi 's Spider @-@ Man trilogy . 
 The film has spawned a media franchise , beginning with two sequels written and directed by Raimi , Evil Dead II ( 1987 ) and Army of Darkness ( 1992 ) , as well as video games , comic books , and a TV series . The film 's protagonist Ash Williams ( Campbell ) is regarded as a cult icon . The fourth film , serving as a reboot , a remake , and a sequel , was titled Evil Dead and was released in 2013 . Raimi co @-@ produced the film alongside Campbell and the franchise producer , Robert Tapert . As with the other films , the followup TV series Ash vs. Evil Dead was created and produced by Sam and Ivan Raimi , with Campbell also executive producing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Five Michigan State University students – Ash Williams ( Bruce Campbell ) , his girlfriend Linda ( Betsy Baker ) , Ash 's sister Cheryl ( Ellen Sandweiss ) , their friend Scotty , and his girlfriend Shelly – venture into the Tennessee hills to vacation in an isolated cabin for their spring break . They soon run into trouble , first narrowly avoiding another motorist , then having a sudden scare as the bridge near the cabin begins to collapse as they cross . That night , while Cheryl is making a drawing of a clock , her hand becomes violently possessed by a mysterious entity , causing her to draw a picture that looks like a book with a deformed , evil face . She fails to mention the incident to the others , dismissing it as her imagination . 
 When the trapdoor to the cellar mysteriously flies open during dinner , Ash and Scotty go down to investigate and find the <unk> <unk> , a Sumerian version of the Egyptian Book of the Dead , along with a tape recording of incantations in which , when played by Ash then Scotty , unleashes demons and evil spirits . Cheryl becomes hysterical when a tree crashes through the window , and she runs to her room . Later , she hears strange voices and goes outside to investigate . She is attacked and raped by demonically possessed trees , but manages to escape . The others do not believe her story , but Ash agrees to drive her to town where she can find a place to stay for the night . However , they find that the only bridge connecting the cabin to the rest of the world has been destroyed . Back at the cabin , Ash listens to more of the tape and while the girls play cards , Cheryl then becomes demonically possessed , telling them that the demons will kill them . She then stabs Linda in the ankle with a pencil , and Scotty locks her in the cellar . 
 Shelly is the next to become possessed ; she attacks Scotty , who eventually dismembers her with an felling axe . They bury her , and a shaken Scotty leaves to find an alternate trail through the woods . Checking on Linda , Ash discovers that she too became possessed . Scotty returns , suffering from injuries inflicted by the possessed trees . Before losing consciousness , he tells Ash that a trail does exist but is impossible because of the trees . Linda and Cheryl unsuccessfully attempt to deceive Ash into believing they are no longer possessed , only to attack him again . He locks Linda outside the cabin and tends to Scotty 's injuries , but she sneaks in through the back door and attacks Ash with a dagger , which he uses to impale her . Taking her body to the woodshed , Ash tries to force himself to dismember her with a chainsaw , but finds himself unable to do it and buries her instead . She rises from the grave and attacks him , forcing him to decapitate her with a shovel . Returning to the cabin , Ash finds that Cheryl has escaped from the cellar . Arming himself with a shotgun , he finds her hiding outside and shoots her in the shoulder . He then descends into the cellar to search for more shotgun shells after barricading the doors . While there , he hears voices and sees blood seeping from numerous crevices and openings in the walls . 
 A demonically possessed Scotty tries to kill Ash as Cheryl breaks through the door . During their fight , Ash sees that the Book of the Dead has fallen near the fireplace and is starting to burn , as are Cheryl and Scotty . As Cheryl raises a fireplace poker to impale him , Ash snatches the book and throws it into the fire . With the book burned , Cheryl and Scotty disintegrate and their blood is soaked all over Ash . After watching in horror , Ash hears an ominous voice saying " Join us " and heads outside while the sun rises . Walking outside to his car , an unseen evil speeds through the forest and the cabin and descends upon him . He turns around and screams in terror before the film cuts abruptly to the end credits . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and writing = = = 
 Raimi and Campbell grew up together , and have been friends from a young age . The duo directed several low @-@ budget Super 8 mm film projects together . Several were comedies , including Clockwork and It 's Murder ! . Shooting a suspense scene in It 's Murder ! inspired Raimi to approach a career in the horror genre , and after researching horror cinema at drive @-@ in theaters , Raimi was set on directing a horror film . The idea was to shoot a short film first , which would attract the interest of producers , and then use the money gained from that to shoot a full @-@ length project . The short film that Raimi created was called Within the Woods . It was produced for $ 1 @,@ 600 , but for The Evil Dead , Raimi needed over $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 To generate funds for the film , Raimi approached Phil Gillis , a lawyer to one of his friends . Raimi showed him Within the Woods , and although Gillis was not impressed by the short film , he offered Raimi legal advice on how to produce The Evil Dead . With his advice in mind , Raimi asked a variety of people for donations , and even eventually " begged " some . Campbell had to ask several of his own family members , and Raimi asked every individual he thought could be interested . He eventually raised enough money to produce a full @-@ length film , though not the full amount he originally wanted . 
 With enough money to produce the film , Raimi and Campbell set out to make what was then titled Book of the Dead , a name inspired by Raimi 's interest in the writer H. P. Lovecraft . The film was supposed to be a remake of Within the Woods , with higher production values and a full @-@ length running time . Raimi turned 20 just before shooting began , and he considered the project his " rite of passage " . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production and casting = = = 
 Raimi asked for help and assistance from several of his friends and past collaborators to make The Evil Dead . Campbell was cast as Ash Williams , the main character . To acquire more actors for the project , Raimi put an ad in The Detroit News . Betsy Baker was one of the actresses who responded , and Ellen Sandweiss , who appeared in Within the Woods , was also cast . The crew consisted almost entirely of Raimi and Campbell 's friends and family . The make @-@ up adviser for Within the Woods , Tom Sullivan , was brought on to compose the effects after expressing a positive reaction to working with Raimi . 
 Without any formal assistance from location scouts , the cast had to find filming locations on their own . The crew initially attempted to shoot the film in Raimi 's hometown of Royal Oak , Michigan , but instead chose Morristown , Tennessee , as Tennessee was the only state that expressed enthusiasm for the project . The crew quickly found a remote cabin located several miles away from any other buildings . During pre @-@ production , the 13 crew members had to stay at the cabin , leading to several people sleeping in the same room . The living conditions were notoriously difficult , with several arguments breaking out between crew members . 
 Steve Frankel was the only carpenter on set , which made him the art direction 's sole contributor . For exterior shots , Frankel had to produce several elaborate props with a circular saw . Otherwise , the cabin mostly remained the way it was found during production . The cabin had no plumbing , but phone lines were connected to it . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Because of the crew 's inexperience , filming was a " comedy of errors " . The first day of filming led to the crew getting lost in the woods during a scene shot on a bridge . Several crew members became injured during the shoot , and because of the cabin 's remoteness , securing medical assistance was difficult . One notably gruesome moment on set involved ripping off Baker 's eyelashes during removal of her face @-@ mask . Because of the low budget , contact lenses as thick as glass had to be applied to the actors to achieve the " demonic eyes " effect . The lenses took ten minutes to apply , and could only be left on for about fifteen minutes because eyes could not " breathe " with them applied . Campbell later commented that to get the effect of wearing these lenses , they had to put " Tupperware " over their eyes . 
 Raimi developed a sense of mise en scène , coming up with ideas for scenes at a fast rate . He had drawn several crude illustrations to help him break down the flow of scenes . The crew was surprised when Raimi began using dutch angles during shots to build atmosphere during scenes . To accommodate Raimi 's style of direction , several elaborate , low @-@ budget rigs had to be built , since the crew could not afford a camera dolly . One involved the " vas @-@ o @-@ cam " , which relied on a mounted camera that was slid down long wood platforms to create a more fluid sense of motion . 
 A camera trick used to emulate a Steadicam inexpensively was the " shaky cam " , which involved mounting the camera to a piece of wood and having two camera operators sprint around the swamp . During scenes involving the unseen force in the woods watching the characters , Raimi had to run through the woods with the makeshift rig , jumping over logs and stones . This often proved difficult due to mist in the swamp . The film 's final scene was shot with the camera mounted to a bike , while it was quickly driven through the cabin to create a seamless long take . 
 Raimi had been a big fan of the The Three Stooges franchise during his youth , and it inspired him to use " fake <unk> " during production . In any scene that required a background shot of a character , he would use another actor as a substitute to save time if the original actor was preoccupied . During a close @-@ up involving Richard <unk> 's hand opening a curtain , Raimi used his own hand in the scene since it was more convenient . His brother Ted Raimi was used as a substitute in many scenes when the original actor was either busy or preoccupied . 
 Raimi famously enjoyed " torturing " his actors . Raimi believed that to capture pain and anger in his actors , he had to abuse them a little at times , saying , " if everyone was in extreme pain and misery , that would translate into a horror . " Producer Robert Tapert agreed with Raimi , commenting that he " enjoyed when an actor bleeds . " While shooting a scene with Campbell running down a hill , Campbell tripped and injured his leg . Raimi enjoyed poking Campbell 's injury with a stick he found in the woods . Because of the copious amounts of blood in the film , the crew produced gallons of fake blood with karo syrup . It took Campbell hours to remove the sticky substance from himself . Several actors had inadvertently been stabbed or thrown into objects during production . 
 On the last few days on set , the conditions had become so poor that the crew began burning furniture to stay warm . Since only exterior shots needed to be filmed at that point , they burned nearly every piece of furniture left . Several actors went days without showering , and because of the freezing conditions , several caught colds and other illnesses . Campbell later described the filming process as nearly " twelve weeks of mirthless exercise in agony " , though he allowed that he did manage to have fun while on set . On January 23 , 1980 , filming was finished and almost every crew member left the set to return home , with Campbell staying with Raimi . While looking over the footage that had been shot , Raimi discovered that a few pick @-@ ups were required to fill in missing shots . Four days of re @-@ shoots were then done to complete the film . The final moment involved Campbell having " monster @-@ guts " splattered on him in the basement . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 After the extensive filming process , Raimi had a " mountain of footage " that he had to put together . He chose a Detroit editing association , where he met Edna Paul , to cut the film . Paul 's assistant was Joel Coen of the Coen brothers , who helped with the film 's editing . Paul edited a majority of the film , although Coen notably edited the shed sequence . Coen had been inspired by Raimi 's Within the Woods and liked the idea of producing a prototype film to help build the interest of investors . Joel used the concept to help make Blood Simple with his brother Ethan , and he and Raimi became friends following the editing process . 
 The film 's first cut ran at around 117 minutes , which Campbell called an impressive achievement in light of the 65 @-@ minute length of the screenplay . It was then edited down to a more marketable 85 minutes . Raimi was inspired by the fact that Brian De Palma was editing his own film Blow Out with John Travolta at the same sound facility . One of the most intricate moments during editing was the stop @-@ motion sequence where the corpses " melted " , which took hours to cut properly . The film had unique sounds that required extensive recording from the crew . Several sounds were not recorded properly during shooting , which meant the effects had to be redone in the editing rooms . Dead chickens were stabbed to replicate the sounds of mutilated flesh , and Campbell had to scream into a microphone for several hours . 
 Much like Within the Woods , The Evil Dead needed to be blown up to 35mm , then the industry standard , to be played at movie theaters . The relatively large budget made this a much simpler process with The Evil Dead than it had been with the short film . 
 = = Promotion and distribution rights = = 
 With the film completed , Raimi and the crew decided to celebrate with a " big premiere " . They chose to screen the film at Detroit 's Redford Theatre , which Campbell had often visited as a child . Raimi opted to have the most theatrical premiere possible , using custom tickets and wind tracks set in the theater , and ordering ambulances outside the theater to build atmosphere . The premiere setup was inspired by horror director William Castle , who would often attempt to scare his audiences by using gimmicks . Local turnout for the premiere exceeded the cast 's expectations , with a thousand patrons showing up . The audiences responded enthusiastically to the premiere , which led to Raimi 's idea of " touring " the film to build hype . 
 Raimi showed the film to anyone willing to watch it , booking meetings with distribution agents and anyone with experience in the film industry . Eventually Raimi came across Irvin Shapiro , the man who was responsible for the distribution of George A. Romero 's Night of the Living Dead and other famous horror films . Upon first viewing the film , he joked that while it " wasn 't Gone with the Wind " , it had commercial potential , and he expressed an interest in distributing it . It was his idea not to use the then @-@ title Book of the Dead , because it made the film sound boring . Raimi brainstormed several ideas , eventually going with The Evil Dead , deemed the " least worst " title . Shapiro also advised distributing the film worldwide to garner a larger income , though it required a further financial investment by Raimi , who managed to scrape together what little money he had . 
 Shapiro was a founder of the Cannes Film Festival , and allowed Raimi to screen the film at the 1982 festival out of competition . Stephen King was present at its screening and gave the film a rave review . USA Today released an article about King 's favorite horror films ; the author cited The Evil Dead as his fifth favorite film of the genre . The film severely affected King , who commented that while watching the film at Cannes , he was " registering things [ he ] had never seen in a movie before " . He became one of the film 's largest supporters during the early efforts to find a distributor , eventually describing it as the " most ferociously original film of the year " , a quote used in the film 's promotional pieces . King 's comments attracted the interest of critics , who otherwise would likely have dismissed the low @-@ budget thriller . 
 The film 's press attracted the attention of British film distribution agent Stephen Woolley . Though he considered the film a big risk , Woolley decided to take on the job of releasing the film in the United Kingdom . The film was promoted in an unconventional manner for a film of its budget , receiving marketing on par with that of larger budget films . Dozens of promotional pieces , including film posters and trailers , were showcased in the UK , heavy promotion rarely expended on such a low @-@ budget film . Woolley was impressed by Raimi , whom he called " charming " , and was an admirer of the film , which led to his taking more risks with the film 's promotion than he normally would have . 
 Fangoria started covering the film in late 1982 , writing several articles about the film 's long production history . Early critical reception at the time was very positive , and along with Fangoria , King , and Shapiro 's approval , the film generated an impressive amount of interest before its commercial premiere . New Line Cinema , one of the distributors interested in the film , negotiated an agreement to distribute it domestically . The film had several " sneak previews " before its commercial release , including screenings in New York and Detroit . Audience reception at both screenings was widely enthusiastic , and interest was built for the film to such an extent that wider distribution was planned . New Line Cinema wrote Raimi a check large enough to pay off all the investors , and decided to release the film in a unique manner : simultaneously into both cinemas and onto VHS , with substantial domestic promotion . 
 = = Commercial release = = 
 Because of its large promotional campaign , the film performed above expectations at the box office . It grossed a total of $ 2 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 worldwide , nearly eight times its production budget . However , the initial domestic gross was described as " disappointing . " It opened in 15 theaters and grossed $ 108 @,@ 000 in its opening weekend . Word of mouth later spread , and the film became a " sleeper hit " , making over $ 600 @,@ 000 domestically and nearly $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 overseas . In its first week of release in 1983 two years later , the film made £ 100 @,@ 000 in the UK and quickly became that week 's best @-@ selling video release . It became the best @-@ selling video in the country that year , out @-@ grossing large @-@ budget horror releases such as The Shining . Its impressive European performance was chalked up to its heavy promotion there and the more open @-@ minded nature of audiences . 
 The film 's release was met with controversy . Raimi made the film as gruesome as possible with neither interest in nor fear of censorship , which led to the film 's receiving an X rating and being named a " video nasty " . Films with this label were quite violent and disturbing , and the rating was often held by pornographic and other X @-@ rated films . While The Evil Dead was not pornographic in nature , it was considered one of the most violent films of its time , and censors had issues with the film 's content , which impacted some of its commercial potential . The film was called the " number one nasty " in a nod to its status as both a nasty and the year 's best @-@ selling video release . Writer Bruce Kawin described The Evil Dead as one of the most notorious splatter films of its day , along with Cannibal Holocaust and I Spit on Your Grave . The film was banned either theatrically or on video in some countries . 
 = = = Home video release = = = 
 The first VHS release of The Evil Dead was by Thorn EMI in 1983 , and Thorn 's successor company HBO ( Time Warner ) / Cannon ( MGM ) Video later repackaged the film . Congress Video , a company notable for public domain films , issued their version in 1989 . 
 The resurgence of The Evil Dead in the home @-@ video market came through two companies that restored the film from its negatives and issued special editions in 1998 : Anchor Bay Entertainment on VHS , and Elite Entertainment on laserdisc . Anchor Bay was responsible for the film 's first DVD release in 1999 , and between them , Elite and Anchor Bay have released six different DVD versions of The Evil Dead , most notably a 2002 " Book Of The Dead " edition , packaged in a latex replica of the Necronomicon sculpted by Tom Sullivan . The film 's high @-@ definition debut was in a 2010 Blu @-@ ray . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Early reception = = = 
 Upon its release , contemporary critical opinion was mostly positive . Bob Martin , editor of Fangoria , reviewed the film before its formal premiere and proclaimed that it " might be the exception to the usual run of low @-@ budget horror films " . The Los Angeles Times called the film an " instant classic " , proclaiming it as " probably the <unk> well @-@ made movie ever . " In a 1982 review , staff from the trade magazine Variety wrote that the film " emerges as the ne plus ultra of low @-@ budget gore and shock effect " , commenting that the " powerful " and inventive camerawork was key to creating a sense of dread . 
 British press for the film was positive ; Kim Newman of Monthly Film Bulletin , Richard Cook of NME , and Julian Petley of Film and Filming all gave the film good reviews during its early release . Petley and Cook compared the film to other contemporary horror films , writing that the film expressed more imagination and " youthful enthusiasm " than an average horror film . Cook described the camera work by Raimi as " audacious " , stating that the film 's visceral nature was greatly helped by the style of direction . Woolley , Newman , and several critics complimented the film for its unexpected use of black comedy , which elevated the film above its genre 's potential trappings . All three critics compared the film to the surrealistic work of Georges Franju and Jean Cocteau , noting the <unk> references to Cocteau 's film Orpheus . Writer Lynn Schofield Clark in his novel From Angels to Aliens compared the film to better @-@ known horror films such as The Exorcist and The Omen , citing it as a key supernatural thriller . 
 = = = Later reception = = = 
 The film continues to receive universal acclaim from modern critics . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 95 % approval rating with an average rating of 8 @.@ 1 / 10 , based on an aggregation of 55 reviews . It summarized the film : " This classic low budget horror film combines just the right amount of gore and black humor , giving The Evil Dead an equal amount of thrills and laughs . " Empire magazine stated the film 's " reputation was deserved " , writing that the film was impressive considering its low budget and the cast 's inexperience . He commented that the film successfully blended the " bizarre " combination of Night of the Living Dead , The Texas Chain Saw Massacre and The Three Stooges . A reviewer for Film4 rated The Evil Dead four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , musing that the film was " energetic , original and icky " and concluding that Raimi 's " splat @-@ stick debut is a tight little horror classic that deserves its cult reputation , despite the best efforts of the censors . " 
 Slant Magazine 's Ed Gonzales compared the film to Dario Argento 's work , citing Raimi 's " unnerving wide angle work " as an important factor to the film 's atmosphere . He mused that Raimi possessed an " almost unreal ability to suggest the presence of intangible evil " , which was what prevented the movie from being " B @-@ movie schlock " . BBC critic Martyn Glanville awarded the film four stars out of five , writing that for Raimi , it served as a better debut film than Tobe Hooper 's The Texas Chainsaw Massacre or Wes Craven 's The Last House on the Left . Glanville noted that other than the " ill @-@ advised trees @-@ that @-@ rape scene " , the film is " one of the great modern horror films , and even more impressive when one considers its modest production values . " 
 Filmcritic.com 's Christopher Null gave the film the same rating as Glanville , writing that " Raimi 's biggest grossout is schlock horror done the right way " and comparing it to Romero 's Night of the Living Dead in its ability to create stark atmosphere . Chicago Reader writer Pat Graham commented that the film featured several " clever " turns on the standard horror formula , adding that Raimi 's " anything @-@ for @-@ an @-@ effect enthusiasm pays off in lots of formally inventive bits . " The make @-@ up effects in one of the final scenes was called " amazing " by Time Out critic Stephen Garrett , who commented that although the film was light on character development , the " relentless " barrage of violent imagery made for an entertaining film . The same site later cited the film as the 41st greatest horror movie ever made . Phelim O 'Neill of The Guardian combined The Evil Dead and its sequel Evil Dead II and listed them as the 23rd best horror film ever made , announcing that the former film " stands above its mostly forgotten peers in the 80s horror boom . " Complex Magazine composed a list of the twenty @-@ five best horror movies available on Netflix , listing The Evil Dead at No. 21 . Don Summer , in his book Horror Movie Freak , and writer Kate Egan have both cited the film as a horror classic . 
 J.C. Maçek III of PopMatters said , " What is unquestionable is that the <unk> and their pals created a monster in The Evil Dead . It started as a disastrous failure to obtain a big break with a too long , too perilous shoot ( note Campbell ’ s changing hairstyle in the various scenes of the one @-@ day plot ) . The film went through name changes and <unk> only to survive as not only ' the ultimate experience in grueling horror ' but as an oft @-@ imitated and cashed @-@ in @-@ on classic , with 30 years of positive reviews to prove it . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 While The Evil Dead received favorable critical comment when it was initially released , it failed to establish Raimi 's reputation . It was , however , a box @-@ office success , which led to Campbell and Raimi teaming up again for the release of another movie . Joel Coen and his brother Ethan had collaborated as directors and released the film Blood Simple , to critical acclaim . According to Campbell , Ethan , then an accountant , expressed surprise when the duo succeeded . The Coen brothers and Raimi collaborated on a screenplay , which was released shortly after The Evil Dead . The film , Crimewave , was a box @-@ office failure . The film 's production was a " disaster " according to Campbell , who stated that " missteps " like Crimewave usually lead to the end of a director 's career . Other people involved with the film expressed similar disappointment with the project . Fortunately , Raimi had the studio support to make a sequel to The Evil Dead , which he initially decided to make out of desperation . 
 Evil Dead II was filmed and released in 1987 , and was also a box @-@ office success . A second , and currently final , sequel was released in 1993 , Army of Darkness . Campbell returned as the lead character Ash Williams in both films . At that time , Raimi had become a successful director , attracting Hollywood 's interest . His 1990 superhero film Darkman was another box @-@ office success , which led to an increased budget for Army of Darkness . Army of Darkness had 22 @.@ 8 times the budget of the original Evil Dead , though it was not considered to be a box @-@ office success like its two predecessors . Evil Dead II received general acclaim from critics and is often considered to be better than the original , and Army of Darkness received mostly positive reviews . The series has often attracted attention because each sequel featured more comedic qualities than the last , progressing into " weirder " territory with each film . 
 Unofficial sequels were also made in Italy — where the film was known as La Casa ( " The House " ) — by Joe D 'Amato 's <unk> . In 1988 , D 'Amato produced two films labeled as sequels to Evil Dead II , Umberto Lenzi 's <unk> ( La Casa 3 ) , and <unk> ( La Casa 4 ) , starring Linda Blair and David Hasselhoff . In 1990 , D 'Amato produced his final La Casa film , Beyond Darkness ( La Casa 5 ) . House II was reissued in Italy as La Casa 6 , and The Horror Show was then released in Italy as La Casa 7 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The Evil Dead and its sequels have become one of the largest cult film trilogies in history . David Lavery , in his book The Essential Cult TV Reader , surmised that Campbell 's " career is a practical guide to becoming a cult idol " . The film launched the careers of Raimi and Campbell , who have since collaborated frequently . Raimi has worked with Campbell in virtually all of his films since , and Campbell has appeared in cameo roles in all three of Raimi 's Spider @-@ Man films , ( as well as a very brief appearance at the end of Darkman ) , which have become some of the highest @-@ grossing films in history . Though it has often been considered an odd choice for Raimi — a director known for his violent horror films — to direct a family @-@ friendly franchise , the hiring was mostly inspired by Raimi 's passion for comic books as a kid . Raimi returned to the horror @-@ comedy genre in 2009 with Drag Me to Hell . 
 Critics have often compared Campbell 's later performances to his role in Evil Dead , which has been called his defining role . Campbell 's performance as Ash has been compared to roles ranging from his performance of Elvis Presley in the film Bubba Ho @-@ <unk> to the bigamous demon in the The X @-@ Files episode " Terms of Endearment " . Campbell 's fan base gradually developed after the release of Evil Dead II and his short @-@ lived series The Adventures of Brisco County , Jr .. He is a regular favorite at most fan conventions and often draws sold @-@ out auditoriums at his public appearances . The Evil Dead developed a substantial cult following throughout the years , and has often been cited as a defining cult classic . 
 The Evil Dead has spawned a media empire . A video game adaptation of the same name was for the Commodore 64 in 1984 , as was a trilogy of PlayStation and PlayStation 2 games in the 1990s : Evil Dead : Hail to the King , Evil Dead : A Fistful of <unk> and Evil Dead : Regeneration . Ted Raimi did voices for the trilogy , and Campbell returned as the voice of Ash . The character Ash became the main character of a comic book franchise . Ash has fought both Freddy Krueger and Jason Voorhees in the Freddy vs. Jason vs. Ash series , Herbert West in Army of Darkness vs. Re @-@ Animator , zombie versions of the Marvel Comics superhero team Avengers in Marvel Zombies vs. The Army of Darkness , and has even saved the life of a fictional Barack Obama in Army of Darkness : Ash Saves Obama . In January 2008 , Dark Horse Comics began releasing a four @-@ part monthly comic book mini @-@ series , written by Mark Verheiden and drawn by John Bolton , based on The Evil Dead . 
 In addition , the film has inspired a stage musical , Evil Dead : The Musical , which was produced with the permission of Raimi and Campbell . The musical has run on and off since its inception in 2003 . A remake of the film was released in 2013 , directed by <unk> Alvarez and produced by Raimi and Campbell . It features actress Jane Levy as the main character , with Ash not appearing . Campbell does make a brief , uncredited cameo appearance at the end of the film in a short post @-@ credits scene . 
 In 2015 , an ongoing television continuation of the films called Ash vs. Evil Dead premiered on the Starz Network . The first episode was directed by Raimi , and Campbell is reprising his role as Ash . The series is being produced by Renaissance , and follows an older Ash as he encounters more spirits and demons from the Necronomicon . 
 = Nebulous = 
 Nebulous is a post @-@ apocalyptic science fiction comedy radio show written by Graham Duff and produced by Ted Dowd from Baby Cow Productions ; it is directed by Nicholas Briggs . The series premiered in the United Kingdom on BBC Radio 4 . Set in the year 2099 AD , the show focuses on the adventures of the eponymous Professor Nebulous , director of operations for the eco @-@ troubleshooting team KENT ( the Key Environmental Non @-@ <unk> Taskforce ) as they combat various catastrophes and try to set the world back on the right path following a worldwide environmental disaster known as " The Withering " . As well as being a parody of a number of famous science fiction programmes , including Doctor Who , Quatermass and Doomwatch , Nebulous is considered a cult radio programme , attracting a number of guest appearances from famous actors . 
 There have been three series of Nebulous ; the first was broadcast between 6 January and 10 February 2005 . The series was well received by critics , and a second series was broadcast between 5 April and 10 May 2006 , with a third series commissioned by the BBC which began broadcasting on Thursday , 15 May 2008 at 23 : 00 BST . The first series was released on compact disc on 5 February 2007 by BBC Audio . Since 2009 all three series have been broadcast on BBC Radio 7 . Duff has also announced that he is planning to make an animated series of Nebulous . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The development of the series began with the production pilot episode , written by Graham Duff and produced by Baby Cow Productions in March 2003 . The episode , which eventually became " Night of the Vegetarians " , featured much of the final cast , but with a number of differences : a different actor played Rory , and Sir Ronald Rolands was voiced by Duff , while Gemini originally had two voices : a female voice played by Julia <unk> , and a male voice by Nicholas Briggs . Malcolm Boyle - who wrote the Nebulous theme and edited the pilot - had written an entire original score for the show . However , due to BBC radio budget limitations , this was not used in the completed series . Nicholas Briggs had also originally created a very deep , realistic soundscape , similar to those he had created for the Big Finish Productions Doctor Who <unk> , but was advised that " it 's likely the listener will have distractions and will not listen to it more than once ; therefore , the soundscape must be totally accessible from any point in the episode " , toning down the sound effects to match the series ' comic nature . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The Moat Studios in London record Nebulous in stereo , with each half @-@ hour episode typically taking one day to record , including read @-@ through and rehearsal . Nicholas Briggs produces the sound , using a combination of synthesised effects from a Roland SH @-@ 101 and foley sound effects . Briggs also carries out the studio editing in order to bring the 30 @-@ minute episodes down to the 28 minutes mandated by the BBC to allow time for radio trailers between programmes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Set in the year 2099 , the series depicts the Earth as very different from today . Following a number of environmental disasters , such as " the Withering " – which resulted in the loss of a great deal of human knowledge including the vacuum cleaner and fire ( although the latter came back fairly quickly ) – and a " Cattle @-@ <unk> " that killed off most of the livestock , the Earth has been reduced to a wasteland separated between " Withered Zones " and the remaining inhabitable areas . The Withering shifted the Earth into a new orbit , resulting in disruption to the seasons and a reformed calendar . Every day of the week is now 25 @-@ hours long except for Thursday ( which , due to time anomalies , has not occurred in over a decade ) , while the change in the length of the year led to the creation of new months such as <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . In addition , the dreary season of Hamble was created , which is permanently dark , cold and drizzly . The Withering resulted in vegetarians , pigeons and gays becoming endangered species , and completely wiped out tarts . 
 The Earth 's geography is also radically altered . A new mountain range was formed in Britain by a day @-@ long ice age , and the Earth now has twelve and a half continents . Many locations have been displaced and reduced to islands , including Oxford University and the London borough of Deptford , which is now in the Indonesian Ocean as a part of the Cockney Islands . The solar system is equally altered : Jupiter has been deep fried by Harry Ramsden 's , Mercury and Neptune have been knocked together , and there was an initiative to destroy the Moon , which according to the show was deleterious to the nightlight industry . 
 Religion also exists in the Nebulous universe . Pieced together following the Withering , theologians conclude that there were four true deities : the evil twins Yin and Yang , Feng Shui the destroyer , and merciful Bod , based on the children 's television programme Bod , the theme tune of which has become a hymn , sung in Gregorian chant . Bod is analogous to God , hence the commonly used phrase " Oh my Bod ! " 
 = = = Storyline = = = 
 Nebulous follows the adventures of the eco @-@ troubleshooting team " KENT " ( the Key Environmental Non @-@ <unk> Taskforce , named after the English county of Kent ) . The group is directed by Professor Nebulous toward the goal of restoring a natural balance to Earth . However , they are woefully under @-@ funded ; KENT was forced to open a laundry to supplement funds . There is at least one other eco @-@ troubleshooting team based in England , but despite their common goals they have a less @-@ than @-@ hospitable view of each other . <unk> ( the Legitimate Organisation Undertaking General Humanitarian Business Operations Requiring Optimum Unconditional Global Harmony , named after the Leicestershire town Loughborough ) is run by Professor Nebulous ’ ex @-@ love interest , Doctor Erica <unk> . By comparison to KENT it is over @-@ funded and well @-@ equipped , with <unk> , black helicopters and info pills , which provide the user with information by ingestion . 
 Nebulous both parodies and pays homage to several well known science fiction programmes and films in both its setting and plotlines , often incorporating several different elements within a single story : Professor Nebulous himself is similar to Bernard Quatermass , a British scientist who led a research group and fought aliens in the classic science fiction serial The Quatermass Experiment and its sequels . KENT itself is based partly on the Department of Measurement of Scientific Work , nicknamed " Doomwatch " , the eponymous organisation from the BBC science fiction television programme Doomwatch , and partly on the Doctor Who Organization " <unk> " , otherwise known as the " United Nations Intelligence Taskforce " . The second episode of series one , " The Loverly Invasion " , is a direct spoof of the Doctor Who episode " The Claws of Axos " , while " The Deptford Wives " takes both its name and premise from The Stepford Wives ( and also borrows from Jurassic Park ) . From the first episode of series 3 onwards , this also began to include the recent Doctor Who spin @-@ off Torchwood and the ITV series Primeval , with references to " baby dinosaurs falling through a hole in time " and " the sheer amount of paranormal activity in the Cardiff area alone ... starting to threaten the Earth 's plausibility shield " . Episode 6 of that series also parodied the tendency in British sci @-@ fi for attempts to take over the world to start in Britain , with the chief villain ( played by Tenth Doctor actor David Tennant ) stating " <unk> enough , that 's a tax thing , " as well as one of the Ninth Doctor 's nicknames , " the oncoming storm " ( with Nebulous known as " the oncoming drizzle " ) . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Mark Gatiss – Professor Boffo Nebulous 
 Rosie Cavaliero – Paula Breeze ( assistant to Nebulous ) 
 Graham Duff – Rory Lawson ( assistant to Nebulous ) 
 Paul <unk> – Harry Hayes ( researcher for KENT ) 
 Graham Crowden – Ronald Rolands ( Minister with Unusual Portfolio ) 
 David Warner – Doctor Klench ( Nebulous ' arch @-@ rival ) 
 Julia <unk> – Nebulous 's mother , Gemini ( KENT 's resident supercomputer ) 
 Matt Wolf – Nebulous 's father 
 Following positive reviews and high listening figures , the second series was able to attract a number of guest appearances from well known actors , including Peter Davison , Steve Coogan , and Kate O 'Mara . The third series featured appearances from Julia Davis and David Tennant . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 Reception to Nebulous was generally positive : a reviewer from The Times described the first series as " a winning blend of Doomwatch , Quatermass and British silliness that has cult written all over it " , while the second series was described as " cool and cultish " . However , The Daily Telegraph was more guarded , comparing the show to " Hitchhiker 's without the philosophy or Red Dwarf without the energy " , going on to say that show is " funny , but not seriously so " . A reviewer for Doctor Who website <unk> also initially expressed concerns about the level of jokes in the show , but later claimed " I should have been more patient because when they did arrive , coinciding with the introduction of the character Harry , they were relentlessly funny " . 
 = Frome = 
 Frome ( / <unk> / <unk> ) is a town and civil parish in eastern Somerset , England . Located at the eastern end of the Mendip Hills , the town is built on uneven high ground , and centres on the River Frome . The town is approximately 13 miles ( 21 km ) south of Bath , 43 miles ( 69 km ) east of the county town , Taunton and 107 miles ( 172 km ) west of London . In the 2011 census , the population was given as 26 @,@ 203 . The town is in the Mendip district of Somerset and is part of the parliamentary constituency of Somerton and Frome . 
 In April 2010 a large hoard of third @-@ century Roman coins was unearthed in a field near the town . From AD 950 to 1650 , Frome was larger than Bath and originally grew due to the wool and cloth industry . It later diversified into metal @-@ working and printing , although these have declined . The town was enlarged during the 20th century but still retains a very large number of listed buildings , and most of the centre falls within a conservation area . 
 The town has road and rail transport links and acts as an economic centre for the surrounding area . It also provides a centre for cultural and sporting activities , including the annual Frome Festival and Frome Museum . A number of notable individuals were born in , or have lived in , the town . In 2014 , Frome was called the " sixth coolest town " in Britain by The Times newspaper . Frome has recently been shortlisted as one of three towns in the country for the 2016 Urbanism Awards in the ' Great Town Award ' category . 
 = = History = = 
 There is some limited evidence for Roman settlement of the area . The remains of a villa were found in the village of Whatley , 3 miles ( 5 km ) to the west of Frome . In April 2010 , the Frome Hoard , one of the largest @-@ ever hoards of Roman coins discovered in Britain , was found by a metal detectorist . The hoard of 52 @,@ 500 coins dated from the third century AD and was found buried in a field near the town , in a jar 14 inches ( 36 cm ) below the surface . The coins were excavated by archaeologists from the Portable Antiquities Scheme , and some are now on display in the British Museum . The find was the subject of a BBC TV programme Digging for Britain in August 2010 . 
 The name Frome comes from the Brythonic word * <unk> ( Modern Welsh <unk> ) meaning fair , fine or brisk and describing the flow of the river . A monastery built by St. Aldhelm in 685 is the earliest evidence of Saxon occupation of Frome . The Saxon kings appear to have used Frome as a base from which to hunt in Selwood Forest and in 934 a witenagemot was held there , indicating that Frome must already have been a significant settlement . One of the first English Kings , Eadred ( son of Edward the Elder ) , died in Frome on 23 November 955 . 
 At the time of the Domesday Survey , the manor was owned by King William , and was the principal settlement of the largest and wealthiest hundred in Somerset . Over the following years , parts of the original manor were spun off as distinct manors ; for example , one was owned by the minster , later passing to the Abbey at Cirencester , which others were leased by the Crown to important families . By the 13th century , the Abbey had bought up some of the other manors ( although it did let them out again ) and was exploiting the profits from market and trade in the town . Local tradition asserts that Frome was a medieval borough , and the reeve of Frome is occasionally mentioned in documents after the reign of Edward I , but there is no direct evidence that Frome was a borough and no trace of any charter granted to it . However , the <unk> Park Charters of Edward 's reign note a Hugh , lord of Parva ( or little ) Frome , as well as other witnesses . Additionally , Henry VII did grant a charter to Edmund <unk> , then lord of the manor , giving him the right to hold fairs on 22 July and 21 September . The parish was part of the hundred of Frome . 
 Hales Castle was built , probably in the years immediately after the Norman conquest of England in 1066 . The circular ringwork is 120 feet ( 37 m ) in diameter and stands on the northern slope of <unk> Hill , close to the Iron Age <unk> <unk> . It comprises banks and outer ditches and has an unfinished bailey . 
 The manufacture of woollen cloth was established as the town 's principal industry in the 15th century , and Frome remained the only Somerset town in which this staple industry flourished . Families of clothiers gradually came to be the principal landowners in the town , with the manor of Frome itself finally passing into the ownership of a cloth merchant in 1714 . From 1665 to 1725 major expansion , including the building of a new artisans ' suburb to the west of Trinity Street , occurred . In the 1720s Daniel Defoe remarked that the town had grown in the previous few decades so that it was " likely to be one of the greatest and wealthiest inland towns in England " . 
 On 12 April 1477 , Ankarette <unk> was taken from the manor house that stands , known locally as the Old Nunnery , in Lower Keyford accused by George Plantagenet , 1st Duke of Clarence of the murder of Isabel Neville , Duchess of Clarence . She was subsequently tried and hanged . Ankarette 's grandson Roger <unk> received from Edward IV a full retrospective pardon for Ankarette , and the petition he submitted to the king in 1478 describes fully the circumstances of the case , well illustrating the quasi @-@ kingly high @-@ handedness of Clarence which was ultimately not tolerated by the king . 
 On 27 June 1685 , the forces of the Duke of Monmouth camped in Frome , following their defeat in a skirmish with the King 's forces at Norton St Philip . Large numbers of his army deserted during the few days he stayed in the town before his eventual defeat at the Battle of Sedgemoor . Following the putting down of the Monmouth Rebellion , 12 men were hanged in the town . 
 Poverty , the decline of the wool industry in the mid @-@ 18th century , increased industrialisation , and rising food prices led to some unrest amongst the inhabitants of Frome , and there were riots during the century . By 1791 , the town was described in less flattering terms than those Defoe had used 70 years earlier . In the early 19th century , plans were developed to reinvigorate the town and once again elevate it to its former position as a more important town than Bath . These plans , the idea of a local businessman , Thomas Bunn , mostly failed to come to fruition , although some public buildings were erected and a wide new approach road to the town centre from the south was cut ( named Bath Street after the landowner , Lord Bath of Longleat House ) . 
 Whilst wool remained an important part of the town 's economy into the 19th ( and even 20th ) centuries , other industries were established in the town . A bell @-@ foundry started in 1684 by William <unk> grew to be a major producer of components for the developing gas industry and employer of 800 people . The J W Singer brass foundry and bronze @-@ casting works , was a major employer and produced bronze statues . John Webb Singer was born in Frome and established his art metal work foundry in 1851 . They made brass ornaments for local churches and became known through the Oxford Movement within the Church of England which led to increasing demand for church ornaments . In addition to church ornaments the firm developed the facilities and expertise to create large statues . One of the first statues cast was a copy of General Gordon riding a camel . The firm was also responsible for the bronze statue of Boudica with her daughters in her war chariot ( furnished with scythes after the Persian fashion ) , which was commissioned by Prince Albert and executed by Thomas Thornycroft . It was not cast in bronze until 1902 , 17 years after <unk> death , and now stands next to Westminster Bridge and the Houses of Parliament , London . The statue of Lady Justice on the dome above the Old Bailey was executed by the British sculptor , F. W. Pomeroy and cast by Singers . She holds a sword in her right hand and a pair of weighing scales in her left . The statue is popularly supposed to show blind Justice ; however , the figure is not blindfolded . The statue of Alfred the Great at Winchester was a further commission . The statues from Singers have also been exported around the world . Printing was another major industry , with the Butler and Tanner printworks being set up in the middle of the century . Brewing was also a source of employment . 
 During the 20th century the old wool industry in Frome declined , although the last fabric mill at <unk> did not close until 1965 . As a result , the population fell and in the 1930s it was slightly smaller than it had been in the mid 19th century . Other industries such as printing , light engineering , metal casting , carpeting and dairying continued , many taking old premises from the cloth mills and others being sited at the new Marston Road Trading Estate which led to growth after World War II , including the construction of council houses . 
 = = Governance and public services = = 
 Frome is the largest town within the Somerset non @-@ metropolitan district of Mendip , although the administrative centre is Shepton Mallet . Prior to 1974 it was administered by Frome Urban District . 
 The town elects three members to Somerset County Council , each from a separate county division . At the last election in May 2013 , Liberal Democrats were elected in Frome East , Frome West and Frome North . However , since then there has been one by @-@ election in which the Conservatives took Frome North and a defection of one Councillor to UKIP in Frome West . The next County elections will be held in 2017 . 
 Frome also has eleven councillors on Mendip District Council , two from each of the town council wards except for Oakfield , which elects only one . Following elections in 2015 , five were Liberal Democrats , three for the Conservatives and three for The Green Party . 
 The civil parish of Frome has adopted the style of a town , and there is a Town Council of 17 members . Reduced from 20 Councillors in 2005 . Councillors are split between eight wards : three each for the Berkley Down , College , Keyford , two each for Market , Oakfield and Park Wards , and once each for the <unk> and Innox Wards . The most recent elections were in May 2015 , following which the council is made up of 17 members of the Independents for Frome party ( <unk> ) . 
 Frome has three twin towns : Château @-@ <unk> in France , <unk> in Germany and <unk> @-@ Zdrój in Poland . 
 There are 6 electoral wards in Frome having the same total population as that quoted above . 
 The town was not represented in Parliament until given one member in the House of Commons by the Reform Act of 1832 . Separate representation was abolished for the 1950 general election , with Frome itself being transferred to the Wells division , whilst most of the remainder of the constituency formed the bulk of the new Somerset North constituency . Further changes took place for the 1983 general election when the current Somerton and Frome constituency was created . The current representative is Conservative MP David Warburton . During the general election of 2015 , in which 72 % of those eligible turned out to vote , David Warburton achieved a majority of 20 @,@ 268 votes ( 33 @.@ 6 % of the total ) , Frome is within the South West England European Parliamentary constituency which elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 The town has a new National Health Service community hospital , operated by Somerset Primary Care Trust , located on the site of the former Showground at Fromefield . The new hospital was opened in 2008 , replacing the former Frome Victoria Hospital in Park Road which had been in use since 1901 . The nearest general hospital is the Royal United Hospital in Bath . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The town rests on Forest Marble which dates back to the Middle Jurassic , and has been used for local building . The area surrounding the town is <unk> , Oxford Clay and Greensand . Frome is unevenly built on high ground above the River Frome , which is crossed by the 16th century town bridge in the town centre . The town centre is approximately 65 metres ( 213 ft ) above sea @-@ level , whilst the outer parts of the town are between 90 metres ( 295 ft ) and 135 metres ( 443 ft ) above sea @-@ level . 
 The main areas of the town are ( approximately clockwise from the north @-@ west ) : Innox Hill , <unk> , <unk> , Fromefield , Stonebridge , Clink , Berkley Down , <unk> , Wallbridge , The Mount , Keyford and Lower Keyford , Marston Gate , The Butts , <unk> , Trinity , and Gould 's Ground . 
 Although the royal forest of Selwood no longer exists , the nearby countryside is still richly wooded , for example on the Longleat , Maiden Bradley and Stourhead estates . To the west of the town , on the edge of the Mendip Hills , there are large active limestone quarries , such as Whatley Quarry and <unk> Quarry , along with disused quarries . The working quarries are served by a dedicated railway line which branches off the main line at Frome , passes through the town centre and out through the <unk> and Spring Gardens areas in the north @-@ west quadrant of the town . 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Frome has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England . The annual mean temperature is about 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) with seasonal and diurnal variations , but due to the modifying effect of the sea , the range is less than in most other parts of the United Kingdom . January is the coldest month with mean minimum temperatures between 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) and 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) . July and August are the warmest months in the region with mean daily maxima around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . In general , December is the dullest month and June the sunniest . The south west of England enjoys a favoured location , particularly in summer , when the Azores High extends its influence north @-@ eastwards towards the UK . 
 Cloud often forms inland , especially near hills , and reduces exposure to sunshine . The average annual sunshine totals around 1600 hours . Rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection . In summer , convection caused by solar surface heating sometimes forms shower clouds and a large proportion of the annual precipitation falls from showers and thunderstorms at this time of year . Average rainfall is around 800 – 900 mm ( 31 – 35 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , with June to August having the lightest . The predominant wind direction is from the south west . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The population of Frome was 12 @,@ 240 in the 1831 census , however it then declined to 11 @,@ 057 in 1901 and remained between 11 @,@ 000 and 12 @,@ 000 until the 1970s . Since then , it has increased , nearly doubling to over 23 @,@ 000 in 1991 . In the 2011 census , the population was 26 @,@ 203 , comprising 11 @,@ 863 ( 48 @.@ 4 % ) males and 12 @,@ 647 ( 51 @.@ 6 % ) females . 7 @,@ 674 ( 31 @.@ 3 % ) residents were aged 16 or below , 13 @,@ 150 ( 63 @.@ 3 % ) between 16 and 65 , and 3 @,@ 686 ( 15 @.@ 0 % ) aged 65 or over . 
 In the 2001 census of the population aged between 16 and 74 , 11 @,@ 580 ( 67 % ) were in employment , with only 513 ( 3 % ) unemployed ( the remainder being otherwise economically inactive ) . About 68 % of those in employment were in service industries , with the remainder in manufacturing . 4 @,@ 323 people were employed in managerial or professional occupations , 1 @,@ 362 were self @-@ employed , and 4 @,@ 635 in routine and semi @-@ routine occupations . 10 @,@ 198 households were recorded in the town , of which 7 @,@ 679 ( 75 % ) were owner @-@ occupied , 981 ( 10 % ) rented from private landlords , and 1 @,@ 538 ( 15 % ) rented from the local authority or other social landlord . 10 @,@ 122 ( 99 @.@ 3 % ) heads of households were white . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The metal @-@ working and printing industries which replaced wool as Frome 's main industry have declined but not left the town . Singers still has a presence in the town , as does Butler and Tanner , although the latter ( now named Butler Tanner and Dennis following a take @-@ over ) hit major financial difficulties in 2008 , and made two @-@ thirds of its workforce redundant . 
 Almost half of the economically active population of Frome commute to work outside the town ( in Bath , Bristol , Warminster , Westbury or further afield ) . About 2 @,@ 700 people commute into the town . A substantial part of the workforce has no formal qualifications and is poorly skilled , leaving them vulnerable to a decline in manufacturing work . There is no major local government employment in the town , and the principal public sector employers are the Primary Care Trust and the schools . 
 Frome town centre contains a considerable number of independent shops , and a few chain stores . Retail is primarily aimed at serving the local population 's requirements for food ( there are two large supermarkets on opposite edges of the town , and three smaller supermarkets in the town centre ) , basic clothing , health and beauty , DIY and some electrical goods . However studies show that only about a quarter of the town 's population do their non @-@ food shopping in the town . Banks and building societies have branches in the town centre . 
 Markets are held on Wednesdays and Saturdays in the town centre : some in the Market Yard car park , and others in the former agricultural warehouse , the Cheese and Grain . The Saturday cattle market was moved from the centre of the town to nearby <unk> in the 1980s . In 2003 , Frome was granted Fairtrade Town status . 
 A Vision for Frome 2008 – 2028 has been developed following a consultation with local people in the spring of 2008 which received over 3 @,@ 000 responses . Mendip District Council and Mendip Strategic Partnership have consulted on a Community Strategy and Local Development Framework for the period to 2026 which includes building 2 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 600 new homes , providing more employment and office space , developing a new secondary school and two new primary schools , remodelling the town centre and encouraging a wider range of retailers and leisure providers into the town . 
 There have been a number of significant housing developments within Frome , many on former industrial sites , and these are continuing with plans for the redevelopment of a site at <unk> and <unk> to include several hundred dwellings , shops and a ' cultural quarter ' containing workshops for artists . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Frome has a thriving arts scene . The high @-@ point is the annual ten @-@ day Frome Festival in July , which in recent years has included more than 160 events held at various venues in and around the town . The town is host to a number of artists , many of whom open their studios to the public during the Festival . An Artisan Market is held on Catherine Hill monthly between April and October . 
 There are two theatres in Frome : The Memorial Theatre was built in 1924 in memory of the fallen of the World War I , while the 240 @-@ seat Merlin Theatre is part of the Frome Community College campus . Frome is also home to Somerset 's first and only pub theatre , with Nevertheless , Productions promoting new dramas four times a year at The <unk> pub . The Cheese and Grain , a former farm produce warehouse which was converted into a market and concert hall in 1997 , has a capacity of up to 800 and hosts regular pop concerts . Locally based musicians include American saxophonist Alfred " Pee Wee " Ellis and Irish folk singer Cara Dillon as well as hardcore punk bands More Than Life , Ghost Of The Avalanche and Landscapes . Frome 's only cinema , the Westway , is in Cork Street in the town centre , which closed indefinitely in March 2016 . There is also an arts centre , The Black Swan , and the town is part of the West Country Carnival circuit . The Glastonbury Festival takes place only 15 miles southwest of Frome at Worthy Farm , Pilton . Frome also boasts two comedy clubs - the Submarine Comedy Club at the Archangel and the Cheesy Grin Comedy Club at the Cheese & Grain bar . 
 The Frome & District Agricultural Society holds an annual Agricultural & Cheese Show in September . This was formerly held on the Showground at Fromefield , but in recent years has moved to West Woodland , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the south of the town . The Frome Society for Local Study was founded in 1958 , and helped to establish and run Frome Museum . 
 Frome is served by two newspapers , the Frome & Somerset Standard and the Frome Times . In 2008 , a ' not for profit ' company called Frome Community Productions was formed by members of the community in order to develop and deliver FromeFM , an internet based community radio station . The station broadcasts 24 hours per day and is completely staffed by volunteers who produce features , interviews and music shows . In 2009 , FromeFM commenced a service to stream the broadcasts to mobile phones . In late 2011 FromeFM was granted a broadcast licence and on 16 July 2012 began broadcast on <unk> in the Frome area . <unk> , another ' non @-@ profit ' organisation , runs an online TV channel presenting Frome 's own Question Time format program , interviews and short films relating to local current affairs . 
 Frome 's Cheap Street is a location in episode six of the first series of BBC TV comedy The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin . Frome has also provided the backdrop to historical dramas , such as Drover 's Gold , filmed by BBC Wales in 1996 . 
 Frome restaurants include the Archangel on King Street , which received a 9 / 10 rating in The Sunday Telegraph . The Archangel was formerly The Angel Inn and is believed to date back to before the Protestant Reformation , and is a Grade II listed building . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The older parts of Frome – for example , around Sheppard 's Barton and Catherine Hill – are picturesque , containing an outstanding collection of small late @-@ 17th- and 18th @-@ century houses . The Trinity area , which was built in the latter half of the 17th century and first half of the 18th century , is a fine ( and rare ) example of early industrial housing . More than 300 houses were built between 1660 and 1756 in a very unusual early example of a planned grid pattern . Although about half the area was demolished in the 1960s under a Slum Clearance Order , before its historical importance was realised , the remainder was saved and was restored at a cost of £ 4 million between 1980 and 1984 . Also in this area is the elaborate former Selwood Printing Works . Stony Street , which leads into Catherine Hill , is a steep , cobbled road climbing out of the town centre . Also in the centre of the town , Cheap Street contains buildings dating to the 16th and 17th centuries and has a stream running down the middle fed by the spring at St John 's Church . Cheap Street has never been used for vehicular traffic and its layout is based on land plots dating to approximately 1500 . Despite a fire in 1923 the buildings have remained substantially unchanged since 1830 apart from shop @-@ frontages . 
 The town bridge , originally built in the 14th century , was rebuilt in the 17th century and widened in the 19th century , at which time houses were built on it . The Tourist Information Centre in Justice Lane is contained within a circular dye @-@ house known to have been in existence by 1813 , one of two surviving in the town ( the other being in Willow Vale ) . It was restored in 1994 . In the 1990s and first few years of the 21st century Frome benefited from considerable investment in the restoration of its historic buildings through the English Heritage Heritage Economic Regeneration Scheme and the National Lottery Townscape Heritage Initiative . 
