 Arias was an opponent of the post @-@ invasion US presence in Panama before the December 31 , 1999 handover of the Panama Canal to the Panama Canal Authority . Arias was criticized in 1998 by Endara 's successor , Ernesto Pérez Balladares , as " immoral " for having claimed almost $ 100 @,@ 000 in salary from his time as vice president despite having resigned . Arias subsequently challenged Pérez Balladares to a debate over the morality of the latter 's plans to amend the constitution and seek a second term . 
 In 2001 , Arias released a book , Democracy without an Army : The Panamanian Experience , arguing that the nation must keep its security forces <unk> . That same year , he allied with Democratic Revolutionary Party , the former party of Noriega . He later pressed criminal defamation charges against La Prensa cartoonist Julio <unk> for a cartoon of Arias standing besides the Grim Reaper , representing the new alliance . Arias additionally asked for a million dollars in damages , stating " That cartoon made me an accomplice of a crime ... That was a defamation I could not accept or tolerate . I was the one who denounced those crimes at the time of the dictatorship . " In 2006 , he supported a project to widen the canal , calling it " historical suicide " not to do so . 
 Arias opposed the 2011 extradition of Noriega from France to Panama , warning that the former dictator could institute a " demagogic populism " similar to that of Venezuela 's Hugo Chávez . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Arias has a Cuban @-@ born wife , Teresa , whom he married in 1964 and with whom he has four children . In the 1960s , she broke new ground for political spouses by attending political rallies and campaigning actively for her husband . Because Endara was a widower , she also acted as Panama 's First Lady until Endara remarried to Ana Mae Diaz Chen in 1990 . 
 = Wayne Gretzky = 
 Wayne Douglas Gretzky CC ( / <unk> / ; born January 26 , 1961 ) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey player and former head coach . He played 20 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for four teams from 1979 to 1999 . Nicknamed " The Great One " , he has been called " the greatest hockey player ever " by many sportswriters , players , and the NHL itself . He is the leading scorer in NHL history , with more goals and more assists than any other player . He scored more assists than any other player scored total points , and is the only NHL player to total over 200 points in one season – a feat he accomplished four times . In addition , he tallied over 100 points in 16 professional seasons , 14 of them consecutive . At the time of his retirement in 1999 , he held 61 NHL records : 40 regular @-@ season records , 15 playoff records , and six All @-@ Star records . As of 2014 , he still holds 60 NHL records . 
 Born and raised in Brantford , Ontario , Gretzky honed his skills at a backyard rink and regularly played minor hockey at a level far above his peers . Despite his unimpressive stature , strength and speed , Gretzky 's intelligence and reading of the game were unrivaled . He was adept at dodging checks from opposing players , and consistently anticipated where the puck was going to be and executed the right move at the right time . Gretzky became known for setting up behind his opponent 's net , an area that was nicknamed " Gretzky 's office " . 
 In 1978 , Gretzky signed with the Indianapolis Racers of the World Hockey Association ( WHA ) , where he briefly played before being traded to the Edmonton Oilers . When the WHA folded , the Oilers joined the NHL , where he established many scoring records and led his team to four Stanley Cup championships . His trade to the Los Angeles Kings on August 9 , 1988 , had an immediate impact on the team 's performance , eventually leading them to the 1993 Stanley Cup Finals , and he is credited with popularizing hockey in California . Gretzky played briefly for the St. Louis Blues before finishing his career with the New York Rangers . Gretzky captured nine Hart Trophies as the most valuable player , ten Art Ross Trophies for most points in a season , two Conn Smythe Trophies as playoff MVP , and five Lester B. Pearson Awards ( now called the Ted Lindsay Award ) for most outstanding player as judged by other players . He won the Lady Byng Trophy for sportsmanship and performance five times , and often spoke out against fighting in hockey . 
 After his retirement in 1999 , Gretzky was immediately inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame , making him the most recent player to have the waiting period waived . The NHL retired his jersey number 99 league @-@ wide , making him the only player to receive this honour . He was one of six players voted to the International Ice Hockey Federation 's ( IIHF ) Centennial All @-@ Star Team . Gretzky became executive director for the Canadian national men 's hockey team during the 2002 Winter Olympics , in which the team won a gold medal . In 2000 , he became part owner of the Phoenix Coyotes , and following the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout he became the team 's head coach . In 2004 , he was inducted into the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame . In September 2009 , following the franchise 's bankruptcy , Gretzky resigned as coach and relinquished his ownership share . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Wayne Gretzky was born on January 26 , 1961 in Brantford , the son of Phyllis Leone ( Hockin ) and Walter Gretzky . The couple had married in 1960 , and lived in an apartment in Brantford , Ontario , where Walter worked for Bell Telephone Canada . The family moved into a house on <unk> Avenue in Brantford seven months after Wayne was born , chosen partly because its yard was flat enough to make an ice rink on every winter . Wayne was joined by a sister , Kim ( b . 1963 ) , and brothers Keith , Glen and Brent . The family would regularly visit Tony and Mary 's farm ( Wayne 's grandparents ) and watch Hockey Night in Canada together . By age two , Wayne was trying to score goals against Mary using a souvenir stick . The farm was where Wayne skated on ice for the first time , aged two years , 10 months . 
 Walter taught Wayne , Keith , Brent , Glen and their friends hockey on a rink he made in the back yard of the family home , nicknamed the " Wally Coliseum " . <unk> included skating around <unk> bleach bottles and tin cans , and flipping pucks over scattered hockey sticks to be able to pick up the puck again in full flight . Additionally , Walter gave the advice to " skate where the puck 's going , not where it 's been " . Wayne was a classic prodigy whose extraordinary skills made him the target of jealous parents . 
 The team that Gretzky played on at age six was otherwise composed of ten @-@ year @-@ olds . His first coach , Dick Martin , remarked that he handled the puck better than the ten @-@ year @-@ olds . According to Martin , " Wayne was so good that you could have a boy of your own who was a tremendous hockey player , and he 'd get overlooked because of what the Gretzky kid was doing . " The sweaters for ten @-@ year @-@ olds were far too large for Gretzky , who coped by tucking the sweater into his pants on the right side . Gretzky continued doing this throughout his NHL career . 
 By the age of ten , Gretzky had scored an astonishing 378 goals and 139 assists in just one season with the Brantford <unk> Steelers . His play now attracted media attention beyond his hometown of Brantford , including a profile by John <unk> in the Toronto Telegram in October 1971 . By age 13 , he had scored over 1 @,@ 000 goals . His play attracted considerable negative attention from other players ' parents , including those of his teammates , and he was often booed . According to Walter , the " capper " was being booed on " Brantford Day " at Toronto 's Maple Leaf Gardens in February 1975 . 
 When Gretzky was 14 , his family arranged for him to move to and play hockey in Toronto , partly to further his career , and partly to remove him from the uncomfortable pressure he faced in his hometown . The Gretzkys had to legally challenge the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association to win Wayne the right to play elsewhere , which was disallowed at the time . The Gretzkys won , and Wayne played Junior B hockey with the Toronto Nationals . He earned Rookie of the Year honours in the Metro Junior B Hockey League in 1975 – 76 , with 60 points in 28 games . The following year , as a 15 @-@ year @-@ old , he had 72 points in 32 games with the same team , then known as the Seneca Nationals . 
 Despite his offensive statistics , two teams bypassed him in the 1977 OMJHL Midget Draft of 16 @-@ year @-@ olds . The Oshawa Generals picked Tom McCarthy , and the Niagara Falls Flyers picked Steve Peters second overall . With the third pick , the Sault Ste . Marie Greyhounds selected Gretzky , even though Walter Gretzky had told the team that Wayne would not move to Sault Ste . Marie , a northern Ontario city that inflicts a heavy traveling schedule on its junior team . The Gretzkys made an arrangement with a local family they knew and Wayne played a season in the Ontario Hockey League at the age of 16 with the Greyhounds . It was with the Greyhounds that Wayne first wore the number 99 on his jersey . He originally wanted to wear number 9 — for his hockey hero Gordie Howe — but it was already being worn by teammate Brian <unk> . At coach <unk> MacPherson 's suggestion , Gretzky settled on 99 . 
 = = World Hockey Association = = 
 In 1978 , the World Hockey Association ( WHA ) league was in competition with the established NHL . The NHL did not allow the signing of players under the age of 20 , but the WHA had no rules regarding such signings . Several WHA teams courted Gretzky , notably the Indianapolis Racers and the Birmingham Bulls . Birmingham Bulls owner John F. Bassett wanted to confront the NHL by signing as many young and promising superstars as possible and saw Gretzky as the most promising young prospect . However , it was Racers owner Nelson Skalbania who , on June 12 , 1978 , signed 17 @-@ year @-@ old Gretzky to a seven @-@ year personal services contract worth $ 1 @.@ 75 million US . Gretzky scored his first professional goal against Dave Dryden of the Edmonton Oilers in his fifth game , and his second goal four seconds later . Skalbania opted to have Gretzky sign a personal @-@ services contract rather than a standard player contract in part because he knew a deal to take some WHA teams into the NHL was in the works . He also knew that the Racers could not hope to be included among those teams , and hoped to keep the Racers alive long enough to collect compensation from the surviving teams when the WHA dissolved , as well as any funds earned from selling the young star . 
 Gretzky only played eight games for Indianapolis . The Racers were losing $ 40 @,@ 000 per game . Skalbania told Gretzky he would be moved , offering him a choice between the Edmonton Oilers and the Winnipeg Jets . On the advice of his agent , Gretzky picked the Oilers , but the move was not that simple . On November 2 , Gretzky , goaltender Eddie Mio and forward Peter Driscoll were put on a private plane , not knowing where they would land and what team they would be joining . While in the air , Skalbania worked on the deal . Skalbania offered to play a game of backgammon with Winnipeg owner Michael Gobuty , the stakes being if Gobuty won , he would get Gretzky and if he lost , he had to give Skalbania a share of the Jets . Gobuty turned down the proposal and the players landed in Edmonton . Mio paid the $ 4 @,@ 000 bill for the flight with his credit card . Skalbania sold Gretzky , Mio and Driscoll to his former partner , and then @-@ owner of the Edmonton Oilers , Peter Pocklington . Although the announced price was $ 850 @,@ 000 , Pocklington actually paid $ 700 @,@ 000 . The money was not enough to keep the Racers alive ; they folded that December . 
 One of the highlights of Gretzky 's season was his appearance in the 1979 WHA All @-@ Star Game . The format was a three @-@ game series between the WHA All @-@ Stars and Dynamo Moscow played at Edmonton 's Northlands Coliseum . The WHA All @-@ Stars were coached by Jacques Demers , who put Gretzky on a line with his boyhood idol Gordie Howe and Howe 's son , Mark . In game one , the line scored seven points , and the WHA All @-@ Stars won by a score of 4 – 2 . In game two , Gretzky and Mark Howe each scored a goal and Gordie Howe picked up an assist as the WHA won 4 – 2 . The line did not score in the final game , but the WHA won by a score of 4 – 3 . 
 On Gretzky 's 18th birthday , January 26 , 1979 , Pocklington signed him to a 10 @-@ year personal services contract ( the longest in hockey history at the time ) worth C $ 3 million , with options for 10 more years . Gretzky finished third in the league in scoring at 110 points , behind Robbie Ftorek and Réal Cloutier . Gretzky captured the Lou Kaplan Trophy as rookie of the year , and helped the Oilers to first overall in the league . The Oilers reached the Avco World Trophy finals , where they lost to the Winnipeg Jets in six games . It was Gretzky 's only year in the WHA , as the league folded following the season . 
 = = NHL career = = 
 = = = Edmonton Oilers ( 1979 – 1988 ) = = = 
 After the World Hockey Association folded in 1979 , the Edmonton Oilers and three other teams joined the NHL . Under the merger agreement the Oilers , like the other surviving WHA teams , were to be allowed to protect two goaltenders and two skaters from being reclaimed by the established NHL teams . 
 Gretzky 's success in the WHA carried over into the NHL , despite some critics suggesting he would struggle in what was considered the bigger , tougher , and more talented league . 
 In his first NHL season , 1979 – 80 , Gretzky was awarded the Hart Memorial Trophy as the League 's Most Valuable Player ( the first of eight in a row ) and tied for the scoring lead with Marcel Dionne with 137 points . Although Gretzky played 79 games to Dionne 's 80 , Dionne was awarded the Art Ross Trophy since he scored more goals ( 53 vs. 51 ) . The season still stands as the highest point total by a first year player in NHL history . Gretzky became the youngest player to score 50 goals but was not eligible for the Calder Memorial Trophy , given to the top NHL rookie , because of his previous year of WHA experience . The Calder was awarded to Boston Bruins defenceman Ray Bourque . 
 In his second season , Gretzky won the Art Ross ( the first of seven consecutive ) with a then @-@ record 164 points , breaking both Bobby Orr 's record for assists in a season ( 102 ) and Phil Esposito 's record for points in a season ( 152 ) . He won his second straight Hart Trophy . In the first game of the 1981 playoffs versus the Montreal Canadiens , Gretzky had five assists . This was a single game playoff record . 
 During the 1981 – 82 season , he surpassed a record that had stood for 35 years : 50 goals in 50 games . Set by Maurice " Rocket " Richard during the 1944 – 45 NHL season and tied by Mike Bossy during the 1980 – 81 NHL season , Gretzky accomplished the feat in only 39 games . His 50th goal of the season came on December 30 , 1981 in the final seconds of a 7 – 5 win against the Philadelphia Flyers and was his fifth of the game . Later that season , Gretzky broke Esposito 's record for most goals in a season ( 76 ) on February 24 , 1982 , scoring three goals to help beat the Buffalo Sabres 6 – 3 . He ended the 1981 – 82 season with records of 92 goals , 120 assists , and 212 points in 80 games , becoming the only player in NHL history to break the two hundred @-@ point mark . That year , Gretzky became the first hockey player and first Canadian to be named Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year . He was also named 1982 " Sportsman of the Year " by Sports Illustrated . The Canadian Press also named Gretzky Newsmaker of the Year in 1982 . 
 The following seasons saw Gretzky break his own assists record three more times ( 125 in 1982 – 83 , 135 in 1984 – 85 , and 163 in 1985 – 86 ) ; he also bettered that mark ( 120 assists ) in 1986 – 87 with 121 and 1990 – 91 with 122 , and his point record one more time ( 215 , in 1985 – 86 ) . By the time he finished playing in Edmonton , he held or shared 49 NHL records , which in itself was a record . 
 The Edmonton Oilers finished first overall in their last WHA regular season . The same success was not immediate when they joined the NHL , but within four seasons , the Oilers were competing for the Stanley Cup . The Oilers were a young , strong team featuring , in addition to Gretzky , future Hall of Famers including forwards Mark Messier , Glenn Anderson and Jari Kurri , defenceman Paul Coffey , and goaltender Grant Fuhr . Gretzky was its captain from 1983 – 88 . In 1983 , they made it to the Stanley Cup Final , only to be swept by the three @-@ time defending champion New York Islanders . The following season , the Oilers met the Islanders in the Final again , this time winning the Stanley Cup , their first of five in seven years . 
 Gretzky was named an officer of the Order of Canada on June 25 , 1984 , for outstanding contribution to the sport of hockey . Since the Order ceremonies are always held during the hockey season , it took 13 years and 7 months — and two Governors General — before he could accept the honour . He was promoted to Companion of the Order of Canada in 2009 " for his continued contributions to the world of hockey , notably as one of the best players of all time , as well as for his social engagement as a philanthropist , volunteer and role model for countless young people " . The Oilers also won the Cup with Gretzky in 1985 , 1987 and 1988 . 
 When the Oilers joined the NHL , Gretzky continued to play under his personal services contract with Oilers owner Peter Pocklington . This arrangement came under increased scrutiny by the mid @-@ 1980s , especially following reports that Pocklington had used the contract as collateral to help secure a $ 31 million loan with the Alberta government @-@ owned Alberta Treasury Branches . Amid growing concern around the league that a financial institution might be able to lay claim to Gretzky 's rights in the event the heavily leveraged Pocklington were to declare bankruptcy , as well as growing dissatisfaction on the part of Gretzky and his advisers , in 1987 Gretzky and Pocklington agreed to replace the personal services contract with a standard NHL contract . 
 = = = The Gretzky rule = = = 
 In June 1985 , as part of a package of five rule changes to be implemented for the 1985 – 86 season , the NHL Board of Governors made a decision to introduce offsetting penalties , where neither team lost a man when coincidental penalties were called . The effect of calling offsetting penalties was felt immediately in the NHL , because during the early 1980s , when the Gretzky @-@ era Oilers entered a four @-@ on @-@ four or three @-@ on @-@ three situation with an opponent , they frequently used the space on the ice to score one or more goals . Gretzky held a press conference one day after being awarded the Hart Memorial Trophy , criticizing the NHL for punishing teams and players who previously benefited . The rule change became known as the Gretzky rule . The rule was changed back for the 1992 – 93 season . 
 = = = Strategy and effect on NHL play = = = 
 Gretzky had a major influence on the style of play of the Edmonton Oilers and in the NHL as a whole , helping to inspire a more team @-@ based strategy . Using this approach , the Oilers , led by Gretzky , became the highest scoring team in league history . 
 " He was , I think , the first Canadian forward to play a true team game " , said hockey writer and former NHL goalie Ken Dryden . The focus of the game prior to Gretzky 's arrival , he said , especially among the Canadian teams , was on the player with the puck — in getting the puck to a star player who would make the big play . " Gretzky reversed that . He knew he wasn 't big enough , strong enough , or even fast enough to do what he wanted to do if others focused on him . Like a magician , he had to direct attention elsewhere , to his four teammates on the ice with him , to create the momentary distraction in order to move unnoticed into the open ice where size and strength didn 't matter . . . . Gretzky made his opponents compete with five players , not one , and he made his teammates full partners to the game . He made them skate to his level and pass and finish up to his level or they would be embarrassed . " 
 Between 1982 and 1985 , the Edmonton Oilers averaged 423 goals a season , when no previous team had scored 400 , and Gretzky on his own had averaged 207 points , when no player before had scored more than 152 in one year . " In the past , defenders and teams had learned to devise strategies to stop opponents with the puck . Without the puck , that was interference . But now , if players without the puck skated just as hard , but faster , dodged and darted to open ice just as determinedly , but more effectively , as those with the puck , how do you shut them down ? " 
 In this , Gretzky added his considerable influence as the preeminent NHL star of his day to that of the Soviets , who had also developed a more team @-@ style of play , and had successfully used it against the best NHL teams , beginning in the 1972 Summit Series . " The Soviets and Gretzky changed the NHL game " , says Dryden . " Gretzky , the kid from Brantford with the Belarusian name , was the acceptable face of Soviet hockey . No Canadian kid wanted to play like Makarov or Larionov . They all wanted to play like Gretzky . " 
 At the same time , Gretzky recognizes the contributions of their coach in the success of the Oilers : " Under the guidance of Glen Sather , our Oiler teams became adept at generating speed , developing finesse , and learning a transition game with strong European influences . " 
 Gretzky explains his style of play further : 
 People think that to be a good player you have to pick the puck up , deke around ninety @-@ three guys and take this ungodly slap shot . No . Let the puck do all the moving and you get yourself in the right place . I don 't care if you 're Carl Lewis , you can 't <unk> that little black thing . Just move the puck : give it up , get it back , give it up . It 's like Larry Bird . The hardest work he does is getting open . The <unk> is cake . 
 That 's all hockey is : open ice . That 's my whole strategy : Find Open Ice . Chicago coach Mike Keenan said it best : " There 's a spot on the ice that 's no @-@ man 's land , and all the good goal scorers find it . " It 's a piece of frozen real estate that 's just in between the defense and the forward . 
 = = = " The Trade " = = = 
 Two hours after the Oilers won the Stanley Cup in 1988 , Gretzky learned from his father that the Oilers were planning to deal him to another team . Walter Gretzky had known for months after having been tipped off by Skalbania , but kept the news from Wayne so as not to upset him . According to Walter , Wayne was being " shopped " to Los Angeles , Detroit , and Vancouver , and Pocklington needed money as his other business ventures were not doing well . At first , Wayne did not want to leave Edmonton , but he later received a call while on his honeymoon from Los Angeles Kings owner Bruce McNall asking permission to meet and discuss the deal . Gretzky informed McNall that his prerequisites for a deal to take place were that Marty McSorley and Mike Krushelnyski join him as teammates in Los Angeles . Both McNall and Pocklington quickly agreed . After the details of the trade were finalized by the two owners , one final condition had to be met : Gretzky had to call Pocklington and request a trade . When Pocklington told Oilers general manager and head coach Glen Sather about his plans to trade Gretzky to L.A. , Sather tried to stop the deal , but when he found out that Gretzky had been involved in the negotiations , he changed his attitude and requested Luc Robitaille in exchange . The Kings refused , instead offering Jimmy Carson . 
 On August 9 , 1988 , in a move that heralded significant change in the NHL , the Oilers traded Gretzky , along with McSorley and Krushelnyski , to the Kings for Carson , Martin Gelinas , $ 15 million in cash , and the Kings ' first @-@ round draft picks in 1989 ( later traded to the New Jersey Devils – New Jersey selected Jason Miller ) , 1991 ( Martin Rucinsky ) , and 1993 ( Nick <unk> ) . " The Trade " , as it came to be known , upset Canadians to the extent that New Democratic Party House Leader Nelson Riis demanded that the government block it , and Pocklington was burned in effigy outside the Northlands Coliseum . Gretzky himself was considered a " traitor " by some Canadians for turning his back on his adopted hometown , and his home country ; his motivation was widely rumoured to be the furtherance of his wife 's acting career . 
 In Gretzky 's first appearance in Edmonton after the trade — a game that was nationally televised in Canada — he received a four @-@ minute standing ovation . The arena was sold out , and the attendance of 17 @,@ 503 was the Oilers ' biggest crowd ever to that date . Large cheers erupted for his first shift , his first touch of the puck , his two assists , and for Mark Messier 's body check of Gretzky into the boards . After the game , Gretzky took the opportunity to confirm his patriotism : " I 'm still proud to be a Canadian . I didn 't desert my country . I moved because I was traded and that 's where my job is . But I 'm Canadian to the core . I hope Canadians understand that . " After the 1988 – 89 season , a life @-@ sized bronze statue of Gretzky was erected outside the Northlands Coliseum , holding the Stanley Cup over his head . 
 = = = Los Angeles Kings ( 1988 – 1996 ) = = = 
 The Kings named Gretzky their alternate captain . He made an immediate impact on the ice , scoring on his first shot on goal in the first regular @-@ season game . The Kings got off to their best start ever , winning four straight on their way to qualifying for the playoffs . Despite being underdogs against the defending Stanley Cup Champion Edmonton Oilers in the Smythe Division semifinals , Gretzky led the Kings to a shocking upset of his old squad , spearheading the Kings ' return from a 3 – 1 series deficit to win the series 4 – 3 . He was nervous that Edmonton would greet him with boos , but they were eagerly waiting for him . For only the second time in his NHL career , Gretzky finished second in scoring , but narrowly beat out Pittsburgh 's Mario Lemieux ( who scored 199 points ) for the Hart Trophy as MVP . In 1990 , the Associated Press named him Male Athlete of the Decade . 
 Gretzky 's first season in Los Angeles saw a marked increase in attendance and fan interest in a city not previously known for following hockey . The Kings now boasted of numerous sellouts . Many credit Gretzky 's arrival with putting non @-@ traditional U.S. hockey markets on " the NHL map " ; not only did California receive two more NHL franchises ( the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim and San Jose Sharks ) during Gretzky 's tenure in L.A. , but his popularity in Southern California proved to be an impetus in the league establishing teams in other parts of the U.S. Sun Belt . 
 Gretzky was sidelined for much of the 1992 – 93 regular season with a back injury , and his 65 @-@ point output ended a record 13 @-@ year streak in which he recorded at least 100 points each season . However , he performed very well in the playoffs , notably when he scored a hat trick in game seven of the Campbell Conference Finals against the Toronto Maple Leafs . This victory propelled the Kings into the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time in franchise history , where they faced the Montreal Canadiens . After winning the first game of the series by a score of 4 – 1 , the team lost the next three games in overtime , and then fell 4 – 1 in the deciding fifth game where Gretzky failed to get a shot on net . 
 The next season , Gretzky broke Gordie Howe 's career goal @-@ scoring record and won the scoring title , but the team began a long slide , and despite numerous player and coaching moves , they failed to qualify for the playoffs again until 1998 . After the financially troubled McNall was forced to sell the Kings in 1994 , Gretzky 's relationship with the Kings ' new owners grew strained . Finally , in early 1996 , Gretzky requested a trade . During the 1994 – 95 NHL lockout , Gretzky and some friends ( including Mark Messier , Marty McSorley , Brett Hull , and Steve Yzerman ) formed the Ninety Nine All Stars Tour and played eight exhibition games in various countries . 
 = = = St. Louis Blues ( 1996 ) = = = 
 On February 27 , 1996 , Gretzky joined the St. Louis Blues in a trade for Patrice Tardif , Roman <unk> , Craig Johnson , and two draft picks ( Peter Hogan and Matt <unk> ) . He partially orchestrated the trade after reports surfaced that he was unhappy in Los Angeles . At the time of the trade , the Blues and New York Rangers emerged as front @-@ runners , but the Blues met his salary demands . Gretzky was immediately named the team 's captain . He scored 37 points in 31 games for the team in the regular season and the playoffs , and the Blues came within one game of the Conference Finals . However , the chemistry that everyone expected with winger Brett Hull never developed , and coach Mike Keenan publicly criticized him . Gretzky rejected a three @-@ year deal worth $ 15 million with the Blues , and on July 21 , he signed with the New York Rangers as a free agent , rejoining longtime Oilers teammate Mark Messier for a two @-@ year $ 8 million ( plus incentives ) contract . 
 = = = New York Rangers ( 1996 – 1999 ) = = = 
 Gretzky ended his professional playing career with the New York Rangers , where he played his final three seasons and helped the team reach the Eastern Conference Finals in 1997 . The Rangers were defeated in the Conference Finals in five games by the Philadelphia Flyers , despite Gretzky leading the Rangers in the playoffs with 10 goals and 10 assists . For the first time in his NHL career , Gretzky was not named captain , although he briefly wore the captain 's ' C ' in 1998 when captain Brian Leetch was injured and out of the lineup . After the 1996 – 97 season , Mark Messier signed a free agent contract with the Vancouver Canucks , ending the brief reunion of Messier and Gretzky after just one season . The Rangers did not return to the playoffs until 2006 , well after Gretzky retired . 
 In 1997 , prior to his retirement , The Hockey News named a committee of 50 hockey experts ( former NHL players , past and present writers , broadcasters , coaches and hockey executives ) to select and rank the 50 greatest players in NHL history . The experts voted Gretzky number one . Gretzky said that he would have voted Bobby Orr or Gordie Howe as the best of all time . 
 The 1998 – 99 season was his last as a professional player . He reached one milestone in this last season , breaking the professional total ( regular season and playoffs ) goal @-@ scoring record of 1 @,@ 071 , which had been held by Gordie Howe . Gretzky was having difficulty scoring this season and finished with only nine goals , contributing to this being the only season in which he failed to average at least a point per game , but his last goal brought his scoring total for his combined NHL / WHA career to 1 @,@ 072 , one more than Howe . As the season wound down , there was media speculation that Gretzky would retire , but he refused to announce his retirement . His last NHL game in Canada was on April 15 , 1999 , a 2 – 2 tie with the Ottawa Senators and the Rangers ' second @-@ to @-@ last game of the season . Following the contest , in a departure from the usual three stars announcement , Gretzky was awarded all three stars . Upon returning to New York , Gretzky announced he would retire after the Rangers ' last game of the season . 
 The final game of Gretzky 's career was a 2 – 1 overtime loss to the Pittsburgh Penguins on April 18 , 1999 , in Madison Square Garden . Although the game involved two American teams , both national anthems were played , with the lyrics slightly adjusted to accommodate Gretzky 's departure . In place of the lyrics " O Canada , we stand on guard for thee " , Bryan Adams ad @-@ libbed , " We 're going to miss you , Wayne Gretzky " . " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " , as sung by John <unk> , was altered to include the words " in the land of Wayne Gretzky " . Gretzky ended his career with a final point , assisting on the lone New York goal scored by Brian Leetch . At the time of his retirement , Gretzky was the second @-@ to @-@ last WHA player still active in professional hockey . Mark Messier , who attended the game along with other representatives of the Edmonton dynasty , was the last . 
 Gretzky told journalist Scott Morrison that the final game of his career was his greatest day . He recounted : 
 My last game in New York was my greatest day in hockey ... Everything you enjoy about the sport of hockey as a kid , driving to practice with mom [ Phyllis ] and dad [ Walter ] , driving to the game with mom and dad , looking in the stands and seeing your mom and dad and your friends , that all came together in that last game in New York . 
 = = International play = = 
 Gretzky made his first international appearance as a member of the Canadian national junior team at the 1978 World Junior Championships in Montreal , Quebec . He was the youngest player to compete in the tournament at the age of 16 . He went on to lead the tournament in scoring with 17 points to earn All @-@ Star Team and Best Forward honours . His 17 points remain the most scored by a 16 @-@ year @-@ old in the World Junior Championships . Canada finished with the bronze medal . 
 Gretzky debuted with the Team Canada 's men 's team at the 1981 Canada Cup . He led the tournament in scoring with 12 points en route to a second @-@ place finish to the Soviet Union , losing 8 – 1 in the final . Seven months later , Gretzky joined Team Canada for the 1982 World Championships in Finland . He notched 14 points in 10 games , including a two @-@ goal , two @-@ assist effort in Canada 's final game against Sweden to earn the bronze . Gretzky did not win his first international competition until the 1984 Canada Cup , when Canada defeated Sweden in a best @-@ of @-@ three finals . He led the tournament in scoring for the second consecutive time and was named to the All @-@ Star Team . 
 Gretzky 's international career highlight arguably came three years later at the 1987 Canada Cup . Gretzky has called the tournament the best hockey he had played in his life . Playing on a line with Pittsburgh Penguins superstar Mario Lemieux , he recorded a tournament @-@ best 21 points in nine games . After losing the first game of a best @-@ of @-@ three final series against the Soviets , Gretzky propelled Canada with a five @-@ assist performance in the second game , including the game @-@ winning pass to Lemieux in overtime , to extend the tournament . In the deciding game three , Gretzky and Lemieux once again combined for the game @-@ winner . With the score tied 5 – 5 and 1 : 26 minutes to go in regulation , Lemieux one @-@ timed a pass from Gretzky on a 3 – on – 1 with defenceman Larry Murphy . Lemieux scored to win the tournament for Canada ; the play is widely regarded as one of the most memorable plays in Canadian international competition . 
 The 1991 Canada Cup marked the last time the tournament was played under the " Canada Cup " moniker . Gretzky led the tournament for the fourth and final time with 12 points in seven games . He did not , however , compete in the final against the United States due to a back injury . Canada nevertheless won in two games by scores of 4 – 1 and 4 – 2 . Five years later , the tournament was revived and renamed the World Cup in 1996 . It marked the first time Gretzky did not finish as the tournament 's leading scorer with seven points in eight games for fourth overall . 
 Leading up to the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano , Japan , it was announced that NHL players would be eligible to play for the first time . Gretzky was named to the club on November 29 , 1997 . However , Gretzky , was passed over for the captaincy , along with several other Canadian veterans including Steve Yzerman and Ray Bourque in favour of the younger Eric Lindros . Expectations were high for the Canadian team , but the team lost to the Czech Republic in the semi @-@ finals . The game went to a shootout with a 1 – 1 tie after overtime , but Gretzky was controversially not selected by coach Marc Crawford as one of the five shooters , all of whom failed to score . Team Canada then lost the bronze medal game 3 – 2 to Finland to finish without a medal . The Olympics marked Gretzky 's eighth and final international appearance , finishing with four assists in six games . He retired from international play holding the records for most goals ( 20 ) , most assists ( 28 ) , and most overall points ( 48 ) in best @-@ on @-@ best hockey . 
 = = Skills and influences = = 
 = = = Style of play = = = 
 Gretzky 's size and strength were unimpressive — in fact , far below average for the NHL — but he is widely considered the smartest player in the history of the game . His reading of the game and his ability to improvise on the fly were unrivaled , and he could consistently anticipate where the puck was going to be and execute the right move at the right time . His coach at the Edmonton Oilers , Glen Sather , said , " He was so much more intelligent . While they were using all this energy trying to rattle his teeth , he was just skating away , circling , analyzing things . " 
 He was also considered one of the most creative players in hockey . " You never knew what he was going to do " , said hockey Hall of Famer Igor Larionov . " He was improvising all the time . Every time he took the ice , there was some spontaneous decision he would make . That 's what made him such a phenomenal player . " Gretzky 's ability to improvise came into the spotlight at the 1998 Olympics in Japan . Then an older player in the sunset of his career , he had been passed over for the captaincy of the team . But as the series continued , his unique skills made him a team leader . 
 The Canadians had trouble with the big ice . They had trouble with the European patterns and the lateral play and the endless , inventive cycling . … Slowly , as game after game went by and the concern continued to rise , Wayne Gretzky began climbing through the lineup . He , almost alone among the Canadians , seemed to take to the larger ice surface as if it offered more opportunity instead of obligation … . His playing time soared , as he was being sent on not just for power plays but double shifts and even penalty kills . By the final round … it was Wayne Gretzky who assumed the leadership both on and off the ice . 
 He passed and shot with prodigious skill . Hall of Fame defenceman Bobby Orr said of Gretzky , " He passes better than anybody I 've ever seen . " In his first two seasons in the NHL , his deft passing skills helped earn him a reputation as an ace playmaker , and so opposing defensemen focused their efforts on foiling his attempts to pass the puck to other scorers . In response , Gretzky started shooting on goal himself — and with exceptional effectiveness . He had a fast and accurate shot . " Wayne Gretzky was one of the most accurate scorers in NHL history " , said one biography . Statistics support the contention : Whereas Phil Esposito , who had set the previous goal @-@ scoring record , needed 550 shots to score 76 goals , Gretzky netted his 76th after only 287 shots — about half as many . He scored his all @-@ time record of 92 goals with just 369 shots . Because he was so light compared to other players , goalies were often surprised by how hard Gretzky 's shot was . <unk> called his shots " sneaky fast . " He also had a way of never hitting the puck with the same rhythm twice , making his shots harder to time and block . 
 = = = Size and strength = = = 
 When he entered the league in 1979 , critics opined that Gretzky was " too small , too wiry , and too slow to be a force in the NHL " . His weight was 160 pounds ( 73 kg ) , compared to the NHL average of 189 pounds ( 86 kg ) at that time . But that year , Gretzky tied for first place in scoring , and won the Hart trophy for the league 's most valuable player . In his second year in the league , weighing just 165 pounds , he broke the previous single @-@ season scoring record , racking up 164 points . The next year ( 1981 – 82 ) , at 170 pounds — still " a wisp compared to the average NHL player " — he set the all @-@ time goal @-@ scoring record , putting 92 pucks in the net . He weighed " about 170 pounds " for the better part of his career . He consistently scored last in strength tests among the Edmonton Oilers , bench pressing only 140 pounds ( 64 kg ) . 
 = = = Stamina , athleticism = = = 
 However , he had remarkable physical stamina . Like his hero , Gordie Howe , Gretzky possessed " an exceptional capacity to renew his energy resources quickly . " In 1980 , when an exercise physiologist tested the recuperative abilities of all of the Edmonton Oilers , Gretzky scored so high the tester said that he " thought the machine had broken . " His stamina is also indicated by the fact that Gretzky often scored late in the game . In the year he scored his record 92 goals , 22 of them went in the net during the first period , 30 in the second — and 40 in the third . 
 He also had strong general athletic skills . Growing up , he was a competitive runner and also batted <unk> for the Junior Intercounty Baseball League 's Brantford <unk> Braves in the summer of 1980 . As a result , he was offered a contract by the Toronto Blue Jays . ( History repeated itself in June 2011 , when Gretzky 's 17 @-@ year @-@ old son , Trevor , was drafted by the Chicago Cubs . Trevor signed with the Cubs the next month . ) Gretzky also excelled at box lacrosse , which he played during the summer . At age ten , after scoring 196 goals in his hockey league , he scored 158 goals in lacrosse . 
 According to him , lacrosse was where he learned to protect himself from hard checks : " In those days you could be hit from behind in lacrosse , as well as cross @-@ checked , so you had to learn how to roll body checks for self @-@ protection . " Gretzky adroitly applied this technique as a professional player , avoiding checks with such skill that a rumour circulated that there was an unwritten rule not to hit him . 
 Defensemen found Gretzky a most elusive target . Fellow Hockey Hall of Famer Denis Potvin compared attempting to hit Gretzky to " wrapping your arms around fog . You saw him but when you reached out to grab him your hands felt nothing , maybe just a chill . " The 205 @-@ pound ( 93 kg ) Potvin , a three @-@ time winner of the Norris Trophy for best defenceman , added that part of the problem in hitting Gretzky hard was that he was " a tough guy to dislike ... what was there to hate about Gretzky ? It was like running Gandhi into a corner . " 
 He received a good deal of cover from burly Oiler defensemen Dave <unk> and Marty McSorley . The latter followed Gretzky to the LA Kings in 1989 , where he played the same policeman role for several more years . But Gretzky discouraged unfair hits in another way . " If a guy ran him , Wayne would embarrass that guy " , said former Oiler Lee Fogolin . " He 'd score six or seven points on him . I saw him do it night after night . " 
 Commentators have noted Gretzky 's uncanny ability to judge the position of the other players on the ice — so much so that many suspected he enjoyed some kind of extrasensory perception . Sports commentators said that he played like he had " eyes in the back of his head . " Gretzky said he sensed other players more than he actually saw them . " I get a feeling about where a teammate is going to be " , he said . " A lot of times , I can turn and pass without even looking . " 
 Veteran Canadian journalist Peter Gzowski says that Gretzky seemed to be able to , in effect , slow down time . " There is an unhurried grace to everything Gretzky does on the ice . Winding up for the slapshot , he will stop for an almost imperceptible moment at the top of his arc , like a golfer with a rhythmic swing . " " Gretzky uses this room to insert an extra beat into his actions . In front of the net , eyeball to eyeball with the goaltender … he will … hold the puck one … extra instant , upsetting the anticipated rhythm of the game , extending the moment . … He distorts time , and not only by slowing it down . Sometimes he will release the puck before he appears to be ready , threading the pass through a maze of players precisely to the blade of a teammate 's stick , or finding a chink in a goaltender 's armour and slipping the puck into it … before the goaltender is ready to react . " 
 = = = Major coaching influences = = = 
 However , Gretzky denied that he had any exotic innate abilities . He said that many of his advantages were a result of his father 's brilliant coaching . 
 Some say I have a " sixth sense " … <unk> . I 've just learned to guess what 's going to happen next . It 's anticipation . It 's not God @-@ given , it 's Wally @-@ given . He used to stand on the blue line and say to me , " Watch , this is how everybody else does it . " Then he 'd shoot a puck along the boards and into the corner and then go chasing after it . Then he 'd come back and say , " Now , this is how the smart player does it . " He 'd shoot it into the corner again , only this time he cut across to the other side and picked it up over there . Who says anticipation can 't be taught ? 
 Gretzky learned much about hockey from his father on a backyard rink at his home . Walter Gretzky had been an outstanding Junior B hockey player . He cultivated a love of hockey in his sons and provided them with a backyard rink and drills to enhance their skills . On the backyard rink , nicknamed the " Wally Coliseum " , winter was total hockey immersion with Walter as mentor @-@ teacher as well as teammate . Walter 's drills were his own invention , but were ahead of their time in Canada . Gretzky would later remark that the Soviet National Team 's practice drills , which impressed Canada in 1972 , had nothing to offer him : " I 'd been doing these drills since I was three . My Dad was very smart . " 
 In his autobiography , Gretzky describes how at practices his dad would drill him on the fundamentals of smart hockey : 
 Wayne also salutes his coach at the Edmonton Oilers , Glen ( " <unk> " ) Sather , as an important influence in his development as a hockey player . Gretzky played for 10 years with the Oilers , with Sather as coach . " It 's as if my father raised me until age 17 , then turned me over to <unk> and said , ' You take him from here . ' " 
 = = = Early start = = = 
 Where Gretzky differed from others in his development was in the extraordinary commitment of time on the ice . " From the age of three to the age of 12 , I could easily be out there for eight to 10 hours a day " , Gretzky has said . In his autobiography , he wrote : 
 All I wanted to do in the winters was be on the ice . I 'd get up in the morning , skate from 7 : 00 to 8 : 30 , go to school , come home at 3 : 30 , stay on the ice until my mom insisted I come in for dinner , eat in my skates , then go back out until 9 : 00 . 
 When asked how he managed , at age ten , to score 378 goals in a single season , Gretzky explained , 
 See , kids usually don 't start playing hockey until they 're six or seven . Ice isn 't grass . It 's a whole new surface and everybody starts from ground zero . … By the time I was ten , I had eight years on skates instead of four , and a few seasons ' worth of ice time against ten @-@ year @-@ olds . So I had a long head start on everyone else . 
 = = = Study of game = = = 
 Much has been written about Gretzky 's highly developed hockey instincts , but he once explained that what appeared to be instinct was , in large part , the effect of his relentless study and practice of the game , in cooperation with his coaches . As a result , he developed a deep understanding of its shifting patterns and dynamics . Peter Gzowski says that the best of the best athletes in all sports understand the game so well , and in such detail , that they can instantly recognize and capitalize upon emerging patterns of play . Analyzing Gretzky 's hockey skills , he says , " What we take to be creative genius is in fact a reaction to a situation that he has stored in his brain as deeply and firmly as his own phone number . " Gzowski presented this theory to Gretzky , and he fully agreed . " Absolutely " , Gretzky said . " That 's a hundred percent right . It 's all practice . I got it from my Dad . Nine out of ten people think it 's instinct , and it isn 't . Nobody would ever say a doctor had learned his profession by instinct ; yet in my own way I 've put in almost as much time studying hockey as a medical student puts in studying medicine . " 
 = = Post @-@ retirement = = 
 Gretzky was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame on November 22 , 1999 , becoming the tenth player to bypass the three @-@ year waiting period . The Hall of Fame then announced that he would be the last player to do so . He was inducted into the IIHF Hall of Fame in 2000 . In addition , Gretzky 's jersey number 99 was retired league @-@ wide at the 2000 NHL All @-@ Star Game . The jersey retirement was similar to Major League Baseball 's retirement of the number 42 worn by Jackie Robinson . In October 1999 , Edmonton honoured Gretzky by renaming one of Edmonton 's busiest freeways , Capilano Drive – which passes by Rexall Place – to " Wayne Gretzky Drive " . Also in Edmonton , the local transit authority assigned a rush @-@ hour bus route numbered No. 99 which also runs on Wayne Gretzky Drive for its commute . In 2002 , the Kings held a jersey retirement ceremony and erected a life @-@ sized statue of Gretzky outside the Staples Center ; the ceremony was delayed until then so that Bruce McNall , who had recently finished a prison sentence , could attend . His hometown of Brantford , Ontario , renamed Park Road North to " Wayne Gretzky Parkway " as well as renaming the North Park Recreation Centre to The Wayne Gretzky Sports Centre . Brantford further inducted Gretzky into its " Walk of Fame " in 2004 . On May 10 , 2010 , he was awarded The Ambassador Award of Excellence by the LA Sports & Entertainment Commission . 
 = = = Phoenix Coyotes = = = 
 Almost immediately after retirement , several NHL teams approached him about an ownership role . In May 2000 , he agreed to buy a 10 % stake in the Phoenix Coyotes in a partnership with majority owner Steve Ellman , taking on the roles of alternate governor , managing partner and head of hockey operations . The Coyotes were in the process of being sold and Ellman convinced Gretzky to come on board , averting a potential move to Portland , Oregon . The sale was not completed until the following year , on February 15 , 2001 , after two missed deadlines while securing financing and partners before Ellman and Gretzky could take over . The sale completed with the addition to the partnership of Jerry Moyes . Gretzky convinced his long @-@ time agent Michael Barnett to join the team as its General Manager . 
 In 2005 , rumors began regarding Gretzky becoming the head coach of the team , but were denied by Gretzky and the Coyotes . He agreed to become head coach on August 8 , 2005 . Gretzky made his coaching debut on October 5 , and won his first game on October 8 against the Minnesota Wild . He took an indefinite leave of absence on December 17 to be with his ill mother . Phyllis Gretzky died of lung cancer on December 19 . Gretzky resumed his head @-@ coaching duties on December 28 . The Coyotes ' record at the end of the 2005 – 06 season was 38 – 39 – 5 , a 16 @-@ win improvement over 2004 – 05 ; they were 36 – 36 – 5 in games Gretzky coached . 
 In 2006 , Moyes became majority owner of the team . There was uncertainty about Gretzky 's role until it was announced on May 31 , 2006 that he had agreed to a five @-@ year contract to remain head coach . The Coyotes ' performance declined in 2006 – 07 , as the team ended the season 15th in their conference . During Gretzky 's coaching tenure , the Coyotes did not reach the postseason , and their best finish in the Western Conference standings was 12th . 
 On May 5 , 2009 , the Coyotes ' holding company , Dewey Ranch Hockey LLC , filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy . An ownership dispute involving Research in Motion 's Jim Balsillie ( with the intention of relocating the team ) and the NHL itself arose , which eventually ended up in Court . Gretzky did not attend the Coyotes ' training camp , leaving associate head coach Ulf Samuelsson in charge , due to an uncertain contractual status with the club , whose bankruptcy hearings were continuing . <unk> for the club had indicated that Gretzky would no longer be associated with the team after it emerged from bankruptcy , and on September 24 , 2009 , Gretzky stepped down as head coach and head of hockey operations of the Coyotes . Gretzky 's final head coaching record was 143 – 161 – 24 . 
 = = = Winter Olympics = = = 
 Gretzky was Executive Director of the Canadian men 's hockey team at the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City , Utah . On February 18 , he lashed out at the media at a press conference , frustrated with media and fan comments regarding his team 's uninspiring 1 – 1 – 1 start . His temper boiled over after Canada 's 3 – 3 draw versus the Czech Republic , as he launched a tirade against the perceived negative reputation of Team Canada amongst other national squads , and called rumours of dissent in the dressing room the result of " American propaganda " . " They 're loving us not doing well " , he said , referring to American hockey fans . American fans online began calling Gretzky a " crybaby " ; defenders said he was merely borrowing a page from former coach Glen Sather to take the pressure off his players . Gretzky addressed those comments by saying he spoke out to protect the Canadian players , and the tirade was not " staged " . The Canadian team won the gold medal , its first in 50 years . 
 Gretzky again acted as Executive Director of Canada 's men 's hockey team at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin , Italy , though not with the success of 2002 ; the team was eliminated in the quarterfinals and failed to win a medal . He was asked to manage Canada 's team at the 2005 Ice Hockey World Championships , but declined due to his mother 's poor health . 
 Gretzky also served as an ambassador and contributor in Vancouver winning the bidding process to host the 2010 Winter Olympics . He went to Prague , Czech Republic and was part of the presentation team . 
 Gretzky was the final Olympic torchbearer at the 2010 Winter Olympics . He was one of four who lit the cauldron at BC Place Stadium during the opening ceremony ( although one did not due to technical difficulties with one of the cauldron 's " arms " which failed to raise ) and then jogged out of the stadium , where he was then driven by police escorts through the streets of downtown Vancouver to light a second , outdoor cauldron near the Vancouver Convention Centre located in the city 's downtown waterfront district . Under IOC rules , the lighting of the Olympic cauldron must be witnessed by those attending the opening ceremony , implying that it must be lit at the location where the ceremony is taking place . Although another IOC rule states that the cauldron should be witnessed outside by the entire residents of the entire host city , this was not possible since the ceremony took place indoors . However , VANOC secretly built a second outdoor cauldron next to the West Building of the Vancouver Convention Centre , and Gretzky was secretly chosen to light this permanent cauldron . Quickly word spread through the downtown Vancouver area that Gretzky was indeed the final torchbearer , and very soon a crush of people came running after the police escort to cheer Gretzky on and hopefully catch a glimpse of him carrying the torch to the outdoor cauldron . For the 2010 Winter Olympics , he was named Special Advisor to the Canada men 's national ice hockey team . 
 = = = Heritage Classic = = = 
 Although Gretzky had previously stated he would not participate in any " old @-@ timers exhibition games " , on November 22 , 2003 , he took to the ice one last time to help celebrate the Edmonton Oilers ' 25th anniversary as an NHL team . The Heritage Classic , held at Commonwealth Stadium in Edmonton , was the first regular season NHL game to be played outdoors . It was preceded by the Mega Stars game , which featured Gretzky and many of his Oiler Dynasty teammates against a group of retired Montreal Canadiens players ( whose likes included Claude Lemieux , Guy Lafleur and others ) . Despite frigid temperatures , the crowd numbered 57 @,@ 167 , with an additional several million watching the game on television . The Edmonton alumni won the <unk> game 2 – 0 , while Montreal went on to win the regular season game held later that day , 4 – 3 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gretzky has made several TV appearances , including as a Dance Fever celebrity judge , and an ' unforgettable appearance ' , acting in a dramatic role alongside Victor Newman in The Young and the Restless in 1981 . In 1984 , he travelled to the Soviet Union to film a television program on Russian goaltender Vladislav Tretiak . Gretzky hosted the Saturday Night Live comedy program in 1989 . A fictional crime @-@ fighting version of him served as one of the main characters in the cartoon <unk> in 1991 . Gretzky has made over 60 movie , network television and video appearances as himself , according to IMDB , as of February 2012 . He is a naturalized American citizen . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 While serving as a judge on Dance Fever , Gretzky met actress Janet Jones . According to Wayne , Janet does not recall him being on the show . They met regularly after that , but did not become a couple until 1987 when they ran into each other at a Los Angeles Lakers game that Wayne and Alan Thicke were attending . Wayne proposed in January 1988 , and they were married on July 16 , 1988 in a lavish ceremony the Canadian press dubbed " The Royal Wedding " . Broadcast live throughout Canada from Edmonton 's St. Joseph 's Basilica , members of the Fire Department acted as ceremonial guards . The event reportedly cost Gretzky over US $ 1 million . Gretzky obtained US citizenship after he was traded to the Kings , but retains his Canadian citizenship . 
 He and Jones have five children : Paulina , Ty , Trevor , Tristan , and Emma . Paulina and golfer Dustin Johnson announced their engagement on August 18 , 2013 . Ty played hockey at Shattuck @-@ Saint Mary 's , but quit the sport , and now attends Arizona State University . Trevor signed a letter of intent in 2010 to play baseball for San Diego State University , but decided to turn pro after he was drafted by the Chicago Cubs in the 2011 MLB draft ; his $ 375 @,@ 000 signing bonus was negotiated by then @-@ Cubs GM Jim Hendry and Wayne himself . He was traded to the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim on March 20 , 2014 for Matt Scioscia , son of Angels ' manager Mike Scioscia . In June , he was named by manager Dave Stapleton to the roster of the Orem Owlz . 
 Wayne Gretzky 's uncle , Al Gretzky , ran as a Conservative candidate in London West in the 2006 federal election and for the libertarian Freedom Party of Ontario in the 2013 provincial by @-@ election for the Legislative Assembly of Ontario . He was unsuccessful both times . 
 = = = Business ventures = = = 
 Gretzky has owned or partnered in the ownership of two sports teams before becoming a partner in the Phoenix Coyotes . In 1985 , Gretzky bought the Hull Olympiques of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League for $ 175 @,@ 000 CA . During his ownership , the team 's colours were changed to silver and black , presaging the change in team jersey colours when he played for the Los Angeles Kings . For the first season that Gretzky played in Los Angeles , the Kings had their training camp at the Olympiques ' arena . Gretzky eventually sold the team in 1992 for $ 550 @,@ 000 CA . 
 In 1991 , Gretzky purchased the Toronto Argonauts of the Canadian Football League with Bruce McNall and John Candy . The club won the Grey Cup championship in the first year of the partnership but struggled in the two following seasons , and the partnership sold the team before the 1994 season . Only McNall 's name was engraved on the Grey Cup as team owner , but in November 2007 , the CFL corrected the oversight , adding Gretzky 's and Candy 's names . In 1992 , Gretzky and McNall partnered in an investment to buy a rare Honus Wagner T206 cigarette card for $ 451 @,@ 000 US , later selling the card . It most recently sold for $ 2 @.@ 8 million US . Gretzky was a board member and executive officer of the Hespeler Hockey Company . 
 As of May 2008 , Gretzky 's current business ventures include the " Wayne Gretzky 's " restaurant in Toronto near the Rogers Centre in downtown Toronto , opened in partnership with Tom Bitove in 1993 . Gretzky is also a partner in First Team Sports , a maker of sports equipment and Worldwide Roller Hockey , Inc . , an operator of roller hockey rinks . Gretzky 's appeal as a product endorser far surpassed that of other hockey players of his era . By 1995 , he was among the five highest @-@ paid athlete endorsers in North America , with deals from The Coca @-@ Cola Company , Domino 's Pizza , Sharp Corporation , and Upper Deck Company among others . He has endorsed and launched a wide variety of products , from pillow cases to insurance . The video game brand EA Sports included Gretzky in its 2010 title NHL Slapshot , and he had previously been an endorser for the 989 Sports games Gretzky NHL 2005 and Gretzky NHL 2006 . Gretzky also made an appearance on the music video for Nickelback 's " Rockstar " . Forbes estimates that Gretzky made US $ 93 @.@ 8 million from 1990 – 98 . 
 = = = Political activity = = = 
 During the 2015 Canadian federal election campaign , Gretzky endorsed the Conservative Party and Prime Minister Stephen Harper , and was featured at a campaign rally praising Harper by calling him " wonderful to the country . " As a non @-@ resident , Gretzky came under some criticism for this endorsement . In 2014 , Gretzky praised Harper at a United for Ukraine Gala event in Toronto calling him " one of the greatest prime ministers ever " . Earlier in 2015 , Gretzky endorsed Patrick Brown during his successful campaign for the leadership of the Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario . While Gretzky is a dual Canadian @-@ American citizen , he is currently unable to vote in Canadian elections as he has not lived in the country since 1988 . 
 In 2003 , Gretzky praised President of the United States George W. Bush and his 2003 invasion of Iraq saying : " The president of the United States is a great leader , I happen to think he 's a wonderful man and if he believes what he 's doing in Iraq is right , I back him 100 per cent . " 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Playing career = = = 
 Figures in boldface italics are NHL records . 
 GP 
 = Games played ; G = 
 Goals ; A 
 = Assists ; Pts = 
 Points ; PIM 
 = Penalty minutes ; + / – = 
 Plus / minus ; PP 
 = Powerplay goals ; SH = 
 <unk> goals ; GW = Game @-@ winning goals 
 = = = International performance = = = 
 = = = Coaching record = = = 
 Source : 
 = The Look of Love ( Madonna song ) = 
 " The Look of Love " is a song by American singer Madonna from the soundtrack album to the 1987 film Who 's That Girl . It was the third and final single release from the album and was released on November 25 , 1987 by Sire Records . While shooting for the film , then called Slammer , Madonna had requested that producer Patrick Leonard develop a downtempo song that captured the nature of her film persona . She later wrote the lyrics and melody to the backing track developed by Leonard , and the song became " The Look of Love " . Madonna was also inspired by actor James Stewart in the 1954 film Rear Window . 
 Featuring instrumentation from percussion , the song begins with a low bass synth line and a slow backing track , followed by Madonna singing the lyrics . Critically appreciated as a haunting track and noted as a " gem " on the album , " The Look of Love " reached the top ten of the charts in Belgium , Ireland , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom . It also charted in France , Germany and Switzerland , while reaching the top 20 of the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles . Madonna 's only live performances of the song were on her Who 's That Girl World Tour in 1987 . During the performance Madonna pretended that she was lost on the stage , like her film character . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In 1986 , Madonna was shooting for her third motion picture Who 's That Girl , known at the time as Slammer . Needing songs for the soundtrack of the movie , she contacted Patrick Leonard and Stephen Bray , with whom she had written and produced her third studio album True Blue in 1986 . Madonna explained to them that she needed an uptempo song and a downtempo song . She came to the studio one Thursday , as Leonard developed the chorus of the songs . He handed over that cassette to Madonna , who went to the backroom and finished the melody and the lyrics of the songs , while Leonard worked on the other parts . The uptempo song developed was " Who 's That Girl " , the first single from the soundtrack , and the downtempo song , developed and written the day after , was " The Look of Love " . Madonna later changed the film name to Who 's That Girl , rather than Slammer , considering it to be a better title . Regarding the development of the songs for the film , Madonna further explained 
 " I had some very specific ideas in mind , music that would stand on its own as well as support and enhance what was happening on screen and the only way to make that a reality was to have a hand in writing the tunes myself . [ ... ] The songs aren 't necessarily about Nikki [ her character name in the movie ] or written to be sung by someone like her , but there 's a spirit to this music that captures both what the film and the characters are about , I think . " 
 Madonna was inspired by the look that actor James Stewart gave actress Grace Kelly in the 1954 film Rear Window . Madonna said : " I can 't describe it , but that is the way I want someone to look at me when he loves me . It 's the most pure look of love and adoration . Like surrender . It 's devastating . " " The Look of Love " was released as the third single from the soundtrack in the United Kingdom , some European countries and Japan . " I Know It " , a track from Madonna 's self @-@ titled debut album , appeared as the B @-@ side . In 1989 , the song was used as the B @-@ side for the " Express Yourself " single release . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " The Look of Love " starts off with a low bass synth line and a slow backing track . It is followed by sound of percussion and a high register note , contrasting with the bassline . The song continues in this way up till the last verse , which is backed by the sound from an acoustic guitar . A two @-@ part vocal is found in the line " No where to run , no place to hide " . According to Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , Madonna 's voice sounds " expressive " when she sings the line " From the look of love " and utters the word " look " over the D minor chord present underneath . The word is sung in a higher note of the musical scale , thus giving an impression of the suspension like quality of the minor ninth chord , dissociating it from the harmony of the other notes . The song is set in the time signature of common time , with a moderate tempo of 80 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of D minor , with Madonna 's voice spanning the notes C5 to B ♭ 3 . " The Look of Love " has a basic sequence of C – Dm – Fm – B as its chord progression . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Rooksby called the song as " the other gem " of the Who 's That Girl soundtrack along with " Causing a Commotion , " and denoted it as " an expressive , understated track . " J. Randy Taraborrelli , author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography , commented that " ' The Look of Love ' was an exotic ballad . " Don Shewey from Rolling Stone said that the song was " so haunting that it would leave you thinking as to where your life is going . " John Evan Seery , author of Political theory for mortals : shades of justice , images of death , commented that the song portrayed Madonna 's " discipline of gaze " . Brian Hadden from Time found the song depressing . <unk> Francis from Vibe wrote : " For a such a commonly titled song , Madonna ’ s take does at least offer something a little different . [ ... ] ' The Look of Love ' actually sounds like part of the score – Madonna could well be singing over what was previously just the moody character development background synth music apparently present in every film in the ’ 80s . [ ... ] But its slow @-@ burn feel means the song is four minutes of not @-@ particularly @-@ intense brooding that never peaks – unlike a ballad . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " The Look of Love " was never released in the United States , and therefore did not enter any Billboard charts . In the United Kingdom , it was released on December 12 , 1987 , and entered the UK Singles Chart at number 15 . The next week , it reached a peak of nine on the chart , her first single to miss the top five since " Lucky Star " . The song was present for a total of seven weeks on the chart . According to the Official Charts Company , " The Look of Love " has sold 121 @,@ 439 copies in the United Kingdom , as of August 2008 . In Germany , the song debuted on the Media Control Charts at number 38 on January 24 , 1988 and moved to its peak of number 34 , the next week . It was present for a total of seven weeks on the chart . In Ireland , the song reached the top ten and peaked at number six . Across Europe , the song reached number nine in Belgium , number 23 in France , number eight in Netherlands and number 20 in Switzerland . On the European Hot 100 Singles , the song reached number 17 . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Madonna performed the song on her 1987 Who 's That Girl World Tour . It was the seventh song of the setlist . Madonna was dressed in gold lamé pants and a sleeveless top . As she finished the performance of " Causing a Commotion " , the spotlight was focused on her . The introductory music of " The Look of Love " started and Madonna roamed around the stage , pretending that she was lost . She wanted to portray her Who 's That Girl character Nikki , when she was lost in a similar sequence in the film . After she finished singing the song , Madonna pretended to walk forward by pushing through the air , as the conveyor belt took her backwards , ultimately taking her away from the stage . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = 2015 Spanish Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 Spanish Grand Prix , formally titled the Formula 1 Gran Premio de España Pirelli 2015 , was a Formula One motor race held on 10 May 2015 at the Circuit de Barcelona @-@ Catalunya in Montmeló , Spain . The race was the fifth round of the 2015 season and marked the forty @-@ fifth running of the Spanish Grand Prix as a round of the Formula One World Championship and the twenty @-@ fifth running at Catalunya . Mercedes driver Nico Rosberg took his first win of the season , his first in Spain and the ninth of his career . His team @-@ mate Lewis Hamilton finished second after a bad start , followed by Sebastian Vettel in third . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Mercedes were expected to be dominant in Barcelona , since it was at the circuit that their advantage per lap had been biggest in 2014 and they had shown strong form at the two pre @-@ season tests at the circuit . 
 After problems with their engine in the first races , which saw Daniel Ricciardo down to his last power unit after just four outings , Renault introduced a new , modified engine for the Spanish Grand Prix , aiming to improve both reliability and drivability . 
 Ferrari brought new parts to Barcelona , but Kimi Räikkönen was unsatisfied with the handling of his car , switching back to the earlier setup for the third practice session . He later conceded that " maybe it would have been better with the new bits . " McLaren arrived in Barcelona with a new dark grey livery in order to " improv [ e ] its visual impact [ ... ] for the floodlights increasingly used in twilight and night races , " a team representative said . 
 = = = = Tyres = = = = 
 On 22 April , Pirelli announced that the teams would be using the hard and medium tyres for this race , the same choice as the year before . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice sessions were held , two 1 @.@ 5 @-@ hour sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . Nico Rosberg was fastest on Friday morning , outpacing his team mate Lewis Hamilton by 0 @.@ 07 seconds . Rosberg raised the interest of the race stewards when he failed to stay to the left of the bollard at the pit lane entrance returning to pit lane after one of his runs . Mercedes lived up to the expectations by lapping almost a second quicker than the next fastest cars , the two Ferraris . Three test drivers took part in the session : Jolyon Palmer took the place of Romain Grosjean at the wheel of one of the Lotus cars as he had done in the two prior races ; Raffaele Marciello returned for Sauber after he had already filled the role at the Malaysian Grand Prix ; and making her debut for 2015 was Susie Wolff for Williams , finishing eight @-@ tenths of a second behind regular driver Felipe Massa . 
 Lewis Hamilton was quickest in the second session on Friday afternoon . Track temperatures rose by more than 20 ° C ( 36 ° F ) to almost 50 ° C ( 122 ° F ) at the end of the session . The extreme heat was especially hard on the tyres , which led to many drivers complaining about a lack of grip on track . Sebastian Vettel split the two Mercedes cars and finished second fastest , four @-@ tenths of a second slower than Hamilton , with Rosberg a further three tenths down . Daniel Ricciardo struggled with his engine yet again , which needed to be changed mid @-@ session , leaving him with only ten minutes of running . McLaren were yet to score in 2015 , but with Jenson Button finishing seventh and Fernando Alonso in eleventh place , they proved to be closer to the point ranks than in previous races . Romain Grosjean suffered from technical problems on his Lotus , which ended in the engine cover of his car shattering on the start @-@ finish straight , bringing out a red flag . 
 The third practice session , on Saturday morning , showed that Mercedes ' advantage on the softer , medium tyres was less significant than on the hard compound , meaning Vettel was able to lap within two @-@ tenths of a second of Rosberg , who was fastest . Hamilton spun in turn three , compromising his session . He finished third fastest , two @-@ tenths down on his team mate . Kimi Räikkönen , who was fifth fastest , was once more unsatisfied with the setup of his car , as he could be heard on the radio telling his team " Excellent . How can we be in wrong settings ? " 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . During the first session ( Q1 ) , Mercedes was able to proceed into the next part without having to use the softer and faster tyre compound . The same applied for Sebastian Vettel , while his Ferrari team mate Kimi Räikkönen was once again unhappy with his setup and recorded his time on the softer medium tyres . McLaren 's upward trend continued , as both cars progressed into Q2 , the first time the team achieved this in 2015 . The Manor Marussias took their familiar place at the back of the grid , Will Stevens in 19th almost three seconds off the time of the next @-@ slowest car . Both Force Indias as well as the Sauber of Marcus Ericsson did not make it into Q2 either . 
 The second part of qualifying saw both Mercedes drivers and Valtteri Bottas make only one timed run , which proved sufficient to get into Q3 comfortably . The second Sauber of Felipe Nasr was eliminated as were both McLarens and both Lotus cars , meaning that the last five rows on the grid would each be taken by pairs of team mates . 
 For the last session of qualifying , the top ten drivers had twelve minutes to set their times . Nico Rosberg recorded provisional pole on his first outing , a quarter of a second in front of team mate Lewis Hamilton . Unlike their team mates , both Felipe Massa in the Williams and Kimi Räikkönen did not have an extra set of fresh tyres , meaning they were caught out by the fast @-@ running Toro Rossos , who took the third row on the grid . Neither Rosberg nor Hamilton were able to improve on their times in their second running . For the first time in 2015 , it was not Hamilton who would start the race first on the grid , as Rosberg recorded the 16th pole position of his career . 
 = = = = Post @-@ qualifying = = = = 
 Toro Rosso were delighted with their result , even though Carlos Sainz , Jr. admitted he did not expect to fare as well in the race . Rosberg was satisfied with his first pole position of the season , commenting " of course I needed it sooner rather than later , " referring to the 27 @-@ point gap in the championship to Hamilton . As pole position is statistically of crucial importance to winning the race , even more so than in Monaco , being first on the grid was considered to be a big advantage for Rosberg . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 At the start of the race , Lewis Hamilton did not get away well , having to yield second place to Sebastian Vettel while also coming under pressure from Valtteri Bottas . Nico Rosberg remained in front while the rest of the field got through the first corners without incidents . Kimi Räikkönen had a good first lap and moved up to fifth . The Toro Rossos were unable to capitalize on their good qualifying performances and steadily headed down the order . As Rosberg was developing a lead , Hamilton told his team that overtaking Vettel on track was " impossible . " Mercedes switched him to a three @-@ stop strategy , starting on lap 14 , but his first stop was marred by a problem with the wheel nut , not being able to get ahead of Rosberg who pitted two laps later without problems . During the following laps , Hamilton tried to overtake Vettel on track , but to no avail . Unlike the top runners , Kimi Räikkönen did not take the medium tyres during his middle stint , but chose instead to run on the hard compound , meaning he would be a force to watch towards the end of the race . 
 Battles for position in midfield during the opening laps saw the two Lotus cars touch , damaging Pastor Maldonado 's rear wing . When he came into the pit for his first stop , the entire right side plate of the wing was taken off , later forcing him to retire on lap 47 . Fernando Alonso had previously become the first retirement of the race when his brake failed due to a torn @-@ off visor lodging in his rear brake . When he came into the pits on lap 28 , he overshot his pit box and hit a mechanic , and was unable to continue . Red Bull , who had a troublesome weekend , qualifying behind their sister team Toro Rosso , made up for lost ground and moved ahead to eventually finish seventh and tenth . 
 Up in front , Hamilton put his three @-@ stop strategy to good use , consistently setting the fastest laps on track . On lap 46 , Rosberg pitted for the second and final time , emerging just a few seconds ahead of Hamilton , who quickly moved past him into the lead . Hamilton came in for his last stop on lap 51 , easily retaining second place in front of Vettel 's Ferrari . He subsequently tried to close the gap to Rosberg in front , but a 19 @-@ second lead proved impossible to overcome in the remaining 14 laps . Räikkönen had closed in on Valtteri Bottas and tried to overtake him during the last laps of the race , but was eventually unable to do so , leaving him in fifth position , lamenting his poor qualifying performance . As the race drew to a close , Rosberg crossed the line for his first victory of the season and the ninth of his career . Rosberg 's victory made him the ninth different winner of the Spanish Grand Prix in as many years . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Race winner Nico Rosberg said he had a " perfect weekend " during the podium interview conducted by Spanish TV presenter Maria Serrat . At the official post @-@ race press conference , Lewis Hamilton conceded that it had " been a long time since I 've had such a poor start " and went on to explain how difficult it is to overtake on the circuit . Sebastian Vettel admitted that had Hamilton 's first stop not gone wrong , it would have been unlikely to stay ahead of him at that point . 
 Kimi Räikkönen , who had decided to drive with the old setup of the car , later stated that he had made a " sacrifice " for the team , saying " I think we learned a lot from going for two separate cars following yesterday and today so I 'm more confident we can see things more balanced . " He went on to point out that the characteristics of the circuit suited Mercedes more than Ferrari , as they had more downforce and raw speed , stating he was not too concerned with the " bigger than normal " gap , after Vettel had finished 45 seconds behind Rosberg . 
 Following another difficult weekend and constant problems with their underpowered Renault power units , Red Bull repeated their threats voiced earlier in the season to exit the sport . Their motorsport advisor Helmut Marko was quoted saying : " If we don 't have a competitive engine in the near future , then either Audi is coming or we are out . " Audi had just two weeks earlier stated that it had " no plans to enter Formula 1 . " Team principal Christian Horner had earlier declared the 2015 season a " write @-@ off " based on their engine reliability issues . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Parnell Dickinson = 
 Parnell Dickinson ( born March 14 , 1953 ) is a former American football quarterback who played in the National Football League ( NFL ) for one season . Over the course of his career , he played in eight games for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , completed 15 of 39 passes for 210 yards , threw one touchdown and five interceptions , and finished his career with a passer rating of 25 @.@ 5 . 
 A four @-@ year starting quarterback at Mississippi Valley State University , Dickinson was drafted by the Buccaneers in the seventh round of the 1976 NFL Draft . He served as the backup quarterback behind Steve Spurrier his rookie season , and saw playing time in eight games , including one start against the Miami Dolphins . His season ended after suffering an injury in a game against the Cleveland Browns . He recovered from the injury and tried to make the team in 1977 , but was cut , ending his career . After retiring , he became a high school offensive coordinator in Tampa . 
 = = College career = = 
 Dickinson played college football at Mississippi Valley State . He was the quarterback for the team during his freshman year in 1972 . His performances that season included a game against the Southern Jaguars where he completed 15 of 31 passes for 180 yards and rushed for two touchdowns in a 23 – 13 win . At the end of the season , Dickinson was named to the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics ( NAIA ) all @-@ star team as a quarterback alongside Ralph Brock . In his sophomore year , Dickinson was awarded the team 's top sportsman award , given to the player with the best attitude and morale . 
 In 1974 , his junior year , Dickinson threw for 1 @,@ 667 yards and 21 touchdowns over the course of the season . In his first three seasons , he led the Southwestern Athletic Conference in total offense . Dickinson 's performances his senior year included a comeback victory over Prairie View A & M , when he threw a touchdown pass with just over a minute left to win the game , 27 – 26 after being down 26 – 14 with under four minutes left . After the season ended , he was named to the Black College All @-@ American football team for the second year in a row . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 After graduating from college , Dickinson was selected by the expansion Tampa Bay Buccaneers with the 183rd overall pick in the seventh round of the 1976 NFL Draft . Buccaneers ' head coach John McKay said that Dickinson was considered the second best prospect on his draft board behind Richard Todd . Steve Spurrier had the starting job wrapped up when he was signed to the team , and as a result Dickinson spent the offseason competing for a backup quarterback spot alongside Bill Cappleman and James Foote . Dickinson started off training camp by throwing the hardest passes of the four quarterbacks , and had a few accuracy issues in the process . Dickinson served as the second @-@ string quarterback throughout the preseason . In a game against the Green Bay Packers , he led the Buccaneers to their first touchdown as a team . By the end of preseason , his place was on the roster was solidified behind Spurrier , as Cappleman and Foote were cut and replaced by Gary Valbuena and Larry Lawrence . 
 Dickinson completed one of five passes for 15 yards in his first professional game against the Houston Oilers after coming in for Spurrier late in the game . The following week , the Buccaneers faced the San Diego Chargers . In that game , Dickinson again came into the game , rushing three times for 54 yards and throwing an interception that was returned by Tom Hayes for a touchdown . He did not play against the Buffalo Bills the following week , but Spurrier ended up getting injured , meaning that Dickinson was slated to possibly get his first NFL start against the Baltimore Colts . Spurrier ended up starting the game , but Dickinson did see playing time against the Colts , completing one of five passes for 12 yards and throwing an interception in a 42 – 17 loss ; he attempted only one pass the following week in a game against the Cincinnati Bengals . 
 Two weeks after the Bengals ' game , Dickinson was slated to start against the Miami Dolphins on October 24 . In the game , he completed all four passes he attempted for 51 yards , and led a 71 yard touchdown drive . However , he suffered a twisted foot and ankle during the game , and was sidelined for what was then an indefinite amount of time . Dickinson returned two weeks later , failing to complete a pass in a game against the Denver Broncos , and allowing another interception that was returned by John <unk> for a touchdown . Dickinson had his most productive outing the following week , completing 7 of 13 passes for 103 yards in a loss to the New York Jets . His last game of the season was against the Cleveland Browns . He completed two of three passes for 29 yards in the fourth quarter . After completing the first two passes , he was intercepted by Terry Brown and was hit late after throwing the pass . The result was torn ligaments in his left knee , which ended his season . Despite the season @-@ ending injury , there was still optimism about Dickinson being the Buccaneers ' quarterback of the future due to his scrambling ability . 
 Dickinson went through knee surgery during the offseason , but there was still concern about whether he had a future in the NFL . That was set aside when he was considered to be progressing well in his recovery as of early July 1977 . During the Buccaneers ' offseason , the quarterbacks on the roster changed entirely , with Dickinson being the only holdover ; Gary Huff was now the starter , and Dickinson was fighting for a backup role alongside Mike Boryla and Randy Hedberg . After the Buccaneers lost Boryla and Huff to injuries , the former for the season , Dickinson ended up being the starting quarterback for the team 's final preseason game against the Bills . In the game , Dickinson completed 2 of 12 passes for -2 yards and was sacked three times in a 17 – 6 loss . A week after the game against the Bills , Dickinson was released by the Buccaneers along with four other players . The Buccaneers re @-@ signed him after Huff got injured in late October , but Dickinson was again released a couple weeks later . 
 In 1978 , Dickinson signed with the New England Patriots . Their quarterback situation was set , and in order to make his way onto an NFL roster , he joined the team as a wide receiver . He was released from the team a month later , and ended his career with the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats of the Canadian Football League . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After retiring from football , Dickinson became an insurance salesman and opened two daycare centers . He also became offensive coordinator at Tampa Catholic High School in the 1980s after being recruited by fellow Buccaneer Dave Lewis . In 1992 , Dickinson became an inaugural member of the Southwestern Athletic Conference Hall of Fame . 
 = 1900 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1900 Atlantic hurricane season featured seven known tropical cyclones , three of which made landfall in the United States . The first system , Hurricane One , was initially observed on August 27 . The final storm , Tropical Storm Seven , transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on October 29 . These dates fall within the period with the most tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic . Every storm of the season except Tropical Storm Seven existed simultaneously with another tropical cyclone . 
 Of the season 's seven tropical cyclones , three reached hurricane status . Furthermore , two of those three strengthened into major hurricanes , which are Category 3 or higher on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The strongest cyclone of the season , the first hurricane , peaked at Category 4 strength with 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) winds . Upon striking Texas shortly after peak intensity , it produced a devastating storm surge in the Galveston area , with nearly destroyed the city and caused at least 8 @,@ 000 fatalities . Nicknamed the " Galveston hurricane of 1900 " , it remains the deadliest natural disaster in the history of the United States . The hurricane also caused about $ 31 @.@ 35 million ( 1900 USD ) in damage . Impact from other tropical cyclones was generally minor , though the remnants of Tropical Storm Five resulted in 1 death and at least $ 100 @,@ 000 in damage in Atlantic Canada . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 Tropical cyclogenesis began with the development of the first hurricane on August 27 well west of Cape Verde . It was the strongest storm of the season , peaking as a Category 4 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 936 mbar ( 27 @.@ 6 inHg ) . This was abnormally late , as the average date of development of the first tropical storm between 1944 and 1996 was July 11 . In comparison , the latest date of the first tropical storm during the satellite era was Hurricane Anita on August 29 , 1977 . During the month of September , which is the climatological peak of hurricane season , three additional tropical cyclones formed , two of which were hurricanes . After the third hurricane dissipated on September 23 , activity went dormant for nearly 2 weeks , until the fifth tropical storm formed near the Lesser Antilles on October 4 . As it was becoming extratropical , a sixth tropical cyclone developed in the Bay of Campeche on October 10 . The final system formed in the eastern Caribbean Sea , crossed Hispaniola , and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone between Bermuda and the East Coast of the United States on October 28 . 
 By far , the storm that caused the most devastation was Hurricane One , nicknamed the " Galveston hurricane " . Its storm surge submerged much of Galveston Island in Texas , killing between 6 @,@ 000 and 12 @,@ 000 people . Official estimates put the death toll at approximately 8 @,@ 000 . As a result , it is currently the deadliest natural disaster in the history of the United States . At the time , it was also the second deadliest tropical cyclone in the Atlantic basin , behind only the Great Hurricane of 1780 , which killed at least 22 @,@ 000 people in the Lesser Antilles . However , the Galveston hurricane was surpassed in 1998 by Hurricane Mitch , which caused more than 11 @,@ 000 fatalities in Central America . The storm was also among the deadliest in Canada , where at least 102 people were killed . Few other tropical cyclones during the 1900 Atlantic hurricane season caused any damage or fatalities . However , the extratropical remnants of Tropical Storm Five brought moderate damage to Canada . The storm caused 1 fatality and about $ 100 @,@ 000 in losses , mainly to railroads . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 81 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One " The Galveston Hurricane " = = = 
 Early on August 27 , a ship encountered the first tropical storm of the season , while located about 1 @,@ 160 miles ( 1 @,@ 870 km ) east of the southernmost islands of Cape Verde . It slowly strengthened while moving steadily west @-@ northwestward and entered the northeastern Caribbean Sea on August 30 . The storm moved south of Puerto Rico and made landfall in Dominican Republic as a weak tropical storm on September 2 . It weakened slightly while crossing Hispaniola , before re @-@ emerging into the Caribbean Sea later that day . On September 3 , the cyclone struck modern day Santiago de Cuba Province and then slowly drifted along the southern coast of Cuba . Upon reaching the Gulf of Mexico on September 6 , the storm strengthened into a hurricane , while situated near Dry Tortugas . 
 Significant intensification followed and the system peaked as a Category 4 hurricane with winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) on September 8 . Early on the next day , it made landfall near modern day Jamaica Beach , Texas with winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) . Around that time , its minimum barometric pressure of 936 mbar ( 27 @.@ 6 inHg ) was observed . It weakened quickly after moving inland and fell to tropical storm intensity late on September 9 . The storm turned east @-@ northeastward and became extratropical over Iowa on September 11 . The extratropical system strengthened while accelerating across the Midwestern United States , Ontario , Quebec , northern New England , and then New Brunswick before reaching the Gulf of Saint Lawrence on September 13 . Later that day , the extratropical remnants struck Newfoundland . It then reached the far North Atlantic Ocean and began to weaken , finally dissipating near Iceland on September 15 . 
 The storm brought heavy rainfall to Cuba , with up to 12 @.@ 58 inches ( 320 mm ) in a 24 ‑ hour period in the city of Santiago de Cuba . Much of Florida experienced tropical storm force winds , though no damage occurred . In Texas , strong winds were reported in the Galveston area , reaching 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . Storm surges between 8 and 12 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 and 3 @.@ 7 m ) inundated the entire Galveston Island . Every house sustained damage , with at least 3 @,@ 636 destroyed . In Galveston alone , approximately 30 @,@ 000 were left homeless , out of a total population of 37 @,@ 000 . The actual death toll is unknown , though it is thought to be at least 8 @,@ 000 . Thus , the 1900 Galveston hurricane was the deadliest natural disaster in the history of the United States . Property damage from the storm was estimated at $ 30 million . Hurricane force winds and storm surge inundated portions of southern Louisiana , though no significant damage or fatalities were reported . Further north , the storm and its remnants continued to produce heavy rains gusty winds , which downed telegraph wires in Illinois , Kentucky , New York , Michigan , and Ohio . Another fatality occurred in New York City when gusty winds knocked over a sign and struck a 23 @-@ year @-@ old man . The remnants brought severe impact to Canada . In the province of Ontario , losses reached about $ 1 @.@ 35 million , with $ 1 million to crops . There were at least 107 deaths in Canada , mostly due to sunken vessels near Newfoundland and the French territory of Saint @-@ Pierre . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A ship reported strong gales in the vicinity of Cape Verde on September 7 . Thus , HURDAT indicates that the second tropical storm of the season formed early on September 7 , while located about 220 miles ( 350 km ) west of the southernmost islands of Cape Verde . It quickly strengthened to a strong tropical storm on September 8 , but then maintained that intensity for nearly 5 days . The system was not tracked until being encountered by the steamship Hungaria on September 13 , at which time it was already a hurricane . Originally , the system was listed as Hurricane Four , it was operationally believed to have developed after the next two tropical cyclones . Later on September 14 , it strengthened further into a Category 2 hurricane while moving northwestward . 
 Re @-@ curving northward , the system intensified into a Category 3 hurricane on September 16 . At 1800 UTC , the hurricane peaked with maximum sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . However , it weakened to a Category 2 hurricane later on September 17 . Shortly thereafter , the storm bypassed southeast of Bermuda , bring gusty winds but little impact . It then re @-@ curved northeastward . The system weakened back to a Category 1 hurricane on September 18 . Later that day , it weakened to a tropical storm and then to a tropical depression early on September 19 . The storm persisted for several more hours , until dissipated about 390 miles ( 630 km ) southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 Ship reports indicates that a tropical storm developed on September 8 at 1200 UTC , while located about 175 miles ( 280 km ) east of the <unk> Islands , Guinea @-@ Bissau . The storm gradually strengthened as it was heading west @-@ northward . By late on September 9 , the system strengthened into a hurricane . It passed southwest of Cape Verde on the following day . The storm then intensified slowly , becoming a Category 2 hurricane early on September 12 . Around that time , the hurricane peaked with maximum sustained winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . Later on September 12 , it re @-@ curved north @-@ northwestward . After turning north @-@ northeast , the storm began executing a small cyclonic loop on September 14 . 
 A weakening trend soon occurred , with it weakening to a Category 1 hurricane early on September 15 . About four days later , the hurricane completed its cyclonic loop and then headed west @-@ northwestward . The system weakened to a tropical storm early on September 20 . During the next few days , the storm decelerated and turned westward . Late on September 22 , it weakened to a tropical depression . The depression continued westward , until dissipating at 1800 UTC on September 23 , while located about 745 miles ( 1 @,@ 200 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Four = = = 
 Weather maps first indicated a tropical storm over the northwestern Caribbean Sea on September 11 . Heading northwestward , the system brushed the Yucatan Peninsula as weak tropical storm . Late on September 11 , it peaked with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 005 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) , while located in the southeastern Gulf of Mexico . Early on September 13 , the storm re @-@ curved northeastward and began weakening . At 0600 UTC on September 13 , it made landfall near Venice , Louisiana at the same intensity . The storm weakened slightly and briefly moved offshore , before making another landfall near Ocean Springs , Mississippi with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . 
 Early on September 14 , the storm weakened to a tropical depression . It weakened slowly while moving northeastward across the Deep South , before dissipating near Athens , Georgia on September 15 . Operationally , it was considered the third tropical cyclone of the season . A telegraph from the Weather Bureau headquarters in Washington , D.C. warned vessels to remain in port for portions of the Gulf Coast of the United States . Strong gales were experienced along the coast from eastern Louisiana to western Florida and severely disrupted telegraph services in the region . The remnants brought heavy rains from Virginia to New England . Rough seas along the coast of New Jersey washed the schooner Willie ashore . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 Observations from a ship indicate that the fifth tropical depression of the season developed at 0600 UTC on October 4 , while located about 230 miles ( 370 km ) northeast of Anguilla . Initially , the system remained weak and failed to strengthen into a tropical storm until October 7 . It began to execute a cyclonic loop by early on the following day . Further intensification occurred and the storm peaked with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) early on October 9 . Eventually , it accelerated north @-@ northeastward and became extratropical early on October 10 . The remnants moved northward and eventually curved northeastward . Late on October 11 , the extratropical remnants struck Nova Scotia . It continued rapidly across Atlantic Canada and re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic . By October 14 , the remnants dissipated near the southern tip of Greenland . 
 The remnants of Tropical Storm Five brought severe impact to Canada . In Nova Scotia , 13 schooners were grounded , while 2 were destroyed . Strong winds downed telegraph wires in the eastern end of the province , while barns were de @-@ roofed and trees were felled in Bayfield . High tides in New Brunswick inundated portions of Saint John , with some houses having up to 18 inches ( 460 mm ) of water . Other low @-@ lying areas were flooded . <unk> disrupted the Canadian Pacific Railway service and swept away portions of the tracks . The cost to repairs the tracks was estimated at $ 100 @,@ 000 . There was also damage to highways and bridges . A child drowned after attempting to cross a swollen creek . On Prince Edward Island , winds damaged small buildings and knocked chimneys of some houses . Electrical wires were reported down in Charlottetown . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Six = = = 
 The sixth tropical storm of the season developed in the Bay of Campeche on October 10 . Operationally , it was believed that the storm originated over eastern Cuba . Moving rapidly north @-@ northeastward across the Gulf of Mexico , the storm peaked with maximum sustained winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 008 mbar ( 29 @.@ 8 inHg ) early on October 11 . The storm re @-@ curved east @-@ northeastward and made landfall near modern day Horseshoe Beach , Florida at the same intensity early on October 12 . 
 It emerged into the Atlantic Ocean late on October 12 , shortly before becoming extratropical while located about 35 miles ( 56 km ) east of Jekyll Island , Georgia . The remnants moved along the East Coast of the United States , striking the Outer Banks of North Carolina , Long Island in New York , and New England . It continued inland over Canada , until dissipating over Labrador on October 15 . Impact from the storm was generally minor . Rainfall and gusty winds were reported between Florida and the Carolinas . Further north , it brought brisk to strong winds to New Jersey and southern New England . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Seven = = = 
 Telegraph reports indicate that a tropical depression developed in the eastern Caribbean Sea on October 24 . The depression moved northwestward without differentiating in intensity before making landfall near San Cristóbal , Dominican Republic with winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . It did not weaken while crossing Hispaniola and instead strengthened into a tropical storm shortly after emerging into the Atlantic Ocean near the northwestern tip of Haiti . Late on October 27 , the storm re @-@ curved north @-@ northeastward and pass through the eastern Bahamas . Around that time , it peaked with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . 
 Early on October 28 , the storm accelerated and re @-@ curved slightly to the northeast . At 0000 UTC on October 29 , it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while located about 310 miles ( 500 km ) northwest of Bermuda . The extratropical remnants persisted until dissipating later on October 29 . No impact was reported in either Dominican Republic or Haiti . Much of eastern Cuba reported light rains , particularly in the provinces of Camagüey and Santiago de Cuba . Strong winds were reported throughout the Bahamas , though no damage occurred . As far east as Jupiter , Florida , sustained winds reached 32 mph ( 51 km / h ) . 
 = Oklahoma State Highway 74 = 
 State Highway 74 , usually abbreviated as SH @-@ 74 or OK @-@ 74 ( or simply Highway 74 ) is the numbering of two different highways maintained by the U.S. state of Oklahoma . These highways were once a single major north – south route , connecting Oklahoma City to more rural parts of the state . The original road stretched from SH @-@ 7 near <unk> , Oklahoma to SH @-@ 11 west of Deer Creek . 
 Due to encroaching Interstate highways — especially Interstate 35 — the middle section of the route through Norman , Moore , and Oklahoma City was decommissioned in 1979 for reasons of redundancy . However , some maps show SH @-@ 74 as concurrent with I @-@ 35 , I @-@ 240 , and I @-@ 44 , thus linking the two sections . 
 The north section of the route is 91 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 147 @.@ 3 km ) in length , while the southern section is 52 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 84 @.@ 5 km ) long . This leads to a total length of 144 miles ( 232 km ) . 
 = = Route descriptions = = 
 = = = Southern section = = = 
 From the southern terminus at SH @-@ 7 , the southern section of SH @-@ 74 goes due north to Elmore City , where it intersects with SH @-@ 29 . After a couple of turns in the Elmore City area , the highway continues due north to Maysville and SH @-@ 19 . Still continuing northward , the highway meets the southern terminus of State Highway 24 , and continues into Purcell . 
 In Purcell , SH @-@ 74 overlaps US @-@ 77 and SH @-@ 39 . It finally splits off and begins heading west . From here , the highway becomes more hilly and curvy as it heads toward Washington . The road never actually enters Washington , passing just one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of it . However , Washington is accessible via SH @-@ 24 , which has its northern terminus at SH @-@ 74 as well . ( Both termini of SH @-@ 24 are at SH @-@ 74 . ) 
 The highway then returns to a due north course after its intersection with SH @-@ 24 . It goes through the town of Goldsby and then ends at I @-@ 35 . 
 = = = Northern section = = = 
 The highway 's northern section begins at a stack interchange with Interstate 44 in Bethany . The first part of the northern section is a freeway , called the Lake Hefner Parkway because part of it runs along the east shore of Lake Hefner . The freeway , a major part of the Oklahoma City freeway system , serves the northwestern part of Oklahoma City . At the Kilpatrick Turnpike , the freeway comes to an end , but Highway 74 continues northward on Portland Avenue . 
 The road passes through the towns of Crescent , Covington , and Garber , Oklahoma as it continues , again on a due north course . Between Covington and Garber the road intersects with US @-@ 64 / 412 , which can be used to access Enid , just 14 miles ( 22 @.@ 5 km ) to the west . 
 Twenty miles ( 32 @.@ 2 km ) north of US @-@ 412 , the highway meets US @-@ 60 near Lamont . The two roads share a brief concurrency before splitting off again . Eight miles ( 12 @.@ 9 km ) north of this , SH @-@ 74 intersects with SH @-@ 11 between Deer Creek and Numa , Oklahoma . It is at this intersection that the designation ends . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1927 , a spur from SH @-@ 33 to Crescent was created as SH @-@ 44 . SH @-@ 44 was renumbered to SH @-@ 74 in 1931 . On December 10 , 1934 , SH @-@ 74 was extended southward to Oklahoma City . The highway was further extended on September 9 , 1935 to Norman . In 1935 and 1936 , the highway 's alignment through Norman was modified ; it was extended from its Main Street terminus to US @-@ 77 . 
 Also in 1936 , SH @-@ 74 began expanding northward . On August 18 , the designation was added to a new section of highway between Crescent and US @-@ 64 ( now State Highway 164 ) in Covington . Nearly a year later , the route was extended southward again . The State Highway Commission lengthened SH @-@ 74 through Goldsby and Purcell to SH @-@ 19 in Maysville on July 1 , 1937 . The section of highway from Covington to US @-@ 60 in Lamont was added on April 14 , 1941 . On June 5 , 1945 , it was extended further south to SH @-@ 29 in Elmore City ( at the time simply named Elmore ) . 
 Throughout the 1950s , State Highway 74 continued to be realigned and extended . Southwest of Norman , it swapped routings with SH @-@ 9 on December 6 , 1954 . SH @-@ 74 was extended twice in 1957 , once in each direction : to the north on February 18 and to the south on June 10 . The 1957 lengthening brought SH @-@ 74 to its greatest length , with its present @-@ day northern terminus and a southern terminus at State Highway 53 near Milo . 
 By 1967 , I @-@ 35 had been constructed through Oklahoma City . On January 4 , 1967 , SH @-@ 74 was split into two sections , with the removal of the section between Goldsby and Norman . The southern section was truncated on December 12 , 1974 , bringing the highway to its current southern terminus . The gap between the two sections of SH @-@ 74 was widened on March 3 , 1975 , when the route was eliminated through Cleveland County and much of Oklahoma City , bringing SH @-@ 74 to its present @-@ day termini . 
 The Lake Hefner Parkway opened in 1992 . SH @-@ 74 was transferred to the new freeway on April 6 . Between April and July 2001 , ODOT installed a <unk> Safety Fence cable barrier along the Lake Hefner Parkway section of SH @-@ 74 . This installation was the first application of this barrier design in the United States . 
 = = Spurs = = 
 SH @-@ 74 currently has five spur routes ( starting at B , and going up to a suffix of F ) . Prior to 2009 , SH @-@ 74A served as a spur route in Norman as well , though it did not intersect SH @-@ 74 . 
 = = = SH @-@ 74A = = = 
 SH @-@ 74A ran along Lindsey Street in Norman , connecting I @-@ 35 to Classen Boulevard , the contemporary routing of US @-@ 77 . This highway ran straight through the University of Oklahoma ( OU ) campus . It was 2 @.@ 76 miles ( 4 @.@ 44 km ) long . 
 SH @-@ 74A was established by action of the Highway Commission on September 23 , 1936 . The highway 's original extent was from SH @-@ 9 / SH @-@ 74 ( 24th Avenue S.W. ) to the OU campus , ending at Jenkins Avenue . It was later extended to I @-@ 35 in the west and US @-@ 77 in the east . It was removed by January 2010 . 
 = = = SH @-@ <unk> = = = 
 SH @-@ <unk> connects SH @-@ 74 in Goldsby to SH @-@ 76 south of Blanchard . Cole lies along the middle of this hilly spur . 
 = = = SH @-@ 74C = = = 
 SH @-@ 74C connects SH @-@ 74 in Crescent to US @-@ 77 north of Guthrie . 
 = = = SH @-@ <unk> = = = 
 SH @-@ <unk> connects SH @-@ 74 to the unincorporated community of Lovell . 
 = = = SH @-@ <unk> = = = 
 SH @-@ <unk> goes from SH @-@ 51 north to Marshall , and then it goes east and ends at SH @-@ 74 . This spur was commissioned on 1951 @-@ 08 @-@ 06 . 
 = = = SH @-@ <unk> = = = 
 SH @-@ <unk> goes from SH @-@ 74 west to <unk> , and then goes north to SH @-@ 33 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = = Southern section = = = 
 = = = Northern section = = = 
 = The Scout Association = 
 The Scout Association is the largest Scouting organization in the United Kingdom and the World Organization of the Scout Movement 's recognised member for the United Kingdom . Following the origin of Scouting in 1907 , The Scout Association was formed in 1910 and incorporated in 1912 by a royal charter under its previous name of The Boy Scouts Association . 
 The current stated purpose of The Scout Association is to " actively engage and support young people in their personal development , empowering them to make a positive contribution to society " . The association achieves this through what it terms the Scout Method and through a youth programme for people aged between 6 and 25 . The latest published census shows that over 446 @,@ 000 young people aged 6 to 25 are members of the association , with a further 40 @,@ 000 young people waiting to join the organization . It is the largest Scout association in Europe , representing 35 % of the membership of the European Scout Region . 
 Girls have been admitted to the association since 1976 when they were first allowed to join the Venture Scouts section for 16- to 20 @-@ year @-@ olds . This expanded to the entire organization in 1991 ; although the decision to admit girls was optional , it has been compulsory since 2007 , although religious preferences can be accommodated . According to the latest available census , there are 83 @,@ 363 female members aged between 6 and 25 and a further 36 @,@ 565 adult women involved in leadership . 
 The Scout Association is open to all faiths and variations to the Scout Promise are allowed in order to accommodate those of different religious obligations or national allegiances . Following criticisms of the lack of provision for atheists , in 2012 the association consulted members about the possibility of creating an alternative Promise for those without a religion , and in October 2013 , announced that an atheist version of the Promise would be available from January 2014 . 
 The association is headed by the Chief Scout , currently the adventurer and television presenter Bear Grylls , supported by Chief Commissioner Wayne <unk> and Chief Executive Matt Hyde ( former Chief Executive of the National Union of Students ) . The association 's president is HRH The Duke of Kent and Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II is a patron of the organisation . 
 The association is a member of the National Council for Voluntary Youth Services . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation of The Scout Association = = = 
 For the origins of Boy Scouts and the Scout Movement before the formation of The Scout Association see Scouting . 
 The Boy Scouts Association was formed in 1910 , in order to provide a national body in the United Kingdom which could organise and support the rapidly growing number of Scout Patrols and Troops , which had begun to form spontaneously following the publication of Scouting for Boys and The Scout magazine in 1908 . It was also the wish of Baden @-@ Powell to wrest control of Scouting from his book 's publishers as it was felt the Scout Movement was not given the status it deserved as the publisher C. Arthur Pearson Limited controlled much of Scouting . 
 = = = 1910 to 1920 : Growth = = = 
 Originally , Scouting was for boys aged between 11 and 18 . However , many girls and younger boys wanted to join in . One group of " Girl Scouts " participated in the 1909 Crystal Palace Rally . Edwardian principles could not accept young girls participating in the rough and tumble , and " wild " activities of the Scouts , and so the Girl Guides were created by Baden @-@ Powell 's sister , Agnes , to provide a more " proper " programme of activities . The solution for younger boys was the creation of the younger Wolf Cubs Section , which was trialed from 1914 and openly launched in 1916 . Later , many of those who had grown out of Scouts still wanted to be a part of Scouting resulting in another section , the Rover Scouts , for those over 18 being created in 1918 . 
 Scouting spread throughout the British Empire and wider world . On 4 January 1912 , The Boy Scouts Association was incorporated throughout the British Empire by Royal charter for " the purpose of instructing boys of all classes in the principles of discipline loyalty and good citizenship " . During the First World War , more than 50 @,@ 000 Scouts participated in some form of war work on the home front . Scout buglers sounded the " all clear " after air raids , others helped in hospitals and made up aid parcels ; Sea Scouts assisted the Coastguard in watching the vulnerable East coast . 
 The Boy Scouts Association organised the first World Jamboree for Scouts , held in Olympia , London in 1920 together with an international conference for leaders which founded the World Organization of the Scout Movement of which The Boy Scouts Association was a founding member . Baden @-@ Powell continued to guide the Scouts and Girl Guides , going on world tours throughout the rest of his life until ill health caused him to retire to Kenya in 1938 where he died on 8 January 1941 . 
 The Headquarters Gazette was first published in July 1909 , as the official publication of the Association for adult Scouters and administrators , alongside The Scout , a magazine for youth members which had been launched in April 1908 . 
 = = = 1920 to 1967 = = = 
 In 1929 , the Boy Scouts Association hosted the 3rd World Scout Jamboree at <unk> Park in Cheshire ; some 56 @,@ 000 Scouts from 35 countries attended , making it the largest World Scout Jamboree to date . The first Gang Show , produced by Ralph Reader , opened at the Scala Theatre in London in October 1932 . Following the outbreak of World War II , over 50 @,@ 000 Scouts trained under the National War Service scheme . Tasks undertaken included police messengers and stretcher bearers . The Air Scout branch was launched in January 1941 , allowing Scout Troops to specialise in activities related to aircraft and flying . Lord Baden @-@ Powell died in 1941 and was succeeded as Chief Scout by Lord Somers . Starting in 1944 , the Scout International Relief Service ( SIRS ) sent teams of Rover Scouts and Scouters to continental Europe to provide humanitarian aid ; ten SIRS teams worked at the recently relieved Bergen @-@ Belsen concentration camp . 
 After years of trial schemes , the Senior Scout Section was officially launched in 1946 , allowing Boy Scouts aged fifteen to eighteen years to form separate patrols or troops , with age appropriate activities and badges . Scouts were prominent in their support of the 1948 Summer Olympics , playing leading roles in the open and closing ceremonies at Wembley Stadium and the sailing events at Torbay . The first Bob a Job Week was in April 1949 , in which Scouts did small tasks for the public in return for a " bob " ( 5 new pence ) to raise funds for the Association and for " starving Europe " . In 1957 , to commemorate fifty years of Scouting and the centenary of Baden @-@ Powell 's birth , the Association hosted the 9th World Scout Jamboree at Sutton Park in Birmingham . 
 = = = 1967 to 2001 = = = 
 The Boy Scouts Association and its programmes in Britain went largely unchanged until it underwent a major review in the 1960s . The Chief Scouts ' Advance Party was formed in 1964 and was sent to survey the organization to see why membership numbers were falling . Their report was published in 1966 and changes were implemented later that year and throughout 1967 . As a result , the name of the organisation was changed to The Scout Association and major changes were made to the sections and their respective programmes . The youngest section were now named Cub Scouts , the Boy Scout section was renamed simply as the Scout section and the Senior Scouts and Rover Scout section was replaced with Venture Scouts for 16 to 20 year olds . The Scout Uniform was also changed with the inclusion of long trousers for the Scouts , as opposed to the compulsory wearing of knee @-@ length shorts , and the wearing of a Beret instead of the Campaign hat . 
 The Advance Party Report was not welcomed by all members and a rival report , " A Boy Scout Black Paper " , was produced in 1970 by " The Scout Action Group " . This provided alternative proposals for the development of the organization and asked for Groups that wished to continue to follow Baden @-@ Powell 's original scheme to be permitted to do so . The rejection of these proposals resulted in the formation of the Baden @-@ Powell Scouts ' Association . 
 Several developments were made over the following years , including the introduction of co @-@ educational units of boys and girls , initially restricted to the Venture Scouts section in 1976 , but from 1991 junior sections were allowed to become mixed as well . Parents involved in Scouting in Northern Ireland also began to organise activities for their children who were too young for Cub Scouts . Originally , only the leaders of the new section , nicknamed Beavers , were members of the association with the youths themselves becoming Scouts officially in 1986 . In the late 1990s , a Muslim Scout Fellowship was formed , which by the end of 2007 , had assisted the establishment of 13 Muslim Scout Groups in England and Wales . 
 Despite these changes , and many other minor ones , Scouting started to fall into a decline through the 1990s with falling membership levels . This spurred a major review into the causes of the decline in 1999 . 
 = = = 2001 to present = = = 
 Scouting found itself competing for young people 's time against many other extracurricular activities and schools themselves which were increasingly venturing into the same types of activities . In addition , adult leaders became concerned with the growing litigation culture in the UK and the negative stereotype as being old fashioned . 
 Various changes occurred in quick succession following the new millennium . A new uniform , designed by Meg Andrews , was introduced in 2001 that was more modern and practical , with younger sections now wearing sweatshirts and with the shirts now in brighter colours complete with activity trousers . The following year , the association launched their new vision towards 2012 alongside a new youth programme . Changes included the replacement of the Venture Scouts with Explorer Scouts and the Scout Network , for members aged between 14 and 18 and 18 and 25 respectively , and the introduction of a new awards and badge scheme complete with new badges on topics covering more adventurous activities and modern skills including IT and PR . A further change occurred in 2003 when Adult Training was relaunched to be more focused and targeted to the volunteers individual role as opposed to the more general training received before . There was criticism of some of these changes , mostly citing problems with the implementation , although several years into the new structure the Explorer Scout and Scout Network sections have become well established . The new badges drew more mixed reactions from several public figures , with some praising The Scout Association for " moving with the times " and others feeling the changes went " against the Scouting ethos of Baden @-@ Powell " . 
 The organization also began to change in its focus , with it being claimed it was becoming more connected with young people and emphasising the adventure and the approximately 200 activities that can be run within a Scouting programme . This was seen through publicity materials , the relaunch of national Scout Activity Centres and through the appointments of Chief Scouts Peter Duncan and Bear Grylls in 2004 and 2009 respectively . Census figures for the last few years show an upturn in membership , with The Scout Association in April 2010 announcing the highest rate of growth in British Scouting since 1972 , with total membership reaching just under half a million . In 2014 , the Association was able to report an increase in youth membership of 100 @,@ 000 in the ten years since 2004 . 
 The Scout Association also hosted many major events during this time including <unk> in 2005 , hosting 10 @,@ 000 Scouts and Guides from 40 countries , the 21st World Scout Jamboree in 2007 as well as playing a major role in the centenary celebrations of Scouting that same year , with celebration events organised on Brownsea Island . 
 One of the association 's largest current problems is encouraging more adults to volunteer with the Scouts to reduce the number of youths currently on waiting lists . This aim was helped when in 2012 , the Duchess of Cambridge announced her intention to become a volunteer leader for the association with a group near her Anglesey home . In the decade up to 2014 , the number of adult volunteers increased by 14 @,@ 596 to a total of over 104 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 The Scout Association is governed by a Council of between 300 and 500 members in accordance with its various Royal Charters . Membership of the Council of the Scout Association is open to the various officers and national commissioners of the Association , together with members nominated by the Scout Counties including young people aged between 18 and 25 , together with additional members elected by the Council itself . The Council elects the Chief Scout who is also the chairman of the Council . Bear Grylls is the current Chief Scout after replacing Peter Duncan in July 2009 . The Council also elects the Board of Trustees of the Scout Association ( formerly called the Committee of the Council ) , which manages the business of the Association and makes the policy and rules . A UK Chief Commissioner acts as Deputy Chief Scout and appoints a team of Chief Commissioners and UK Commissioners who are responsible for the Scouting programme in their respective fields . The Board of Trustees maintain a professional Headquarters staff who implement the policy of the Association and provide support and services for the " proper conduct and development of Scouting " . The Chief Executive is appointed by the Board to manage the work of the Headquarters staff . 
 The Scout Association is divided into four mainland national groupings : England , Scotland , Wales , and Northern Ireland . While Scouting in England is directly managed by the UK Headquarters , each of the other nations has its own Scout Council and administration . Each of national divisions is further broken up into local Counties for England and Northern Ireland , Areas for Wales , Regions for Scotland and a <unk> in the case of Guernsey , which generally follow the boundaries of the ceremonial counties of Great Britain . The County / Area / Region can then , in most cases , be broken down further into a number of Scout Districts which usually cover a town , some or all of a city or a section of a larger region such as the New Forest . These districts are themselves made up of several Scout Groups . 
 The Groups are the local organisations for Scouting , and are the direct descendants of the original Scout Patrols . Groups can consist of one or more Beaver Colonies , Cub Packs , and Scout Troops and may also have one or more Scout Active Support Units , or an Explorer Scout Unit attached to it . Scout Groups only manage the first three sections , with Explorer Scouts managed by the Scout District and Scout Networks , including those run within a district , controlled from the County or equivalent . Scout Groups are led by a Group Scout Leader whose main role is handling communication between the local District and the Section Leaders and ensuring the Scout Group meets the minimum standard required by The Scout Association . 
 At all levels , Scouts are governed by an executive of trustees , known as executive committees – these could be volunteers from the local community who have had ties with Scouting , either themselves or through their children . The executive normally consists of a chairman , secretary , treasurer , and a number of other officers . In Group Executive Committees , Group Scout Leaders and Section Leaders also form part of the committee . Their role is to ensure that the best interests of the young people and the community are served by the Group , District , County , or National organisations . 
 All leaders work as unpaid volunteers , of which there are around 120 @,@ 000 . In addition to this number , the Association employs 198 full @-@ time and part @-@ time staff to support the work of its adult volunteers . Senior volunteers in The Scout Association are called ' Commissioners ' . Every County / Area / Region and District is headed by a Commissioner who is responsible for ensuring the Districts / Groups under their jurisdiction meet the standards set by The Scout Association . They receive support from Regional Development Officers in England , who are employed by the Regional Development Service and deployed locally to help support The Scout Association 's objectives . Commissioners in the other nations receive support from Field Commissioners , employed and directed differently . District Commissioners report to the County / Area / Regional Commissioner , who in turn report to the UK Chief Commissioner . 
 = = Sections = = 
 In the Scout Association , there are five sections to cater for youth aged between 6 and 25 years of age : 
 * In addition , many Scout Network members have adult roles in the Scout Association ; including these , the total Scout Network membership is 5 @,@ 574 for 2014 . 
 The first four sections ( Beavers to Explorers ) are led by a Section Leader and aided by Assistant Leaders , Sectional Assistants , Occasional Helpers and Young Leaders , who are Explorer Scouts trained in leadership techniques . Scout Networks are mainly member led , but are assisted by a Network Leader who ensures that the Network is working within the rules of the association . In addition to adult leadership , the association encourages its members themselves to take on positions of responsibility for their section meetings . This can be through responsibility for a group of members , such as the Patrol Leader and Assistant Patrol Leader in Scouts and Sixers and <unk> in Cubs , or through sectional forums to feedback on programmes . The Scout section also have the role of Senior Patrol Leader , usually someone about to move on to Explorers who overlooks all the patrols , and the members of the Explorer section are openly encouraged to run evenings and to plan their own meetings . 
 = = = Air and Sea Scouts = = = 
 Some Scout Groups belong to separate branches of the Scouting programme called Air Scouts and Sea Scouts . Both branches follow the core programme in all Sections but can add more aeronautical or nautical emphasis depending on the branch , with some Group branches choosing to be recognised by the Royal Air Force or Royal Navy . In the United Kingdom there are approximately 400 Sea Scout Groups , of which about 25 % ( 101 Groups ) are Royal Navy recognised , whilst of 117 Air Scout Groups , 43 are recognised by the RAF . 
 = = = Adult roles and appointments = = = 
 There are a variety of different appointments and roles that exist for adults . The highest roles in the association are the honorary positions of Patron and President which is taken by the Head of State and a member of the Royal Family respectively , currently Queen Elizabeth II and The Duke of Kent . 
 Below these are the members of UK Headquarters including the Chief Scout , who is honorary head of Scouting in the UK and the public face of Scouting , and the UK Chief Commissioner , who is in charge of the volunteers in the organization and of the other commissioners . Below these are the Commissioners for the Nations , Regions , Counties , Areas and Districts all of whom are assisted by deputies and assistant commissioners who can oversee and advise on a particular area of responsibility - for example an Assistant District Commissioner for Beaver Scouts particularly ensures that that section in the district is abiding to the Scout Association 's rules . The final managerial role in the organization is that of the Group Scout Leader and their Assistant , who are both in charge of a local Scout group . All of these roles are uniformed and for those volunteer roles from County level downwards training is required in the basic values of Scouting , safety and child protection , inclusion and advanced managerial skills to achieve their Wood Badge . 
 At the local sectional level , a section is run by a Scout Leader , who is in overall charge of the section , and by Assistant Scout Leaders , who assist the Leader in their role . These roles are uniformed and also require training to achieve their Wood Badge , although their training content consists of the basic values of Scouting , safety and child protection , inclusion , camping and Scout skills and administration . They are also required to complete First Aid every three years . 
 Below leaders are the uniformed role of Sectional Assistant and the non @-@ uniformed role of Occasional Helper . The Sectional Assistant has to complete basic training consisting of the values of Scouting , safety and child protection only while an occasional helper is a non @-@ uniformed role and requires only to have a criminal records check by the Disclosure and Barring Service . In addition , there are Young Leaders who must complete training in child protection and safety and then have the option to complete further modules on topics that mirror the adult training programme . 
 Adults can also become members of Scout Active Support Units that provide a variety of services to Scouting at Group , District or County / Area level . These units allow adults to support Scouting activities without having the full @-@ time commitment of a leadership role . 
 = = Programme , badges and awards = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 The current youth programme has been developed from Baden @-@ Powell 's original Scout training scheme , which aimed to encourage personal achievement and provide a framework for the activities of the Scout Troop . In the Boy Scout section , this consisted of the award of badges for Tenderfoot , Second and First Class Scout and finally King 's Scout , which were earned by passing tests in a wide variety of skills associated with the outdoors , health and good citizenship . With the creation of the Wolf Cub section in 1916 , a similar system was devised , the awards being <unk> , First Star and Second Star , and an award called the Leaping Wolf was added later which required Cubs to move up to the Scout Troop . In parallel with this scheme , Cubs and Scouts were able to earn Proficiency Badges for specific skills and hobbies , an idea that Baden @-@ Powell probably copied from Ernest Thompson Seton . The test requirements for Baden @-@ Powell 's scheme were revised in 1944 and again in 1958 without altering the basic structure . 
 The 1966 Advance Party Report recommended a wholly new Progressive Training Scheme ; for Cub Scouts the Bronze , Silver and Gold Arrows , for Scouts the Scout Standard , Advanced Scout Standard and Chief Scout 's Award and for the new Venture Scout Section , the Venture Award and the Queen 's Scout Award which focussed on long @-@ term service and commitment as well as the completion of an expedition lasting four days and fifty miles . These changes were implemented in October 1967 . From then on , the programme has been subject to regular revision ; the Scout standards were replaced in 1984 by the Scout Award , Pathfinder Award and Explorer Award with a fully revised Chief Scout 's Award . The Cub arrows were replaced in 1991 with the Cub Scout Award , Adventure Award and Adventure Crest Award . All these awards were replaced following the introduction of the Programme Review in February 2002 . A new concept called the Balanced Programme replaced the previous scheme . Challenge Awards could be earned by participating in activities in various Programme Zones such as outdoors , fitness , community or international . Earning a certain number of Challenge Awards and the completion of a personal challenge led to the Bronze Chief Scout 's Award for Beavers , Silver for Cubs and Gold for Scouts . Proficiency Badges were revised and renamed Activity Badges . In 2015 , the programme was revised again following consultation within the movement , the changes being called the Programme Refresh . 
 = = = The current award scheme = = = 
 The previous Programme Zones have been replaced by three themes , being " outdoor and adventure " , " world " and " skills " . It is recommended for all sections that about 50 % of the programme be devoted to outdoor and adventure skills and activities . The structure of Challenge Badges and Chief Scout 's Awards has been retained but the content has been revised and made " more challenging " . Beavers have to earn six Challenge Badges to Gain the Bronze Chief Scout 's Award , Cubs seven for the Silver and Scouts nine for the Gold . The final three awards , The Chief Scout 's Platinum and Diamond Awards and the Queen 's Scout Award are available in the Explorer Scout and Scout Network sections . The awards mirror the requirements of The Duke of Edinburgh 's Award at Bronze , Silver and Gold level respectively , consisting of a period of time volunteering in the local community , a prolonged physical activity , the advancement of a skill and the undertaking an expedition , allowing a participant to achieve both the <unk> and the Scout award at the same time . In addition , these three awards do not have to be completed in order , and participants can skip straight to a specific award , although additional work is involved . Achieving the Queen 's Scout Award is seen as a significant event on a national scale ; recipients of the award are invited to join the St George 's Day service at Windsor Castle the year after completing the scheme , and parade before the Queen . 
 = = = Awards for gallantry , meritorious conduct and good service = = = 
 The Cornwell Scout Badge may be awarded to youth members who display " pre @-@ eminently high character and devotion to duty , together with great courage and endurance " . Any member of the Association may be awarded the Gilt Cross or the Silver Cross for gallantry , or the Bronze Cross for " special heroism or action in the face of extraordinary risk " . The Chief Scout 's Commendation for Meritorious Conduct and the Medal of Meritorious Conduct may also be awarded to any member . Adult members are awarded the Chief Scout 's Length of Service Award which marks the number of years of service in any role . More distinguished good service by adult members may be marked by the award of the Chief Scout 's Commendation for Good Service , the Award of Merit , the Silver Acorn or ultimately , the Silver Wolf , which is the unrestricted gift of the Chief Scout and is awarded for service of " a most exceptional nature " . 
 = = Promise and law = = 
 The Scout Promise is made by all members of The Scout Association from the Scout section upwards , including Leaders : 
 Additional variations of the promise are used for different faiths or for members from other countries , whose allegiance is pledged to the country and not the monarch . For the two younger sections , a simpler promise is used : Cub Scouts utilise the normal promise with the omission of the opening ' On my honour ' and a change in the final line " to keep the Cub Scout Law " , while beaver Scouts use a different promise altogether : 
 In addition to the promise , there is a Scout Law which dictates what qualities a Scout should hold . The Scout Law is as follows : 
 A Scout is to be trusted . 
 A Scout is loyal . 
 A Scout is friendly and considerate . 
 A Scout belongs to the world @-@ wide family of Scouts . 
 A Scout has courage in all difficulties . 
 A Scout makes good use of time and is careful of possessions and property . 
 A Scout has self @-@ respect and respect for others . 
 This law is used for all sections except Cubs and Beavers . Beaver Scouts have no law , as these values are to be demonstrated through the meetings themselves . The Cub Scout law is different again : 
 The motto of the Scout Association , and of Scouting as a whole , is ' Be Prepared ' . These were explained in the original Scouting books and was expanded in a series of promotional posters for the sections in the early 2000s . 
 = = = Variations of the promise = = = 
 There are permitted variations to accommodate those whose faith or national allegiance give rise to problems with the wording of the " core " Scout Promise . The Scout Association expects that the phrases " ... duty to God <unk> and " ... to love God " will suitable for most faiths " including Christians , Hindus , Jews , Muslims and Sikhs " . Muslims who have difficulty with the phrase " On my honour " because of the Islamic proscription of swearing oaths , are able to say " In the name of Allah , the Most Beneficent the Most Merciful … " instead if they prefer . Also , " ... duty to Allah and to the Queen " may be used . Hindus and Buddhists may promise " ... duty to my Dharma " . 
 Foreign nationals resident in the United Kingdom are able to promise to do their " ... duty to God and to the country in which I am now living " , although British subjects must include the Queen in their promise . 
 In 2012 the Scout Association reviewed its fundamentals and launched a consultation to ask its members whether an alternative version of the Scout Promise should be developed for atheists and those unable to make the existing commitment . In 2013 it was announced that the consultation had led to the addition of an alternative promise for humanists and atheists . Taking effect on January 1 , 2014 , members can choose to replace " duty to God " with " to uphold our Scout values " . The change has been welcomed by representatives of the Church of England , the Roman Catholic Church , the Free Churches Group and the British Humanist Association . The alternative promise takes the following form : 
 = = Uniform = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 In Scouting for Boys , Baden @-@ Powell recommended a distinctive and practical uniform that was " very like the uniform worn by my men when I commanded the South African Constabulary " . This in turn , seems to have been derived from the dress adopted by Baden @-@ Powell in the Second Matabele War of 1896 , influenced by his friend and colleague , Frederick Russell Burnham . The original Boy Scout uniform consisted of a khaki shirt and shorts , a neckerchief or " scarf " , campaign hat and a Scout staff . At the formation of the Wolf Cub section in 1916 , Baden @-@ Powell wanted to make the younger boys totally distinct from the older Boy Scouts ; the result was a green woollen jersey , shorts , neckerchief and a green cricket cap with gold piping . In 1946 , the new Senior Scout section were allowed to wear a maroon beret instead of the hat ; a green beret became an option for the Boy Scout section in 1954 . 
 In 1966 , the Advance Party Report recommended a total redesign and modernisation of the uniform , commenting that there had been much criticism of " the Boer War appearance of our uniforms " and that the " wearing of shorts by members of the Movement is one of the most damaging aspects of our present public image " . Although the Cub uniform barely changed , retaining short trousers , the Scout section were to wear a long sleeved dark green shirt and long trousers in a brownish colour described as " mushroom " . Venture Scouts and male Scouters had identical khaki shirts and mushroom trousers , but the neckerchief was replaced by a tie , brown for Venture Scouts and green for Scouters . Female Scouters had a dark green dress and a cap similar to those worn my airline flight attendants at the time . These recommendations were accepted and implemented from October 1967 . Later amendments included khaki shirts for female Venture Scouts and Scouters , the abolition of all uniform headgear except Sea Scout caps and Air Scout berets , and black long trousers for Cubs as an option to shorts . A grey sweatshirt was introduced for the new Beaver Scout section and a dark green sweatshirt replaced the Cubs ' knitted jersey . In 2001 , following a consultation process within the association , a new range of uniforms designed by Meg Andrews was launched on Founder 's Day , 22 February . 
 = = = Current uniforms = = = 
 = = = = Beaver Scouts = = = = 
 Beaver Scout uniform consists of a turquoise sweatshirt , a neckerchief and woggle , and the option of navy blue combat trousers , known officially as " activity trousers " . A skirt , activity shorts , a polo shirt and a grey fleece jacket are also available options . 
 = = = = Cub Scouts = = = = 
 Cub Scout uniform consists of a dark green sweatshirt , a neckerchief and woggle , and navy blue activity trousers . A skirt , activity shorts , a polo shirt and a grey fleece jacket are available as options . 
 = = = = Scouts = = = = 
 The uniform for Scouts is the same as for Cub Scouts , with the exception that a long @-@ sleeved shirt of a blue @-@ green colour , described as " teal " , is the main part of the uniform . Scouts in Scotland or Northern Ireland may wear a kilt . Sea Scout uniform is as for Scouts , but with either a navy blue jersey or a light blue shirt as the main part of the uniform . Headgear is a seaman 's cap with a " Sea Scout " tally band . Air Scouts wear a light blue shirt as the main part of the uniform and headgear is a blue @-@ grey beret . 
 = = = = Explorer Scouts = = = = 
 As for Scouts , but with a beige shirt as the main part of the uniform . A navy blue tie is an option to the neckerchief . Explorer Sea Scouts and Explorer Air Scouts wear a light blue shirt , with either a white @-@ topped officer 's peaked cap or a blue @-@ grey beret respectively . 
 = = = = Adult members = = = = 
 As for Explorer Scouts , but with a shirt of a light khaki colour , described as " stone " . Adult members attached to Sea or Air Scout Groups or Units wear identical uniforms to Sea and Air Explorer Scouts . 
 = = Finances = = 
 The Scout Association is a Registered Charity . The Association 's finances are collected through a variety of ways . Members pay for Scouting through an annual capitation and subs , paid termly , monthly or weekly depending on local preference . <unk> pays for member insurance and for the services and leader support provided by their district , country ( or equivalent ) and headquarters . Subs is instead used to pay for the day @-@ to @-@ day running of activities , pay for materials and to finance to section 's meeting place . 
 To lessen the burden on members , many Groups undertake local fundraising and utilise additional methods of funding , such as Gift Aid . In addition , headquarters operates several other ventures open to those outside of Scouting , the profits of which are returned to Scouting . 
 = = = Scout Community Week = = = 
 Scout Community Week is the only current campaign of the association and the biggest national fundraising event . A revival and update of the earlier " Bob @-@ a @-@ job " scheme , in which Scouts were paid a shilling for doing work for local residents , Scout Community Week involves Scouts from all sections of the organization taking part in community work in exchange for a donation to the group . Re @-@ introduced in 2012 , the event frequently attracts media attention due to the high profile nature of some projects . 
 = = = Commercial ventures = = = 
 The Scout Association operates several outside ventures that offer an enhancement to the Scout programme but also services for users outside Scouting . These are : 
 Scout Shops Ltd - sells Scouting uniform , equipment and gifts online and on the high street . In 2012 , it had a turnover of £ 7 @.@ 2 million , of which their taxable profits of £ 2 @.@ 2 million was donated to the Scout Association . The association also has a related subsidiary World Scout Shop Ltd which sells similar merchandise to a global market as well as world Scouting specific items . It was created in 2011 at the 22nd World Scout Jamboree in Sweden and had a turnover of £ 0 @.@ 285 million and a taxable profit of £ 0 @.@ 164 million which was donated to the Scout Association . 
 Scout Insurance Services Ltd trading as Unity - offers insurance solutions bespoke for the requirements of Scouting activities . In 2012 it had a turnover of £ 1 @.@ 2 million and a profit after tax of £ 0 @.@ 4 million which was donated to the association . There is also a similarly aimed and named subsidiary in Guernsey which contributed £ 600 @,@ 000 in 2012 . 
 Scout Activity Centres - operates a national network of camp sites and activity centres . The Scout Association also runs the conference centres at Gilwell Park and at Baden @-@ Powell House . 
 Scout Holiday Homes Trust - operates ten properties across the UK catering for those with disabilities , or those whose income usually prohibits a holiday . 
 Scouting Magazine - sells advertising space in its free bi @-@ monthly magazine . The publication had a circulation in 2013 of 116 @,@ 707 . 
 = = Campsites = = 
 Across the country , over 900 campsites are owned by the Scout Association ; usually they are owned and operated by a Scout District or County . These campsites are also used by others outside the organisation and gains additional income for the Scout county or district . However , ten different sites are run directly from the national levels of the Scout Association . 
 Seven sites are branded and operated as Scout Activity Centres , providing camping sites and adventurous activities alongside . These seven are Gilwell Park on the London / Essex border , <unk> in County Down , Downe in Kent , <unk> Crofts in the New Forest , Great Tower in the Lake District , <unk> in Northumberland , Woodhouse Park in Gloucestershire , <unk> in Oxfordshire and Yr Hafod in Snowdonia . 
 In addition to these sites , the Scout Association runs two conference centres , one within Gilwell Park , and another at a separate site in central London , Baden @-@ Powell House . Baden @-@ Powell House is also a Scouting hostel , providing cheap Scout accommodation for central London trips . 
 = = Youth Commissioner = = 
 In 2014 , The Scout Association created the role of Youth Commissioner and Deputy Youth Commissioner . The Youth Commissioner works with the national leadership team , to advocate on behalf of youth members . Hannah Kentish was appointed as YC and Jagz <unk> and Jay Thompson were appointed as deputies . 
 = = Relations with other organisations = = 
 = = = Girlguiding UK = = = 
 The Scout Association and Girlguiding UK are separate organisations , but were both founded by Robert Baden @-@ Powell and share similar aims and methods . Co @-@ operation between Scouting and Guiding is encouraged at all levels . " Joint Groups " of Scout and Guide units meeting separately in the same headquarters and operating under the same support structure are recognized and encouraged by both associations . It is also possible to have a " Joint Unit " , which may consist of Rainbow Guides and Beaver Scouts , or Brownie Guides and Cub Scouts , or Guides and Scouts . They meet together as a single unit , sharing leadership and facilities but individual members wear the uniform and follow the training programme of the association that they belong to . Members of Girlguiding UK are invited to join the United Kingdom Scout Contingent to participate in the World Scout Jamborees every four years . 
 = = = Scouting Ireland = = = 
 The Scout Association of Northern Ireland co @-@ exists in the province with Scouting Ireland which is the World Organisation of the Scout Movement recognized association for the Republic of Ireland . The two associations have been increasingly working in partnership ; they jointly run a project called " <unk> " which delivers citizenship and peace building programmes with a range of groups in Northern Ireland and the border counties of the Republic . 
 = = Notable former Scouts = = 
 The Scout Association has had many notable members in the past , with the following selection being the best known : 
 David Attenborough - broadcaster and naturalist 
 David Beckham – England international footballer and former captain 
 Tony Blair – former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom 
 Chris Bonington - mountaineer 
 David Bowie - singer @-@ songwriter , producer and actor 
 Richard Branson – Virgin Group Founder 
 Ronnie Corbett – actor and comedian who worked with Ronnie Barker in the British television comedy series The Two Ronnies 
 Bear Grylls – adventurer and television personality and current Chief Scout 
 John Major – former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom 
 Paul McCartney – singer / songwriter / bassist of the Beatles and Wings 
 George Michael – singer / songwriter 
 Cliff Richard – singer 
 Keith Richards – guitarist and songwriter of the Rolling Stones 
 Harold Wilson – former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom 
 = = The Scout Association overseas = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 Following the origin of Scouting , Scout organisations formed in many parts of the British Empire . Some of these organisations later became branches of The Boy Scouts Association after its formation . In other cases , The Boy Scouts Association started branches itself in parts of British Empire . The Boy Scouts Association 's " Headquarters " in London was renamed " Imperial Headquarters " ( <unk> ) . The Boy Scouts International Bureau was formed in 1920 and became fully functional as part of the World Association of the International Scout Movement in 1922 . Subsequently , The Boy Scouts Association branches in the Dominions of Canada , Australia , New Zealand , Newfoundland , and South Africa were given the option of being " separately represented " with the Boy Scouts International Bureau , but chose instead to remain under <unk> control . Over time , many of the branches of The Scout Association became direct members of the World Organization of the Scout Movement ; for instance , Scouts Canada in 1946 and The Scout Association of Hong Kong in 1977 . 
 = = = Current overseas branches = = = 
 The Scout Association is currently responsible for Scouting in the British overseas territories and Crown Dependencies , as well as some small independent nations . Non @-@ sovereign territories with Scouting run by The Scout Association include : 
 Sovereign countries with Scouting run by The Scout Association , as they are without independent Scouting organisations , include : 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Solomon Islands 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Tonga 
 Tuvalu 
 Vanuatu 
 The British Scout programme is also offered to British citizens living outside of the United Kingdom via the British Scouting Overseas ( BSO ) Area . BSO has Scout " Districts " in France & Iberia , Benelux & Scandinavia , Germany , Middle East and Rest of the World 
 = Action of 9 September 1796 = 
 The Action of 9 September 1796 was an inconclusive minor naval engagement between small French Navy and British Royal Navy squadrons off northeastern Sumatra , near Banda Aceh , during the French Revolutionary Wars . The French squadron comprised six frigates engaged on a commerce raiding operation against British trade routes passing through captured parts of the Dutch East Indies , and posed a considerable threat to the weakened British naval forces in the region . The British force consisted of two 74 @-@ gun ships of the line hastily paired to oppose the eastward advance of the French squadron . 
 The French squadron , commanded by Contre @-@ amiral Pierre César Charles de Sercey , had left their base on Île de France in July , cruising off Ceylon and Tranquebar before sailing eastwards . Their movements had so far been unopposed as British forces in the East Indies were concentrated at Simon 's Town in the west and Malacca in the east . After raiding the shipping at Banda Aceh on 1 September the squadron sailed eastwards to attack Penang . On 8 September , while the French were removing supplies from a captured British merchant ship east of Banda Aceh , two large sails were spotted . These were HMS Arrogant and HMS Victorious , sent to drive off the French before they could attack the scattered British shipping and ports in the region . 
 Although the British ships were substantially larger than any individual French vessel , the frigates were more numerous and more manoeuvrable . Neither side could afford to take significant damage in the battle , so each sought to drive the other off rather than achieve an outright victory . On 9 September Sercey 's frigates formed a line of battle , successfully engaging first Arrogant and then Victorious and inflicting damage on each while preventing them from supporting one another . The French frigates , particularly Vertu and Seine , also suffered and by late morning both sides disengaged , the British retiring to Madras for repairs while Sercey anchored at King 's Island in the Mergui Archipelago , eventually sheltering in Batavia . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the start of 1796 French and allied forces had been almost completely driven from the Indian Ocean , most of the colonies of the French @-@ allied Batavian Republic falling to British invasions during 1795 . The only significant French presence was on Île de France and a few other nearby islands , from which a squadron of two frigates periodically operated against British trade . The British were so confident of supremacy that they had split their forces , with a large squadron based at Simon 's Town in the Cape Colony of Southern Africa under Sir George Keith Elphinstone and a smaller dispersed force operating under Peter Rainier in the Dutch East Indies , based at the captured port of Malacca . The important trading ports of Calcutta , Madras and Bombay were largely undefended , as were the valuable trade routes which supported them . 
 On 4 March 1796 significant French reinforcements were dispatched when a squadron of four frigates and two corvettes sailed from Rochefort under the command of Contre @-@ amiral Pierre César Charles de Sercey . Both corvettes were lost before the squadron had left the Bay of Biscay and frigate Cocarde forced to return to port after running aground . After resupplying at La Palma and joining with replacement frigate Vertu , the squadron enjoyed unimpeded progress , seizing several British and Portuguese ships , including two Indiamen in the South Atlantic and Western Indian Ocean . The squadron had not been dispatched primarily to increase the French military presence in the East Indies , but rather to enforce the National Convention 's decree that Île de France abolish slavery . The agricultural economy of the island depended on slavery to remain profitable , and the colonial committee had simply ignored the decree when it first arrived in 1795 . The matter was then taken up by the Committee for Public Safety , which sent agents Baco and Burnel to ensure the ruling was carried out , supported by 800 soldiers under General François @-@ Louis Magallon . 
 On arrival at Port Louis on 18 June , the agents were confronted by a large body of heavily armed militia opposed to the abolition of slavery . Although they ordered Magallon to attack the islanders , the general refused and the agents were sent back to sea in a small corvette , eventually returning to Europe . Sercey remained in the East Indies , refitting his ships and joining his squadron to that already at Île de France . This force he divided , sending Preneuse and a corvette to patrol the Mozambique Channel . The remaining six frigates , comprising Vertu , Régénérée , Forte , Seine , Prudente and Cybèle , with the privateer schooner Alerte , Sercey took eastwards on 14 July , towards the Bay of Bengal . 
 Sercey was unaware of how scattered <unk> forces were in the region , and sent Alerte to scout ahead after the squadron arrived off Ceylon . Captain <unk> of Alerte made the miscalculation of attacking a ship on 14 August which turned out to be the 28 @-@ gun British dispatch frigate HMS Carysfort , and on board Alerte the British captors discovered documents revealing the exact extent of Sercey 's strength and intentions . Carysfort 's captain was unable to warn any allied ships as his small frigate was the only British warship in the Bay of Bengal , and so he instead arranged for false information to be passed to Sercey regarding a fictional British battle squadron at Madras . This was sufficient to deter Sercey from lingering in the area , and after a raiding sweep along the coast to Tranquebar his squadron sailed eastwards once more . 
 On 1 September Sercey raided Banda Aceh , capturing a number of merchant ships and on 7 September seized the small merchant ship Favourite off the northeastern coast of Sumatra en route to attack the British port of Penang . The following morning , as his squadron transferred rice from the prize , two large sails appeared in the distance to the northeast . These sails belonged to the 74 @-@ gun British ships of the line HMS Arrogant under Captain Richard Lucas and HMS Victorious under Captain William Clark . These ships had been sent to the East Indies from the Cape at the start of August on orders from Elphinstone and were engaged in protecting British trade with China . When news reached Penang that Sercey was in the region , Lucas ordered Clark to join him in a search for the French in the Straits of Malacca . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Lucas first sighted the French at 06 : 00 on 8 September , approximately 24 nautical miles ( 44 km ) east of Point Pedro , the northeastern tip of Sumatra . By 10 : 00 Sercey had determined that the new arrivals were probably hostile and formed his frigates into a line of battle , tacking to investigate . Lucas and Clark conferred at 14 : 00 , Clark believing that two of the ships were French ships of the line while Lucas correctly insisted that they were six frigates , accompanied by the captured East Indiaman Triton . The captains agreed to pursue the French and bring them to battle when possible . At 14 : 30 , Forte determined that the approaching ships were British ships of the line and Sercey turned away , unwilling to risk suffering severe damage in a pointless engagement with two such powerful opponents . Sercey 's squadron attempted to seek shelter in coastal waters , closely pursued by Lucas ' ships ; by 21 : 30 the British were just 3 nautical miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) behind the French . 
 By the morning of 9 September the wind had dropped and the French frigates were sailing in line slowly eastwards along the northern coast of Sumatra , the British ships close behind . With battle inevitable , Sercey gave orders at 06 : 00 for his line to put about and seize the weather gage while Lucas led Arrogant on a path to intercept . At 07 : 25 Lucas opened fire on the lead French ship Vertu at the range of 700 yards ( 640 m ) . The British ship was able to fire two broadsides before Captain Lhermitte on Vertu could reply , the first French volley snatching away the ensign . Arrogant then progressively came under fire from the whole French line , as Seine , Forte and Cybèle passed , the more distant <unk> and Prudente joining the fusillade . During this exchange of fire both Arrogant and Vertu suffered damage to their sails and rigging , the Arrogant temporarily unmaneuverable as the winds dropped almost completely . 
 Victorious was also hit , Captain Clark forced to retire wounded after being struck in the thigh by debris at 08 : 00 . At 08 : 30 the rearmost French ship , Prudente , passed out of range of Arrogant leaving the ship isolated . With Lucas unable to participate , Lieutenant William Waller on Victorious assumed command and ordered his ship to engage the French at 08 : 40 , a string of signal flags hoisted on Arrogant unreadable in the light winds . Victorious was soon surrounded by the French , with two frigates on the port bow and four on the port beam , all firing into the ship of the line from approximately 900 yards ( 820 m ) . By 10 : 15 , when the wind suddenly returned , Victorious had been badly damaged . Using the wind to turn towards the distant Arrogant , Waller exposed his ship 's stern and was repeatedly raked . The winds remained unreliable , and Victorious took further damage for the next half @-@ hour , the French ships remaining outside the arcs of fire from the British ship . 
 The damage Vertu had taken early in the combat rendered Lhermitte unable to continue the action , and his ship gradually fell out of the line to the south . Captain Pierre Julien Tréhouart turned Cybèle away too , using sweeps to reach Vertu and take the ship under tow . With Vertu secured and Arrogant slowly coming back into range , Sercey ordered his squadron to turn away to the north at 10 : 55 , the last shots fired at long range from Victorious at 11 : 15 . 
 = = = Combatant summary = = = 
 In this table , " Guns " refers to all cannon carried by the ship , including the maindeck guns which were taken into consideration when calculating its rate , as well as any carronades carried aboard . Broadside weight records the combined weight of shot which could be fired in a single simultaneous discharge of an entire broadside . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Losses on both sides were heavy . Arrogant had been damaged early in the battle and lost seven killed and 27 wounded while Victorious which bore the brunt of the French attack , suffered 17 killed and 57 wounded , the latter including Clark . Neither British ship was in sufficient repair to continue the engagement ; Arrogant had several cannon dismounted and her sail 's and rigging were tattered . Victorious was less badly damaged , but had more than one in five of the crew unfit for duty . All of the French ships suffered damage and casualties , although Régénérée reported no losses in the aftermath . Vertu was damaged early on and took 24 casualties , Seine was hit by heavy fire later in the battle and lost 62 dead and wounded , with the captain among the former . The remainder of the squadron suffered lighter losses , with 12 on Prudente , 17 on Cybèle and 23 on Forte . 
 Lucas and Clark remained off Sumatra until basic repairs could be completed before Arrogant then took Victorious under tow , leading the damaged ship back to Penang and then Madras for repairs , arriving on 6 October . Sercey abandoned plans for an attack on Penang and sailed northwards to King 's Island in the Mergui Archipelago . There his ships underwent extensive repairs , some even replacing their lower masts . In October the squadron swept eastwards to the Ceylon coast before turning back west towards Batavia , where Sercey hoped the supply depots would provide more support than those on Île de France . The squadron remained at Batavia throughout the winter , ceding control of the Indian Ocean trade routes to the British . 
 The action has been described as inconclusive by British historian C. Northcote Parkinson as neither side could achieve a decisive result . Parkinson is also scathing of his criticism of both Clark and Waller , accusing them of failing to properly to prepare for battle or effectively manoeuvere their ship under fire . During the battle neither side had actually sought a decisive result , both unwilling to risk damage which would jeopardise their mission . Sercey 's orders were to raid British trade routes , not to engage heavy warships and suffer the consequent damage : the battle severely curtailed his opportunities to prey on British merchant shipping in the East Indies during 1796 . Lucas sought to block Sercey 's passage through the Malacca Straits , but was aware that his ships , though large and powerful , were outnumbered and outgunned in the engagement , particularly given the size of the main French line , composed of ships with batteries of 18 @-@ pounder long guns and including Forte , one of the most massive frigates then at sea . William James considers that had the winds been more favourable Lucas might have been able to cut off and capture at least two French frigates , but had Sercey attempted a boarding action against the ships of the line his more numerous crews would probably have successfully seized them . 
 = Glasgow , Paisley , Kilmarnock and Ayr Railway = 
 The Glasgow , Paisley , Kilmarnock and Ayr Railway ( GPK & AR ) was a railway in Scotland that provided train services between Glasgow , Kilmarnock and Ayr . It opened its first line , between Glasgow and Ayr in 1839 - 1840 . The section between Glasgow and Paisley was made jointly with the Glasgow , Paisley and Greenock Railway . Later it built a line from Dalry via Kilmarnock to Cumnock , linking there with the Glasgow , Dumfries and Carlisle Railway , and together forming a through route from Glasgow to Carlisle . The two companies merged to form the Glasgow and South Western Railway . 
 The original main line from Glasgow to Ayr , and the line from Kilmarnock to Carlisle , are in use today , although many intermediate stations and branch lines have closed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Earliest lines = = = 
 Coal and other minerals were extracted in the west of Scotland from medieval times ; getting the heavy product to market was always a challenge , and this encouraged the development of tracked systems ; the earliest <unk> in the vicinity of Ayr date from — at the latest — 1775 . 
 In 1812 the Kilmarnock and Troon Railway opened , also a horse @-@ operated plateway , constructed to carry coal from the Kilmarnock area to the harbour at Troon , for onward conveyance by coastal shipping ; it was the first railway in Scotland to have an authorising Act of Parliament . 
 In the late 1820s , several further mineral railways were constructed in the west of Scotland : the Monkland and Kirkintilloch Railway , opened in 1826 , proved a remarkable success in carrying coal from the collieries near Airdrie and was quickly followed by the <unk> Railway . These " coal railways " used horse traction ( mostly ) and short cast iron rails on stone block sleepers . The key technical advance was that they used " edge rails " : the guidance was provided by flanges on the wheels of the wagons . These lines showed the way forward . 
 In 1831 the Ardrossan Railway opened ; it too was a horse @-@ operated line using stone block sleepers , but passenger operation was a major part of its objective . It was conceived as a means of developing Ardrossan Harbour as the sea port for Glasgow . However the promoters were unable to raise sufficient money to build the whole of their line ; moreover recent improvements to the navigability of the River Clyde enabled sea @-@ going ships to reach the City . Accordingly , the line was truncated , and only reached a terminal at Kilwinning and collieries east of that town . Nonetheless it was a considerable commercial success , carrying passengers and in enabling coal , particularly from the pits belonging to the Earl of Eglinton to be exported at Ardrossan , and it further emphasised the viability of railways . 
 The Liverpool and Manchester Railway had opened the previous year , and proved a remarkable success in abstracting traffic from the parallel canal , and indicated that longer distances , not merely feeders to a harbour or from a colliery , could be dealt with , and everywhere business people were considering where a railway might advantageously be built next . When the Grand Junction Railway was authorised in 1833 , it was possible to consider that railways might one day link central Scotland and the south of England . 
 = = = Glasgow to Ayr and Kilmarnock = = = 
 By 1835 the idea of building a railway from Glasgow into Ayrshire gained sufficient support for a survey to be commissioned from John Miller , a partner in the firm of Grainger and Miller , which had been heavily involved in the earlier railways in the west of Scotland . Miller proposed a route from Tradeston , in Glasgow at the south end of Glasgow Bridge , through Paisley and the <unk> Valley to Kilwinning and Ayr , with a branch from Dalry to Kilmarnock . The cost was to be £ 550 @,@ 000 and a 10 % return could be expected ; notwithstanding the south @-@ westerly course of the line , it was foreseen as a first step towards linking with railways in England . 
 Interests in Kilmarnock were dismayed to be consigned to a branch line , and the Burgh Council of Kilmarnock commissioned Scott , Stephen and Gale , an engineering partnership " which was not to make a mark on railway engineering " to plan a more direct route . Plotting a direct route was easy , but gradients were severe , earthworks would be formidable , and there was much less intermediate business . Gale was a rival canal company 's engineer , and was hardly impartial . It was necessary to bring in someone to settle the matter ; George Stephenson gave a report supporting Miller 's choice of route . 
 Raising capital proved straightforward , and it was possible to present a Bill for the line in the 1837 session of Parliament . There was strenuous opposition from river and canal interests , but this was overcome . At the time the Glasgow , Paisley and Greenock Railway ( GP & GR ) was also promoting its line , with a similar route from Tradeston to Paisley . It became obvious that Parliament would be hostile to the formation of two adjacent lines , so it was determined to build the line jointly as far as Paisley . Both the GPK & AR and the GP & GR received the royal assent on 15 July 1837 . The Glasgow , Paisley Kilmarnock and Ayr Railway Act authorised share capital of £ 625 @,@ 000 , and £ 208 @,@ 300 in loans . The line was to be constructed simultaneously from each end , to prevent the experience of the Ardrossan Railway which failed to build the eastern end of its authorised line . 
 The gauge of the new line was not yet determined , although the estimates had been prepared on the basis that it would not exceed 6 feet . Many of Grainger and Miller 's lines had been to a gauge of 4 ft 6in ; the Dundee and <unk> Railway ( 1831 ) had been at 4 ft 6 ½ in ( 1 @,@ 384 mm ) and the Dundee and Arbroath Railway , authorised in 1836 , was to be 5 ft 6in ( 1 @,@ 676 mm ) . Connections to local railways were considered important in determining the gauge , but the engineer Joseph Locke urged that conformity to the gauge of the English railways was important , and in the end this was adopted : standard gauge , 4 ft 8 ½ in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) . 
 = = = Construction starts = = = 
 Construction of the line , supervised by Grainger & Miller , proved challenging , as a large @-@ scale contracting industry was not yet in place in Scotland ; nor was large @-@ scale financing . At the end of 1838 Miller was instructed to build a branch from Barassie to Troon Harbour , earlier thoughts of taking over the Kilmarnock and Troon Railway and converting it — as it was then still a horse @-@ operated plateway — having been dropped . 
 In 1839 the Ardrossan and Johnstone Railway was engaged in converting its gauge to standard so as to <unk> with the GPK & AR ( with which it was to connect at Kilwinning ) , and the following year it changed its name to the Ardrossan Railway 
 = = = Opening — in stages = = = 
 After a directors ' special run between Ayr ( north of the river , at Newton @-@ on @-@ Ayr ) and Irvine on 19 July 1839 , the line opened to the public between those points on 5 August 1839 . This was an enormous success and that limited section of the line made a surplus of £ 500 in the remainder of the year . The section between Irvine and Kilwinning opened on 23 March 1840 . 
 On 13 July 1840 the joint line between Paisley and a temporary terminus in Glasgow at Bridge Street was ready for a demonstration run , opening fully to the public the following day . 
 The remainder of the main line opened in further stages , and the dates for the whole line were : 
 Glasgow Bridge Street ( temporary station ) to Paisley ( Joint Line ) : 14 July 1840 ; 
 Paisley to a temporary station at <unk> ( then spelt Howood ) : 21 July 1840 ; 
 Howood to Beith : 12 August 1840 ; Howood station then closed ; 
 Beith to Kilwinning : 21 July 1840 ; 
 Kilwinning to Irvine : 23 March 1840 ; 
 Irvine to Ayr ( Newton @-@ on @-@ Ayr ) : 19 July 1839 . 
 The permanent Bridge Street station opened on 6 April 1841 . 
 The GPK & AR moved their head offices to Bridge Street from Gordon Street in March 1841 . 
 The construction of the main line was stated to have overrun estimated costs considerably , and at a shareholders ' meeting in February 1841 it was stated that as a result , the Kilmarnock branch could not be started until authority for additional capital had been obtained , and of course the money actually raised . Kilmarnock had to be content with a coach connection until the line there from Dalry Junction opened on 4 April 1843 . 
 = = = By rail and sea to London = = = 
 The opening of the line and the conversion of the Ardrossan railway to run in connection , enabled a fast service — 26 ½ hours — between Glasgow and London to be instituted . The fast steamer Fire King plied on alternate days between Ardrossan and Liverpool ; from May 1841 the English terminal was transferred to Fleetwood following the opening of the Preston & Wyre Railway and Dock Company . The service only lasted a few days and was not a commercial success ; the GPK & AR sold the vessel to James Burns , who continued the service but " soon withdrew it " , transferring the boat to a route to Ireland . 
 = = = The railway route to England = = = 
 From the time the GPK & AR was authorised , controversy raged about the route a railway to England might take . It was plain that Carlisle would be reached from the south ; a direct route from Glasgow over the Southern Uplands , the route that became known as the Annandale line , would involve severe gradients , and pass through almost unpopulated territory . The locomotives available at the time were not thought to be capable of climbing the steep inclines , and rope haulage was put forward by some as the solution . By contrast , a route from Kilmarnock through Cumnock and Dumfries — the Nithsdale line — would have much easier gradients and pass through considerable population centres , bringing in additional traffic . Moreover , the Nithsdale route would be much cheaper to build . 
 The Government intervened and in 1839 appointed two Royal Commissioners to determine the way forward ; at this time there was a presumption that one railway route from Scotland to England would suffice ; but which ? There was no consensus between expert witnesses , and in 1840 the Commissioners reported that the Annandale route should prevail , but " the promoters must prove their bona fide intention to complete the English portion of the line , otherwise preference would be given to the East Coast route " ( from Edinburgh via Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed and Newcastle upon Tyne ) . This stalled the whole process : there was no such single group as " the promoters " of any route via Carlisle , and in fact the Lancaster and Carlisle Railway was not authorised until 1844 . 
 The report of the Commissioners was not binding , and the rivalry between supporters of the two routes intensified . An independent Glasgow , Dumfries and Carlisle Railway was proposed , to build from Carlisle to meet the GPK & AR , and the GPK & AR itself proposed several branches , mostly for tactical reasons , to weaken or exclude the Caledonian Railway ( CR ) , as the dominant supporter of the Annandale route . Of these only an extension from Kilmarnock to Horsecleugh , south of the mining town of Old Cumnock was authorised , by Act of 21 July 1845 . The CR case was strengthened by its intended branch to Edinburgh ; moreover locomotive designs were being improved , and the capacity to haul trains over the steep gradients of the Annandale route was diminishing in importance . In Parliamentary hearings in 1845 , the Caledonian Railway passed the Commons and despite the GPK & AR fighting on in the Lords , the Caledonian Railway was authorised , in preference to the Nithsdale route , on 31 July 1845 . 
 The Glasgow , Dumfries and Carlisle Railway felt the setback most keenly , as it had no railway and had just been refused sanction to build one . 
 = = = A resilient mood ; but then collapse = = = 
 The GPK & AR was at least able to see a positive future without the line to Carlisle ; a 6 % dividend was declared in August 1845 . The Shareholders approved the lease of the Kilmarnock and Troon Railway ( K & TR ) ; as a horse @-@ operated plateway this would need to be converted and upgraded at a cost of £ 40 @,@ 000 , but the process would give access much improved access to the harbour for collieries in the area . In addition a mineral line was to be built from Auchinleck , on the Cumnock extension , to Muirkirk . There had long been an ironworks at Muirkirk which suffered from the disadvantage of poor transport links to market ; in addition a new ironworks at Lugar would also be accessed by the line . 
 The 1846 session of Parliament experienced a snowstorm of bills for new railways ; many of these threatened to encroach on the GPK & AR area of influence and abstract business ; several schemes were promoted by the Caledonian Railway or its allies ; in self @-@ defence the GPK & AR itself promoted numerous schemes — in fact 25 branches as well as a bill nominally by the K & TR to authorise the modernisation works — to head off some of the encroachment . 
 In this session , the remodelled Glasgow , Dumfries and Carlisle Railway got its authorising Act of Parliament ( on 13 August or 16 July ) , to build from Horsecleugh ( near Cumnock , the southern limit of the GPK & AR authorisation ) to Gretna Junction , reaching Carlisle from Gretna over the Caledonian Railway line . The Act stipulated that on actual completion of the construction , the GD & CR should merge with the GPK & AR to form a new company , the Glasgow and South Western Railway . 
 This huge volume of intended activity was fuelled by financial speculation — the " railway mania " . It appeared that fortunes could be made by subscribing to shares in new lines , and the subscriber only had to put a small deposit down until construction got under way . Over @-@ optimism led to stark inability to pay up when the calls ( for cash on subscribed shares ) came in , and suddenly money was impossible to come by . Most of the speculative schemes collapsed at once . 
 = = = Regaining momentum = = = 
 Although in difficulties for cash , the GD & CR started construction ; obstructions by the Caledonian Railway at the Gretna end were eventually resolved , and a fresh Act structuring the merger with the GPK & AR was passed ( on 9 July 1847 ) , but " so heavily amended ... as to be useless to the Companies " . 
 On 1 March 1847 the Kilmarnock and Troon line reopened , as a standard gauge locomotive operated railway . It had been closed for the modernisation work , and it now provided a proper link from Kilmarnock to the coast . The GPK & AR opened a short connecting spur between its own line and the K & TR in Kilmarnock . On the same day a branch at Dalry to Swinlees was opened ; there was a copper mine there . 
 On 22 July 1847 the company acquired control of the Paisley and Renfrew Railway under the Paisley & Renfrew Railway Sale and Improvement Act . , . The purchase had earlier been agreed by the proposed Paisley , Barrhead and Hurlet Railway , supported by the GPK & AR , for £ 34 @,@ 000 . It was horse @-@ operated and had a track gauge of 4 ft <unk> ( 1 @,@ 321 mm ) . The line was loss @-@ making and had no practical value other than the tactical one of securing territory against competing companies . The Paisley Barrhead and Hurlet Bill failed in the 1847 session of Parliament and was re @-@ presented in 1848 ; the share capital proposed had risen to £ 230 @,@ 000 ; during the Lords ' hearings it became plain that running powers were likely to be granted to the Barrhead and Neilston Direct Railway , an offshoot of the Caledonian Railway . The GPK & AR had subscribed to £ 150 @,@ 000 in face value of the shares of this proposed line , with the sole intention of excluding the Caledonian Railway from the area . The GPK & AR now petitioned against the Bill , but this was unsuccessful , and it received the Royal Assent , with the running powers clause , on 31 August 1848 . 
 Having a majority shareholding , the GPK & AR was able to stall any plans to proceed with construction of the Hurlet line , but on 9 October a special GPK & AR Shareholders ' Meeting reviewed the financial commitments made by their Board in the frenzied days of 1845 and 1846 , when support to numerous new lines had been committed ; the meeting left the directors in no doubt as to their disapproval . 
 On 28 May 1848 a line opened between Irvine and Busbie , about 2 miles ( 3 km ) north @-@ west of Kilmarnock ; a short branch to Irvine Harbour opened on the same day . The Cumnock line as far as Auchinleck and the Muirkirk branch from that point , opened on 9 August . This included the <unk> Viaduct , located near <unk> ; it was built with a central span of 181 feet ( 55 @.@ 2 m ) and 175 feet ( 53 @.@ 3 m ) high above the River Ayr . It was the largest masonry arch span in the world at the time of its completion , and is the highest railway bridge in Britain . 
 Also on 9 August 1848 the Newmilns branch opened from Hurlford to Galston . 
 A branch to Perceton Colliery ( a short northward spur from the Irvine - Busbie line ) opened on 26 June 1848 . On 1 July 1848 , a Perceton branch from the <unk> line of the Ardrossan Railway opened . It was actually the only part of the Glasgow Kilmarnock and Ardrossan Railway to be built ; it became part of the Ardrossan Railway . 
 On 26 February 1849 the Fairlie branch of the former Kilmarnock and Troon Railway was opened . 
 = = = Completing the line to Carlisle = = = 
 The Glasgow , Dumfries and Carlisle Railway had been proceeding with construction as fast as funds would allow , and on 23 August 1848 it opened its line between Gretna and Dumfries . At Gretna passengers could change to Caledonian Railway trains ; the Dumfries station was a temporary structure south of Annan Road . The GPK & AR provided the rolling stock to its junior partner . The GD & CR was insolvent , owing £ 230 @,@ 000 and needing £ 602 @,@ 000 to complete the line ; these facts emerged after another bruising session at which shareholders criticised the liabilities and futile Parliamentary expenses incurred by the directors of both companies . ( In fact there was considerable overlap on the two boards . ) 
 By March 1849 these negative feelings led to the GPK & AR Chairman , James McCall being removed along with several directors ; Andrew Orr took over as chairman , but for a period the remaining directors from the earlier years formed an obstructive group ; their motivation seemed to be the personal liabilities they had taken on on behalf of the company , and their wish to be indemnified against personal loss . Orr eventually resolved these issues and on 24 August , Orr held shareholders ' meetings of each company ( separately ) and announced that all the " old " directors had resigned , and that a new board would shortly be formed , with an identical composition for the two companies . The engineer John Miller also resigned at this time in the interest of economy . All the remaining GD & CR construction contracts had been let and were proceeding , and the two companies would operate as a single unit using GPK & AR rolling stock . 
 On 20 May 1850 the line was opened between Auchinleck and New Cumnock , completing the GPK & AR southward extension and including the northern extremity of the GD & CR line . 
 By 28 October 1850 the final section of the main line to Carlisle was completed by the GD & CR , and trains began to run through to Carlisle ; evidently the difficulty with the Caledonian Railway from Gretna southwards had been resolved . 
 = = = The Glasgow and South Western Railway is formed = = = 
 The GPK & AR and the GD & CR had already been authorised by the Acts of 1846 and 1847 to amalgamate at this stage . In fact the GD & CR was absorbed by the GPK & AR which then changed its name to the G & SWR ; the 1847 Act provided for the vesting of the GD & CR in the GPK & AR on the date of the opening throughout of the GD & CR , when that company would be dissolved . From the date of the amalgamation the company would be called the Glasgow and South Western Railway . 
 On 28 October 1850 the Glasgow and South Western railway started its existence . 
 = = Train services = = 
 The first services on the line in 1839 , between Irvine and Ayr , travelled at an average of 21 miles per hour ( 34 km / h ) with stoppages averaging 1 min 6 secs per station , meaning a trip along the entire 10 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 16 @.@ 9 km ) line at that point would have taken around 35 ½ minutes . The maximum fare for passengers at the time was 2d , 1 ½ d and 1d for first , second and third class respectively . 137 @,@ 117 passengers travelled on the line during the first year of services . 
 In conjunction with the Ardrossan Railway , which was <unk> in 1840 , on alternate days a fast steamboat service ran between Ardrossan Pier and Liverpool , and vice versa . This connected with the Grand Junction Railway and London and Birmingham Railway 's expresses to London . In 1841 the steamboat service was transferred from Liverpool to the new Port at Fleetwood , Lancashire . 
 In March 1850 the passenger train service consisted of five trains southbound and four northbound on the Ayr line ; these called at all stations except that Cochrane Mill was served only by the first southbound and last northbound trains ; the journey time to Ayr was two to two and a half hours . The service between Glasgow and Muirkirk had four trains each way , but only two went throughout ; one trip was to and from Auchinleck only , and one was to and from Kilmarnock ; there were connecting trains from Ayr to Irvine . The journey time Glasgow to Muirkirk was three hours . Three of the four Kilmarnock line trains were combined with Ayr trains between Glasgow and Irvine , and between Dalry and Kilmarnock trains travelled via Irvine and Dreghorn . 
 In addition a " Glasgow to Troon direct " train was advertised , running on Wednesdays and Fridays in connection with the steamers to Liverpool , leaving Glasgow at 4 @.@ 30 pm . This is the departure time of an ordinary parliamentary train to Troon and Ayr , so it does not appear to be a separate boat train . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 The original locomotives used on the line in 1839 were similar to those used on the London and Birmingham Railway , having 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) cylinders , 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) stroke and four wheels . Designed by Bury , the 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 0 locomotives cost around £ 1 @,@ 200 per engine were given the names Mazeppa , Mercury , Marmion and Cutty @-@ <unk> . Two more of the same design were obtained in 1841 named Stuart and Bute . The six original locomotives were withdrawn between 1858 and 1860 . In 1840 @-@ 1841 twelve 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 2 locomotives ( designed by company engineer J. Miller ) were built and given names such as Bruce , Eglinton , Phoenix , Prince Albert and Loudoun . Bruce and Cutty @-@ <unk> hauled the first special train from Glasgow to Ayr on 11 August 1840 . 
 Early passenger carriages were of similar design to those used on railways in England at the time , holding eighteen passengers on first class carriages , and thirty on second class . Third class carriages originally had seats , but on 15 April 1840 a board decision declared that all future third class carriages were to be made without seats . All existing third class carriages also had their seats removed . A later board decision on 3 July 1840 ordered that third class carriages would be situated closest to the engine , followed by second class , with first class at the rear . 
 = = Development under the Glasgow and South Western Railway = = 
 On taking over the GPK & AR and GD & CR networks , the Glasgow and South Western Railway had a main line from Glasgow to Ayr , and from Glasgow to Carlisle , and some branches . It already served areas rich in minerals , especially coal and ironstone , and had useful access to west coast ports . 
 It had two main limitations . The first was that the Carlisle line was very circuitous compared with the competing Caledonian Railway ( CR ) route via Beattock , which also served Edinburgh ; the route also depended on running over the CR from Gretna Junction to Carlisle , and needed accommodation at Carlisle station . The CR was to prove a formidable competitor for Anglo @-@ Scottish traffic , both passenger and goods , and much energy and money were expended in securing exclusive territory for the G & SWR , and in keeping the CR out . 
 The second issue was that both the Glasgow and Ayr stations were awkward . The Glasgow station , at Bridge Street , was on the south of the Clyde ( and Glasgow Bridge carried a toll at the time ) . The Ayr station was north of the River Ayr , and although not inconvenient for passenger access to the town , the location prevented southward railway extension . 
 The means adopted to overcome these challenges are described more fully in the Glasgow and South Western Railway and other articles . In overview : 
 The company encouraged local promoters to build railways that extended or fed the G & SWR ; often this was with substantial financial support from the company ; 
 a number of branches were constructed directly ; this was especially the case to serve districts where mining was dominant ; 
 in later years a number of agreements were finalised with the Caledonian Railway over primacy of territory and limitation on the formation of encroaching routes ; 
 the Ayr and Dalmellington Railway , encouraged by the G & SWR , built its line southwards from Falkland Junction , immediately north of Ayr station ; the new line passed round the east side of the burgh , and a new through station for Ayr was provided on it in 1857 ; after initial reluctance , this became the main passenger station for Ayr ; 
 with the North British Railway , the G & SWR sponsored the City of Glasgow Union Railway , which opened a line crossing the Clyde in Glasgow and making a south to north link line ; as part of that scheme a new passenger terminal at St Enoch was opened , and ( no less important ) a central goods terminal at College , on land vacated by the University of Glasgow ; the river crossing and a temporary central station were in use in 1870 and the St Enoch station was opened in 1876 ; after a short time the Bridge Street station was vacated by the G & SWR ; 
 the Glasgow , Barrhead and Kilmarnock Joint Railway was made , jointly with the Caledonian Railway , forming a direct route between Glasgow and Kilmarnock , and shortening the route from Glasgow to Carlisle ; this opened in 1873 ; the Dalry to Kilmarnock line was reduced in importance for express passenger trains , but continued as an important link from Carlisle to the West Coast ports , and for mineral and goods traffic . 
 = = Twentieth century closures = = 
 In the first half of the twentieth century , the extractive industries of the West of Scotland underwent a metamorphosis . The small pits were either worked out or were mechanised and merged . A similar process took place in the iron and steel production industries , and the medium scale iron works in many locations closed down . Many railway branch lines had been heavily dependent on business from the mineral industries , and could not be sustained when they had gone , but some continued as passenger lines where they served sizable communities . 
 The heavy rationalisation process in British Railways in the 1960s , often referred to as the Beeching Axe , resulted in a re @-@ assessment of those lines , at a time when efficient bus services were abstracting passengers from often infrequent and inconvenient train services . 
 The effect of this process on the original GPK & AR network can be summarised thus : 
 Glasgow to Ayr : still operating ; electrified 19 January 1987 ; a diversion to serve Troon more conveniently replaced a short section of the original main line there in 1892 ; 
 Dalry to Kilmarnock : closed to local passenger trains on 18 April 1966 . ; a night sleeper train continued running over the line , giving a direct Paisley to London service , but the lien closed completely on 23 October 1973 ; 
 Kilmarnock to Horsecleugh : still operating as part of the Glasgow - Kilmarnock - Dumfries - Carlisle route ; 
 Irvine to Busbie Junction : closed to local passenger traffic on 6 April 1964 , and closed completely 11 October 1965 ; 
 Irvine Harbour branch ; closed ; 
 Perceton branch ; closed ; 
 Barassie to Kilmarnock ( former Kilmarnock and Troon Railway ) : still operating ; 
 Auchinleck to Newmilns : the section between Auchinleck and Cronberry closed to passenger traffic on 3 July 1950 . The line between Cronberry and Newmilns was part of a route between Ayr and Muirkirk , but this too closed to passenger trains on 1 October 1950 . In 1951 services were reinstated for two weeks to accommodate diverted trains from Edinburgh to Ayr . The entire line from Auchinleck to Muirkirk then closed to regular passenger traffic on 1 October 1950 ; the line was used until 1976 . 
 = = Topography = = 
 Note : station and route details are confined to those opened during GPK & AR days , and the subsequent history of those stations and routes ; details of stations opened on the route later than 1850 , and of contiguous routes opened later , can be found in the Glasgow and South Western Railway article . Locations in italic were not passenger stations ; entries in bold are passenger stations open at the present . 
 = = = Bridge <unk> to Ayr = = = 
 GPK & AR trains used the Glasgow and Paisley Joint Line as far as Paisley ; it was joint with the Glasgow , Paisley and Greenock Railway . The line between Shields Junction and Paisley was quadrupled in 1880s . It was reduced again to double track during the mid 1960s . A third track was added once more in early 2012 . 
 Bridge Street 
 Moss Road ; opened 1843 ; closed 1843 ; <unk> station opened on the same site 1879 ; 
 Paisley ; renamed Paisley Gilmour Street from 1883 ; 
 Johnstone ; renamed Johnstone High from 1851 until 1962 ; 
 Cochrane Mill ; opened 1846 ; renamed Milliken Park 1853 ; closed 1966 ; a new Milliken Park was opened a short distance nearer Dalry on 15 May 1989 ; 
 Howood ; opened 1840 ; closed 1840 ; re @-@ opened as <unk> 1876 ; closed 1955 ; reopened 28 October 1988 ; 
 <unk> # # # # 
 <unk> ; opened 1841 ; renamed <unk> 1951 ; 
 Swinlees Junction ; junction for mineral line from Swinlees ; ( the branch opened 1847 ; cut back to <unk> 1920 ; closed in the 1950s ) ; 
 Dalry ; 
 Dalry Junction ; opened 1850 ; closed 1860 ; junction to Kilmarnock line ; 
 Kilwinning ; junction to Ardrossan Railway ; 
 Irvine ; junction for line to Busbie and for line to Irvine Harbour ; 
 Barassie ; junction for line from Kilmarnock ; junction for line to Troon Harbour ; the station probably did not have platforms on the Kilwinning line during the lifetime of the GPK & AR . 
 The section of line between Barassie and <unk> Junction closed in 1975 . 
 Troon ; closed 1892 when the new station on the loop line was opened ; 
 <unk> Junction ; 
 Monkton ; closed 1940 ; 
 Prestwick ; 
 Ayr ; closed 1857 when all passenger services were transferred to the through station . 
 = = = Dalry Junction - Kilmarnock - Auchinleck = = = 
 Dalry Junction ; ( above ) ; 
 <unk> ; renamed <unk> 1873 ; closed 1950 ; ( the name <unk> was transferred to a station on the Glasgow , Barrhead and Kilmarnock Joint Railway , nearer the town ) ; 
 Busby ; ( spelt Busbie when the line was being planned ) ; <unk> 1850 ; re @-@ opened as <unk> 1872 ; closed 1966 ; 
 Kilmarnock ; 
 Hurlford ; closed 1955 ; 
 Mauchline ; closed 1965 ; 
 Auchinleck ; closed 1965 ; re @-@ opened 1984 ; 
 Old Cumnock ; renamed Cumnock 1955 ; closed 1965 ; 
 Horsecleugh ; end @-@ on junction with the Glasgow , Dumfries and Carlisle Railway ; no station or siding facilities . 
 = = = Irvine to Busby line = = = 
 Irvine ; see above ; 
 Dreghorn ; closed 1850 ; opened 1868 ; closed 1964 ; 
 junction for the Perceton branch , open 1848 to 1950 ; 
 Busby ; see above . 
 = = = Troon Harbour to Kilmarnock = = = 
 Troon Harbour ; 
 Barassie ; see above ; 
 <unk> ; closed 1969 ; 
 <unk> ; closed 1969 ; 
 Kilmarnock ; see above . 
 = = = Hurlford to Galston = = = 
 Hurlford ; see above ; 
 Mayfield Junction ; junction to Mayfield goods station ; branch cut back to <unk> Works 1930 ; closed 1965 ; 
 Galston ; closed 1964 ; 
 Newmilns . 
 = = 1994 - present : Privatisation and current operations = = 
 Privatisation resulted in the former GPK & AR being under the ownership of Railtrack , and then from 2002 , Network Rail . Passenger services between Glasgow and Ayr operate under the title Ayrshire Coast Line ( which also incorporates the Largs branch ) , and passenger train services on the line from Kilmarnock to Carlisle are called the Glasgow South Western Line . Local services are run by First ScotRail on behalf of Strathclyde Partnership for Transport . 
 = = Connections to other lines = = 
 Ardrossan Railway at Kilwinning and <unk> Junction 
 Ayr and Dalmellington Railway at Falkland Junction 
 Ayr to Mauchline Branch and associated lines at Prestwick , Falkland Junction , ( near Newton @-@ on @-@ Ayr station ) and Mauchline 
 Bridge of Weir Railway at Elderslie 
 Dalry and North Johnstone Line at Brownhill Junction , north east of Dalry 
 <unk> Branch at Hurlford Junction , south east of Kilmarnock 
 Glasgow , Barrhead and Kilmarnock Joint Railway at Kilmarnock 
 Glasgow , Dumfries and Carlisle Railway at Horsecleugh 
 Glasgow , Paisley and Greenock Railway at Paisley Gilmour Street 
 Kilmarnock and Troon Railway at Barassie and Kilmarnock 
 Paisley Canal Line at Elderslie and at Shields Junction 
 = K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I = 
 K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I ( Mayan pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ) , also known as Ruler 1 , was an ajaw of Piedras Negras , an ancient Maya settlement in Guatemala . He ruled during the Late Classic Period , from 603 – 639 AD . It has been proposed that he began a new dynasty at Piedras Negras , following years of ineffective kings . The manner in which K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I came to power is largely unknown , although it is known that he waged several successful wars against Palenque and Sak Tz 'i ' . He was succeeded by his son , Itzam K 'an Ahk I , in 639 AD . K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I left behind several monuments , including stelae at Piedras Negras and a large mortuary temple now known as Pyramid R @-@ 5 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I , also known as Ruler 1 , was an ajaw of Piedras Negras in the 7th century AD . According to Mayanists Simon Martin and Nikolai Grube , the ruler 's name means " Great @-@ Sun ? <unk> " . His name was later taken by his eventual successors , K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk II and Yo 'nal Ahk III . The title k 'inich translates to " red @-@ faced " , and is a reference to the settlement 's rulers ' belief that they were lords of the sun . He ascended to the throne on November 14 , 603 AD ( 9 @.@ 8 @.@ 10 @.@ 6 @.@ 16 10 <unk> 9 Mak in the Long Count ) , although the exact details surrounding his rise to power are unknown . Mayanists Stephen D. Houston and Charles Golden have proposed the theory that he refounded the ruling dynasty at Piedras Negras in the wake of a disaster that had ruined previous rulers of the site . 
 K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I destroyed older buildings and monuments at Piedras Negras that were associated with older kings , seemingly to cleanse the center of their connection with these " discredited " rulers . This period of destruction — which focused heavily on structures in and around the West Group of the site , and the acropolis — has left behind tell @-@ tale clues , such as offerings of pottery , jade , and small figures , suggesting that it was heavily ritualized . After this period of destruction , K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I moved his focus to the more ancient South Group , where he began to erect new buildings . 
 During his lifetime , he waged many battles , including notable ones against Palenque and Sak Tz 'i ' . In the former he captured an aj k <unk> , or lord , named Ch 'ok Balam , and in the latter he captured an ajaw named K 'ab Chan Te ' . Palenque was Piedras Negras 's main rival in the area , whereas Sak Tz 'i ' seems to have eventually come under Piedras Negras 's control . K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I died on February 3 , 639 AD ( 9 @.@ 10 @.@ 6 @.@ 2 @.@ 1 5 Imix 19 K <unk> ) and seems to have been buried at Pyramid R @-@ 5 . K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I was succeeded by his son , Itzam K 'an Ahk I , who later dedicated or re @-@ opened the tomb in 658 AD . 
 = = Monuments = = 
 = = = Stelae = = = 
 Many of the stelae that K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I erected became prototypes for monuments raised by his successors . The first stela raised , Stela 25 , is the king 's inaugural monument , and it established the precedent for the niche style . This type of stela features the newly installed king in a small hollow and seated on an intricately decorated scaffold , being symbolically lifted into the air . On Stela 25 , K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I is seated on a jaguar cushion , reached by a ladder covered in bloody footprints , symbolizing sacrifice . The cushion itself is raised on a reed effigy . The king is covered by a canopy that is symbolic of the sky ; crowning the sky is a great celestial bird , an avian version of the Maya god Itzamna . 
 Stela 26 , dating from 628 AD , features the aforementioned war with Palenque . This monument is notable because it marks the first time that a stela at Piedra Negras had carvings on multiple faces , in this case dedication texts . Stela 26 is aligned with Itzam K 'an Ahk II 's Stela 35 , creating a direction connection between the two monuments , conveying " an image of continuity , repetition , and renewal over time and across generations . " Stela 31 , dating from around 637 AD , depicts the war with Sak Tz 'i ' . Stela 31 's placement is also notable , as it is standing in front of Structures R @-@ 3 and R @-@ 4 , where many of Piedras Negras 's earliest monuments , such as Stela 30 , stood . The platform for the monument was more expansive than other stelae platforms , giving more room for observation . The stela was also extremely tall , at about 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @-@ metre ( 15 – 16 ft ) meters in height , making it nearly two meters taller than Stela 26 . 
 Both Stelae 26 and 31 feature examples of one of K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I 's prominent themes , that of the " warrior king " motif . This design often depicts the king in a frontal pose , wearing a large headdress featuring iconography of the Teotihuacan War Serpent . 
 = = = R @-@ 5 Pyramid = = = 
 The R @-@ 5 Pyramid is largely believed to by K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I 's tomb , based mostly on evidence from Panel 4 , crafted by Itzam K 'an Ahk I , which records the new ajaw either dedicating or ceremonially re @-@ opening the tomb of K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I. The panel itself explicitly names the R @-@ 5 pyramid as the <unk> , or burial , of K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I. However , despite intense efforts , no burial has ever been found in the pyramid , although the search was complicated by — and eventually abandoned because of — rubble fill left behind by looters . It is probable that the majority of the pyramid was constructed within the years following the death of K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk I , likely under Itzam K 'an Ahk I 's patronage . Itzam K 'an Ahk I later erected six stelae at the base of this pyramid . 
 = Percy Lavon Julian = 
 Percy Lavon Julian ( April 11 , 1899 – April 19 , 1975 ) was an African American research chemist and a pioneer in the chemical synthesis of medicinal drugs from plants . He was the first to synthesize the natural product physostigmine , and a pioneer in the industrial large @-@ scale chemical synthesis of the human hormones progesterone and testosterone from plant sterols such as stigmasterol and sitosterol . His work laid the foundation for the steroid drug industry 's production of cortisone , other corticosteroids , and birth control pills . 
 He later started his own company to synthesize steroid intermediates from the wild Mexican yam . His work helped greatly reduce the cost of steroid intermediates to large multinational pharmaceutical companies , helping to significantly expand the use of several important drugs . 
 Julian received more than 130 chemical patents . He was one of the first African Americans to receive a doctorate in chemistry . He was the first African @-@ American chemist inducted into the National Academy of Sciences , and the second African @-@ American scientist inducted ( behind David Blackwell ) from any field . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Percy Lavon Julian was born in Montgomery , Alabama , as the first child of six born to James Sumner Julian and Elizabeth Lena Julian , née Adams . Both of his parents were graduates of what was to be Alabama State University . His father , James , whose own father had been a slave , was employed as a clerk in the Railway Service of the United States Post Office , while his mother , Elizabeth , worked as a schoolteacher . Percy Julian grew up in the time of racist Jim Crow culture and legal regime in the southern United States . Among his childhood memories was finding a lynched man hanged from a tree while walking in the woods near his home . At a time when access to an education beyond the eighth grade was extremely rare for African @-@ Americans , Julian 's parents steered all of their children toward higher education . 
 Julian attended DePauw University in Greencastle , Indiana . The college accepted few African @-@ American students . The segregated nature of the town forced social humiliations . Julian was not allowed to live in the college dormitories and first stayed in an off @-@ campus boarding home , which refused to serve him meals . It took him days before Julian found an establishment where he could eat . He later found work firing the furnace , waiting tables , and doing other odd jobs in a fraternity house ; in return , he was allowed to sleep in the attic and eat at the house . Julian graduated from DePauw in 1920 as a Phi Beta Kappa and valedictorian . By 1930 Julian 's father would move the entire family to Greencastle so that all his children could attend college at DePauw . He still worked as a railroad postal clerk . 
 After graduating from DePauw , Julian wanted to obtain his doctorate in chemistry , but learned it would be difficult for an African @-@ American to do so . Instead he obtained a position as a chemistry instructor at Fisk University . In 1923 he received an Austin Fellowship in Chemistry , which allowed him to attend Harvard University to obtain his M.S. However , worried that Euro @-@ American students would resent being taught by an African @-@ American , Harvard withdrew Julian 's teaching assistantship , making it impossible for him to complete his Ph.D. at Harvard . 
 In 1929 , while an instructor at Howard University , Julian received a Rockefeller Foundation fellowship to continue his graduate work at the University of Vienna , where he earned his Ph.D. in 1931 . He studied under Ernst <unk> and was considered an impressive student . In Europe , he found freedom from the racial prejudices that had stifled him in the States . He freely participated in intellectual social gatherings , went to the opera and found greater acceptance among his peers . Julian was one of the first African Americans to receive a Ph.D. in chemistry , after St. Elmo Brady and Dr. Edward M.A. Chandler . 
 After returning from Vienna , Julian taught for one year at Howard University . At Howard , in part due to his position as a department head , Julian became caught up in university politics , setting off an embarrassing chain of events . At university president Mordecai Wyatt Johnson 's request , he goaded white Professor of chemistry , Jacob <unk> ( Ph.D from Harvard ) , into resigning . In late May 1932 , <unk> retaliated by releasing to the local African @-@ American newspaper the letters Julian had written to him from Vienna . The letters described " a variety of subjects from wine , pretty Viennese women , music and dances , to chemical experiments and plans for the new chemical building . " In the letters , he spoke with familiarity , and with some derision , of specific members of the Howard University faculty , terming one well @-@ known Dean , an " ass " . 
 Around this same time , Julian also became entangled in an interpersonal conflict with his laboratory assistant , Robert Thompson . Julian had recommended Thompson for dismissal in March 1932 . Thompson sued Julian for " alienating the affections of his wife " , Anna Roselle Thompson , stating he had seen them together in a sexual tryst . Julian counter @-@ sued him for libel . When Thompson was fired , he too gave the paper intimate and personal letters which Julian had written to him from Vienna . Dr. Julian 's letters revealed " how he fooled the [ Howard ] president into accepting his plans for the chemistry building " and " how he bluffed his good friend into appointing " a professor of Julian 's liking . Through the summer of 1932 , the Baltimore Afro @-@ American published all of Julian 's letters . Eventually , the scandal and accompanying pressure forced Julian to resign . He lost his position and everything he had worked for . 
 Some happiness for Dr. Julian , however , was to come from this scandal . On December 24 , 1935 he married Anna Roselle ( Ph.D. in Sociology , 1937 , University of Pennsylvania ) . They had two children : Percy Lavon Julian , Jr . ( August 31 , 1940 – February 24 , 2008 ) , who became a noted civil rights lawyer in Madison , Wisconsin ; and Faith Roselle Julian ( 1944 – ) , who still resides in their Oak Park home and often makes inspirational speeches about her father and his contributions to science . 
 At the lowest point in Julian 's career , his former mentor , William Blanchard , threw him a much @-@ needed lifeline . Blanchard offered Julian a position to teach organic chemistry at DePauw University in 1932 . Julian then helped Josef Pikl , a fellow student at the University of Vienna , to come to the United States to work with him at DePauw . In 1935 Julian and Pikl completed the total synthesis of physostigmine and confirmed the structural formula assigned to it . Robert Robinson of Oxford University in the U.K. had been the first to publish a synthesis of physostigmine , but Julian noticed that the melting point of Robinson 's end product was wrong , indicating that he had not created it . When Julian completed his synthesis , the melting point matched the correct one for natural physostigmine from the <unk> bean . 
 Julian also extracted stigmasterol , which took its name from <unk> <unk> , the west African <unk> bean that he hoped could serve as raw material for synthesis of human steroidal hormones . At about this time , in 1934 , Butenandt and <unk> , in Germany , had shown that stigmasterol , isolated from soybean oil , could be converted to progesterone by synthetic organic chemistry . 
 = = Private sector work : Glidden = = 
 In 1936 Julian was denied a professorship at DePauw for racial reasons . DuPont had offered a job to fellow chemist Josef Pikl but declined to hire Julian , despite his superlative qualifications as an organic chemist , apologizing that they were " unaware he was a Negro " . Julian next applied for a job at the Institute of Paper Chemistry ( IPC ) in Appleton , Wisconsin . However , Appleton was a sundown town , forbidding African Americans from staying overnight , stating directly : " No Negro should be bed or boarded overnight in Appleton . " 
 Meanwhile , Julian had written to the Glidden Company , a supplier of soybean oil products , to request a five @-@ gallon sample of the oil to use as his starting point for the synthesis of human steroidal sex hormones ( in part because his wife was suffering from infertility ) . After receiving the request , W. J. O 'Brien , a vice @-@ president at Glidden , made a telephone call to Julian , offering him the position of director of research at Glidden 's Soya Products Division in Chicago . He was very likely offered the job by O 'Brien because he was fluent in German , and Glidden had just purchased a modern continuous countercurrent solvent extraction plant from Germany for the extraction of vegetable oil from soybeans for paints and other uses . 
 Julian supervised the assembly of the plant at Glidden when he arrived in 1936 . He then designed and supervised construction of the world 's first plant for the production of industrial @-@ grade , isolated soy protein from oil @-@ free soybean meal . Isolated soy protein could replace the more expensive milk casein in industrial applications such as coating and sizing of paper , glue for making Douglas fir plywood , and in the manufacture of water @-@ based paints . 
 At the start of World War II , Glidden sent a sample of Julian 's isolated soy protein to National Foam System Inc . ( today a unit of <unk> Fire Fighting ) , which used it to develop Aer @-@ O @-@ Foam , the U.S. Navy 's beloved fire @-@ fighting " bean soup . " While it was not exactly Julian 's brainchild , his meticulous care in the preparation of the soy protein made the fire fighting foam possible . When a <unk> of isolated soy protein was fed into a water stream , the mixture was converted into a foam by means of an aerating nozzle . The soy protein foam was used to smother oil and gasoline fires aboard ships and was particularly useful on aircraft carriers . It saved the lives of thousands of sailors and airmen . Citing this achievement , in 1947 the NAACP awarded Julian the Spingarn Medal , its highest honor . 
 = = Steroids = = 
 Julian 's research at Glidden changed direction in 1940 when he began work on synthesizing progesterone , estrogen , and testosterone from the plant sterols stigmasterol and sitosterol , isolated from soybean oil by a foam technique he invented and patented . At that time clinicians were discovering many uses for the newly discovered hormones . However , only minute quantities could be extracted from hundreds of pounds of the spinal cords of animals . 
 In 1940 Julian was able to produce 100 lb of mixed soy sterols daily , which had a value of $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 79 @,@ 000 today ) as sex hormones . Julian was soon <unk> 100 pounds daily of mixed sterol <unk> . The soy stigmasterol was easily converted into commercial quantities of the female hormone progesterone , and the first pound of progesterone he made , valued at $ 63 @,@ 500 ( $ 503 @,@ 000 today ) , was shipped to the buyer , Upjohn , in an armored car . Production of other sex hormones soon followed . 
 His work made possible the production of these hormones on a larger industrial scale , with the potential of reducing the cost of treating hormonal deficiencies . Julian and his co @-@ workers obtained patents for Glidden on key processes for the preparation of progesterone and testosterone from soybean plant sterols . Product patents held by a former cartel of European pharmaceutical companies had prevented a significant reduction in wholesale and retail prices for clinical use of these hormones in the 1940s . He saved many lives with this discovery . 
 On April 13 , 1949 , <unk> Philip Hench at the Mayo Clinic announced the dramatic effectiveness of cortisone in treating rheumatoid arthritis . The cortisone was produced by Merck at great expense using a complex 36 @-@ step synthesis developed by chemist Lewis <unk> , starting with <unk> acid from cattle bile acids . On September 30 , 1949 , Julian announced an improvement in the process of producing cortisone . This eliminated the need to use osmium tetroxide , which was a rare and expensive chemical . By 1950 , Glidden could begin producing closely related compounds which might have partial cortisone activity . Julian also announced the synthesis , starting with the cheap and readily available pregnenolone ( synthesized from the soybean oil sterol stigmasterol ) of the steroid cortexolone ( also known as Reichstein 's Substance S ) , a molecule that differed from cortisone by a single missing oxygen atom ; and possibly <unk> @-@ hydroxyprogesterone and <unk> , which he hoped might also be effective in treating rheumatoid arthritis , but unfortunately they were not . 
 On April 5 , 1952 , biochemist Durey Peterson and microbiologist Herbert Murray at Upjohn published the first report of a fermentation process for the microbial 11α @-@ oxygenation of steroids in a single step ( by common molds of the order <unk> ) . Their fermentation process could produce 11α @-@ hydroxyprogesterone or 11α @-@ <unk> from progesterone or Compound S , respectively , which could then by further chemical steps be converted to cortisone or 11β @-@ <unk> ( cortisol ) . 
 After two years , Glidden abandoned production of cortisone to concentrate on Substance S. Julian developed a multistep process for conversion of pregnenolone , available in abundance from soybean oil sterols , to cortexolone . In 1952 , Glidden , which had been producing progesterone and other steroids from soybean oil , shut down its own production and began importing them from Mexico through an arrangement with <unk> ( a small Mexican company founded in 1947 by Russell Marker after leaving Syntex ) . Glidden 's cost of production of cortexolone was relatively high , so Upjohn decided to use progesterone , available in large quantity at low cost from Syntex , to produce cortisone and hydrocortisone . 
 In 1953 , Glidden decided to leave the steroid business , which had been relatively unprofitable over the years despite Julian 's innovative work . On December 1 , 1953 , Julian left Glidden after 18 years , giving up a salary of nearly $ 50 @,@ 000 a year ( equivalent to $ 440 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) to found his own company , Julian Laboratories , Inc . , taking over the small , concrete @-@ block building of Suburban Chemical Company in Franklin Park , Illinois . 
 On December 2 , 1953 , Pfizer acquired exclusive licenses of Glidden patents for the synthesis of Substance S. Pfizer had developed a fermentation process for microbial 11β @-@ oxygenation of steroids in a single step that could convert Substance S directly to 11β @-@ hydrocortisone ( cortisol ) , with Syntex undertaking large @-@ scale production of cortexolone at very low cost . 
 = = Oak Park and Julian Laboratories = = 
 Circa 1950 , Julian moved his family to the Chicago suburb of Oak Park , becoming the first African @-@ American family to reside there . Although some residents welcomed them into the community , there was also opposition . Before they even moved in , on Thanksgiving Day , 1950 , their home was fire @-@ bombed . Later , after they moved in , the house was attacked with dynamite on June 12 , 1951 . The attacks galvanized the community , and a community group was formed to support the Julians . Julian 's son later recounted that during these times , he and his father often kept watch over the family 's property by sitting in a tree with a shotgun . 
 In 1953 , Julian founded his own research firm , Julian Laboratories , Inc . He brought many of his best chemists , including African @-@ Americans and women , from Glidden to his own company . Julian won a contract to provide Upjohn with $ 2 million worth of progesterone ( equivalent to $ 16 million today ) . To compete against Syntex , he would have to use the same Mexican yam Mexican <unk> trade as his starting material . Julian used his own money and borrowed from friends to build a processing plant in Mexico , but he could not get a permit from the government to harvest the yams . Abraham <unk> , a former Jewish University of Vienna classmate whom Julian had helped escape from the Nazi European holocaust , led a search to find a new source of the yam in Guatemala for the company . 
 In July 1956 , Julian and executives of two other American companies trying to enter the Mexican steroid intermediates market appeared before a U.S. Senate subcommittee . They testified that Syntex was using undue influence to monopolize access to the Mexican yam . The hearings resulted in Syntex signing a consent decree with the U.S. Justice Department . While it did not admit to restraining trade , it promised not to do so in the future . Within five years , large American multinational pharmaceutical companies had acquired all six producers of steroid intermediates in Mexico , four of which had been Mexican @-@ owned . 
 Syntex reduced the cost of steroid intermediates more than 250 @-@ fold over twelve years , from $ 80 per gram in 1943 to $ 0 @.@ 31 per gram in 1955 . Competition from Upjohn and General Mills , which had together made very substantial improvements in the production of progesterone from stigmasterol , forced the price of Mexican progesterone to less than $ 0 @.@ 15 per gram in 1957 . The price continued to fall , bottoming out at $ 0 @.@ 08 per gram in 1968 . 
 In 1958 , Upjohn purchased 6 @,@ 900 kg of progesterone from Syntex at $ 0 @.@ 135 per gram , 6 @,@ 201 kg of progesterone from Searle ( who had acquired Pesa ) at $ 0 @.@ 143 per gram , 5 @,@ 150 kg of progesterone from Julian Laboratories at $ 0 @.@ 14 per gram , and 1 @,@ 925 kg of progesterone from General Mills ( who had acquired <unk> ) at $ 0 @.@ 142 per gram . 
 Despite continually falling bulk prices of steroid intermediates , an oligopoly of large American multinational pharmaceutical companies kept the wholesale prices of corticosteroid drugs fixed and unchanged into the 1960s . <unk> was fixed at $ 5 @.@ 48 per gram from 1954 , hydrocortisone at $ 7 @.@ 99 per gram from 1954 , and prednisone at $ 35 @.@ 80 per gram from 1956 . Merck and Roussel <unk> concentrated on improving the production of corticosteroids from cattle bile acids . In 1960 Roussel produced almost one @-@ third of the world 's corticosteroids from bile acids . 
 Julian Laboratories chemists found a way to quadruple the yield on a product on which they were barely breaking even . Julian reduced their price for the product from $ 4 @,@ 000 per kg to $ 400 per kg . He sold the company in 1961 for $ 2 @.@ 3 million ( equivalent to $ 18 million today ) . The U.S. and Mexico facilities were purchased by Smith Kline , and Julian 's chemical plant in Guatemala was purchased by Upjohn . 
 In 1964 , Julian founded Julian Associates and Julian Research Institute , which he managed for the rest of his life . 
 = = National Academy of Sciences = = 
 He was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1973 in recognition of his scientific achievements . He became the second African @-@ American to be inducted , after David Blackwell . 
 = = Legacy and honors = = 
 In 1950 , the Chicago Sun @-@ Times named Percy Julian the Chicagoan of the Year . 
 Since 1975 , the National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers has presented the Percy L. Julian Award for Pure and Applied Research in Science and Engineering . 
 In 1975 , Percy L. Julian High School was opened on the south side of Chicago , Illinois as a Chicago public high school . 
 In 1980 , the science and mathematics building on the DePauw University campus was rededicated as the Percy L. Julian Mathematics and Science Center . In Greencastle , Indiana , where DePauw is located , a street was named after Julian . 
 In 1985 , Hawthorne School in Oak Park , Illinois , was renamed Percy Julian Middle School . 
 Illinois State University , where Julian served on the board of trustees , named a hall after him . 
 A structure at Coppin State University is named the Percy Julian Science Building . 
 In 1990 , he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame . 
 In 1993 Julian was honored on a stamp issued by the United States Postal Service . 
 In 1999 , the American Chemical Society recognized Julian 's synthesis of physostigmine as a National Historic Chemical Landmark . 
 In 2002 , scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed Percy Lavon Julian on his list of 100 Greatest African @-@ Americans . 
 In 2011 , the qualifying exam preparation committee at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine was named for Percy Julian . 
 In 2014 , Google honored him with a Doodle . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] 
 = = = Nova documentary = = = 
 Ruben Santiago @-@ Hudson portrayed Percy Julian in the Public Broadcasting Service Nova documentary about his life , called " Forgotten Genius " . It was presented on the PBS network on February 6 , 2007 , with initial sponsorship by the Camille and Henry Dreyfus Foundation and further funding by the National Endowment for the Humanities . Approximately sixty of Julian 's family members , friends , and work associates were interviewed for the docudrama . 
 Production on the biopic began at DePauw University 's Greencastle campus in May 2002 and included video of Julian 's bust on display in the atrium of the university 's Percy Lavon Julian Science and Mathematics Center . Completion and broadcasting of the documentary program was delayed in order for Nova to commission and publish a matching book on Julian 's life . 
 According to University of Illinois historian James Anderson in the film , " His story is a story of great accomplishment , of heroic efforts and overcoming tremendous odds ... a story about who we are and what we stand for and the challenges that have been there and the challenges that are still with us . " 
 = = = Archive = = = 
 The Percy Lavon Julian family papers are archived at DePauw University . 
 = = Patents = = 
 U.S. Patent 2 @,@ 218 @,@ 971 , October 22 , 1940 , Recovery of sterols 
 U.S. Patent 2 @,@ 373 @,@ 686 , July 15 , 1942 , <unk> product and method of making 
 U.S. Patent 2 @,@ 752 @,@ 339 , June 26 , 1956 , Preparation of cortisone 
 U.S. Patent 3 @,@ 149 @,@ 132 , September 15 , 1964 , 16 @-@ <unk> @-@ 17 @-@ <unk> derivatives 
 U.S. Patent 3 @,@ 274 @,@ 178 , September 20 , 1966 , Method for preparing 16 ( alpha ) <unk> and intermediates obtained therein 
