 U.S. Patent 3 @,@ 761 @,@ 469 , September 25 , 1973 , Process for the manufacture of steroid <unk> ; with Arnold Lippert Hirsch 
 = = Publications = = 
 Studies in the <unk> Series . I. The Synthesis of Alpha @-@ <unk> ; Percy L. Julian , Josef Pikl ; J. Am . Chem . Soc . 1933 , 55 ( 5 ) , pp 2105 – 2110 . 
 Studies in the <unk> Series . V. The Complete Synthesis of <unk> ( <unk> ) ; Percy L. Julian , Josef Pikl ; J. Am . Chem . Soc . 1935 , 57 ( 4 ) , pp 755 – 757 . 
 = Battle of Ohrid = 
 The Battle of Ohrid took place on 14 or 15 September 1464 between the Ottoman Empire 's forces and Skanderbeg 's Albania . A crusade against Sultan Mehmed II had been planned by Pope Pius II with Skanderbeg as one of its main leaders . The battle near Ohrid occurred as a result of an Albanian incursion into Ottoman territory . The Turks stationed in the area were assaulted by Skanderbeg 's men and 1 @,@ 000 Venetian soldiers under Cimarosto . The Turks were lured out of their protections in Ohrid and ambushed by the Albanian cavalry . Skanderbeg won the resulting battle and his men earned 40 @,@ 000 ducats after captured Ottoman officers were ransomed . Pius died before the planned crusade began , however , forcing Skanderbeg to fight his battles virtually alone . 
 = = Background = = 
 Pope Pius II 's crusade against the Ottoman Empire was declared in November 1463 . Skanderbeg , the leader of the Albanians , was a vital ally to this effort and would have become one of its main leaders . The Venetians , who had also joined the crusade , could not persuade Lekë Dukagjini , Skanderbeg 's lukewarm ally in northern Albania , to join until the pope intervened . Furthermore , the major European powers were reluctant to join the pope 's crusade . Among those inquired were the city of Florence , Francisco Sforza of Milan , Louis XI of France , and Ferdinand I of Naples , all of whom declined for their own reasons . The Republic of Venice , however , decided to aid Skanderbeg by sending 500 cavalry and 500 infantry under the condottiero Antonio da Cosenza , also known as Cimarosto . Once the campaign season began , Mathias Corvinus of Hungary recaptured many of the Bosnian strongpoints , including Jajce , which had been taken from the Kingdom of Bosnia by the Ottomans . Mehmed II marched into Bosnia , pillaging the countryside , hoping that his enemies would surrender . The Hungarian resistance , however , was stiff . The Ottomans still managed to make headway against the Hungarians who had been trying to lift Ottoman the siege on Jajce with a ruse . The Sultan continued his siege while Mathias escaped from the fortress with a force of men , but the retreating army was harried with two @-@ hundred soldiers being captured and sent to Constantinople for execution . Despite the setback , Jajce held out and Mehmed retreated from Bosnia . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 After Skanderbeg 's raid into Macedonia the year before , the Sultan decided to strengthen his fortresses in the area . He then sent Şeremet bey to Ohrid , a city close to Skanderbeg 's domains , with 14 @,@ 000 cavalry to prevent another Albanian incursion . After learning of this , Skanderbeg prepared to march against Şeremet . The pasha 's men , however , were stationed both inside and outside the city , making it difficult to defeat them . Before marching , Skanderbeg received news that Pius had arrived in Ancona and died upon seeing the crusader fleet . He left Cimarosto with an Italian force in <unk> near modern @-@ day <unk> in eastern Albania . Skanderbeg then decided to march against Şeremet anyway and set off with 12 @,@ 000 cavalry three hours after dusk . After one day of marching , Skanderbeg reached Macedonia and began pillaging the land . 
 = = = Battle = = = 
 Once he reached Ohrid , Skanderbeg gave a speech to his men , encouraging them for the coming battle . He then assigned <unk> <unk> and Peter Engjëlli , Pal Engjëlli 's brother , as commanders of a 500 @-@ man troop of cavalry where they were to approach the gates of Ohrid and provoke the Turks to attack . They were to throw smoke and dust into the air to irritate the garrison . Then they were to feign retreat where the pursuing Ottoman cavalry would be ambushed by the main Albanian force . On 14 or 15 September , everything went as planned and the trap was sprung . Skanderbeg 's assault came out and killed 10 @,@ 000 Turkish men and captured twelve Turkish forces , among them Şeremet 's son . The Turkish forces were pursued by the Venetian forces alongside the Albanians . The Albanian @-@ Venetian losses were few . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 According to legend , Skanderbeg celebrated the event by dining off <unk> ( Ohrid trout ) , a fish found in Lake Ohrid that was sent to the Byzantine emperors every Friday for their supper meal . The twelve captured officers were ransomed for 40 @,@ 000 ducats . Skanderbeg distributed this amount through his force , with every man receiving his fair share . He then besieged Ohrid for a short time before returning to Albania ; the Venetian Senate ( Signoria ) hailed the campaign as a victory despite not being able to take Ohrid . The crusade seemed to have gone well for the Christian side but , after Pius ' death , the remaining cardinals lost their hope and handed the money raised for the crusade to the Venetians . Mehmed saw Skanderbeg 's vulnerability and sent Ballaban <unk> , an Albanian <unk> , to Albania where they met at <unk> and he was defeated . Ballaban had replaced Şeremet as the commander in Ohrid after the latter fell out of favor with the sultan . Ballaban would meet Skanderbeg several more times in battle before being mortally wounded in action at the second siege of Krujë . 
 = Action of 13 January 1797 = 
 The Action of 13 January 1797 was a minor naval battle fought between a French ship of the line and two British frigates off the coast of Brittany during the French Revolutionary Wars . During the action the frigates successfully outmanoeuvred the much larger French vessel and drove it onto shore in heavy seas , resulting in the deaths of between 400 and 1 @,@ 000 of the 1 @,@ 300 persons aboard . One of the British frigates was also lost in the engagement with six sailors drowned after running onto a sandbank while failing to escape a lee shore . 
 The French 74 @-@ gun ship Droits de l 'Homme had been part of the Expédition d 'Irlande , an unsuccessful attempt by a French expeditionary force to invade Ireland . During the operation , the French fleet was beset by poor coordination and violent weather , eventually being compelled to return to France without landing a single soldier . Two British frigates , the 44 @-@ gun HMS Indefatigable and the 36 @-@ gun HMS Amazon , had been ordered to patrol the seas off Ushant in an attempt to intercept the returning French force and sighted the Droits de l 'Homme on the afternoon of 13 January . 
 The engagement lasted for more than 15 hours , in an increasing gale and the constant presence of the rocky Breton coast . The seas were so rough that the French ship was unable to open the lower gun ports during the action and as a result could only fire the upper deck guns , significantly reducing the advantage that a ship of the line would normally have over the smaller frigates . The damage the more manoeuvrable British vessels inflicted on the French ship was so severe that as the winds increased , the French crew lost control and the Droits de l 'Homme was swept onto a sandbar and destroyed . 
 = = Background = = 
 In December 1796 , during the French Revolutionary Wars , a French expeditionary force departed from Brest on an expedition to invade Ireland . This army of 18 @,@ 000 French soldiers was intended to link up with the secret organisation of Irish nationalists known as the United Irishmen and provoke a widespread uprising throughout the island . It was hoped that the resulting war would force Britain to make peace with the French Republic or risk losing control of Ireland altogether . Led by Vice @-@ Admiral Morard de Galles , General Lazare Hoche and leader of the United Irishmen Wolfe Tone , the invasion fleet included 17 ships of the line , 27 smaller warships and transports and carried extensive field artillery , cavalry and military stores to equip the Irish irregular forces they hoped to raise . 
 = = = Departure from Brest = = = 
 Morard de Galles planned to sail his fleet from the French naval fortress of Brest under cover of darkness on the night of 15 – 16 December . The British Channel Fleet normally maintained a squadron off Brest to blockade the port , but its commander , Rear @-@ Admiral John Colpoys , had withdrawn his force from its usual station 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ) offshore to 40 nautical miles ( 74 km ) northwest of Brest because of severe Atlantic winter gales . The only British ships within sight of Brest were an inshore squadron of frigates under Sir Edward Pellew in HMS Indefatigable , accompanied by HMS Amazon , HMS Phoebe , HMS Révolutionnaire and the lugger HMS Duke of York . Pellew was already renowned , having been the first British officer of the war to capture a French frigate : the Cléopâtre at the Action of 18 June 1793 . He later captured the frigates Pomone and Virginie in 1794 and 1796 , and saved 500 lives following the shipwreck of the East Indiaman Dutton in January 1796 . For these actions he had first been knighted and then raised to a baronetcy . Indefatigable was a razee , one of the largest frigates in the Royal Navy , originally constructed as a 64 @-@ gun third rate and cut down to 44 guns in 1795 to make the ship fast and powerful enough to catch and fight the largest of French frigates . Armed with 24 @-@ pounder cannon on the main decks and 42 @-@ pounder carronades on the quarter deck , she had a stronger armament than any equivalent French frigate . 
 Observing the French fleet 's departure from the harbour at dusk , Pellew immediately dispatched Phoebe to Colpoys and Amazon to the main fleet at Portsmouth with warnings , before approaching the entrance to Brest in Indefatigable with the intention of disrupting French movements . Believing that the frigates in the bay must be the forerunners of a larger British force , de Galles attempted to pass his fleet through the Raz de Sein . This channel was a narrow , rocky and dangerous passage , and de Galles used corvettes as temporary light ships that shone blue lights and fired fireworks to direct his main fleet through the passage . Pellew observed this , and sailed Indefatigable right through the French fleet , launching rockets and shining lights seemingly at random . This succeeded in confusing the French officers , causing the Séduisant to strike the Grand <unk> rock and sink with the loss of over 680 men from a complement of 1 @,@ 300 . Séduisant 's distress flares added to the confusion and delayed the fleet 's passage until dawn . His task of observing the enemy completed , Pellew took his remaining squadron to Falmouth , sent a report to the Admiralty by semaphore telegraph , and refitted his ships . 
 = = = Failure of the Expédition d 'Irlande = = = 
 During December 1796 and early January 1797 , the French army repeatedly attempted to land in Ireland . Early in the voyage , the frigate Fraternité carrying de Galles and Hoche , was separated from the fleet and missed the rendezvous at Mizen Head . Admiral Bouvet and General Grouchy decided to attempt the landing at Bantry Bay without their commanders , but severe weather made any landing impossible . For more than a week the fleet waited for a break in the storm , until Bouvet abandoned the invasion on 29 December and , after a brief and unsuccessful effort to land at the mouth of the River Shannon , ordered his scattered ships to return to Brest . During the operation and subsequent retreat a further 11 ships were wrecked or captured , with the loss of thousands of soldiers and sailors . 
 By 13 January most of the survivors of the fleet had limped back to France in a state of disrepair . One ship of the line that remained at sea , the 74 @-@ gun Droits de l 'Homme , was commanded by Commodore Jean @-@ Baptiste Raymond de Lacrosse and carried over 1 @,@ 300 men , 700 – 800 of them soldiers including General Jean Humbert . Detached from the main body of the fleet during the retreat from Bantry Bay , Lacrosse made his way to the mouth of the Shannon alone . Recognising that the weather was still too violent for a landing to be made , Lacrosse acknowledged the failure of the operation and ordered the ship to return to France , capturing the British privateer Cumberland en route . 
 = = Chase = = 
 Pellew too was on his way back to Brest in Indefatigable , accompanied by Amazon under the command of Captain Robert Carthew Reynolds . While the rest of the Channel Fleet had been unsuccessful pursuing of the French , Pellew had had his ships refitted and resupplied at Falmouth so that both frigates were at full complement , well armed and prepared for action . At 13 : 00 on 13 January , the British ships were approaching the island of Ushant in a heavy fog when they spied another ship through the gloom ahead . This ship , clearly much larger than either of the British vessels , was the Droits de l 'Homme . At the same time , lookouts on the French ship spotted the British , and Lacrosse was faced with the dilemma of whether or not to engage the enemy . He knew that his ship was far larger than either of his opponents , but had earlier spotted sails to westwards he believed to be British and thus considered himself outnumbered and possibly surrounded . British records show that no other British vessels were in the vicinity at the time and it is likely that Lacrosse had seen the French ships Révolution and Fraternité returning to Brest from Bantry Bay . In addition , Lacrosse was concerned by the increasing gale and rocky lee shoreline , which posed a considerable threat to his over @-@ laden vessel , which was already damaged from its winter voyage and carried a regiment of the French Army and Humbert , neither of which could be placed at risk in an inconsequential naval action . 
 Determined to avoid battle , Lacrosse turned southeast , hoping to use his wider spread of sail to outrun his opponent in the strong winds . Pellew , however , manoeuvred to cut the Droits de l 'Homme off from the French coast , at this stage still unsure of the nature of his opponent . As the chase developed , the weather , which had been violent for the entire preceding month , worsened . An Atlantic gale swept the Ushant headland , driving a blizzard eastwards and whipping the sea into a turbulent state , making steering and aiming more difficult . At 16 : 15 , two of Droits de l 'Homme 's topmasts broke in the strong winds . This dramatically slowed the French ship and allowed Pellew , who had recognised his opponent as a French ship of the line , to close with Droits de l 'Homme . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Pellew was aware that his frigate was heavily outclassed by his much larger opponent , and that Amazon , which was 8 nautical miles ( 15 km ) distant , was not large enough to redress the balance when it did arrive . He correctly assumed , however , that the ocean was too rough to allow Lacrosse to open his lower gunports without the risk that heavy waves would enter them and cause Droits de l 'Homme to founder . In fact the French ship was totally unable to open her lower deck gunports during the action : an unusual design feature had the ports 14 inches ( 36 cm ) lower than was normal and as a result the sea poured in at any attempt to open them , preventing any gunnery at all from the lower deck and halving the ship 's firepower . Although this reduced the number of available guns on the French vessel , Lacrosse still held the advantage in terms of size , weight of shot and manpower . The French situation was worsened however by the loss of the topmasts : this caused their ship to roll so severely in the high seas that it was far more difficult both to steer the ship and to aim the cannon than on the British vessels . 
 To the surprise of Lacrosse and his officers , Indefatigable did not retreat from the ship of the line , nor did she pass the ship of the line at long @-@ range to leeward as expected . Instead , at 17 : 30 , Pellew closed with the stern of Droits de l 'Homme and opened a raking fire . Lacrosse turned to meet the threat and opened fire with the guns on the upper deck accompanied by a heavy volley of musket fire from the soldiers on board . Pellew then attempted to pull ahead of Droits de l 'Homme and rake her bow , to which Lacrosse responded by attempting to ram Indefatigable . Neither manoeuvre was successful , as Droits de l 'Homme raked the British ship but caused little damage as most of her shot scattered into the ocean . 
 Indefatigable and Droits de l 'Homme manoeuvred around one another , exchanging fire when possible until 18 : 45 , when Amazon arrived . During this exchange , one of Droits de l 'Homme 's cannon burst , causing heavy casualties on her packed deck . Approaching the larger French ship with all sail spread , Reynolds closed to within pistol shot before raking Droits de l 'Homme . Lacrosse responded to this new threat by manoeuvring to bring both British ships to face the westward side of his ship , avoiding becoming trapped in a crossfire . The battle continued until 19 : 30 , when both Amazon and Indefatigable pulled away from their opponent to make hasty repairs . By 20 : 30 the frigates had returned to the much slower French ship and began weaving in front of Droits de l 'Homme 's bow , repeatedly raking her . Lacrosse 's increasingly desperate attempts to ram the British ships were all unsuccessful and what little cannon fire he did manage to deploy was ineffectual , as the rolling of the ship of the line prevented reliable aiming . 
 By 22 : 30 , Droits de l 'Homme was in severe difficulties , with heavy casualties among her crew and passengers and the loss of her mizzenmast to British fire . Observing the battered state of their opponent , Pellew and Reynolds closed on the stern quarters of the French ship , maintaining a high rate of fire that was sporadically returned by Droits de l 'Homme . Having exhausted the 4 @,@ 000 cannonballs available , Lacrosse was forced to use shells against the frigates . In the high winds , these proved even less effective than solid shot but did drive the frigates to a further distance . With their opponent almost immobilised , the British frigates were able to remain outside her arc of fire , effect repairs when necessary and secure guns that had broken loose in the heavy seas . For the rest of the night the three battered ships remained locked in a close range duel , until suddenly , at 04 : 20 , land was spotted just 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) to leeward by Lieutenant George Bell of the Indefatigable . 
 = = Shipwrecks = = 
 Pellew immediately turned seawards in an effort to escape the shore and signalled Reynolds to follow suit . Although both ships had suffered severe damage from the battle and weather , they were able to make the turn away from land , Amazon to the north and Indefatigable , at the insistence of its Breton pilot , to the south . Initially it was believed that the land spotted was the island of Ushant , which would have given the ships plenty of sea @-@ room in which to manoeuvre . However at 06 : 30 , with the sky lightening , it became apparent on the Indefatigable that there were breakers to the south and east , indicating that the three ships had drifted during the night into Audierne Bay . On discovering his situation , Pellew was determined to bring his ship westwards , attempting to work his ship out of danger against the wind . Hasty repairs had to be made to the damaged rigging before it was safe to alter their course . Due to her northwards turn , Amazon had even less room to manoeuvre than Indefatigable and by 05 : 00 she had struck upright on a sandbank . Efforts to bring her off failed and at 08 : 00 Reynolds ordered his men to prepare to abandon the ship . 
 Droits de l 'Homme had been more seriously damaged than the British frigates , and was closer to shore at the time land was spotted . As Lacrosse 's crew made desperate efforts to turn southwards , the ship 's foremast and bowsprit collapsed under the pressure of the wind . With the ship virtually unmanageable , Lacrosse ordered the anchors lowered in an attempt to hold the ship in position until repairs could be made . This effort was futile , as all but two anchors had been lost during efforts to hold position in Bantry Bay , and British gunfire had damaged one of the anchor cables and rendered it useless . The final anchor was deployed , but it failed to restrain the ship and at 07 : 00 ( according to the French account ) , the Droits de l 'Homme struck a sandbank close to the town of Plozévet . This broke off the remaining mast and caused the ship to heel over onto her side . 
 = = = Amazon = = = 
 As daylight broke over Audierne Bay , crowds of locals gathered on the beach . The Droits de l 'Homme lay on her side directly opposite the town of Plozévet , with large waves breaking over her hull ; 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) to the north , Amazon stood upright on a sandbar , her crew launching boats in an effort to reach the shore , while Indefatigable was the only ship still afloat , rounding the Penmarck rocks at the southern edge of the bay at 11 : 00 . On board the Amazon , Reynolds maintained discipline and gave orders to launch the boats in an orderly fashion and build rafts in which to bring the entire crew safely off . Six men disobeyed his command , stole a launch and attempted to reach the shore alone , but were swept away . Their boat was capsized by the waves , and all six drowned . The remaining crew , including those wounded in the previous night 's action , were safely brought ashore by 09 : 00 , where they were made prisoners of war by the French authorities . 
 = = = Droits de l 'Homme = = = 
 Droits de l 'Homme was irreparably damaged . Each successive wave swept more men into the water and desperate attempts to launch boats failed when the small craft were swept away by the waves and broken in the surf . Rafts were constructed , but several were swamped in attempts to carry a rope to the shore and the men on the raft that remained upright were forced to cut the rope to prevent them from foundering in the heavy seas . Some of the men on this raft reached the beach , the first survivors of the wreck . Subsequent attempts were made by men to swim to shore with ropes , but they were either drowned or driven back to the ship by the force of the sea . With no aid possible from the shore , night fell on 14 January with most of the crew and passengers still aboard . During the night , the waves stove in ( smashed in ) the stern of the ship , flooding much of the interior . On the morning of 15 January , a small boat carrying nine British prisoners from the Cumberland managed to reach shore , which prompted a mass launching of small rafts from the wreck in hopes of gaining the beach . However the waves increased once more , and not one of these small craft survived the passage . 
 By the morning of 16 January , hunger and panic had taken over on the wreck , and when a large raft carrying the wounded , two women and six children was launched during a lull in the weather , over 120 unwounded men scrambled to board it . This severely overloaded the craft and within minutes a large wave struck the heavy raft and capsized it , drowning all aboard . By the evening the survivors , without food or fresh water , began to succumb to exposure and at least one officer drowned in a desperate attempt to swim to shore . Through the night , the survivors gathered on the less exposed parts of the hull , and in the hope of staving off death by dehydration , drank sea water , urine , or vinegar from a small barrel that had floated up from the hold . The morning of 17 January finally saw a reduction in the storm and the arrival of a small French naval brig , the Arrogante . This ship could not come close without the risk of grounding but sent her boats to the wreck in the hope of bringing off survivors . The brig was joined later in the day by the cutter Aiguille . 
 On the Droits de l 'Homme , many survivors were too weak to make the dangerous attempt to reach the boats and a number of men fell from the hull and drowned in the attempt . Many more could not find room in the small boats , and only 150 were rescued on 17 January . The following morning , when the boats returned , they found just another 140 survivors , at least as many again having died during the night . The last people to leave the ship were Humbert and Jean @-@ Baptiste Lacrosse . Taken to Brest , the survivors were fed and clothed and given medical treatment . All the surviving prisoners from the Cumberland were returned to Britain , in recognition of their efforts to save lives from the shipwreck . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Exact French casualties are difficult to calculate , but of the 1 @,@ 300 aboard Droits de l 'Homme , 103 are known to have died in the battle and just over 300 were saved from the wreck , indicating the deaths of approximately 900 men on the French ship between the morning of 14 January and the morning of 18 January . However , a French source suggests that up to another 500 of the crew were rescued from the wreck by the corvette Arrogante and the cutter Aiguille on January 17 and 18 . This would give a toll of only about 400 . A <unk> at Plozévet , with an inscription carved in 1840 gives a death toll of six hundred . 
 Amazon lost three in the battle and six in her wreck , with 15 wounded , while Indefatigable did not lose a single man killed , suffering only 18 wounded . The discrepancy in losses during the action is likely due to the extreme difficulty the French crew had in aiming their guns given their ship 's instability in heavy seas . 
 Reynolds and his officers were exchanged for French prisoners some weeks later and in the routine court @-@ martial investigating the loss of their ship were honourably acquitted " with every sentiment of the court 's highest approbation . " Reynolds was subsequently appointed to the large frigate HMS Pomone . The senior lieutenants of each frigate were promoted to commander and head money ( prize money based on the number of the enemy 's crew and awarded when the defeated ship was destroyed ) was distributed among the crews . Pellew remained in command of Indefatigable off Brest for another year and seized a number of French merchant ships . He was later promoted several times and by the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 had become Lord Exmouth , Commander in Chief of the Mediterranean Fleet . Reynolds did not survive the war , dying in the wreck of HMS St George in 1811 . Lacrosse and Humbert were not censured for the loss of their ship : the commodore was promoted to admiral and later became ambassador to Spain , while Humbert led the next and equally unsuccessful attempt to invade Ireland , surrendering at the Battle of Ballinamuck in 1798 . 
 In Britain , the action was lauded at the time and since : First Lord of the Admiralty Lord Spencer described the operation as " an exploit which has not I believe ever before graced our naval annals " . Historian James Henderson says of the action : " It was a feat of arms and seamanship such as had never been done before , and never was done again , " and Richard Woodman calls it " a dazzling display of seamanship by all concerned in the alternating darkness and moonlight of a boisterous night " . Five decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by the Naval General Service Medal , with clasps " Indefatigable 13 Jany . 1797 " and " Amazon 13 Jany . 1797 " , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . 
 = Bharatiya Janata Party = 
 The Bharatiya Janata Party ( pronounced [ <unk> ̪ <unk> <unk> ̪ aː <unk> ] ; translation : Indian People 's Party ; abbr . BJP ) is one of the two major political parties in India , along with the Indian National Congress . As of 2016 , it is the country 's largest political party in terms of representation in the national parliament and state assemblies , and it is the world 's largest party in terms of primary membership . The BJP is a right @-@ wing party , with close ideological and organisational links to the Hindu nationalist Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh . 
 The BJP 's origins lie in the Bharatiya Jana Sangh , formed in 1951 by Syama Prasad Mookerjee . After the State of Emergency in 1977 , the Jana Sangh merged with several other parties to form the Janata Party ; it defeated the incumbent Congress party in the 1977 general election . After three years in power , the Janata party dissolved in 1980 with the members of the erstwhile Jana Sangh reconvening to form the BJP . Although initially unsuccessful , winning only two seats in the 1984 general election , it grew in strength on the back of the Ram Janmabhoomi movement . Following victories in several state elections and better performances in national elections , the BJP became the largest party in the parliament in 1996 ; however , it lacked a majority in the lower house of Parliament , and its government lasted only 13 days . 
 After the 1998 general election , the BJP @-@ led coalition known as the National Democratic Alliance ( NDA ) formed a government under Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee for a year . Following fresh elections , the NDA government , again headed by Vajpayee , lasted for a full term in office ; this was the first non @-@ Congress government to do so . In the 2004 general election , the NDA suffered an unexpected defeat , and for the next ten years the BJP was the principal opposition party . Long time Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi led it to a landslide victory in the 2014 general election . Since that election , Modi leads the NDA government as Prime Minister and as of March 2015 , the alliance governs 15 states . 
 The official ideology of the BJP is " integral humanism " , first formulated by Deendayal Upadhyaya in 1965 . The party expresses a commitment to Hindutva , and its policy has historically reflected Hindu nationalist positions . The BJP advocates social conservatism and a foreign policy centred on nationalist principles . Its key issues have included the abrogation of the special status to Jammu and Kashmir , the building of a Ram temple in Ayodhya and the implementation of a uniform civil code . However , the 1998 – 2004 NDA government did not pursue any of these controversial issues . It instead focused on a largely neoliberal economic policy prioritising globalisation and economic growth over social welfare . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Bharatiya Jana Sangh ( 1951 – 77 ) = = = 
 The BJP 's origins lie in the Bharatiya Jana Sangh , popularly known as the Jana Sangh , founded by Syama Prasad Mookerjee in 1951 in response to the politics of the dominant Congress party . It was founded in collaboration with the Hindu nationalist volunteer organisation , the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh ( RSS ) , and was widely regarded to be the political arm of the RSS . The Jana Sangh 's aims included the protection of India 's " Hindu " cultural identity , in addition to countering what it perceived to be the appeasement of Muslim people and the country of Pakistan by the Congress party and then @-@ Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru . The RSS loaned several of its leading <unk> , or full @-@ time workers , to the Jana Sangh to get the new party off the ground . Prominent among these was Deendayal Upadhyaya , who was appointed General Secretary . The Jana Sangh won only three Lok Sabha seats in the first general elections in 1952 . It maintained a minor presence in parliament until 1967 . 
 The Jana Sangh 's first major campaign , begun in early 1953 , centred on a demand for the complete integration of Jammu and Kashmir into India . Mookerjee was arrested in May 1953 for violating orders from the state government restraining him from entering Kashmir . He died of a heart attack the following month , while still in jail . <unk> Chandra Sharma was elected to succeed Mookerjee ; however , he was forced out of power by the RSS activists within the party , and the leadership went instead to Upadhyaya . Upadhyay remained the General Secretary until 1967 , and worked to build a committed grassroots organisation in the image of the RSS . The party minimised engagement with the public , focusing instead on building its network of propagandists . Upadhyaya also articulated the philosophy of integral humanism , which formed the official doctrine of the party . Younger leaders , such as Atal Behari Vajpayee and Lal Krishna Advani also became involved with the leadership in this period , with Vajpayee succeeding Upadhyaya as president in 1968 . The major themes on the party 's agenda during this period were legislating a uniform civil code , banning cow slaughter and abolishing the special status given to Jammu and Kashmir . 
 After assembly elections across the country in 1967 , the party entered into a coalition with several other parties , including the Swatantra Party and the socialists . It formed governments in various states across the Hindi heartland , including Madhya Pradesh , Bihar and Uttar Pradesh . It was the first time the Jana Sangh held political office , albeit within a coalition ; this caused the shelving of the Jana Sangh 's more radical agenda . 
 = = = Janata Party ( 1977 – 80 ) = = = 
 In 1975 , Prime Minister Indira Gandhi imposed a state of emergency . The Jana Sangh took part in the widespread protests , with thousands of its members being imprisoned along with other agitators across the country . In 1977 , the emergency was withdrawn and general elections were held . The Jana Sangh merged with parties from across the political spectrum , including the Socialist Party , the Congress ( O ) and the Bharatiya Lok Dal to form the Janata Party , with its main agenda being defeating Indira Gandhi . 
 The Janata Party won a majority in 1977 and formed a government with Morarji Desai as Prime Minister . The former Jana Sangh contributed the largest tally to the Janata Party 's parliamentary contingent , with 93 seats or 31 % of its strength . Vajpayee , previously the leader of the Jana Sangh , was appointed the Minister of External Affairs . 
 The national leadership of the former Jana Sangh consciously renounced its identity , and attempted to integrate with the political culture of the Janata Party , based on Gandhian and Hindu traditionalist principles . According to Christophe <unk> , this proved to be an impossible assimilation . The state and local levels of the Jana Sangh remained relatively unchanged , retaining a strong association with the RSS , which did not sit well with the moderate centre @-@ right constituents of the Party . Violence between Hindus and Muslims increased sharply during the years that the Janata Party formed the government , with former Jana Sangha members being implicated in the riots at Aligarh and Jamshedpur in 1978 @-@ 79 . The other major constituents of the Janata Party demanded that the Jana Sangh should break from the RSS , which the Jana Sangh refused to do . Eventually , a fragment of the Janata Party broke off to form the Janata Party ( Secular ) . The Morarji Desai government was reduced to a minority in the Parliament , forcing its resignation . Following a brief period of coalition rule , general elections were held in 1980 , in which the Janata Party fared poorly , winning only 31 seats . In April 1980 , shortly after the elections , the National Executive Council of the Janata Party banned its members from being ' dual members ' of party and the RSS . In response , the former Jana Sangh members left to create a new political party , known as the Bharatiya Janata Party . 
 = = = BJP ( 1980 – present ) = = = 
 = = = = Formation and early days = = = = 
 Although the newly formed BJP was technically distinct from the Jana Sangh , the bulk of its rank and file were identical to its predecessor , with Vajpayee being its first president . Historian Ramachandra Guha writes that the early 1980s were marked by a wave of violence between Hindus and Muslims . The BJP initially moderated the Hindu nationalist stance of its predecessor the Jana Sangh to gain a wider appeal , emphasising its links to the Janata Party and the ideology of Gandhian Socialism . This was unsuccessful , as it won only two Lok Sabha seats in the elections of 1984 . The assassination of Indira Gandhi a few months earlier resulted in a wave of support for the Congress which won a record tally of 403 seats , contributing to the low number for the BJP . 
 = = = = Babri Masjid demolition and the Hindutva movement = = = = 
 The failure of Vajpayee 's moderate strategy led to a shift in the ideology of the party toward a policy of more hardline Hindu nationalism . In 1984 , Advani was appointed president of the party , and under him it became the political voice of the Ram Janmabhoomi movement . In the early 1980s , the Vishwa Hindu Parishad ( VHP ) began a campaign for the construction of a temple dedicated to the Hindu deity Rama at the site of the Babri mosque in Ayodhya . The mosque had been constructed by the Mughal Emperor Babur in 1527 . There is a dispute about whether a temple once stood there . The agitation was on the basis of the belief that the site was the birthplace of Rama , and that a temple had been demolished to construct the mosque . The BJP threw its support behind this campaign , and made it a part of their election platform . It won 86 Lok Sabha seats in 1989 , a tally which made its support crucial to the National Front government of V. P. Singh . 
 In September 1990 , Advani began a <unk> yatra ( chariot journey ) to Ayodhya in support of the Ram temple movement . According to Guha , the imagery employed by the yatra was " religious , allusive , militant , masculine , and anti @-@ Muslim " , and the speeches delivered by Advani during the yatra accused the government of appeasing Muslims and practising " pseudo @-@ secularism " that obstructed the legitimate aspirations of Hindus . Advani defended the yatra , stating that it had been free of incident from Somnath to Ayodhya , and that the English media were to blame for the violence that followed . Advani was placed under preventive detention on the orders of the then Bihar chief minister Lalu Prasad Yadav . A large number of kar <unk> nonetheless converged on Ayodhya . On the orders of Uttar Pradesh chief minister Mulayam Singh Yadav , 150 @,@ 000 of them were detained , yet half as many managed to reach Ayodhya and some attacked the mosque . Three days of fighting with the paramilitary forces ended with the deaths of several kar <unk> . Hindus were urged by VHP to " take revenge " for these deaths , resulting in riots against Muslims across Uttar Pradesh . The BJP withdrew its support from the V.P. Singh government , leading to fresh general elections . It once again increased its tally , to 120 seats , and won a majority in the Uttar Pradesh assembly . 
 On 6 December 1992 , the RSS and its affiliates organised a rally involving more than 100 @,@ 000 VHP and BJP activists at the site of the mosque . Under circumstances that are not entirely clear , the rally developed into a frenzied attack that ended with the demolition of the mosque . Over the following weeks , waves of violence between Hindus and Muslims erupted all over the country , killing over 2 @,@ 000 people . The government briefly banned the VHP , and many BJP leaders , including Advani were arrested for making inflammatory speeches provoking the demolition . Several historians have said that the demolition was the product of a conspiracy by the Sangh Parivar , and not a spontaneous act . 
 A 2009 report , authored by Justice Manmohan Singh <unk> , found that 68 people were responsible for the demolition , mostly leaders from the BJP . Among those named were Vajpayee , Advani , and Murli Manohar Joshi . The report also criticised Kalyan Singh , Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh during the demolition . He was accused of posting bureaucrats and police officers who would stay silent during the demolition . Anju Gupta , an Indian Police Service officer in charge of Advani 's security , appeared as a prominent witness before the commission . She said that Advani and Joshi made provocative speeches that were a major factor in the mob 's behaviour . 
 In the parliamentary elections in 1996 , the BJP capitalised on the communal polarisation that followed the demolition to win 161 Lok Sabha seats , making it the largest party in parliament . Vajpayee was sworn in as Prime Minister , but was unable to attain a majority in the Lok Sabha , forcing the government to resign after 13 days . 
 = = = = NDA government ( 1998 – 2004 ) = = = = 
 A coalition of regional parties formed the government in 1996 , but this grouping was short lived , and mid @-@ term polls were held in 1998 . The BJP contested the elections leading a coalition called the National Democratic Alliance ( NDA ) , which contained its existing allies like the <unk> Party , the Shiromani Akali Dal , the Shiv Sena in addition to the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( AIADMK ) and the Biju Janata Dal . Among these regional parties , the Shiv Sena was the only one which had an ideology similar to the BJP ; Amartya Sen , for example , called the coalition an " ad hoc " grouping . The NDA had a majority with outside support from the Telugu Desam Party ( TDP ) and Vajpayee returned as Prime Minister . However , the coalition ruptured in May 1999 when the leader of AIADMK , <unk> , withdrew her support , and fresh elections were held again . 
 On 13 October 1999 , the NDA , without the AIADMK , won 303 seats in parliament and thus an outright majority . The BJP had its highest ever tally of 183 . Vajpayee became Prime Minister for the third time ; Advani became Deputy Prime Minister and Home Minister . This NDA government lasted its full term of five years . Its policy agenda included a more aggressive stance on defence and terror as well as neo @-@ liberal economic policies . 
 In 2001 , Bangaru Laxman , then the BJP president , was filmed accepting a bribe of ₹ 100 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to ₹ 280 @,@ 000 or US $ 4 @,@ 100 in 2016 ) to recommend the purchase of hand @-@ held thermal <unk> for the Indian Army to the Defence Ministry , in a sting operation by Tehelka journalists . The BJP was forced to make him resign and he was subsequently prosecuted . In April 2012 , he was sentenced to four years in prison and died on 1 March 2014 . 
 = = = = 2002 Gujarat violence = = = = 
 On 27 February 2002 , a train carrying Hindu pilgrims was burned outside the town of Godhra , killing 59 people . The incident was seen as an attack upon Hindus , and sparked off massive anti @-@ Muslim violence across the state of Gujarat that lasted several weeks . The death toll estimated was as high as 2000 , while 150 @,@ 000 were displaced . Rape , mutilation , and torture were also widespread . The then @-@ Gujarat chief minister Narendra Modi and several high @-@ ranking government officials were accused of initiating and condoning the violence , as were police officers who allegedly directed the rioters and gave them lists of Muslim @-@ owned properties . In April 2009 , a Special Investigation Team ( SIT ) was appointed by the Supreme Court to investigate and expedite the Gujarat riots cases . In 2012 , Modi was cleared of complicity in the violence by the SIT and BJP MLA Maya Kodnani , who later held a cabinet portfolio in the Modi government , was convicted of having orchestrated one of the riots and sentenced to 28 years imprisonment . Scholars such as Paul Brass , Martha Nussbaum and <unk> Gupta have said that there was a high level of state complicity in the incidents . 
 = = = = General election defeats = = = = 
 Vajpayee called for elections in early 2004 , six months ahead of schedule . The NDA 's campaign was based on the slogan " India Shining " , which sought to depict it as responsible for a rapid economic transformation of the country . However , the NDA unexpectedly suffered a heavy defeat , winning only a 186 seats in the Lok Sabha , compared to the 222 of the Congress and its allies . Manmohan Singh succeeded Vajpayee as Prime Minister as the head of the United Progressive Alliance . The NDA 's failure to reach out to rural Indians was provided as an explanation for its defeat , as was its divisive policy agenda . 
 In May 2008 , the BJP won the state elections in Karnataka . This was the first time that the party won assembly elections in any South Indian state . In the 2009 general elections , its strength in the Lok Sabha was reduced to 116 seats . It lost the next assembly election in 2013 . 
 = = = = General election victory , 2014 = = = = 
 In the 2014 Indian general election , the BJP won 282 seats , leading the NDA to a tally of 336 seats in the 543 @-@ seat Lok Sabha . The BJP parliamentary leader Narendra Modi was sworn in as the 15th Prime Minister of India on 26 May 2014 . 
 The vote share of the BJP was 31 % of all votes cast , a low figure relative to the number of seats it won . This was the first instance since 1984 of a single party achieving an outright majority in the Indian Parliament and the first time that it achieved a majority in the Lok Sabha on its own strength . Support for the BJP was concentrated in the Hindi @-@ speaking belt in North @-@ central India . The magnitude of the BJP victory was not predicted by most opinion and exit polls . 
 Political analysts have suggested several reasons for this victory , including the popularity of Narendra Modi , the prime @-@ ministerial candidate of the BJP , and the loss of support for the Congress due to the corruption scandals in its previous term . The BJP was also able to expand its traditionally upper @-@ caste , upper @-@ class support base and received significant support from middle @-@ class and Dalit people , as well as among Other Backward Classes . Its support among Muslims remained low ; only 8 % of Muslim voters voted for the BJP . The BJP was also very successful at mobilising its supporters , and raising voter turnout among them . 
 = = General election results = = 
 The Bharatiya Janata Party was officially created in 1980 , and the first general election it contested was in 1984 , in which it won only two Lok Sabha seats . Following the election in 1996 , the BJP became the largest party in the Lok Sabha for the first time , but the government it formed was short @-@ lived . In the elections of 1998 and 1999 , it remained the largest party , and headed the ruling coalition on both occasions . In the 2014 general election , it won an outright majority in parliament . From 1991 onwards , a BJP member has led the Opposition whenever the party was not in power . 
 = = Ideology and political positions = = 
 = = = Social policies and Hindutva = = = 
 The official philosophy of the BJP is " Integral humanism , " a philosophy first formulated by Deendayal Upadhyaya in 1965 , who described it as advocating an " indigenous economic model that puts the human being at center stage . " It is committed to Hindutva , an ideology articulated by Indian independence activist Vinayak Damodar Savarkar . According to the party , Hindutva is cultural nationalism favouring Indian culture over westernisation , thus it extends to all Indians regardless of religion . However , scholars and political analysts have called their Hindutva ideology an attempt to redefine India and recast it as a Hindu country to the exclusion of other religions , making it a Hindu nationalist party in a general sense . The BJP has slightly moderated its stance after the NDA was formed in 1998 , due to the presence of parties with a broader set of ideologies . 
 The BJP 's Hindutva ideology has been reflected in many of its government policies . It supports the construction of the Ram temple at the site of the Babri Mosque . This issue was its major poll plank in the 1991 general elections . However , the demolition of the mosque during a BJP rally in 1992 resulted in a backlash against it , leading to a decline of the temple 's prominence in its agenda . The education policy of the NDA government reorganised the National Council of Educational Research and Training ( <unk> ) and tasked it with extensively revising the textbooks used in Indian schools . Various scholars have stated that this revision , especially in the case of history textbooks , was a covert attempt to " <unk> " Indian history . The NDA government introduced Vedic astrology as a subject in college curricula , despite opposition from several leading scientists . 
 Taking a position against what it calls the " pseudo @-@ secularism " of the Congress party , the BJP instead supports " positive secularism " . Vajpayee laid out the BJP 's interpretation of Mahatma Gandhi 's doctrine of <unk> Dharma <unk> and contrasted it with what he called European secularism . He had said that Indian secularism attempted to see all religions with equal respect , while European secularism was independent of religion , thus making the former more " positive " . The BJP supports a uniform civil code , which would apply a common set of personal laws to every citizen regardless of their personal religion , replacing the existing laws which vary by religious community . According to historian Yogendra Malik , this ignores the differential procedures required to protect the cultural identity of the Muslim minority . The BJP favours the abrogation of Article 370 of the Indian constitution , which grants a greater degree of autonomy to the Jammu and Kashmir in recognition of the unusual circumstances surrounding its accession to the Indian union . 
 The BJP opposes illegal migration into India from Bangladesh . The party states that this migration , mostly in the states of Assam and West Bengal , threatens the security , economy and stability of the country . Academics have pointed out that the BJP refers to Hindu migrants from Bangladesh as refugees , and reserves the term " illegal " for Muslim migrants . Academic Michael Gillan writes that this is an attempt to use an emotive issue to mobilise Hindu sentiment in a region where the party has not been historically successful . 
 In 2013 , the Supreme Court of India reinstated the controversial Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code , which , among other things , criminalises homosexuality . There was a popular outcry , although clerics , including Muslim religious leaders , stated that they supported the verdict . BJP president Rajnath Singh said that the party supported section 377 , because it believed that homosexuality was unnatural , though its stand has softened after its victory in the 2014 general elections . 
 = = = Economic policies = = = 
 The BJP 's economic policy has changed considerably since its founding . There is a significant range of economic ideologies within the party . In the 1980s , like the Jana Sangh , it reflected the thinking of the RSS and its affiliates . It supported <unk> ( the promotion of indigenous industries and products ) and a protectionist export policy . However , it supported internal economic liberalisation , and opposed the state @-@ driven industrialisation favoured by the Congress . 
 During the 1996 elections , the BJP shifted its stance away from protectionism and towards globalisation ; its election manifesto recommended increasing foreign investment in priority sectors , while restricting it in others . When the party was in power in 1998 , it shifted its policy even further in favour of globalisation . The tenure of the NDA saw an unprecedented influx of foreign companies in India . This was criticised by the left parties and the BJP 's affiliates ( the RSS and the Swadeshi Jagran <unk> ) . The communist parties said that the BJP was attempting to appease the World Bank and the United States government through its neoliberal policies . Similarly , the RSS stated that the BJP was not being true to its <unk> ideology . 
 The two NDA governments in the period 1998 @-@ 2004 introduced significant deregulation and privatisation of government owned enterprises . It also introduced tariff @-@ reducing measures . These reforms built off of the initial economic liberalisation introduced by the Congress government in the early 1990s . India 's GDP growth increased substantially during the tenure of the NDA . The 2004 campaign slogan " India Shining " was based on the party 's belief that the free market would bring prosperity to all sectors of society . After its unexpected defeat , commentators said that it was punished for neglecting the needs of the poor and focusing too much on its corporate allies . 
 This shift in the economic policies of the BJP was also visible in state governments , especially in Gujarat , where the BJP held power for 16 years . Modi 's government , in power from 2002 to 2014 , followed a strongly neo @-@ liberal agenda , presented as a drive towards development . Its policies have included extensive privatisation of infrastructure and services , as well as a significant rollback of labour and environmental regulations . While this was praised by the business community , commentators criticised it as catering to the BJP 's upper class constituency instead of the poor . 
 = = = Defence and terrorism = = = 
 Compared to the Congress , the BJP takes a more aggressive and nationalistic position on defence policy and terrorism . The NDA government carried out nuclear weapons tests , and enacted the Prevention of Terrorism Act , which later came under heavy criticism . It also deployed troops to evict infiltrators from Kargil , and supported the United States ' War on Terror . 
 Although previous Congress governments developed the capability for a nuclear weapons test , the Vajpayee government broke India 's historical strategy of avoiding it and authorised Pokhran @-@ II , a series of five nuclear tests in 1998 . The tests came soon after Pakistan tested a medium range ballistic missile . They were seen as an attempt to display India 's military prowess to the world , and a reflection of anti @-@ Pakistan sentiment within the BJP . 
 The Vajpayee government ordered the Indian armed forces to expel the Pakistani soldiers occupying Kashmir territory , later known as the Kargil War . Although the government was later criticised for the intelligence failures that did not detect Pakistani presence , it was successful in ousting them from the disputed territory . The Vajpayee administration also offered political support to the US War on Terror , in the hope of better addressing India 's issues with terrorism and insurgency in Kashmir . This led to closer defence ties with the US , including negotiations for the sale of weapons . 
 After the terrorist attack on the Indian Parliament in December 2001 , the NDA government passed the Prevention of Terrorism Act . The aim of the act was the improve the government 's ability to deal with terrorism . It initially failed to pass in the Rajya Sabha ; therefore , the NDA took the extraordinary step of convening a joint session of the Parliament , where the numerical superior Lok Sabha allowed the bill to pass . The act was subsequently used to prosecute hundreds of people accused of terrorism . However , it was criticised by opposition parties and scholars for being an infringement upon civil liberties , and the National Human Rights Commission stated that it had been used to target Muslims . It was later repealed by the Congress @-@ led UPA government in 2004 . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 The historical stance of the BJP towards foreign policy , like the Jana Sangh , was based on an aggressive Hindu nationalism combined with economic protectionism . The Jana Sangh was founded with the explicit aim of reversing the partition of India ; as a result , its official position was that the existence of Pakistan was illegitimate . This antagonism toward Pakistan remains a significant influence on the BJP 's ideology . The party and its affiliates have strongly opposed India 's long standing policy of <unk> , and instead advocate closeness to the United States . 
 The Vajpayee government 's foreign policy in many ways represented a radical shift from BJP orthodoxy , while maintaining some aspects of it . Its policy also represented a significant change from the <unk> idealism of previous governments , opting instead for realism . His party criticised him for adopting a much more moderate stance with Pakistan . In 1998 , he made a landmark visit to Pakistan , and inaugurated the Delhi – Lahore Bus service . Vajpayee signed the Lahore Declaration , which was an attempt to improve Indo @-@ Pakistani relations that deteriorated after the 1998 nuclear tests . However , the presence of Pakistani soldiers and militants in the disputed Kashmir territory was discovered a few months later , causing the 1999 Kargil War . The war ended a couple of months later , with the expulsion of the infiltrators two months later , without any shift in the Line of Control that marked the de facto border between the two countries . Despite the war , Vajpayee continued to display a willingness to engage Pakistan in dialogue . This was not well received among the BJP cadre , who criticised the government for being " weak " . This faction of the BJP asserted itself at the post @-@ Kargil Agra summit , preventing any significant deal from being reached . 
 = = Organisation and structure = = 
 The BJP is the world 's largest political party by primary membership , having 100 million registered members as of April 2015 . The organisation of the BJP is strictly hierarchical , with the president being the highest authority in the party . Until 2012 , the BJP constitution mandated that any qualified member could be national or state president for a single three @-@ year term . This was amended to a maximum of two consecutive terms . Below the president is the national executive , which contains a variable number of senior leaders from across the country . It is the higher decision making body of the party . Its members are several vice @-@ presidents , general @-@ secretaries , treasurers and secretaries , who work directly with the president . An identical structure , with an executive committee led by a president , exists at the state , regional , district and local level . 
 The BJP is a cadre @-@ based party . It has close connections with other organisations with similar ideology , such as the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh and the Vishwa Hindu Parishad . The cadres of these groups often supplement the BJP 's . Its lower members are largely derived from the RSS and its affiliates , loosely known as the Sangh Parivar : 
 The Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad ( All India Student 's Union ) , the students ' wing of the RSS . 
 The Bharatiya Kisan Sangh ( Indian Farmer 's Union ) , the farmers ' division . 
 The Bharatiya <unk> Sangh ( Indian Labourers Union ) , the labour union associated with the RSS . 
 The party has subsidiary organisations of its own , such as : 
 The BJP Mahila Morcha ( BJP Women 's Front ) , its women 's division . 
 The Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha ( Indian People 's Youth Front ) , its youth wing . 
 The BJP Minority Morcha ( BJP Minority Front ) , its minority division . 
 = = Presence in various states = = 
 As of May 2016 , the BJP holds a majority of assembly in nine states : 
 Gujarat 
 Madhya Pradesh 
 Chhattisgarh 
 Rajasthan 
 Goa 
 Haryana 
 Maharashtra 
 Assam 
 Jharkhand 
 In five other states , it shares power with other political parties of the NDA coalition . In all these states , the BJP is junior ally in the ruling alliance . The states are : 
 Jammu and Kashmir ( with Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Democratic Party ) 
 Punjab ( with Shiromani Akali Dal ) 
 Nagaland ( with Naga People 's Front ) 
 Andhra Pradesh ( with Telugu Desam Party ) and 
 Sikkim ( with Sikkim Democratic Front ) 
 In the past , the BJP has also been the sole party in power in the following states : 
 Uttar Pradesh 
 Uttarakhand 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Karnataka 
 Arunachal Pradesh and 
 Delhi 
 It has also ruled the following states as a junior ally being a part of coalition governments in the past : 
 Odisha 
 Bihar 
 Arunachal Pradesh 
 It also has a regional political alliance in the North @-@ East named the North @-@ East Democratic Alliance . 
 = = = List of Current NDA / BJP coalitions Chief Ministers = = = 
 = No. 3 Aircraft Depot RAAF = 
 No. 3 Aircraft Depot ( No. 3 AD ) was a maintenance unit of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Formed in March 1942 at RAAF Station Amberley , Queensland , its prime function initially was the assembly and despatch of combat aircraft from the United States ; it also performed salvage operations . From 1942 until 1947 it took on the role of administering the Amberley base . The depot was responsible for heavy maintenance of the RAAF 's English Electric Canberra jet bombers following their entry into service in 1953 . In the 1970s it began maintaining and upgrading the General Dynamics F @-@ 111C swing @-@ wing bomber , along with Bell UH @-@ 1 Iroquois and Boeing CH @-@ 47 Chinook helicopters . No. 3 AD merged with No. 482 Maintenance Squadron in March 1992 to form No. 501 Wing , which maintained the F @-@ 111 until disbanding in 2001 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 No. 3 Aircraft Depot ( No. 3 AD ) was formed at RAAF Station Amberley , Queensland , on 16 March 1942 . It came under the control of No. 5 ( Maintenance ) Group . The depot 's first , temporary , commanding officer was Squadron Leader W.H. Nicholson . On establishment , No. 3 AD 's main purpose was the assembly and despatch of combat aircraft manufactured in the United States . In its first six weeks of operation , it assembled 123 Bell P @-@ 39 Airacobra fighters and a dozen Martin B @-@ 26 Marauder medium bombers . The depot was also responsible for the inspection of RAAF CAC Wirraways and Lockheed Hudsons . A further role was salvaging damaged aircraft from units in the local area , and despatching them to No. 5 Aircraft Depot at RAAF Station Wagga , New South Wales , for repair . 
 Wing Commander ( later Group Captain ) G.E. Douglas , previously in charge of No. 1 Aircraft Depot at Laverton , Victoria , assumed command of No. 3 AD in June 1942 . Station Headquarters Amberley was dissolved on 1 July , and the depot took over the role of command and control of the base . As the war progressed , Amberley became one of Australia 's largest aircraft maintenance facilities , as well as a way station for United States Army Air Forces personnel and equipment bound for operations in the South West Pacific . In addition to Airacobras and Marauders , among the aircraft types No. 3 AD assembled during World War II were Curtiss P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks , Republic P @-@ 43 Lancers , Vultee A @-@ 31 Vengeances , Supermarine Spitfires , Grumman F6F Hellcats , and North American P @-@ 51 Mustangs . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 No. 82 ( Heavy Bomber ) Wing and its three squadrons of Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberators arrived at Amberley as lodger units between February and April 1946 . In the aftermath of World War II , No. 3 AD continued to command and administer the base until the re @-@ establishment of Station Headquarters Amberley in 1947 . No. 82 Wing converted to Avro Lincolns during 1948 . In October 1952 , when Lincolns flew observation flights as part of Operation Hurricane , the first British atomic test in Australia , No. 3 AD was responsible for handling underwing canisters used to collect radioactive particles . The RAAF 's first jet bomber , the English Electric Canberra , began replacing the Lincoln in December 1953 . No. 3 AD was responsible for " deep " maintenance of the Canberra , which involved stripping aircraft back to their components . This process was generally required every five years , and could take up to a year to complete . The depot also performed deep maintenance on the CAC Sabre fighter during its service with the RAAF . No. 3 AD 's crest was approved by Queen Elizabeth II in June 1959 ; the design featured a Maltese cross in azure , symbolising the unit 's home state of Queensland , surmounted by a cock 's head in gold with a red comb . From December 1966 until January 1969 , No. 3 AD was commanded by Group Captain James Rowland , later Chief of the Air Staff and Governor of New South Wales . By the 1970s , the depot was responsible for maintenance of the RAAF 's Bell UH @-@ 1 Iroquois helicopters as well as the Canberra bombers . It also maintained the McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4E Phantoms leased to the RAAF from 1970 to 1973 as an interim strike force pending delivery of the long @-@ delayed General Dynamics F @-@ 111C . 
 The F @-@ 111C represented the most significant maintenance challenge undertaken by the RAAF , and No. 3 AD 's hangars and workshops were extensively revamped before and after the new bomber 's entry into service in mid @-@ 1973 . The depot was responsible for major upgrades and complex maintenance involving stripping down the airframe and engines , while intermediate @-@ level servicing was carried out by No. 482 ( Maintenance ) Squadron , a unit of No. 82 Wing . After General Dynamics in Fort Worth , Texas , had modified the first of four F @-@ 111Cs earmarked to be brought up to RF @-@ 111C standard for photographic reconnaissance , No. 3 AD modified the remaining three aircraft at Amberley during 1980 . In 1982 – 83 , the depot upgraded to C @-@ model standard four F @-@ 111As delivered to replace the four F @-@ 111Cs from the RAAF 's original order that had been lost through accidents . It conducted the F @-@ 111 Pave Tack infra @-@ red and laser @-@ guided precision weapons targeting system upgrade in 1985 . No. 3 AD also took on responsibility for maintenance of Boeing CH @-@ 47 Chinooks after the helicopters entered service with No. 12 Squadron , based at Amberley , in September 1973 . The depot had no familiarity dealing with significant damage to the Chinook , and when one of the helicopters crashed following an engine failure in 1975 the repairs were not completed until 1981 . 
 From the 1980s , No. 3 AD 's organisation included a maintenance management squadron made up of individual flights responsible for the upkeep of equipment , engines , and airframes , the last @-@ mentioned including armament and de @-@ seal / re @-@ seal . The process for de @-@ sealing and re @-@ sealing the F @-@ 111s fuel tanks , which the depot first undertook between 1977 and 1982 and which lasted six months per aircraft , caused controversy owing to the hazardous working conditions for ground crews . Brain damage to personnel caused by chemical exposure resulted in a class action that cost the Australian government more than A $ 20 million in damages . On 16 March 1992 , No. 3 AD merged with No. 482 Squadron to form No. 501 Wing , which became the largest unit in the RAAF , comprising over 1 @,@ 200 personnel . The depot completed its disbandment on 30 June that year . No. 501 Wing continued to provide deep maintenance and logistics support for the F @-@ 111s at Amberley until 2001 , when Boeing Australia was awarded the maintenance contract . 
 = Alnus glutinosa = 
 Alnus glutinosa , the common alder , black alder , European alder or just alder , is a species of tree in the family Betulaceae , native to most of Europe , southwest Asia and northern Africa . It thrives in wet locations where its association with the bacterium Frankia alni enables it to grow in poor quality soils . It is a medium size , short @-@ lived tree growing to a height of up to 30 metres ( 100 ft ) . It has short @-@ stalked rounded leaves and separate male and female flower in the form of catkins . The small , rounded fruits are cone @-@ like and the seeds are dispersed by wind and water . 
 The common alder provides food and shelter to wildlife , with a number of insects , lichens and fungi being completely dependent on the tree . It is a pioneer species , colonising vacant land and forming mixed forests as other trees appear in its wake . Eventually common alder dies out of woodlands because the seedlings need more light than is available on the forest floor . Its more usual habitat is forest edges , swamps and riverside corridors . The timber has been used in underwater foundations and for manufacture into paper and fibreboard , for smoking foods , for joinery , turnery and carving . Products of the tree have been used in ethnobotany , providing folk remedies for various ailments , and research has shown that extracts of the seeds are active against pathogenic bacteria . 
 = = Description = = 
 Alnus glutinosa is a tree that thrives in moist soils , and grows under favourable circumstances to a height of 20 to 30 metres ( 66 to 98 ft ) and exceptionally up to 37 metres ( 121 ft ) . Young trees have an upright habit of growth with a main axial stem but older trees develop an arched crown with crooked branches . The base of the trunk produces adventitious roots which grow down to the soil and may appear to be propping the trunk up . The bark of young trees is smooth , glossy and greenish @-@ brown while in older trees it is dark grey and fissured . The branches are smooth and somewhat sticky , being scattered with resinous warts . The buds are purplish @-@ brown and have short stalks . Both male and female catkins form in the autumn and remain dormant during the winter . 
 The leaves of the common alder are short @-@ stalked , rounded , up to 10 cm ( 4 in ) long with a slightly wedge @-@ shaped base and a wavy , serrated margin . They have a glossy dark green upper surface and paler green underside with rusty @-@ brown hairs in the angles of the veins . As with some other trees growing near water , the common alder keeps its leaves longer than do trees in drier situations , and the leaves remain green late into the autumn . As the Latin name glutinosa implies , the buds and young leaves are sticky with a resinous gum . 
 The species is monoecious and the flowers are wind @-@ pollinated ; the slender cylindrical male catkins are pendulous , reddish in colour and 5 to 10 cm ( 2 to 4 in ) long ; the female flowers are upright , broad and green , with short stalks . During the autumn they become dark brown to black in colour , hard , somewhat woody , and superficially similar to small conifer cones . They last through the winter and the small winged seeds are mostly scattered the following spring . The seeds are flattened reddish @-@ brown nuts edged with webbing filled with pockets of air . This enables them to float for about a month which allows the seed to disperse widely . 
 Unlike some other species of tree , common alders do not produce shade leaves . The respiration rate of shaded foliage is the same as well @-@ lit leaves but the rate of assimilation is lower . This means that as a tree in woodland grows taller , the lower branches die and soon decay , leaving a small crown and unbranched trunk . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Alnus glutinosa was first described by Carl Linnaeus in 1753 , as one of two varieties of alder ( the other being A. incana ) , which he regarded as a single species Betula <unk> . In 1785 , Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck treated it as a full species under the name Betula glutinosa . Its present scientific name is due to Joseph Gaertner , who in 1791 accepted the separation of alders from birches , and transferred the species to Alnus . The epithet glutinosa means " sticky " , referring particularly to the young shoots . 
 Within the genus Alnus , the common alder is placed in subgenus Alnus as part of a closely related group of species including the grey alder , Alnus incana , with which it hybridizes to form the hybrid A. × hybrida . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The common alder is native to almost the whole of continental Europe ( except for both the extreme north and south ) as well as the United Kingdom and Ireland . In Asia its range includes Turkey , Iran and Kazakhstan , and in Africa it is found in Tunisia , Algeria and Morocco . It is naturalised in the Azores . It has been introduced , either by accident or by intent , to Canada , the United States , Chile , South Africa , Australia and New Zealand . Its natural habitat is in moist ground near rivers , ponds and lakes but it can also grow in drier locations and sometimes occurs in mixed woodland and on forest edges . It tolerates a range of soil types and grows best at a pH of between 5 @.@ 5 and 7 @.@ 2 . Because of its association with the nitrogen @-@ fixing bacterium Frankia alni , it can grow in nutrient @-@ poor soils where few other trees thrive . 
 = = Ecological relationships = = 
 The common alder is most noted for its symbiotic relationship with the bacterium Frankia alni , which forms nodules on the tree 's roots . This bacterium absorbs nitrogen from the air and fixes it in a form available to the tree . In return , the bacterium receives carbon products produced by the tree through photosynthesis . This relationship , which improves the fertility of the soil , has established the common alder as an important pioneer species in ecological succession . 
 The common alder is susceptible to Phytophthora alni , a recently evolved species of oomycete plant pathogen probably of hybrid origin . This is the causal agent of <unk> disease of alder which is causing extensive mortality of the trees in some parts of Europe . The symptoms of this infection include the death of roots and of patches of bark , dark spots near the base of the trunk , yellowing of leaves and in subsequent years , the death of branches and sometimes the whole tree . Taphrina alni is a fungal plant pathogen that causes alder tongue gall , a chemically induced distortion of female catkins . The gall develops on the maturing fruits and produces spores which are carried by the wind to other trees . This gall is believed to be harmless to the tree . Another , also harmless , gall is caused by a midge , Eriophyes <unk> , which sucks sap from the leaves forming pustules . 
 The common alder is important to wildlife all year round and the seeds are a useful winter food for birds . Deer , sheep , hares and rabbits feed on the tree and it provides shelter for livestock in winter . It shades the water of rivers and streams , moderating the water temperature , and this benefits fish which also find safety among its exposed roots in times of flood . The common alder is the foodplant of the larvae of a number of different butterflies and moths and is associated with over 140 species of plant @-@ eating insect . The tree is also a host to a variety of mosses and lichens which particularly flourish in the humid moist environment of <unk> trees . Some common lichens found growing on the trunk and branches include tree lungwort ( Lobaria pulmonaria ) , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , the last of which is restricted to alders . Some 47 species of mycorrhizal fungi have been found growing in symbiosis with the common alder , both partners benefiting from an exchange of nutrients . As well as several species of <unk> , these symbionts include Russula <unk> , the milkcaps Lactarius <unk> and Lactarius <unk> , and the alder roll @-@ rim Paxillus filamentosus , all of which grow nowhere else except in association with alders . In spring , the catkin cup <unk> <unk> grows on fallen alder catkins . 
 As an introduced species , the common alder can affect the ecology of its new locality . It is a fast @-@ growing tree and can quickly form dense woods where little light reaches the ground , and this may inhibit the growth of native plants . The presence of the nitrogen @-@ fixing bacteria and the annual accumulation of leaf litter from the trees also alters the nutrient status of the soil . It also increases the availability of phosphorus in the ground , and the tree 's dense network of roots can cause increased sedimentation in pools and waterways . It spreads easily by wind @-@ borne seed , may be dispersed to a certain extent by birds and the woody fruits can float away from the parent tree . When the tree is felled , regrowth occurs from the stump , and logs and fallen branches can take root . A. glutinosa is classed as an environmental weed in New Zealand . 
 = = Cultivation and uses = = 
 The common alder is used as a pioneer species and to stabilise river banks , to assist in flood control , to purify water in waterlogged soils and to moderate the temperature and nutrient status of water bodies . It can be grown by itself or in mixed species plantations , and the nitrogen @-@ rich leaves falling to the ground enrich the soil and increase the production of such trees as walnut , Douglas fir and poplar on poor quality soils . Although the tree can live for up to 160 years , it is best felled for timber at 60 to 70 years before heart rot sets in . 
 On marshy ground it is important as coppice @-@ wood , being cut near the base to encourage the production of straight poles . It is capable of enduring clipping as well as marine climatic conditions and may be cultivated as a fast @-@ growing windbreak . In woodland , the seedlings cannot tolerate dense shade and as the forest matures , the alder trees in it die out . The species is cultivated as a specimen tree in parks and gardens , and the cultivar ' <unk> ' has gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit . 
 = = = Timber = = = 
 The wood is soft , white when first cut , turning to pale red ; the knots are attractively mottled . The timber is not used where strength is required in the construction industry , but is used for paper @-@ making , the manufacture of fibreboard and the production of energy . Under water the wood is very durable and is used for deep foundations of buildings . The piles beneath the Rialto in Venice , and the foundations of several medieval cathedrals are made of alder . The Roman architect Vitruvius mentioned that the timber was used in the construction of the causeways across the Ravenna marshes . The wood is used in joinery , both as solid timber and as veneer , where its grain and colour are appreciated , and it takes dye well . As the wood is soft , flexible and somewhat light , it can be easily worked as well as split . It is valued in turnery and carving , in making furniture , window frames , clogs , toys , blocks , pencils and bowls . 
 = = = Tanning and dyeing = = = 
 The bark of the common alder has long been used in tanning and dyeing . The bark and twigs contain 16 to 20 % tannic acid but their usefulness in tanning is limited by the strong accompanying colour they produce . Depending on the mordant and the methods used , various shades of brown , fawn , and yellowish @-@ orange hues can be imparted to wool , cotton and silk . Alder bark can also used with iron sulphate to create a black dye which can substitute for the use of <unk> or galls . The <unk> are said to chew the bark and use their saliva to dye leather . The shoots of the common alder produce a yellowish or cinnamon @-@ coloured dye if cut early in the year . Other parts of the tree are also used in dyeing ; the catkins can yield a green colour and the fresh @-@ cut wood a pinkish @-@ fawn colour . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 It is also the traditional wood that is burnt to produce smoked fish and other smoked foods , though in some areas other woods are now more often used . It supplies high quality charcoal . 
 The leaves of this tree are sticky and if they are spread on the floor of a room , their adhesive surface is said to trap fleas . 
 Chemical constituents of Alnus glutinosa include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> { 3- ( 4 @-@ hydroxyphenyl ) <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ β @-@ D @-@ <unk> } and <unk> acid ( 2 @,@ 3 @-@ <unk> acid ) . 
 = = Health = = 
 Pollen from the common alder , along with that from birch and hazel , is one of the main sources of tree pollen allergy . As the pollen is often present in the atmosphere at the same time as that of birch , hazel , hornbeam and oak , and they have similar physicochemical properties , it is difficult to separate out their individual effects . In central Europe , these tree <unk> are the second most common cause of allergic conditions after grass pollen . 
 The bark of common alder has traditionally been used as an astringent , a cathartic , a hemostatic , a <unk> , a tonic and a restorative ( a substance able to restore normal health ) . A decoction of the bark has been used to treat swelling , inflammation and rheumatism , as an emetic , and to treat pharyngitis and sore throat . Ground up bark has been used as an ingredient in toothpaste , and the inner bark can be boiled in vinegar to provide a skin wash for treating dermatitis , lice and scabies . The leaves have been used to reduce breast discomfort in nursing mothers and folk remedies advocate the use of the leaves against various forms of cancer . Alpine farmers are said to use the leaves to alleviate rheumatism by placing a heated bag full of leaves on the affected areas . Alder leaves are consumed by cows , sheep , goats and horses though pigs refuse to eat them . According to some people , consumption of alder leaves causes blackening of the tongue and is harmful to horses . 
 In a research study , extracts from the seeds of the common alder have been found to be active against all the eight pathogenic bacteria against which they were tested , which included Escherichia coli and methicillin @-@ resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) . The only extract to have significant antioxidant activity was that extracted in methanol . All extracts were of low toxicity to brine shrimps . These results suggest that the seeds could be further investigated for use in the development of possible anti @-@ MRSA drugs . 
 = = Details of Alder structure and galls = = 
 Details 
 = Lynton and Barnstaple Railway = 
 The Lynton & Barnstaple Railway ( L & B ) opened as an independent railway in May 1898 . It was a single track , 1 ft 11 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 597 mm ) narrow gauge railway and was slightly over 19 miles ( 31 km ) long running through the rugged and picturesque area bordering Exmoor in North Devon , England . Although opened after the 1896 Light Railways Act came into force , it was authorised and constructed prior to that act . Therefore , as with all other railways , it was authorised under its own Act of Parliament and built to higher ( and more costly ) standards than similar railways of the time . In the United Kingdom it was notable as being the only narrow gauge line required to use main @-@ line standard signalling . For a short period the line earned a modest return for shareholders , but for most of its life the L & B made a loss . In 1923 the L & B was taken over by the Southern Railway , and eventually closed in September 1935 . 
 The Lynton & Barnstaple Railway Association was formed in 1979 ; and a short section was reopened to passengers in 2004 . This was extended in 2006 ; and the following year plans were announced to open 9 miles ( 14 km ) of track , linking the station at Woody Bay to both Lynton ( at a new terminus on an extension to the original line , closer to the town ) and Blackmoor Gate , and to a new station at Wistlandpound Reservoir . The present track is now 600 mm ( 1 ft 11 5 ⁄ 8 in ) narrow gauge . 
 = = History = = 
 Following the opening of the Devon and Somerset Railway to Barnstaple , there were calls for an extension to serve the twin villages of Lynton and Lynmouth , which were popular with holiday @-@ makers . 
 Through the middle of the 19th century , several schemes were proposed , from established railway companies and independent developers . One scheme suggested electric power , while another proposed a line from South Molton . None of these schemes offered sufficient prospects to encourage investment , and few got further than initial plans . 
 Due to the difficult terrain , one scheme suggested a 1 ft 11 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 597 mm ) narrow gauge , already in use by the <unk> [ sic ] Railway Company and elsewhere , to ease construction . This scheme was supported by Sir George Newnes , publisher of <unk> and The Strand Magazine who became chairman of the company . The Lynton & Barnstaple Railway Bill was passed on 27 June 1895 , and the line opened on 11 May 1898 with public service commencing on 16 May , connecting with trains from Waterloo on the Ilfracombe Branch Line at Barnstaple Town . 
 The scheme did not meet with universal enthusiasm , and from the beginning , there were some who doubted the true intentions of the promoters . Although many of the sinuous curves and deviations were due to having to maintain a 1 in 50 gradient where there was no leeway ( most observers being oblivious to the fact that a straighter shorter line would have made the gradient even steeper ) , several were due to resistance by local landowners along the route . 
 A guide published whilst the line was being built stated : 
 The L & B seldom attracted sufficient passengers to remain viable . The journey of nearly 20 miles ( 32 km ) took on average an hour and a half . To satisfy several influential residents , the terminus at Lynton was some distance from the town itself , and from the cliff railway to Lynmouth . 
 Declining tourism during World War I , improved roads , increased car ownership further depleted the line 's income until it was no longer economic . A guidebook published in 1921 described the situation : 
 Despite numerous cost @-@ saving measures and extra investment in the line , the Southern Railway was unable to reverse the trend , and closed the line . 
 The last train ran on 29 September 1935 . An observer at the time wrote : 
 The Southern removed everything they could use elsewhere , and by 8 November , had lifted the track from Lynton to milepost 15 ⅓ - on the Barnstaple side of Woody Bay station . On 13 November an auction was held , although the railway failed to attract much interest . Most rolling stock , and every loco except for Lew , was scrapped at Pilton . Some coaches were sectioned for use as garden sheds . Third class seats became garden furniture , and first class seats found their way into local snooker halls and Masonic lodges . In December , Plymouth ship breaker Sidney Castle won the tender to dismantle the railway . The remaining track was lifted by June 1936 , and in September , surviving loco Lew was shipped to Brazil . The stations and track bed were auctioned in 1938 . 
 The L & B had an exemplary safety record , and no members of the public were killed or injured during its 37 @-@ year existence , although accidents at Braunton Road and <unk> did claim the lives of three track workers . 
 = = Route = = 
 The route of this diminutive railway and the scenery through which it passes , has been described many times , such as in a 1920s guide to the area : 
 ( * Note : <unk> Bay station was actually renamed Woody Bay in 1901 . The geographical feature Woody Bay after which the station was named was the subject of an attempt to develop it as a tourist resort to rival Lynmouth ; a pier was even constructed . The developers felt that the spelling " Woody " was more attractive to tourists , and so changed it from the original " <unk> " ; the station name was changed accordingly . ) 
 As well as several <unk> and cycle @-@ routes which can still be followed today , the hostelry in Parracombe mentioned in the article remains a popular venue ( although the geese are now singular ) . 
 = = = Gradient profile = = = 
 The L & B rises and falls several times along its length . Starting at 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) above sea level , The first 3 3 ⁄ 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 0 km ) , through Barnstaple , and along the Yeo Valley stays relatively level . Collard Bridge marks the start of an 8 @-@ mile ( 13 km ) climb , mainly at one in fifty , to Blackmoor Gate . A shallower down @-@ gradient follows , of about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , towards Parracombe Bank , and the start of another climb , of about 2 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 4 km ) , to Woody Bay — at 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 305 m ) , the highest railway station in southern England . The line then falls , again mostly at one in fifty ( 2 % ) - to Lynton & Lynmouth station , still 700 feet ( 213 m ) above the sea , and hidden by the landscape from the town of Lynton . The minimum radius on curves was 5 @-@ chain ( 100 m ) . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 One of the most distinctive aspects of the L & B was its rolling stock , with the locomotives appearing originally in a livery of plain lined Holly green , later on a black base , with chestnut under @-@ frames , hauling passenger carriages coloured terracotta with off @-@ white upper panels , and light grey goods wagons . The schemes were simplified as individual vehicles were repainted . With the take over by the Southern and arrival of Lew the livery was slowly changed to Maunsell Green for locos and passenger stock , and umber for the goods wagons . The loco headlamps which had been black under the L & B were re @-@ painted red . 
 = = = Locomotives = = = 
 At least four contractors ' locomotives were used for construction . Unusually , some of the temporary track was wider than the final gauge - the section around Parracombe Bank for example , spanning the Heddon valley , was built to 3 ft ( 914 mm ) gauge , with a locomotive known as Winnie . A fifth locomotive - perhaps named <unk> - may also have been used , although little is known of either of these . In 1900 , Kilmarnock was sold by the L & B. It is believed to have been left behind by James Nuttall , as a result of the financial problems and litigation between railway and contractor . 
 The L & B used only coal @-@ fired steam motive power . In 1896 , the Hunslet Engine Company submitted two designs ( a 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 2T and a 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0T ) , but eventually an order was placed for three 2 @-@ 6 @-@ <unk> from Manning Wardle & Co of Leeds . The locos were named after local rivers : Yeo , Exe , and Taw . These were supplemented by a 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 2T , Lyn , built by the Baldwin Locomotive Works of Philadelphia , USA , as the Company realised that three locos would be insufficient . Baldwin was selected as they could deliver the loco — based largely on standard components — more quickly than domestic suppliers , who had a backlog of orders , caused by a national engineering dispute over the 8 hour working day resulting in a lock @-@ out by employers from July 1897 and January 1898 . After construction by Baldwin , the loco was shipped across the Atlantic in parts , and re @-@ assembled at Pilton by railway staff . It first steamed in July 1898 . The Manning <unk> were delivered ahead of the lock @-@ out , and Yeo and Taw were used in the final stages of construction . Exe was stored locally in a stable , where she received the unwelcome attention of thieves who stole various brass fittings and fixtures . 
 In 1923 the L & B was absorbed into the Southern Railway , and began an upgrade programme . All locos & coaches were repainted in Southern Maunsell Green livery , the wagons were repainted in Southern Umber livery and track and buildings were improved . A fifth locomotive , Lew was purchased in 1925 , with improvements to the original Manning Wardle design . 
 = = = = Fate of Lew = = = = 
 Although bought at the auction ( it is believed by <unk> of London ) by December 1935 , Lew was working for Sidney Castle , the <unk> of the railway . This work was completed by July 1936 and in September , Lew was moved by rail to Swansea and loaded onto the S.S. Sabor destined for the port of Pernambuco ( since renamed Recife ) , Brazil . Most of the relevant shipping records were destroyed in World War II , Lew then just vanished and despite several attempts , no trace of the locomotive , or evidence of its fate , has so far been found . 
 = = = Passenger stock = = = 
 Sixteen passenger carriages were delivered for the opening . Built by the Bristol Wagon & Carriage Works Co . Ltd . , these comprised six different types , all the same size , being 39 ft 6 in ( 12 @.@ 0 m ) long , 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) wide , ( 7 ft 4 in or 2 @.@ 2 m over steps ) and 8 ft 7 in ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) high — large by narrow gauge standards — and certainly superior to any previous British narrow gauge stock . 
 The coaching stock was extremely solidly constructed , and offered levels of accommodation far in advance of anything else at the time - certainly compared to any other narrow gauge railway . Almost 70 years later , the design was used as the basis for a new rake of carriages built by the Ffestiniog - testament to the excellence of the original design . 
 The body for coach 17 was built in 1911 , by local firm Shapland and Petter , and mounted on a steel underframe constructed by the railway in its own workshops at Pilton . Marginally longer than the earlier coaches , it contained both smoking and non @-@ smoking accommodation for first and third class passengers , as well as the brake van space . 
 = = = Goods stock = = = 
 The Southern Railway introduced several new items of goods stock , and also purchased two ex @-@ War Department travelling cranes for the line . 
 Goods @-@ only trains were a rarity , and the usual practice was to attach goods wagons to any scheduled passenger services . Whilst the shunting of wagons at intermediate stations no doubt added to the interest of the tourist and occasional traveller , it also added marginally to the journey time . 
 The open goods wagons were originally delivered with a single top @-@ hung side door on each side , but these proved inefficient , and all were eventually converted to side hung double doors . By 1907 , most had been fitted with tarpaulin rails . The goods vans used the same underframe , and were fitted with double sliding doors on each side . 
 The bogie open doors were also originally top @-@ hung , but converted by the railway at Pilton . 
 Wagon № 19 was originally used by the contractors . After the railway opened , it was modified and entered revenue service in 1900 . At only 6 long tons ( 6 @.@ 1 t ; 6 @.@ 7 short tons ) it was used often in preference to an 8 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 8 @.@ 1 t ; 9 @.@ 0 @-@ short @-@ ton ) wagon as it reduced the overall weight of a train . 
 Van 23 - now restored and being prepared ( 2014 ) for service at Woody Bay - was built at Pilton by the L & B. Unlike all other L & B stock , its underframe was entirely made of wood . 
 The travelling cranes were ex @-@ WD stock , and fitted with outriggers , rated at 3 long tons ( 3 @.@ 05 t ; 3 @.@ 36 short tons ) with a fifteen @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 57 m ) radius , 4 @.@ 5 long tons ( 4 @.@ 6 t ; 5 @.@ 0 short tons ) at 11 ft 6 in ( 3 @.@ 51 m ) . Intended as recovery cranes in the event of a derailment , neither saw much use . One crane , with its match truck , was kept in the long <unk> at Pilton , the other was put to use in Lynton goods yard . 
 The 1927 bogie goods vans were originally fitted with heavy diagonal wooden cross braces at each end , but these were later replaced with single diagonal angle @-@ iron braces . 
 = = Present = = 
 Eighty years after its closure , much of the line is still in evidence . The most spectacular evidence is Bridge 22 - the brick @-@ built Chelfham Viaduct . Fully restored in 2000 , its eight 42 @-@ foot ( 13 m ) wide arches reach 70 feet ( 21 m ) above the Stoke Rivers valley — the largest narrow @-@ gauge railway structure in England . 
 The stations at Lynton and Bratton Fleming are now private residences , Blackmoor Gate is a restaurant and Barnstaple Town a school . Chelfham and Woody Bay both serve the new L & B. Chelfham station is currently being restored , and open to visitors every weekend , while Woody Bay is the main centre of operations . Snapper Halt was purchased in 2010 by Exmoor Associates - a private company dedicated to securing trackbed for the restoration of the railway . 
 A short section of the line reopened to passengers in 2004 . Bridge 67 was generously rebuilt as a gift by Edmund Nuttall Ltd . — a firm descended from James Nuttall of Manchester , the main contractors for the original construction — allowing an extension to Killington Lane in 2006 . 
 Work is progressing on the next section to be restored , towards Parracombe , Blackmoor and a new temporary Southern terminus at Wistlandpound Reservoir . A total of 7 planning applications were submitted to Exmoor National Park Authority and North Devon Council in February 2016 , with decisions expected during the Summer . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 Unlike the Welsh Highland Railway , the track bed was sold off piecemeal - often reverting to the original owners , paying much less than they had sold it for originally . Although there has been minor development on parts of the route , and Wistlandpound Reservoir has flooded the track bed close to its mid @-@ point , much is still in open countryside , with many sections identifiable . 
 The Lynton & Barnstaple Railway Association ( since 2000 , a charitable trust ) was formed in 1979 . Woody Bay Station was purchased by the Lynton and Barnstaple Railway Company in 1995 and , after much effort , a short section of railway reopened to passengers in 2004 . This was extended to over a mile in 2006 , with steam and diesel @-@ hauled trains running between Woody Bay and the new , temporary terminus at Killington Lane . 
 In 1995 , the <unk> Railway — at the Milky Way , a theme park near Clovelly , was created and operated by L & B volunteers . Profits from this funded the purchase , restoration and reopening of Woody Bay . The <unk> was handed over to the park in 2005 , once Woody Bay had become established , and continues to operate as part of the attraction . 
 Little original rolling stock survives , but as well as the heritage coaches mentioned below , the largely restored Van 23 was on display at Woody Bay until being removed to the L & B restoration team in Essex in November 2013 , for refurbishment and the fitting of brakes , underframe and couplers . The remains of several other coaches and Goods Van 4 are in storage awaiting reconstruction . 
 Coach 2 , used as a summer house , is on display ( unrestored ) at the National Railway Museum York along with the nameplates of the original locomotives . Coach 15 , recovered from Snapper Halt in 1959 and restored by the Ffestiniog Railway in North Wales , has been running there ( now as FR Coach 14 ) for longer than it did on the L & B. Due to the Ffestiniog 's smaller loading gauge , the roof profile was altered so it can pass through Garnedd tunnel . In September 2010 , Coach 15 visited the L & B with the Lew replica loco , Lyd . 
 A 1915 Kerr Stuart " Joffre " class 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0T loco was bought in 1983 , and named Axe . Restored to working order in 2008 , Axe worked most passenger trains at Woody Bay until December 2013 . An 0 @-@ 4 @-@ <unk> Maffei named Sid , owned by several L & B members , was also used on the L & B steam service until the end of 2013 , when it was sold off to a railway museum line in Sweden . To replace " Sid " , another privately owned loco , " Isaac " - a Bagnall 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 2T , № <unk> , built in 1953 for use in South African Platinum mine - arrived at Woody Bay from Boston Lodge in December 2013 , principally for use hauling the restored original L & B heritage coaches . 
 The Trust owns two industrial diesel locomotives , one of which Heddon Hall , is often used as backup for Axe and Isaac , and for maintenance trains . 
 A number of other visiting diesel and steam locomotives have also seen service on the line . 
 = = = = Heritage coaches = = = = 
 Sixteen coaches were originally built for the L & B in 1898 , and another was built by the railway in 1911 . Although most were broken up when the railway closed , several parts have survived , and have been retrieved and stored by the railway preservationists . 
 Following a ten @-@ year restoration , Coaches 7 and 17 returned to Woody Bay on 15 April 2013 , to re @-@ enter passenger @-@ carrying service on 10 May 2013 after an absence of 78 years . Coach 16 followed in September 2013 , and Coach 11 returned in April 2015 . The initial rake of three heritage coaches , after an inaugural service over the Autumn Gala weekend in September 2013 , entered regular service - hauled by " Isaac " - for the Santa Specials in December 2014 . 
 = = = = Modern replicas = = = = 
 = = = = = Lyd = = = = = 
 A Lynton and Barnstaple Manning Wardle type replica , named Lyd , is operational on the Ffestiniog Railway in North Wales . 
 First Steamed in Spring 2010 , Lyd visited Woody Bay in September 2010 - to mark the 75th Anniversary of the closure of the L & B. Lyd first moved under its own steam on 5 August 2010 and then underwent running @-@ in trials before visiting the L & B in September 2010 with former L & B coach 15 and Ffestiniog Railway observation car 102 . 
 = = = = = Lyn = = = = = 
 A replica of the Baldwin , Lyn is currently being built . It is being assembled by Alan Keef Ltd and is due to be operational in 2016 . 
 = = = = = Yeo = = = = = 
 A set of frames for a new Yeo were built by Winson Engineering in 2000 , and these are in storage , awaiting further funds to continue the construction . 
 = = Prospects = = 
 Restoring passenger services from Woody Bay was a major undertaking by the enthusiastic volunteers . Although much of the track bed survives intact , several obstacles — including Wistlandpound Reservoir — must be overcome if the greater part of the route is to be restored , fulfilling the hopes expressed in a card left at Barnstaple on the day after the line closed — <unk> it is not dead , but <unk> ... 
 In October 2007 , the railway announced plans for reinstating enough trackbed to reopen 9 miles ( 14 km ) of track , linking the station at Woody Bay to both Lynton ( at a new terminus on an extension to the original line , closer to the town ) and a new station at Wistlandpound . 
 Exmoor Enterprise , the working group leading the project , estimated that the full project being considered was likely to cost around £ 30 million , including the building of replica rolling stock , reconstructing original coaches and Van 4 , as well as improving the line as an important local tourist attraction . The railway 's management predicts the scheme will generate over £ 70 million for the south west economy within five years . 
 Working closely with international engineering and design consultants Arup , The L & B Trust held a series of public consultations during May and June 2012 , providing information to local communities about plans for obtaining a TWO , and the next phase of the reinstatement , south @-@ west from Killington Lane to Blackmoor , then Wistlandpound , and north @-@ east to <unk> , and eventually to Lynton . 
 Longer @-@ term plans see reopening the line towards Barnstaple . 
 = Thomas Percy ( Gunpowder Plot ) = 
 Thomas Percy ( c . 1560 – 8 November 1605 ) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605 . A tall , physically impressive man , little is known of his early life beyond his matriculation in 1579 at the University of Cambridge , and his marriage in 1591 to Martha Wright . In 1596 his second cousin own removed , Henry Percy , 9th Earl of Northumberland , appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle and made him responsible for the Percy family 's northern estates . He served the earl in the Low Countries in about 1600 – 1601 , and in the years before 1603 was his intermediary in a series of confidential communications with King James VI of Scotland . 
 Following James 's accession to the English throne in 1603 , Percy became disenchanted with the new king , who he supposed had reneged on his promises of toleration for English Catholics . His meeting in June 1603 with Robert Catesby , a religious zealot similarly unimpressed with the new royal dynasty , led the following year to his joining Catesby 's conspiracy to kill the king and his ministers by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder . Percy helped fund the group and secured the leases to certain properties in London , one of which was the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords , in which the gunpowder was finally placed . The conspirators also planned to instigate an uprising in the Midlands and to simultaneously kidnap James 's daughter , Princess Elizabeth . Percy was to remain in London and secure the capture of her brother , Prince Henry . 
 When the plot was exposed early on 5 November 1605 , Percy immediately fled to the Midlands , catching up with some of the other conspirators en route to Dunchurch in Warwickshire . Their flight ended on the border of Staffordshire , at Holbeche House , where they were besieged early on 8 November by the pursuing Sheriff of Worcester and his men . Percy was reportedly killed by the same musketball as Catesby , and was buried nearby . His body was later exhumed , and his head exhibited outside Parliament . 
 In his youth Percy was reportedly " very wild more than ordinary , and much given to fighting " , although his excesses were tempered somewhat by his conversion to Catholicism . He may have abandoned his first wife for another woman , and was for a time imprisoned for killing a man during a border skirmish . His membership of the plot proved extremely damaging to his patron , the Earl of Northumberland , who although uninvolved was imprisoned in the Tower of London until 1621 . 
 = = Life before 1604 = = 
 Thomas Percy was the younger of two sons born to Edward Percy of Beverley and his wife Elizabeth ( née Waterton ) . His father was a son of Jocelyn / Josceline Percy ( died 1532 ) , whose father was Henry Percy , 4th Earl of Northumberland . He was born around 1560 and matriculated at the University of Cambridge as a member of Peterhouse in 1579 . Little is known of his early life . He may have been a papist before he was at some point received into the Catholic Church , and he may have sailed with George Clifford , 3rd Earl of Cumberland , in 1589 . In 1591 he married Martha Wright , daughter of Ursula Wright ( a convicted recusant ) and sister to Christopher and John Wright ( both later involved in the Gunpowder Plot ) . Claims by several authors that Percy may have left Martha " mean and poor " for an unidentified woman in Warwickshire are disputed , but the two were at least estranged . In 1605 Martha and her daughter were living on an annuity funded by the Catholic William Parker , 4th Baron Monteagle . Thomas and Martha 's son , Robert , married Emma Mead at <unk> in Somerset on 22 October 1615 . 
 Percy was a tall , physically impressive man , " of serious expression but with an attractive manner " , although by his forties he was prematurely greying . He appears to have had some complaint with his clothing ; author Alan Haynes describes this as a skin disorder so acute that " he could not endure any shirt but of the finest <unk> or cambric " , although author and historian Antonia Fraser has written of his propensity to sweat so much that he changed his shirt twice a day . 
 Thomas was the great @-@ grandson of Henry Percy , 4th Earl of Northumberland , and the second cousin once removed of the 4th Earl 's descendent , Henry Percy , 9th Earl of Northumberland . Despite not being a close relative , in 1595 the 9th earl made him responsible for collecting rents from his northern estates , and the following year appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle . Thomas exercised his authority in a manner which gave some cause for complaint , not least from an officer he replaced , and contemporary reports of his dealings with the earl 's tenants include claims of mismanagement and bribery . During a border skirmish he killed James Burne , a Scot , for which he was imprisoned at a London gaol , but his release was secured by the intervention of Robert Devereux , 2nd Earl of Essex . Thomas subsequently aided Essex in a conspiracy against the Scottish warden of the middle marches , although unlike several others who later joined the Gunpowder Plot , he was not a member of the earl 's failed rebellion of 1601 . 
 Percy has been variously described as a belligerent and eccentric man , with " surges of wild energy subsiding into sloth " . The Jesuit priest Father John Gerard wrote that in his youth Percy had " been very wild more than ordinary , and much given to fighting " , while the Jesuit Oswald Tesimond thought he had been " rather wild and given to the gay life , a man who relied much on his sword and personal courage . " According to both men , Percy 's conversion to Catholicism was a calming influence , but biographer Mark Nicholls , who calls Percy " a pugnacious character " , says that this was only true to a point . His excesses did not prevent him from joining Northumberland during his command in the Low Countries , held from 1600 – 1601 , for which he was rewarded with £ 200 . The earl also appointed Percy his receiver of rents in Cumberland and Northumberland , in 1603 . Henry Percy was considered a supporter of the Catholic cause , and on several occasions before 1603 , suspecting that Queen Elizabeth I did not have long to live , he entrusted Thomas with the delivery of secret correspondence to and from her probable successor , King James VI of Scotland . Northumberland 's uncle had been executed for his involvement in the Rising of the North , a plot to replace Elizabeth with James 's mother , Mary , Queen of Scots . He planned to make up for his family 's disgrace by building a strong relationship with James , but also wished to counter the influence of Robert Cecil , 1st Earl of Salisbury , whose father ( it was rumoured ) James believed had been responsible for Mary 's death . 
 Exactly what assurances James gave Percy are unknown . Tesimond wrote that he made " very generous promises to favour Catholics actively " , and " he would admit them to every kind of honour and office " , but the consensus among historians is that what promises James did make were oral , rather than written . Fraser posits that the Scottish king probably intended to allow Catholics to worship privately , which if true was a much more reserved view than that subsequently announced by Percy , who told his fellow Catholics that the king had promised to protect their religion . Considering the " quaintness " of James 's spoken English there may have been some misunderstanding on both sides . In his surviving correspondence with Northumberland , the king writes only that neither would " quiet " Catholics be disturbed , nor would those that deserved recognition " through their good service " be overlooked . This mixing of signals was to have lasting consequences . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Percy became the fifth member of the Gunpowder plot on Sunday 20 May 1604 . Almost a year earlier , he had called at Robert Catesby 's home at Ashby St Ledgers , and complained bitterly about James , who since succeeding Elizabeth had done little to fulfil his expectations . He had threatened to kill the new king with his own hands , but was asked by Catesby to restrain himself , and told " I am thinking of a most sure way and I will soon let thee know what it is . " Thus Percy found himself at the Duck and Drake inn near the Strand in London , along with Catesby and his cousin Thomas Wintour , John Wright and Guy Fawkes . His first words at the meeting were " Shall we always , gentlemen , talk and never do anything ? " All five later swore an oath of secrecy on a prayer book , and then celebrated Mass in another room with Father Gerard , who was ignorant of their pact . 
 While the plotters did not then have a detailed plan , Percy 's appointment on 9 June as a Gentleman Pensioner gave him a reason to establish a London base . Through Northumberland 's agents , Dudley Carleton and John Hippesley , he subleased a house in Westminster from Henry Ferrers , a tenant of John Whynniard , and installed Fawkes there as his servant , " John Johnson " . On 25 March 1605 Percy also obtained the lease for the undercroft directly underneath the first @-@ floor House of Lords . It was into this room that the plotters moved 36 barrels of gunpowder from Catesby 's lodgings on the opposite side of the River Thames . The plan was that during the State Opening of Parliament , at which the king and his ministers would be present , the plotters would blow up the House of Lords , killing all those within it . James 's daughter , Princess Elizabeth , would be captured during a Midlands uprising , and installed as a titular queen . 
 Percy spent that Autumn collecting Northumberland 's rents , while Catesby continued to enlist support . By October 1605 , he had 12 Catholic men assigned to his cause and was at work on the remaining details . Several conspirators expressed disquiet over the safety of fellow Catholics who might be caught in the planned explosion . Percy 's concern was for his patron , Northumberland , who it seems might have been made Lord Protector if the plot had succeeded . Lord Monteagle 's name was also mentioned , by a worried Francis Tresham . The fate of Elizabeth 's brother , Prince Henry , was uncertain ; although the plotters presumed that he would die with his father , they decided that if he did not attend Parliament , Percy should kidnap him . 
 = = Monteagle letter = = 
 On Saturday 26 October , at his house in Hoxton , Monteagle received an anonymous letter that warned him to stay away from Parliament . Uncertain of its meaning , he delivered it to Robert Cecil , 1st Earl of Salisbury . Cecil was already aware of certain stirrings , although he did not then know the exact nature of the plot or who exactly was involved . Instead of informing the king immediately , he decided to wait and watch what happened . Catesby 's reaction to news of the letter 's existence was somewhat different ; he and Wintour suspected Francis Tresham was its author and the two went to confront him . Tresham managed to convince them of his innocence , all the while urging them to abandon the plot . Percy reacted to the news by declaring that he was ready to " abide the uttermost trial " . He may have visited the infant Prince Charles on 1 November , indicating perhaps that some rearrangement of the plan was being considered . The deposition of a servant claimed that Percy visited the prince 's lodgings and " made many enquiries as to the way into his chamber " , although the statement came too late for Percy to comment on it . 
 Percy visited Northumberland at Syon House , west of London , on 4 November . Fraser suggests that his visit was a " fishing expedition " , to find out what , if anything , Northumberland had heard about the letter . This " expedition " later proved disastrous for the earl , who claimed that there was nothing treasonable about their conversation , and that Percy had merely asked him " whether he would command any service " before leaving . Percy then went to another of Northumberland 's properties , Essex House in London , and spoke with his nephew , Josceline . Later that evening he met with Wintour , John Wright and Robert Keyes , and assured them that all was well . He then travelled to his lodgings along Gray 's Inn Road , where he left orders for his horses to be made ready for an early departure the next morning . 
 = = Failure and death = = 
 By then , the king knew about the letter . James felt that it hinted at " some strategem of fire and powder " , perhaps an explosion exceeding in violence the one that killed his father , Lord Darnley , in 1567 . The following day , the Privy Council told him that they had decided to undertake a search of Parliament , " both above and below " . The first , headed by Thomas Howard , 1st Earl of Suffolk , was made on 4 November . In the undercroft beneath the House of Lords he noticed a tall man who appeared to be a servant , and a large pile of faggots — far too large to serve the small house Percy had subleased from Henry Ferrers . The house 's owner , John Whynniard , told the search party that its tenancy was held by Percy . Monteagle , present during the search , immediately told Suffolk that he suspected Percy was the letter 's author . The king ordered a second , more thorough search to be made , and at about midnight , Fawkes was discovered guarding the gunpowder , and was immediately arrested . 
 As Fawkes identified himself as John Johnson , servant to Thomas Percy , it was Percy 's name which appeared on the government 's first arrest warrant . It described him as a " tall , florid man , with a broad beard — ' the head more white then the beard ' — and stooping shoulders , being also ' long footed , small legged ' " . The celebrated astrologer Simon Forman was employed to divine his whereabouts , a rider was sent to look for him in northern England , and a search was made of Essex House . All of this was in vain , however , as Percy had been warned of Fawkes 's capture and had fled for the Midlands with Christopher Wright , telling a servant as he went , " I am undone . " The two men met Catesby and the others ( who had left for the Midlands uprising ) and continued on to Dunchurch , at one point throwing their cloaks off to increase their speed . A relative of Lieutenant of the Tower of London William Waad encountered Percy leaving London , which led to Waad writing the following letter to Salisbury on 5 November : 
 It may please your good lordship my cousin Sir Edward York , being lately come out of the north and coming this afternoon to me , upon speech of the happy discovery of this most monstrous plot , he <unk> me he met Thomas Percy , the party sought for , going down to the north disguised ... From the Tower in haste . 
 Accompanied by some of his fellow conspirators , Percy 's flight ended at about 10 : 00 pm on 7 November , at Holbeche House on the border of Staffordshire . He was unharmed by a gunpowder accident that injured Catesby and a few of the others , but those who remained resolved to wait for the arrival of government forces , who were only hours behind . Thus at 11 : 00 am the following morning the house was besieged by the Sheriff of Worcester , Richard Walsh , and his company of 200 men . In the ensuing firefight , Percy and Catesby were reportedly killed by the same musket ball , fired by a John Streete of Worcester . News of the battle soon reached London , rendering superfluous a government proclamation made on the same day and which offered a rich reward for his capture . The survivors were taken into custody and the dead buried near Holbeche , but on the orders of the Earl of Northampton , the bodies of Percy and Catesby were exhumed and their heads displayed on spikes at " the side of the Parliament House " . 
 With Thomas dead , there was nobody who could either implicate or clear Henry Percy of any involvement in the plot . His failure to ensure that Thomas took the Oath of Supremacy upon his appointment as a Gentleman Pensioner , and their meeting on 4 November , constituted damning evidence , and the Privy Council also suspected that had the plot succeeded , he would have been Princess Elizabeth 's protector . With insufficient evidence to convict him he was charged with contempt , fined £ 30 @,@ 000 and stripped of all public offices . He remained in the Tower until 1621 . 
 = Penélope Cruz = 
 Penélope Cruz Sánchez ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; born 28 April 1974 ) , known professionally as Penélope Cruz , is a Spanish actress and model . Signed by an agent at age 15 , she made her acting debut at 16 on television and her feature film debut the following year in Jamón , jamón ( 1992 ) to critical acclaim . Her subsequent roles in the 1990s and 2000s included Open Your Eyes ( 1997 ) , The Hi @-@ Lo Country ( 1999 ) , The Girl of Your Dreams ( 2000 ) and Woman on Top ( 2000 ) . Cruz achieved recognition for her lead roles in the 2001 films Vanilla Sky , All the Pretty Horses , Captain Corelli 's Mandolin and Blow . 
 She has since appeared in films in a range of genres , including the comedy Waking Up in Reno ( 2002 ) , the thriller Gothika ( 2003 ) , the Christmas film Noel ( 2004 ) , and the action adventure Sahara ( 2005 ) . She was critically acclaimed for her roles in Volver ( 2006 ) and Nine ( 2009 ) , receiving Golden Globe and Academy Award nominations for each . She won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in 2008 for playing María Elena in Vicky Cristina Barcelona . She was the first Spanish actress in history to receive an Academy Award and the first Spanish actress to receive a star at the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 Cruz has modelled for Mango , Ralph Lauren and L 'Oréal . Penélope and her younger sister Mónica Cruz have designed clothing for Mango . Cruz has volunteered in Uganda and India , where she spent one week working with Mother Teresa ; she donated her salary from The Hi @-@ Lo Country to help fund the late nun 's mission . 
 = = Early life = = 
 She was born in the working @-@ class town of <unk> , Madrid , Spain , to <unk> ( née Sánchez ) , a hairdresser and personal manager , and Eduardo Cruz , a retailer and car mechanic . She has two siblings , Monica , an actress , and Eduardo , Jr . She also has a paternal half @-@ sister , Salma . She was raised as a Roman Catholic . Cruz grew up in <unk> , and spent long hours at her grandmother 's apartment . She says she had a happy childhood . Cruz remembers " playing with some friends and being aware that I was acting as I was playing with them . I would think of a character and pretend to be someone else . " 
 Initially , Cruz focused on dance , having studied classical ballet for nine years at Spain 's National Conservatory . She took three years of Spanish ballet training and four years of theatre at Cristina Rota 's New York school . She says that ballet instilled in her discipline that would be important in her future acting career . When she became a cinephile at 10 or 11 , her father bought a Betamax machine , which was then a very rare thing to own in her neighborhood . She visited Yerevan with her cousin Jennifer to accept an award from President Sarkisian . 
 As a teenager , Cruz became interested in acting after seeing the film Tie Me Up ! Tie Me Down ! by Spanish director Pedro Almodóvar . She did casting calls for an agent but was rejected multiple times because the agent felt that she was too young . Cruz commented on the experience , " I was very extroverted as a kid .... I was studying when I was in high school at night , I was in ballet and I was doing castings . I looked for an agent and she sent me away three times because I was a little girl but I kept coming back . I 'm still with her after all these years . " In 1989 , at the age of 15 , Cruz won an audition at a talent agency over more than 300 other girls . In 1999 , Katrina <unk> , Cruz 's agent , commented , " She was absolutely magic [ at the audition ] . It was obvious there was something very impressive about this kid .... She was very green , but there was a presence . There was just something coming from within . " 
 Her father Eduardo died at his home in Spain in 2015 , aged 62 , due to heart attack . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early work , 1989 – 1996 = = = 
 In 1989 , 15 @-@ year @-@ old Cruz made her acting debut in a music video for the Spanish pop group Mecano 's song " La Fuerza del Destino " . Between 1990 and 1997 , she hosted the Spanish TV channel Telecinco 's talk show La Quinta Marcha , a programme that was hosted by teenagers , aimed at a teenage audience . She also played in the " Elle et lui " episode of an erotic French TV series called Série rose in 1991 , where she appeared nude . In 1992 , Cruz made her feature film debut at 18 as the lead female role in the comedy drama art house film , Jamón , jamón . In the film , she portrayed Silvia , a young woman who is expecting her first child with a man whose mother does not approve of the relationship and attempts to sabotage it by paying Javier Bardem 's character to seduce her . People magazine noted that after Cruz appeared topless in the film , she became " a major sex symbol " . In an interview with the Los Angeles Daily News in 1999 , Cruz commented that " it was a great part , but ... I wasn 't really ready for the nudity . [ ... ] But I have no regrets because I wanted to start working and it changed my life . " Charlie Rose of 60 Minutes noted that Cruz " became an overnight sensation as much for her nude scenes as for her talent " . When Rose asked Cruz if she was concerned about how she would be perceived after her role in the film , Cruz replied , " I just knew I had to do the complete opposite . " 
 Jamón , jamón received favorable reviews , with Chris Hicks of the Deseret News describing Cruz 's portrayal of Silvia as " enchanting " . Writing for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , film critic Roger Ebert wrote " it stars actors of considerable physical appeal , most particularly Penélope Cruz as Silvia " . For her performance , Cruz was nominated for a Spanish Actors Union Newcomer Award and a Goya Award for Best Actress . The same year she appeared in the Academy @-@ Award winning Belle <unk> as the virginal Luz . People magazine noted that Cruz 's role as Luz showed that she was versatile . From 1993 to 1996 , Cruz appeared in ten Spanish and Italian films . At 20 , she went to live in New York for two years at Christopher and Greenwich to study ballet and English between films . She recalls learning English " kind of late " only knowing the dialogue she had learned for the casting beyond that , she could only say , " How are you ? " and " Thank you . " 
 = = = Early critical success , 1997 – 2000 = = = 
 Cruz 's agent is <unk> Queally , shared with Cate Blanchett and Kate Winslet . In 1997 , Cruz appeared in the Spanish comedy film Love Can Seriously Damage Your Health . She portrays Diana , a fan of the Beatles band member John Lennon ; she tries unsuccessfully to meet him . Years later , after multiple failed relationships , Diana re @-@ unites with an acquaintance under unusual circumstances . Also in 1997 , she appeared in the opening scene of Pedro Almodóvar 's Live Flesh as a prostitute who gives birth on a bus and in Et <unk> af <unk> ( A Corner of Paradise ) as Doña Helena . Cruz 's final appearance in 1997 was the <unk> @-@ directed Spanish sci @-@ fi drama , " Abre Los Ojos " / Open Your Eyes . She plays Sofia , the love interest of Eduardo Noriega 's lead character . Open Your Eyes received positive reviews , and was later remade by U.S. director Cameron Crowe as " Vanilla Sky " ( who cast Cruz in the same role and Tom Cruise in Noriega 's role ) , but " Open Your Eyes " was not commercially successful . Kevin N. <unk> of the Montreal Film Journal commented in his September 2002 review that Cruz " has been getting some really bad reviews for her recent American work , but I personally think that she 's a more than decent actress , especially here , where she 's charming , moving and always believable . [ ... ] There 's one shot in particular , where Cruz enters a room in a greenish glow , which is right out of Hitchcock 's picture [ Vertigo ] . " 
 The following year , Cruz appeared in her first American film as Billy Crudup 's consolation @-@ prize Mexican girlfriend in Stephen Frears ' western film , The Hi @-@ Lo Country . Cruz stated that she had difficulties understanding people speaking English while she was filming The Hi @-@ Lo Country . The film was critically and commercially unsuccessful . Kevin Lally of the Film Journal International commented in his review for the film that " in an ironic casting twist , the Spanish actress Penélope Cruz [ ... ] is much more appealing as Josepha [ than in her previous roles ] " . For her performance in the film , she was nominated for an ALMA Award for Best Actress . Also in 1998 Cruz appeared in Don Juan and The Girl of Your Dreams . 
 In the period drama The Girl of Your Dreams ( La niña de <unk> ojos ) , Cruz portrayed Macarena Granada , a singer who is in an on @-@ and @-@ off relationship with Antonio <unk> 's character , Blas . They are part of a Francoist film troupe that travels from Spain during the Spanish Civil War to Nazi Germany for a joint production with UFA . Cruz 's performance in the film was praised by film critics , with Jonathan <unk> of Variety magazine writing " if confirmation is still needed that Cruz is an actress first and a pretty face second , then here it is " . A writer for Film4 commented that " Cruz herself is the inevitable focus of the film " but noted that overall the film " looks great " . Cruz 's role as <unk> has been viewed as her " largest role to date " . For her performance , Cruz received a Goya Award and Spanish Actors ' Union Award , and was nominated for a European Film Award . In 1999 , Cruz worked with Almodóvar again in All About My Mother , playing Sister María Rosa Sanz , a pregnant nun with AIDS . The film received favorable reviews , and was commercially successful , grossing over $ 67 million worldwide , although it performed better at the box office internationally than domestically . 
 In 2000 , she appeared in Woman on Top in the lead female role as Isabelle , a world @-@ class chef who has suffered from motion sickness since birth , her first American lead role . Lisa <unk> of Variety magazine praised the performances of both Cruz and her co @-@ star , Harold Perrineau , saying they " burst off the screen " , and added that Cruz has a charming accent . BBC News film critic Jane Crowther said that " Cruz is wonderfully ditzy as the innocent abroad " but remarked that " it 's Harold Perrineau Jr as Monica who pockets the movie " . Annlee Ellingson of Box Office magazine wrote " Cruz is stunning in the role — innocent and vulnerable yet possessing a mature grace and determined strength , all while sizzling with unchecked sensuality . " Also in 2000 , she played Alejandra Villarreal , who is Matt Damon 's love interest in Billy Bob Thornton 's film adaptation of the western bestselling novel , All the Pretty Horses . Susan Stark of the Detroit News commented that in the film Thornton was able to guide Damon , Henry Thomas and Cruz to " their most impressive performances in a major movie yet " . However , Bob <unk> of The Atlanta Journal Constitution was less enthusiastic about Cruz and Damon 's performance , saying that their " resulting onscreen chemistry would hardly warm a can of beans " . 
 = = = Breakthrough acting , 2001 – 2005 = = = 
 2001 marked a turning point year when Cruz starred in the feature films Vanilla Sky and Blow . In Vanilla Sky , Cameron Crowe 's interpretation of Open Your Eyes , she played Sofia Serrano , the love interest of Tom Cruise 's character . The film received mixed reviews but made $ 200 million worldwide . Her performance was well received by critics , with BBC film critic Brandon Graydon saying that Cruz " is an enchanting screen presence " , and Ethan Alter of the Film Journal International noting that Cruz and her co @-@ star Cruise were " able to generate some actual chemistry " . Her next film was Blow , adapted from Bruce Porter 's 1993 book Blow : How a Small Town Boy Made $ 100 million with the Medellín Cocaine Cartel and Lost It All . She had a supporting role as <unk> Jung , the wife of Johnny Depp 's character . The film received mixed reviews , but made $ 80 million worldwide . Nina <unk> of the Boston Phoenix described Cruz as " multi @-@ talented " and Mark Salvo of The Austin Chronicle wrote " I may be one of the last male holdouts to join the Cruz @-@ Rules camp , but her tour de force performance here sucks you right in . " 
 In 2001 , she also appeared in Don 't <unk> Me , playing Carmen Ramos . The film received negative reviews . Jeff Vice of the Deseret News commented that " unfortunately , casting Cruz as a tough girl is a hilariously bad [ idea ] " and Michael Miller of the Village Voice writing that " as Satan 's helper Carmen , Penélope Cruz doesn 't hold a candle to her cocaine @-@ huffing enabler in Blow " . Cruz 's last film in 2001 was Captain Corelli 's Mandolin , film adaption of the novel of the same name . She played Pelagia , who falls in love with another man while her fiancé is in battle during the Second World War . Captain Corelli 's Mandolin was not well received by critics , but made $ 62 million worldwide . In 2002 , she had a minor role in Waking Up in Reno . It had negative reviews and was a box office failure , making $ 267 @,@ 000 worldwide . The following year , Cruz had a supporting role in the horror film Gothika , as Chloe Sava , a patient at a mental hospital . David Rooney of Variety wrote that Cruz " adds a <unk> malevolent edge to <unk> 's apparent madness " . Cruz 's performance in <unk> la <unk> , also in 2003 , was not well received , Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian commenting that Cruz " deserves a special Cannes Razzie for a performance of purest teak " . 
 In 2004 , Cruz appeared in the Christmas film Noel as Nina , the girlfriend of Paul Walker 's character and as Mia in the romantic drama , Head in the Clouds , set in the 1930s . Head in the Clouds performed poorly at the box office . For Head in the Clouds , Bruce <unk> of Jam ! Canoe said , " The story feels forced and the performances dreary , with the notable exception of Cruz , who seems to be in a different film from the rest of the cast . " Desson Thompson of The Washington Post was more critical ; his comment about the character 's " pronounced limp " was that " Cruz ( hardly the world 's greatest actress ) can 't even perform without looking fake " . She also starred in Sergio Castellitto 's melodrama Don 't Move . Cruz , who learned Italian for the role , earned critical acclaim for her performance and won the David di Donatello . She was also awarded the European Film Award for Best Actress for the film in 2004 . In 2005 , Cruz appeared as Dr. Eva Rojas in the action adventure Sahara . She earned $ 1 @.@ 6 million for her supporting role . The film grossed $ 110 million worldwide but did not recoup its $ 160 million budget . Moviefone dubbed the film " one of the most famous flops in history " and in 2007 , listed it at 24 on its list of " Biggest Box @-@ Office Turkeys of All Time " . Lori Hoffman of the Atlantic City Weekly felt Cruz put her " considerable [ acting ] skills on cruise control as Dr Eva Rojas " and James <unk> of ReelViews described Cruz 's performance as a " black hole " , that she " lacks screen presence " . Also in 2005 , Cruz appeared in <unk> , screened at the 2005 Cannes Film Festival and released the following year . Mathew Turner of View London said Cruz 's character Gloria , a cancer @-@ riddled prostitute , is " actually more interesting than the main storyline " while Time Evan 's of Sky Movies wrote , " The Cruz / Ifans storyline — featuring the only two remotely sympathetic characters — never really fuses with the main plot . " Her final 2005 film was Don 't Move playing Italia . Eric Harrison of the Houston Chronicle noted that Cruz " goes all out " with her appearance and Patrick Peters of Empire magazine commented that the film 's director , who also appears in the film , was able to draw a " sensitive performance " from Cruz . 
 = = = Worldwide recognition , 2006 – 2009 = = = 
 Cruz appeared alongside her good friend Salma Hayek in the 2006 Western comedy film , <unk> . Randy Cordova of the Arizona Republic said the film " sports " Cruz and her co @-@ star Salma Hayek as the " lusty dream team " and that they were the " marketing fantasy " for the film . Also in 2006 , Cruz received favourable reviews for her performance as <unk> in Pedro Almodóvar 's Volver . Carina Chocano of The Los Angeles Times wrote , " Cruz , who has remarked that in Hollywood she 's rarely allowed to be anything more than pretty , instills her with an awesome resoluteness and strength of character . " She shared a Best Actress award at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival with five of her co @-@ stars , as well as receiving a Goya Award and European Film Award , and was nominated for the Golden Globe , the Screen Actors Guild Award , the BAFTA Award , and the Academy Award for Best Actress in a leading role . She was the first Spaniard to ever be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress . 
 In 2007 , Cruz appeared in the lead female role in <unk> , a biopic of bullfighter Manuel Laureano Rodríguez Sánchez , playing <unk> " Lupe " Sino . She also appeared in The Good Night , playing two characters , Anna and Melody . TV Guide film critic Maitland McDonagh noted that in the film Cruz " expertly mines the contrast between chic , compliant , white @-@ clad Anna and funky , street @-@ wise Melody , who treats [ Martin Freeman 's character ] Gary like the world @-@ class drag he is " . In 2008 , Cruz appeared in Isabel <unk> 's film Elegy , which was based on the Philip Roth story The Dying Animal , as the lead female role , Consuela Castillo . Ray Bennett of The Hollywood Reporter described Cruz 's performance as being " outstanding in an otherwise lame male fantasy [ film ] " . Later that year , she starred in Woody Allen 's Vicky Cristina Barcelona as María Elena , a mentally unstable woman , which was praised . Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian praised Cruz 's performance in the film . Cruz received a Goya Award and her first Academy Award and BAFTA Award for Best Supporting Actress . She also received a Golden Globe and SAG nomination . Cruz was the first Spanish actress to ever be awarded an Academy Award in that category and the sixth Hispanic person to ever receive the award . 
 After being shelved since 2007 , Cruz 's film <unk> ( originally shot in 2005 ) released on demand via cable , satellite , <unk> and online in June 7 , 2011 under the title A Matador 's Mistress . 
 Cruz 's next film was the kid @-@ friendly G @-@ Force voicing a guinea pig spy named Juarez . G @-@ Force was a commercial success , making over $ 290 million worldwide . Also in 2009 , she appeared in the film Broken Embraces as Lena . Stephanie Zacharek of Salon.com noted in her review for the film that Cruz " doesn 't coast on her beauty in Broken Embraces , and she has the kind of role that can be difficult to flesh out " . Cruz received nominations from the Satellite Awards and European Film Awards for her performance in Broken Embraces . Cruz 's final 2009 film was the film version of the musical Nine , playing the character Carla Albanese , the lead character 's mistress . Variety reported that Cruz had originally auditioned for the role of the film within a film 's star , Claudia , which eventually went to Nicole Kidman . Cruz said that she trained for three months for the dance routine in the film . Claudia Puig of USA Today commented that while Cruz " does a steamy song and dance " , her " acting is strangely caricatured " . Cruz 's performance as Carla garnered her nominations for Best Supporting Actress from the Academy Awards , Golden Globes and SAG Awards . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 Cruz only film of 2010 Sex and the City 2 , the sequel to the 2008 film , in which she appeared as a banker in a cameo role . A commercial success , the comedy film was largely panned by critics . Cruz appeared in her biggest Hollywood turn to date in Rob Marshall 's Pirates of the Caribbean : On Stranger Tides , the fourth installment in the film series , opposite Johnny Depp . In the film , Cruz portrayed Angelica , a former love interest of Jack Sparrow , who blames him for her corruption . Cruz was the only actress considered for the role , as she fit Marshall 's description and invited her for the role as they wrapped the production of Nine . The actress spent two months working out and learning fencing for the role . During filming , Cruz discovered she was pregnant , leading the costume department to redesign her wardrobe to be more elastic , and the producers to hire her sister Mónica Cruz to double for Penélope in risky scenes . One of the most expensive film ever made , On Stranger Tides ranks among the highest @-@ grossing film of all time , grossing more than $ $ 1 @.@ 046 billion in box @-@ office receipts worldwide . On 1 April 2011 , prior to the film 's release , Cruz received the <unk> star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in front of the El Capitan Theatre . She became the first Spanish actress to receive a Star . 
 In 2012 , Cruz appeared in the first ever Nintendo commercial to promote New Super Mario Bros. 2 and the Nintendo 3DS XL in which she played the role of Mario in the ad . She spoke Italian again , this time in Woody Allen 's romantic ensemble comedy film To Rome with Love , in which she portrayed a street @-@ smart prostitute who agrees to pretend to be the wife of a newlywed . Fond to work with her again , Allen compared Cruz 's play in the film with that of Italian icons Anna Magnani and Sophia Loren . While the film garnered mixed reviews in general , Cruz received favourable reviews for her " exuberantly , cartoonishly sexy " performance , which reviewers such as The Week cited as a stand out . The same year , Cruz also reunited with Italian director Sergio Castellitto in his war tale Twice Born about an infertile Italian woman who returns to relive her past in Sarajevo . An adaptation of Castellitto 's wife Margaret <unk> 's same @-@ titled bestseller , Cruz portrayed the transitional character at different phases in her life , ranging from her early twenties to her late forties . Despite receiving little praise from critics , Cruz 's performance opposite Emile Hirsch earned positive reviews . 
 In 2013 , Cruz appeared in Ridley Scott 's The Counselor , featuring an ensemble cast consisting of Michael Fassbender , Cameron Diaz , Brad Pitt and husband Javier Bardem . The crime thriller follows a lawyer who , tempted by the lure of quick money , finds himself involved in drug dealing with ruthless Mexican cartels . Cruz plays his girlfriend , Laura , the only innocent character in the story . The film received mostly negative reviews from critics and became a moderate commercial success at the international box offices . The same year , Cruz along with Antonio Banderas made a cameo appearance in Pedro Almodóvar 's farcical comedy I 'm So Excited , which marked a return to the director 's light , campy comedies of the 1980s and 1990s . " 
 In 2015 , Cruz co @-@ produced and starred in the Spanish drama film Ma Ma , directed by Julio Medem . In it , she plays Magda , a gutsy mother and unemployed teacher , who is diagnosed with breast cancer , a role which Cruz later cited as " one of the most complex , beautiful characters I 've ever been offered , the most difficult . " The melodrama was screened in the Special Presentations section of the 2015 Toronto International Film Festival , where it garnered generally negative reviews for its weepie story line . Cruz however was praised for her " aces performance , " which earned her an eighth Goya nomination at the 30th awards ceremony . 
 Cruz 's first film of 2016 was the American comedy Zoolander 2 , co @-@ starring and directed by Ben Stiller . In the sequel film , Cruz portrayed a secret Interpol agent who enlists models Derek Zoolander ( Stiller ) and Hansel McDonald , played by Owen Wilson , to help find out who is killing the world ’ s most beautiful people . Specifically written for her persona , Cruz , a fan of the original 2001 film , was one of the first actors to be cast in their parts . Upon its release , the film received generally negative reviews from critics , who felt that it had " more celebrity cameos than laughs . " Cruz 's other film that year was Louis Leterrier 's British spy comedy Grimsby , in which she played a powerful philanthropist , opposite Sacha Baron Cohen and Mark Strong . Cruz was reportedly offered $ 400 @,@ 000 for her appearance in the film , which was released to generally mixed reviews from critics , who felt that the actress was highly underused and " looking even less invested here than she did in Zoolander 2 . " 
 As of March 2016 , Cruz has various film projects in different states of production . She has reteamed with Fernando Trueba on his Spanish @-@ language period pic The Queen of Spain , a sequel to Trueba 's 1998 drama The Girl of Your Dreams , also starring Cruz and set during the Spanish Civil War . She has also signed on to appear in Fernando León de <unk> 's Pablo Escobar biopic Escobar , also starring husband Javier Bardem , and will start work with Iranian director Asghar Farhadi 's on his second foreign film in fall 2016 . 
 = = Public image = = 
 In 2006 , Cruz became spokesmodel for French cosmetics company L 'Oréal to promote products such as the L 'Oréal Paris hair dye Natural Match and L 'Oreal mascara products . She receives $ 2 million a year for her work for the company . Cruz has appeared in print ads for Mango and had a contract with Ralph Lauren in 2001 . Cruz and her sister designed their second collection for Mango in 2007 . It was inspired by Brigitte Bardot and summers in St Tropez . 
 Cruz ranked as No. 58 in Maxim 's " Hot 100 " of 2007 list , and was chosen by Empire magazine as being one of the 100 Sexiest Movie Stars in the world . Cruz was also ranked on <unk> 's Most Desirable Women of 2008 at No. 26 , in 2009 at No. 25 , and in 2010 at No. 7 . In April 2010 , she replaced Kate Winslet as the new face and ambassador of Lancôme 's Trésor fragrance . Lancôme has signed Cruz as the brand 's third superstar spokesmodel , along with Julia Roberts and Winslet . The campaign was shot by Mario Testino at Paris 's Hotel de <unk> and debuted in the autumn of 2010 . 
 In 2010 , Cruz was a guest editor for the French Vogue magazine , focusing on larger @-@ size models in a provocative photo shoot . Almodóvar described her as his muse . On the cover of Spanish Vogue 's December 2010 issue , she agreed to be photographed by fashion photographer Peter Lindbergh only if her pregnancy was not shown . In 2011 , The Telegraph reported the most sought after body parts of the rich and famous revealed by two Hollywood plastic surgeons who carried out a survey among their patients to build up the picture of the perfect woman . Under the category of the most sought after body shape , Penélope Cruz , known for her voluptuous figure , was voted as having the top body . Men 's Health ranked her at No. 32 @.@ on their " 100 Hottest Women of All @-@ Time " list . Esquire named her the Sexiest Woman Alive in 2014 . 
 During the 2014 Israel – Gaza conflict , Cruz along with her husband signed an open letter , denouncing Israel 's actions as a " genocide " . a letter that was criticized by several Hollywood personalities including actor Jon Voight . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Cruz has donated money and time to charity . In addition to work in Nepal , she has volunteered in Uganda and India , where she spent a week working with Mother Teresa that included assisting in a leprosy clinic . That trip inspired Cruz to help start a foundation to support homeless girls in India , where she sponsors two young women . She donated her salary from her first Hollywood film , The Hi @-@ Lo Country , to Mother Teresa 's mission . In the early 2000s , she spent time in Nepal photographing Tibetan children for an exhibition attended by the Dalai Lama . She also photographed residents at the Pacific Lodge Boys ' Home , most of whom are former gang members and recovering substance abusers . She said : " These kids break my heart . I have to control myself not to cry . Not out of pity , but seeing how tricky life is and how hard it is to make the right choices . " A pregnant Cruz showed her support for the battle against AIDS by lighting up the Empire State Building with red lights in New York City on 1 December 2010 on International AIDS Day , as part of ( RED ) ' s new awareness campaign , ' An AIDS Free Generation is Due in 2015 , ' which aims to eradicate the HIV virus from pregnant mothers to their babies . In 2012 , she posed for an ad supporting PETA 's anti @-@ fur campaign . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cruz is married to Spanish actor Javier Bardem . Bardem was her co @-@ star in her first breakthrough role as Silvia in Jamon , Jamon as well as starring alongside her in Vicky Cristina Barcelona . They were also both in the 2013 film The Counselor . Cruz began dating Bardem in 2007 and they married in early July 2010 in a private ceremony at a friend 's home in the Bahamas . They have a son born in 2011 in Los Angeles , and a daughter born in 2013 . She has become a public advocate of breastfeeding since the birth of her children . 
 Cruz had a three @-@ year relationship with Tom Cruise after they appeared together in Vanilla Sky . It ended in January 2004 . In April 2003 , she filed a lawsuit against the Australian magazine New Idea for defamation over an article about her relationship with Cruise . 
 Cruz is a friend of Spanish director Pedro Almodóvar , whom she has known for more than two decades and with whom she has worked on films . She is known to friends as Pe . Cruz owns a clothing store in Madrid and designed jewelry and handbags with her younger sister for a company in Japan . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Dissidia Final Fantasy = 
 Dissidia Final Fantasy ( ディシディア ファイナルファンタジー , <unk> Fainaru Fantajī ) is a fighting game with action RPG elements developed and published by Square Enix for the PlayStation Portable as part of the campaign for the Final Fantasy series ' 20th anniversary . It was released in Japan on December 18 , 2008 , in North America on August 25 , 2009 , in Australia on September 3 , 2009 and in Europe on September 4 , 2009 . It was then re @-@ released as an international version in Japan , based on the North American port , as Dissidia Final Fantasy : Universal Tuning , on November 1 , 2009 . 
 The game features characters from different Final Fantasy games and centers on a great conflict between Cosmos , goddess of harmony , and Chaos , the god of discord . The two summon multiple warriors to fight for their sides in their thirteenth war . During the story , the player controls the ten warriors chosen by Cosmos , the protagonists from the first ten Final Fantasy games , in their journey . The game 's English and international versions also give access to other features such an arcade mode . 
 Dissidia originated from Kingdom Hearts director Tetsuya Nomura 's desire to create a spin @-@ off for the franchise , but it was changed to the Final Fantasy series . Besides designing the characters , Nomura worked with the Square staff with the desire to make it appealing to Western players . Dissidia was well received commercially and critically , with positive reviews and sales of over 1 @.@ 8 million . A follow @-@ up titled Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy was released in March 2011 , and features several new characters and gameplay features . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dissidia Final Fantasy 's genre has been described as " dramatic progressive action " and its graphics are in three dimensions . It has wireless one @-@ on @-@ one multiplayer and fights revolving around the use of individual special skills of characters to do damage to opponents . Players can also customize their characters with equipment . 
 Character movement is fully functional within the three @-@ dimensional field map . Characters are able to perform special maneuvers using the environment by pressing the Triangle button . Traps with a variety of ill effects can be found throughout the arena . Characters ' equipment can be customized , and they can gain EXP and gil from battles . 
 Similar to many fighting games , the aim is for the player to reduce their opponent 's HP to zero . A character 's offensive ( and , to a lesser extent , defensive ) power is shown in numerical form called BRV or " Bravery Points " . Both characters start out with a set amount of BRV , and each must reduce their health to 0 by attacking them with a HP attack . Players can steal BRV from their opponent by attacking them with the basic " BRV attack " to add it to their own total and gain the upper hand . Players can then use the " HP attack " to cause direct damage to their opponent ; HP damage is equal to the player 's current amount of Bravery . However , once an HP attack is used , the character 's own BRV is reduced to 0 and then slowly recovers to its starting amount . A character whose BRV total has been depleted ( past 0 BRV and into the negatives ) is forced into " Break mode " , where , aside from not being able to cause HP and BRV damage ( But being able to gain BRV ) , all attacks made against them cause critical damage and the opponent gets all of the BRV in the " Bravery Pool " ( a number that can be seen at the bottom of the screen ) , massively boosting their BRV amount . 
 One main feature of the combat system is the " EX Gauge " , which can be filled in a variety of ways , such as inflicting damage on opponents , taking damage from opponents , and obtaining EX cores scattered around the field of play . Once the EX Gauge is filled , the character can enter their " EX Mode " , significantly increasing their power and enabling new attacks , including the " EX Burst " , an unavoidable and very damaging special attack similar to the Limit Break mechanic seen in many games in the series . The player on the offense charges up the attack by following the on @-@ screen instructions , while the player on the defense can reduce the amount of damage taken by continuously pressing the circle button . Once the EX Burst is executed , EX Mode ends . 
 In a gameplay mode exclusive to Western releases , the Arcade mode converts the game in a traditional fighting game , with all RPG elements removed and characters ' abilities being stripped down to the basics to balance the playing field . Within the Arcade Mode , there are three tiers : Normal , Hard , and Time Attack ; beating any tier of the Arcade mode will reward the player with PP ( player points ) and special items that can be used in story mode . All characters , including villains , are playable in Arcade mode ; for example , Golbez , Sephiroth , Kuja , and Jecht are available for use in this mode from the start , but they still need to be bought via the PP Catalog for use in other modes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 The story revolves around two gods : Cosmos ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the goddess of harmony , and Chaos , the god of discord . The game unites both protagonists and antagonists from installments of the main Final Fantasy series , their stories narrated by the first Final Fantasy game 's Cid of the <unk> . Other than the gods and their champions , the player also deals with crystal @-@ like doppelgangers called Manikins . The game has an overarching storyline that requires playing through all of the characters to complete . The game contains twenty @-@ two total playable characters : ten heroes and ten villains , one of each representing Final Fantasy through Final Fantasy X , and two secret characters : a heroine representing Final Fantasy XI , and a villain representing Final Fantasy XII . Initially , only the ten main heroes are playable in all gameplay modes ; the ten main villains are playable in Arcade mode , but must still be unlocked for access in all other gameplay modes . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The gods Cosmos and Chaos have been locked in eternal conflict with " World B " , a mirror dimension to the realm of " World A " where the first Final Fantasy takes place , summoning several warriors from other worlds from the main series to battle in a never @-@ ending cycle of death and rebirth until the balance is tipped in favor of Chaos . As the war seems to be nearing its end , the ten warriors of Cosmos band together to strike back at Chaos 's minions and restore balance . Having lost much of her power in the previous cycle , Cosmos gives her ten warriors — Warrior of Light , Firion , Onion Knight , Cecil , Bartz , Terra , Cloud , Squall , Zidane , and Tidus — the task of retrieving the ten crystals that will help them defeat Chaos . They each set out on a journey called a " Destiny Odyssey , " where their respective stories are told and interlink with one another . During their " Destiny Odysseys , " the heroes encounter their personal villains , defeating them through epiphanies about themselves that help them obtain their crystals . 
 Following the " Destiny Odysseys " is the " Shade Impulse , " where all ten warriors are in possession of their crystals , but arrive too late to save Cosmos , who is killed by Chaos . The heroes begin to fade away , but are saved by the power of the crystals , allowing them to use what time they have left to strike back against the villains and defeat Chaos once and for all . In the end , the other warriors leave World A for their own worlds , the Warrior of Light embarks on another adventure , and Cosmos revives to reign over World B. 
 The game also features two other storylines with " Distant Glory " where <unk> and Gabranth are introduced to the player in two different areas where they are trapped and have to find a way out . The other <unk> , " Inward Chaos " , serves as an alternate scenario in which Chaos has never been defeated and the player is guided by an entity known as <unk> to defeat Chaos . 
 = = Development = = 
 Dissidia Final Fantasy was originally envisioned by producer Tetsuya Nomura as a Kingdom Hearts spin @-@ off featuring a cast of Disney characters while the Square Enix staff were developing Kingdom Hearts II . Nomura later felt uncomfortable with the Disney characters fighting each other and instead opted to use Final Fantasy characters , although the original idea eventually gave rise to the development of Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days , with the game 's multiplayer mode inspired by Dissidia 's gameplay . The game was made in <unk> of the franchise 's 20th anniversary and despite being handled by young employees , Nomura noticed there was no pressure , having assisted them in the designing various areas from the gameplay . The game was directed by Takeshi Arakawa whom Nomura noted that his experience in a previous Square Enix game , The World Ends With You , had a good effect in the game . In order to have their desired way of fighting , the team chose the PlayStation Portable console . There were plans for online play but the console 's capacities made them unable to add such feature . Developing the game took three years due with the battle system requiring two years and the RPG mode one . 
 Deciding the Final Fantasy heroes was easy for the staff with the exception of Terra Branford . While her game , Final Fantasy VI , features multiple characters with that fit the role of main character , Terra was chosen in the end so that there would a female fighter in Cosmos ' side . For villains , they decided to include warriors who had a strong rivalry with the heroes rather than the games ' final bosses . This resulted in the inclusion of non @-@ final bosses such as Final Fantasy IV 's Golbez , Final Fantasy IX 's Kuja and Final Fantasy X 's Jecht who were connected with their games ' leads , Cecil Harvey , Zidane Tribal and Tidus , respectively . Shantotto from Final Fantasy XI was used based on her popularity , while Gabranth was used to represent Final Fantasy XII in Balthier 's place as the latter had already been featured in Final Fantasy Tactics : War of the Lions and Square wanted his inclusion to surprise gamers . Other characters meant to have been featured were Final Fantasy IV 's Kain Highwind and Final Fantasy XIII 's Lightning . Following the game 's positive reception by gamers in Japan that surpassed Nomura 's expectations , he already had in mind several new ideas for a sequel , and wished to feature Kain in it . 
 Nomura was responsible for the character designs , which changed much of the look and style of Yoshitaka Amano 's illustrations . Working in the Final Fantasy and Final Fantasy IX designs brought no difficulties since in for the former game , Nomura based his designs on Amano 's illustrations while he had already been involved in handling his illustrations in the latter . On the other hand , Nomura had difficulties making Onion Knight as it ended being too cartoony and requested advice from Amano . Nomura 's own original illustrations were also redesigned for Dissidia ; Nomura commented to the Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu that Tidus was designed to look younger than he was in Final Fantasy X to " match the design touch of the rest of the Dissidia " cast . 
 On April 6 , 2007 , Square Enix filed for United States trademark registration of " <unk> " ; the mark 's relation to Final Fantasy was omitted . The title was connected with Final Fantasy when Square Enix introduced Dissidia Final Fantasy on May 8 , 2007 with an official Japanese website . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Dissidia Final Fantasy Original Soundtrack by Takeharu Ishimoto was released on December 24 , 2008 , and is available in both regular and special editions , similar to the game itself . Most tracks are often remixes done by Ishimoto of past Final Fantasy music originally composed by Nobuo Uematsu . 
 The main theme of the game is " The Messenger " by Your Favorite Enemies . The tracks " Cosmos " and " Chaos - Last Battle 1 " are also performed by Your Favorite Enemies . " The Messenger " is the main theme song of the game , with lyrics from both " Cosmos " and " Chaos - Last Battle 1 . " " Cosmos " features female vocals , while " Chaos " is dominated by male vocals . In <unk> 's documentary on the conception of the songs for Dissidia , lyricist and vocalist Alex Foster admitted that the lyrics have no direct connection to themes of the game ; rather , he left it up to the listeners to interpret the lyrics based on their own thoughts and ideas . 
 Tracklist 
 = = Release and merchandise = = 
 For the western localization , the Square Enix staff used analysis from their subsidiary companies in London and Los Angeles to readjust the game for Western audiences . Director Takeshi Arakawa and producer Yoshinori Kitase announced that the release date for the western world would be August 25 , 2009 ( starting in North America ) , and that it will include a number of small changes , including re @-@ adjustments in gameplay , new gameplay events , an arcade gameplay mode , a shortened tutorial , new moves for playable characters , and extra cutscenes featuring cameos from several other characters from the main characters ' original games that do not appear in the Japanese version . Arakawa referred to the Western version as a more action @-@ based game than the original Japanese version which was more RPG @-@ based . 
 For the Dissidia Final Fantasy US release , <unk> released the game with two additional covers for anyone who reserved it before it came out . On August 24 , 2009 , it was announced that there would be an international version of the game . Named Dissidia Final Fantasy : Universal Tuning ( ディシディア ファイナルファンタジー <unk> ) , this revision of the game would be a direct port of the North American version of the game , retaining all the extra features added , and was released in Japan on November 1 , 2009 . Both English and Japanese voices are available in battle , with the player deciding which language the characters will speak . 
 SCEA later announced a Dissidia Final Fantasy @-@ themed PSP bundle , which included a " Mystic Silver " PSP system , a copy of Dissidia Final Fantasy , a 2GB memory stick , and a copy of Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children . It was also released on August 25 , 2009 . 
 Studio BentStuff published the Dissidia Final Fantasy Ultimania α as the initial reference guide for the game . Released on December 4 , 2008 , this book became part of the Ultimania series , which includes the Kingdom Hearts Ultimania α . Suntory Ltd. also collaborated with Square Enix to create the " Dissidia Final Fantasy Potion " drinks which were released on December 9 , 2008 in Japan to promote the game 's release . 
 Square Enix released a line of Trading Arts figures in early 2009 with Series 1 containing Cloud Strife , Squall Leonhart , Zidane Tribal , Tidus , and the Warrior of Light . A second series was later released featuring Sephiroth , Terra , Bartz , Firion , and Cecil . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Dissidia sold well according to Takeshi Arakawa , despite concerns about piracy . As of August 17 , 2009 , Dissidia Final Fantasy has sold 910 @,@ 000 copies in Japan , making it the fourth best @-@ selling game for the PSP in Japan . It was the 12th best @-@ selling game in Japan in 2008 , selling 660 @,@ 262 copies . In the United States , Dissidia debuted at the 7th place of the August 2009 charts with 130 @,@ 000 copies , despite only four days of availability . Figures from the NPD Group list Dissidia Final Fantasy as the best @-@ selling PSP game of 2009 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Dissidia was well received by the Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu with individual scores of 9 / 9 / 10 / 8 , earning the game a place in its " Best Picks of This Week " feature as well as its " Platinum Hall of Fame . " The game 's battle system was described as fast paced and exhilarating , with simple controls capable of producing battles like those found in Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , though it was noted that the action can become difficult to follow when things got hectic and that some of the more technical aspects of the game can be hard to grasp . The game was also praised for its story and cutscenes , with one reviewer noting that the history was " exacting " . 
 The game also enjoyed positive reviews by American critics . 1UP.com and GameSpot praised the fighting system and visuals , with the latter commenting on the mix of RPG and action gameplay . The story received mixed reactions , as GameSpot stated that it would only interest fans of the franchise , while <unk> enjoyed its references to previous games . <unk> called the game " one of the few must @-@ have games for the PSP . " Game Informer was critical , claiming the story and gameplay were too similar to past Final Fantasy titles and would turn off new players . 
 In the Best of E3 2009 , Dissidia was awarded " Best Fighting Game " by IGN . Dissidia also received awards from Famitsu and in the Japan Game Awards 2008 . In 2010 , the game was included as one of the titles in the book 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 A follow up to Dissidia titled Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy was released in March 2011 for the PlayStation Portable . Since Dissidia had a concrete ending , the team decided to make the story a prequel . Tetsuya Nomura stated that there would be no more Dissidia games following Dissidia 012 although the series may continue " in another form " since the team already believed they did enough with the fighting genre . The main story of Dissidia also served as a basis for the 2012 rhythm game Theatrhythm Final Fantasy for the Nintendo 3DS also uses multiple characters from the Final Fantasy series . In 2013 , Ichiro <unk> stated that he and much of the team intended to make a third Dissidia title , but did not mention possible platforms . In February 2015 at Japan Amusement Expo ( <unk> ) , a gameplay teaser trailer was unveiled for a new game titled Dissidia Final Fantasy , coming to arcades in Japan . Unlike the previous Dissidia titles , this game will feature <unk> combat , as well as adding new playable characters such as Y ’ <unk> and Ramza Beoulve . 
 = Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption = 
 Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption is a first @-@ person action @-@ adventure game developed by Retro Studios and published by Nintendo for the Wii video game console . It is the 9th game in the Metroid series , and the final entry in the Metroid Prime trilogy — excluding two spin @-@ off titles . It was released in North America and Europe in 2007 , and in Japan the following year . The Wii Remote and Nunchuk devices are featured in a new control scheme that took a year to develop and caused the game 's release to be delayed several times . 
 The story of Corruption is set six months after the events of Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes , and follows bounty hunter Samus Aran as she assists the Galactic Federation in its fight against the Space Pirates . While fending off a Space Pirate assault , Samus and her fellow bounty hunters are attacked by her doppelgänger , Dark Samus , who incapacitates them with a mutagenic material called Phazon . After losing contact with the other hunters , the Federation sends Samus on a mission to determine what happened to them . During the course of the game , Samus works to prevent the Phazon from spreading from planet to planet while being slowly corrupted by the Phazon herself . 
 The game was first shown to the public at the E3 2005 trade show . Reception to Corruption has been positive , with several reviews specifically praising the gameplay . More than one million copies of the game were sold in 2007 . It was re @-@ released as part of Metroid Prime : Trilogy , a Wii compilation of the three main games of the Prime series with Wii Remote controls . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption is a first @-@ person action @-@ adventure game . The player controls the protagonist , Samus Aran , using the Wii Remote and Nunchuk devices . The Nunchuk enables the player to perform actions such as moving Samus and locking on to enemies and targets . The Wii Remote allows the player to execute actions such as jumping , aiming , and firing weapons . 
 Corruption is a large , open @-@ ended game that takes place across several planets , each with regions connected by elevators , rail systems , and bridges . Each region has rooms separated by doors that can be opened when shot with the correct weapon . The gameplay revolves around solving puzzles to uncover secrets , jumping on platforms , and shooting enemies with the help of a " lock @-@ on " mechanism that allows Samus to move in a circle while staying aimed on an enemy . The game uses a first @-@ person view , except in Morph Ball mode , in which Samus 's suit transforms into an armored ball and the game uses a third @-@ person camera . The third person camera is also used in conjunction with the Screw Attack power @-@ up : in this case Samus 's suit emits strange energy waves as she performs a continuous jump . 
 The game 's heads @-@ up display simulates the inside of Samus ' helmet , and features a radar , map , ammunition gauge and health meter . The player can change visors to enable new abilities such as X @-@ ray vision , collecting information on many items , creatures and enemies , and interfacing with certain mechanisms such as force fields and elevators . Corruption also includes a hint system that periodically displays on @-@ screen instructions and navigation assistance . The game also has the addition of the Hypermode , a feature in which health is drained to give temporary invincibility and more powerful attacks . Excessive usage of the Hypermode leads into Corrupt Hypermode , that if not stopped leads to a non @-@ standard game over due to Samus being overtaken by Phazon . Another new feature is the Command Visor , which allows Samus to summon remotely her gunship from a suitable landing site to save the game , or travel to another destination quickly . During the progress of the game , new abilities can be obtained to allow it to perform aerial attacks against enemy targets and transport heavy objects . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The events in Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption take place six months after Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes . The game 's protagonist , Samus Aran , is a bounty hunter hired to assist the Galactic Federation during its ongoing conflict with the Space Pirates . After facing initial defeat on the planet Zebes during the events of the first Metroid title , the Space Pirates sought to gain power by using a newly discovered mutagen called Phazon . However , Samus managed to disrupt their operations throughout the Prime trilogy and ultimately allowed the Galactic Federation to confiscate and replicate their Phazon armaments . 
 The Space Pirates ' operation was left in disarray following defeat in Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes . In their desperation , they turned to Dark Samus , Samus 's sinister doppelgänger , for aid . Dark Samus strengthened the Space Pirates ' forces , while also slowly indoctrinating them into mindless servants . Their combined forces seek to corrupt the universe with Phazon by first executing a series of methodical attacks on three Federation planets : Norion , <unk> , and Elysia . The game is primarily centered on these planets and three other locations that become accessible after completing certain in @-@ game tasks . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption begins with a meeting between Samus , three other bounty hunters , and Admiral Dane , leader of the Galactic Federation fleet . The bounty hunters , including Samus , receive orders to clear a computer virus from several organic supercomputers called " Aurora Units " , located throughout the galaxy . Suddenly , the meeting ends abruptly when Space Pirates attack the Federation fleet . Samus and the other bounty hunters are deployed to the planet Norion , where the Space Pirates are concentrating an attack on a Federation naval base . While suppressing the attack , Samus learns that a Phazon asteroid , called a Leviathan Seed , will soon collide into Norion . Samus and the other bounty hunters attempt to activate the base 's defense systems , when they are suddenly attacked by a newly armored Dark Samus . With the other bounty hunters knocked out , a severely wounded Samus manages to activate the system just in time to destroy the Leviathan Seed before she falls unconscious . 
 A month later , Samus awakens aboard a Galactic Federation starship , where she learns that Dark Samus 's Phazon @-@ based attacks have corrupted her . The Federation equips her with a Phazon Enhancement Device ( PED ) that enables her to harness the Phazon energy within herself . She is informed that her fellow bounty hunters , also corrupted with Phazon and equipped with PEDs , have gone missing during their missions to investigate several planets embedded with Leviathan Seeds . Samus is first sent to the planet <unk> and later Elysia to determine what happened to her missing comrades . She soon discovers that both planets and their inhabitants are slowly being corrupted by the Leviathan Seeds ; and that she must destroy the seeds to reverse this . 
 Samus encounters heavy resistance from the Space Pirates , Phazon @-@ corrupted monstrosities , and her fellow bounty hunters who have been corrupted by Dark Samus . Throughout her mission , which eventually takes her to the Space Pirate homeworld , Samus slowly becomes further Phazon @-@ corrupted . She manages to stop the Space Pirate assault with the assistance of the Galactic Federation Navy . The fleet then warps to the planet Phaaze , the source of all Phazon in the galaxy . Samus travels to its core , where she finally defeats Dark Samus , then the corrupted Aurora Unit 313 . As a result , Dark Samus is obliterated , Phaaze is destroyed , and all Phazon in the galaxy is rendered inert . At the end of the game , if the player collects 100 percent of the upgrades , Samus is seen flying into hyperspace with Sylux 's spaceship following her . 
 = = Development = = 
 Retro Studios intended to give Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption larger environments than Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes , and enable the game to run at 60 frames per second . The developers were also interested in using the WiiConnect24 feature to provide additional content for the game that would be accessible from the Internet . Retro announced that Corruption would be the final chapter of the Prime series and would have a plot " about closure , told against the backdrop of an epic struggle " . After the Wii Remote was revealed , Nintendo demonstrated how Metroid Prime 3 would take advantage of the controller 's special abilities with a version of Echoes modified for the Wii and shown at the Tokyo Game Show in 2005 . 
 The title Corruption and some of the first gameplay footage were revealed at Nintendo 's Media Release at the E3 2006 trade show . Iwata said he hoped Corruption would launch with the Wii in November 2006 , but a few months later the game was delayed to 2007 . In April 2007 , Nintendo of America President Reggie Fils @-@ Aime stated in an interview that Corruption was " not going to ship by June " and set it at a summer 2007 release date at the earliest . Later he opined , " when we release it , it will be perfect . And if that 's a little later than folks would have liked , I 'm hoping they 're going to be happy . " In late April 2007 , IGN editor Matt Casamassina revealed that Corruption would be shown in detail during May of that year , and that the game would be released on August 20 , 2007 , in the United States . Nintendo of America later announced to have moved the release date to August 27 , 2007 , but Nintendo finally announced an " in stores " date of August 28 , 2007 . The game was released in Europe on October 26 , 2007 . At the Media Summit held by Nintendo during the week of May 21 , 2007 , Reggie Fils @-@ Aime said that Metroid games " never played this way before " when referring to Corruption . He also noted that Nintendo employees who had seen the game in action claimed that it " will reinvent the control scheme for a first @-@ person shooter " . 
 Game director Mark Pacini stated that the biggest concern Retro had during production was the controls , which had " too many functions for the amount of buttons " . Pacini also said the Wii <unk> , a gun shell peripheral , was never considered because it was announced when the game 's development was almost done . Retro president Michael Kelbaugh said that the delays for the game 's release gave them more time to tune the controller , which took a year . He also stated that while Retro did " a great job on the multiplayer in Metroid Prime 2 " , focus was centered on the single player portion of the game , which was considered to be " the core strength of the franchise " . Art director Todd Keller declared the graphics to be focused in both texture detail and variety , with every single texture being hand @-@ made and trying to " make every room its own custom stage " . During development , the Nintendo EAD team involved with Corruption suggested Retro to turn Hypermode into the core of the game , saying it would enhance the tension as it made players powerful but if used excessively would lead to a game over . Retro initially disagreed , saying it would be difficult to implement the feature without dampening the entertainment value , but after discussion decided to turn Hyper Mode into a regular functionality of the game . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The soundtrack for Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption was composed by Kenji Yamamoto , Minako Hamano and Masaru Tajima . The game took advantage of the increase in the amount of RAM that took place when the series switched from the GameCube to the Wii ; this allowed for higher quality audio samples to be used and thus allowing a better overall audio quality . Yamamoto used Hirokazu Tanaka 's musical design of the original Metroid in Corruption , by keeping the music and themes dark and scary until the very end , when uplifting music is played during the credits . 
 Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption is the first game in the Metroid series to feature a significant amount of voice acting , compared to previous games in the series in which Samus " [ acted ] alone [ ... and ] always came across as a lone wolf " . The producers decided to include voices to create a stronger connection between players and the characters . The characters ' voices were performed by Timothy Patrick Miller , Lainie Frasier , Christopher Sabat , Edwin Neal , Claire Hamilton , Brian Jepson , Gray Haddock , Clayton <unk> and Ken Webster . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 IGN initially criticized Nintendo for its minimal marketing campaign for Corruption and compared it to the larger campaign for the original Metroid Prime , which included its own live action advertisement . The website concluded that the campaign was the result of Nintendo 's new focus on casual games for their console . When questioned on the company 's actions , Nintendo of America responded by saying , " Nintendo fans will be surprised by the quantity and quality of Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption information that becomes available before the game launches on Aug. 27 . Your patience will be rewarded ( or Corrupted ) . " Following this promise , Nintendo released the " Metroid Prime 3 Preview " channel on August 10 , 2007 , in North America and on October 15 , 2007 , in Europe . The channel , available as a free download via the Wii Shop Channel , allowed Wii owners to view preview videos of the game that included a battle sequence and previously unannounced details on new characters . The Preview channel was the first in a series of new downloadable content including videos made available in North America . The " month of Metroid " , as named by Nintendo , included Virtual Console versions of Metroid , available on August 13 , 2007 , and Super Metroid , available on August 20 , 2007 . 
 Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption was released in North America on August 27 , 2007 , in Europe on October 26 , 2007 , and in Japan on March 6 , 2008 . In the Japanese version , the game 's difficulty level is decided by answering to " a questionnaire from the Galactic Federation " , in contrast to the North American version where the difficulty level is chosen directly by the player . Metroid Prime series producer Kensuke Tanabe said that an idea for a questionnaire came from Retro Studios . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption received critical acclaim . Nintendo Power commented , " The stunning visuals and immersive gameplay of the finale to the Prime series proves that the Wii is ready for the mainstream gamer . " IGN awarded the game an Editor 's Choice Award , and noted that the game was beautifully designed and the best looking game for the Wii . They also praised the inclusion of " well @-@ done " voice acting , in contrast to the lack of any voice acting in most other Nintendo games . Despite stating that Metroid Prime 3 was too similar to its predecessors , the review concluded that it was the best game in the Prime trilogy . IGN also said that it could be worthy of the same score as the original Metroid Prime ( 9 @.@ 8 ) , had it not been for the aforementioned reason . X @-@ Play claimed that the game was enjoyable , but it had a few awkward control mechanics and was a little difficult to control on the Wii . They also said that although it was fun , there were problems that lead to odd lock @-@ on mechanics and painful wrists from continuous motions . 
 Brand Jones from GameTrailers praised the more user @-@ friendly and action @-@ packed nature of the game compared to Metroid Prime and Echoes . Jones also praised the superior motion @-@ sensitive controls , stating , " After playing Metroid Prime 3 you 'll never want to play a shooter with dual analog controls again , it 's that good . " He further added that those elements make Corruption " far superior to the original Metroid Prime " . 1UP.com was enthusiastic about the new control system and said the graphics were " some of the best visuals in gaming , period " . Electronic Gaming Monthly gave Corruption a Silver award and ranked the title as Game of the Month in a three @-@ way tie with FIFA 08 and The Legend of Zelda : Phantom Hourglass . GameSpot stated the game had enjoyable puzzles , boss battles , atmospheric levels , and smooth gameplay . It also explained that the game was more like a traditional shooter video game than an adventure shooter , and stated that the motion activated actions were too unresponsive . 
 GamesRadar named Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption the 10th best Wii game of all time out of a list of 25 , stating that " Metroid Prime 3 is the ultimate achievement of the series . The formula , which was repeated several times by Corruption , was been tweaked and pruned to its most perfect point , with some of the best shooting on the system . " In IGN 's Best of 2007 Awards , Corruption received the awards for Best Wii Adventure Game , Best Artistic Design , and Best Overall Adventure Game . GameSpy ranked it as the second best Wii game of the year , behind Super Mario Galaxy , and honored it as the Best Innovation on the Wii . Australian website <unk> named Prime 3 as the second best Wii game currently available , behind Super Mario Galaxy . Despite being released on August 27 , Corruption was the fifth best @-@ selling game of the month , with 218 @,@ 100 copies sold . It also debuted at the fifth spot of the Japanese charts , with 34 @,@ 000 units in the first week of release . More than one million copies of the game were sold in 2007 , and as of March 2008 , 1 @.@ 31 million copies of the game were sold worldwide . 
 = = <unk> and future = = 
 Metroid Prime 3 was rereleased on August 24 , 2009 in North America , alongside Metroid Prime and Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes , as a single @-@ disc compilation titled Metroid Prime : Trilogy . Prime and Echoes feature the motion controls and achievement systems introduced in Corruption . The compilation was later rereleased on the Wii U 's Nintendo eShop on January 29 , 2015 . 
 Metroid Prime : Federation Force , an upcoming Nintendo 3DS game to be developed by Next Level Games , was announced at E3 2015 ; Metroid Prime series producer Kensuke Tanabe said that " this time around we 're doing a story on the Galactic Federation . " Regarding the Corruption 's ending , Tanabe wanted to create a story that centers on Samus and Sylux , noting that " [ t ] here 's something going on between them . I want to make a game that touches upon [ it ] . " Tanabe added that Nintendo has no plans on releasing the next Metroid Prime game for the Wii U , stating it " would likely now be on Nintendo 's NX console . " 
 = Kelly pool = 
 Kelly pool ( also known as pea pool , pill pool , <unk> , the <unk> game , and killy ) is a pocket billiards game played on a standard pool table using fifteen numbered markers called peas or pills , and a standard set of sixteen pool balls . Gameplay involves players drawing peas at random from a shake bottle , which assigns to them the correspondingly numbered pool ball , kept secret from their opponents , but which they must pocket in order to win the game . Kelly pool is a rotation game , which means that players must contact the lowest numbered object ball on each shot first until the opportunity to pocket their own is presented . Two rule variants are set forth under rules promulgated by the Billiard Congress of America ( BCA ) . In the simpler form , the object of play starts and ends with the goal of pocketing one 's secret ball . In the second , in addition to the goal of pocketing one 's secret ball , points are scored in various ways . In the instance where pills are unavailable , a cloth may be used to cover the balls , which are then chosen blindly , recorded , and replaced for play . 
 Reportedly invented by Chicagoan Calistus " Kelly " Mulvaney in 1893 , kelly pool was a popular game during the early- to mid @-@ 20th century . Mentions of it were at one time common in US newspapers , often painting it in a negative light as its play was considered a stronghold of gambling . Authorities in various parts of the United States at times called for a moratorium on the game 's play . Until 1964 , in fact , playing the game was a <unk> offense in the state of Montana . 
 Many billiard @-@ specific and etymological sources point to kelly pool , or an early version of the game called kelly rotation , as the origin of the common idiom , " behind the eight ball " . Some publications blithely assume the expression to be eponymously derived from the game of eight ball , but it has been pointed out that the expression came into use before eight ball was popularized , and that the game did not even use an actual 8 ball under the version first marketed to the public . The predecessor to the BCA , The National Billiard Association , meanwhile , holds that the expression simply emanates from the fact that the eight ball , being black @-@ colored , is harder to see than other balls , thus resulting in an association with any difficult position . 
 = = Origins = = 
 According to an article which appeared in the June 29 , 1913 edition of the Chicago Tribune , " Kelly pool was invented by Kelly Mulvaney " . The quote is attributed in the article to Hugh E. Keough , a well @-@ known Chicago sportswriter of 31 years . Further information is provided in a November 10 , 1916 Indianapolis Star obituary for one Calistus Mulvaney , who is listed as having died the preceding day . The obituary , entitled " <unk> ' Kelly Pool ' " , states that : " ... for thirty five years [ Mulvaney ] was identified with Kelly pool in the loop district ... He was widely known as the father of ' Kelly pool ' and better known as Kelly Mulvaney than Calistus . He was born at Fox Lake Wis [ <unk> ] sixty @-@ five years ago . " 
 In Calistus Mulvaney 's entry in the 1910 United States Census ( pictured at right ) , his occupation is listed as " billiard hall <unk> [ <unk> ] " and his position there as " keeper " . As part of the same household , Mulvaney 's brother @-@ in @-@ law 's listing appears on the same census page , with his occupation and position identically recorded . The census records Mulvaney 's age in 1910 as 56 , his birthdate as " about 1854 " , his birthplace as Wisconsin , his spouse 's name as Kate , and his area of residence at that time as Chicago Ward 14 , Cook Co . , Illinois . Although there is a given @-@ name discrepancy , additional illumination is provided by Simpson M. Ritter in the publication From the Annals of Sports . As Simpson is quoted in the book Sports in the Pulp Magazines by John A. Dinan : 
 You may not be surprised to learn that Kelly Pool was neither invented by a man named Kelly nor is it of Irish origin . Its inventor , <unk> [ sic ] Mulvaney , was of Irish origin but invented the game in 1893 in Chicago . The first games were played in that city at the Hannah and Hoggs Billiard Hall on Madison St. 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Kelly pool accommodates players with a wide variety of skill levels . The game is designed for group play with a minimum of 2 players , best suited for 4 – 6 , but allowing up to 15 to take part . The Billiard Congress of America ( BCA ) publishes a long @-@ standardized set of rules for the game . 
 = = = Set up = = = 
 At the start of kelly pool , the numbered markers ( commonly called peas or pills , and sometimes tally balls or shake balls ) are placed in a specially made , narrow @-@ necked container ( called variously a bottle , pea bottle , pill bottle , kelly bottle , tally bottle or shake bottle ) which is shaken to randomly distribute them . Each player then draws a numbered pea from the bottle . The number of the pea drawn assigns to that player the correspondingly numbered object ball , which that player must keep secret from his opponents . The object of the game is for the player to legally pocket their assigned , undisclosed ball ( sometimes called their " private number " ) . 
 At the start of the game a standard set of fifteen pool object balls are racked at the foot end of a pool table , with the apex ball of the rack centered over the foot spot . Viewed from the racker 's vantage point , the 1 ball is placed at the rack 's apex , the 2 ball at the rack 's right corner and the 3 ball at the rack 's left corner ( as in the game of rotation ) ; all other object balls are placed randomly . An open break is required , meaning that at least four balls must be driven to rails ( as opposed to a safety break , such as is used for the opening break in straight pool and one @-@ pocket ) . 
 = = = Rules of play = = = 
 Kelly pool is a rotation game , which means that the lowest numbered ball on the table must be contacted by the cue ball on every shot . There are no called safeties in kelly pool ; the legal pocketing ( i.e. , with no foul committed on the same stroke ) of the lowest numbered ball on the table , permits and requires the shooter to continue play . When a ball is illegally pocketed it is spotted to the foot spot ( or as close as possible , toward the foot rail ) . 
 If a foul is committed , there is no point penalty and the incoming player has the option of accepting the table in position , or requiring the offending player to continue shooting . However , when the foul is the result of jumping the cue ball off the table , or scratching it into a pocket , the incoming player has cue ball in hand from the kitchen ( behind the head string ) , and retains the option of forcing the opponent to shoot . Whichever player ultimately shoots with cue ball in hand has the option of spotting the object ball to the foot spot if it is in the kitchen area . 
 = = = Scoring = = = 
 There are two main scoring variations ; under the first and simpler ruleset , the first player to pocket his private number wins . Under the second variation , although a player still wins by pocketing his private number , points are scored in various ways : 1 ) two points are given by each participant to the winning player for the pocketing of his private number ; 2 ) a player receives one point for pocketing any other player 's private number , and the player whose private number was pocketed is penalized one point ( and can have a negative point total ) , but is not out of the game and can still win points in this way ; 3 ) if a player whose private number is pocketed by another does not disclose this fact before a subsequent shot is taken , the non @-@ disclosing player forfeits , immediately losing the game , and the player who made that ball is given two points instead of one . In the event that no player succeeds in pocketing his private number , gameplay ends when the last private number is potted , and the game is played again with all points values doubled . 
 = = Association with gambling = = 
 Kelly pool has long been associated with gambling — so much so , that it was made illegal in some municipalities in the US and Canada . In the state of Montana , for example , the playing of kelly pool was punishable by a $ 25 fine until the law was repealed in 1964 . Likewise , the playing of kelly pool was banned in the Canadian province of Manitoba at least as of 1918 . Gambling exploits associated with kelly pool were often depicted in Clare Briggs ' comic strip of the same name , which centered on the game . The Kelly Pool strip ( panel pictured at right ) , ran in the New York Tribune 's sports section from 1912 to 1917 . 
 From the early- to mid @-@ 20th century numerous newspaper stories cover indictments of kelly pool as a bastion of gambling . In February 1908 , the county attorney of Oklahoma City denounced kelly pool , declaring " that it comes with in [ sic ] the pale of the law against gambling " , and issued orders to the city 's sheriff 's department to enforce a moratorium . In April 1912 a Vincennes , Indiana resident was indicted for embezzling $ 11 @,@ 000 from the brick company he managed reportedly due " to his infatuation with ' pea ' pool and shaking dice " . The following month , Mayor Mudge of Edwardsville , Illinois announced that " effective at once ... <unk> ... must do away with all forms of gambling , including Kelly Pool . " In the same vein , in 1914 Judge J.A. McIlvaine of a Washington , Pennsylvania court , in passing sentence on a pool room proprietor who allowed pea pool games to be wagered on in his establishment , announced that persons committing similar crimes would " be severely punished ... This is the most pernicious form of gambling for it starts youths to higher grades of crime . " 
 In January 1916 a Washington D.C. billiard hall proprietor was fined $ 100 by a Police Court judge for allowing the game to be played at his establishment . The United States Attorney handling the case told reporters " There is considerable playing of this Kelly pool in the <unk> of the city , where many young men lose their entire week 's wages on a single Saturday night , and I propose to have it stopped , if possible . " In April 1922 , Charleston , West Virginia 's then mayor , Grant P. Hall , declared " baseball pools , pay @-@ ball , Kelly pool and all other forms of gambling in billiard parlors and cigar stores must cease forthwith . " Likewise , in December of the same year , Oxford , Ohio 's then mayor , J. M. Hughes , declared a war on all forms of gambling , announcing in the local newspaper that " schemes of chance ... [ including ] Kelly pool ... are contrary to law . " In 1934 , sports promoter and notorious gambler Jack Doyle 's billiard establishment was raided and he , along with 14 patrons , were arrested for placing bets on Kelly pool . 
 = = " Behind the eight ball " = = 
 " Behind the eight ball " ( or " behind the eight " ) is a common idiom meaning to be in trouble , stymied or thwarted , in an awkward position or out of luck . It is often assumed that the expression derives from the inability to use the 8 ball in a combination in the game of eight @-@ ball — if the cue ball is directly behind the 8 ball a player has no direct shot route . However , numerous billiards @-@ specific and etymological publications state that the expression derives instead from kelly pool , or an early version of kelly pool called kelly rotation . 
 Billiards historian Michael Ian <unk> in The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Billiards ( 1993 ) , citing information provided by Charles C. Peterson ( first president of the Billiard Association of America ) , and Steve Mizerak and Michael E. <unk> in Steve Mizerak 's Complete Book of Pool ( 1990 ) , indicate that ascribing the phrase 's origin to the game of eight ball results in an anachronism , the phrase being traceable to at least 1919 , while the form of game that became " eight @-@ ball " was not described by that name , and its rules were not published in any official rule book , until after 1940 . The game that would ultimately be named " eight ball , " after a physical 8 ball became part of play , was invented shortly after 1900 . That precursor game was little known until it was popularized in 1925 under the name B.B.C. Co . Pool by the Brunswick @-@ Balke @-@ Collender Company , marketed by them with a special set of balls that did not have a numbered 8 ball , but rather came with a ball set consisting of seven of one color , seven of another , and an unnumbered black ball . Thus , multiple @-@ time world champion Steve Mizerak explains that behind the eight ball cannot derive from the game of eight ball as " the phrase predates the game ... by at least 20 years . " 
 Two different kelly pool @-@ based derivations for behind the eight ball are provided in diverse sources . As noted , in kelly pool each player is randomly assigned a specific ball of the fifteen ball rack , which must be made in numerical order . The game ends when any player makes his assigned ball . Based on these rules , one origin theory holds that when a large number of players are participating , players assigned balls numerically higher than 8 — that is , balls that are behind the 8 ball in order — have little chance of winning . This is a result of the likelihood that random distribution will result in multiple players with assigned balls numbered lower than 8 having an opportunity to shoot first , and that with such large a number of players at least one will come to the table with the opportunity to shoot at his assigned ball . 
 A second theory refers to a kelly pool rule variation under which the 8 ball is excluded from assignment as a secret number and , if another ball strikes the 8 ball at any time during play , the player responsible is penalized . " So a position directly behind the eight ball is a position of great hazard . " 
 A more generic origin of the phrase that is independent of any particular game 's rule , instead depending from a property of the 8 ball itself , is proffered by Billiard Congress of America predecessor , The National Billiard Association , which organization was the governing body of American billiards from 1921 to 1941 : 
 It is generally conceded that the 8 @-@ ball is the most difficult for the player to see clearly in the execution of his shot . This , because it is black , naturally the edges of the ball , or in fact any part of the ball , do not stand out as clearly as colored . Therefore , professional players , if possible , avoid being forced to play the 8 @-@ ball from a difficult position or with the cue ball a long distance from the 8 @-@ ball because it is more difficult to see clearly . In reality , this fact was what started the now common saying , ' behind the eight ball , ' used in the player 's vernacular in the sense that being in any kind of a difficult point on the table , many times calls for the remark that one is ' behind the eight ball . ' In other words , they use this to explain any difficult situation that may confront them in the game . 
 In the game of snooker , the roughly equivalent idiom is " <unk> " , and it too has entered the language ( especially Commonwealth English of various forms in countries where snooker is a major sport ) as a metaphor . 
 = Lagmann mac Gofraid = 
 Lagmann mac Gofraid , known in Old Norse as <unk> Guðrøðarson and <unk> Guðrøðarson , was a late eleventh @-@ century King of the Isles , whose rise , reign , and fall from power are obscure . He was the eldest son of Gofraid Crobán , King of Dublin and the Isles , a Norse @-@ Gaelic dynast who conquered and ruled the kingdoms of the Isles and Dublin , before dying in 1095 . Three years after the latter 's death , the Isles was conquered by Magnús Óláfsson , King of Norway , whose regime in the region lasted until his death in 1103 . The chronology of Lagmann 's reign is uncertain : he may have begun his reign either before Magnús ' conquest , during his regime , or after his demise . 
 As King of the Isles , Lagmann faced significant opposition from factions supporting his younger brothers , Aralt and Amlaíb . At some point , the Islesmen are reported to have petitioned Muirchertach Ua Briain , King of Munster to select a temporary ruler in the region . This act may have been initiated on behalf of a faction supporting Amlaíb . Whatever the case , Ua Briain responded by placing an Uí Briain relative upon the throne . The Uí Briain interlopers , however , do not appear to have been well received ; and were evidently ejected by the Islesmen , perhaps led by supporters of Lagmann himself . 
 The chronology and circumstances surrounding the conclusion of Lagmann 's reign are uncertain . According to one source , he voluntarily resigned the kingship and journeyed to Jerusalem where he died . This account could be evidence that he died on crusade : one possibility is the First Crusade , perhaps in the entourage of Robert II , Duke of Normandy ; another possibility is the so @-@ called Norwegian Crusade , in the entourage of Sigurðr Magnússon , King of Norway . Although one source claims that Lagmann 's trek to the Holy Land was undertaken in remorse for the cruelty he had inflicted upon Aralt , another possibility is that he was forced into exile instead . Whatever the case , it is apparent that about a decade after Magnús ' death , the Crovan dynasty was restored to the kingship in the person of Lagmann 's youngest brother . 
 = = Antecedents , accession , and insurrection = = 
 Lagmann was one of three sons of Gofraid Crobán , King of Dublin and the Isles ( died 1095 ) . Gofraid first emerges into history in the mid eleventh century . Although his precise parentage is uncertain , he appears to have been a descendant of Amlaíb Cuarán , King of Dublin and Northumbria ( died 981 ) . Gofraid 's apparent Uí Ímair antecedents appear to have endowed him with ancestral claims to the Norse @-@ Gaelic kingdoms to Dublin and the Isles . In the 1070s , he secured the kingship of the Isles through his conquest of Mann , and forcefully added Dublin to his realm in 1091 . Gofraid 's downfall came in 1094 , when he was driven out of Ireland by the Uí Briain , and died the following year in the Hebrides . 
 There is uncertainty concerning the political situation in the Isles in the last decade of the eleventh century . What is known for sure is that , before the end of the century , Magnús Óláfsson , King of Norway ( died 1103 ) led a marauding fleet from Scandinavia into the Isles , seized control of the kingdom , and held onto power in the Irish Sea region until his death in 1103 . According to the Chronicle of Mann , when Gofraid died in 1095 , Lagmann succeeded him as his eldest son , and went on to reign for seven years . The numerical calculations and chronology of this source are suspect , and it is uncertain if Lagmann 's reign began before Magnús ' arrival , during Magnús ' overlordship , or even after Magnús ' death . One possibility is that Lagmann commenced his reign in the Isles immediately after his father assumed the kingship of Dublin in 1091 . If so , this transfer of power would seem to evidence the eminent status of Dublin 's kinship amongst the Norse @-@ Gaelic elite . 
 Despite the uncertainly surrounding the inception of his reign , the chronicle reveals that Lagmann faced continued opposition from within his own family , in the form of an ongoing rebellion by his brother , Aralt . Lagmann eventually overcame Aralt , however , and is stated to have had the latter blinded and emasculated . Afterwards , if the chronicle is to be believed , Lagmann repented the cruelty that he had inflicted upon Aralt , and remorsefully resigned his kingdom , before setting off to Jerusalem , where he died . 
 = = Irish intervention = = 
 Although the Chronicle of Man maintains that Lagmann voluntarily vacated his throne , there is reason to suspect that he was forced from power . In about 1096 , the chronicle claims that the leading Islesmen sought assistance of Muirchertach Ua Briain , King of Munster ( died 1119 ) , and petitioned him to provide a regent from his own kin to govern the kingdom until Lagmann 's younger brother , Amlaíb ( died 1153 ) , was old enough to assume control . The chronicle 's account could be evidence that , by about 1096 , Lagmann faced a faction formed around his younger brother ; and that , when this faction was unable to topple Lagmann by itself , it approached Ua Briain for assistance in placing Amlaíb upon the throne . 
 Ua Briain was certainly a formidable potential ally , having recently imposed his dominance over the kingdoms of Connacht , Leinster , Mide , and Dublin as well . In fact , it was through his conquest of the latter that Ua Briain had banished Lagmann 's father from Ireland once and for all , and thereby secured control of Dublin 's awesome naval power . In consequence of this predominance , the clause as stated by the chronicle — that Ua Briain was to provide the Isles with a regent from his own kin — may well have been a condition on his intervention , rather than a request of the Islesmen themselves . Whatever the case , the chronicle reveals that Ua Briain then installed Domnall mac Taidc ( died 1115 ) upon the throne . Although Domnall had previously opposed Ua Briain over the kingship of Munster , he was the son of Ua Briain 's brother , and further possessed strong familial connections with the Isles through his maternal descent from Echmarcach mac Ragnaill , King of Dublin and the Isles ( died 1064 / 1065 ) . In fact , the Annals of Ulster appears to indicate that at least two apparent members of Echmarcach 's family were killed less than a decade before in a repulsed invasion of Mann . As a result , Domnall may have been the leading male representative of Echmarcach 's family . The slaying of Domnall 's brother , Amlaíb , as recorded by the Annals of the Four Masters in 1096 , suggests that Domnall and the rest of the Meic Taidc faced significant opposition in the Isles , possibly in the form of Lagmann 's adherents . The chronicle credits Domnall with an oppressive three @-@ year reign that ended when the leading Islesmen revolted against him , and drove him from the kingdom back to Ireland . 
 = = Norwegian domination and diminishment = = 
 The extent of Domnall 's rule in the kingdom is unknown , and it is questionable whether he had any real authority in the northern Hebrides , furthest from Mann . In about 1097 , Magnús sent a delegate named Ingimundr into the Isles to take possession of the kingdom . After installing himself in Lewis , Ingimundr was overthrown and killed whilst attempting to usurp the kingship . Ingimundr 's rationale for seating himself upon an island ( Lewis and Harris ) on the edge of the kingdom may have been due to the fact that he was unable to gain any authority on Mann itself . In fact , the chronicle reveals that civil war erupted there the following year , and the chronicler Orderic Vitalis ( died c . 1142 ) indicates that Mann was devastated to point of being a virtual desert by the time Magnús appeared on the scene . The warring itself may have been related to the aforesaid factional struggles between Gofraid 's sons . The fact that the chronicle makes no mention of Domnall during this particular conflict may be evidence that he had lost control of Mann by then . Within the year , the same source records the arrival of Magnús himself , which could suggest that it was Ingimundr 's slaying , at the hands of the Islesmen , that had incited Magnús to take matters into his own hands . 
 Magnús ' takeover of the Isles is colourfully depicted in the chronicle , and several mediaeval Norse sources , such as the early thirteenth @-@ century Morkinskinna , Fagrskinna , Orkneyinga saga , and Magnúss saga <unk> within the early thirteenth @-@ century saga @-@ compilation Heimskringla . As the Norwegian fleet descended upon the Isles , the latter source specifies that Lagmann set himself to defend the <unk> ( " Northern Islands " ) , a term that likely refers to the Outer Hebrides . A particular verse of poetry in Morkinskinna , attributed to the contemporary skald <unk> <unk> , describes Lagmann as " <unk> gram " ( " Prince of Uist " , or " Lord of Uist " ) . This title not only appears to corroborate Lagmann 's authority in the northern Isles , but could also indicate that he was primarily based on Uist as well . 
 At several points in the history of the Isles , the realm endured periods of fragmentation between rival factions . Whether the references to Lagmann in the north are evidence of a similarly partitioned kingdom is unknown . The Norwegian subjugation of the Isles , and subsequent capture of Lagmann , are recounted by several sources . For instance , Orkneyinga saga states as much ; whilst Morkinskinna further specifies that Lagmann fled southwards and out to sea , as Magnús ' fleet advanced , only to be captured and kept in the Norwegian king 's company for some time afterwards . 
 Having overwintered in Isles , Magnús left for Norway in the summer , only to make his return nearly four years later , in 1102 or 1103 . Once re @-@ established on Mann , Magnús entered into an alliance with Ua Briain , formalised through the marriage between Magnús 's young son , Sigurðr ( died 1130 ) , and Ua Briain 's daughter , Bjaðmunjo ( fl . 1102 / 1103 ) . Magnús , therefore , appears to have intended for Sigurðr to rule over his recently @-@ won territories . Unfortunately for Ua Briain , and his long @-@ term ambitions in Ireland and the Isles , Magnús was slain in Ulster in 1103 , whereupon Sigurðr immediately repudiated his bride and returned to Norway . Although Ua Briain was able to regain control of Dublin , and still held considerable influence in the Isles , Magnús ' death appears to have left a power vacuum in the region that he was unable to fill . 
 In 1111 , Domnall mac Taidc appears to have forcefully seized the kingship of the Isles . Although it is possible that he had backing from Ua Briain himself , there is evidence to suggest that made his move without Ua Briain 's consent . Not long after this undertaking , Domnall appears to have been either forced from the Isles , or drawn back to Ireland in an attempt to capitalise on Ua Briain 's failing health , only to be slain himself in 1115 . The encroachment of competing Irish factions into the Isles may well have been as unpalatable to the English and Scots as the power vacuum left in the wake of Magnús ' demise . Since the chronicle records that the subsequent reign of ( Lagmann 's brother ) Amlaíb lasted forty years , the latter 's accession to the kingship appears to date to about 1112 or 1113 , not long after Domnall launched his bid for the throne . In fact , the chronicle indicates that Amlaíb spent his youth at the court of Henry I , King of England ( died 1135 ) , and it appears that this restoration of the Crovan dynasty , in the person of Lagmann 's youngest brother , was the work of the English king . 
 = = Departure and death = = 
 Late in 1095 , Pope Urban II ( died 1099 ) first proclaimed an armed pilgrimage , or penitential holy war , that led to the First Crusade of 1096 – 1102 . Before the end of the year , tens of thousands of men , women , and children answered his call to re @-@ establish Christian control of Jerusalem . The particular terminology employed by the Chronicle of Mann — that Lagmann departed the kingdom " marked with the sign of the Lord 's cross " — suggests that he participated in a crusade . On the other hand , since the chronicle was compiled in the thirteenth century , during a period when the idea of a cross @-@ bearing pilgrim was well established , it is possible that this depiction of Lagmann has been contaminated by anachronistic conceptions . 
 There are many reasons why crusaders volunteered to " take the cross " . One particular reason was the desire of repentance . Remorse for the cruelty that he had inflicted upon his own brother may well have played a part in Lagmann 's decision . On the other hand , embarking upon a crusade could also be a means of escaping political tribulations and pressure at home , as in the case of the embattled Robert II , Duke of Normandy ( died 1134 ) . In Lagmann 's case , his participation may have been a direct after @-@ effect of Magnús ' conquest of the Isles in 1098 , or the aforesaid later revival of Uí Briain <unk> in Dublin and the Isles . 
 If Lagmann was indeed a crusader , it is uncertain which particular crusade he undertook . One possibility is that he took part in the First Crusade , a movement that reached its climax with the successful siege and capture of Jerusalem in mid 1099 . Lagmann could have embarked upon this enterprise in about 1096 , the year the pope 's calls reached England , and perhaps joined Robert 's assembling forces that summer . Alternately , in light of Lagmann 's capture by the Norwegians in 1098 , it is conceivable that his release from custody was made conditional upon his exile and participation in the First Crusade . On the other hand , it is not impossible that Lagmann originally undertook a pilgrimage before catching wind of the crusade en route . Whatever the case , if Lagmann indeed participated and perished in the First Crusade , he may have met his end on campaign in Syria or Anatolia . 
 Another possibility is that Lagmann regained some form of control in the Isles following Magnús ' death , and afterwards joined Sigurðr 's expedition to Holy Land in the first decade of the twelfth century . Whether Sigurðr 's undertaking was a planned crusade per se , or merely an eventful and violent pilgrimage , is debatable . The precise chronology of this enterprise is similarly uncertain , although the Norwegian fleet certainly reached England before the end of the first decade of the twelfth century . It may have been at this point , whilst Sigurðr overwintered at the English royal court , that Lagmann joined up with him . If Lagmann and Sigurðr indeed rendezvoused in England , this may have been the time when Amlaíb , the future King of the Isles , was entrusted to the safekeeping of the English king . 
 = Tropical Storm Debra ( 1978 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Debra was the second of two tropical storms to hit the United States in the 1978 Atlantic hurricane season . The fourth named storm of the season , Debra developed from the interaction between a high @-@ altitude cold low and a lower tropical wave in the Gulf of Mexico . Forming on August 25 , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Debra based on data from a Hurricane Hunter aircraft . As Debra approached the coast , it attained peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The storm made landfall on the coast of Louisiana , east of the Texas border . Two deaths were caused by the storm . Debra weakened as it moved inland and ultimately dissipated on August 29 over Arkansas . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Debra originated in an upper @-@ level cold @-@ core low pressure system that developed over southwestern Florida in late August 1978 . The low moved southwest towards the Yucatán Peninsula over the next day , as a tropical wave drifted westwards from the Caribbean Sea . The interaction between the upper @-@ level system and the wave led to the formation of a tropical depression on August 26 around 460 miles ( 740 km ) south of New Orleans . 
 At first the depression drifted westward but , as the western periphery of a high @-@ pressure area weakened , it tracked towards the north and slowly strengthened . After a reconnaissance aircraft found surface winds of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) on August 28 , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Debra . The aircraft also recorded a minimum pressure of 1002 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 59 inHg ) . While Debra approached the coast of Louisiana , an additional flight into the system found a drop in surface pressure to 1000 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) , as well as peak winds of approximately 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) at 00 : 00 GMT on August 29 . Observation stations off the coast recorded sustained winds of 45 – 50 mph ( 70 – 80 km / h ) on August 28 , as Debra passed 150 miles ( 240 km ) to the west . 
 The storm made landfall between Beaumont , Texas , and Lake Charles , Louisiana , on August 28 . Two stations recorded surface pressures of 1002 mbar ( hPa ; ( 29 @.@ 59 inHg ) ) . As Debra moved north @-@ northeast through Louisiana and Arkansas , the central pressure rose slightly . In south central Arkansas the residual low pressure system merged with a frontal trough on August 29 ; the frontal wave drifted into southern Illinois and traveled eastbound into the Ohio Valley for the next three days . Five tornadoes were reported from the system in Texas , Louisiana , and Mississippi shortly after Debra 's landfall . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Louisiana = = = 
 A flash flood watch was issued in advance of Debra for the whole of Louisiana . ExxonMobil , Royal Dutch Shell , Chevron , and other oil companies shut down operations and evacuated about 1 @,@ 000 employees from offshore oil rigs in Texas and Louisiana . Despite these evacuations , a 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wave killed a person at a rig 80 miles ( 130 km ) offshore from Cameron . Three evacuation centers in Lake Charles , were set up to help those needing shelter and departing the Cameron area , and the Red Cross opened four shelters at the Calcasieu Parish Public Schools . In Louisiana , more than six thousand people were evacuated from Cameron Parish , as well as an undetermined number from Vermilion Parish . 
 Louisiana had moderate flooding , especially in Rapides Parish . Rainfall amounted to 6 inches ( 15 cm ) at Lake Charles and Lafayette , 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) at Shreveport , and 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 8 @.@ 9 cm ) at Monroe . Flash flood warnings were issued during the storm for Louisiana , Mississippi , Arkansas , Missouri , and Tennessee . By dawn on August 29 , all rainwater had receded from the streets and tides were back to normal levels . 
 A confirmed tornado at the Ike settlement in Vernon Parish , knocked over a trailer . The greatest amount of rainfall caused by Debra , 10 @.@ 81 in ( 275 mm ) , was recorded in Freshwater Bayou Lock . More than 6 in ( 150 mm ) was recorded across Louisiana , and tides between Atchafalaya Bay and Vermilion Bay were 5 @.@ 7 ft ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) above normal . At Grand Chenier , a wind gust of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) to 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) was recorded , and there were reports of downed trees and damage to roofs in Lake Charles and New Orleans . Tides at Lake Pontchartrain were 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above normal . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Gale warnings were prompted from Galveston , Texas , through to Grand Isle , Louisiana , at 18 : 00 GMT on August 28 . A confirmed tornado in Hardin County , Texas , damaged a trailer home and power lines . More than 6 inches ( 150 mm ) of rainfall was recorded within Texas and 7 inches ( 180 mm ) in the Beaumont – Port Arthur area caused minor street flooding . Tides were 1 ft ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) above normal at Corpus Christi , while tides at Galveston were 2 @.@ 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 67 m ) above normal . 
 A tornado spawned in Turkey Creek , Mississippi , destroyed three mobile homes and a house , killing one person and seriously injuring another ; this tornado tracked on to Crystal Springs , Mississippi . Many rice stands were knocked over because of the gusts of wind from Tropical Storm Debra . Rainfall of more than 6 in ( 15 cm ) was recorded in locations across Mississippi , Missouri , and Illinois . Tornadoes were reported in Memphis , Tennessee ; Little Rock , Arkansas ; Starkville , Springdale , <unk> and Flora in Mississippi ; Livingston and Ascension parishes and north Lafayette in Louisiana . One person was hurt in the Memphis tornado . Power was knocked out at four blocks of the Memphis International Airport , gas supplies were cut off in Memphis , and downed trees and power poles blocked many streets . Overall damage caused by Debra was minimal . 
 = Black vulture = 
 The black vulture ( Coragyps atratus ) also known as the American black vulture , is a bird in the New World vulture family whose range extends from the southeastern United States to Central Chile and Uruguay in South America . Although a common and widespread species , it has a somewhat more restricted distribution than its compatriot , the turkey vulture , which breeds well into Canada and south to Tierra del Fuego . Despite the similar name and appearance , this species is unrelated to the Eurasian black vulture . The latter species is an Old World vulture in the family Accipitridae ( which includes eagles , hawks , kites and harriers ) , whereas the American species is a New World vulture . It is the only extant member of the genus Coragyps , which is in the family Cathartidae . It inhabits relatively open areas which provide scattered forests or shrublands . With a wingspan of 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) , the black vulture is a large bird though relatively small for a vulture . It has black plumage , a featherless , grayish @-@ black head and neck , and a short , hooked beak . 
 The black vulture is a scavenger and feeds on carrion , but will also eat eggs or kill newborn animals . In areas populated by humans , it also feeds at garbage dumps . It finds its meals either by using its keen eyesight or by following other ( New World ) vultures , which possess a keen sense of smell . Lacking a syrinx — the vocal organ of birds — its only vocalizations are grunts or low hisses . It lays its eggs in caves or hollow trees or on the bare ground , and generally raises two chicks each year , which it feeds by regurgitation . In the United States , the vulture receives legal protection under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 . This vulture also appeared in Mayan codices . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The common name " vulture " is derived from the Latin word vulturus , which means " tearer " and is a reference to its feeding habits . The species name , atratus , means " clothed in black , " from the Latin ater ' black ' . The genus name , Coragyps means " raven @-@ vulture " , from a contraction of the Greek corax / κόραξ and gyps / <unk> for the respective birds . The family name , Cathartidae , means " purifier " and is also derived from the Greek kathartēs / καθαρτης . 
 The exact taxonomic placement of the black vulture and the remaining six species of New World vultures remains unclear . Though both are similar in appearance and have similar ecological roles , the New World and Old World vultures evolved from different ancestors in different parts of the world . Just how different the two are is currently under debate , with some earlier authorities suggesting that the New World vultures are more closely related to storks . More recent authorities maintain their overall position in the order Falconiformes along with the Old World vultures , or place them in their own order , Cathartiformes . The South American Classification Committee has removed the New World vultures from Ciconiiformes and instead placed them in incertae sedis , but notes that a move to Falconiformes or Cathartiformes is possible . 
 There are three subspecies of black vulture : 
 C. a. atratus , named by the German ornithologist Johann Matthäus Bechstein in 1793 , is known as the North American black vulture . It is the nominate subspecies . It is approximately the same size as C. a. foetens , but its plumage is not as dark . Its range stretches from northern Mexico through Texas and the southern United States north to New Jersey and Pennsylvania . 
 C. a. brasiliensis , named by Charles Lucien Jules Laurent Bonaparte in 1850 , is known as the Southern American black vulture . It is smaller than C. a. atratus and C. a. foetens . The light markings on the undersides of the primaries are whiter and broader than those of the other subspecies , and the underwing coverts are lighter than those of C. a. foetens . It is found in Central America and northern South America . To the south , the range extends to the coastal regions of Peru on the west and the lowlands of Bolivia on the east . To the north , it stretches to Sonora in western Mexico and San Luis Potosí in eastern Mexico . It is not found in high @-@ altitude regions . 
 C. a. foetens , named by Martin Lichtenstein in 1817 , is known as the Andean black vulture . It is approximately the same size as C. a. atratus . The markings on the undersides of the primaries are smaller than those of the other subspecies , and the underwing coverts are darker . It is found in the Andes range , from northern Ecuador through Peru , northern Bolivia , Paraguay , Uruguay , and the lowlands of Chile . 
 = = = Evolutionary history of Coragyps = = = 
 From the Early to the Late Pleistocene , a prehistoric species of black vulture , Coragyps occidentalis , known as the Pleistocene black vulture or – somewhat in error – the " western black vulture " , occurred across the present species ' range . This bird did not differ much from the black vulture of today except in size ; it was some 10 – 15 % larger , and had a relatively flatter and wider bill . It filled the same ecological niche as the living form , and indeed seems to have evolved into it by decreasing in size during the last ice age . Well documented from fossil bones , the genus Coragyps gives a rare glimpse in the evolutionary dynamics of two chronospecies . The final stages of this evolutionary transformation must have been witnessed by humans : a subfossil bone of the extinct species was found in an Paleo Indian to Early Archaic ( 9000 – 8000 years BCE ) midden at Five Mile Rapids near The Dalles , Oregon . 
 Fossil ( or subfossil ) black vultures cannot necessarily be attributed to the Pleistocene or the recent species without further information : the same size variation found in the living bird was also present in its larger prehistoric relative . Thus , in 1968 , Hildegarde Howard separated the Mexican birds as Coragyps occidentalis mexicanus as opposed to the birds from locations farther north ( such as Rancho La Brea ) which constituted the nominate subspecies C. o. occidentalis . The southern birds were of the same size as present @-@ day north black vultures and can only be distinguished by their somewhat stouter tarsometatarsus and the flatter and wider bills , and even then only with any certainty if the location where the fossils were found is known . As the Pleistocene and current black vultures form an evolutionary continuum rather than splitting into two or more lineages , some include the Pleistocene taxa in C. atratus . 
 = = Description = = 
 The black vulture is a fairly large bird of prey , measuring 56 – 74 cm ( 22 – 29 in ) in length , with a 1 @.@ 33 – 1 @.@ 67 m ( 52 – 66 in ) wingspan . Weight for Black Vultures from North America and the Andes ranges from 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 75 kg ( 3 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 1 lb ) but in the smaller vultures of the tropical lowlands it is 1 @.@ 18 – 1 @.@ 94 kg ( 2 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 3 lb ) . 50 vultures in Texas were found to average 2 @.@ 15 kg ( 4 @.@ 7 lb ) while 119 birds in Venezuela were found to average 1 @.@ 64 kg ( 3 @.@ 6 lb ) . The extended wing bone measures 38 @.@ 6 – 45 cm ( 15 @.@ 2 – 17 @.@ 7 in ) , the <unk> tail measures 16 – 21 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 – 8 @.@ 3 in ) and the relatively long tarsus measures 7 – 8 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 3 in ) . Its plumage is mainly glossy black . The head and neck are featherless and the skin is dark gray and wrinkled . The iris of the eye is brown and has a single incomplete row of eyelashes on the upper lid and two rows on the lower lid . The legs are grayish white , while the two front toes of the foot are long and have small webs at their bases . The feet are flat , relatively weak , and are poorly adapted to grasping ; the talons are also not designed for grasping , as they are relatively blunt . 
 The nostrils are not divided by a septum , but rather are perforate ; from the side one can see through the beak . The wings are broad but relatively short . The bases of the primary feathers are white , producing a white patch on the underside of the wing 's edge , which is visible in flight . The tail is short and square , barely reaching past the edge of the folded wings . The subspecies differ in size according to Bergmann 's Rule , and the amount of white underwing coloration also varies . As it probably forms a cline over its entire range , the species is often considered monotypic . 
 A leucistic Coragyps atratus brasiliensis was observed in <unk> , Ecuador in 2005 . It had white plumage overall , with only the tarsus and tail as well as some undertail feathers being black . It was not an albino as its skin seemed to have had the normal , dark color and it was part of a flock of some twenty normally plumaged individuals . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The black vulture has a Nearctic and Neotropic distribution . Its range includes the mid @-@ Atlantic , including New Jersey , the southern United States , Mexico , Central America and most of South America . It is usually a permanent resident throughout its range , although birds at the extreme north of its range may migrate short distances , and others across their range may undergo local movements in unfavourable conditions . In South America , its range stretches to central Chile and Argentina . It also is found as a vagrant on the islands of the Caribbean . It prefers open land interspersed with areas of woods or brush . It is also found in moist lowland forests , shrublands and grasslands , wetlands and swamps , pastures , and heavily degraded former forests . Preferring lowlands , it is rarely seen in mountainous areas . It is usually seen soaring or perched on fence posts or dead trees . 
 This bird with its somehow crow @-@ like aspect gave foot to the naming of the Quebrada de los Cuervos ( Crows Ravine ) in Uruguay , where they dwell together with the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture and the turkey vulture . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 It soars high while searching for food , holding its wings horizontally when gliding . It flaps in short bursts which are followed by short periods of gliding . Its flight is less efficient than that of other vultures , as the wings are not as long , forming a smaller wing area . In comparison with the turkey vulture , the black vulture flaps its wings more frequently during flight . It is known to regurgitate when approached or disturbed , which assists in predator deterrence and taking flight by decreasing its takeoff weight . Like all New World vultures , the black vulture often defecates on its own legs , using the evaporation of the water in the feces and / or urine to cool itself , a process known as urohidrosis . It cools the blood vessels in the unfeathered tarsi and feet , and causes white uric acid to streak the legs . Because it lacks a syrinx , the black vulture , like other New World vultures , has very few vocalization capabilities . It is generally silent , but can make hisses and grunts when agitated or while feeding . The black vulture is gregarious , and roosts in large groups . In areas where their ranges overlap , the black vulture will roost on the bare branches of dead trees alongside groups of turkey vultures . The black vulture generally forages in groups ; a flock of black vultures can easily drive a rival turkey vulture , which is generally solitary while foraging , from a carcass . 
 Like the turkey vulture , this vulture is often seen standing in a spread @-@ winged stance . The stance is believed to serve multiple functions : drying the wings , warming the body , and baking off bacteria . This same behavior is displayed by other New World vultures , Old World vultures , and storks . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 In natural settings , the black vulture eats mainly carrion . In areas populated by humans , it may scavenge at garbage dumps , but also takes eggs and decomposing plant material and can kill or injure newborn or incapacitated mammals . Like other vultures , it plays an important role in the ecosystem by disposing of carrion which would otherwise be a breeding ground for disease . The black vulture locates food either by sight or by following New World vultures of the genus Cathartes to carcasses . These vultures — the turkey vulture , the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture , and the greater yellow @-@ headed vulture — forage by detecting the scent of ethyl mercaptan , a gas produced by the beginnings of decay in dead animals . Their heightened ability to detect odors allows them to search for carrion below the forest canopy . The black vulture is aggressive when feeding , and may chase the slightly larger turkey vulture from carcasses . 
 The black vulture also occasionally feeds on livestock or deer . It is the only species of New World vulture which preys on cattle . It occasionally harasses cows which are giving birth , but primarily preys on newborn calves . In its first few weeks , a calf will allow vultures to approach it . The vultures swarm the calf in a group , then peck at the calf 's eyes , or at the nose or the tongue . The calf then goes into shock and is killed by the vultures . 
 Black vultures have sometimes been seen to pick ticks off resting capybaras . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The timing of black vultures ' breeding season varies with the latitude at which they live . In the United States , birds in Florida begin breeding as early as January , for example , while those in Ohio generally do not start before March . In South America , Argentinian and Chilean birds begin egg @-@ laying as early as September , while those further north on the continent typically wait until October . Some in South America breed even later than that — black vultures in Trinidad typically do not start until November , for example , and those in Ecuador may wait until February . Pairs are formed following a courtship ritual which is performed on the ground : several males circle a female with their wings partially open as they strut and bob their heads . They sometimes perform courtship flights , diving or chasing each other over their chosen nest site . 
 The black vulture lays its eggs on the ground in a wooded area , a hollow log , or some other cavity , seldom more than 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) above the ground . While it generally does not use any nesting materials , it may decorate the area around the nest with bits of brightly colored plastic , shards of glass , or metal items such as bottle caps . Clutch size is generally two eggs , though this can vary from one to three . The egg is oval and on average measures 7 @.@ 56 cm × 5 @.@ 09 cm ( 2 @.@ 98 in × 2 @.@ 00 in ) . The smooth , gray @-@ green , bluish , or white shell is variably blotched or spotted with lavender or pale brown around the larger end . Both parents incubate the eggs , which hatch after 28 to 41 days . Upon hatching , the young are covered with white down . Both parents feed the nestlings , regurgitating food at the nest site . The young remain in the nest for two months , and after 75 to 80 days they are able to fly skillfully . Predation of black vultures is relatively unlikely , though eggs and nestlings are readily eaten if found by mammalian predators such as raccoons , coatis and foxes . Due to its aggressiveness and size , few predators can threaten the fully @-@ grown vulture . However , various eagles may kill vultures in conflicts and even the ornate hawk @-@ eagle , a slightly smaller bird than the vulture , have preyed on adult black vultures . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The black vulture is considered a threat by cattle ranchers due to its predation on newborn cattle . The droppings produced by black vultures and other vultures can harm or kill trees and other vegetation . The bird is also considered a threat to the safety of aerial traffic , especially when it congregates in large numbers in the vicinity of garbage dumps — as is the case in the Rio de Janeiro Tom Jobim International Airport . 
 The black vulture can be held in captivity , though the Migratory Bird Treaty Act only allows this in the case of animals which are injured or unable to return to the wild . It receives special legal protections under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 in the United States , by the Convention for the Protection of Migratory Birds in Canada , and by the Convention for the Protection of Migratory Birds and Game Mammals in Mexico . In the United States it is illegal to take , kill , or possess black vultures and violation of the law is punishable by a fine of up to US $ 15 @,@ 000 and imprisonment of up to six months . It is listed as a species of Least Concern by the IUCN Red List . Populations appear to remain stable , and it has not reached the threshold of inclusion as a threatened species , which requires a decline of more than 30 % in ten years or three generations . 
 The black vulture appears in a variety of Maya hieroglyphics in Mayan codices . It is normally connected with either death or as a bird of prey . The vulture 's glyph is often shown attacking humans . This species lacks the religious connections that the king vulture has . While some of the glyphs clearly show the black vulture 's open nostril and hooked beak , some are assumed to be this species because they are vulture @-@ like but lack the king vulture 's knob and are painted black . 
 This vulture has appeared on two stamps : those of Guyana in 1990 and Nicaragua in 1994 . 
 = Amy Wyatt = 
 Amy Marie Violet Wyatt is a fictional character from the British soap opera Emmerdale , played by Chelsea Halfpenny . She debuted on @-@ screen during the episode airing on 8 October 2010 . Since her inception Amy has been central to main storylines and has been played as the serial 's rebellious teenager . Halfpenny has said she enjoys playing the character 's mischievous side . Amy 's unstable upbringing in children 's homes and foster care has impacted on her persona . She is a troubled character and protects herself by creating a hard exterior . Amy 's biggest fear is embarrassment and she aspires to lead a normal family life with her foster parents Val and Eric Pollard . As her storylines have developed she has grown close to the pair , yet rebelled at various stages . Charlie Hardwick and Chris <unk> who play Val and Eric have expressed their delight with the positive impact Amy has had on their on @-@ screen family . She has a kooky style and wears heavy make @-@ up . 
 Other stories for the character include blackmail , one @-@ night stands , heavy drinking and robberies . In 2011 , the programme 's series producer Stuart Blackburn devised a storyline to help viewers relate to Amy more . It began when Amy discovers she is pregnant by the serial 's villain Cain Dingle . As the narrative progresses , Amy becomes ostracised as the fear of losing her new @-@ found family increases . Amy has received mixed reviews from critics . Jane Simon from the Daily Mail said her first scenes resembled a horror movie , while her colleague Jaci Stephen has opined that Amy wears too much make @-@ up . However , entertainment website Digital Spy has favoured many of her storylines . Halfpenny has been nominated for three Best Newcomer awards for her portrayal of Amy . Halfpenny announced her departure from Emmerdale in October 2013 . She departed on 14 November 2013 . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Creation and Characterisation = = = 
 Series producer Gavin Blyth first mentioned Amy 's arrival in June 2010 . He said the characters of Val ( Charlie Hardwick ) and Eric Pollard ( Chris <unk> ) faced a " fascinating future " with the arrival of a " fresh @-@ faced stranger who takes a shine to the pair . " Amy debuted on @-@ screen on 8 October 2010 when she found herself stranded outside the village . She later moves in with Val and Eric and attempts to rebuild her life . 
 Amy is a happy character with a mischievous personality . As Amy grew up in foster care it shows in her persona . Though it is often hard for people to understand why she acts wayward , she also has the vulnerability factor . Halfpenny said she likes Amy 's mischievous side and hoped she would not learn to be sensible . Halfpenny also felt it was important that Amy remained youthful because she disliked portrayals of teenagers growing up too quickly . She found it easy to portray a character younger than herself as she could base aspects of Amy 's story on her own teenage experience . At times she is scared she puts on a " hard exterior " . Amy has a distinct style , Halfpenny described it as being quite " out there " in her choice of clothing and make @-@ up . Halfpenny said that viewers would not be getting used to Amy 's " nice side " and reminded them that she is good at " lying and scheming " . She concluded that Amy 's bad side was due to resurface . 
 = = = Adjusting to family life = = = 
 After Val and Eric foster Amy , she starts acting rebellious again . She starts drinking and throwing herself at men , forcing her foster parents to have second thoughts . Halfpenny told Inside Soap that Amy goes off the rails because she is convinced everything goes wrong in her life . " She 's afraid of getting hurt , so she spoils things for herself before anyone else can get there first . " Halfpenny explained that Val 's parental approach compared to Eric 's was contrasting . Eric had not been around when his son David Metcalfe ( Matthew Wolfenden ) grew up , Halfpenny said this factor meant that Eric is not tolerant with Amy 's bad behaviour . Though , Val had brought up her own children , her approach towards Amy is " light @-@ hearted . " However , when Amy continues her alcohol binges , Val and Eric feel she has " gone too far " and " question their ability to cope with her . " Served with an ultimatum , Amy has to endure changes to remain with her new family . Halfpenny claimed the main change she had to make was " to keep her tongue in her own mouth and cool it down with the boys . " 
 Off @-@ screen Wolfenden , Hardwick and <unk> were thrilled by Amy 's inclusion . Wolfenden said Halfpenny 's acting skill has " freshened the whole place up . " In comparison , David was initially hostile to Amy 's inclusion in his family . However , in one storyline his attitude towards her softens and results in Amy developing feelings for him . Wolfenden said David " has a soft spot for Amy " and flirted with her . Over time he began to see her as his " little sister . " When David 's girlfriend , Leyla Harding ( Roxy <unk> ) accuses Amy of stealing from the shop , David proves her innocence by exposing Alicia Gallagher ( Natalie Anderson ) as the thief . Wolfenden added that David has given out the wrong signals and acted naive during the story arc . Wolfenden explained that Amy misreads the signs because " she never had that sort of affection when she was growing up . " Amy kisses David which shocks him , though Wolfenden felt it should not surprise him . Amy lies to her best friend Victoria Sugden ( Isabel Hodgins ) , claiming she has slept with him and runs away from home . 
 Halfpenny revealed that Amy genuinely liked David and thought the feeling was mutual . " She wouldn 't do it to embarrass herself ; i think that is one of Amy 's biggest fears being embarrassed . " When David tracks Amy down ; she blackmails him in return for the truth but David exposes her to Eric . Halfpenny said Amy was hurt by David 's deception because she trusted him and despite their problems had a " good relationship " . Eric tries to convince Amy to return home to lead the life she had always wanted , because " deep down he really cares about her . " The strict parenting role is played once again with Eric , and Halfpenny branded the moment as Amy " meeting her match . " As " nothing is straight forward with Amy " , she returns home but finds telling the truth hard . Amy settles into village life until Jared Haynes ( Philip Hill @-@ Pearson ) arrives and blackmails Amy . An Emmerdale spokesperson revealed that Amy had an affair with Jared 's father and ruined his family . " She ’ s got herself in a mess and this is just the start of her problems . " Amy steals from Val and Eric to pay Jared off . At this point in the story Val and Eric " are sick of Amy 's bad behaviour . " Val refuses to give her any more help . 
 = = = Cain Dingle and pregnancy = = = 
 Amy 's role in the serial increased with her much publicised pregnancy storyline . The plot begins when Amy has sex with Cain Dingle ( Jeff Hordley ) . Halfpenny said " It 's Amy who takes the lead and it goes from there . " Hordley explained that Amy 's attention inflates Cain 's ego and he thinks " ' aye , aye " . It 's still young but in his book , he 's like , ' <unk> , I 've still got it ' . " However , when he learns she is sixteen , " he feels incredibly stupid and " embarrassed . " Cain shows no guilt and orders her to keep her distance . Halfpenny said Amy is not fazed by Cain 's attitude and uses the situation to make David jealous . 
 In August 2011 , Amy discovers she is pregnant and is left in a state of shock . With the storyline Halfpenny received her busiest filming schedules since she started filming . Halfpenny told What 's on TV that " it couldn 't have come at a worse time " because Amy is on her final chance with Val and Eric . Cain is unsympathetic , angry - while Amy is scared . Hordley said Cain wants to keep it " low @-@ key - to get rid and then move on . " He attempts to force her to abort the baby . Amy agrees because she isn 't " very bright " and thinks it will be the " easier option . " When she sees her ultrasound scan , Amy cannot go ahead with the abortion due to her own upbringing . Amy 's left in a terrified frame of mind when Victoria tells her about Cain 's violent past . 
 As the storyline developed , it held the potential to ruin the positive changes that the character had achieved . Halfpenny said Amy had become really close to Val and Eric . They are in a " good place " and they think " Amy 's all happy . " The one person she wants to tell is Val , with whom she shares the closest bond and shes " gutted " to remain silent . It prevents them from having a normal parent / child relationship , as the truth would ruin her one last chance . Halfpenny said her portrayal turns Amy to a " dark place " as she is " too young to be coping with something like this . " As Amy becomes preoccupied with fear in case Cain finds out , Halfpenny said it makes Amy do " something dangerous . " Though , Amy has Victoria to fall back on and is described as " her rock " . Emmerdale series producer Stuart Blackburn said the storyline would change the lives of a lot of people around Amy . At times he said the narrative is " truly heart breaking " and dangerous . " I think it 's going to change perceptions of Amy [ ... ] we ’ re going to start to understand Amy an awful lot more . " 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 On 11 October 2013 , it was announced Halfpenny would be leaving Emmerdale . The actress said she had had " an amazing experience " with the show and added " It 's completely changed my life , as it 's given me confidence and I 'm coming out of it having learnt so much . I now feel ready to move on and play other characters , although playing Amy Wyatt has been more fun than I 'd ever imagined . " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Amy 's car breaks down outside the village and Andy Sugden ( Kelvin Fletcher ) stops to help . Amy claims she is pregnant but Andy knows she is lying and takes her to the local garage . 
 While her car is being serviced , Amy checks into the B & B where she meets Val and Eric and claims to be a trainee nurse to get a discount ; but tells Victoria that she is actually sixteen and has run away from foster care . Victoria tries to sneak Amy out without paying but Val catches her so she offers to pay her debt by working in the B & B. The police arrive and inform Val that Amy stole her foster parents ' car and she leaves with a social worker . Victoria stays in touch with Amy and when she runs away again , Victoria hides her in the basement of the B & B. Val finds her and lets her stay but Eric forces her to leave . Amy visits Val again and tells her that her foster parents have separated and she is moving to a care home . Amy locks herself in a bathroom and workers at the care home telephone Val , claiming she will not resurface until Val arrives . Val arranges for Amy to stay at the B & B and later fosters her . 
 Amy starts working for Leyla and develops feelings for David , who pays her attention . Amy sleeps with Cain and tries to make David jealous , misinterpreting his concern about her behaviour . When Alicia steals £ 500 worth of stock , Leyla accuses Amy but David defends her and Alicia admits it was her . Amy kisses David on the cheek to thank him for his support and misinterpreting his concern , makes further advances but runs away after David rejects her . When she comes home , she blackmails David and tells Victoria she has slept with him . Later , Amy admits that she lied . Amy , Val and Eric move into their new home at the barn conversion but her happiness is short @-@ lived as a man from her past , Jared , tracks her down . He threatens to tell her new family and friends about her past and demands money to keep quiet until Zak Dingle ( Steve Halliwell ) intervenes , realizing something is wrong . She tells Zak about her past and makes him promise to keep quiet . She pays Jared but when threatened by Zak , he reveals that Amy 's affair with his father caused his family to break down . Zak makes Jared leave but Amy discovers she is pregnant and tells Cain , who demands she have a termination . Victoria suggests Amy tell Val but at the clinic , learns that her pregnancy is too advanced for a termination and the baby is due in December . She tells Belle Dingle ( Eden Taylor @-@ Draper ) about her condition but insists that Belle keep it secret , scared of Cain 's reaction if he finds out . Amy later gives birth to a baby boy in the church graveyard . Thinking he is dead , Amy wraps him in her jumper before leaving him in a telephone box and goes to David 's house . She tells him what has happened and he learns that the baby has been found alive and taken to hospital . Knowing Amy needs medical attention herself , he waits for her to fall asleep and calls an ambulance , Val and Eric . At the hospital , she apologizes to Eric and Val for keeping her pregnancy a secret and initially decides to keep the baby , now named Kyle , delighting Val and Eric . On Christmas Day 2011 , Amy is bathing Kyle but freezes when she remembers her mother dropping her in the bath and giving her to social services . Amy runs away , leaving Kyle with Val , and confides in Victoria who helps her decide to give Kyle up for adoption . Val is upset by Amy 's decision and that Eric is supporting her , making them drift apart . Val tries to win Amy back with a family trip to Portugal but goes alone and clears the bank account . Amy is upset when Eric begins dating Brenda Walker ( Lesley Dunlop ) and attempts to keep them apart ; however , she realizes how happy Brenda makes Eric and supports the relationship . 
 Amy discovers that Kyle 's adoptive parents have died . She and Victoria attend the funeral to see if Kyle is there but they see him at the wake with his adoptive grandmother , Joanie Wright ( Denise Black ) . When Kyle drops his toy , Amy tries to tell Joanie but she does not hear her so Amy keeps it . The next day , Amy returns and a barmaid tells her where Joanie lives . Amy plans to return the toy but changes her mind at the last minute and leaves . Needing to see Kyle , she persuades Andy to let her take baby Jack to Kyle 's playgroup and makes friends with Joanie , telling her that she is studying childcare and asking if she needs any help with Kyle . Joanie accepts and allows Amy to look after Kyle occasionally . Val is thrilled when she finds out but Victoria and Eric are not convinced that it is a good idea and Eric tells Joanie that Amy is Kyle 's birth mother . Disgusted , Joanie refuses to let Amy see Kyle any more but is eventually convinced to change her mind . Sadly , while Amy and Kyle are on a picnic together , Kyle almost drowns accidentally and Joanie blames Amy and bans her from seeing Kyle again . This time Joanie refuses to change her mind and even calls the police when Amy visits repeatedly who warn her to stay away . Desperate to see her son , Amy and Andy ( who she is now dating ) call Social Services to see if she can get custody of Kyle but the social worker tells her that being awarded custody is very unlikely . Feeling now that the adoption was a mistake , Amy decides to snatch Kyle and go on the run . Kerry , knowing how Amy feels about losing her child , tries to talk her out of it but when she can 't , decides to help her instead . They go to Kyle 's playgroup and kidnap him and Kerry drives them to the docks so that she can go to Ireland . During the drive , Val phones repeatedly but they don 't answer . Eventually Kerry answers and Amy tearfully reveals her plans before throwing the phone away . Eric checks the history on the computer and finds out where Amy is heading . Cain , Andy , Val , Eric and Joanie all head to the docks . In the end , Cain persuades Amy to return Kyle , warning her of the complications of the life on the run and how Kyle might be affected . She says goodbye to Kyle and gives him to Cain , who tries to convince her to stay too but Amy , fearing she 'll be sent to prison , refuses and leaves , devastating Val . Val later gets a call from Amy and learns that she is living in Ireland with her aunt . 
 In September 2015 , David informs Amy of Val 's death and the funeral date , but Amy believes it would be too big a risk to return to the village . She passes her regards to Eric and the family . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2011 , Halfpenny was nominated in the category of " Best Soap Newcomer " at the TV Choice Awards . She was later nominated in the category of " Best Newcomer " at the Inside Soap Awards . She was later nominated for " Best Newcomer " at the 2012 National Television Awards . Jane Simon of the Daily Mirror said Amy 's first scenes resembled the start of a " teen horror movie . " Inside Soap described Amy stating : " To survive in soapland you need attitude - and Amy Wyatt isn 't lacking in that department . " 
 Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail has criticised Amy for the amount of make @-@ up she wears . When Leyla accused her of thieving , Stephen said it couldn 't have been her because she wears too much eye make @-@ up . She <unk> " she 's lucky she can find one foot in front of the other . " When Amy is unsure whether or not to abort her baby , Stephen jested her first decision should be whether to change her mascara - " I ’ ve seen less fuel @-@ faced coal miners . " Stephen opined that it was obvious David was heading for trouble with " <unk> Geordie Amy . " She said she had no sympathy for him because he knowingly walked into Amy 's " maelstrom of rampant teen hormones . " Entertainment website Digital Spy have chosen certain plots featuring Amy in their " Picture of the day " recommendation feature . These include Amy being accused of thieving , blackmailing David and revealing her pregnancy to Cain . 
 = Political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union = 
 There was systematic political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union , based on the interpretation of political opposition or dissent as a psychiatric problem . It was called " psychopathological mechanisms " of dissent . 
 During the leadership of General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev , psychiatry was used to disable and remove from society political opponents ( " dissidents " ) who openly expressed beliefs that contradicted the official dogma . The term " philosophical intoxication " , for instance , was widely applied to the mental disorders diagnosed when people disagreed with the country 's Communist leaders and , by referring to the writings of the Founding Fathers of Marxism – Leninism — Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , and Vladimir Lenin — made them the target of criticism . 
 Article 58 @-@ 10 of the Stalin @-@ era Criminal Code , " Anti @-@ Soviet agitation " , was to a considerable degree preserved in the new 1958 RSFSR Criminal Code as Article 70 " Anti @-@ Soviet agitation and propaganda " . In 1967 a weaker law , Article 190 @-@ 1 " Dissemination of fabrications known to be false , which defame the Soviet political and social system " , was added to the RSFSR Criminal Code . These laws were frequently applied in conjunction with the system of diagnosis for mental illness , developed by Academician Andrei Snezhnevsky . Together they established a framework within which non @-@ standard beliefs could easily be defined as a criminal offence and the basis , subsequently , for a psychiatric diagnosis . 
 = = Applying the diagnosis = = 
 The " anti @-@ Soviet " political behavior of some individuals — being outspoken in their opposition to the authorities , demonstrating for reform , and writing critical books — were defined simultaneously as criminal acts ( e.g. , a violation of Articles 70 or 190 @-@ 1 ) , symptoms of mental illness ( e.g. , " delusion of reformism " ) , and susceptible to a ready @-@ made diagnosis ( e.g. , " sluggish schizophrenia " ) . Within the boundaries of the diagnostic category , the symptoms of pessimism , poor social adaptation and conflict with authorities were themselves sufficient for a formal diagnosis of " sluggish schizophrenia . " 
 The psychiatric incarceration of certain individuals was prompted by their attempts to emigrate , to distribute or possess prohibited documents or books , to participate in civil rights protests and demonstrations , and become involved in forbidden religious activities . The religious beliefs of prisoners , including those of well @-@ educated former atheists who had become adherents of a religious faith , was considered to be a form of mental illness that required treatment . The KGB routinely sent dissenters to psychiatrists for diagnosing to avoid embarrassing <unk> trials and to discredit dissidence as the product of ill minds . Highly classified government documents which have become available after the dissolution of the Soviet Union confirm that the authorities consciously used psychiatry as a tool to suppress dissent . 
 According to the " Commentary " to the post @-@ Soviet Russian Federation Law on Psychiatric Care , individuals forced to undergo treatment in Soviet psychiatric medical institutions were entitled to rehabilitation in accordance with the established procedure and could claim compensation . The Russian Federation acknowledged that before 1991 psychiatry had been used for political purposes and took responsibility for the victims of " political psychiatry . " 
 The political abuse of psychiatry in Russia has continued , nevertheless , since the fall of the Soviet Union and human rights activists may still face the threat of a psychiatric diagnosis for their legitimate civic and political activities . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Definitions = = = 
 Political abuse of psychiatry is the misuse of psychiatric diagnosis , detention and treatment for the purposes of obstructing the fundamental human rights of certain groups and individuals in a society . It entails the <unk> and committal of citizens to psychiatric facilities based upon political rather than mental health @-@ based criteria . Many authors , including psychiatrists , also use the terms " Soviet political psychiatry " or " punitive psychiatry " to refer to this phenomenon . 
 In his book Punitive Medicine ( 1979 ) Alexander Podrabinek defined the term " punitive medicine " , which is identified with " punitive psychiatry , " as " a tool in the struggle against dissidents who cannot be punished by legal means . " Punitive psychiatry is neither a discrete subject nor a psychiatric specialty but , rather , it is an emergency arising within many applied sciences in totalitarian countries where members of a profession may feel themselves compelled to serve the diktats of power . Psychiatric confinement of sane people is uniformly considered a particularly pernicious form of repression and Soviet punitive psychiatry was one of the key weapons of both illegal and legal repression . 
 As Vladimir Bukovsky and Semyon Gluzman wrote in their joint A Manual on Psychiatry for Dissenters , " the Soviet use of psychiatry as a punitive means is based upon the deliberate interpretation of dissent ... as a psychiatric problem . " 
 = = = An inherent capacity for abuse = = = 
 Psychiatry possesses an inherent capacity for abuse that is greater than in other areas of medicine . The diagnosis of mental disease can give the state license to detain persons against their will and insist upon therapy both in the interest of the detainee and in the broader interests of society . In addition , receiving a psychiatric diagnosis can in itself be regarded as oppressive . In a monolithic state , psychiatry can be used to bypass standard legal procedures for establishing guilt or innocence and allow political incarceration without the ordinary odium attaching to such political trials . 
 In the period from the 1960 @-@ s to 1986 , the abuse of psychiatry for political purposes was reported to have been systematic in the Soviet Union and episodic in other Eastern European countries such as Romania , Hungary , Czechoslovakia , and Yugoslavia . The practice of incarceration of political dissidents in mental hospitals in Eastern Europe and the former USSR damaged the credibility of psychiatric practice in these states and entailed strong condemnation from the international community . Psychiatrists have been involved in human rights abuses in states across the world when the definitions of mental disease were expanded to include political disobedience . As scholars have long argued , governmental and medical institutions have at times classified threats to authority during periods of political disturbance and instability as a form of mental disease . In many countries political prisoners are still sometimes confined and abused in mental institutions . 
 In the Soviet Union dissidents were often confined in the so @-@ called psikhushka , or psychiatric wards . <unk> is the Russian ironic diminutive for " mental hospital " . One of the first <unk> was the Psychiatric Prison Hospital in the city of Kazan . In 1939 it was transferred to the control of the NKVD ( the secret police and precursor of the KGB ) on the orders of Lavrentiy Beria , the head of the NKVD . International human rights defenders such as Walter Reich have long recorded the methods by which Soviet psychiatrists in <unk> hospitals diagnosed schizophrenia in political dissenters . Western scholars examined no aspect of Soviet psychiatry as thoroughly as its involvement in the social control of political dissenters . 
 = = = Under Stalin , Khrushchev and Brezhnev = = = 
 As early as 1948 , the Soviet secret service took an interest in this area of medicine . One of those with overall responsibility for the Soviet secret police , pre @-@ war Procurator General and State Prosecutor , the deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Andrey Vyshinsky , was the first to order the use of psychiatry as a tool of repression . Russian psychiatrist Pyotr <unk> also believed that in a class society , especially during the most severe class struggle , psychiatry was incapable of not being repressive . A system of political abuse of psychiatry was developed at the end of Joseph Stalin 's regime . 
 Punitive psychiatry was not simply an inheritance from the Stalin era , however , according to Alexander <unk> . The <unk> , or Chief Administration for Corrective Labor Camps , was an effective instrument of political repression . There was no compelling requirement to develop an alternative and more expensive psychiatric substitute . The abuse of psychiatry was a natural product of the later Soviet era . From the mid @-@ 1970s to the 1990s the structure of the USSR mental health service conformed to the double standard in society , being represented by two distinct systems which co @-@ existed peacefully for the most part , despite periodic conflicts between them : 
 system one was that of punitive psychiatry . It directly served the authorities and those in power , and was headed by the Moscow Institute for Forensic Psychiatry named in honour of Vladimir Serbsky ; 
 system two was made up of elite , <unk> oriented clinics . It was headed by the Leningrad <unk> Institute named in memory of Vladimir <unk> . 
 The hundreds of hospitals in the provinces combined elements of both systems . 
 If someone was mentally ill then , he was sent to a psychiatric hospital and confined there until his dying day . If his mental health was uncertain but he was not constantly unwell , he and his <unk> [ testimonial from employers , the Party and other Soviet institutions ] were sent to a labour camp or to be shot . When allusions to socialist legality started to be made , it was decided to prosecute such people . Soon it became apparent that putting people who gave anti @-@ Soviet speeches on trial only made matters worse for the regime . Such individuals were no longer tried in court . Instead they were given a psychiatric examination and declared insane . 
 = = The Joint Session , October 1951 = = 
 In the 1950s , the psychiatrists of the Soviet Union turned themselves into the medical arm of the Gulag State . A precursor of later abuses in psychiatry in the Soviet Union , the " Joint Session " of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences and the Board of the All @-@ Union Neurological and Psychiatric Association took place from 10 to 15 October 1951 . The event was dedicated , supposedly , to the great Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov and alleged that several of the USSR 's leading neuroscientists and psychiatrists of the time ( among them <unk> <unk> , Vasily <unk> , Raisa <unk> , Aleksandr <unk> , and Mikhail Gurevich ) were guilty of practicing " anti @-@ Pavlovian , anti @-@ Marxist , idealistic [ and ] reactionary " science , and this was damaging to Soviet psychiatry . 
 During the Joint Session these eminent psychiatrists , motivated by fear , had to publicly admit that their scientific positions were erroneous and they also had to promise to conform to " Pavlovian " doctrines . These public declarations of obedience proved insufficient . In the closing speech Snezhnevsky , the lead author of the Session 's policy report , stated that the accused psychiatrists " have not disarmed themselves and continue to remain in the old anti @-@ Pavlovian positions " , thereby causing " grave damage to the Soviet psychiatric research and practice " . The vice president of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences accused them of " diligently worshipping the dirty source of American pseudo @-@ science " . Those who articulated these accusations at the Joint Session — among them Irina <unk> , Vasily <unk> , Oleg <unk> , and Snezhnevsky — were distinguished by their careerist ambition and fear for their own positions . Not surprisingly , many of them were promoted and appointed to leadership posts shortly after the session . 
 The Joint Session also had a negative impact on several leading Soviet academic neuroscientists , such as Pyotr <unk> , Aleksey <unk> , Lina Stern , Ivan <unk> , and Leon Orbeli . They were labeled as anti @-@ <unk> , anti @-@ materialists and reactionaries and subsequently they were dismissed from their positions . In addition to losing their laboratories some of these scientists were subjected to torture in prison . The Moscow , Leningrad , Ukrainian , Georgian , and Armenian schools of neuroscience and neurophysiology were damaged for a period due to this loss of personnel . The Joint Session ravaged productive research in neurosciences and psychiatry for years to come . Pseudo @-@ science took control . 
 Following a previous joint session of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences ( 28 June – 4 July 1950 ) and the 10 @-@ 15 October 1951 joint session of the Presidium of the Academy of Medical Sciences and the Board of the All @-@ Union Society of <unk> and Psychiatrists , <unk> 's <unk> was given the leading role . The 1950 decision to give monopoly over psychiatry to the Pavlovian school of Snezhnevsky was one of the crucial factors in the rise of political psychiatry . The Soviet doctors , under the incentive of Snezhnevsky , devised a " Pavlovian theory of schizophrenia " and increasingly applied this diagnostic category to political dissidents . 
 = = " Sluggish schizophrenia " = = 
 " The incarceration of free thinking healthy people in <unk> is spiritual murder , it is a variation of the gas chamber , even more cruel ; the torture of the people being killed is more malicious and more prolonged . Like the gas chambers , these crimes will never be forgotten and those involved in them will be condemned for all time during their life and after their death . " ( Alexander Solzhenitsyn ) 
 Psychiatric diagnoses such as the diagnosis of " sluggish schizophrenia " in political dissidents in the USSR were used for political purposes . It was the diagnosis of " sluggish schizophrenia " that was most prominently used in cases of dissidents . Sluggish schizophrenia as one of new diagnostic categories was created to facilitate the stifling of dissidents and was a root of self @-@ deception among psychiatrists to placate their consciences when the doctors acted as a tool of oppression in the name of a political system . According to the Global Initiative on Psychiatry chief executive Robert van Voren , the political abuse of psychiatry in the USSR arose from the conception that people who opposed the Soviet regime were mentally sick since there was no other logical rationale why one would oppose the sociopolitical system considered the best in the world . The diagnosis " sluggish schizophrenia , " a longstanding concept further developed by the Moscow School of Psychiatry and particularly by its chief Snezhnevsky , furnished a very handy framework for explaining this behavior . 
 The weight of scholarly opinion holds that the psychiatrists who played the primary role in the development of this diagnostic concept were following directives from the Communist Party and the Soviet secret service , or KGB , and were well aware of the political uses to which it would be put . Nevertheless , for many Soviet psychiatrists " sluggish schizophrenia " appeared to be a logical explanation to apply to the behavior of critics of the regime who , in their opposition , seemed willing to jeopardize their happiness , family , and career for a reformist conviction or ideal that was so apparently divergent from the prevailing social and political orthodoxy . 
 Snezhnevsky , the most prominent theorist of Soviet psychiatry and director of the Institute of Psychiatry of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences , developed a novel classification of mental disorders postulating an original set of diagnostic criteria . A carefully crafted description of sluggish schizophrenia established that psychotic symptoms were non @-@ essential for the diagnosis , but symptoms of psychopathy , hypochondria , depersonalization or anxiety were central to it . Symptoms referred to as part of the " negative axis " included pessimism , poor social adaptation , and conflict with authorities , and were themselves sufficient for a formal diagnosis of " sluggish schizophrenia with scanty symptoms . " According to Snezhnevsky , patients with sluggish schizophrenia could present as quasi sane yet manifest minimal but clinically relevant personality changes which could remain unnoticed to the untrained eye . Thereby patients with non @-@ psychotic mental disorders , or even persons who were not mentally sick , could be easily labelled with the diagnosis of sluggish schizophrenia . Along with paranoia , sluggish schizophrenia was the diagnosis most frequently used for the psychiatric incarceration of dissenters . As per the theories of Snezhnevsky and his colleagues , schizophrenia was much more prevalent than previously considered since the illness could be presented with comparatively slight symptoms and only progress afterwards . As a consequence , schizophrenia was diagnosed much more often in Moscow than in cities of other countries , as the World Health Organization Pilot Study on Schizophrenia reported in 1973 . The city with the highest prevalence of schizophrenia in the world was Moscow . In particular , the scope was widened by sluggish schizophrenia because according to Snezhnevsky and his colleagues , patients with this diagnosis were capable of functioning almost normally in the social sense . Their symptoms could be like those of a neurosis or could assume a paranoid character . The patients with paranoid symptoms retained some insight into their condition but overestimated their own significance and could manifest grandiose ideas of reforming society . Thereby , sluggish schizophrenia could have such symptoms as " reform delusions , " " perseverance , " and " struggle for the truth . " As Viktor <unk> reported , Snezhnevsky diagnosed a reformation delusion for every case when a patient " develops a new principle of human knowledge , drafts an academy of human happiness , and many other projects for the benefit of mankind . " 
 In the 1960s and 1970s , theories , which contained ideas about reforming society and struggling for truth , and religious convictions were not referred to delusional paranoid disorders in practically all foreign classifications , but Soviet psychiatry , proceeding from ideological conceptions , referred critique of the political system and proposals to reform this system to the delusional construct . Diagnostic approaches of conception of sluggish schizophrenia and paranoiac states with delusion of reformism were used only in the Soviet Union and several Eastern European countries . 
 On the covert orders of the KGB , thousands of social and political reformers — Soviet " dissidents " — were incarcerated in mental hospitals after being labelled with diagnoses of " sluggish schizophrenia " , a disease fabricated by Snezhnevsky and " Moscow school " of psychiatry . American psychiatrist Alan A. Stone stated that Western criticism of Soviet psychiatry aimed at Snezhnevsky personally , because he was essentially responsible for the Soviet concept of schizophrenia with a " sluggish type " manifestation by " <unk> " including other symptoms . One can readily apply this diagnostic scheme to dissenters . Snezhnevsky was long attacked in the West as an exemplar of psychiatric abuse in the USSR . The leading critics implied that Snezhnevsky had designed the Soviet model of schizophrenia and this diagnosis to make political dissent into a mental disease . He was charged with cynically developing a system of diagnosis which could be bent for political purposes , and he himself diagnosed or was involved in a series of famous dissident cases , and , in dozens of cases , he personally signed a commission decision on legal insanity of mentally healthy dissidents including Vladimir Bukovsky , Natalya Gorbanevskaya , Leonid Plyushch , <unk> <unk> , and Pyotr Grigorenko . 
 = = Beginning of the trend toward mass abuse = = 
 = = = From Khrushchev to Andropov = = = 
 The campaign to declare political opponents mentally sick and to commit dissenters to mental hospitals began in the late 1950s and early 1960s . As Vladimir Bukovsky commented on the emergence of the political abuse of psychiatry , Nikita Khrushchev reckoned that it was impossible for people in a socialist society to have an anti @-@ socialist consciousness . Whenever manifestations of dissidence could not be justified as a provocation of world imperialism or a legacy of the past , they were self @-@ evidently the product of mental disease . In a speech published in the Pravda daily newspaper on 24 May 1959 , Khrushchev said : 
 A crime is a deviation from generally recognized standards of behavior frequently caused by mental disorder . Can there be diseases , nervous disorders among certain people in a Communist society ? Evidently yes . If that is so , then there will also be offences , which are characteristic of people with abnormal minds . Of those who might start calling for opposition to Communism on this basis , we can say that clearly their mental state is not normal . 
 The now available evidence supports the conclusion that the system of political abuse of psychiatry was carefully designed by the KGB to rid the USSR of undesirable elements . According to several available documents and a message by a former general of the Fifth ( dissident ) Directorate of the Ukrainian KGB to Robert van Voren , political abuse of psychiatry as a systematic method of repression was developed by Yuri Andropov along with a selected group of associates . 
 Andropov was in charge of the wide @-@ ranging deployment of psychiatric repression from the moment he was appointed to head the KGB . He became KGB Chairman on 18 May 1967 . On 3 July 1967 , he made a proposal to establish a Fifth Directorate ( ideological counterintelligence ) within the KGB to deal with internal political opposition to the Soviet regime . The Directorate was set up at the end of July and took charge of KGB files on all Soviet dissidents , including Andrei Sakharov and Alexander Solzhenitsyn . In 1968 KGB Chairman Andropov issued a departmental order " On the tasks of State security agencies in combating the ideological sabotage by the adversary " , calling for the KGB to struggle against dissidents and their imperialist masters . His aim was " the destruction of dissent in all its forms " and he insisted that the struggle for human rights was just one part of a wide @-@ ranging imperialist plot to undermine the Soviet state 's foundation . Similar ideas can be found in the 1983 book Speeches and Writings by Andropov published when he had become General Secretary of the CPSU : 
 [ w ] hen analyzing the main trend in present @-@ day bourgeois criticism of [ Soviet ] human rights policies one is bound to draw the conclusion that although this criticism is camouflaged with " concern " for freedom , democracy , and human rights , it is directed in fact against the socialist essence of Soviet society ... 
 = = = Implementation and the legal framework = = = 
 On 29 April 1969 , Andropov submitted an elaborate plan to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union to set up a network of mental hospitals that would defend the " Soviet Government and the socialist order " from dissenters . To persuade his fellow Politburo members of the risk posed by the mentally ill , Andropov circulated a report from the Krasnodar Region . A secret resolution of the USSR Council of Ministers was adopted . Andropov 's proposal to use psychiatry for struggle against dissenters was adopted and implemented . 
 In 1929 the USSR had 70 psychiatric hospitals and 21 @,@ 103 psychiatric beds . By 1935 this had increased to 102 psychiatric hospitals and 33 @,@ 772 psychiatric beds , and by 1955 there were 200 psychiatric hospitals and 116 @,@ 000 psychiatric beds in the Soviet Union . The Soviet authorities built psychiatric hospitals at a rapid pace and increased the quantity of beds for patients with nervous and mental illnesses : between 1962 and 1974 the number of beds for psychiatric patients increased from 222 @,@ 600 to 390 @,@ 000 . Such an expansion in the number of psychiatric beds was expected to continue in the years up to 1980 . Throughout this period the dominant trend in Soviet psychiatry ran counter to the vigorous attempts in Western countries to treat as many as possible as out @-@ patients rather than in @-@ patients . 
 On 15 May 1969 , a Soviet Government decree ( No. 345 – 209 ) was issued " On measures for preventing dangerous behavior ( acts ) on the part of mentally ill persons . " This decree confirmed the practice of having undesirables hauled into detention by psychiatrists . Soviet psychiatrists were told whom they should examine and were assured that they might detain these individuals with the help of the police or entrap them into coming to the hospital . The psychiatrists thereby doubled as interrogators and as arresting officers . Doctors fabricated a diagnosis requiring detention and no court decision was required for subjecting the individual to indefinite confinement in a psychiatric institution . 
 By the end of the 1950s , confinement to a psychiatric institution had become the most commonly used method of punishing leaders of the political opposition . In the 1960s and 1970s , the trials of dissenters and their referral for " treatment " to the Special Psychiatric Hospitals under MVD control and oversight came out into the open , and the world learned of a wave of " psychiatric terror " which was flatly denied by those in charge of the Serbsky Institute . The bulk of psychiatric repression spans the period from the late 1960s to the early 1980s . As CPSU General Secretary , from November 1982 to February 1984 , Yury Andropov demonstrated little patience with domestic <unk> and continued the Brezhnev Era policy of confining dissenters in mental hospitals . 
 = = Examination and hospitalization = = 
 Political dissidents were usually charged under Articles 70 ( agitation and propaganda against the Soviet state ) and 190 @-@ 1 ( dissemination of false fabrications defaming the Soviet state and social system ) of the RSFSR Criminal Code . Forensic psychiatrists were asked to examine offenders whose mental state was considered abnormal by the investigating officers . 
 In almost every case , dissidents were examined at the Serbsky Central Research Institute for Forensic Psychiatry in Moscow , where persons being prosecuted in court for committing political crimes were subjected to a forensic @-@ psychiatric expert evaluation . Once certified , the accused and convicted were sent for involuntary treatment to the Special Psychiatric Hospitals controlled by the Ministry of Internal Affairs ( MVD ) of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic . 
 The accused had no right of appeal . The right was given to their relatives or other interested persons but they were not allowed to nominate psychiatrists to take part in the evaluation , because all psychiatrists were considered fully independent and equally credible before the law . 
 According to dissident poet Naum <unk> , the atmosphere at the Serbsky Institute in Moscow altered almost overnight when Daniil Lunts took over as head of the Fourth Department ( otherwise known as the Political Department ) . Previously , psychiatric departments were regarded as a ' refuge ' against being dispatched to the Gulag . Now that policy altered . The first reports of dissenters being hospitalized on non @-@ medical grounds date from the early 1960s , not long after Georgy Morozov was appointed director of the Serbsky Institute . Both Morozov and Lunts were personally involved in numerous well @-@ known cases and were notorious abusers of psychiatry for political purposes . Most prisoners , in Viktor Nekipelov 's words , characterized Daniil Lunts as " no better than the criminal doctors who performed inhuman experiments on the prisoners in Nazi concentration camps . " 
 A well @-@ documented practice was the use of psychiatric hospitals as temporary prisons during the two or three weeks around the 7 November ( October Revolution ) Day and May Day celebrations , to isolate " socially dangerous " persons who otherwise might protest in public or manifest other deviant behavior . 
 = = Struggle against abuse = = 
 In the 1960s , a vigorous movement grew up protesting against abuse of psychiatry in the USSR . Political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union was denounced in the course of the Congresses of the World Psychiatric Association in Mexico City ( 1971 ) , Hawaii ( 1977 ) , Vienna ( 1983 ) and Athens ( 1989 ) . The campaign to terminate political abuse of psychiatry in the USSR was a key episode in the Cold War , inflicting irretrievable damage on the prestige of medicine in the Soviet Union . 
 = = Classification of the victims = = 
 Upon analysis of over 200 well @-@ authenticated cases covering the period 1962 – 1976 , Sidney Bloch and Peter Reddaway developed a classification of the victims of Soviet psychiatric abuse . They were classified as : 
 advocates of human rights or democratization ; 
 nationalists ; 
 would @-@ be emigrants ; 
 religious believers ; 
 citizens inconvenient to the authorities . 
 The advocates of human rights and democratization , according to Bloch and Reddaway , made up about half the dissidents repressed by means of psychiatry . Nationalists made up about one @-@ tenth of the dissident population dealt with psychiatrically . Would @-@ be emigrants constituted about one @-@ fifth of dissidents victimized by means of psychiatry . People , detained only because of their religious activity , made up about fifteen per cent of dissident @-@ patients . Citizens inconvenient to the authorities because of their " obdurate " complaints about bureaucratic excesses and abuses accounted for about five per cent of dissidents subject to psychiatric abuse . 
 = = Incomplete figures = = 
 In 1985 , Peter Reddaway and Sidney Bloch provided documented data on some five hundred cases in their book Soviet Psychiatric Abuse . 
 According to the 1993 book by Russian psychiatrist Mikhail Buyanov , the harm inflicted by Soviet punitive psychiatry on the image of domestic medicine is , of course , great , but bears no comparison to the crimes of the Nazi doctors . Now , when all the passions have cooled , one can say that the zeal of Soviet psychiatrists inflicted suffering on up to 100 or 120 people of all 280 million citizens of the former Soviet Union , Buyanov writes . He adds that among the persons were many fanatical nationalists , religious <unk> , and political <unk> who after escaping to freedom corrupted the masses , <unk> their heads with nonsense , carried away immature people with their ideas through the connivance of the so @-@ called progressive intelligentsia , and a result of it is wars , blood , and reciprocal hatred . 
 = = = True scale of repression = = = 
 On basis of the available data and materials accumulated in the archives of the International Association on the Political Use of Psychiatry , one can confidently conclude that thousands of dissenters were hospitalized for political reasons . From 1994 to 1995 , an investigative commission of Moscow psychiatrists explored the records of five prison psychiatric hospitals in Russia and discovered about two thousand cases of political abuse of psychiatry in these hospitals alone . In 2004 , Anatoly Prokopenko said he was surprised at the facts obtained by him from the official classified top secret documents by the Central Committee of the CPSU , by the KGB , and MVD . According to his calculations based on what he found in the documents , about 15 @,@ 000 people were confined for political crimes in the psychiatric prison hospitals under the control of the MVD . In 2005 , referring to the Archives of the CPSU Central Committee and the records of the three Special <unk> Hospitals — <unk> , Leningrad and Chernyakhovsk hospitals — to which human rights activists gained access in 1991 , Prokopenko concluded that psychiatry had been used as punitive measure against about 20 @,@ 000 people for purely political reasons . This was only a small part of the total picture , Prokopenko said . The data on the total number of people who had been held in all sixteen prison hospitals and in the 1 @,@ 500 " open " psychiatric hospitals remains unknown because parts of the archives of the prison psychiatric hospitals and hospitals in general are classified and inaccessible . The figure of fifteen or twenty thousand political prisoners in psychiatric hospitals run by the Soviet Ministry of Internal Affairs was first put forward by Prokopenko in the 1997 book Mad Psychiatry ( " <unk> <unk> " ) , which was republished in 2005 . 
 An indication of the extent of the political abuse of psychiatry in the USSR is provided by Semyon Gluzman 's calculation that the percentage of " the mentally ill " among those accused of so @-@ called anti @-@ Soviet activities proved many times higher than among criminal offenders . The attention paid to political prisoners by Soviet psychiatrists was more than 40 times greater than their attention to ordinary criminal offenders . This derives from the following comparison : 1 – 2 % of all the forensic psychiatric examinations carried out by the Serbsky Institute targeted those accused of anti @-@ Soviet activities ; convicted dissidents in penal institutions made up 0 @.@ 05 % of the total number of convicts ; 1 – 2 % is 40 times greater than 0 @.@ 05 % . 
 According to Viktor <unk> , the struggle against dissent operated on many more layers than those registered in court sentences . We do not know how many the secret services kept under surveillance , held criminally liable , arrested , sent to psychiatric hospitals , or who were sacked from their jobs , and restricted in all kinds of other ways in the exercise of their rights . No objective assessment of the total number of repressed persons is possible without fundamental analysis of archival documents . The difficulty is that the required data are very diverse and are not to be found in a single archive . They are scattered between the State Archive of the Russian Federation , the archive of the Russian Federation State Statistical Committee ( <unk> ) , the archives of the RF Ministry of Internal Affairs ( MVD of Russia ) , the FSB of Russia , the RF General Prosecutor 's Office , and the Russian Military and Historical Archive . Further documents are held in the archives of 83 constituent entities of the Russian Federation , in urban and regional archives , as well as in the archives of the former Soviet Republics , now the 11 independent countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States or the three Baltic States ( Baltics ) . 
 = = = Concealment of the data = = = 
 According to Russian psychiatrist Emmanuil Gushansky , the scale of psychiatric abuses in the past , the use of psychiatric doctrines by the totalitarian state have been thoroughly concealed . The archives of the Soviet Ministries of Internal Affairs ( MVD ) and Health ( USSR Health Ministry ) , and of the Serbsky Institute for Forensic Psychiatry , which between them hold evidence about the expansion of psychiatry and the regulations governing that expansion , remain totally closed to researchers , says Gushansky . Dan Healey shares his opinion that the abuses of Soviet psychiatry under Stalin and , even more dramatically , in the 1960s to 1980s remain under @-@ researched : the contents of the main archives are still classified and inaccessible . Hundreds of files on people who underwent forensic psychiatric examinations at the Serbsky Institute during Stalin 's time are on the shelves of the highly classified archive in its basement where Gluzman saw them in 1989 . All are marked by numbers without names or surnames , and any biographical data they contain is <unk> and inaccessible to researchers . 
 Anatoly Sobchak , the former Mayor of Saint Petersburg , wrote : 
 The scale of the application of methods of repressive psychiatry in the USSR is testified by inexorable figures and facts . A commission of the top Party leadership headed by Alexei Kosygin reached a decision in 1978 to build 80 psychiatric hospitals and 8 special psychiatric institutions in addition to those already in existence . Their construction was to be completed by 1990 . They were to be built in Krasnoyarsk , Khabarovsk , <unk> , Kuibyshev , Novosibirsk , and other parts of the Soviet Union . In the course of the changes that the country underwent in 1988 , five prison hospitals were transferred from the MVD to the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Health , while another five were closed down . There was a hurried covering of tracks through the mass rehabilitation of patients , some of whom were mentally disabled ( in one and the same year no less than 800 @,@ 000 patients were removed from the psychiatric registry ) . In Leningrad alone 60 @,@ 000 people with a diagnosis of mental illness were released and rehabilitated in 1991 and 1992 . In 1978 , 4 @.@ 5 million people throughout the USSR were registered as psychiatric patients . This was equivalent to the population of many civilized countries . 
 In Ukraine , a study of the origins of the political abuse of psychiatry was conducted for five years on the basis of the State archives . A total of 60 people were again examined . All were citizens of Ukraine , convicted of political crimes and hospitalized on the territory of Ukraine . Not one of them , it turned out , was in need of any psychiatric treatment . 
 From 1993 to 1995 a presidential decree on measures to prevent future abuse of psychiatry was being drafted at the Commission for Rehabilitation of the Victims of Political Repression . For this purpose , Anatoly Prokopenko selected suitable archival documents and , at the request of Vladimir <unk> , the head of research and publications at the Commission , Emmanuil Gushansky drew up the report . It correlated the archival data presented to Gushansky with materials received during his visits , conducted jointly with the commission of the Independent Psychiatric Association of Russia , to several strict @-@ regime psychiatric hospitals ( former Special Hospitals under MVD control ) . When the materials for discussion in the Commission for Rehabilitation of the Victims of Political Repression were ready , however , the work came to a standstill . The documents failed to reach the head of the Commission Alexander Yakovlev . 
 The report on political abuse of psychiatry prepared at the request of the Commission by Gushansky with the aid of Prokopenko lay unclaimed and even the Independent Psychiatric Journal ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) would not publish it . The Moscow Research Center for Human Rights headed by Boris <unk> and Alexei Smirnov and the Independent Psychiatric Association of Russia whose president is Yuri Savenko were asked by Gushansky to publish the materials and archival documents on punitive psychiatry but showed no interest in doing so . Publishing such documents is dictated by present @-@ day needs and by how far it is feared that psychiatry could again be abused for non @-@ medical purposes . 
 In its 2000 report , the Commission for Rehabilitation of the Victims of Political Repression included only the following four phrases about the political abuse of psychiatry : 
 The Commission has also considered such a complex , socially relevant issue , as the use of psychiatry for political purposes . The collected documents and materials allow us to say that the extrajudicial procedure of admission to psychiatric hospitals was used for compulsory hospitalization of persons whose behavior was viewed by the authorities as " suspicious " from the political point of view . According to the incomplete data , hundreds of thousands of people have been illegally placed to psychiatric institutions of the country over the years of Soviet power . The rehabilitation of these people was limited , at best , to their removal from the registry of psychiatric patients and usually remains so today , due to gaps in the legislation . 
 In the 1988 and 1989 , about two million people were removed from the psychiatric registry at the request of Western psychiatrists . It was one of their conditions for the re @-@ admission of Soviet psychiatrists to the World Psychiatric Association . Yury Savenko has provided different figures in different publications : about one million , up to one and a half million , about one and a half million people removed from the psychiatric registry . Mikhail Buyanov provided the figure of over two million people removed from the psychiatric registry . 
 = = Theoretical analysis = = 
 In 1990 , Psychiatric Bulletin of the Royal College of Psychiatrists published the article " Compulsion in psychiatry : blessing or curse ? " by Russian psychiatrist Anatoly Koryagin . It contains analysis of the abuse of psychiatry and eight arguments by which the existence of a system of political abuse of psychiatry in the USSR <unk> easily be demonstrated . As Koryagin wrote , in a dictatorial State with a totalitarian regime , such as the USSR , the laws have at all times served not the purpose of self @-@ regulation of the life of society but have been one of the major levers by which to manipulate the behavior of subjects . Every Soviet citizen has constantly been straight considered state property and been regarded not as the aim , but as a means to achieve the rulers ' objectives . From the perspective of state pragmatism , a mentally sick person was regarded as a burden to society , using up the state 's material means without recompense and not producing anything , and even potentially capable of inflicting harm . Therefore , the Soviet State never considered it reasonable to pass special legislative acts protecting the material and legal part of the patients ' life . It was only instructions of the legal and medical departments that stipulated certain rules of handling the mentally sick and imposing different sanctions on them . A person with a mental disorder was automatically divested of all rights and depended entirely on the psychiatrists ' will . Practically anybody could undergo psychiatric examination on the most senseless grounds and the issued diagnosis turned him into a person without rights . It was this lack of legal rights and guarantees that advantaged a system of repressive psychiatry in the country . 
 According to American psychiatrist Oleg <unk> , Russia until 1993 did not have any specific legislation in the field of mental health except uncoordinated instructions and articles of laws in criminal and administrative law , orders of the USSR Ministry of Health . In the Soviet Union , any psychiatric patient could be hospitalized by request of his headman , relatives or instructions of a district psychiatrist . In this case , patient 's consent or dissent mattered nothing . The duration of treatment in a psychiatric hospital also depended entirely on the psychiatrist . All of that made the abuse of psychiatry possible to suppress those who opposed the political regime , and that created the vicious practice of ignoring the rights of the mentally ill . 
 According to Yuri Savenko , the president of the Independent Psychiatric Association of Russia ( the IPA ) , punitive psychiatry arises on the basis of the interference of three main factors : 
 The <unk> of science , its breakaway from the achievements of world psychiatry , the party orientation of Soviet forensic psychiatry . 
 The lack of legal basis . 
 The total nationalization of mental health service . 
 Their interaction system is principally sociological : the presence of the Penal Code article on slandering the state system inevitably results in sending a certain percentage of citizens to forensic psychiatric examination . Thus , it is not psychiatry itself that is punitive , but the totalitarian state uses psychiatry for punitive purposes with ease . 
 According to Larry <unk> , the root cause of the problem was the State itself . The definition of danger was radically extended by the Soviet criminal system to cover " political " as well as customary physical types of " danger " . As Bloch and Reddaway note , there are no objective reliable criteria to determine whether the person 's behavior will be dangerous , and approaches to the definition of dangerousness greatly differ among psychiatrists . 
 Richard Bonnie , a professor of law and medicine at the University of Virginia School of Law , mentioned the deformed nature of the Soviet psychiatric profession as one of the explanations for why it was so easily bent toward the repressive objectives of the state , and pointed out the importance of a civil society and , in particular , independent professional organizations separate and apart from the state as one of the most substantial lessons from the period . 
 According to Norman Sartorius , a former president of the World Psychiatric Association , political abuse of psychiatry in the former Soviet Union was facilitated by the fact that the national classification included categories that could be employed to label dissenters , who could then be forcibly incarcerated and kept in psychiatric hospitals for " treatment " . Darrel Regier , vice @-@ chair of the DSM @-@ 5 task force , has a similar opinion that the political abuse of psychiatry in the USSR was sustained by the existence of a classification developed in the Soviet Union and used to organize psychiatric treatment and care . In this classification , there were categories with diagnoses that could be given to political dissenters and led to the harmful involuntary medication . 
 According to Moscow psychiatrist Alexander <unk> , the so @-@ called " <unk> " approach in the Moscow psychiatric school established by Snezhnevsky <unk> down to the ability to make the only diagnosis , schizophrenia ; psychiatry is not science but such a system of opinions and people by the thousands are falling victims to these opinions — millions of lives were crippled by virtue of the concept " sluggish schizophrenia " introduced some time once by an academician Snezhnevsky , whom <unk> called a state criminal . 
 St Petersburg academic psychiatrist professor Yuri Nuller notes that the concept of Snezhnevsky 's school allowed psychiatrists to consider , for example , schizoid psychopathy and even schizoid character traits as early , delayed in their development , stages of the inevitable <unk> process , rather than as personality traits inherent to the individual , the dynamics of which might depend on various external factors . The same also applied to a number of other personality disorders . It entailed the extremely broadened diagnostics of sluggish ( neurosis @-@ like , psychopathy @-@ like ) schizophrenia . Despite a number of its controversial premises and in line with the traditions of then Soviet science , Snezhnevsky 's hypothesis has immediately acquired the status of dogma which was later overcome in other disciplines but firmly stuck in psychiatry . Snezhnevsky 's concept , with its dogmatism , proved to be psychologically comfortable for many psychiatrists , relieving them from doubt when making a diagnosis . That carried a great danger : any deviation from a norm evaluated by a doctor could be regarded as an early phase of schizophrenia , with all ensuing consequences . It resulted in the broad opportunity for voluntary and involuntary abuses of psychiatry . But Snezhnevsky did not take civil and scientific courage to reconsider his concept which clearly reached a deadlock . 
 According to American psychiatrist Walter Reich , the misdiagnoses of dissidents resulted from some characteristics of Soviet psychiatry that were distortions of standard psychiatric logic , theory , and practice . 
 According to Semyon Gluzman , abuse of psychiatry to suppress dissent is based on condition of psychiatry in a totalitarian state . Psychiatric paradigm of a totalitarian state is culpable for its expansion into spheres which are not initially those of psychiatric competence . Psychiatry as a social institution , formed and functioning in the totalitarian state , is incapable of not being totalitarian . Such psychiatry is forced to serve the two differently directed principles : care and treatment of mentally ill citizens , on the one hand , and psychiatric repression of people showing political or ideological dissent , on the other hand . In the conditions of the totalitarian state , independent @-@ minded psychiatrists appeared and may again appear , but these few people cannot change the situation in which thousands of others , who were brought up on incorrect pseudoscientific concepts and fear of the state , will sincerely believe that the uninhibited , free thinking of a citizen is a symptom of madness . Gluzman specifies the following six premises for the unintentional participation of doctors in abuses : 
 The specificity , in the totalitarian state , of the psychiatric paradigm tightly sealed from foreign influences . 
 The lack of legal conscience in most citizens including doctors . 
 Disregard for fundamental human rights on the part of the lawmaker and law enforcement agencies . 
 Declaratory nature or the absence of legislative acts that regulate providing psychiatric care in the country . The USSR , for example , adopted such an act only in 1988 . 
 The absolute state paternalism of totalitarian regimes , which naturally gives rise to the dominance of the archaic paternalistic ethical concept in medical practice . Professional consciousness of the doctor is based on the almost absolute right to make decisions without the patient 's consent ( i.e. there is disregard for the principle of informed consent to treatment or withdrawal from it ) . 
 The fact , in psychiatric hospitals , of frustratingly bad conditions , which refer primarily to the poverty of health care and inevitably lead to the dehumanization of the personnel including doctors . 
 Gluzman says that there , of course , may be a different approach to the issue expressed by Michel Foucault . According to Michael <unk> , Foucault in his book Madness and Civilization documented the history of using institutional psychiatry as a political tool , researched the expanded use of the public hospitals in the 17th century in France and came to the conclusion that " <unk> [ was an ] answer to an economic crisis ... reduction of wages , unemployment , scarcity of coin " and , by the 18th century , the psychiatric hospitals <unk> " the <unk> economic and moral demand for <unk> . " 
 In 1977 , British psychiatrist David Cooper asked Foucault the same question which Claude <unk> had formerly asked Viktor Fainberg during a press conference given by Fainberg and Leonid Plyushch : when the USSR has the whole penitentiary and police apparatus , which could take charge of anybody , and which is perfect in itself , why do they use psychiatry ? Foucault answered it was not a question of a distortion of the use of psychiatry but that was its fundamental project . In the discussion Confinement , Psychiatry , Prison , Foucault states the cooperation of psychiatrists with the KGB in the Soviet Union was not abuse of medicine , but an evident case and " condensation " of psychiatry 's " inheritance " , an " intensification , the ossification of a kinship structure that has never ceased to function . " Foucault believed that the abuse of psychiatry in the USSR of the 1960s was a logical extension of the invasion of psychiatry into the legal system . In the discussion with Jean <unk> and Robert Badinter , Foucault says that criminologists of the 1880 — 1900s started speaking surprisingly modern language : " The crime cannot be , for the criminal , but an abnormal , disturbed behavior . If he upsets society , it 's because he himself is upset " . This led to the twofold conclusions . First , " the judicial apparatus is no longer useful . " The judges , as men of law , understand such complex , alien legal issues , purely psychological matters no better than the criminal . So commissions of psychiatrists and physicians should be substituted for the judicial apparatus . And in this vein , concrete projects were proposed . Second , " We must certainly treat this individual who is dangerous only because he is sick . But , at the same time , we must protect society against him . " Hence comes the idea of mental isolation with a mixed function : therapeutic and prophylactic . In the 1900s , these projects have given rise to very lively responses from European judicial and political bodies . However , they found a wide field of applications when the Soviet Union became one of the most common but by no means exceptional cases . 
 According to American psychiatrist Jonas <unk> , psychiatry has been playing a part in controlling deviant behavior for three hundred years . Vagrants , " originals , " eccentrics , and homeless wanderers who did little harm but were vexatious to the society they lived in were , and sometimes still are , confined to psychiatric hospitals or deprived of their legal rights . Some critics of psychiatry consider the practice as a political use of psychiatry and regard psychiatry as promoting <unk> . 
 As Vladimir Bukovsky and Semyon Gluzman point out , it is difficult for the average Soviet psychiatrist to understand the dissident 's poor adjustment to Soviet society . This view of dissidence has nothing surprising about it — conformity reigned in Soviet consciousness ; a public intolerance of non @-@ conformist behavior always penetrated Soviet culture ; and the threshold for deviance from custom was similarly low . 
 An example of the low threshold is a point of Donetsk psychiatrist Valentine Pekhterev , who argues that psychiatrists speak of the necessity of adapting oneself to society , estimate the level of man 's social functioning , his ability to adequately test the reality and so forth . In Pekhterev 's words , these speeches hit point @-@ blank on the dissidents and revolutionaries , because all of them are poorly functioning in society , are hardly adapting to it either initially or after increasing requirements . They turn their inability to adapt themselves to society into the view that the company breaks step and only they know how to help the company restructure itself . The dissidents regard the cases of personal maladjustment as a proof of public ill @-@ being . The more such cases , the easier it is to present their personal ill @-@ being as public one . They bite the society 's hand that feed them only because they are not given a right place in society . Unlike the dissidents , the psychiatrists destroy the hardly formed defense attitude in the dissidents by regarding " public well @-@ being " as personal one . The psychiatrists extract teeth from the dissidents , stating that they should not bite the feeding hand of society only because the tiny group of the dissidents feel bad being at their place . The psychiatrists claim the need to treat not society but the dissidents and seek to improve society by preserving and improving the mental health of its members . After reading the book Institute of Fools by Viktor Nekipelov , Pekhterev concluded that allegations against the psychiatrists sounded from the lips of a negligible but vociferous part of inmates who when <unk> themselves with cakes pretended to be sufferers . 
 According to the response by Robert van Voren , Pekhterev in his article condescendingly argues that the Serbsky Institute was not so bad place and that Nekipelov exaggerates and slanders it , but Pekhterev , by doing so , misses the main point : living conditions in the Serbsky Institute were not bad , those who passed through psychiatric examination there were in a certain sense " on holiday " in comparison with the living conditions of the Gulag ; and all the same , everyone was aware that the Serbsky Institute was more than the " gates of hell " from where people were sent to specialized psychiatric hospitals in Chernyakhovsk , Dnepropetrovsk , Kazan , <unk> , and that is not all . Their life was transformed to unimaginable horror with daily tortures by forced administration of drugs , beatings and other forms of punishment . Many went crazy , could not endure what was happening to them , some even died during the " treatment " ( for example , a miner from Donetsk Alexey Nikitin ) . Many books and memoirs are written about the life in the psychiatric Gulag and every time when reading them a shiver seizes us . The Soviet psychiatric terror in its brutality and targeting the mentally ill as the most vulnerable group of society had nothing on the Nazi euthanasia programs . The punishment by placement in a mental hospital was as effective as imprisonment in <unk> concentration camps in breaking persons psychologically and physically . The recent history of the USSR should be given a wide publicity to immunize society against possible repetitions of the Soviet practice of political abuse of psychiatry . The issue remains highly relevant . 
 According to Fedor Kondratev , an expert of the Serbsky Center and supporter of Snezhnevsky and his colleagues who developed the concept of sluggish schizophrenia in the 1960s , those arrested by the KGB under RSFSR Criminal Code Article 70 ( " anti @-@ Soviet agitation and propaganda " ) , 190 @-@ 1 ( " dissemination of knowingly false fabrications that defame the Soviet state and social system " ) made up , in those years , the main group targeted by the period of using psychiatry for political purposes . It was they who began to be searched for " psychopathological mechanisms " and , therefore , mental illness which gave the grounds to recognize an accused person as mentally incompetent , to debar him from appearance and defence in court , and then to send him for compulsory treatment to a special psychiatric hospital of the Ministry of Internal Affairs . The trouble ( not guilt ) of Soviet psychiatric science was its theoretical <unk> as a result of the strict demand to severely preclude any deviations from the " exclusively scientific " concept of Marxism – Leninism . This showed , in particular , in the fact that Soviet psychiatry under the totalitarian regime considered that penetrating the inner life of an ill person was flawed <unk> , <unk> . In this connection , one did not admit the possibility that an individual can behave " in a different way than others do " not only because of his mental illness but on the ground alone of his moral sets consistently with his conscience . It entailed the consequence : if a person different from all others opposes the political system , one needs to search for " psychopathological mechanisms " of his dissent . Even in cases when <unk> confirmed the correctness of a diagnosis of schizophrenia , it did not always mean that mental disorders were the cause of dissent and , all the more , that one needed to administer compulsory treatment " for it " in special psychiatric hospitals . What seems essential is another fact that the mentally ill could oppose the totalitarianism as well , by no means due to their " psychopathological mechanisms " , but as persons who , despite having the diagnosis of schizophrenia , retained moral civic landmarks . Any ill person with schizophrenia could be a dissident if his conscience could not keep silent , Kondratev says . 
 According to St Petersburg psychiatrist Vladimir Pshizov , with regard to punitive psychiatry , the nature of psychiatry is of such a sort that using psychiatrists against opponents of authorities is always tempting for the authorities , because it is seemingly possible not to take into account an opinion by the person who received a diagnosis . Therefore , the issue will always remain relevant . While we do not have government policy of using psychiatry for repression , psychiatrists and former psychiatric nomenklatura retained the same on @-@ the @-@ spot reflexes . 
 As Ukrainian psychiatrist Ada Korotenko notes , the use of punitive psychiatry allowed of avoiding the judicial procedure during which the accused might declare the impossibility to speak publicly and the violation of their civil rights . Making a psychiatric diagnosis is insecure and can be based on a preconception . Moreover , while diagnosing mental illness , subjective fuzzy diagnostic criteria are involved as arguments . The lack of clear diagnostic criteria and clearly defined standards of diagnostics contributes to applying punitive psychiatry to vigorous and gifted citizens who disagree with authorities . At the same time , most psychiatrists incline to believe that such a misdiagnosis is less dangerous than not diagnosing mental illness . 
 German <unk> <unk> <unk> says the uncertainty of diagnosis is prone to other than medical influence , e.g. , political influence , as was the case with Soviet dissenters who were stifled by a psychiatric diagnosis , especially that of " sluggish schizophrenia , " in order to take them away from society in special psychiatric hospitals . 
 According to Russian psychologist Dmitry <unk> , punitive psychiatry in the Soviet Union was based on the assumption that only a madman can go against public dogma and seek for truth and justice . 
 K. Fulford , A. Smirnov , and E. Snow state : " An important vulnerability factor , therefore , for the abuse of psychiatry , is the subjective nature of the observations on which psychiatric diagnosis currently depends . " The concerns about political abuse of psychiatry as a tactic of controlling dissent have been regularly voiced by American psychiatrist Thomas Szasz , and he mentioned that these authors , who correctly emphasized the value @-@ laden nature of psychiatric diagnoses and the subjective character of psychiatric classifications , failed to accept the role of psychiatric power . Musicologists , drama critics , art historians , and many other scholars also create their own subjective classifications ; however , lacking state @-@ legitimated power over persons , their classifications do not lead to anyone 's being deprived of property , liberty , or life . For instance , plastic surgeon 's classification of beauty is subjective , but the plastic surgeon cannot treat his or her patient without the patient 's consent , therefore , there cannot be any political abuse of plastic surgery . The bedrock of political medicine is coercion masquerading as medical treatment . What transforms coercion into therapy are physicians diagnosing the person 's condition a " illness , " declaring the intervention they impose on the victim a " treatment , " and legislators and judges <unk> these categorizations as " illnesses " and " treatments . " In the same way , physician @-@ eugenicists advocated killing certain disabled or ill persons as a form of treatment for both society and patient long before the Nazis came to power . Szasz argued that the spectacle of the Western psychiatrists loudly condemning Soviet colleagues for their abuse of professional standards was largely an exercise in hypocrisy . Psychiatric abuse , such as people usually associated with practices in the former USSR , was connected not with the misuse of psychiatric diagnoses , but with the political power built into the social role of the psychiatrist in democratic and totalitarian societies alike . <unk> and legally fit subjects for involuntary mental hospitalization had always been " dissidents . " It is the contents and contours of dissent that has changed . Before the American Civil War , dissent was constituted by being a Negro and wanting to escape from slavery . In Soviet Russia , dissent was constituted by wanting to " reform " Marxism or emigrate to escape from it . As Szasz put it , " the classification by slave owners and slave traders of certain individuals as Negroes was scientific , in the sense that whites were rarely classified as blacks . But that did not prevent the " abuse " of such racial classification , because ( what we call ) its abuse was , in fact , its use . " The collaboration between psychiatry and government leads to what Szasz calls the " Therapeutic State " , a system in which disapproved actions , thoughts , and emotions are repressed ( " cured " ) through <unk> interventions . Thus suicide , unconventional religious beliefs , racial bigotry , unhappiness , anxiety , shyness , sexual promiscuity , shoplifting , gambling , overeating , smoking , and illegal drug use are all considered symptoms or illnesses that need to be cured . 
 As Michael Robertson and Garry Walter suppose , psychiatric power in practically all societies expands on the grounds of public safety , which , in the view of the leaders of the USSR , was best maintained by the repression of dissidence . According to Gwen Adshead , a British forensic psychotherapist at the Broadmoor Hospital , the question is what is meant by the word " abnormal . " Evidently it is possible for abnormal to be identified as " socially inappropriate . " If that is the case , social and political dissent is turned into a symptom by the medical terminology , and thereby becomes an individual 's personal problem , not a social matter . 
 According to Russian psychiatrist Emmanuil Gushansky , psychiatry is the only medical specialty in which the doctor is given the right to violence for the benefit of the patient . The application of violence must be based on the mental health law , must be as much as possible transparent and monitored by representatives of the interests of persons who are in need of involuntary examination and treatment . While being hospitalized in a psychiatric hospital for urgent indications , the patient should be accompanied by his relatives , witnesses , or other persons authorized to control the actions of doctors and law @-@ enforcement agencies . Otherwise , psychiatry becomes an obedient maid for administrative and governmental agencies and is deprived of its medical function . It is the police that must come to the aid of citizens and is responsible for their security . Only later , after the appropriate legal measures for social protection have been taken , the psychiatrist must respond to the queries of law enforcement and judicial authorities by solving the issues of involuntary hospitalization , sanity , etc . In Russia , all that goes by opposites . The psychiatrist is vested with punitive functions , is involved in involuntary hospitalization , the state machine hides behind his back , actually manipulating the doctor . The police are reluctant to investigate offences committed by the mentally ill . After receiving the information about their disease , the bodies of inquiry very often stop the investigation and do not bring it to the level of investigative actions . Thereby psychiatry becomes a cloak for the course of justice and , by doing so , serves as a source for the <unk> and stigmatization of both psychiatrists and persons with mental disorders . The negative attitude to psychiatrists is thereby supported by the state machine and is accompanied by the aggression against the doctors , which increases during the periods of social unrest . 
 Vladimir Bukovsky , well known for his struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union , explained that using psychiatry against dissidents was usable to the KGB because hospitalization did not have an end date , and , as a result , there were cases when dissidents were kept in psychiatric prison hospitals for 10 or even 15 years . " Once they pump you with drugs , they can forget about you " , he said and added , " I saw people who basically were asleep for years . " 
 US President Ronald Reagan attributed the view that the " brutal treatment of Soviet dissidents was due to bureaucratic inertia . " 
 = = Residual problems = = 
 In the opinion of the Moscow Helsinki Group chairwoman Lyudmila <unk> , the attribution of a mental illness to a prominent figure who came out with a political declaration or action is the most significant factor in the assessment of psychiatry during the 1960 – 1980s . The practice of forced confinement of political dissidents in psychiatric facilities in the former USSR and Eastern Europe destroyed the credibility of psychiatric practice in these countries . When psychiatric profession is discredited in one part of the world , psychiatry is discredited throughout the world . Psychiatry lost its professional basis entirely with its abuse to stifle dissidence in the former USSR and in the so @-@ called euthanasia program in Nazi Germany . There is little doubt that the capacity for using psychiatry to enforce social norms and even political interests is immense . Now psychiatry is vulnerable because many of its notions have been questioned , and the sustainable pattern of mental life , of boundaries of mental norm and abnormality has been lost , director of the Moscow Research Institute for Psychiatry Valery Krasnov says , adding that psychiatrists have to seek new reference points to make clinical assessments and new reference points to justify old therapeutical interventions . 
 As Emmanuil Gushansky states , today subjective position of a Russian patient toward a medical psychologist and psychiatrist is defensive in nature and prevents the attempt to understand the patient and help him assess his condition . Such a position is related to constant , subconscious fear of psychiatrists and psychiatry . This fear is caused by not only abuse of psychiatry , but also constant violence in the totalitarian and post @-@ totalitarian society . The psychiatric violence and psychiatric arrogance as one of manifestations of such violence is related to the primary emphasis on symptomatology and biological causes of a disease , while ignoring psychological , existential , and psychodynamic factors . <unk> notices that the modern Russian psychiatry and the structure of providing mental health care are aimed not at protecting the patient 's right to an own place in life , but at discrediting such a right , revealing symptoms and isolating the patient . 
 The psychiatrist became a scarecrow attaching psychiatric labels . He is feared , is not confided , is not taken into confidence in the secrets of one 's soul and is asked to provide only medications . Psychiatric labels , or stigmas , have spread so widely that there is no such thing as the media that does not call a disliked person <unk> and does not generalize psychiatric assessments to phenomena of public life . The word psikhushka entered everyday vocabulary . All persons who deviate from the usual standards of thought and behavior are declared mentally ill , with an approving giggling of public . Not surprisingly , during such a stigmatization , people with real mental disorders fear publicity like the plague . Vilnius psychologist Oleg Lapin has the same point that politicians and the press attach psychological , psychiatric and medical labels ; he adds that psychiatry has acquired the new status of normalizing life that was previously possessed by religion . Formerly , one could say : you are going against God or God is with us ; now one can say : I behave reasonably , adequately , and you do not behave in that way . In 2007 , Alexander <unk> , a professor at the Moscow State University and adviser to State Duma speaker Sergei Naryshkin , presented opponents of Vladimir Putin 's policy as mentally ill by saying , " There are no longer opponents of Putin 's policy , and if there are , they are mentally ill and should be sent to prophylactic health examination . " In The Moscow Regional Psychiatric Newspaper of 2012 , psychiatrist <unk> <unk> in violation of medical privacy and ethics publicized the diagnosis of histrionic personality disorder , which she in absentia gave <unk> Sobchak , a Russian TV anchor and a member of political opposition , and stated that Sobchak was harmful to society . 
 Robert van Voren noted that after the fall of the Berlin Wall , it became apparent that the political abuse of psychiatry in the USSR was only the tip of the iceberg , the sign that much more was basically wrong . This much more realistic image of Soviet psychiatry showed up only after the Soviet regime began to loosen its grip on society and later lost control over the developments and in the end entirely disintegrated . It demonstrated that the actual situation was much <unk> and that many individuals had been affected . Millions of individuals were treated and stigmatized by an outdated biologically oriented and hospital @-@ based mental health service . Living conditions in clinics were bad , sometimes even terrible , and violations of human rights were rampant . According to the data of a census published in 1992 , the mortality of the ill with schizophrenia exceeded that of the general population by 4 – 6 times for the age of 20 – 39 years , by 3 – 4 times for the age of 30 – 39 years , by 1 @.@ 5 – 2 times for the age over 40 years ( larger values are for women ) . 
 According to Robert van Voren , although for several years , especially after the implosion of the USSR and during the first years of Boris Yeltsin 's rule , the positions of the Soviet psychiatric leaders were in jeopardy , now one can firmly conclude that they succeeded in riding out the storm and retaining their powerful positions . They also succeeded in avoiding an inflow of modern concepts of delivering mental health care and a fundamental change in the structure of psychiatric services in Russia . On the whole , in Russia , the impact of mental health reformers has been the least . Even the reform efforts made in such places as St. Petersburg , Tomsk , and Kaliningrad have faltered or were encapsulated as centrist policies under Putin brought them back under control . 
 Throughout the post @-@ communist period , the pharmaceutical industry has mainly been an obstacle to reform . Aiming to explore the vast market of the former USSR , they used the situation to make professionals and services totally dependent on their financial sustenance , turned the major attention to the availability of medicines rather than that of psycho @-@ social rehabilitation services , and stimulated corruption within the mental health sector very much . 
 At the turn of the century , the psychiatric reform that had been implemented by Franco <unk> in Italy became known and was publicly declared to be implemented in Russia , with the view of retrenchment of expenditures . But when it became clear that even more money was needed for the reform , it got bogged down in the same way the reform of the army and many other undertakings did . Russia is decades behind the countries of the European Union in mental health reform , which has already been implemented or is being implemented in them . Until Russian society , Gushansky says , is aware of the need for mental health reform , we will live in the atmosphere of animosity , mistrust and violence . Many experts believe that problems spread beyond psychiatry to society as a whole . As Robert van Voren supposes , the Russians want to have their compatriots with mental disorders locked up outside the city and do not want to have them in community . Despite the 1992 Russian Mental Health Law , coercive psychiatry in Russia remains generally unregulated and fashioned by the same trends toward hyperdiagnosis and overreliance on institutional care characteristic of the Soviet period . In the Soviet Union , there had been an increase of the bed numbers because psychiatric services had been used to treat dissidents . 
