 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The Proposal received mixed reviews . The film has a 44 % approval rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , based on 180 reviews with an average rating of 5 @.@ 3 / 10 , with the consensus : " Sandra Bullock and Ryan Reynolds exhibit plenty of chemistry , but they 're let down by The Proposal 's devotion to formula . " Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score , gave the film a 48 out of 100 based on 30 reviews from critics . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave a mixed review , giving the film three out of four stars despite complaining that the film " recycles a plot that was already old when Tracy and Hepburn were trying it out " . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone was very critical of the film , calling it insipid . He wrote , " Anne Fletcher directs Peter Chiarelli 's script like a manufacturer of hard plastic that is guaranteed to ward off intrusion from all recognizable human emotion . " New York Times writer Manohla Dargis felt that Bullock 's character was awkward in comparison to her previous work . She continued : " She ’ s always been better in fundamentally independent roles that allow her to grab the wheel [ ... ] and take the spotlight [ ... ] , an independence that persists all the way through the last @-@ act coupling . She can smile as brightly at a man as well as the next leading lady , though , like all genuinely big female stars , she ’ s really more of a solo act . " The Telegraph 's Tim Robey expressed disappointment towards the film , giving it a two out of five stars . 
 The interaction between Reynolds and Bullock was well received by critics . Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly opined that the chemistry between the two actors was " fresh and irresistible . " <unk> Kit of The Huffington Post exclaimed that " what [ kept ] audiences of this lite @-@ fare comedy in their seats is the undeniable on @-@ screen chemistry between leads Sandra Bullock and Ryan Reynolds . " She continued : " The two are so adept at comedy and have so much fun with one another , viewers watching The Proposal won 't be able to resist their charms , even when some of the plot veers in to unnecessarily silliness . " Betsey <unk> of the Los Angeles Times felt that their relationship was a " cheeky update of The Taming of the Shrew . " She opined , " Bullock 's deft physical comedy , one of her most endearing qualities , is given a full run . [ ... ] Reynolds ' ability to deliver a line , or a look , with withering , surgical precision is there at every turn . " Giving it a one out of five stars , The Guardian writer Peter Bradshaw gave a negative reaction to the interaction between Reynolds and Bullock . Bradshaw stated : " Their initial sparky detestation isn 't convincing , and neither is their later thawing and romance . In each scene , it looks as if they have never met before . And Margaret isn 't permitted to be a convincing cow , because that would make her unsympathetic [ ... ] . Andrew can 't be a total wimp , because that would be unsexy , so the fundamental comic premises of the film are fudged . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Proposal was released by Touchstone Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on October 13 , 2009 . It sold over 2 @.@ 4 million units within its first week , translating to an addition of $ 39 @.@ 3 million in the box office . In its second week , sales numbers declined by 70 % to 623 @,@ 744 units , ranking second among DVD sales of the week . By July 2013 , The Proposal had sold over 5 @.@ 6 million units and earned over $ 90 million in sales . 
 = = Remakes = = 
 The 2012 Malayalam – language Indian film My Boss is a remake of The Proposal . Set in Mumbai and Kerala , the remade version has many differences from the original although the basic storyline remains the same . Popular actors Dileep and <unk> Mohandas played the lead roles in this version . The remake was also a hit . 
 A Chinese remake co @-@ produced by Walt Disney Pictures and <unk> Pictures and directed by Yee Chin @-@ yen was announced in June 2016 . 
 = 1960 South Vietnamese coup attempt = 
 On November 11 , 1960 , a failed coup attempt against President Ngô Đình Diệm of South Vietnam was led by Lieutenant Colonel Vương Văn Đông and Colonel Nguyễn Chánh Thi of the Airborne Division of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) . 
 The rebels launched the coup in response to Diệm 's autocratic rule and the negative political influence of his brother Ngô Đình Nhu and his sister @-@ in @-@ law Madame Nhu . They also bemoaned the politicisation of the military , whereby regime loyalists who were members of the Ngô family 's covert Cần Lao Party were readily promoted ahead of more competent officers who were not insiders . Đông was supported in the conspiracy by his brother @-@ in @-@ law Lieutenant Colonel Nguyen Trieu Hong , whose uncle was a prominent official in a minor opposition party . The main link in the coup was Đông 's commanding officer Thi , whom he persuaded to join the plot . 
 The coup caught the Ngô family completely off @-@ guard , but was also chaotically executed . The plotters neglected to seal the roads leading into the capital Saigon to seal off loyalist reinforcements , and they hesitated after gaining the initiative . After initially being trapped inside the Independence Palace , Diệm stalled the coup by holding negotiations and promising reforms , such as the inclusion of military officers in the administration . In the meantime , opposition politicians joined the fray , trying to exploit Diệm 's position . However , the president 's real aim was to buy time for loyalist forces to enter the capital and relieve him . The coup failed when the 5th and 7th Divisions of the ARVN entered Saigon and defeated the rebels . More than four hundred people — many of whom were civilian spectators — were killed in the ensuing battle . These included a group of anti @-@ Diệm civilians who charged across the palace walls at Thi 's urging and were cut down by loyalist gunfire . 
 Đông and Thi fled to Cambodia , while Diệm berated the United States for a perceived lack of support during the crisis . Afterwards , Diệm ordered a crackdown , imprisoning numerous anti @-@ government critics and former cabinet ministers . Those that assisted Diệm were duly promoted , while those that did not were demoted . A trial for those implicated in the plot was held in 1963 . Seven officers and two civilians were sentenced to death in absentia , while 14 officers and 34 civilians were jailed . Diệm 's regime also accused the Americans of sending Central Intelligence Agency members to assist the failed plot . When Diệm was assassinated after a 1963 coup , those jailed after the 1960 revolt were released by the new military junta . 
 = = Background = = 
 The revolt was led by 28 @-@ year @-@ old Lieutenant Colonel Vương Văn Đông , a northerner , who had fought with the French Union forces against the Viet Minh during the First Indochina War . Later trained at Fort Leavenworth in the United States , Đông was regarded by American military advisers as a brilliant tactician and the brightest military prospect of his generation and he served in the Airborne Division . Back in Vietnam , Đông became discontented with Diệm 's arbitrary rule and constant meddling in the internal affairs of the army . Diệm promoted officers on loyalty rather than skill , and played senior officers against one another in order to weaken the military leadership and prevent them from challenging his rule . Years after the coup , Đông asserted that his sole objective was to force Diệm to improve the governance of the country . Đông was clandestinely supported by his brother @-@ in @-@ law Lieutenant Colonel Nguyen Trieu Hong , the director of training at the Joint General Staff School , and Hong 's uncle Hoang Co Thuy . Thuy was a wealthy Saigon @-@ based lawyer , and had been a political activist since World War II . He was the secretary @-@ general of a minority opposition party called the Movement of Struggle for Freedom , which had a small presence in the rubber @-@ stamp National Assembly . 
 Many Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) officers were members of other anti @-@ communist nationalist groups that were opposed to Diệm , such as the Đại Việt Quốc dân đảng ( Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam ) and the Việt Nam Quốc Dân Đảng ( VNQDĐ , Vietnamese Nationalist Party ) , which were both established before World War II . The VNQDĐ had run a military academy in Yunnan near the Chinese border with the assistance of their nationalist Chinese counterparts , the Kuomintang . Diệm and his family had crushed all alternative anti @-@ communist nationalists , and his politicisation of the army had alienated the servicemen . Officers were promoted on the basis of political allegiance rather than competence , meaning that many VNQDĐ and Đại Việt trained officers were denied such promotions . They felt that politically minded officers , who joined Diệm 's secret Catholic @-@ dominated Cần Lao Party , which was used to control South Vietnamese society , were rewarded with promotion rather than those most capable . 
 Planning for the coup had gone on for over a year , with Đông recruiting disgruntled officers . This included his commander , Colonel Nguyễn Chánh Thi . In 1955 , Thi had fought for Diệm against the Bình Xuyên organised crime syndicate in the Battle for Saigon . This performance so impressed Diệm — a lifelong bachelor — that he thereafter referred to Thi as " my son " . However , the Americans who worked with Thi were less impressed . The CIA described Thi as " an opportunist and a man lacking strong convictions " . An American military advisor described Thi as " tough , unscrupulous , and fearless , but dumb " . There is some dispute as to whether Thi participated in the coup of his free choice . According to some sources , Thi was still an admirer of Diệm and was forced at gunpoint by Đông and his supporters to join the coup at the last minute , having been kept unaware of the plotting . According to this story , Thi 's airborne units were initially moved into position for the coup without his knowledge . 
 Many months before the coup , Đông had met Diệm 's brother and adviser Ngô Đình Nhu , widely regarded as the brains of the regime , to ask for reform and de @-@ politicisation of the army . Đông said that the meeting went well and was hopeful that Nhu would enact change . However , a few weeks later , Dong and his collaborators were transferred to different commands and physically separated . Fearing that Diệm and Nhu were trying to throw their plans off balance , they accelerated their planning work , and decided to move on October 6 . However , they were then scheduled to go into battle against the communists near Kon Tum in the II Corps in the Central Highlands , forcing a postponement . According to the historian George McTurnan Kahin , Đông was without a command by the time the coup was held . 
 The Americans started to notice and become alarmed at increasing reports of political disillusionment in the military officer corps in August . An intelligence report prepared by the US State Department in late August claimed the " worsening of internal security , the promotion of incompetent officers and Diệm 's direct interference in army operations ... his political favoritism , inadequate delegation of authority , and the influence of the Can Lao " . It also claimed that discontent with Diệm among high @-@ ranking civil servants was at their highest point since the president had established in power , and that the bureaucrats wanted a change of leadership , through a coup if needed . It was said that Nhu and his wife were the most despised among the civil service . The report predicted that if a coup was to occur , the objective would probably be to force Nhu and his wife out of positions of power and allow Diệm to continue to lead the country with reduced power , should he be willing to do so . The intelligence analysis turned out to be correct . 
 The US Ambassador Elbridge Durbrow , who had been in the post since 1957 , had a long record of trying to pressure Diệm into political reforms . He felt that South Vietnam 's political problems were due to Diệm 's <unk> and thought the communist insurgency would be more easily defeated if Diệm reached out to a broader cross @-@ section of society , cracked down on corruption , cronyism , abusive public servants , and implemented land reform . However , the South Vietnamese president saw authoritarianism as the solution to political problems and opposition , and the US military hierarchy in Vietnam agreed , leading to frequent disputes between Durbrow and the Military Assistance Advisory Group . Durbrow frequently reported to Washington that Diệm 's strong @-@ arm tactics against opposition only created more dissent and opportunities for the communists . 
 Around this time , Durbrow began to advise Diệm to remove Nhu and his wife from the government , basing his arguments on a need to cultivate broad popular support to make South Vietnam more viable in the long term . His key suggestions included Nhu being sent abroad as an ambassador and " altering the nature of the Cần Lao Party " . As Nhu and the Can Lao were a core means of his keeping power , Diệm did not follow Durbrow 's advice . 
 On September 16 , after another fruitless meeting with Diệm , Durbrow reported to Washington : " If Diệm 's position in [ the ] country continues to deteriorate ... it may become necessary for [ the ] US government to begin consideration [ of ] alternative courses of action and leaders in order [ to ] achieve our objective . " In another State Department Report , it was concluded that a coup would become more likely " if Diệm continued to remain uncompromising and if the opposition felt that the United States would not be unsympathetic to a coup or that <unk> relations would not be seriously damaged . " As it turned out those in Vietnam discontented with Diệm reached the same conclusion , that the US would not mind them toppling the president . 
 The coup was organised with the help of some VNQDĐ and Đại Việt members , civilians and officers alike . Đông enlisted the cooperation of an armoured regiment , marine unit and three paratrooper battalions . The marine battalion was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Pham Van Lieu . The operation was scheduled to launch on November 11 at 05 : 00 . However , the airborne soldiers were not aware of what their officers had in store . They were told that they were heading into the countryside to attack the Viet Cong . Once they were on their way , the officers claimed that the Presidential Guard , who were meant to guard the presidential palace , had mutinied against Diệm . 
 = = Coup = = 
 According to Stanley Karnow , the Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning author of Vietnam : A History , the coup was ineffectively executed ; although the rebels captured the headquarters of the Joint General Staff at Tan Son Nhut Air Base , they failed to follow the textbook tactics of blocking the roads leading into Saigon . They also failed to disconnect phone lines into the palace , which allowed Diệm to call for aid from loyal units . 
 The paratroopers headed down the main thoroughfare of Saigon towards Independence Palace . At first , the forces encircled the compound without attacking , believing that Diệm would comply with their demands . Đông attempted to call on US ambassador Elbridge Durbrow to put pressure on Diệm . Durbrow , although a persistent critic of Diệm , maintained his government 's position of supporting Diệm , stating " We support this government until it fails " . Durbrow later recalled receiving a telephone call from an aide to Diệm who insisted that he call Diệm and tell him to surrender or face a howitzer attack on the palace . Durbrow refused and no attack took place . He consequently learned that the aide was forced to make the call . 
 Most of the rebel soldiers had been told that they were attacking in order to save Diệm from a mutiny by the Presidential Guard . Only one or two officers in any given rebel unit knew the true situation . A high wall , a fence and a few guard posts , surrounded the palace grounds . The mutinous paratroopers disembarked from their transport vehicles and moved into position for an attack on the main gate . Some ran forward and others raked automatic gunfire at the front of the palace , shattering most of the windows and puncturing the walls . Diệm was nearly killed in the opening salvoes . A rebel machine gun fired into Diệm 's bedroom window from the adjacent Palais de Justice and penetrated his bed , but the president had arisen just a few minutes earlier . 
 The paratroopers ' first assault on the palace met with surprising resistance . The Presidential Guardsmen who stood between the rebels and Diệm were estimated at between 30 and 60 , but they managed to repel the initial thrust and kill seven rebels who attempted to scale the palace walls and run across the grass . The rebels cordoned off the palace and held fire . They trucked in reinforcements and the attack restarted at 7 : 30 , but the Presidential Guard continued to resist . Half an hour later , the rebels brought in five armored vehicles and circumnavigated the palace . They fired at the perimeter posts , and mortared the palace grounds . However , the exchange had petered out by 10 : 30 . In the meantime , the rebels had captured the national police offices , Radio Saigon and the barracks of the Presidential Guard . They had also put most of the Saigon @-@ based generals under house arrest , meaning that Diệm 's saviours would have to come from outside Saigon . However , the rebels also suffered a setback when Hong was killed during the battle for the police headquarters . He had been sitting in his jeep behind the frontline when he was hit by stray gunfire . 
 Diệm headed for the cellar , joining his younger brother and confidant Ngô Đình Nhu , and his wife Madame Nhu . Brigadier General Nguyễn Khánh , at the time the Chief of Staff of the ARVN , climbed over the palace wall to reach Diệm during the siege . Khanh lived in the city center , close to the palace , and awoken by the gunfire , he drove towards the action . The plotters had tried to put him under house arrest at the start of the coup , but were unaware that he moved house . Khanh proceeded to coordinate the loyalist defenders , along with Ky Quan Liem , the deputy director of the Civil Guard . 
 At dawn , civilians began massing outside the palace gates , verbally encouraging the rebels and waving banners advocating regime change . Saigon Radio announced that a " Revolutionary Council " was in charge of South Vietnam 's government . Diệm appeared lost , while many Saigon @-@ based ARVN troops rallied to the insurgents . According to Nguyễn Thái Bình , an exiled political rival , " Diệm was lost . Any other than he would have capitulated . " However , the rebels hesitated as they decided their next move . There was debate on what Diệm 's role would be in future . Đông felt that the rebels should take the opportunity of storming the palace and capturing Diệm . Thi on the other hand , was worried that Diệm could be killed in an attack . Thi felt that despite Diệm 's shortcomings , the president was South Vietnam 's best available leader , believing that enforced reform would yield the best outcome . The rebels wanted Nhu and his wife out of the government , although they disagreed over whether to kill or deport the couple . 
 Thi demanded that Diệm appoint an officer as prime minister and that Diệm remove Madame Nhu from the palace . Saigon Radio broadcast a speech authorised by Thi 's Revolutionary Council , claiming that Diệm was being removed because he was corrupt and suppressed liberty . Worried by the uprising , Diệm sent his private secretary Vo Van Hai to negotiate with the coup leaders . In the afternoon , Khanh left the palace to meet with rebel officers to keep abreast of their demands , which they reiterated . The rebels ' negotiators were Đông and Major Nguyen Huy Loi . They wanted officers and opposition figures to be appointed to a new government to keep Diệm in check . 
 The plotters unilaterally named Brigadier General Lê Văn Kim , the head of the Vietnamese National Military Academy , the nation 's premier officer training school in Da Lat , would be their new prime minister . Kim was not a Can Lao member and was later put under house arrest after Diệm regained control . According to Kim 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Major General Trần Văn Đôn , Kim was willing to accept the post but was not going to say anything unless the coup succeeded . The rebels also suggested that Diệm appoint General Lê Văn Tỵ , the chief of the armed forces , be made defence minister . Diệm asked Ty , who had been put under house arrest by the plotters , if he was willing , but the officer was not . During the afternoon of November 11 , the rebels used Ty as an intermediary to pass on their demands to the president . A broadcast was made over Saigon Radio , during which Ty said he had consulted with Diệm and obtained his agreement for the " dissolution of the present government " and that " with agreement of the Revolutionary Council " had given the officers the task of constituting " a provisional military government " . 
 Phan Quang Đán joined the rebellion and acted as the rebels ' spokesman . The most prominent political critic of Diệm , Đán had been disqualified from the 1959 legislative election after winning his seat by a ratio of 6 : 1 despite Diệm having organised <unk> against him . He cited political mismanagement of the war against the Viet Cong and the government 's refusal to broaden its political base as the reason for the revolt . Đán spoke on Radio Vietnam and staged a media conference during which a rebel paratrooper pulled a portrait of the president from the wall , ripped it and stamped on it . In the meantime , Thuy went about organising a coalition of political parties to take over post @-@ Diệm . He had already lined up the VNQDĐ , Đại Việt , and the Hòa Hảo and Cao Đài religious movements , and was seeking more collaborators . 
 Khanh returned to the palace and reported the result of his conversation to the Ngos . He recommended that Diệm resign due to the demands of the rebel forces and protestors outside the palace . Madame Nhu railed against Diệm agreeing to a power @-@ sharing arrangement , asserting that it was the destiny of Diệm and his family to save the country . Madame Nhu 's aggressive stance and persistent calls for Khanh to attack , prompted the general to threaten to leave . This forced Diệm to silence his sister @-@ in @-@ law , and Khanh remained with the president . 
 During the standoff , Durbrow ambivalently noted " We consider it overriding importance to Vietnam and Free World that agreement be reached soonest in order avoid continued division , further bloodshed with resultant fatal weakening Vietnam 's ability [ to ] resist communists . " American representatives privately recommended to both sides to reach a peaceful agreement to share power . 
 In the meantime , the negotiations allowed time for loyalists to enter Saigon and rescue the president . Khanh used the remaining communication lines to message senior officers outside Saigon . The Fifth Division of Colonel Nguyễn Văn Thiệu , a future president , brought infantry forces from Biên Hòa , a town north of Saigon . The Seventh Division of Colonel Trần Thiện Khiêm brought in seven infantry battalions and tanks from the Second Armored Battalion from Mỹ Tho , a town in the Mekong Delta south of Saigon . Khiêm was a Catholic with ties to Diệm 's older brother , Archbishop Ngô Đình Thục . Khanh also convinced Lê Nguyên Khang , the acting head of the Republic of Vietnam Marine Corps to send the 1st and 2nd Marine Battalions . Rangers were called into Saigon from the western town of Tây Ninh . Assistant Secretary of Defense Nguyễn Đình Thuận phoned Durbrow and discussed the impending standoff between the incoming loyalists and the rebels . Durbrow said " I hope that the Revolutionary Committee and President Diệm can get together and agree to cooperate as a civil war could only benefit communists . If one side or the other has to make some concessions in order [ to ] reach an agreement , I believe that would be desirable to ensure unity against the communists . " Durbrow was worried that if he sided with one faction over the other , and that group was defeated , the United States would be saddled with a hostile regime . 
 Diệm advised Khanh to continue to negotiate with the paratroopers and seek a rapprochement . After consenting to formal negotiations , the parties agreed to a ceasefire . In the meantime , loyalist forces continued to head towards the capital , while the rebels publicly claimed on radio that Diệm had surrendered in an apparent attempt to attract more troops to their cause . Diệm promised to end press censorship , liberalise the economy , and hold free and fair elections . Diệm refused to sack Nhu , but he agreed to dissolve his cabinet and form a government that would accommodate the Revolutionary Council . In the early hours of November 12 , Diệm taped a speech detailing the concessions , which the rebels broadcast on Saigon Radio . In it he expressed his intention to " coordinate with the Revolutionary Council to establish a coalition government " . 
 As the speech was being aired , two infantry divisions and supporting loyal armour approached the palace grounds . Some of these had broken through the rebel encirclement by falsely claiming to be anti @-@ Diệm reinforcements , before setting up their positions next to the palace . The loyalists opened fire with mortars and machine guns , and both sides exchanged fire for a few hours . During the morning , Durbrow tried to stop the fighting , phoning Diệm to say that if the violence was not stopped , " the entire population will rise up against both loyalists and rebels , and the communists will take over the city . If a bloodbath is not avoided , all of Vietnam will go communist in a very short time . " Durbrow deplored the attempt to resolve the situation with force . Diệm blamed the rebels for causing the outbreak of fighting and the collapse of the power @-@ sharing deal . Some of the Saigon @-@ based units that had joined the rebellion sensed that Diệm had regained the upper hand and switched sides for the second time in two days . The paratroopers became outnumbered and were forced to retreat to defensive positions around their barracks , which was an ad hoc camp that had been set up in a public park approximately 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) away . After a brief but violent battle that killed around 400 people , the coup attempt was crushed . This included a large number of civilians , who had been engaging in anti @-@ Diệm protests outside the palace grounds . Thi exhorted them to bring down the Ngos by charging the palace , and 13 were gunned down by the loyalist soldiers from the 2nd Armored Battalion as they invaded the grounds . The others dispersed quickly . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the failed coup , Đông , Thi , Lieu and several other prominent officers fled to Tan Son Nhut and climbed aboard a C @-@ 47 . They fled to Cambodia , where they were happily given asylum by Prince Norodom Sihanouk . Cambodia and South Vietnam had been on bad terms ; Cambodia turned a blind eye to Vietnamese communists using their territory as a staging ground , while Diệm and Nhu had tried to foment opposition and had supported attempts to overthrow the Cambodian leader . Nhu had failed in a 1959 attempt to assassinate Sihanouk with a parcel bomb , and both nations ' leaders despised one another . 
 Diệm promptly reneged on his promises , and began rounding up scores of critics , including several former cabinet ministers and some of the Caravelle Group of 18 who had released a petition calling for reform . One of Diệm 's first orders after re @-@ establishing command was to order the arrest of Dan , who was imprisoned and tortured . 
 For Diệm and his family , the failed coup was a turning point in relations with the US support , which had generally been unconditional and strong since 1955 . He felt the US had let him down and that some Americans had been encouraging his overthrow and undermining his rule . He had previously though the Americans had full support for him , but afterwards , he told his confidants that he felt like Syngman Rhee , the President of the anti @-@ communist South Korea who had been strongly backed by Washington until being deposed in a coup earlier in 1960 , a regime change Diệm saw as US @-@ backed . Diệm 's opponents felt the same way about the similarities to Korea . Lieu later told Kahin " We had no worry about getting continued American assistance if we were successful ; we felt we could count on it , just like Park did when he overthrew Rhee . " Kahin also wrote that several senior officers including a senior figure in the coup , whom he did not name , were " explicit in charging American encouragement of the rebels " . 
 In the wake of the failed coup , Diệm blamed Durbrow for a perceived lack of US support , while his brother Nhu further accused the ambassador of colluding with the rebels . Durbrow denied this in later years , saying that he had been " 100 % in support of Diệm " . In January 1961 , Diệm told Kahin of his belief the US had been involved , while Nhu told Karnow " the principal culprits in the revolt were the ' western embassies ' and individual Americans in particular ... American military advisers were helping the paratroopers during the revolt . " In May 1961 , Nhu said " [ t ] he least you can say ... is that the State Department was neutral between a friendly government and rebels who tried to put that government down ... and the official attitude of the Americans during that coup was not at all the attitude the President would have expected " . For Diệm , that Durbrow had called for restraint was an indication he saw Diệm and the rebels as equals , something Diệm saw as anathema . Durbrow called for Diệm to treat the remaining rebel leaders leniently , stressing the need for Diệm to " unify all elements of the country " , but Diệm was adamantly opposed to this , angrily rebuffing the ambassador , saying " You apparently do not understand that the rebels caused much blood @-@ letting " , accusing them having " duped " innocent people . Diệm also sent Gene Gregory , an American supporter who edited the Times of Vietnam — an English @-@ language newspaper operated as a mouthpiece for the Nhus and known for stridently attacking Ngô family opponents — to meet Durbrow with concrete evidence of " American support of and complicity in the coup " . From the coup onwards , Diệm became increasingly suspicious of Washington 's policies . He was also angry with US media coverage of the coup , which depicted Diệm as authoritarian and the revolt as a manifestation of widespread discontent . Diệm instead viewed opposition simply as troublemakers . 
 The American military establishment strongly backed Diệm . Colonel Edward Lansdale , a CIA agent who helped entrench Diệm in power in 1955 , ridiculed Durbrow 's comments and called on the Eisenhower administration to recall the ambassador . Lansdale said that " It is most doubtful that Ambassador Durbrow has any personal stature remaining . Diệm must feel that Durbrow sided with the rebels emotionally . Perhaps he feels that Durbrow 's remarks over the months helped incite the revolt . " Lansdale criticised Durbrow : " At the most critical moment of the coup , the U.S. Ambassador urged Diệm to give in to rebel demands to avoid bloodshed . " Lieutenant General Lionel McGarr , the new commander of the Military Assistance Advisory Group , agreed with Lansdale . McGarr had been in contact with both the rebel and loyalist units during the standoff and credited the failure of the coup to the " courageous action of Diệm coupled with loyalty and versatility of commanders bringing troops into Saigon " . McGarr asserted that " Diệm has emerged from this severe test in position of greater strength with visible proof of sincere support behind him both in armed forces and civilian population . " General Lyman Lemnitzer , the chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff said that " When you have rebellious forces against you , you have to act forcibly and not restrain your friends . The main point is that sometimes bloodshed can 't be avoided and that those in power must act decisively . " The State Department advised President Dwight David Eisenhower to send Diệm a congratulatory message , but Durbrow objected , arguing that Diệm would interpret the message as an unqualified endorsement of his rule and prevent him from " grasping and heeding lessons of [ the ] coup " . 
 Diệm later implicated two Americans , George Carver and Russ Miller for involvement in the plot . Both had spent the coup attempt with the rebel officers . Durbrow had sent them there to keep track of the situation , but Diệm felt that they were there to encourage the uprising ; the coup group 's desired changes were very similar to those advocated by Durbrow in previous months . It was later revealed that Carver had friendly relations with the coup leaders and then arranged for Thuy to be evacuated from South Vietnam when the loyalists overwhelmed the paratroopers . Carver had also spent some of the coup period in a meeting with civilian rebel leaders at Thuy 's house , although it is not known if he pro @-@ actively encouraged Diệm opponents . The Ngô brothers indicated to the Americans that Carver should be deported , and soon after , Carver received a death warrant . The threat was supposedly signed by the coup leaders , who were ostensibly angry because Carver had abandoned them and withdrawn American support for them . The Americans thought that Nhu was the real culprit , but told the Ngô family that they were removing Carver from the country for his own safety , thereby allowing all parties to avoid embarrassment . Years later , Carver said he agreed with the rebels ' thinking that Diệm was doing poorly and needed to be replaced , saying he was " absolutely convinced " that a regime change was needed to " achieve American objective in Vietnam " . In his memoir , Don claimed Miller had cryptically encouraged him to overthrow Diệm a few months before the coup attempt . 
 The rift between American diplomatic and military representatives in South Vietnam began to grow . In the meantime , Durbrow continued his policy of pressuring Diệm to liberalize his regime . Durbrow saw the coup as a sign that Diệm was unpopular and with the South Vietnamese president making only token changes , the ambassador informed Washington that Diệm might have to be removed . However , in December , the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs J. Graham Parsons told Durbrow to stop , cabling " Believe for present Embassy has gone as far as feasible in pushing for liberalization and future exhortation likely to be counterproductive . " This was mirrored in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam and Diệm . The paratroopers had been regarded as the most loyal of the ARVN 's units , so Diệm intensified his policy of promoting officers based on loyalty rather than competence . Khiêm was made a general and appointed Army Chief of Staff . The Ngô brothers were so paranoid that they felt that Khanh was suspect as he had broken through the rebel lines too easily . Khanh 's action gained him a reputation of having helped the president , but he was later criticised for having a foot in both camps . Critics claimed that Khanh had been on good terms with the rebels and decided against rebelling when it was clear that Diệm would win . Khanh was later dispatched to the Central Highlands as the commander of the II Corps . General Dương Văn Minh , who did not come to Diệm 's defense during the siege and instead stayed at home , was demoted . During the revolt , the plotters had nominated Minh to become their Defence Minister , but he refused when Diệm contacted him , claiming that he would willingly fight for Diệm on the battlefield , but was neither interested in nor suited for politics . However , Minh did not come to assist Diệm , and the president responded by appointing him to the post of Presidential Military Advisor , where he had no influence or troops to command in case the thought of coup ever crossed his mind . 
 Lansdale continued to be critical of Durbrow , and wanted to replace him as ambassador . Two months later , the incoming US President John F. Kennedy started a review of Washington 's stance with regards to Saigon . Lansdale 's report predicted South Vietnam 's demise , and along with it , the rest of South East Asia and US preeminence in global affairs , unless a new direction was found . He blamed what he saw as Durbrow 's poor judgement for the problems in the alliance , and that the current ambassador could not work effectively anymore because he had " sympathized strongly " with the coup . Without explicitly suggesting himself , Lansdale said that Durbrow had to be replaced with someone " with marked leadership talents " and the ability to " influence Asians through understanding them sympathetically " . Lansdale called Diệm " the only Vietnamese with executive ability and the required determination to be an effective President " and said the new ambassador needed thus needed to have a rapport with him . Lansdale said Diệm was comfortable with <unk> and the CIA , but felt that diplomats were " very close to those who tried to kill him on November 11 " . During the meeting at which these matters were discussed , there was strong agreement that Durbrow 's position in Saigon had become untenable . Lansdale 's submissions were seen as being important in Kennedy 's decision to replace Durbrow with Frederick Nolting in May 1961 . Nolting was a mild man who was seen as unlikely to pressure Diệm to reform and therefore upset him . Kennedy was thought to have seriously contemplated the appointment of Lansdale , before encountering complaints from sections of the State and Defense Departments , among them Defense Secretary Robert McNamara . Kennedy also increased funding for Diệm immediately and made a show of support for the Vietnamese leader at the advice of Lansdale . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The trial of those charged with involvement in the coup occurred more than two years later in mid @-@ 1963 . Diệm scheduled the hearing in the middle of the Buddhist crisis , a move that was interpreted as an attempt to deter the populace from further dissent . Nineteen officers and 34 civilians were accused of complicity in the coup and called before the Special Military Court . 
 Diệm 's officials gave the Americans an unsubtle warning not to interfere . The official prosecutor claimed to have documents proving that a foreign power was behind the failed coup but said that he could not publicly name the nation in question . It was later revealed in secret proceedings that he pinpointed two Americans : George Carver , an employee of the United States Operations Mission ( an economic mission ) who was later revealed to be a CIA agent , and Howard C. <unk> , described as the deputy chief of the American mission in Saigon . 
 One of the prominent civilians summoned to appear before the military tribunal was a well @-@ known novelist who wrote under the pen name of Nhat Linh . He was the VNQDĐ leader Nguyễn Tường Tam , who had been Ho Chi Minh 's foreign affairs minister in 1946 . Tam had abandoned his post rather than lead the delegation to the Fontainebleau Conference and make concessions to the French Union . In the 30 months since the failed putsch , the police had not taken the conspiracy claims seriously enough to arrest Tam , but when Tam learned of the trial , he committed suicide by ingesting cyanide . He left a death note stating " I also will kill myself as a warning to those people who are trampling on all freedom " , referring to Thích Quảng Đức , the monk who self @-@ immolated in protest against Diệm 's persecution of Buddhism . Tam 's suicide was greeted with a mixed reception . Although some felt that it upheld the Vietnamese tradition of choosing death over humiliation , some VNQDĐ members considered Tam 's actions to be romantic and sentimental . 
 The brief trial opened on July 8 , 1963 . The seven officers and two civilians who had fled the country after the failed coup were found guilty and sentenced to death in absentia . Five officers were acquitted , while the remainder were imprisoned for terms ranging from five to ten years . Another VNQDĐ leader Vũ Hồng Khanh was given six years in prison . Former Diệm cabinet minister Phan Khắc Sửu was sentenced to eight years , mainly for being a signatory of the Caravelle Group which called on Diệm to reform . Dan , the spokesman was sentenced to seven years . Fourteen of the civilians were acquitted , including Tam . 
 However , the prisoners ' time in prison was brief , as Diệm was deposed and killed in a coup in November 1963 . On November 8 , political opponents who had been imprisoned on the island of <unk> <unk> were released by the military junta . Đán was garlanded and taken to military headquarters , and on November 10 , Suu was released and welcomed by a large crowd at the town hall . Suu later served as president for a brief period and Dan as a deputy prime minister . Thi , Đông and Lieu returned to South Vietnam and resumed their service in the ARVN . 
 = Elmo Tanner = 
 William Elmo Tanner , known as Elmo Tanner ( August 8 , 1904 – December 20 , 1990 ) was an American whistler , singer , bandleader and disc jockey , best known for his whistling on the chart @-@ topping song “ Heartaches ” with the Ted Weems Orchestra . Tanner and Weems recorded the song for two different record companies within a period of five years . Neither recording was successful originally . The song became a hit for both record companies after a Charlotte , North Carolina disk jockey played it at random in 1947 . 
 Tanner was originally hired by Weems as a vocalist ; the bandleader discovered Tanner 's whistling ability while the band was traveling to an engagement . Like Bing Crosby , he was able to whistle from his throat due to the muscles in his larynx . He subsequently became a featured performer as a whistler , earning the nicknames " Whistler ’ s Mother ’ s Boy " , " The Whistling Troubador , " and " the nation ’ s best @-@ known whistler " . He began appearing in films as part of the Ted Weems Orchestra in 1936 ; his first film role was in The Hatfields and McCoys , and he later appeared in the movie Swing , Sister , Swing ( 1938 ) and the musical film short , Swing Frolic ( 1942 ) . Weems considered Tanner 's whistling important enough to his orchestra that in 1939 he insured Tanner 's throat for $ 10 @,@ 000 . Besides musical whistling , he also imitated birds for Disney . 
 After a failed attempt at running a restaurant in his native Nashville in the early 1950s , he toured with the Elmo Tanner Quartet until 1958 , when he found work as a disc jockey in Florida . After working as an auto dealer in the 1960s , in the early 1970s he resumed musical activity , singing with a St. Petersburg , Florida @-@ based quartet . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Tanner was born on August 8 , 1904 in Nashville , Tennessee . He grew up in Detroit , and moved to Memphis with his family by 1926 . As a young boy , Tanner studied the violin and was successful with it until eye trouble made it difficult for him to read notes . His musical training helped Tanner to develop the ability to scan music or lyrics quickly and then either sing or whistle what he had just read . On his walk home from work , Tanner passed a cemetery each night and started whistling as he passed by . Not everyone appreciated Tanner 's whistling in the evening ; he was once jailed in Albuquerque , New Mexico for whistling after 10pm . A graduate of the University of Tennessee , Tanner raced automobiles and worked as a mechanic in Memphis . While performing the duties of his employment he liked to whistle and sing . One day in 1928 , he had a repair job for a customer who happened to work at WMC radio . After hearing Tanner singing while working on his car , the announcer suggested Tanner audition for the radio station . His consequent on @-@ air appearance brought a call from Paramount Records , which had offices in Chicago . 
 = = Career = = 
 By the late 1920s , Elmo Tanner had moved to the Chicago area and had established himself as a professional musician . Although Elmo Tanner never gained a large reputation as a singer , he was occasionally featured as such with Weems . It was as a vocalist that he made his initial recordings . He recorded a few dozen sides as a soloist for Paramount and Vocalion in 1927 through 1929 . Interestingly , the Paramount discs appeared in the Race record series , and the Vocalion sides were likewise marketed to African Americans . His versatility was noted by Vocalion , who utilized him to provide vocals for jazz outfits such as Jimmie Noone and for more sedate recordings with the Victor Young orchestra and with organist Eddie House . Not having signed an exclusive contract with any recording company , he was able to appear on the prestigious Victor label with Nathaniel Shilkret . In 1928 he formed a duet with Fred Rose as " The Tune Peddlers " and appeared on radio stations WLS , KYW , and WBBM . 
 While working at KYW with Rose , Tanner received an offer from Ted Weems . Weems offered a higher salary than Tanner was making at the radio station , but Tanner was hesitant because the job with Weems involved substantial travel . The KYW station manager offered to match the $ 50 per week salary . A few days later , Weems made a higher offer which was met by the station manager 's offer to match it . This continued until only Fred Rose came to work . When he arrived , Rose told the station manager that Weems now offered Tanner $ 100 a week and he had accepted it . 
 = = = Ted Weems Orchestra and “ Heartaches ” = = = 
 Tanner joined the Ted Weems band as a singer in 1929 and became a prominent feature of the group . Tanner 's whistling talent was unveiled by accident . In high spirits on their way to their next performance , the band members were singing , yelling and whistling on the bus . When Tanner joined in , Weems was impressed enough to add a whistling segment to one of the band 's sets . Tanner whistled the Show Boat song , " Make Believe " ; the audience asked for an encore . Tanner 's whistling became so popular that Perry Como , another featured performer in the band , said “ The whistler was the whole band . ” On occasion , Tanner ’ s lips would pucker up , interfering with his whistling . Although generally noted for his graciousness as a bandleader , Weems would have fun at Tanner ’ s expense , running him through the most difficult songs in his repertoire when he noticed Tanner was struggling . Tanner became known as " Whistler ’ s Mother ’ s Boy " , " The Whistling Troubador , " and " the nation ’ s best @-@ known whistler " . Tanner was noted for the ease with which he hit high notes and performed trills . He had the ability to whistle while triple @-@ tonguing , and like Bing Crosby , he was able to whistle from his throat due to the muscles in his larynx . His range was from low G to high B ♭ . Professional whistler Joel Brandon has named Tanner as a " top pick " . Ted Weems considered Tanner 's whistling so important to his band , he insured the musician 's throat with Lloyd 's of London for $ 10 @,@ 000 in 1939 . The policy provided payment for any medical expenses related to Tanner 's possible inability to whistle and included payment to the holder if Tanner was unable to perform . 
 In an era when whistling was commonly featured on popular recordings , Tanner was often confused with Fred Lowery , who was blind and worked with Horace Heidt and his Musical Knights . People would come up to Tanner and ask if it was true that he was blind . “ Only on Saturday night , ” he would reply . When not singing or whistling , Elmo played guitar in the band . The primary purpose was evidently to show Tanner was " doing something " while keeping him in view , as it became a standard joke that the guitar he was playing had rubber bands in place of strings . 
 Tanner began appearing in films as part of the Ted Weems Orchestra in 1936 ; his first film role was in The Hatfields and McCoys , In 1938 he appeared in the movie Swing , Sister , Swing with the Weems outfit . Tanner also featured with Ted Weems and his Orchestra in a 1942 musical film short , Swing Frolic . During this time period Tanner appeared on the popular radio show Beat the Band with Weems ; the program ran from January 28 , 1940 until February 23 , 1941 . 
 Tanner , Ted Weems , and the rest of his orchestra joined the Merchant Marine in 1942 . At ( and intermittently before ) his discharge in 1944 he pursued a solo career . He headlined in various nightclubs and theaters such as Chicago ’ s Oriental and Colosimo ’ s and at the Orpheum in Los Angeles alongside the King Sisters and Maurice Rocco . Besides musical whistling , he also imitated birds for Disney . He continued to perform songs that were associated with Weems , such as “ Nola ” . Tanner announced he would be fronting a twelve @-@ piece band in September 1946 ; the band 's theme was " Heartaches " . He took over the Andy Anderson unit that was based in Atlanta and signed on with the William Morris Agency . His orchestra featured his whistling and vocals by Carol Bridges . However , this proved to be short @-@ lived because of the surprise success of an old recording . 
 = = = = The delayed success of " Heartaches " = = = = 
 “ Heartaches ” , composed by Al Hoffman and John <unk> in 1931 , was recorded as an unusual half @-@ rumba , half washboard rhythm . In 1933 , Victor had assigned the recording of the song to Ted Weems and his Orchestra , and wanted it recorded quickly . Weems and his band had time for only one rehearsal before recording the song . Initially , Weems did not like the song ; he decided to omit the lyrics by way of having Tanner whistle instead . While running through the song at rehearsal , someone thought of trying it with a speedier tempo than initially written . It was not a large seller , and the master was filed away . In 1938 , Weems was now working with Decca Records and was preparing to make another record . When someone had forgotten to assign a song for the " B " side of the record , Weems and Tanner made another recording of " Heartaches " ; the Decca version was not any more successful than the Victor one had been five years earlier . 
 In 1947 , a young disk jockey in Charlotte , North Carolina who worked the overnight shift had recently received some older records which he brought to work with him . He chose one at random and put it on the turntable . Shortly after the record had finished , the radio station 's telephones began ringing with people asking about the song and requesting to hear it again . By afternoon , the city 's music stores were calling the radio station , hoping to learn where they could order copies of " Heartaches " . Both Victor and Decca went into their vaults to find their masters of the record and began pressing them for southern United States sales . As disk jockeys in other parts of the US began obtaining copies of the record and playing it , the demand for " Heartaches " went from coast to coast . This older recording went to the top of all the main charts in 1947 , including sales , juke box play , and airplay . 
 Unusually , two separate recordings were given equal credit in the charts . Victor ’ s version was recorded on August 4 , 1933 and issued on Bluebird <unk> . Decca ’ s recording was made on August 23 , 1938 and originally appeared on catalog number <unk> . The hit records were credited to RCA Victor 20 @-@ 2175 and Decca <unk> , respectively . Altogether the recordings were credited with selling 8 @.@ 5 million copies . Tanner said in a 1960 interview that neither he nor Ted Weems received any compensation for the " Heartaches " re @-@ issue as they both had let the contracts on the song expire while they were in the Merchant Marine . Tanner and Weems missed collecting an estimated $ 250 @,@ 000 in royalties because of the expired contracts . 
 Because of the renewed success of “ Heartaches ” , Tanner joined the re @-@ formed Weems outfit in March 1947 , and both were signed to Mercury Records . This later outfit often received poor reviews , with the exception of Elmo ’ s “ outstanding ” whistling ; it was Tanner ’ s whistling that audiences most responded to . Tanner made one more recording of " Heartaches " in 1953 with Billy Vaughn for Dot Records . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 Tanner left Weems in 1950 to open a restaurant in Nashville . This occupied him for a year and a half , but it proved to be a failure and Tanner suffered financially . He formed the Elmo Tanner Quartet and resumed touring for the next few years , until , tired of travel , he broke up his group in Seattle in 1958 . He spent the next fourteen months in Birmingham as a disk jockey and leading a musical combo . He reunited briefly with Weems , then settled in the St. Petersburg , Florida area in Treasure Island . In 1959 , Tanner began working as a disc jockey on radio station <unk> in St. Pete Beach , Florida , a position which lasted several years . During this time he continued to make recordings with orchestras such as David Carroll and Billy Vaughn to continued positive reviews . His association continued with Weems , making the occasional guest appearance with the band he was closely connected to . In the early 1960s , Tanner was also selling Datsuns at a local St. Petersburg auto dealership . In the early 1970s he resumed musical activity , singing with a St. Petersburg @-@ based quartet . 
 = = Personal life and death = = 
 In 1936 , while Tanner was living in Chicago , he was divorced from his first wife , Verne . Tanner married Eleanor Jones of Birmingham on January 31 , 1939 in Indianapolis . While playing an engagement with Weems , Tanner got his marriage license between the first and second acts on the bill , bought a wedding ring between the second and third acts and was married between the third and fourth acts . He met his second wife while working with the Weems band on Catalina Island . They had four children together : Elmo Jr . , twins Margaret and Patricia , and John Emmet . By 1969 he was retired . Tanner underwent gall bladder surgery in 1985 and was able to recover at his home in St. Petersburg . He died on December 20 , 1990 in St. Petersburg , Florida . Tanner is buried in Mount Olivet Cemetery , Nashville , Tennessee . He was posthumously inducted into the <unk> ' Hall of Fame in 1991 , joining previous inductees Bing Crosby and Fred Lowery . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Poole = 
 Poole / <unk> / is a large coastal town and seaport in the county of Dorset , on the south coast of England . The town is 33 kilometres ( 21 mi ) east of Dorchester , and adjoins Bournemouth to the east . The local council is Borough of Poole and was made a unitary authority in 1997 , gaining administrative independence from Dorset County Council . The borough had a population of 147 @,@ 645 at the 2011 census , making it the second largest in Dorset . Together with Bournemouth and Christchurch , the town forms the South East Dorset conurbation with a total population of over 465 @,@ 000 . 
 Human settlement in the area dates back to before the Iron Age . The earliest recorded use of the town 's name was in the 12th century when the town began to emerge as an important port , prospering with the introduction of the wool trade . In later centuries , the town had important trade links with North America and at its peak in the 18th century it was one of the busiest ports in Britain . In the Second World War , the town was one of the main departing points for the Normandy landings . 
 Poole is a tourist resort , attracting visitors with its large natural harbour , history , the Lighthouse arts centre and Blue Flag beaches . The town has a busy commercial port with cross @-@ Channel freight and passenger ferry services . The headquarters of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution ( RNLI ) are in Poole , and the Royal Marines have a base in the town 's harbour . Despite their names , Poole is the home of The Arts University Bournemouth , the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra and a significant part of Bournemouth University . 
 = = History = = 
 The town 's name derives from a corruption of the Celtic word bol and the Old English word pool meaning a place near a pool or creek . Variants include Pool , Pole , Poles , Poll , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The area around modern Poole has been inhabited for the past 2 @,@ 500 years . During the 3rd century BC , Celts known as the Durotriges moved from hilltop settlements at Maiden Castle and Badbury Rings to heathland around the River Frome and Poole Harbour . The Romans landed at Poole during their conquest of Britain in the 1st century and took over an Iron Age settlement at Hamworthy , an area just west of the modern town centre . In Anglo @-@ Saxon times , Poole was included in the Kingdom of Wessex . The settlement was used as a base for fishing and the harbour a place for ships to anchor on their way to the River Frome and the important Anglo @-@ Saxon town of Wareham . Poole experienced two large @-@ scale Viking invasions during this era : in 876 , Guthrum sailed his fleet through the harbour to attack Wareham , and in 1015 , Canute began his conquest of England in Poole Harbour , using it as a base to raid and pillage Wessex . 
 Following the Norman conquest of England , Poole rapidly grew into a busy port as the importance of Wareham declined . The town was part of the manor of Canford , but does not exist as an identifiable entry in the Domesday Book . The earliest written mention of Poole occurred on a document from 1196 describing the newly built St James 's Chapel in " La Pole " . The Lord of the Manor , Sir William <unk> , sold a charter of liberties to the burgesses of Poole in 1248 to raise funds for his participation in the Seventh Crusade . Consequently , Poole gained a small measure of freedom from feudal rule and acquired the right to appoint a mayor and hold a court within town . Poole 's growing importance was recognised in 1433 when it was awarded staple port status by King Henry VI , enabling the port to begin exporting wool and in turn granting a licence for the construction of a town wall . In 1568 , Poole gained further autonomy when it was granted legal independence from Dorset and made a county corporate by the Great Charter of Elizabeth I. During the English Civil War , Poole 's puritan stance and its merchants ' opposition to the ship money tax introduced by King Charles I led to the town declaring for Parliament . Poole escaped any large @-@ scale attack and with the Royalists on the brink of defeat in 1646 , the Parliamentary garrison from Poole laid siege to and captured the nearby Royalist stronghold at Corfe Castle . 
 Poole established successful commerce with the North American colonies in the 16th century , including the important fisheries of Newfoundland . The trade with Newfoundland grew steadily to meet the demand for fish from the Catholic countries of Europe . Poole 's share of this trade varied but the most prosperous period started in the early 18th century and lasted until the early 19th century . The trade was a three @-@ cornered route ; ships sailed to Newfoundland with salt and provisions , then carried dried and salted fish to Europe before returning to Poole with wine , olive oil , and salt . By the early 18th century Poole had more ships trading with North America than any other English port and vast wealth was brought to Poole 's merchants . This prosperity supported much of the development which now characterises the Old Town where many of the medieval buildings were replaced with Georgian mansions and terraced housing . The end of the Napoleonic Wars and the conclusion of the War of 1812 ended Britain 's monopoly over the Newfoundland fisheries and other nations took over services provided by Poole 's merchants at a lower cost . Poole 's Newfoundland trade rapidly declined and within a decade most merchants had ceased trading . 
 The town grew rapidly during the industrial revolution as urbanisation took place and the town became an area of mercantile prosperity and overcrowded poverty . At the turn of the 19th century , nine out of ten workers were engaged in harbour activities , but as the century progressed ships became too large for the shallow harbour and the port lost business to the deep water ports at Liverpool , Southampton and Plymouth . Poole 's first railway station opened in Hamworthy in 1847 and later extended to the centre of Poole in 1872 , effectively ending the port 's busy coastal shipping trade . The beaches and landscape of southern Dorset and south @-@ west Hampshire began to attract tourists during the 19th century and the villages to the east of Poole began to grow and merge until the seaside resort of Bournemouth emerged . Although Poole did not become a resort like many of its neighbours , it continued to prosper as the rapid expansion of Bournemouth created a large demand for goods manufactured in Poole . 
 During World War II , Poole was the third largest embarkation point for D @-@ Day landings of Operation Overlord and afterwards served as a base for supplies to the allied forces in Europe . Eighty @-@ one landing craft containing American troops from the 29th Infantry Division and the US Army Rangers departed Poole Harbour for Omaha Beach . Poole was also an important centre for the development of Combined Operations and the base for a US Coast Guard rescue flotilla of 60 cutters . Much of the town suffered from German bombing during the war and years of neglect in the post @-@ war economic decline . Major redevelopment projects began in the 1950s and 1960s and large areas of slum properties were demolished and replaced with modern public housing and facilities . Many of Poole 's historic buildings were demolished during this period , particularly in the Old Town area of Poole . Consequently , a 6 @-@ hectare ( 15 @-@ acre ) Conservation Area was created in the town centre in 1975 to preserve Poole 's most notable buildings . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Council = = = 
 On 1 April 1997 , the town was made a unitary authority following a review by the Local Government Commission for England , and became once again administratively independent from Dorset . The borough reverted to its previous title of the Borough and County of the Town of Poole , which recalled its status as a county corporate before the implementation of the Local Government Act 1888 . For local elections , 42 councillors are elected across 16 wards and elections take place every four years . The last election took place in May 2015 , giving a Council made up of 32 Conservative , 6 Liberal Democrat , 3 Poole People and 1 UKIP councillors . Poole 's Mayor is Peter Adams ( Conservative ) . 
 = = = Parliamentary representation = = = 
 Poole is represented by three parliamentary constituencies in the House of Commons ; Poole , Mid Dorset and North Poole , and Bournemouth West , Alderney and Branksome East . The borough constituency of Poole has existed since 1950 . Previously the town had been a parliamentary borough , electing two members of parliament from 1455 until 1865 when representation was reduced to one member . In 1885 the constituency was abolished altogether and absorbed into the East Dorset constituency until its reintroduction in 1950 . Robert Syms ( Conservative ) has been the Member of Parliament since 1997 . At the 2010 general election , the Conservatives won a majority of 7 @,@ 541 and 47 @.@ 5 % of the vote . The Liberal Democrats won 31 @.@ 6 % of the vote , Labour 12 @.@ 7 % , the UK Independence Party 5 @.@ 3 % and the British National Party 2 @.@ 5 % . The county constituency of Mid Dorset and North Poole was created in 1997 and includes the north east of Poole , Wimborne Minster , Wareham and extends into rural Dorset . Annette Brooke ( Liberal Democrat ) has been the Member of Parliament since 2001 . At the 2010 general election , the Liberal Democrats won with a majority of 269 and 45 @.@ 1 % of the vote in Mid Dorset and North Poole . The Conservatives won 44 @.@ 5 % of the vote , Labour 5 @.@ 9 % and the UK Independence Party 4 @.@ 15 % . Poole is included in the South West England constituency for elections to the European Parliament . 
 = = = Coat of arms = = = 
 The design of the coat of arms originated in a seal from the late 14th century and were recorded by Clarenceux King of Arms during the heraldic visitation of Dorset in 1563 . The wavy bars of black and gold represent the sea and the dolphin is sign of Poole 's maritime interests . The scallop shells are the emblem of Saint James and are associated with his shrine at Santiago de Compostela – a popular destination for Christian pilgrims departing from Poole Harbour in the Middle Ages . 
 The arms were confirmed by the College of Arms on 19 June 1948 , and at the same time the crest ( a mermaid supporting an anchor and holding a cannonball ) was granted . Following local government reorganisation in 1974 , the 1948 arms were transferred to Poole Borough Council . In 1976 , the council received the grant of supporters for the coat of arms . The supporters refer to important charters given to the town ; to the left is a gold lion holding a long sword representing William Longespee who in 1248 granted the town 's first charter ; on the right is a dragon derived from the Royal Arms of Elizabeth I who granted Poole county corporate status in 1568 . The Latin motto – Ad <unk> <unk> De Poole , means : According to the Custom of the Town of Poole , and derives from the Great Charter of 1568 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Poole is located on the shore of the English Channel and lies on the northern and eastern edges of Poole Harbour , 179 kilometres ( 111 mi ) west @-@ southwest of London , at 50 @.@ 72 ° N 1 @.@ 98 ° W ﻿ / 50 @.@ 72 ; <unk> . The oldest part of the town ( including the historic Old Town , Poole Quay and the Dolphin Shopping Centre ) lies to the south @-@ east of Holes Bay on a peninsula jutting into the harbour , although much of the land to the east of the peninsula has been reclaimed from the harbour since the mid 20th century . To the west is Upton and Corfe Mullen and across the northern border at the River Stour lies Wimborne Minster . At the eastern edge of Poole , the town abuts Bournemouth and the settlements of <unk> , Winton and Westbourne . To the south of Poole along the coast lies Poole Bay , featuring 4 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 0 mi ) of sandy beaches from Sandbanks in the west to Bournemouth in the east . 
 Urban areas and districts of the <unk> is made up of numerous suburbs and neighbourhoods , many of which developed from villages or hamlets that were absorbed into Poole as the town <unk> – <unk> – Branksome – Branksome Park – Broadstone – Canford Cliffs – Canford Heath – <unk> – <unk> – Hamworthy – Lilliput – Longfleet – <unk> – Newtown – Oakdale – Parkstone – Penn Hill – Sandbanks – <unk> – Talbot Village – <unk> – Waterloo – <unk> 
 The natural environment of Poole is characterised by lowland heathland to the north and wooded chines and coastline to the south . The heathland habitat supports the six native British reptile species and provides a home for a range of dragonflies and rare birds . Development has destroyed much of the heath but scattered fragments remain to the north of Poole and have been designated Special Protection Areas . The town lies on <unk> beds of Eocene clays ( mainly London Clay and Gault Clay ) , sands and gravels . The River Frome runs through this weak rock , and its many tributaries have carved out a wide estuary . At the mouth of the estuary sand spits have been deposited , enclosing the estuary to create Poole Harbour . 
 The harbour is the largest natural harbour in Europe and the claimant of the title of second largest natural harbour in the world after Sydney Harbour . It is an area of international importance for nature conservation and is noted for its ecology , supporting salt marshes , mudflats and an internationally important habitat for several species of migrating bird . It has been designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) , a Special Protection Area and a Ramsar site as well as falling within an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . The harbour covers an area of 38 square kilometres ( 15 sq mi ) and is extremely shallow : although the main shipping channels are 7 @.@ 5 metres ( 25 ft ) deep the average depth of the harbour is 48 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 57 ft ) . It contains several small islands , the largest is Brownsea Island , a nature reserve owned by the National Trust and the birthplace of the Scouting movement and location of the first Scout Camp . Britain 's largest onshore oil field operates from Wytch Farm on the south shore of the harbour . The oil reservoirs extend under the harbour and eastwards from Sandbanks and Studland for 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) under the sea to the south of Bournemouth . 
 Situated directly to the east of the Jurassic Coast , Poole is a gateway town to the UNESCO World Heritage Site , which includes 153 kilometres ( 95 mi ) of the Dorset and east Devon coast important for its geology , landforms and rich fossil record . The South West Coast Path stretches for 1 @,@ 014 kilometres ( 630 mi ) from Minehead in Somerset , along the coast of Devon and Cornwall and on to Poole . The path is the England 's longest national trail at 1 @,@ 014 kilometres ( 630 mi ) . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Due to its location on the south coast of England , Poole has a temperate climate with a small variation in daily and annual temperatures . The average annual mean temperature from 1971 to 2000 was 10 @.@ 2 to 12 ° C ( 50 @.@ 4 to 53 @.@ 6 ° F ) . The warmest months in Poole are July and August , which have an average temperature range of 12 to 22 ° C ( 54 to 72 ° F ) , and the coolest months are January and February , which have a range of 2 to 8 @.@ 3 ° C ( 35 @.@ 6 to 46 @.@ 9 ° F ) . Mean sea surface temperatures range from 6 @.@ 9 ° C ( 44 @.@ 4 ° F ) in February to 18 @.@ 5 ° C ( 65 @.@ 3 ° F ) in August . The average annual rainfall of 592 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 23 @.@ 33 in ) is well below the UK average of 1 @,@ 126 millimetres ( 44 @.@ 3 in ) . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Poole merges with several other towns to form the South East Dorset conurbation which has a combined population of over 465 @,@ 000 , forming one of the South Coast 's major urban areas . In the 2011 census the population of the borough of Poole was 147 @,@ 645 , an increase from 138 @,@ 288 in 2001 . The town has a built @-@ up area of 65 square kilometres ( 25 sq mi ) , giving an approximate population density of 2 @,@ 128 residents per square kilometre ( 5 @,@ 532 per sq mi ) in 60 @,@ 512 dwellings . The population has grown steadily since the 1960s , inward migration has accounted for most of the town 's growth and a significant part of this has been for retirement . Housing stock has increased by over 100 % in the past 40 years from 30 @,@ 000 in 1961 to approximately 62 @,@ 700 in 2004 . Compared to the rest of England and Wales , Poole has an above average number of residents aged 65 + ( 20 @.@ 3 % ) , but this is less than the Dorset average of 22 @.@ 2 % . The largest proportion of the population ( 24 @.@ 8 % ) is between the ages of 45 to 64 , slightly above the national average of 23 @.@ 8 % . Population projections have predicted a continual growth ; a population of 151 @,@ 481 is estimated by 2016 . 
 The district is overwhelmingly populated by people of a white ethnic background , 95 @.@ 98 % of residents are of White British ethnicity , well above the rest of England at 86 @.@ 99 % . Minority ethnic groups ( including those in white ethnic groups who did not classify themselves as British ) represent 4 @.@ 0 % of Poole 's population . The largest religion in Poole is Christianity , at almost 74 @.@ 34 % , slightly above the United Kingdom average of 71 @.@ 6 % . The next @-@ largest sector is those with no religion , at almost 16 @.@ 23 % , also above the UK average of 15 @.@ 5 % . 
 The average house price in Poole is high compared to the rest of the UK and the surrounding south west region . The average price of a property in Poole in 2008 was £ 274 @,@ 011 ; detached houses were on average £ 374 @,@ 150 , semi @-@ detached and terraced houses were cheaper at £ 226 @,@ 465 and £ 217 @,@ 128 respectively . An apartment or flat costs on average £ 216 @,@ 097 , more than any other part of Dorset . The average house prices in Poole are boosted by those in Sandbanks which had the fourth most expensive house prices in the world in 2000 ; in 2007 the average house price was £ 488 @,@ 761 . A study in 2006 by the National Housing Federation reported that Poole was the most unaffordable town in which to live in the UK . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Poole 's economy is more balanced than the rest of Dorset . In the 1960s prosperity was fuelled by growth in the manufacturing sector , whereas the 1980s and 1990s saw expansion in the service sector as office based employers relocated to the area . The importance of manufacturing has declined since the 1960s but still employed approximately 17 % of the workforce in 2002 and remains more prominent than in the economy of Great Britain as a whole . Sunseeker , the world 's largest privately owned builder of motor yachts and the UK 's largest manufacturer , is based in Poole and employs over 1 @,@ 800 people in its Poole shipyards . It was estimated in 2004 that Sunseeker generates £ 160 million for the local economy . Other major employers in the local manufacturing industry include Faerch Plast , Hamworthy Heating , Hamworthy Combustion , Lush , <unk> , Penske Cars Ltd ( who build racing cars for Penske Racing ) , Kerry Foods , Transmission Developments , Precision Disc Casting , Siemens , <unk> and <unk> . Poole has the largest number of industrial estates in South East Dorset , including the Nuffield Industrial estate , Mannings Heath , Arena Business Park , Poole Trade Park and the Branksome Business Centre . 
 The service sector is the principal economy of Poole ; a large number of employees work for the service economy of local residents or for the tourist economy . During the 1970s , Poole 's less restrictive regional planning policies attracted businesses wishing to relocate from London . These included employers in the banking and financial sector , such as Barclays Bank ( who operate a regional headquarters in Poole ) , American Express Bank and the corporate trust division of Bank of New York Mellon . Other important service sector employers include the national headquarters and college of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution ( RNLI ) , the UK headquarters of Fitness First , Bournemouth University and Arts University Bournemouth . Poole is also the headquarters for clothing company Animal , cosmetics manufacturer , Lush , and Merlin Entertainments , the world 's second @-@ largest theme park operator after Disney . The Dolphin Shopping Centre is Poole 's main retail area , and the largest indoor shopping centre in Dorset . It opened in 1969 as an Arndale Centre , and underwent three major refurbishments in 1980 , 1989 and 2004 . The centre provides 47 @,@ 000 square metres ( 510 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of retail space with 110 stores and two multi @-@ storey car parks with 1 @,@ 400 parking spaces . A pedestrianised high street containing shops , bars , public houses and restaurants connects the Dolphin Centre with the historic Old Town area and Poole Quay . Tourism is important to the Poole 's economy and was worth an estimated £ 158 million in 2002 . Poole 's Harbour , Quay , Poole Pottery and the beaches are some of the main attractions for visitors . Visitor accommodation consists of hotels , guest houses and bed and breakfast rooms located around the town , particularly in Sandbanks and the town centre . Rockley Park , a large caravan site in Hamworthy , is owned and operated by Haven and British Holidays . 
 Since the 1970s , Poole has become one of Britain 's busiest ports . Investment in new port facilities in Hamworthy , and the deepening of shipping channels allowed considerable growth in cross @-@ channel freight and passenger traffic . The port is a destination for bulk cargo imports such as steel , timber , bricks , fertiliser , grain , aggregates and <unk> traffic . Export cargoes include clay , sand , fragmented steel and grain . Commercial ferry operators run regular passenger and freight services from Poole to Cherbourg , St Malo and the Channel Islands . The Royal Marines operate out of the harbour at RM Poole , established in Hamworthy in 1954 . The base is home to 1 Assault Group Royal Marines ( responsible for landing craft and small boat training ) , a detachment of the Royal Marines Reserve and special forces unit the Special Boat Service . In 2008 , 105 fishing boats were registered and licensed to the port and held a permit issued by the Southern Sea Fisheries District Committee ( <unk> ) to fish commercially . It is the largest port in terms of licences in the <unk> district which covers the coastline of Dorset , Hampshire and the Isle of Wight , and one of the largest registered fishing fleets in the UK . However , the fleet is gradually declining because of rising fuel costs and restrictive fishing quotas introduced by the European Union . A large number of unlicensed boats also operate charted or private angling excursions . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Poole Quay is a visitor attraction to the south of the town centre lined with a mixture of traditional public houses , new bars , redeveloped warehouses , modern apartment blocks and historic listed buildings . Once the busy centre of Poole 's maritime industry , all port activities moved to Hamworthy in the 1970s as the Quay became increasingly popular with tourists . The Grade II * listed Customs House on the quay @-@ front was built in 1814 and now functions as a restaurant and bar . Nearby the Grade I listed Town Cellars , a medieval warehouse built in the 15th century on the foundations of a 14th @-@ century stone building , houses a local history centre . <unk> 's Court , another Grade I listed building , also dates from the medieval era . The Poole Pottery production factory once stood on the eastern end of the Quay but the site was redeveloped into a luxury apartment block and marina in 2001 , although an outlet store remains on the site . Boats regularly depart from the quay during the summer and provide cruises around the harbour and to Brownsea Island , the River Frome and Swanage . Public artworks along the Quay include Sea Music – a large metal sculpture designed by Sir Anthony Caro , and a life @-@ size bronze sculpture of Robert Baden @-@ Powell created to celebrate the founding of the Scout Movement on Brownsea Island . At the western end of the quay near the mouth of Holes Bay is Poole Bridge . Built in 1927 , it is the third bridge to be located on the site since 1834 . 
 Poole 's Guildhall has played a varied part in the history of the town . A Grade II * listed building , the Guildhall was built in 1761 at a cost of £ 2 @,@ 250 . The new building included an open market house on the ground floor and a courtroom and offices for the town council on the first floor and has also been used as a Court of Record , Magistrates ' Court , Court of Admiralty and a venue for Quarter Sessions . Between 1819 and 1821 the building was consecrated as a Parish Church while the old St. James Church was pulled down and replaced with the present church . During the Second World War the building was used as a canteen and meeting room for American soldiers prior to the invasion of France . The showers and washing facilities installed at this time were later converted into public baths which were used until the 1960s . The building was converted for use as the town museum between 1971 and 1991 but stood empty for the next 16 years . After a renovation project funded by Poole Borough Council , the restored Guildhall opened in June 2007 as a Register Office for weddings , civil partnerships and other civic ceremonies . 
 Poole has several urban parks – the largest is Poole Park adjacent to Poole Harbour and the town centre . It opened in 1890 and is one of two Victorian parks in Poole . Designated a Conservation Area in 1995 and awarded a Green Flag in 2008 , the park comprises 44 @.@ 3 hectares ( 109 acres ) of which 24 hectares ( 59 acres ) include the park 's man @-@ made lake and ponds . The park contains two children 's play areas , a miniature railway , tennis courts , a bowling green , a miniature golf course , an Italian restaurant and an indoor ice rink for children . A cricket field and pavilion at the eastern end are home to Poole Town Cricket Club and water sport activities such as sailing , windsurfing , kayaking and rowing take place on the large lake . A war memorial stands in the centre of the park as a monument to Poole citizens killed during the First and Second World Wars . The park hosts several road races such as the Race for Life and the annual Poole Festival of Running . 
 Poole 's sandy beaches are a popular tourist destination extending 4 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 0 mi ) along Poole Bay from the Sandbanks peninsular to Branksome Dene Chine at the border with Bournemouth . The beaches are divided into four areas : Sandbanks , Shore Road , Canford Cliffs Chine and Branksome Chine . Poole 's beaches have been awarded the European Blue Flag for cleanliness and safety 21 times since 1987 , more than any other British seaside resort and in 2000 the Tidy Britain Group resort survey rated Poole 's beaches among the top five in the country . Along the seafront there are seaside cafés , restaurants , beach huts and numerous water @-@ sports facilities . Royal National Lifeboat Institution Beach Rescue lifeguards patrol the coastline in the busy summer season between May and September . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 Poole falls within the Church of England Diocese of Salisbury and the Roman Catholic Diocese of Plymouth . Poole has many sites of Christian worship including five Grade II * and five Grade II listed churches , but no notable sites of worship for any other major religious groups . The Grade II * St James ' Church is a simplified Gothic Revival style Church of England parish church in the Old Town which was rebuilt in 1820 . The previous church on the site was first mentioned in documents from 1142 and had been extensively rebuilt in the 16th century , but in 1819 it was deemed structurally unsafe by a surveyors report . The United Reformed Church hall , also in the town centre , is a Grade II * building built in 1777 . The other Grade II * churches are : St. Peter 's Parish Church in Parkstone which was first built in 1833 and replaced in 1876 ; St Dunstan of Canterbury Orthodox Church , also in Parkstone , an Antiochian Orthodox church , formerly the Anglican Church of St Osmund , in a Neo @-@ Byzantine style building ; and the Parish Church of St. Aldhelm in Branksome , built by the architects Bodley and Garner in 1892 in the Gothic Revival style . Described by English Heritage as " one of Poole 's most important landmarks " , the Gothic Revival church of St Mary 's in Longfleet , built in 1833 , is one of Poole 's Grade II listed churches . 
 = = Sport and recreation = = 
 Poole Harbour and Poole Bay are popular areas for a number of recreational pursuits , including sailing , windsurfing , surfing , kitesurfing and water skiing . The harbour 's large areas of sheltered waters attract <unk> , particularly around the northern and eastern shores . Water skiing takes place in the harbour in a special designated area known as the Wareham Channel . The waters around the harbour , Poole Bay and Studland Bay are also popular for recreational angling and diving . 
 Poole 's wide and sandy beaches are used for swimming , sunbathing , water sports and sailing . The beaches at Sandbanks are often used for sporting events such as the Sandbanks Beach Volleyball Festival , and the annual British Beach polo Championship . 
 Since 1999 the town 's <unk> Leisure Centre has hosted the <unk> Poole Gymnastics Competition every October with the Holiday Inn Express hosting some of the competitors as well as a Disco on the Saturday evening , hundreds of competitors from across the country compete each year , the competition celebrates its 14th Anniversary in 2013 . 
 Dorset Dolphins VI Cricket Club - Est 2013 - Visually Impaired Cricket Team - Representing Dorset - Steve Bailey - Captain / Coach 
 = = = Sailing = = = 
 Poole Harbour is one of the largest centres for sailing in the UK with yacht clubs including Lilliput Sailing Club , Parkstone Yacht Club and Poole Yacht Club . Parkstone Yacht Club hosted the OK Dinghy World Championships in 2004 , the J / 24 National Championships in 2006 and the J / 24 European Championships in 2007 , and are the organisers of Youth Week and Poole Week – two of the largest annual dinghy regattas of their type in the country . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 Poole 's oldest football team is Poole Town F.C. , a semi @-@ professional team who play in the Southern League Premier Division – the seventh tier of the English football league system . Established in 1880 , the team has had erratic success at their level ; they have never risen above non @-@ League levels but once reached the third round of the FA Cup . They played at Poole Stadium until 1994 and have since settled at <unk> Farm , sharing the school playing field with Oakdale Junior School . Poole 's other football teams are Hamworthy United , who formed in 1970 and also play in the Wessex Premier League , and amateur team Poole Borough F.C. who play in the Dorset Premier League . Poole is one of the largest towns in England without a professional football team . 
 = = = Speedway = = = 
 Poole 's motorcycle speedway team , the Poole Pirates , were established and began racing at Poole Stadium in 1948 in the National League Division Three . The team now races in the top tier of league racing ( the Elite League ) which they won in 2008 , 2011 , 2013 , and 2014 . Poole Stadium is also a venue for greyhound racing ; race nights occur three days a week throughout the year . 
 = = = Scouting = = = 
 Poole has three of the oldest Scout Association groups in the world . 1st Parkstone Air Scout Group holds records dating back to February 1908 and 1st Hamworthy Scout Group has records dating back to October 1908 ; both groups were formed out of the original Boys Brigade units that had members take part in the original Scout Camp in 1907 . Broadstone Group has records dating back to December 1908 and was home to the first King 's / Queen 's Scout . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The ' Beating of the bounds ' is an ancient annual custom first carried out in 1612 , which revives the traditional checking of the sea boundaries awarded to Poole by the Cinque Port of Winchelsea in 1364 . The Admiral of the Port of Poole ( the mayor ) and other dignitaries , and members of the public sail from the mouth of the River Frome to Old Harry Rocks to confirm the Mayor 's authority over the water boundaries of the harbour and check for any encroachments . As there are no physical landmarks that can be beaten at sea , traditionally children from Poole were encouraged to remember the bounds of their town by taking part in the ' Pins and Points ' ceremony involving the beating of a boy and pricking of a girl 's hand with a needle . In modern times , the acts have been symbolically carried out . 
 Poole 's Summertime in the South is an annual programme providing various events on Poole Quay and Sandbanks from May until September . During June and July , live music , street entertainment and a large firework display take place on Poole Quay every Thursday evening . In August , the entertainment moves to the beaches at Sandbanks . 
 Poole 's Lighthouse is the largest arts centre complex in the United Kingdom outside London . Built in 1978 , the centre contains a cinema , concert hall , studio , theatre , image lab and media suite and galleries featuring exhibitions of contemporary photography and modern digital art . The venue underwent an £ 8 @.@ 5 million refurbishment in 2002 , paid for by the Arts Council England , the Borough of Poole and private donations . The centre 's concert hall has been the residence of the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra 's main concert series since their former base at the Bournemouth Winter Gardens closed in 1985 . Situated in the centre of the Old Town , Poole Museum illustrates the story of the area and its people and the collections reflect the cultural , social and industrial history of Poole . Displays include the Poole <unk> and a detailed history of Poole from the Iron Age to the present day . The museum has a floor devoted to the history of Poole Pottery and some of the company 's products are on display . Entrance to the museum is free . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The A350 road is Poole town centre 's main artery , running north from Poole Bridge along Holes Bay and on to the A35 , and as a single carriageway to Bath and Bristol . To the east , the <unk> road leads to Lymington and the New Forest . The A35 trunk road runs from Devon to Southampton and connects to the A31 on the outskirts of the town . The A31 , the major trunk road in central southern England , connects to the M27 motorway at Southampton . From here the M3 motorway leads to London , and fast access may also be gained via the A34 to the M4 north of Newbury . A second bridge is being built to connect Poole and Hamworthy as the existing bridge is unsuitable for the traffic flow . The £ 34 million Twin Sails bridge project was given approval by the Department for Transport in 2006 but construction was initially held up due to a stalemate between the council and the land owners and delays by the Department for Transport in approving a £ 14 million grant . After negotiations between the council and the land owners were settled in August 2009 and the government grant was provided in March 2010 , construction began in May 2010 with completion due by early 2012 . A road link to Studland and the Isle of Purbeck across the narrow entrance of Poole Harbour is provided by the Sandbanks Ferry . 
 Most local bus services are run by More Bus who are based at the town 's bus station and have served Poole since 1983 . More Bus operate networks across Poole , Bournemouth , Christchurch and Salisbury , in addition to operations on the Isle of Purbeck and the New Forest . Other services are run by Bournemouth @-@ based Yellow Buses and Damory Coaches . Poole is connected to towns and villages along the Jurassic Coast by the First in Hampshire & Dorset <unk> service , which runs along a route of 142 kilometres ( 88 mi ) to Weymouth , Bridport , Lyme Regis , Seaton and Exeter . Poole is also a calling point for National Express Coaches , which have frequent departures to London Victoria Coach Station . There are also direct services to the Midlands , the North of England and to Heathrow and Gatwick airports . 
 Poole has four railway stations on the South Western Main Line from London Waterloo to Weymouth . From east to west these are Branksome near the border with Bournemouth , Parkstone , Poole railway station in the town centre and Hamworthy . Services are operated by South West Trains and consist of up to three trains an hour ( fast , semi @-@ fast and stopping services ) to and from London , and twice an hour to and from Weymouth . Plans for a £ 50 million redevelopment of Poole railway station have stalled since 2006 due to contractual issues between land owners Network Rail and developers the Kier Group . 
 Poole is a cross @-@ Channel port for passengers and freight . Ferry services from Poole Harbour to Cherbourg are provided by Brittany Ferries who operate one round trip per day using the Barfleur The Condor Ferries catamarans Condor Express and Condor Vitesse run seasonal services to Guernsey , Jersey and St. Malo , Brittany . LD Lines run a year round passenger and freight service to Santander , Spain and in January 2014 will launch a service to Gijón , Spain using the ferry Norman Asturias . Bournemouth International Airport in Hurn , on the periphery of Bournemouth , is the nearest airport to Poole – 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) from Poole town centre . Ryanair , easyJet , Thomson Airways and <unk> operate from the airport and provide scheduled services to destinations in the UK and Europe . 
 = = Education = = 
 Poole has sixteen first <unk> a few junior school , middle schools , seven combined schools , eight secondary and grammar schools , five special schools , two independent schools and one college of further education . Canford School is an independent boarding school administered by Poole local education authority . Poole 's two grammar schools maintain a selective education system , assessed by the Twelve plus exam . Poole High School is the largest secondary school in Poole with 1 @,@ 660 pupils . The Bournemouth and Poole College attracts over 16 @,@ 000 students a year and is one of the largest further education colleges in the country and the leading provider of academic and vocational education in Dorset . It has two centrally located main campuses in Poole and Bournemouth . In 2008 , the college announced plans to refurbish and redevelop its campuses at an estimated cost of £ 120 million . However , the project stalled in 2009 when the Learning and Skills Council , which had promised to provide 80 % of the money , ran out of funds . 
 From the 2007 General Certificate of Secondary Education ( GCSE ) results , Poole was ranked 18th out of 148 local authorities in England based on the percentage of pupils attaining at least five A * to C grades at GCSE level including maths and English ( 54 @.@ 5 % compared with the national average of 46 @.@ 8 % ) . Parkstone Grammar School was the most successful secondary school in Poole for GCSE results in 2007 : 100 % of pupils gained five or more GCSEs at A * to C grade including maths and English . Canford School also achieved 100 % and Poole Grammar School was the next best performing school with 98 % . Poole High School achieved 39 % and the worst performing school was <unk> Community College where only 19 % of students achieved five or more A * to C grade results . Poole 's grammar schools were also the best performing for A @-@ level results . Poole Grammar School was the 60th most successful school / sixth form in the country in 2007 : each student achieved on average 1071 @.@ 4 points compared to the national average of 731 @.@ 2 . Parkstone Grammar School students averaged 1017 @.@ 9 points . 
 Bournemouth University was designated as a university in 1992 and despite its name , the university 's main campus ( the Talbot Campus ) and buildings are within the boundaries of Poole Borough ; a smaller campus is situated in Bournemouth itself . Media courses are the university 's strength , and recent teaching quality assessments have resulted in ratings of ' excellent ' for courses in the areas of communication and media , business and management , catering and hospitality , archaeology and nursing and midwifery . The Arts University Bournemouth was designated as a university in 2012 and is located at <unk> . The AUB offers undergraduate , foundation degree , postgraduate and further education courses in contemporary arts , design and media . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Home Office policing in Poole is provided by the Poole and Bournemouth Division of Dorset Police which has two police stations in Poole : on Wimborne Road in the town centre , and on Gravel Hill in Canford Heath . Dorset Fire and Rescue Service provides statutory emergency fire and rescue services for Poole and are based at Poole Fire Station in <unk> which opened in 2008 . The former fire station on Wimborne Road was demolished in 2008 and was replaced with a new joint fire and police divisional headquarters which opened in 2009 . 
 Poole Hospital is a large NHS Foundation Trust hospital in Longfleet with 789 beds . It opened in 1969 as Poole General Hospital , replacing Poole 's Cornelia Hospital which had stood on the site since 1907 . The hospital is the major trauma center for East Dorset and provides core services such as child health and maternity for a catchment area including Bournemouth and Christchurch . Specialist services such as neurological care and cancer treatment are also provided for the rest of Dorset . The South Western Ambulance Service provides emergency patient transport . 
 Waste management and recycling are co @-@ ordinated by Poole Borough Council in partnership with Viridor Waste Management . Locally produced inert waste is sent to landfill for disposal . Recycle waste is taken to the recycling plant at the Allington Quarry Waste Management Facility in Kent for processing . Poole 's Distribution Network Operator for electricity is Scottish and Southern Energy . Drinking and waste water is managed by Wessex Water ; groundwater sources in Wiltshire and Dorset provide 80 % of drinking water , the rest comes from reservoirs fed by rivers and streams . 
 = = Media = = 
 Poole has two local <unk> , the Daily Echo , which is owned by Newsquest . Published since 1900 , the newspaper and app features news from Poole , Bournemouth and the surrounding area . Issues appear Monday through Saturday with a daily circulation of 32 @,@ 441 . And the " Poole Post " , a community media hub supporting the work of ROC , and reporting Poole news , sport , business and entertainment . For local television , Poole is served by the BBC South studios based in Southampton , and by ITV Meridian from studios in Fareham . Radio stations broadcasting to the town include BBC Radio Solent , Wave 105 , Heart Dorset & New Forest ( formerly <unk> FM ) , <unk> , Fire Radio and Hot Radio . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 The town has been the birthplace and home to notable people , of national and international acclaim . Former residents include British radio disc jockey Tony Blackburn , the artist Augustus John , John Lennon 's aunt and parental guardian Mimi Smith , and The Lord of the Rings author J. R. R. Tolkien who lived in Poole for four years during his retirement . Alfred Russel Wallace , the 19th century explorer , naturalist and co @-@ <unk> of the theory of evolution by natural selection , moved to Poole in 1902 when he was 78 years old and is buried in Broadstone cemetery . 
 Notable people born in Poole include Greg Lake of the band Emerson , Lake & Palmer , the author John le Carré , the novelist Maggie Gee , stage actor Oswald Yorke , boxer Freddie Mills , the writer and actor David Croft , and James Stephen , the principal lawyer associated with the British abolitionist movement . Edgar Wright , the director of films such as Shaun of the Dead , Hot Fuzz and The World 's End was born in Poole and out of the five previous British winners of the Miss World title , two have hailed from Poole : Ann Sydney and Sarah @-@ Jane Hutt . Harry Redknapp , the former Tottenham Hotspur F.C. manager , and his son Jamie Redknapp , a former England national football team player , have owned homes in Sandbanks . Former Blue Peter presenter Katy Hill was also born in Poole . 
 = = Twin towns = = 
 Poole is twinned with : 
 Cherbourg in France ( since 1977 ) 
 = Commission to <unk> the Ballistic Missile Threat to the United States = 
 The Commission to <unk> the Ballistic Missile Threat to the United States , also called the Rumsfeld Commission , was an independent commission formed by the US Congress to evaluate the ballistic missile threat posed to the United States . 
 The group began work in January 1998 and issued their unanimous final report on July 15 , 1998 , within the six @-@ month mandate . The report warned of a growing threat of ballistic missiles and the inability for US intelligence to keep track of developments . This contrasted with the views of previous US intelligence estimates , which stated that the threat of ballistic missiles was still 10 to 20 years away . The commission further fueled the debate over a national missile defense system , and may have contributed to the coining of the phrase axis of evil . 
 = = Background = = 
 The argument for a national missile defense system in the United States was traditionally to protect the country from a Soviet missile attack . With the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 , proponents of a missile defense shield began instead to focus on the risk posed by rogue states developing ballistic missiles capable of eventually reaching the US . 
 This case was blunted by a 1995 National Intelligence Estimate ( NIE ) , which stated that no country besides the five major nuclear powers was capable of acquiring missiles that could reach Canada or the contiguous United States within the ensuing 15 years . Republican lawmakers intent on funding a defensive shield criticized the report and the Clinton administration for inaccurate assessments and distorted intelligence . Republican Congressman Curt Weldon of Pennsylvania walked out of a CIA briefing on the NIE , and later said that it was " the most outrageous politicisation of an intelligence document that I 've seen in the 10 years I 've been in Washington . " 
 From February to May 1996 , the House National Security Committee held hearings on the ballistic missile threat , and in a final report recommended that two reviews be created : one to investigate the NIE itself , and another to complete a new investigation of the ballistic missile threat . This process was also highly politicized , and the ranking Democrat on the committee , California Congressman Ronald Dellums , accused it of relying far too heavily on outside experts . Many of the witnesses called before the committee were in fact strong proponents of missile defense . The first review was conducted by former Director of Central Intelligence ( DCI ) and future Defense Secretary Robert Gates . He concluded that while there was evidence of faulty methodology in the NIE , there was no political bias in its conclusions . This conclusion again angered the missile defense supporters who had counted on this review to further their arguments . 
 = = Commission history = = 
 The second review was to be conducted by an outside commission , although it took lawmakers until 1997 to agree upon the commission 's membership . The commission eventually began to meet in mid @-@ January 1998 in the Old Executive Office Building and under the chairmanship of the once and future Secretary of Defense , Donald Rumsfeld . Although the commission was not formed to investigate the feasibility of a national missile defense shield , the reality that their conclusions would influence that debate led many in Washington to doubt that a unanimous conclusion was possible . Rumsfeld still wished to reach a consensus , and instituted a policy whereby any noted objection in the report needed to have the support of at least two commissioners . 
 The first weeks of deliberations and testimonies gleaned little new information on the threat being investigated , so in mid @-@ February , with their mandate supposedly giving them access to all necessary information from the executive branch , the commission complained in person to then DCI George Tenet . From that point on , the commission gained much greater access to the information and personnel of the US intelligence community . 
 The commission continued briefings until mid @-@ July 1998 . During that time they were frustrated by the compartmentalization of intelligence , the refusal of analysts to speculate or hypothesize on given information , and what they considered general inexperience in the intelligence personnel . The group did not limit their interviews to members of the government , but also spoke with employees of Boeing and Lockheed Martin , especially about how Scud missile designs could be used as the basis for a long @-@ range ballistic missile program . 
 = = Conclusions = = 
 There were two final reports of the commission : a 300 @-@ page classified report for Congress and a 27 @-@ page unclassified report . In the unclassified version , the group came to four unanimous conclusions : 
 The US is threatened by ballistic missiles tipped with biological or nuclear payloads from China , Russia , Iran , Iraq , and North Korea . Iran and North Korea could develop the capability to strike the US within five years of a decision to pursue ballistic missile technology ; Iraq would require ten years . 
 The US intelligence community has underestimated these growing threats . 
 The processes of the intelligence community to make estimates on this threat are causing an erosion of accurate assessments . 
 The US has a diminishing warning time before missile systems are operationally deployed , and may conceivably have no warning in the future . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Immediate = = = 
 The findings of the commission generated mixed reactions among lawmakers , intelligence officers , and experts . The intelligence community was privately angered by the harsh language the report used to describe their own assessments of the threat , although CIA Director George Tenet did not openly criticize it in public . Congressional proponents of a national missile shield , especially Republicans , used the findings to further push their case that such a shield was necessary . However , some experts in and out of government questioned the usefulness of the report , saying that it made general speculations without reaching any definite conclusions . Whereas the intelligence estimate focused on what was actually occurring , the commission focused on what might occur . This was labeled in one article " ' hypothesis @-@ based ' threat assessment " . 
 Many observers took a moderate tone in their reaction , acknowledging that funding should be provided for further national missile defense tests , but also saying that the US should not rush into developing technology that might prove ineffective and too costly . 
 Within months of the final report several events occurred which to some supporters reinforced the commission 's conclusions . In late July , Iran tested for the first time its new Shahab @-@ 3 missile , which traveled 620 miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km ) before exploding . Its basic design was modeled on the North Korean Rodong @-@ 1 . North Korea launched what it described as a three @-@ stage satellite launch on August 31 of that year , a surprise for US intelligence , which had expected a test of the two @-@ stage <unk> @-@ 1 ( partially based on the Scud ) . While the third stage failed , it was nonetheless a major development in that introduced stage separation and solid fuel in North Korean rocketry . 
 = = = Bush Administration = = = 
 The commission reentered the public consciousness in 2000 when the former chairman of the commission , Donald Rumsfeld , was named by newly elected President George W. Bush to be Secretary of Defense , his second time in that office . On December 30 , 2000 , Richard Garwin , a former commissioner , praised Rumsfeld for his commission work in a New York Times op @-@ ed piece , although he reiterated that the commission never suggested whether or not the US should build a missile defense system . Other staffers and members of the commission were also appointed by the new Bush administration : Paul Wolfowitz was named Deputy Secretary of Defense , William Schneider , Jr. was appointed by Rumsfeld to the Defense Science Board , and in March 2003 Stephen Cambone was selected by Rumsfeld to fill the newly created Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence position . Robert Gates , the man who conducted the first review of the ballistic missile threat , was appointed Secretary of Defense after Rumsfeld 's November 2006 resignation . 
 The commission is thought by some foreign policy analysts to be the basis for President George W. Bush 's axis of evil line in his 2002 State of the Union Address , in which he accused Iraq , Iran , and North Korea of being state sponsors of terrorism and of pursuing weapons of mass destruction . The Rumsfeld Commission grouped the three countries together because they all were believed to be pursuing ballistic missile programs based on the Scud missile . In the pre @-@ 9 / 11 days of the Bush presidency , the administration had focused heavily on developing a national missile defense system to counter such threats . A month after the address , former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich , who appointed Rumsfeld as head of the commission , mentioned the importance of the commission 's findings in relation to the US ability to predict the threat posed by the axis members . 
 = = Participants = = 
 The commission was chaired by former Secretary of Defense and Republican Donald Rumsfeld , and included the following members : 
 = = = Republicans = = = 
 William Graham 
 William Schneider , Jr . 
 General Larry Welch , US Air Force Ret . 
 Paul Wolfowitz 
 James Woolsey 
 = = = Democrats = = = 
 Barry <unk> 
 General Lee Butler , US Air Force Ret . 
 Richard Garwin 
 = = = Core Staff = = = 
 Stephen Cambone 
 Steven <unk> 
 Eric Desautels 
 David Dunham 
 Jason <unk> 
 Bernard Victory 
 <unk> Henry 
 = Covenant ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' Covenant " is the sixteenth episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on March 21 , 1997 . The episode was written by Robert Moresco , and directed by Roderick J. Pridy . " Covenant " featured guest appearances by John Finn , Michael O 'Neill and Sarah Koskoff . 
 Millennium Group consultant Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) travels to Utah to construct a profile on a convicted murderer ( Finn ) who is asking for the death sentence . Reconstructing the crime , Black begins to doubt the man 's guilt . 
 Elements of " Covenant " were inspired by real @-@ life murderers Albert Fish , Susan Smith and Arthur Shawcross . The episode was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 7 million households in its original broadcast . It has received positive reviews , with Moresco 's script praised for its subtlety . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Millennium Group member Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) travels to Provo , Utah to meet Calvin Smith ( Michael O 'Neill ) , the prosecutor in a local murder case ; and Didi Higgens ( Sarah Koskoff ) , a pathologist for the County Medical Examiner 's office . Smith and Higgens have been involved in the trial of former sheriff William Garry ( John Finn ) , who has been convicted of killing his three children and wife . Garry pleaded guilty to murders , and forensic evidence has linked him to a wood @-@ carving chisel used to commit the murders . Black has been asked to construct an offender profile for Garry , to determine whether the man is sufficiently dangerous to society for a judge to issue a death penalty . Garry himself is asking to be executed . 
 Black travels to Garry 's home with a deputy , Kevin Reilly ( Steve Bacic ) . <unk> in blood on the kitchen window are the numbers " 1 28 15 " , which Reilly notes no one has been able to understand . Black also listens to a recording of Garry 's confession , which details the murders meticulously . Black convinces Garry 's attorney to allow him an interview , insisting he will be entirely impartial . Garry tells Black he had planned the murders for some time , motivated by hatred for his wife and monetary concerns . Black refutes this , pointing out that Garry had carved a wooden angel as a gift for his wife that same day , using the chisel that was the murder weapon . Smith , realizing that Black does not believe Garry to be guilty , dismisses him from the case . 
 Black discovers that Garry had been having an affair , having previously believed that Mrs. Garry was the unfaithful one ; he also realizes that Garry was unaware that his wife was pregnant . Black has Higgens help him in getting the bodies exhumed , allowing the two to see that Mrs. Garry 's wounds were not defensive , but self @-@ inflicted . Black also determines that the message written in blood was in fact " I 28 15 " — Book of Isaiah , chapter 28 , verse 15 ; which is concerned with lies and falsehoods . Black pieces together the actual events of the night of the murders , realizing that Mrs. Garry killed her children before committing suicide ; before she died she blamed Garry for her actions , causing him to seek atonement by admitting to the crimes . Reilly admits to having helped Garry rearrange the crime scene to incriminate himself ; Black urges him to come forward with the real events to save his friend 's life . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Covenant " was written by Robert Moresco and directed by Roderick J. Pridy , and was the first contribution to the series by either of the two . Moresco would go on to write " Broken World " later in the first season , and also acted as a producer during the series ' run . Pridy would return to helm the second season episode " The Mikado " . 
 Guest star John Finn would go on to appear in Millennium 's sister show The X @-@ Files , playing the recurring character Michael Kritschgau in several episodes beginning with season four 's " Gethsemane " . Sarah Koskoff , who portrayed assistant pathologist Didi Higgens , also had a minor recurring role in The X @-@ Files , making several appearances as an alien abductee . " Covenant " featured the last appearance in the series by Don MacKay as the Black family 's neighbour Jack Meredith . MacKay had previously portrayed the character in " Pilot " , " Gehenna " and " Weeds " . 
 The premise of a repentant murderer seeking to atone for their actions appears to have been based on the real @-@ life case of Albert Fish , who practised severe self @-@ harm after killing twelve @-@ year @-@ old Grace Budd . Fish would insert needles into his perineum and force rose stems along his urethra to be forcibly pulled out . However , the actual murders may have been inspired by the case of Susan Smith , a mother of two who drowned her children by sinking her car in a lake . Mention is also made in the episode of Arthur Shawcross , whose recidivism is cited by Garry 's prosecutors as an example of why murder should warrant a death penalty . Shawcross was released from prison after serving a sentence for killing two children , only to kill eleven women while on parole . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Covenant " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on March 21 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6 @.@ 9 during its original broadcast , meaning that 6 @.@ 9 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented approximately 6 @.@ 7 million households , and left the episode the sixty @-@ third most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a B + , praising Moresco 's script for its subtlety . VanDerWerff noted the premise 's similarity to the Susan Smith case , and felt that the episode " actually gains strength from a certain distance from when it originally aired . Back then , it was just another ripped @-@ from @-@ the @-@ headlines tale of a murderous mother . Now , it ’ s a crafty mystery that doesn ’ t reveal its cards until late " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 4 out of 5 , noting that the episode " broke clichés and trampled all over formulas " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " Covenant " four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , calling it " Millennium 's version of Twelve Angry Men " . Shearman praised <unk> 's writing , noting that the episode was " tightly plotted and boast [ ed ] extremely good dialogue " . Shearman felt that Koskoff 's acting showed a " naivety that isn 't as subtle as the script demands " , but overall felt that the episode was " fresh and exciting " . 
 = Inon Zur = 
 Inon Zur ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> ; born July 4 , 1965 ) is an Israeli @-@ American music composer who has won several awards for his work . Originally writing for movies and television , he later moved into composing for video games . He has been described as being " internationally recognized as one of the A @-@ list orchestral composers in the video games industry " . During his career to date , Zur has composed the music to over 50 video games , 15 television shows , and 10 movies , as well as many movie trailers . He has been nominated for numerous awards , and has won three — a Telly Award in 1997 for Best Score on Power Rangers : Turbo , a Game Audio Network Guild award in 2004 for Best Original Instrumental track for Men of Valor , and a Hollywood Music in Media Award in 2009 for Best Original Song – Video Game for Dragon Age : Origins . He currently lives in Encino , California , in the United States , and is composing the scores for several unreleased games . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Inon Zur was born in Israel . As early as five years old , he was trying to compose harmonies with his mother 's singing , and became inspired by classical music . He learned to play french horn as a child , studied piano by the age of eight , and was studying composition by the age of ten . He graduated from the Music Academy of Tel Aviv , and spent four years in the Israeli military . He emigrated to the United States in 1990 to study at the Dick Grove School of Music for a year , and then under private tutor Jack Smalley , a television music composer , and others for two years at the University of California , Los Angeles . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 Zur began his career in 1994 by working on soundtracks for movies , such as Yellow Lotus , featured at the Sundance Film Festival . He then signed on to compose for Fox Family for six years , and made soundtracks for various children 's television shows , including Digimon and Power Rangers . By 2002 he estimated that he had composed the soundtrack to over 360 Power Rangers episodes alone . He won his first award during this period in his career , a Telly Award for his work on Power Rangers : Turbo . While he enjoyed the work , he began to want to go work somewhere " more intriguing , more advanced , and basically a place that people really appreciate music more " ; his agent overcame his initial reluctance and convinced him to work in the video games industry . His first video game soundtrack was 2000 's Star Trek : Klingon Academy , though he started composing for the game in 1997 . Zur quickly moved on to prestigious titles , composing for the award @-@ winning and critically acclaimed Baldur 's Gate II : Throne of Bhaal in 2001 and Icewind Dale II in 2002 , among many others . Icewind Dale II earned him the first of many nominations for video game music awards , that of the Game Audio Network Guild 's Music of the Year award . He continued to work on movies and television programs during these years , composing the soundtrack to Au Pair in 1999 and the English version of the 2000 anime series <unk> . 
 Zur 's latest movie soundtrack to date was that of 2001 's Au Pair II . He has worked on a few television series since then ; his last traditional television soundtrack was for The Bachelor in 2002 , though he has composed music for three webisode series since then . He continued to work on numerous best @-@ selling video games , including Prince of Persia : The Two Thrones in 2005 and Crysis in 2007 . He has also garnered several nominations for video game music awards , including his first win , for Men of Valor in the Best Original Instrumental track category of the 2004 Game Audio Network Guild awards . His latest released titles have been the highly successful Fallout 3 and Prince of Persia in 2008 , and 2009 's Dragon Age : Origins and the Nintendo DS version of James Cameron 's Avatar : The Game . He is currently working on the soundtracks to several unreleased video games , and continues to live in Encino , California . Dragon Age has earned Zur his third career award , that of Best Original Song – Video Game in the 2009 Hollywood Music In Media Awards . 
 Zur penned the original musical score for The Lord of the Rings : War in the North ( Warner Bros. ) video game , conducting and recording with the London Philharmonia Orchestra and the Pinewood Singers Choir at the legendary Abbey Road Studios in London . In an industry first , a dedicated concert of his music from THE LORD OF THE <unk> was performed each evening at the 2011 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) in Los Angeles . The one @-@ hour concert series was conducted by Zur and performed by The Hollywood Orchestra and Choir with the participation of The <unk> Quartet and solos from celebrated vocalist Aubrey Ashburn . 
 = = Performances = = 
 Zur 's compositions have been played several times in live concerts . The first of these was a concert held in Seoul , South Korea on May 30 , 2006 dedicated to his music for Lineage II : Chronicle V : Oath of Blood . On August 20 , 2008 , music from his soundtrack to Crysis was played in Leipzig , Germany at a Video Games Live concert . His music from Dragon Age : Origins and Prince of Persia was performed at the September 26 , 2009 " A Night in Fantasia 2009 " concert in Sydney , Australia by the Eminence Symphony Orchestra . Inon Zur was a special guest at the concert . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Zur 's compositions frequently are focused on full orchestras , choir and , in some games like Prince of Persia , ethnic instruments like Arabic flutes and the woodwind duduk . He has often collaborated with the Northwest Sinfonia orchestra from Seattle , though he has on occasion used other orchestras . Whenever Zur works with a real orchestra , he always conducts it himself . He has named some of his musical influences as classical artists such as Sergey Prokofiev , Igor Stravinsky , and Beethoven , movie composers like John Williams and Jerry Goldsmith , and jazz artists like George Gershwin and Henry <unk> . While he would one day like to compose music not intended to be part of a larger piece of media , he finds that the pressure of a deadline and the feedback from the developers are crucial in his development process . He feels that his music sounds best when it is in the context given by the media it was made for , though he feels that performances of the music by itself transforms it " from just a soundtrack to an art form on its own " . Zur sometimes collaborates with other musicians while composing his game soundtracks ; for example , he worked with Florence and the Machine to create a unique rendition of " I ’ m Not Calling You A Liar " for the Dragon Age II soundtrack . 
 Zur typically is brought in to compose for a game once it is mostly complete , though he notes that that is earlier than for films and television — where nothing changes after he starts besides post @-@ production effects — making video game music composition a more " flexible " process . He finds that it is " crucial " for him to play a game before he can compose music for it , even if it only a development version . Rather than compose music based around the setting in the game where it will be played , Zur composes music around the emotion that he wants the player to feel at that point in the game . While he feels that music composition technology has come far enough in recent years to no longer be a limiting factor in his music , he does feel that the music budgets for games limit what he can create . Zur feels that he is considered in the industry to be a very fast composer , which he attributes to his tendency to compose music " intuitively " , rather than spending a lot of time planning it out . When not composing , Zur likes to play video games , especially those he has composed for , as well as play basketball and spend time with his family . The types of projects that he would like to work on in the future that he has not yet done are children 's games and soundtracks incorporating jazz music . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Dead Letters ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' Dead Letters " is the third episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on November 8 , 1996 . The episode was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Thomas J. Wright . " Dead Letters " featured guest appearances by Chris Ellis , Ron Halder and James Morrison . 
 Millennium Group consultant Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) is sent to evaluate a prospective member of the group , who perform private investigative work and liaise with law enforcement . Meeting this hopeful member , Jim Horn ( Morrison ) , Black is drawn to investigate a serial killer operating in the area ; while Horn begins to unravel under the strain of the case . 
 Several of the cast and crew made their first contributions to the series in " Dead Letters " , with Wright , Morgan , Wong and Ellis all returning for future episodes . Production of " Dead Letters " impressed other series regulars — series writer Chip Johannessen praised the script 's attention to detail , while producer John Peter <unk> called positive attention to its physical and make @-@ up effects . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jordan Black ( Brittany Tiplady ) is awakened by a nightmare , and is comforted by her father Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) . However , Black is soon called to investigate the body of a woman at a dog pound in Portland , Oregon . Black works for the Millennium Group , an organisation which offers private investigation services and consults with law enforcement on certain types of cases . He is asked by Group member Jim Penseyres ( Chris Ellis ) to help a local detective on the murder case , as he is being considered as prospective member of the Millennium Group . Black believes the murder to be the work of a serial killer , and is convinced there will be a message from him on the bodies . 
 Black meets up with the detective , Jim Horn ( James Morrison ) , and sees that he is a competent and experienced investigator , although his recent separation from his wife has left him distracted and on edge . 
 The killer murders another woman , disposing of the body in a post office 's dead letter office . Investigating , Black finds a human hair with a message etched into it — " hair today , gone tomorrow " — which he takes as an indication that the murderer is lashing out at a world that he feels has treated him as insignificant . Horn 's mental condition seems to deteriorate , and he begins to take the case personally , leading Black to doubt his ability . 
 A third victim turns up , with another message — " nothing ventured , nothing gained " . A lens from the killer 's glasses is also recovered . Black organises a press release in an attempt to draw out the killer , taunting his intelligence by including a falsified profile describing him as uneducated . Black and Horn feel this will tempt the killer to show up at the latest victim 's memorial service . Horn attacks an innocent man at the service , believing him to be the killer ; although a cross found at the memorial with " ventured " etched upon it proves the killer did attend . Surveillance footage of the service yields two leads — a local optician recognizes the suspect as a customer having a glasses lens replaced , and the killer 's vehicle is identified . 
 Black and Horn realize that the killer will have chosen the optician as his next victim , and agree to set another trap with her as the bait . Horn , more and more unhinged throughout the case , begins imagining the killer and his van at every turn . As he and Black wait for the killer to make an attempt on the optician 's life , Horn admits that he cannot trust himself to be there , and is told to go home . However , he parks his car on the route towards the trap , feigning a flat tyre . When the killer 's van attempts to pass , Horn attacks him , but the police arrive in time to stop him beating the killer to death . The attack renders any evidence found in the van inadmissible in court , although Black tells him enough evidence was found at the killer 's home to secure a conviction . Later , Horn asks Black how he can deal with cases like this on a regular basis . Black does not answer , but later comforts his daughter after another bad dream . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Dead Letters " is the first episode of Millennium to be written by James Wong and Glen Morgan , who would go on to write another fourteen episodes across the first and second seasons . The episode is also the first not to have been written by series creator Chris Carter , who had penned both of the preceding episodes , " Pilot " and " Gehenna " . " Dead Letters " also marked the first time Thomas J. Wright had directed an episode of the series . Wright would go on to direct twenty @-@ six episodes across all three seasons , as well as directing " Millennium " , the series ' crossover episode with its sister show The X @-@ Files . He had also previously worked with Morgan and Wong on their series Space : Above and Beyond . 
 The episode marked the second of three appearances by Chris Ellis as Millennium Group member Jim Penseyres ; Ellis had previously appeared in " Gehenna " , and would reappear in the next episode , " The Judge " . Guest star James Morrison , who portrayed the troubled Jim Horn , had also previously appeared as a main character in Morgan and Wong 's Space : Above and Beyond , playing Tyrus Cassius McQueen ; his character 's son in this episode is named TC as a reference to this . Lisa <unk> , who played the optician used to bait the killer , had previously worked with Morgan and Wong in The X @-@ Files , appearing in the first season episode " Beyond the Sea " . 
 Producer and writer Chip Johannessen felt that the scene in this episode in which a human hair is discovered with a message inscribed upon it was a " perfect " moment , in that it " told you everything about this guy [ the killer ] ... but you had no idea what he was or what he was going to do next ... you know what kind of crazy motherfucker would do that , but where he is or what he 's going to do next , who knows " . The episode 's opening nightmare sequence , in which Jordan Black ( Brittany Tiplady ) is terrified by a clown crawling along the ceiling , was inspired by the childhood nightmares of Morgan and Wong , and left Tiplady suffering from bad dreams herself for several nights after filming . Producer John Peter Kousakis recalls having visited the episode 's set late during production , having felt that make @-@ up effects supervisor Toby Lindala had been doing " fabulous " work on the series ' prosthetic body parts . Walking on set to find Lindala 's recreation of a quartered corpse , Kousakis remarked " we 're doing something special here , but we 're also doing something really outrageous " . Lance Henriksen also found this scene too graphic to film all at once , taking time between shots to compose himself . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Dead Letters " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on November 8 , 1996 ; and earned a Nielsen rating of 8 , meaning that roughly 8 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . 
 " Dead Letters " earned positive reviews from critics . Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen rated the episode a B + . Handlen felt that the episode is " not art , not yet , but it is deeply personal " , and praised the opening dream sequence , describing it as " flat @-@ out Lynchian nightmare territory " . However , he noted that the episode 's dialogue felt too " flat " and " expository " , adding that it serves to draw " attention to themes that were already plastered across the screen in blinding red and black " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 4 out of 5 , describing it as being " one of the more horrifying episodes in Season 1 " . Gibron added that " seeing Jim Horn go through his mental breakdown gives us insight into where Frank Black is coming from " , although he felt that the lack of real insight into the killer 's personality let the episode down . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , describing it as a " gripping and sincere portrait of human ugliness at its most banal " . Shearman and Pearson praised guest star James Morrison 's acting , noting that he was " the very humanity that the show is crying out for " . 
 = Marburg 's Bloody Sunday = 
 Marburg 's Bloody Sunday ( German : Marburger <unk> , Slovene : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is the name of a massacre that took place on Monday , 27 January 1919 in the city of Maribor ( German : Marburg an der Drau ) in Slovenia . Soldiers from the army of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) , under the command of Slovene officer Rudolf Maister , killed between 9 and 13 civilians of German ethnic origin , wounding a further 60 , during a protest in a city centre square . Estimates of casualties differ between Slovene and Austrian sources . 
 In November 1918 , after the First World War ended , the territories of southern Carinthia and southern Styria , which had been claimed by the Republic of German Austria , were captured by military units under Maister 's command . 
 Maribor was the largest city of southern Styria , and had a predominately German population . A US delegation led by Sherman Miles visited Maribor on 27 January 1919 as part of a wider mission to resolve territorial disputes . On the same day , German citizens organised a protest proclaiming their desire for Maribor to be incorporated into the Republic of German Austria . The protest was interrupted by Meister 's soldiers firing at the people and causing numerous casualties . In response , German Austria launched a military offensive which expelled the Yugoslavs from several small towns in Upper Styria along the Mur River . A ceasefire was agreed under the mediation of France in February 1919 . According to the Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye , signed on 10 September 1919 , Maribor and the rest of Lower Styria became part of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes . No @-@ one was ever charged over the Maribor massacre . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Republic of German Austria was created following the defeat of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire in the First World War and claimed areas with a predominantly German @-@ speaking population within the bounds of the former empire . In addition to the current area of the Republic of Austria , these included parts of South Tyrol and the town of Tarvisio , both now in Italy ; southern Carinthia and southern Styria , now in Slovenia ; and Sudetenland proper and German Bohemia ( later also part of Sudetenland ) , now in the Czech Republic . 
 The victorious Allied Powers divided the territories of the former Austro @-@ Hungarian empire between German Austria , Hungary and several other countries . Though the division of territories was conducted through a proclaimed principle of national self @-@ determination , populations of ethnic Germans and Hungarians remained resident in many of these territories , including Czechoslovakia , Romania and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia . 
 Control of the city of Maribor was disputed by Yugoslavia and German Austria . A Federal Act of German Austria , concerning " the Extent , the Borders and the Relations of the State Territories of November 22 , 1918 " , asserted a claim to the region of Lower Styria within which Marburg / Maribor was located , but excluded from its claim the predominantly Slav @-@ populated regions . To resolve the question of the ownership of Carinthia , the greater region of which Lower Styria formed a part , the <unk> Coolidge Mission in Vienna proposed a demographic investigation of the territory . The mission was led by Archibald Cary Coolidge , professor of history at Harvard College , and operated under the American Commission to Negotiate Peace . The mission appointed a delegation to be led by Colonel Sherman Miles and including Lieutenant LeRoy King , professor of Slavic languages at the University of Missouri , and professors Robert Kerner and Lawrence Martin . 
 On the way to Carinthia , the delegation visited Maribor which , prior to the First World War , had a population comprising 80 % Austrian Germans and 20 % Slovenes . Most of Maribor 's capital and public life was in Austrian German hands and it was known mainly by its German @-@ language name Marburg an der Drau . According to the last Austro @-@ Hungarian census in 1910 , the city and its suburbs <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( Thesen ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , and <unk> ( <unk> ) housed 31 @,@ 995 Austrian Germans ( including German @-@ speaking Jews ) , and 6 @,@ 151 ethnic Slovenes . The surrounding area however was populated almost entirely by Slovenes , although many Austrian Germans lived in smaller towns like Ptuj ( Pettau , 79 @.@ 39 % ) or Celje ( <unk> , 66 @.@ 80 % ) . 
 In November 1918 , the Slovene major ( later general ) Rudolf Maister seized the city of Maribor and surrounding areas of Lower Styria in the name of the newly formed State of Slovenes , Croats and Serbs , a forerunner of Yugoslavia . On 23 November 1918 , Maister and his soldiers disarmed and disbanded the " Green Guard " ( German : <unk> , Slovene : <unk> Garda ) security force maintained by the Maribor city council . Maister captured several villages and towns north of the Mur River , including <unk> , Bad Radkersburg , Mureck and <unk> . On 31 December 1918 , Maister 's units imprisoned 21 notable Maribor citizens of ethnic German origin . 
 = = Massacre = = 
 Sources differ on the exact cause and extent of the massacre in Maribor . All agree that on 27 January 1919 , the Coolidge Mission 's delegation , led by Sherman Miles , visited Maribor and found thousands of citizens of German ethnic origin gathered in the main city square and waving flags of German Austria , many of which also decorated nearby buildings . German Austrian sources indicate that there were 10 @,@ 000 protesters singing songs and wearing patriotic dress . Twenty soldiers under Maister 's command were stationed in front of the city hall , armed with rifles mounted with bayonets . 
 German @-@ language sources assert that the soldiers began firing into the crowd without provocation , aiming for unarmed civilians . According to these sources the fatalities numbered 13 , and a further 60 protesters were wounded . 
 A Slovene account of the same event asserts that the soldiers began to fire only when an Austrian citizen discharged a revolver in the direction of the Slovene soldiers , striking the bayonet of one . The soldiers then returned fire : according to this account 11 were killed , and an unknown number wounded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Subsequently , on 4 February 1919 , German Austria commenced a military offensive to recover the regions of Upper Styria controlled by Maister 's troops . A ceasefire was agreed on 10 February 1919 , under French mediation from their military mission located in Maribor . On 13 February 1919 , a ceasefire agreement was signed and Maister 's troops retreated from part of Upper Styria . 
 LeRoy King , one of the members of the Coolidge Mission , wrote in his report that the authorities in Maribor were suspicious of the work of the mission and apparently feared that it had uncovered information they would have preferred to conceal . He argued that there were Slovene populations in Styria who would have preferred the maintenance of Austrian rule . 
 The Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye , signed on 10 September 1919 observed that Maribor was firmly under the control of the Yugoslav army and that , since Slovenes constituted a majority in the region surrounding the city , Maribor should remain , with the rest of Lower Styria , within the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes . 
 Responsibility for the shooting in Maribor was never conclusively established . Austrian sources attributed blame to Rudolf Maister , and referenced him in some accounts as the Butcher of Maribor . In Slovenia , by contrast , Maister remains well @-@ regarded ; numerous societies institutions and streets are named in his honour and he is commemorated in several monuments . 
 = Ian Craig = 
 Ian David Craig , OAM ( 12 June 1935 – 16 November 2014 ) was an Australian cricketer who represented the Australian national team in 11 Tests between 1953 and 1958 . A right @-@ handed batsman , Craig holds the records for being the youngest Australian to make a first @-@ class double century , appear in a Test match , and captain his country in a Test match . Burdened by the public expectation of being the " next Bradman " , Craig 's career did not fulfil its early promise . In 1957 , he was appointed Australian captain , leading a young team as part of a regeneration plan following the decline of the national team in the mid @-@ 1950s , but a loss of form and illness forced him out of the team after one season . Craig made a comeback , but work commitments forced him to retire from first @-@ class cricket at only 26 years of age . 
 A teenage prodigy , Craig made his first @-@ class debut for New South Wales in the last match of the 1951 – 52 Australian season , aged only 16 . The following summer , Craig earned comparisons to Don Bradman , generally regarded as the greatest batsman of all time , after becoming the youngest player to score a first @-@ class double century , an unbeaten 213 against the touring South African team . The innings secured Craig 's Test debut in the final match against South Africa , making him the youngest player to represent Australia in a Test , aged 17 years and 239 days . Craig started his Test career well , scoring 53 and 47 to ensure his selection for the 1953 Ashes tour , making him the youngest Australian player to tour England . Craig 's arrival precipitated media comparisons to the arrival and success of Bradman in 1930 , but he performed poorly and was not selected for any of the Tests . 
 Having missed a season due to national service and university studies , Craig returned to first @-@ class cricket in 1955 – 56 , earning a place in the 1956 Ashes touring squad . Craig regained a Test position for the final two Tests of the series . After the series , at which point Australia had suffered three consecutive Ashes series defeats , captain Ian Johnson and vice @-@ captain Keith Miller retired . The selectors focussed on young players to rebuild the team , appointing Craig as the captain for the 1957 – 58 tour of South Africa , although he had played just six Tests and was not an established member of the team . Aged 22 years and 194 days , Craig was , at the time , the youngest captain in Test history and led a team that critics dismissed as having no chance to a convincing 3 – 0 victory ; his own batting form was poor , and he averaged less than 20 . He contracted hepatitis before the start of the 1958 – 59 season and withdrew from cricket . Although he returned the following season for New South Wales , he could not regain his Test place . He retired from first @-@ class cricket at the age of just 26 : work commitments as a pharmacist increasingly restricted his ability to train . In later life , Craig was the managing director of the Australian subsidiary of the British pharmaceutical firm Boots . He had a continued involvement with cricket as an administrator , working with the New South Wales Cricket Association , the Sydney Cricket Ground Trust and the Bradman Museum . Craig was awarded the Medal of the Order of Australia in 1997 for his service to cricket . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Birth and school success = = = 
 Ian Craig was the first son of John Craig and his wife Katherine ( née Dun ) . Shortly after Ian 's birth in the rural town of Yass , John jokingly told friends that " Australia 's second Don Bradman has just been born . " When John 's employers , the Bank of New South Wales , moved him to Sydney , the family relocated when Ian was just three ; John went on to be the chief manager of the Sydney office . Ian studied at North Sydney Boys High School , and showed an aptitude for ball games from an early age . He was a member of Australia 's schoolboy baseball team for three years , first playing at 13 years of age . He captained his school 's rugby union team and was a member of the state 's schoolboy team , but was only vice captain of the First XI cricket team behind Peter Philpott , another future Test player . At the time , cricket was only his third priority ; his obituary in the Sydney Morning Herald suggests that he was initially a better rugby player but was persuaded to focus on cricket when he broke his jaw playing rugby . He joined Mosman Cricket Club on Sydney 's North Shore and scored a first @-@ grade century at the age of 16 . Craig was not coached heavily ; the philosophy of the day was to supervise young players and to only intervene if mistakes were being made . 
 After good performances for Mosman , Craig was selected to make his first @-@ class debut for New South Wales at the age of 16 years and 249 days , during the 1951 – 52 season , making him the youngest ever Sheffield Shield player . He struck 91 against South Australia in his only first @-@ class innings of the season , before falling leg before wicket . He remained in the team for the following season ; in the first eight games he scored 350 runs at an average of 35 @.@ 00 , with three fifties . Given a chance to push his claims for Test selection after being selected for the Australian XI to play South Africa , he made only 38 and 11 . 
 = = = The " Next Bradman " = = = 
 Craig 's breakthrough came in January 1953 when , at the age of 17 years and 207 days , he became the youngest double centurion in the history of first @-@ class cricket at the time , in only his 13th first @-@ class innings . As of 2015 , he remains the youngest Australian to have achieved the feat . In a match for New South Wales against the touring South Africans , Craig came into bat on the second day and after a slow start reached 105 not out at the close of play . After play , he went to work at his job as an apprentice pharmacist . The next day , teammate Sid Barnes offered him a new bat if he reached 200 . When play resumed , he took his score to 213 not out , helping to build a total of 416 runs for the loss of seven wickets ( 7 / 416 ) . Hitting many cover drives , Craig scored quickly , making 98 of the 159 runs scored in a partnership with Keith Miller , a Test player known for his attacking strokeplay . Craig brought up his double century by sweeping Hugh Tayfield for a boundary . 
 The innings generated comparisons with Don Bradman , widely regarded as the finest batsman in cricket history . Bradman had dominated Australian sports media coverage for two decades until his retirement in 1948 and the Australian public were eager for another sporting hero of his magnitude . Bradman had not played first @-@ class cricket at the age of 17 and was 20 when he made his Test debut , so Craig 's quicker rise up the ranks caused much excitement . The Daily Telegraph said that Craig batted with " a grim purposefulness " that was " reminiscent of Bradman . " Miller cautioned against heaping so much media pressure on Craig , but the newspapers persisted , even comparing Craig 's batting grip to that of Bradman . 
 Craig 's innings also caught the eye of Australian selectors and he was selected for the Test team . He was named twelfth man for the Fourth Test , before making his debut in the Fifth Test after Miller and Ray Lindwall were rested due to mild injuries . Australia were leading the series 2 – 1 heading into the deciding match . 
 = = Test match career = = 
 = = = Debut = = = 
 Making his Test debut at the Melbourne Cricket Ground , Craig became , at the age of 17 years and 239 days , the youngest ever Australian to play Test cricket . Australia batted first and Craig received a standing ovation from the 47 @,@ 000 @-@ strong crowd as he walked out to bat amid high expectations from the public . As South African captain Jack Cheetham stopped proceedings to set his field , the crowd jeered . Australia were comfortably positioned at 3 / 269 with Craig 's partner Neil Harvey on his way to a double century . Craig cover drove his third ball , bowled by Percy Mansell , for four and quickly moved to 20 . In an innings marked by leg glances and fine cuts , Craig progressed to 53 before the new ball was taken . He hit a ball into the covers and was caught , ending the 148 @-@ run partnership with Harvey and silencing the crowd . Australia collapsed and ended at 520 but still took a first innings lead of 85 runs . Craig top @-@ scored in the second innings with 47 , giving him exactly 100 runs for the match as Australia collapsed to be all out for 209 and conceded defeat by six wickets . Given Bradman 's Test average of 99 @.@ 94 , Craig 's match aggregate prompted further press discussions of <unk> similarities . However , his debut ended on a sour note as South Africa scored 4 / 297 to win by six wickets and level the series 2 – 2 . 
 = = = Ashes tour of 1953 = = = 
 Craig was selected for his first tour of England in 1953 as the last player to make the cut , after only 10 first @-@ class matches . The youngest Australian player ever to be sent to England , Craig was 15 months younger than Clem Hill in 1896 . He had been one of the leading batsmen of the summer , scoring 867 first @-@ class runs at a batting average of 54 @.@ 18 with seven half @-@ centuries in addition to his double century . This placed him fourth among Australian batsmen for the season in terms of run @-@ scoring , with only leading Test batsman Neil Harvey averaging higher . Craig had a strong preparation before departing for England , scoring fifties in three consecutive matches for the Australians on home soil . 
 Craig was again the centre of media speculation , with some media likening his arrival to Bradman 's first tour of England in 1930 . Bradman had scored a world Test series record of 974 runs in 1930 , a mark that remains unsurpassed . At a reception at the start of the tour , British judge and cricket enthusiast Lord Birkett said " If I know the English as I think I do , every Mother in the land will pray for him . " During the tour he was presented with a birthday cake on television . However , the trip was unsuccessful in terms of batting . 
 Craig began poorly ; in ten innings before the Tests started , he scored only 146 runs at 14 @.@ 60 without passing fifty . He was overlooked for the First Test , and continued to struggle for runs during the tour ; he ended with 429 runs in 27 innings with a top score of 71 not out and an average of 16 @.@ 50 . He was not selected for any Tests . Craig had difficulty adjusting to the English pitch conditions and his confidence plummeted . Craig had particular trouble against off cutters on the seaming pitches . In a reception at Lord 's , the home of cricket , Queen Elizabeth II asked him " I understand this is your first visit to England ? " , which prompted Craig to reply " Yes , your majesty , and unless my batting improves , it will be my last . " During the tour , tensions sometimes arose between the senior players , who were war veterans and drinkers , while the younger players including Craig tended to abstain from alcohol . Craig estimated that bus journeys to matches proceeded at an average speed of 16 km / h because of persistent stoppages outside pubs , something that frustrated the non @-@ drinkers . 
 = = = In the wilderness = = = 
 Upon returning home , Craig was unable to maintain the level of performances that he displayed in the previous Australian summer . In a season which contained no international cricket , he scored 395 runs at an average of 35 @.@ 90 in eight matches , placing him 20th in the season 's run scoring list . He scored 93 in an eight @-@ wicket victory over South Australia , and 106 for Arthur Morris 's XI in a testimonial match against Lindsay Hassett 's XI , his first century against Australian opposition . 
 Craig 's career was interrupted by final year university studies for a diploma of pharmacy at the University of Sydney and national service , causing him to miss the entire 1954 – 55 season , including the home Test series against England , the early 1955 tour to the West Indies and the Sheffield Shield season . He returned to first @-@ class cricket during the 1955 – 56 Australian season , and a healthy aggregate of 495 runs at 45 @.@ 09 with one century . During the season , he made his first century in the Sheffield Shield , amassing 145 against Queensland . For these performances , he was selected for the 1956 Ashes tour , the last player to be picked . 
 = = = Second Ashes tour = = = 
 Craig 's tour started poorly , and food poisoning hampered him until after the Second Test — one particular severe bout forced him to be hospitalised . In his first six first @-@ class matches , Craig made only 104 runs at 17 @.@ 33 . His tour began to improve in late June , when he made consecutive half @-@ centuries against Yorkshire and Gloucestershire before breaking through in a match against Somerset . He was dropped before going on to score 62 and 100 not out — his first century in 38 innings in England . He was selected for the Fourth Test at Old Trafford , after Australia had suffered a heavy defeat at Headingley in the Third Test at the hands of the Surrey spin pairing of Jim Laker and Tony Lock , Australia 's first innings defeat in 18 years . The Fourth Test was to be known as Laker 's Test , in which Laker took a record 19 wickets in the match . Laker trapped Craig leg before wicket for eight in the first innings as Australia were bowled out for 84 . In the second innings , Craig came out to bat at 1 / 28 in the second innings on a sticky wicket and combined in a defiant third @-@ wicket partnership of 59 with Colin McDonald . He battled for over four hours in compiling 38 before being dismissed by Laker . Reflecting on the match , Craig said " Jim bowled well , and we batted very badly . We were all pissed off , felt we 'd been <unk> and we dropped our bundle a bit . " His stubborn display saw him retain his position for the Fifth Test at The Oval when he scored two and seven . Craig ended the season with 872 runs at 36 @.@ 33 from 20 matches , with one century and five fifties , the fifth highest aggregate for the Australians . 
 Despite his failure to reach double figures at The Oval , Craig maintained his position in the playing XI on the tour of the Indian subcontinent en route to Australia in late 1956 , playing Test matches against Pakistan and India . However , he failed to pass 40 in his five innings . He made a duck and 18 on a matting wicket in Australia 's one @-@ off Test against Pakistan in Karachi before playing in the First Test against India , scoring 40 in an innings win in Madras . He was dropped for the Second Test but returned to make 36 and 6 in the Third Test in Calcutta as Australia took a 2 – 0 series win . The matches were the first time that Australia had played a Test in Asia . 
 = = Captaincy of Australia = = 
 = = = Youngest ever captain = = = 
 The 1956 – 57 season marked the start of a renewal phase in Australian cricket . Australia had lost three consecutive Ashes series and had fallen from the heights of the " Invincibles " team that had toured England in 1948 . Australia were not scheduled to play any Tests until a tour of South Africa in 1957 – 58 and captain Ian Johnson and his deputy Keith Miller retired upon their return to Australia , both men being in their late 30s . In a move regarded as surprising , the 21 @-@ year @-@ old Craig , rather than Richie Benaud , replaced the retired Miller as state captain and staked his claim to be a part of Australia 's long @-@ term future with a consistent season in which he scored 521 runs at an average of 47 @.@ 36 , with two centuries . New South Wales won another Sheffield Shield title under Craig 's leadership . In one match against arch @-@ rivals Victoria , Craig was ill with tonsillitis , but came out to bat with his team struggling at 7 / 70 while chasing a low total of 161 . Craig made 24 and put on 70 with Benaud to take his team towards victory , but the match eventually ended in a tie . 
 Near the end of the 1956 – 57 season , the selectors met to choose a team for a short non @-@ Test tour of New Zealand . The leading contender for the captaincy was 28 @-@ year @-@ old Victorian Neil Harvey , who had been a regular member of the team for eight years and was the senior batsman . However , both Harvey and Miller had been criticised for their attitude towards Johnson in an official report to the board about the 1956 tour . The selectors thus thrust Craig into the leadership at the age of 21 and a half . He was a young player leading an inexperienced team — the youngest cricket team from any country to be sent overseas , with no players older than 30 . It was seen as a bold move , as Craig had only played six Tests , was far from being a regular member of the team and had only a year of captaincy at first @-@ class level . 
 The day after the announcement , the Harvey @-@ led Victorians met Craig 's New South Welshmen at the SCG . Harvey admitted to being irked by the board 's snub and felt that it was because of his blunt nature . The men were cordial at the toss and Craig sent the Victorians in to bat . At the same time , Colin McDonald broke his nose while practising in the nets and was taken to hospital . Harvey asked Craig for a gentleman 's agreement to allow a substitute , but the home skipper refused . An angry Harvey struck 209 in five hours , but Craig scored 45 and 93 to help secure a draw and therefore win the Sheffield Shield . 
 Craig , regarded as a personable , level @-@ headed and well educated man , was seen as an investment in the future . Personal skills were seen as important in an era when captains were expected to make many after @-@ dinner speeches at functions on tours , especially to England . Ray Robinson opined that " a sincere nature and unassuming manner " reduced the risk of team friction in the rebuilding phase and that Craig was " level headed and tactful beyond his years . " Craig 's lack of leadership ambition was cited as a major reason for the improvement in team harmony . The New Zealand tour was regarded as a test of Craig 's leadership . Wicket @-@ keeper Barry Jarman said that Craig " had to do it himself ... I wasn 't so dumb that I couldn 't see the senior players didn 't give him much support . " The senior players resented his surprise selection as captain , but he gained favour by defying a management @-@ imposed curfew , which was later scrapped . 
 During the tour , the Australians won all three of their first @-@ class matches against the hosts ' provincial teams . The Australians then played against a New Zealand representative team , although the matches were not classified as Tests . In the first game , Craig scored an unbeaten 123 in the second innings to ensure a draw after the visitors had conceded a first innings lead . In the second match , Australia stumbled to 6 / 146 in their second innings after conceding a first innings lead of 34 . After the unconvincing performances in the first two matches , Craig scored 57 in the third , which Australia won by ten wickets . Craig ended with 224 runs at 56 @.@ 00 in the three international matches and 308 runs at 38 @.@ 50 overall . 
 = = = South African tour = = = 
 At the start of the 1957 – 58 season , Craig was made captain for Australia 's Test tour to South Africa , making him the youngest captain in Test history at the age of 22 years and 194 days , with Harvey as his deputy . The appointment came despite his mixed batting form during the New Zealand tour . The selectors further demonstrated their view to the future when they dropped veteran Ray Lindwall altogether . The average age of Craig 's team was two and a half years younger than the Australian squad sent to England in 1956 , and they had only one player over the age of 30 , whereas the 1956 team had five members over the age of 30 . As a result of the team 's relative inexperience , they were judged by critics to be the worst to have left Australian shores . Craig joined his team in Johannesburg after flying in from London , where he had been working for six months as a pharmacist , with the approval of the Australian board . 
 Craig 's workload grew after the team manager Jack <unk> suffered a heart attack before the tour , leaving the captain to handle off @-@ field matters until a replacement for <unk> was found two weeks later . Craig instituted a novel set of rules to raise morale , but journalists and former player Dick Whitington derided it as " Anglicised fripperies " , while Jack Fingleton said that Craig was " much too callow in years and experience to lead a team abroad . " Some players remained resentful of Craig 's dubious elevation but appreciated that he had not promoted himself and that he was fair and open to input from teammates . 
 Craig made a good start to the tour in two warm @-@ up matches against Rhodesia , scoring a century in each match . Australia won the matches by an innings and ten wickets respectively . Craig led his men in five first @-@ class matches before the Tests and Australia won all by convincing margins ; three ended in innings victories and the others were won by nine and ten wickets . This included a match against a South African XI , in which Craig scored 88 as Australia amassed 8 / 519 declared before winning by an innings . 
 Craig led his team into the First Test at Johannesburg starting on 23 December with an inexperienced bowling attack . With Lindwall dropped , the pace attack was led by Alan Davidson , who at the time had managed only 16 Test wickets in 12 matches . Davidson 's partner Ian Meckiff was making his debut . Benaud was in his first Test as the lead spinner , while left arm wrist spinner Lindsay Kline was another debutant . In all , Craig 's team had four debutants . Craig made only 14 and 17 as his team held on for a draw . At the end of the match , an unpopular 10 p.m. curfew that was imposed by the replacement manager was repealed . 
 The Australian skipper again struggled with the bat in the Second Test in Cape Town , making a duck , but this was overlooked by the media as his team won by a decisive innings margin . In the Third Test at Durban , Craig made 52 on a pitch that was difficult for batting , his first Test half @-@ century since his debut . His team scored 163 in their first innings , and after the hosts made 384 , Craig made a duck as Australia struggled to a score of 7 / 292 , salvaging a draw in the process . In the Fourth Test at Johannesburg , Craig promoted Benaud ahead of him in the batting order , feeling that flexibility in the team interest was paramount . Benaud scored a century , prompting Robinson to describe Craig 's action as " the most imaginative piece of captaincy of the season . " The innings allowed Australia to seize the momentum and set up a 10 @-@ wicket victory , which yielded an unassailable 2 – 0 series lead . 
 Despite the disagreement as to whether Craig was deserving of the captaincy , the team proceeded without infighting . Prior to the Fifth Test , Craig wanted to drop himself due to poor form , which would have made Harvey captain . Peter Burge , the third member of the selection panel and a Harvey supporter , was comfortable with this , but Harvey ordered Burge to retain Craig . When the vote was formally taken , Harvey and Burge outvoted Craig , who was still offering to drop himself . 
 Craig failed to pass 20 in the Fifth Test as Australia won again to take a creditable 3 – 0 series win , something highly unexpected at the beginning of the tour . Overall , Craig 's men won 11 of their 20 first @-@ class games on tour , and the South African Cricket Annual recognised the Australian captain 's leadership by naming him as one of their Five Cricketers of the Year . 
 = = Later career = = 
 = = = Hepatitis = = = 
 Although the match results were encouraging for such a young and inexperienced team , Craig scored only 103 runs at 14 @.@ 71 . Despite his contributions as a leader , this was not up to standard . He had trouble with his defence , being bowled eight times in 17 innings . In the 12 matches in the last three months of the tour , Craig passed fifty only once in 13 innings . However , the selectors did not have to reverse their youth policy : Craig contracted a bout of hepatitis before the start of the 1958 – 59 season . He returned to cricket at the beginning of the season , but was underprepared , scoring two ducks in his only two innings of the season , the second coming against the touring England team . Craig declared that he was not ready for a return to Test cricket and relinquished the captaincy , which the selectors handed to Benaud . Benaud went on to defeat England 4 – 0 ; as England were widely regarded as the best team at the time , this established him as captain of a resurgent Australia . 
 The illness @-@ enforced layoff left Craig facing an uphill battle to regain his place in the national team . Prior to the start of the 1959 – 60 season , Craig recovered his health and toured South Africa with a Commonwealth XI , where he scored 276 runs at 55 @.@ 20 including a century against a combined Transvaal XI . 
 = = = Attempted comeback = = = 
 Returning to Australia , he had a moderately successful Sheffield Shield season , accumulating 376 runs at 31 @.@ 33 with three half @-@ centuries . New South Wales went on to win another title . The selectors named him to lead an Australian Second XI to New Zealand — while the first choice team toured the Indian subcontinent — hoping that he was still good enough to secure a long @-@ term future in the Australian team . The four matches against New Zealand were closely contested . In the first match , Australia were 7 / 201 in pursuit of 22 for victory when time ran out . In the second fixture , Craig made 70 as the tourists struggled to 8 / 211 in pursuit of 262 for victory to hold on for a draw . After narrowly escaping defeat in the first two matches , Australia won the third match by eight wickets . In the final match , Australia reduced New Zealand to 8 / 149 in pursuit of 284 when time ran out , sealing a 1 – 0 series win . Craig struggled with the bat , making 222 runs at 27 @.@ 75 in the games against New Zealand . 
 Craig had a strong Sheffield Shield season in 1960 – 61 . At the time , he had become a production manager at his pharmaceutical firm and declared that the season would be his last owing to work commitments . His employers had been pressuring him to commit to a career after cricket . Early in the campaign , Craig scored consecutive centuries against Queensland and Victoria . He then scored 83 as New South Wales defeated the touring West Indians by an innings and 97 runs , but he was overlooked for Test selection . He ended his season with 197 in an innings victory over Western Australia . Overall , he totalled 710 runs at 59 @.@ 16 , as New South Wales won their eighth successive Shield . After a successful campaign , he reversed his decision and made himself available for the 1961 tour of England , but Bill Lawry was selected ahead of him . 
 = = = Final season = = = 
 The 1961 – 62 season was Craig 's last at first @-@ class level ; he accumulated 629 runs at 37 @.@ 00 , with seven fifties but he was unable to convert any of these into a century . In one match against arch @-@ rivals Victoria , Craig scored 80 and 65 not out to help his team to a ten @-@ wicket triumph . New South Wales won six consecutive matches to seal another title , but Craig found himself under increasing pressure for his place in the state team ; with no internationals that season , all the Test players were available , which put his position under threat . New South Wales had a streak of nine consecutive Shield titles up until 1961 – 62 , and the batting line @-@ up was particularly strong . The 1950s – 60s era teams were regarded as among the strongest in Australian history . In total , Craig acted as captain in 48 first @-@ class matches , winning 27 , tying one and losing only two . Although Craig 's record as the youngest captain in Test history has now been surpassed , he remains the youngest Australian to have scored a first @-@ class double century , play a Test match and then captain the national team . 
 Craig signed off on his first @-@ class career at the end of the season with a tour of New Zealand with an International XI . He played in three matches and ended with 240 runs at 48 @.@ 00 ; in his final match , against the Cricket Club of India President 's XI , he made 101 , his 15th century at first @-@ class level . 
 = = Style = = 
 Standing 173 cm ( 5 ft 8 in ) and weighing 63 kg ( 139 lb ) , Craig was a lightly built and frail looking batsman . He had a neat and compact batting style . Craig was known for his leg side batting repertoire , in particular his ability to clip the ball from his pads . He had an unorthodox grip , low on the bat handle with the back of the top hand pointing to point . This caused him to have a tendency to close the face of his bat . Although Craig was small in stature , he was still able to hit the ball a long distance . During the testimonial match for Lindsay Hassett at the end of the 1953 – 54 season , Craig struck four sixes in five balls from the off spin of Johnson . During his first tour to England , Craig had difficulty with off cutters bowled by pacemen and <unk> the hook shot , but after his comeback from illness , he transformed himself into an opening batsman , earning praise for his performances against the express pace of Wes Hall and Ian Meckiff . Benaud felt that Craig was finally reaping the rewards of his early experience . On Australian pitches , Craig had a reputation for having difficulty with the left arm wrist spin of Kline and David <unk> . Craig 's light build allowed him to move quickly while fielding , prompting Robinson to call him " the Bambi of the fielding side . " In his early years , Craig was a non @-@ smoker , but the pressure and tension brought on by the burden of captaincy resulted in him taking up the habit . He was known for being softly spoken , with his players often having to ask him to repeat his instructions . Craig had a reputation for being good @-@ natured ; he did not complain about his cricket career and said that he had " no regrets . " 
 = = After cricket = = 
 Craig retired from first @-@ class cricket at just 26 years of age in 1962 , but continued playing for Mosman in Sydney grade cricket on weekends until 1969 . His marriage to Rosslyn Carroll in 1962 and his pharmaceutical career prevented him from applying himself fully to cricket . The couple had a boy and a girl , as well as an adopted son . Craig joined the Australian subsidiary of the British pharmaceutical firm Boots , rising to the position of managing director . He later served on the board of directors of the Bradman Museum in Bowral and later became its chairman . He was a board member of the New South Wales Cricket Association ( NSWCA ) for three years and served on the Trust of the Sydney Cricket Ground for varying periods from 1968 to 1996 , totalling 18 years . Upon first being appointed in 1968 to replace Stan McCabe , Craig was the youngest ever trustee of the SCG . One of the most controversial incidents during this time occurred in 1977 – 78 during the period of the breakaway World Series Cricket , which wanted to install floodlights at the SCG . The NSWCA opposed this , while the government sided with WSC . As a result of Craig 's support of the NSWCA , the government dismissed him . Craig retired as the managing director of Boots ' Australian subsidiaries . Craig was awarded the Medal of the Order of Australia in 1997 for his contributions to cricket as a player and administrator . He died in Bowral from cancer on 16 November 2014 . 
 = = Test match performance = = 
 = Phellodon = 
 Phellodon is a genus of tooth fungi in the family Bankeraceae . Species have small- to medium @-@ sized fruitbodies with white spines on the underside from which spores are released . All Phellodon have a short stalk or stipe , and so the genus falls into the group known as " stipitate hydnoid fungi " . The tough and leathery flesh usually has a pleasant , fragrant odor , and develops a cork @-@ like texture when dry . Neighboring fruitbodies can fuse together , sometimes producing large mats of joined caps . Phellodon species produce a white spore print , while the individual spores are roughly spherical to ellipsoid in shape , with spiny surfaces . 
 The genus , with about 20 described species , has a distribution that includes to Asia , Europe , North America , South America , Australia , and New Zealand . About half of the species are found in the southeastern United States , including three species added to the genus in 2013 – 14 . Several Phellodon species were placed on a preliminary Red List of threatened British fungi because of a general decline of the genus in Europe . Species grow in a symbiotic mycorrhizal association with trees from the families Fagaceae ( beeches and oaks ) and Pinaceae ( pines ) . Accurate DNA @-@ based methods have been developed to determine the presence of Phellodon species in the soil , even in the extended absence of visible fruitbodies . Although Phellodon fruitbodies are considered inedible due to their fibrous flesh , the type species , P. niger , is used in mushroom dyeing . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Phellodon was circumscribed in 1881 by Finnish mycologist Petter Karsten to contain white @-@ toothed fungi . Karsten included three species : P. cyathiformis , P. melaleucus , and the type , P. niger ( originally published with the epithet nigrum ) . P. nigrum was originally described by Elias Fries in 1815 as a species of Hydnum . Some early authors did not consider Phellodon distinct enough to be a separate genus , and folded species assigned to this genus into Hydnellum . 
 Hydnellum is classified in the family Bankeraceae , which was circumscribed by Marinus Anton Donk in 1961 . Donk 's original family concept included the genera Bankera and Phellodon , whose species produce hyaline ( translucent ) and <unk> spores ( covered with small spines ) . Donk also noted that Bankeraceae species lacked clamp connections . When clamp connections were discovered in Phellodon fibulatus and tuberculate spore ornamentation ( the presence of small nodules on the spores ) was found in P. niger , Kenneth Harrison thought the family Bankeraceae was superfluous , and placed Phellodon and Bankera in the family Hydnaceae . This taxonomic rearrangement was rejected by Rudolph Arnold Maas Geesteranus in 1974 , who showed that the tuberculate spores of P. niger were the result of an immature specimen . Richard Baird and Saeed Khan investigated spore ornamentation in North American Phellodon species using scanning electron microscopy , and rejected the placement of Phellodon in the Bankeraceae , preferring to leave it and Bankera in the Hydnaceae . Modern molecular phylogenetic analysis places Phellodon in the <unk> clade ( roughly equivalent to the order Thelephorales ) along with the related genera Bankera , Hydnellum , and Sarcodon . Although the status of the Bankeraceae has not been fully clarified with molecular genetic techniques , Phellodon is classified in this family by authorities on fungal taxonomy . 
 The generic name is derived from <unk> , meaning " cork " , and <unk> , meaning " tooth " . In North America , Phellodon species are commonly known as " cork hydnums " . The British Mycological Society , in their recommended list of common names for fungi in the United Kingdom , name Phellodon species in the form " descriptor word " plus " tooth " : fused tooth ( P. confluens ) , grey tooth ( P. melaleucus ) , black tooth ( P. niger ) , and woolly tooth ( P. tomentosus ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of Phellodon species have caps and stipe , and thus fall into the general category " stipitate hydnoid fungi " . The cap surfaces are initially velvety to tomentose , eventually becoming matted . The surface is rough , with pits and ridges , and sometimes with <unk> zones of color or texture . The color can vary considerably , from cream to yellowish , brownish , greenish , greyish or black . Neighboring fruitbodies can fuse together , forming intertwined caps and partially fused stipes . Alexander H. Smith wrote of P. tomentosus , " It often occurs in large mats of fused caps almost producing a ceiling over large areas of the moss under conifers . " Phellodon fruitbodies can envelop nearby grass or twigs . The stipe is thickly tomentose or smooth , typically the same color as the cap or darker . In P. niger , the outer covering of the stipe is a thick <unk> layer of mycelium that absorbs water like a sponge . The hymenophore ( the fertile , spore @-@ bearing surface ) is on the underside of the cap . The spines become grey at maturity . In conditions of high humidity , P. niger can form striking drops of black liquid on the actively growing caps . 
 The fibrous flesh is single to double @-@ layered ; duplex layering results from differences in compactness or in the alignment of the constituent hyphae . Tough and leathery when fresh , the flesh develops a <unk> texture when dry . In the dried state it often has an odor of fenugreek or curry powder . Phellodon species are often free of insect damage , suggesting that they may have defensive chemicals that deter predation . Fruitbodies are not considered edible due to their fibrous flesh . 
 The hyphal system is monomitic , containing only generative hyphae . These hyphae are not less than 6 μm in diameter . All European species lack clamp connections , but they are present in the North American species P. fibulatus and P. mississippiensis . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored . Cystidia are either absent , or present infrequently as incompletely differentiated cystidioles ( sterile cells about the size of an immature basidium ) . In mass , the spores are white . Spores are broadly ellipsoid to roughly spherical , and <unk> ( covered with small spines ) . They are also hyaline and inamyloid . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Fruit bodies grow on the ground . Phellodon species , like all members of the order Thelephorales , are thought to be mycorrhizal , forming symbiotic relationships with trees . Usual hosts include species from the families Fagaceae ( beeches and oaks ) and Pinaceae . The ectomycorrhizae that P. niger forms with Norway spruce ( Picea abies ) has been comprehensively described . It is distinguished from the ectomycorrhizae of other Thelephorales species by the unique shape of its chlamydospores . Stable isotope ratio analysis of the abundance of the stable isotope carbon @-@ 13 shows that P. niger has a metabolic signature close to that of saprotrophic fungi , indicating that it may be able to obtain carbon from sources other than a tree host . 
 Many Phellodon species are known from the southeastern United States , where they have been extensively researched . According to Baird and colleagues , there are nine distinct Phellodon species from Great Smoky Mountains and the surrounding southern Appalachian Mountains . Three additional species from this area , P. mississippiensis , P. <unk> @-@ olivaceus , and P. <unk> were added to the genus in 2013 – 14 . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Phellodon species , like other members of the family Bankeraceae , are sensitive to air pollution and soil pollution , and are in general decline in western Europe . In a preliminary assessment for a red list of threatened British Fungi , P. confluens , P. tomentosus , and P. melaleucus are considered vulnerable , and P. niger is rare . 
 Conservation efforts for stipitate hydnoid fungi are hampered by a dearth of information about their basic ecology , and so molecular genetic techniques are increasingly employed in attempts to better understand these fungi . In the case of Phellodon tomentosus , for example , there is little correlation between fruitbody appearance and below @-@ ground mycelium , making it hard to determine the distribution and rarity of the fungus with standard surveying techniques . Phellodon melaleucus and P. niger were included in a Scottish study to develop species @-@ specific PCR primers that can be used to detect the mycelia of stipitate <unk> in soil . DNA testing of collections labelled as P. melaleucus and P. niger from the United Kingdom revealed additional cryptic species . PCR analysis can be used to determine the presence of a Phellodon species up to four years after the appearance of fruitbodies , allowing a more accurate determination of their possible decline and threat of extinction . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 Phellodon species contain thelephoric acid , a metabolite of the shikimic acid pathway . <unk> acid is a terphenyl quinone — a 1 @,@ 4 @-@ benzoquinone wherein positions carbon @-@ 2 and carbon @-@ 5 are substituted with phenyl groups . The <unk> derivative <unk> acid is found in P. melaleucus . <unk> acid , which exhibits antibiotic activity towards bacteria and other fungi , was the first bioactive compound reported from any member of the order Thelephorales . A total synthesis was described for <unk> acid in 2008 using cis @-@ 1 @,@ 2 @-@ <unk> as the starting material . The compound atromentin was reported to occur in fruitbodies of P. melaleucus , but this was not confirmed in a later analysis . P. niger has been a source for several bioactive compounds : the cyathane @-@ type diterpenoids , <unk> A and B ; a nitrogenous terphenyl derivative , <unk> ; 2 ' , 3 ' <unk> @-@ 3 @,@ 4 @,@ 5 ' , 6 ' , 4 ' <unk> @-@ p @-@ terphenyl ; <unk> ; and 4 @-@ O @-@ <unk> acid . P. niger has also been used for mushroom dyeing , in which it produces gray @-@ blue and green colors . 
 = = Species = = 
 Phellodon was originally circumscribed with three species . Joost Stalpers included 13 Phellodon species in his 1993 monograph on the Thelephorales . The tenth edition of the Dictionary of the Fungi ( 2008 ) indicated 16 species in the genus . As of September 2015 , Index Fungorum lists 18 species of Phellodon , not including the three eastern United States species added in 2013 – 14 . 
 Phellodon atratus K.A.Harrison ( 1964 ) – California , United States 
 Phellodon <unk> @-@ olivaceus R.E.Baird ( 2013 ) – United States 
 Phellodon confluens ( Pers . ) Pouzar ( 1956 ) – China , eastern United States , Europe 
 Phellodon <unk> R.E.Baird ( 1985 ) – Mexico 
 Phellodon fibulatus K.A.Harrison ( 1972 ) – North Carolina , United States 
 Phellodon <unk> ( <unk> ) Baird ( 2013 ) – United States 
 Phellodon <unk> R.E.Baird & <unk> ( 1986 ) – Florida , United States 
 Phellodon indicus Khara ( 1978 ) – Himachal Pradesh , India 
 Phellodon <unk> ( Lloyd ) Maas Geest . ( 1966 ) – Australia , New Zealand 
 Phellodon melaleucus ( <unk> ex Fr . ) P.Karst. ( 1881 ) – Europe , North America 
 Phellodon mississippiensis <unk> ( 2014 ) – Mississippi , United States 
 Phellodon niger ( Fr . ) P.Karst. ( 1881 ) – Europe , North America 
 Phellodon nothofagi McNabb ( 1971 ) – New Zealand 
 Phellodon <unk> ( Lloyd ) Maas Geest . ( 1966 ) – Australia 
 Phellodon <unk> ( <unk> ) Banker ( 1906 ) – North America 
 Phellodon <unk> R.E.Baird ( 1985 ) – North America 
 Phellodon rufipes Maas Geest . ( 1971 ) – Japan 
 Phellodon <unk> <unk> & <unk> ( 2003 ) – Finland 
 Phellodon <unk> ( Berk . ) <unk> ( 1958 ) – New Zealand 
 Phellodon tenuis R.E.Baird ( 1988 ) – Brazil 
 Phellodon tomentosus ( L. ) Banker ( 1906 ) – Europe , North America 
 = HMS Jamaica ( 44 ) = 
 HMS Jamaica , a Crown Colony @-@ class cruiser of the Royal Navy , was named after the island of Jamaica , which was a British possession when she was built in the late 1930s . The light cruiser spent almost her entire wartime career on Arctic convoy duties , except for a deployment south for the landings in North Africa in November 1942 . She participated in the Battle of the Barents Sea in 1942 and the Battle of North Cape in 1943 . Jamaica escorted several aircraft carriers in 1944 as they flew off airstrikes that attacked the German battleship Tirpitz in northern Norway . Late in the year she had an extensive refit to prepare her for service with the British Pacific Fleet , but the war ended before she reached the Pacific . 
 Jamaica spent the late 1940s in the Far East and on the North America and West Indies Station . When the Korean War began in 1950 she was ordered , in cooperation with the United States Navy , to bombard North Korean troops as they advanced down the eastern coast . The ship also provided fire support during the Inchon Landing later that year . Jamaica was refitted late in the year and returned to Great Britain in early 1951 where she was placed in reserve . 
 She was recommissioned in 1954 for service with the Mediterranean Fleet . In 1955 Jamaica was used to play HMS Exeter in the film Battle of the River Plate , in company with her wartime partner HMS Sheffield as HMS Ajax . In 1956 the ship participated in Operation Musketeer , the Anglo @-@ French invasion of Egypt to seize control of the Suez Canal . Jamaica was paid off in 1958 and sold for scrap in 1960 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Jamaica displaced about 8 @,@ 631 long tons ( 8 @,@ 770 t ) at standard load and 11 @,@ 017 long tons ( 11 @,@ 194 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 555 feet 6 inches ( 169 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 68 feet 5 inches ( 20 @.@ 9 m ) and a draught of 19 feet 10 inches ( 6 @.@ 0 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving four shafts , which developed a total of 80 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 60 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 32 @.@ 25 knots ( 59 @.@ 73 km / h ; 37 @.@ 11 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by four Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Jamaica carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 700 long tons ( 1 @,@ 700 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 6 @,@ 520 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 080 km ; 7 @,@ 500 mi ) at 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 733 officers and men in peacetime and 900 during war . 
 The ship mounted twelve 50 @-@ calibre 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns in four three @-@ gun turrets . Her secondary armament consisted of eight 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in four twin turrets . Jamaica mounted two quadruple 2 @-@ pounder ( 40 mm ) light AA mounts ( " pom @-@ poms " ) . Her short @-@ range AA armament is not known . The ship carried two above @-@ water triple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . 
 Jamaica lacked a full waterline armour belt . The sides of her boiler and engine rooms and the magazines were protected by 3 @.@ 25 – 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 83 – 89 mm ) of armour . The deck over the machinery spaces and magazines was reinforced to a thickness of 2 – 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 51 – 89 mm ) . She carried an aircraft catapult and two Supermarine Sea Otter seaplanes . 
 = = History = = 
 Jamaica was laid down on 28 April 1938 by Vickers @-@ Armstrongs in Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness , England as part of the 1938 Naval Programme and named for the Colony of Jamaica . The ship was launched on 16 November 1940 and completed on 29 June 1942 . After working up , the ship provided distant cover to Convoy PQ 18 in September . She was assigned to the Centre Task Force of Operation Torch in early November and was unsuccessfully attacked by the Vichy French submarine Fresnel . The Arctic convoys had been suspended at PQ 18 , but were scheduled to resume on 15 December with Convoy JW 51A . HMS Jamaica and HMS Sheffield , with several escorting destroyers , formed Force R , under the command of Rear @-@ Admiral Robert Burnett and were tasked to cover the convoy against any German surface ships . The convoy was not spotted by the Germans and arrived at the Kola Inlet without incident on 25 December . 
 = = = Battle of the Barents Sea = = = 
 Force R sailed from Kola on 27 December to rendezvous with Convoy JW 51B in the Norwegian Sea , but the convoy had been blown southwards by a major storm . Several of its ships had been separated during storm and they confused the radar of Force R 's ships as to the true location of the convoy . Thus Force R was 30 miles ( 48 km ) north of the convoy on the morning of 31 December when the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper attacked the convoy . Admiral Hipper was first held at bay by the British destroyers HMS Onslow , HMS Obedient , HMS Obdurate and HMS Orwell . Initially driven off , Admiral Hipper returned , only to be engaged by Force R shortly before noon and was hit by three 6 @-@ inch shells from the cruisers . Two German destroyers , Z16 Friedrich Eckoldt and Z4 Richard Beitzen , misidentified Sheffield as Admiral Hipper and attempted to form up on her . Sheffield sank Friedrich Eckoldt at a range of 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) while Jamaica unsuccessfully engaged Richard Beitzen . Less than an hour later Force R spotted the pocket battleship Lutzow and Admiral Hipper and opened fire . Neither side scored any hits in the darkness before both sides turned away a few minutes later . Force R continued to track the German ships for several hours before they lost contact . Although the destroyer HMS Achates and the minesweeper HMS Bramble were sunk by the Kriegsmarine , the convoy reached the Kola Inlet intact . Force R remained at sea to protect Convoy RA 51 that was returning to Great Britain until relieved by HMS Berwick and HMS Kent . 
 Jamaica was relieved of escort duties on her return in January 1943 and had her main gun barrels replaced in March . She rejoined the Home Fleet , but was refitted in Portsmouth from July to September . Sometime during the year she received six twin power @-@ operated 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) AA guns as well as four single guns . During November she protected the convoys RA 54B , JW 54A , JW 54B and RA 54B , but was not engaged . On 15 December she was assigned to Force 2 , the distant escort for Convoy JW <unk> , with the battleship HMS Duke of York and four destroyers . Force 2 was commanded by Admiral Bruce Fraser , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Home Fleet , in Duke of York . For the first time the British distant cover force escorted the convoy all the way to the Kola Inlet . Their passage was uneventful and Force 2 sailed on 18 December to refuel at Iceland . Before he reached his destination , Admiral Fraser received Ultra information that a sortie by the German battleship Scharnhorst was likely to attack Convoy JW 55B , which was already at sea . 
 = = = Battle of North Cape = = = 
 German aerial reconnaissance spotted the convoy on 22 December , and Scharnhorst , escorted by five destroyers of the 4th Destroyer Flotilla , sailed on 25 December to intercept it . The resulting engagement became known as the Battle of North Cape . The Germans were spotted on the morning of 26 December and were engaged by the covering force that consisted of the cruisers HMS Belfast , HMS Sheffield , HMS Norfolk and four destroyers . Meanwhile , HMS Jamaica and HMS Duke Of York approached from the south west , barring the Scharnhorst ’ s path of retreat . The German battleship turned for her base at Altafjord in the early afternoon after two brief encounters with the British cruisers . She was spotted by Duke of York 's Type 273 radar at a range of 45 @,@ 500 yards ( 41 @,@ 600 m ) and Duke of York opened fire half an hour later . Jamaica fired her first salvo a minute after , and hit Scharnhorst on her third broadside . She was forced to cease fire after 19 volleys as the German ship was faster in the heavy seas than the British ships , and was opening up the range despite heavy damage from the British shells . One shell from Duke of York 's last volley penetrated into Scharnhorst 's Number One boiler room and effectively destroyed it . This reduced the German ship 's speed sufficiently for the British destroyers to catch up and make four torpedo hits using a pincer attack . This slowed the ship again , so that Jamaica and Duke of York also caught up and opened fire at a range of 10 @,@ 400 yards ( 9 @,@ 500 m ) . They hit the German ship continually , but she was not sinking after 20 minutes of firing so Jamaica was ordered to torpedo her . Two torpedoes from her first volley of three missed and the third misfired , so the cruiser had to turn about to fire her other broadside of three , two of which appeared to hit . Belfast and the destroyers also fired torpedoes before Scharnhorst finally sank . 
 = = = Further convoys and the raids on the Tirpitz = = = 
 In February – March 1944 , Jamaica served as part of the covering forces for Convoys JW 57 , JW 58 and RA 58 . She was detached from the latter to escort the aircraft carrier HMS Victorious as she launched an air strike against the German battleship Tirpitz as part of Operation Tungsten . In July she formed part of the covering force for the carriers HMS Formidable , HMS Furious and HMS Indefatigable during an unsuccessful attack on the German battleship Tirpitz berthed in Kaafjord ( Operation Mascot ) . Jamaica escorted the Convoys JW 59 and RA 59 in August – September before starting a major refit in October that lasted until April 1945 . The ship 's ' X ' turret ( third from the front ) was removed and replaced by two more 2 @-@ pounder mounts while her radar suite was modernized . 
 On 6 June the cruiser conveyed King George VI and the Queen on a visit the Channel Islands . Jamaica joined the 5th Cruiser Squadron at Colombo in October and replaced HMS Norfolk as the squadron flagship in April 1946 . The ship returned to Devonport for a refit in November 1947 and was transferred to the North America and West Indies Station in August 1948 after its completion . She was sent to Hong Kong in April 1949 and remained in the Far East until the Korean War began in June 1950 . 
 = = = The Korean War = = = 
 Fighting between North and South Korea had broken out on 25 June 1950 , whilst Jamaica was on passage to Japan . She , and her escort HMS Black Swan , were ordered to rendezvous with the American light cruiser USS Juneau off the east coast of Korea to bombard advancing North Korean troops . On 2 July a North Korean supply convoy was returning from Chumunjin when it was spotted by the Allied ships . The escorting motor torpedo boats and motor gun boats turned to fight , but three torpedo boats and both gun boats were sunk without inflicting any damage on the Allied ships . They resumed bombarding coastal targets . Six days later Jamaica was hit by a 75 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) shell that killed six and wounded five . On 15 August the ship bombarded captured harbour facilities in Kunsan . The following month , Jamaica participated in the preparatory bombardment of the island of <unk> @-@ do before the main landing on 15 September . During the landing itself she supported the southern flank of the assault and she was tasked to support the 1st Marine Regiment afterwards . Two days after the landing Jamaica and the American heavy cruiser USS Rochester were attacked by a pair of Yakovlev piston @-@ engined fighters at dawn . One aircraft succeeded in strafing the ship , killing one sailor , before it was shot down by the ship 's guns . Jamaica was sent to refit in Singapore in October and then sailed for home after it was completed . She arrived in Plymouth in February 1952 and was placed in reserve . 
 = = = Post war = = = 
 The ship was the flagship of the Reserve Fleet from May 1953 to 1954 when she was recommissioned for service with the Mediterranean Fleet . Assigned to the 1st Cruiser Squadron , she was refitted in Chatham Dockyard from June 1955 and rejoined her squadron . The ship participated in Operation Musketeer in November 1956 . The ship led the bombardment force covering the Royal Marine landings at Port Said , but she was not permitted to fire her main guns as the Cabinet had banned naval gunfire support by guns larger than 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) . In 1954 she played the part of HMS Exeter in the war film The Battle of the River Plate . Jamaica was placed in reserve again in September 1958 after a port visit to Kiel . She was sold on 14 November 1960 to BISCO . The ship arrived at Arnott Young 's yards at Dalmuir on 20 December 1960 for scrapping . This was not completed until 15 August 1963 at Troon . 
 = Thatgamecompany = 
 Thatgamecompany , LLC ( stylized as thatgamecompany ) is an American independent video game development company co @-@ founded by University of Southern California students Jenova Chen and Kellee Santiago in 2006 . The company was a developer for Sony Computer Entertainment , contracted to create three downloadable games for the PlayStation 3 's PlayStation Network service , and has since secured independent funding . The first of their games is a remake of Chen 's award @-@ winning Flash title Flow , with enhanced visuals and sound , added multiplayer modes and compatibility with the PlayStation 3 's motion sensitive controller . The title was released on the PlayStation Store in 2007 . The company 's second PlayStation 3 game , Flower , was released on the PlayStation Store in 2009 , and their third game , Journey , was released in March 2012 on the PlayStation Store . 
 The company focuses on creating video games that provoke emotional responses from players . Its employees have stated that , while they are not opposed to making action @-@ oriented games , they believe that enough such titles are released by the established video game industry . When designing a game , Thatgamecompany employees start by mapping out what they want the player to feel , rather than by establishing game mechanics . Employees have stated that the company does not plan to produce large , blockbuster titles , due to their belief that the pressure for high sales would stifle innovation . 
 = = History = = 
 In late 2005 , Jenova Chen and Kellee Santiago began thinking about creating their own video game company . The two were in their final year as master 's students in the Interactive Media Program at the University of Southern California 's School of Cinematic Arts , and had just released a video game — Cloud — that they had developed with several other students . The group intended the project as an experiment , meant to reveal whether they could create a game that " expressed something different than video games had in the past " , and to determine the public 's level of interest in video games of that nature . Due to the game 's strongly positive reception , Chen and Santiago began to consider founding their own company , so that they could continue making games like Cloud — in which the design is not based on gameplay mechanics , but on inspiring emotions in players — after they left college . 
 At the time , digital distribution was gaining popularity . The two saw it as an opportunity to create games without the high financial risk of retail distribution , which they believed would require them to first accumulate funds by working for other video game companies . Thatgamecompany was founded on May 15 , 2006 , as Chen and Santiago finished their master 's degrees . The company soon signed a deal with Sony Computer Entertainment , which had been impressed by Chen 's Flash game Flow — a component of his master 's thesis at USC . Thatgamecompany was contracted to produce three games for the upcoming PlayStation Network distribution system , and was given startup funding and a location at Sony 's offices in Los Angeles . 
 Initially , Thatgamecompany consisted of Chen , Santiago , Nick Clark , who had collaborated with Chen on Flow , and John Edwards . Santiago was the president of the company and the producer for its games , Clark was the designer , and Edwards was the lead engineer . Although Chen cofounded the company , he initially worked at Maxis on the game Spore . The company considered adapting Cloud as their first product for Sony , but instead decided on Flow , as it was " more fleshed @-@ out as a design " . They felt that it would be easier than Cloud to develop while they built the company ; no members of the team had experience with managing a business or with creating a commercial game . Several contract workers assisted Thatgamecompany with Flow 's development , including Austin Wintory , the game 's composer . 
 The company had believed that the PlayStation 3 version of Flow could be completed in four months , and that it would be ready for the November 2006 launch of the PlayStation Network . However , when it was released in February 2007 , it did not include " half of the original design " . According to Santiago , the Sony producer assigned to the team had anticipated that they would underestimate the game 's development length , and was not surprised by the delay . The game was well received ; it became the most downloaded game on the PlayStation Network in 2007 , and was nominated for the Best Downloadable Game of the Year award at the 2008 Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences Interactive Achievement Awards , and for the Best Innovation award at the 2007 British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) awards . After its release , an expansion pack and a PlayStation Portable version of the game were created by SuperVillain Studios . Thatgamecompany was not involved in the development of either project beyond ensuring that they retained the same design and art direction as the original , as they were busy creating their next title , Flower . 
 Flower was Thatgamecompany 's " first game outside the safety net of academia " , according to Santiago . Six to nine people were involved at different stages of development . Chen returned to work full @-@ time at the company prior to the game 's development , and served as the creative director . The game 's music was composed by Vincent Diamante , who had worked with Chen and Santiago on Cloud . The game was developed for two years , but the team spent three @-@ fourths of that time in the prototyping stage . After they decided on the game 's elements , Flower was produced in only six months . Like Flow , the game was well received when it was released in February 2009 , selling in the top ten PlayStation Network titles of the year and garnering several awards . After the release of Flower , Thatgamecompany moved into their own building in Los Angeles . 
 The company 's latest project is Journey , which was released on March 13 , 2012 . It was the final game in Thatgamecompany 's three @-@ game contract with Sony , and was developed by a team of fourteen . This team did not include Santiago , who , in order to concentrate on her role as the company 's president , was replaced as a producer by Robin Hunicke . The game was in development for three years , despite having been expected to take one year , and the development team faced several problems in expanding the company from seven employees as they began the game to eighteen , and risked running out of money . Upon release , the game achieved both critical and commercial success . It became the fastest @-@ selling game to date on PlayStation Store in North America and Europe . After the game was released , as the company began work on another project , several employees left for other opportunities . Santiago left the company to pursue other ventures , designer Chris Bell left to form his own studio The <unk> , and Hunicke resigned to work at Tiny Speck . Chen attributes the exodus to the end of Thatgamecompany 's three @-@ game contract , and to the fact that the company had run out of money to pay employees , mandating an unpaid hiatus until the revenue from Journey came in . 
 Once the money from Journey began to arrive , Thatgamecompany brought back several of the employees affected by the cashflow problems , and some new developers . The company , with its contract with Sony complete , raised $ 5 @.@ 5 million in venture capitalist funding , which they hope to use to develop future games for multiple platforms without influences by publishers . The team has been working since the release of Journey on a new , unannounced game , and as of June 2013 was made up of around 12 people , only half of whom worked on Journey . Thatgamecompany hopes to release the game on " as many platforms as possible " , and to include touch controls in an innovative way in the same way their previous games included tilting the controller . On May 27 , 2014 it was reported that the next game from Thatgamecompany had received $ 7 million in funding from Capital Today and a team of other investors . While the unnamed game has been in development , Thatgamecompany has re @-@ released Flow and Flower onto both the PlayStation 4 and the PlayStation Vita , and an updated port of Journey for the PlayStation 4 . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 When Thatgamecompany designs a game , they begin by deciding on the emotions and feelings they wish to invoke in the player . This differs from the approach of most developers , who build from game mechanics or genre features . According to Santiago , the company creates emotional responses to demonstrate the wide range of possible experiences in video games , which she believes is larger than the few — excitement and fear , for example — that are typically presented . Chen has said that the company 's games are meant to evoke emotions more than a message ; he specifically changed the design of Flower when early testers felt that the game promoted green energy . Chen believes that he is " too young " to make a game with a strong message , and so designs the company 's products to avoid overt meanings . Santiago has said that Thatgamecompany 's goal is " to create games that push the boundaries of videogames as a communicative medium , and to create games that appeal to a wide variety of people " . She hopes to change the video game industry with this process , so that other companies approach video games as a " creative medium " instead of a mass product . 
 Thatgamecompany 's employees are not opposed to making action titles , and , as a break from their regular projects , have internally created " exciting " games that were well received by Sony . However , Chen believes that there is no reason for the company to commercially produce such games , as they would not be creating new ideas that justified the cost of remaining an independent studio , as opposed to working for existing game developers . Similarly , Chen does not intend for Thatgamecompany to make " big budget blockbuster games " , as he believes that the financial pressure would stifle innovation . 
 = = Games = = 
 In Flow , the player navigates a series of two @-@ dimensional planes with an aquatic microorganism that evolves by consuming other microorganisms . The game 's design is based on Chen 's research into dynamic difficulty adjustment at the University of Southern California , and on psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 's theoretical concept of mental immersion or flow . It was released for the PlayStation 3 on February 22 , 2007 . 
 Flower was intended as a spiritual successor to Flow . Using the PlayStation 3 's motion sensitive controller , the player controls wind that blows a flower petal through the air . Flying close to flowers results in the player 's petal being followed by other flower petals . Approaching flowers may also have side @-@ effects on the game world , such as bringing vibrant color to previously dead fields or activating stationary windmills . The game features no text or dialogue , forming a narrative arc primarily through visual representation and emotional cues . It was released for the PlayStation 3 on February 12 , 2009 . 
 Journey is Thatgamecompany 's latest game . The player controls a robed figure who wakes up in a desert , with a large mountain in the distance as their destination . While traveling , the player can encounter other players over the Internet , one at a time . Players cannot communicate verbally , but may help each other or not as they wish . The game was released for the PlayStation 3 on March 13 , 2012 . Austin Wintory was nominated for a Grammy Award in 2013 for Best Score Soundtrack for Journey , the first such nomination for a full video game score , but lost to Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross for The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo . 
 = Roger le Poer = 
 Roger le Poer ( sometimes Roger Pauper or Roger Poer ) was a medieval Lord Chancellor from 1135 until 1139 for King Stephen of England . The son of a powerful bishop , Roger owed his position to his family connections . He lost his office when his father and other relatives lost power . Arrested along with his father , Roger was used to secure the surrender of a castle held by his mother and then disappeared from history . 
 = = Background and early life = = 
 Roger was the son of Roger of Salisbury , Lord Chancellor for King Henry I of England and Bishop of Salisbury , and Matilda of Ramsbury . It is possible that Roger of Salisbury was married to Matilda prior to his elevation to the episcopate , but this is unlikely . Because their son Roger le Poer was described as " young " in 1139 , it is most likely that he was born after his father 's consecration as bishop in 1107 . A biographer of Roger of Salisbury , Edward <unk> , has argued that Roger le Poer is the same person as Roger , the archdeacon of Berkshire who died in the 1160s . Another possibility , that the younger Roger was the same as Roger of Ramsbury , archdeacon of Wiltshire , is less likely , as it is known that Roger of Ramsbury was not closely related to Adelelm , the nephew or son of Roger of Salisbury . The historian Diana Greenway in the Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae 1066 – 1300 takes this view . 
 = = Chancellor = = 
 The younger Roger 's family was a powerful one in England - not only was his father the Bishop of Salisbury , but he also held the administration of the government in his hands . The older Roger had the powers of the office of justiciar , without having actually been appointed to that office , as a continuation of the power he had held during the second part of the reign of Henry I. The elder Roger 's two nephews – Nigel , who was Bishop of Ely and had previously been Lord Treasurer , and Alexander , who was Bishop of Lincoln - both held important bishoprics , and another nephew or son held the <unk> from 1136 . This was Adelelm , who may have been a full brother to Roger le Poer . The family also controlled a number of castles throughout England . William of Malmesbury , a medieval chronicler , claimed that the younger Roger 's appointment as chancellor was the price demanded by the elder Roger for the bishop 's support of Stephen as king after the death of King Henry I of England . Roger served as chancellor from 1135 until 24 June 1139 . 
 Roger travelled with the king , often accompanying him in the royal progresses around England . In late 1136 or 1137 , Roger was with the king at a court called at Westminster which heard a complaint by the Holy Trinity Priory in London that <unk> de Tany , the castellan of the Tower of London , had taken land that belonged to the priory . In the end , the priory regained custody of their land . In March 1137 Roger was with the king right before the king sailed to Normandy , as the chancellor witnessed a charter of the king just prior to his departure . As chancellor , Roger was a witness on over 60 royal writs . 
 = = Arrest and exile = = 
 In the middle of 1139 , rumours were current that the family was going to defect to Stephen 's rival for the throne , the Empress Matilda . These rumours appear to have been started by a group of nobles led by twin brothers Waleran de Beaumont , the Count of Meulan , and Robert de Beaumont , the Earl of Leicester , with Alan of Brittany . Whether Roger and his family really intended to switch their support to Matilda is unclear , but unlikely . In late June , a fight broke out between some of the retainers of Alan and men in the service of Roger 's family . This fight was the excuse for the king moving against Roger 's family . Both the elder and younger Roger were arrested , along with Alexander , but Nigel escaped . Matilda of Ramsbury , who held out in Devizes Castle against the king , was persuaded to surrender the castle to Stephen when the king threatened to hang the younger Roger if she did not yield . The younger Roger was restrained with chains and put on a high platform in view of the castle with a noose around his neck . 
 The name le <unk> , or <unk> , means " pauper " and was not given to Roger until after his and his father 's fall from power in 1139 . It is possible the new name was bestowed because he could have expected to receive a bishopric after his time as chancellor , which did not happen because of his family 's disgrace . Another possible reason for the name was to contrast with his father 's wealth . It is unlikely that he was actually poor , as his family was wealthy and powerful . The historian Francis West described the base of the family 's power as " control of the important offices of royal government " . 
 Roger was sent into exile after his family 's disgrace . If he is the same person as the archdeacon of Berkshire , he died in the middle of the 1160s , but no other sure information is known about him after his exile . 
 = Arizona State Route 89A = 
 State Route 89A ( SR 89A ) is an 83 @.@ 85 @-@ mile ( 134 @.@ 94 km ) state highway that runs from Prescott north to Flagstaff in the U.S. state of Arizona . The highway begins at SR 89 and heads northward from Prescott , entering Jerome . From Jerome , the route then heads to Cottonwood and Sedona . The highway is notable for its scenic value as it passes through Sedona and the Oak Creek Canyon . The route then enters Flagstaff , where it crosses Interstate 17 ( I @-@ 17 ) and I @-@ 40 . The highway ends at I @-@ 40 Business in Flagstaff . What is now SR 89A became a state highway in the late 1920s as SR 79 . The highway was extended and improved several times through 1938 . SR 79 was renumbered to U.S. Route 89A ( US 89A ) in 1941 and then to SR 89A in the early 1990s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 89A runs from its southern terminus in Prescott northward through the towns of Jerome , Cottonwood and Sedona to its northern terminus in Flagstaff . The highway is known for its scenic views as it passes through the Sedona and Oak Creek Canyon . 
 = = = Prescott to Jerome = = = 
 The southern terminus of SR 89A is located at a junction with SR 89 north of Prescott near the Antelope Hills Golf Course and Ernest A. Love Field . The road heads east from the junction with SR 89 as a four @-@ lane divided highway with diamond interchanges located at most intersections . It continues as a divided highway until it reaches Fain Road in Prescott Valley . The route continues beyond this intersection as a two @-@ lane undivided highway . 
 As SR 89A moves to the northeast , it begins to ascend the Black Hills mountain range . The roadway follows the terrain through a series of hairpin turns as it climbs in elevation . Once SR 89A reaches passes over the mountains , it begins its descent into the Verde Valley . During its descent , SR 89A enters the town of Jerome . In Jerome , the highway provides access to the nearby Jerome State Historic Park . 
 = = = Jerome to Sedona = = = 
 Upon exiting Jerome , SR 89A heads northeast through the Verde Valley . After it enters the town of Clarkdale , it turns southeast at a roundabout with Clarkdale Parkway . The route continues towards the southeast through Clarkdale before entering the town of Cottonwood . There , the highway starts heading east at Cottonwood Street before reaching an intersection with Main Street . 
 The historic route of 89A from Clarkdale to Cottonwood , when it was called U.S. Route 89A , ran through the old downtown areas of each city . From Jerome , the route continued along 11th Street ( now Clarkdale Parkway ) , turning right at Main Street in Clarkdale , and then right again at Broadway . It continued past <unk> National Monument , becoming Main Street in Cottonwood , and providing access to Dead Horse Ranch State Park . The route intersects Cottonwood Street , where the bypass route now intersects Main Street . This portion is now signed as " Historic U.S. 89A . " 
 Following the intersection with Cottonwood Street , the road follows Main Street to an intersection with SR 260 , which heads to the south toward Camp Verde and I @-@ 17 . SR 89A then moves northeastward towards Sedona . 
 As the highway leaves Cottonwood , it again becomes a divided highway north of Rocking Chair Road , heading into desert . Before reaching Sedona , SR 89A provides access to Red Rock State Park . The route remains a divided highway until it reaches Sedona , an arts and resort community known for its red sandstone formations . As it enters the city of Sedona , the route is known as the Si Birch Memorial Highway . The route continues east through Sedona , providing access to the Sedona Airport . SR 89A continues towards the east through Sedona to an intersection with SR 179 , which heads south from this intersection through the southern part of Sedona to provide access to I @-@ 17 . 
 = = = Sedona to Flagstaff = = = 
 The highway heads northeast into a wooded area from Sedona and follows Oak Creek as it enters Oak Creek Canyon . SR 89A then curves to the north as it follows the creek and provides access to Slide Rock State Park along this portion of the highway . The roadway leaves the creek as it begins to ascend through the canyon . Upon ascending , the road goes through a series of hairpin turns ( no trucks over 50 ft . ) towards the Mogollon Rim . The roadway continues northward away from the canyon towards Flagstaff . It curves northeastward as it passes to the west of the Forest Highlands Golf Club . The route continues to the northeast towards I @-@ 17 near Flagstaff Pulliam Airport . SR 89A begins to run concurrently with I @-@ 17 as a freeway northward . The two highways continue north to an interchange with I @-@ 40 , where I @-@ 17 terminates . The route continues north along Milton Road , passing to the west of Northern Arizona University before reaching its northern terminus at Interstate 40 Business in Flagstaff . 
 = = History = = 
 The routing of SR 89A was first defined as a state highway in 1927 as SR 79 by the Arizona Department of Transportation ( ADOT ) . At the time , only the portion from Prescott to Clarkdale was built , but the remaining portion to Flagstaff had been planned . By 1929 , the highway had been extended north to Sedona , although the entire highway was not paved at this time . A graded dirt road was built the following year between Flagstaff and Sedona . The southern half of the section between Sedona and Flagstaff had been improved to a gravel road by 1934 , with the northern half under construction . The next year , the construction on the northern section near Flagstaff was complete . The southern end of the highway near Prescott and the section between Jerome and Cottonwood had been paved by this time . By 1938 , the entire route had been paved . 
 By 1941 , the highway was redesignated from SR 79 to US 89A . Before the establishment of the route for I @-@ 17 , the only route to Flagstaff was through Prescott . There were two routes available : US 89A through Jerome , Cottonwood , Clarkdale , Sedona and Oak Creek Canyon or north through Chino Valley via US 89 to US 66 . The route was redesignated from US 89A to SR 89A in 1993 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Spur route = = 
 Fain Road / Prescott Loop is a short , route running roughly northwest to southeast , along Fain Road in Prescott Valley . Its primary original purpose was to provide a direct route from SR 69 to SR 79 and was originally designated as SR 179 and went to west <unk> meeting than SR 79 ( Jerome JCT ) now known as 89A . It now moves west away from West Mingus and towards Robert Road in Prescott Valley where it meets 89A . The road was originally two lanes wide , but it has since been widened to a 4 @-@ lane divided highway and Future plans to make it part of the Prescott Loop Freeway system that will connect Future Interstate 11 and Interstate 17 via Freeway . 
 = Play @-@ Doh = 
 Play @-@ Doh is a modeling compound used by young children for art and craft projects at home and in school . Composed of flour , water , salt , boric acid , and mineral oil , the product was first manufactured in Cincinnati , Ohio , U.S. , as a wallpaper cleaner in the 1930s . The product was reworked and marketed to Cincinnati schools in the mid @-@ 1950s . Play @-@ Doh was demonstrated at an educational convention in 1956 and prominent department stores opened retail accounts . Advertisements promoting Play @-@ Doh on influential children 's television shows in 1957 furthered the product 's sales . Since its launch on the toy market in the mid @-@ 1950s , Play @-@ Doh has generated a considerable amount of ancillary merchandise such as The Fun Factory . In 2003 , the Toy Industry Association named Play @-@ Doh in its " Century of Toys List " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The non @-@ toxic , non @-@ staining , reusable modeling compound that came to be known as " Play @-@ Doh " was a pliable , putty @-@ like substance concocted by Noah McVicker of Cincinnati @-@ based soap manufacturer <unk> Products . It was devised at the request of Kroger Grocery , which wanted a product that could clean coal residue from wallpaper . Following World War II , with the transition from coal @-@ based home heating to natural gas and the resulting decrease in internal soot , and the introduction of <unk> vinyl @-@ based wallpaper , the market for wallpaper cleaning putty decreased substantially . McVicker 's nephew , Joe McVicker , joined <unk> with the remit to save the company from bankruptcy . Joe McVicker was the brother @-@ in @-@ law of nursery school teacher Kay Zufall , and Zufall had seen a newspaper article about making art projects with the wallpaper cleaning putty . Her students enjoyed it , and she persuaded Bill <unk> ( who also sold the putty ) and Joe McVicker to manufacture it as a child ’ s toy . Zufall and her husband came up with the name Play @-@ Doh ; Joe McVicker and <unk> had wanted to call it " Rainbow Modeling Compound " . 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 Joe McVicker took Play @-@ Doh to an educational convention for manufacturers of school supplies , and Woodward & Lothrop , a department store in Washington , DC began selling the compound . In 1956 , the <unk> formed the Rainbow Crafts Company to make and sell Play @-@ Doh . Also in 1956 , a three @-@ pack of 7 @-@ ounce cans was added to the product line , and , after in @-@ store demonstrations , Macy 's of New York and Marshall Field 's of Chicago opened retail accounts . In 1957 , chemist Dr. Tien Liu reduced Play Doh 's salt content ( thus allowing models to dry without losing their color ) , and Play @-@ Doh ads were telecast on Captain Kangaroo , Ding Dong School , and Romper Room . In 1958 , Play @-@ Doh 's sales reached nearly $ 3 million . 
 = = = Subsequent developments = = = 
 In 1964 , Play @-@ Doh was exported to Britain , France , and Italy . In the 1980s , its cardboard can ( with a rust @-@ prone metal bottom ) was scuttled for a more cost effective plastic container . By 1965 , Rainbow Crafts was issued a patent for Play @-@ Doh . Also in 1965 , General Mills purchased Rainbow Crafts and all rights to Play @-@ Doh for $ 3 million , placing the compound with its Kenner Products subsidiary . In 1971 , Rainbow Crafts and Kenner Products merged , and , in 1987 , the Tonka Corporation bought the two . In 1991 , Hasbro became Play @-@ Doh 's owner , and continues to manufacture the product today through its preschool division . In 1996 , gold and silver were added to Play @-@ Doh 's palette to celebrate its 40th anniversary . 
 = = = Mascots = = = 
 Play @-@ Doh packaging was briefly illustrated with children in the mid @-@ 1950s , but replaced by an elf mascot which , in 1960 , was superseded by Play @-@ Doh Pete , a smock and beret @-@ wearing cartoonish boy . In 2002 , Play @-@ Doh Pete 's beret was replaced with a baseball cap . Since 2011 , living Play @-@ Doh cans named the Doh @-@ <unk> have been seen in adverts . 
 = = Ingredients = = 
 Play @-@ Doh 's current manufacturer , Hasbro , reveals the compound is primarily a mixture of water , salt , and flour , while its 2004 United States patent indicates it is composed of water , a starch @-@ based binder , a retrogradation inhibitor , salt , lubricant , surfactant , preservative , <unk> , <unk> , fragrance , and color . A petroleum additive gives the compound a smooth feel , and borax prevents mold from developing . Many home @-@ made recipes will include salt , flour or corn starch , a vegetable oil ( such as canola or olive oil ) and cream of tartar . 
 = = Related merchandise = = 
 In 1960 , the Play @-@ Doh Fun Factory ( a toy press that extrudes the compound in various shapes ) was invented by Bob <unk> and Bill Dale . The Play @-@ Doh Fuzzy Pumper Barber & Beauty Shop of 1977 featured a figurine whose extruded " hair " could be styled . Making its debut in 1996 for computer @-@ savvy young modelers was an educational software CD @-@ ROM game , Play @-@ Doh Creations , and , in 2003 , the Play @-@ Doh Creativity Table was made available . Play @-@ Doh related merchandise introduced during the 2007 anniversary year included the Play @-@ Doh Birthday Bucket , the Play @-@ Doh Fifty Colors Pack , the Fuzzy Pumper Crazy Cuts ( a reworking of the 1977 Fuzzy Pumper Barber & Beauty Shop ) , and the Play @-@ Doh Creativity Center . In 2012 , " Play @-@ Doh Plus " was created . It is lighter , more pliable , and softer than regular Play @-@ Doh . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 More than two billion cans of Play @-@ Doh were sold between 1955 and 2005 , and , in 2005 , Play @-@ <unk> was being sold in 75 countries around the world at 95 million cans a year . In the United States , more than 6 @,@ 000 stores carry Play @-@ Doh . 
 To mark Play @-@ Doh 's fiftieth anniversary , Greece created a limited @-@ edition fragrance inspired by Play @-@ Doh 's odor for " highly @-@ creative people , who seek a whimsical scent reminiscent of their childhood . " 
 Play @-@ Doh was inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame at The Strong in Rochester , New York , in 1998 . 
 In 2003 , the Toy Industry Association placed Play @-@ Doh into its " Century of Toys List " , a roll call of the 100 most memorable and most creative toys of the twentieth century . 
 In late 2014 the company offered to replace a new " Play @-@ Doh Cake Mountain " <unk> tool , for free , after receiving complaints about the toy 's " phallic shape " . 
 = = Film = = 
 In April 2 , 2015 , 20th Century Fox announced to work on a Play @-@ Doh movie with Hasbro Studios and Chernin Entertainment producing , Jason Micallef writing and Paul Feig directing from his production company <unk> . 
 = Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes = 
 Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes is a first @-@ person , action @-@ adventure video game developed by Retro Studios and published by Nintendo for the GameCube video game console . It is the seventh published game in the Metroid series , a direct sequel to Metroid Prime , and the first game in the series with a multiplayer feature . Echoes was released in North America , Europe , and Australia in 2004 ; and in Japan in May 2005 . 
 The story of Echoes follows bounty hunter Samus Aran after she is sent to rescue Galactic Federation Marines from a ship near Aether , a planet inhabited by a race known as the Luminoth . There , she discovers that the troops were slaughtered by the Ing , a race that came from an alternate dimension of Aether . Samus must travel to three temples to ensure the destruction of the Ing , while battling Space Pirates and her mysterious doppelgänger called Dark Samus . 
 Retro decided to make the game different from its predecessor by adding more focus on storyline and including new gameplay elements . Nintendo launched a viral marketing campaign to promote the game that included several websites written as if taking place in the Metroid universe . Echoes ' single player mode and graphics were praised by critics , while its steep difficulty level and multiplayer components were met less positively . Since its release , Echoes has received several video game industry awards , as well as spots on " top games " lists by Nintendo Power and IGN . Over 800 @,@ 000 copies of the game were sold worldwide . In 2009 , an enhanced version was released for Wii as a standalone game in Japan and as part of Metroid Prime : Trilogy internationally . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes is a first @-@ person action @-@ adventure game that takes place in an open @-@ ended world with interconnected regions . Gameplay revolves around solving puzzles to uncover secrets , platform jumping , and shooting enemies . Echoes features two parallel dimensions , Light Aether and Dark Aether , where changes in either dimension often reflect changes in the other . Although the maps in both dimensions have the same general layout , rooms often vary in their designs , creatures , and objects . Progress through the game requires both dimensions to be explored , using power @-@ ups that Samus acquires over time . Equipment players collect include the Screw Attack , which allows Samus to somersault in midair and off certain surfaces , and new beam weapons that have limited ammunition . 
 Dark Aether 's atmosphere is caustic and damages Samus 's Power Suit , requiring the player to move between designated " safe zones " that allow Samus 's health to be regained slowly . Safe zones are either permanent , or need to be activated by firing certain beam weapons at force field generators . Power Suit upgrades can reduce or nullify damage caused by the atmosphere . 
 The game 's head @-@ up display simulates the inside of Samus 's helmet and features a radar , map , missile ammunition meter , health meter , and statistics on bosses . Several visors are available , and each performs a different function . One , also seen in the previous game , is a scanner that searches for enemy weaknesses , interfaces with mechanisms such as force fields and elevators and retrieves text entries from certain sources . The others reveal and highlight interdimensional objects or cloaked enemies , and create a visual representation of sound . 
 Echoes also features a multiplayer mode that allows up to four players to engage in combat using a split screen . It has six arenas and two modes : Deathmatch , in which players attempt to kill their opponents as many times as possible within a set amount of time ; and Bounty , which focuses on collecting coins that injured characters drop . Multiplayer in Echoes features the same control scheme as the single @-@ player mode , including the lock @-@ on system for circle strafing while targeting . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Echoes takes place on a rogue planet in the Dasha region , Aether , inhabited by a race known as the Luminoth . The Luminoth lived peacefully , protecting the planet 's pure natural energy , which they call the " Light of Aether " . Five decades before the game 's events , a Phazon meteor collides into the planet and leaves a scar causing environmental damage and splitting the planetary energy . The split creates another planet in an alternate dimension , Dark Aether , a mirror version of Aether that is dark , arid , and has a poisonous atmosphere . Dark Aether becomes home to the Ing , cruel shapeshifting creatures who intend to destroy the Luminoth , and are able to possess bodies of the living , the dead , and the artificially intelligent . Eventually , the Ing and the Luminoth engage in a war over the planet 's energy — whichever race controls it is capable of destroying the other . 
 Around this time , Space Pirates set up a base on Aether after detecting the mutagenic substance Phazon on the planet . A Galactic Federation Marine Corps patrol ship encounters one of the Pirates ' supply ships leaving the planet and an altercation follows . Both ships suffer heavy damage , and after the Federation loses contact with the Marines , it calls the bounty hunter Samus Aran to investigate . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 While looking for the Marines near Aether , Samus 's ship is damaged by severe lightning storms from the planet . Said storms have caused electromagnetic interference that prevented the Marines from communicating with the Federation . Samus finds the troops dead and surrounded by hive creatures called Splinters . Deceased Marines suddenly rise and attack her , apparently possessed , and she fights them off . Samus then encounters her evil doppelgänger , Dark Samus , for the first time , and Dark Samus jumps through a portal . Samus decides to follow her through it and into Dark Aether , where Samus is attacked by a group of dark creatures called Ing , who steal the weapons from Samus 's suit before pushing her back through the portal . 
 Upon returning to Aether , Samus learns that the Marines were attacked and killed by Ing @-@ possessed Splinters , and decides to enter a nearby alien temple structure to look for clues . When she reaches the structure , she meets U @-@ Mos , the last remaining sentinel of the Luminoth , an alien race that have fought against the Ing for decades . They are now on the verge of defeat . He tells Samus that after a meteor struck Aether , the impact was so devastating , it created a vile trans @-@ dimensional duplicate Aether , called " Dark Aether " . The toxic world hosts a deadly and aggressive species called Ing . He also tells Samus that the Ing have taken virtually all of the ' Light of Aether ' , the entire collective planetary energy for Aether that keeps the planet stable , and begs her to retrieve it . As if any world gains all this energy , the other will perish . 
 Samus goes to three regions — the Agon Wastes , a parched , rocky , desert wasteland region ; <unk> Bog , a drenched swamp area that houses a partially submerged <unk> ; and the Sanctuary Fortress , a highly advanced cliffside fortress built by the Luminoth filled with corrupted robots that serves as the Ing hive in Dark Aether — to retrieve the Light of Aether and return it to the Luminoth temples . Samus fights Space Pirates , Dark Samus , and monstrous Ing guardians on her mission . 
 After Samus has retrieved three pieces of the Light of Aether , she enters the Ing 's Sky Temple and faces the Emperor Ing , the strongest Ing who guards the remaining Light of Aether in the Dark Aether . Samus defeats the creature and retrieves the last remaining energy as Dark Aether , becomes critically unstable and collapses ; however , her path out of the temple is blocked by a horribly altered and unstable Dark Samus . After defeating her foe , Samus escapes as the dark world disappears around her . Returning to U @-@ Mos , she finds that the Luminoth were in a state of hibernation but have now awakened . After a brief celebration , Samus leaves Aether in her repaired gunship . If the player has collected 100 percent of the power @-@ ups , a post @-@ credits scene shows Dark Samus has survived the implosion , and now reforming herself above Aether . 
 = = Development = = 
 After the critical and commercial success of Metroid Prime , Nintendo asked Retro Studios to produce a sequel . The developers decided against recycling the features of the first game , and instead used new sound models , weapon effects , and art designs . They also implemented the Screw Attack and wall jumping features seen in previous Metroid games , which were not incorporated in the first Prime due to time constraints . Another element considered for the previous game was the multiplayer component . Since the game was a first @-@ person adventure and its deathmatch mode could not easily replicate other shooters in the market , Retro just tried to " make a multiplayer experience that fans of Metroid games would instantly know and recognise " . 
 The staff opted for a more immersive storyline , with increased use of cut scenes and a plot that focused less on the Space Pirates and Metroids that permeate the rest of the series . Retro decided that the game would follow a theme of light and dark , which originated from " something that everyone understands : the conflict between good and evil " . Mike Wikan , the game 's senior designer , elaborated on the theme : " We wanted a push and pull , the whole game is pushing and pulling you back and forth between the dark and the light . It ended up being that we wanted something that would feed into that dichotomy , that conflict between the two , and how the player 's basic abilities reflect that . " The developers asked the producers of The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past , another Nintendo game , for advice because the game also used the theme of parallel worlds . 
 In developing Dark Samus , Retro wanted to create a character that was similar to Samus and be the same size , as opposed to the enormous monsters of Metroid Prime . One of the inspirations for the character was a boss battle in Metroid : Zero Mission , where Samus fights a mirror image of herself . The developers considered Dark Samus a " natural choice " for the game because it fit in well with the " dramatic feel of dark and light " . 
 Retro decided to make the game more challenging than Metroid Prime — which was supposed to familiarize players with the control scheme — and felt that " with the second Prime , we had the ability or the freedom " to do so . They wanted Echoes to be focused towards a hardcore audience by making the player " always worried about his health " , so more mini @-@ bosses were added to provide unique boss fights . After the game 's release , the developers admitted that it was more difficult to develop than they first imagined , and Michael Kelbaugh , Retro Studios ' president , commented : " We wanted to expand and add to the title , and not just slam out a sequel . Nintendo doesn 't do things that way . " Retro tried to include some extras , such as a hidden version of Super Metroid , but were halted by the short development time . Producer Kensuke Tanabe later revealed that the game was just about thirty percent complete three months before the strict deadline Nintendo had set for a release in the 2004 holiday season . 
 The music for Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes was composed by Kenji Yamamoto . The themes used for areas on Dark Aether are dark variations of the themes used for the same areas on Light Aether . Some remixes of music from the previous Metroid games were also used , with the escape theme being a remix of Metroid 's " Escape " theme , the " Hunters " multiplayer theme taking on Super Metroid 's " Upper Brinstar " theme , and the theme for the underwater <unk> region , the " Lower Brinstar " theme from the same game . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Versions = = = 
 Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes was originally released for the GameCube in North America on November 15 , 2004 , Europe on November 26 , and in Australia on December 2 . The PAL version of Echoes have lacked the standard 50 Hz mode , and offered 60 Hz mode only . In Japan , it was later released on May 26 , 2005 , titled Metroid Prime 2 : Dark Echoes . 
 Echoes was re @-@ released in Japan in 2009 for the Wii as part of the New Play Control ! series . It has revamped controls that use the Wii Remote 's pointing functionality , similar to those of Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption . The credit system from Corruption is also included to unlock the original bonus content , as well as the ability to take snapshots of gameplay . The difficulty of the boss battles in Echoes was also lowered . Metroid Prime , Echoes , and Corruption were bundled together on a single disc as Metroid Prime : Trilogy , released in North America on August 24 , 2009 . Both Prime and Echoes contain all of the enhancements found in their Japanese New Play Control ! counterparts . On January 29 , 2015 , the compilation became available for download from the Wii U 's Nintendo eShop . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Nintendo launched several websites to initiate a viral marketing campaign for Echoes , with inspiration drawn from Halo 2 's alternate reality game I Love Bees . The websites included Luminoth Temple , an Internet forum ; Channel 51 , a conspiracy theory website that featured grainy QuickTime videos of Metroid Prime 2 as if it were footage of extraterrestrials ; Orbis Labs , which sold a " self @-@ contained armored machine " called " Battle Sphere " , similar to the Morph Ball ; and Athena Astronautics , which advertised sending women into space , featured a blog , and offered job positions for bounty hunters on <unk> Athena Astronautics gave a random selection of 25 people who replied to the offer an " interactive training manual " , which was in fact a free copy of Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes . 
 A Metroid @-@ related spoof of " I Love Bees " appeared online in October 2004 , to which Nintendo reacted by stating that it was not involved with it . The campaign featured similarly named domain names such as <unk> , which each had an image of Samus with the caption : " All your bees are belong to us . Never send a man to do a woman 's job . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes was critically acclaimed upon release . When comparing it to its predecessor , Metroid Prime , GameSpot 's Brad Shoemaker said that Echoes was as good as its predecessor , and delivered everything he expected . IGN 's Matt Casamassina called the gameplay " superb " and " nearly flawless " , and Vicious Sid of GamePro praised Echoes as " an extraordinary return to form " . Echoes was considered one of the best single @-@ player experiences on the GameCube by Kristan Reed of Eurogamer , who also considered the story to be " intricately designed and elaborately constructed into a coherent environment " . GameSpot and IGN praised the campaign as a lengthy and rewarding adventure and appreciated the minimum 20 hours required to complete the game . The game was considered suitable for players of any age by Computer and Video Games , which called Echoes essential for anyone who owned a GameCube . The theme 's dynamics between dark and light was lauded by GamePro , along with the " simple , quirky , and ridiculously addictive " multiplayer mode . 
 Echoes 's graphics and design received significant praise ; GameSpot considered it some of the best on the GameCube , and IGN called it " gorgeous " and " one of the prettiest GameCube titles " . The Guardian 's Nick Gillett found the game entertaining and stated that its maps , terrain , and bestiary made the game an amazing epic space adventure . Bryn Williams from GameSpy complimented the game 's controls and level design , commenting that the game was challenging but fair . 
 A major criticism of Echoes focused on the game 's high difficulty , with Game Informer declaring that " not only are the boss fights unforgiving , the environment is sometimes difficult to follow " . Some reviewers found it difficult to search for the Sky Temple keys . GameSpot criticized this mechanism and called it " a scavenger hunt much tougher than the rest of the game " , and 1UP.com said that the only purpose it served was to artificially extend the game 's length . The game 's multiplayer mode was also considered unsatisfying . GameSpy called it a " secondary feature " , The Age 's Jason Hill called it " bland and dull " and Eurogamer said that the single @-@ player features did not translate well to that mode . Game Informer criticized the multiplayer mode because of its inclusion of the lock @-@ on mechanism , considering it a feature that made multiplayer too simple . 
 IGN was critical of Echoes ' graphics and noted that the textures sometimes blurred when viewed up close , and the frame rate occasionally decreased . Publications including IGN and The Independent considered the gameplay too similar to Metroid Prime , while GamePro was unhappy that the game did not have a customizable control scheme . Computer and Video Games and The Age were disappointed that Echoes was not as innovative in terms of gameplay as Metroid Prime . The Age 's review also found the control scheme " unwieldy " and the difficulty " unforgiving " . Serge <unk> of The Observer noted there were too few opportunities to save the game while playing , an aspect X @-@ Play also criticized by saying that most of the game 's difficulty was " because the save system is poorly implemented and downright cheap " . 
 Echoes sold 470 @,@ 000 copies in North America in December 2004 . It was the ninth best @-@ selling game in its debut month in Japan with 16 @,@ 105 copies sold , ranking it behind Yu Yu Hakusho Forever and Hanjuku Hero 4 : 7 @-@ Jin no Hanjuku Hero . By August 2009 , 800 @,@ 000 copies had sold worldwide . Echoes won an award in almost every category it was nominated for at the 2004 Nintendo Power Awards , and won awards for Best GameCube Game of 2004 from IGN , Electronic Gaming Monthly , and GameSpy . It was rated the 174th best game made on a Nintendo system in Nintendo Power 's Top 200 Games list , the 74th best game by GameFAQs users , the 15th best GameCube game by IGN , and the 13th best by GameSpy . 
 = Delrina = 
 Delrina was a Canadian software company , which was founded in 1988 and was subsequently acquired by the American software firm Symantec in 1995 . The company sold electronic form products , including PerForm and FormFlow , but was best known for its WinFax software package , which enabled computers equipped with fax modems to transmit copies of documents to standalone fax machines or other similarly equipped computers . 
 Delrina also produced a set of screensavers , including one that resulted in a well @-@ publicized lawsuit for copyright and trademark infringement ( Berkeley Systems Inc. v. Delrina ) . The case set a precedent in American law whereby satiric commercial software products are not subject to the same First Amendment exemptions as parodic cartoons or literature . 
 It also sold online communications software with its WinComm product and produced a Web browser called Cyberjack . The firm was sold to Symantec in 1995 . After the company was acquired by Symantec , various divisions were sold off and several of Delrina 's former executives went on to found venture capital firms . 
 = = Corporate history = = 
 Delrina was founded in Toronto in 1988 by Zimbabwean expatriate Bert Amato , South African expatriates Mark Skapinker and Dennis Bennie and American Lou Ryan . Delrina was Bennie 's second major entrepreneurial start up after co @-@ founding Mission Electronics , a home theatre equipment company . Delrina 's business strategy was to " establish technical and market leadership in niche markets " , which it accomplished with its electronic form and PC @-@ based fax software . A year before the firm was incorporated , Amato and Skapinker had quit their jobs to start work on an electronic forms product which would eventually become PerForm . Both would later meet with Bennie , who was then the Chief Executive Officer of <unk> Systems International , a firm that made business software for Hewlett @-@ Packard . Bennie facilitated an initial seed investment of $ 1 @.@ 5 million CAD to finance a new start @-@ up company , " Delrina " , to develop this idea . In return , <unk> received 51 % of Delrina 's shares . 
 Delrina 's initial corporate headquarters was located in a small office on Mount Pleasant St in Toronto . A sales office was set up in San Jose , California which became its worldwide sales center run by co @-@ founder Lou Ryan . From its Toronto headquarters , the company expanded by establishing branch offices in Kirkland , Washington ; Washington , DC ; and Lexington , Massachusetts . Other offices were later established in the United Kingdom , France , and Germany . 
 = = = Origins of PerForm = = = 
 Delrina 's initial product offering was an electronic forms application called PerForm . Amato and Skapinker came up with the idea for the product while working as consultants that what their clients wanted was a way to fill in forms electronically , rather than an easier way to create paper @-@ based forms from a computer . There was significant and long @-@ term uptake of electronic forms products within governmental agencies both in Canada and the United States , the latter spurred on in particular by the requirements of the <unk> Reduction Act to reduce the total amount of paperwork handled by the United States government . One of the firm 's early major software deals included a multi @-@ year agreement to sell PerForm to the U.S. Navy in 1990 . Soon after the software was installed on Compaq laptops that accompanied U.S. troops during the First Gulf War , where it was used to requisition " everything from Coca @-@ Cola to privies " . Other significant volume sales went to 3M and Rockwell International . What helped set apart Delrina 's electronic forms from its competitors in product reviews included its easy @-@ to @-@ use interface , its extensive development tools , and its comparatively low price . It also scored highly when it came to workflow and routing functions as well as security features . In early 1991 InfoWorld selected PerForm Pro as its " Product of the Year " in the electronic forms category , and PC World Magazine gave the product it 's " Best Buy " designation . PerForm proved to be successful in its niche , effectively capturing the retail market by 1993 . 
 In the early 1990s Delrina made deals with value @-@ added resellers like NCR and GE Information Services who had the staff to customize the product to the needs of corporate customers looking to move away from paper @-@ based forms . The forms products sold well and the annual revenues for the firm grew steadily ; 1989 annual revenues ( in Canadian dollars ) were $ 5 @,@ 630 @,@ 393 , in 1990 they were $ 8 @,@ 759 @,@ 623 , and by 1991 they were $ 11 @,@ 894 @,@ 474 . 
 = = = Struggle for profitability = = = 
 Despite the growing revenues , the company struggled to make a profit . Heavy expenditures — primarily marketing along with research and development costs — drove the firm 's losses from $ 500 @,@ 000 from 1989 to $ 1 @.@ 5 million by the end of the following fiscal year . For fiscal 1991 it posted a net loss of $ 1 @.@ 7 million . 
 Needing an infusion of funds , in April 1991 Bennie managed to raise $ 7 @.@ 7 million in a private placement . 
 The firm subsequently sought to find ways to more widely distribute its electronic form software , with Bennie saying in May 1992 that " we 've barely scratched the surface of our market " . 
 In early 1992 word leaked to the press on a possible merger between WordStar International Inc . , and soon after both firms made public the fact that they had signed a letter of intent on a merger deal . However , just over a month later word came out that the merger talks had fallen through , at the time cited to differences over " complex legal , accounting and management issues " . WordStar , whose share of the word processing market had by that time fallen to 5 % ( from a high of 80 % ) was seeking Delrina 's advanced technologies while Delrina was hoping to utilize the other firm 's established global sales network . Despite the failure of the merger talks , Bennie said soon after that " we 're still convinced that a larger sales force would give us the kind of marketing clout we need . I still believe that it 's possible for us to become a global operation " . Not long after WordStar merged with Spinnaker Software Corporation and <unk> Software Products Inc. to form <unk> International . Delrina subsequently signed deals with Wallace Computer Services , <unk> and NCR Corporation in an effort to gain greater sales distribution of its products . 
 = = = Development of WinFax = = = 
 In a deliberate attempt to diversify the business , The Company chose to move into the fax software market with its WinFax product . Software developer Tony Davis ( another South African expatriate who had moved to Canada ) was initially hired as a consultant to work on the forms line of products in the late 1980s , soon afterwards becoming part of that team . In his spare time he developed a prototype of what would become the first WinFax product , with the agreement that Delrina would be its publisher . In 1990 Delrina devoted a relatively small space to this new product at that year 's COMDEX ( a computer trade show ) , under a sign that said simply : " Send a Fax from Your PC " . It garnered the most attention of any Delrina product being demonstrated at that show . This interest convinced the founding partners of the commercial viability of the product . Tony Davis went on to sell his product idea to Delrina , and stayed on as its lead software architect and designer . 
 The initial version of WinFax only worked on fax modems containing a specific chipset , and was only capable of sending faxes ; it could not receive them . This was remedied with the launch of the WinFax PRO 2 @.@ 0 product during the summer of 1991 . One of the key factors that differentiated this version of WinFax from other fax software packages of the time was the deliberate attempt to make the program compatible with all fax / modems . Prior to the introduction of WinFax PRO 2 @.@ 0 , competitors concentrated primarily on building software that would only work with a single brand of fax / modem hardware . At the same time that it launched its WinFax PRO 2 @.@ 0 product , Delrina also announced an OEM version of the same product designed to be bundled with new fax / modems . Within a few months , eight modem manufacturers had agreed to bundle this OEM version ( called " WinFax LITE " ) of the program along with their own product . By the summer of the following year this number had grown to 50 OEM partnerships with various fax @-@ modem and computer system manufacturers to bundle the " LITE " version of Delrina 's WinFax software with their own products . By February 1993 this number had grown to over 100 OEM partnerships . 
 Bundling the LITE version of WinFax proved to be lucrative for Delrina . Whenever a person used the program for the first time and submitted their registration information by fax to the company , Delrina would subsequently mail the user an upgrade offer for the PRO version . This sales technique proved to be very effective , and the firm ended up making most of its sales from these upgrades . 
 In order to reach Apple computer users in this marketplace Delrina acquired Solutions Inc. and their <unk> software for the Macintosh platform in December 1991 , which would become " Delrina Fax Pro " . A version of the program was also designed for use in DOS ( " DosFax PRO " ) which was launched in June 1992 . 
 Initially looking for ways to further improve its electronic forms software , in November 1991 Delrina had attempted to buy two associated firms that produced Optical Character Recognition ( OCR ) software , with the intention of incorporating OCR functionality into its forms products . The acquisition deal fell through , though by Fall 1992 Delrina had made a deal with Caere Corporation to include its <unk> OCR software within its products . This functionality was incorporated into WinFax PRO 3 @.@ 0 in late 1992 , and subsequently in FormFlow Despite the agreement with Caere , the subsequent version of WinFax used Xerox 's <unk> OCR engine instead . 
 Based on strong sales of WinFax , by October 1992 Delrina posted its first profitable quarter in three years . At the same time , the firm also announced its intention to acquire other software firms that sold into the consumer software market . 
 = = = Acquisition of Amaze Inc . = = = 
 In October 1992 Delrina acquired Amaze Inc . , based out of Kirkland , Washington . The firm created daily planner software , providing time management features while providing some humour by featuring licensed cartoon strips like Cathy , Bloom County , B.C. and The Far Side . The firm became a wholly owned subsidiary of Delrina in a deal which also paid down Amaze 's $ 3 million ( U.S. ) debt and placed two of the firm 's directors on Delrina 's board . These two individuals were Rowland Hanson , former VP Corporate Communications for Microsoft and George Clut . 
 = = = = Berkeley Systems Inc. v. Delrina = = = = 
 One of Delrina 's screensaver products was based on the licensed Bloom County characters Opus the Penguin and Bill the Cat . The initial Opus ' n Bill screensaver , launched in 1993 , landed the company in court as its Death Toasters module depicted Opus taking shots at a number of flying toasters , a well @-@ known emblem in Berkeley System 's Flying Toasters module from their After Dark screensaver . Berkeley Systems sued for copyright and trademark infringement . The following court case of Berkeley Systems Inc. v. Delrina was fought by Delrina on the basis that a software @-@ based parody should fall under the same First Amendment protection offered to the press . 
 A preliminary injunction was filed against Delrina in September 1993 which halted the sale of the product , and subsequently forced a recall of it through the court . The case drew political satirist Mark Russell to speak in defense of Delrina , who argued in favour of the screensaver as a valid parody , while the estate of composer Irving Berlin sided with Berkeley . Commenting on the case involving his characters , cartoonist Berkeley Breathed said : " If David Letterman can depict the NBC peacock wearing men 's boxer shorts , then Delrina should be able to plug a flying toaster with hot lead " . 
 Judge Eugene Lynch found in favour of Berkeley , citing that a commercial software product was not subject to the same exemptions as parodist literature , and that the toasters were too similar in design . The total cost of the court case and the recalled product was roughly $ 150 @,@ 000 U.S. 
 In the court case , it was also cited that the design for winged toasters was not original and that the Berkeley Systems ' design was itself derived from the Jefferson Airplane album Thirty Seconds Over Winterland , which also used flying toasters adorned with wings . Berkeley argued that the firm was unaware of the previous artwork until 1991 , and that the album cover 's toasters had clocks in addition to their wings . Jefferson Airplane later sued Berkeley Systems in turn for the use of the same flying toaster emblem . The rock group lost the case as they did not trademark the album cover at the time of publication . 
 The court decision was interpreted by the writer L. Ray Patterson as an erosion of First Amendment rights over the increasing protection provided to copyright holders . 
 While Delrina lost the court case , the publicity it generated was substantial , with coverage in over a thousand newspapers across North America , resulting in consumers turning out in droves to buy the offending program before it could be recalled . 
 Delrina subsequently removed the wings from the toasters and replaced them with propellers in order to avoid trademark infringement . The module was also renamed from " Death Toasters " to " Censored Toaster Module " . Thanks to the publicity from the court case , sales of this new version ended up being triple what had been expected . Updated modules for this particular screensaver were sold for the next couple of years . 
 Josef <unk> , who managed the firm 's publicity during this period , later commented : " We had the feeling that we might get sued — actually , we prayed to get sued . Because by suing us , the number one player in the marketplace opened up the door . Anyone can create an interesting product , spend $ 10 million and create awareness of it . But it 's another thing to create a product and spend one @-@ tenth that amount and create twice as much awareness . " 
 This division of the firm at its height only represented less than 15 % of the company 's total revenues . 
 = = = WinFax = = = 
 The increasing sales of the WinFax product lead to significant growth in revenues for the firm ; by 1992 its sales had climbed to $ 19 @,@ 208 @,@ 420 , and more than doubling the next year to $ 48 @,@ 583 @,@ 932 . The product soon overtook that of the initial forms product in terms of revenues , and within a few years of its launch , WinFax would account for 80 % of the company 's revenues . By 1994 the firm had sold more than 3 million copies of WinFax , and it regularly featured in the " Top 10 " lists of software applications sold during this period . 
 The rapid growth in sales of this product was unexpected , with Bennie quoted in an interview from late 1993 as saying " the success of WinFax really caught us by surprise " . With the success of the WinFax product , the company grew rapidly . By early 1993 the number of employees had grown to 250 , and by the end of the year to 350 . The increasing success of the WinFax product consequently led to significant strains on the firm to handle the increasing volume of calls to its Technical Support department , as each of the over 300 modems on the market at the time had their own nuances in how they implemented the fax data standard . Delrina spent roughly $ 800 @,@ 000 in an improved telephone infrastructure in an attempt to get wait times to under five minutes . In December 1993 Delrina hired 40 additional people to help alleviate the growing number of calls to the firm for technical support . By the end of 1994 the situation had improved to the point where noted industry commentator Robert X. <unk> put Delrina in his shortlist of firms providing " exceptional " product support . 
 In order to further enhance the appeal of its new flagship product , in 1993 the firm established a Communication Services division , designed to tap into the commercial market . The firm started making deals with major telecommunication companies , such as BellSouth and MCI Inc. in preparation for the services the firm was about to offer . In November of that year the division launched its Fax Broadcast service . The Fax Broadcast service allowed subscribers to upload a single fax and a recipient list to Delrina . Systems at Delrina would then send out the fax to the recipients on that list , to a maximum of 500 fax numbers . A subsequent Fax Mailbox feature — which enabled subscribers to remotely access both fax and voice messages from a single phone number — was initially held up following a dispute with <unk> Telecom for the rights to the technology . This dispute was resolved by June 1994 , though with both sides publicly disputing the story of the other , and with <unk> receiving an undisclosed sum in compensation . 
 By late 1994 the firm was considered one of the fastest @-@ growing software companies in North America , and employed over 500 people , most located at its offices in Toronto . The firm 's financial situation improved greatly , and by February 1995 Delrina was reported to have captured almost three @-@ quarters of the fax software market , was debt @-@ free and had $ 40 million in the bank . The firm was shipping 200 @,@ 000 units of WinFax a month , and had an installed base of four million users . The cost of doing business had also improved , as the firm 's cost of sales was now 25 % of net sales , down from 30 % the previous fiscal year , improving the firm 's gross profits . 
 = = = The impact of Windows 95 = = = 
 In November 1992 Skapinker met Bill Gates at a Microsoft @-@ sponsored dinner where he asked whether there were any plans to include any fax functionality in their forthcoming operating system ( which could become Windows 95 ) . Gates replied that there were plans to include " base @-@ level fax capability " in the next version of Windows , and suggested that Skapinker get in touch with his development staff in order to produce a value @-@ added product for it . 
 The firm decided to work on a suite of applications designed to be an enhancement on what was to be available of Windows 95 . In response to a question about Windows 95 , Bennie responded by saying : " We are quite convinced that on top of Windows 95 , we can build four different applications and will encompass fax , data , telephony or digital voice , and Internet access " . This would later become the <unk> 95 product . 
 In 1994 the firm acquired AudioFile , a company that specialized in computer @-@ based voice technology . The company created a product called TalkWorks , which enabled users to use certain fax / modems as a voice mail client . 
 Seeing a growing business in online communications utilities , Delrina licensed <unk> 's <unk> terminal emulator system in 1993 , and used it as the basis for the initial version of its WinComm online communications software . The initial version of the product was originally bundled with WinFax as part of the Delrina Communications Suite , but in March 1994 was issued as a standalone product . It was a relative latecomer to the market , which was then dominated at the time by <unk> 's <unk> series of communications software . 
 Delrina tried to expand aggressively into this market space , first by acquiring the Canadian online bulletin board service CRS Online , and then using it as a distribution channel for free versions of its WinComm LITE and DOS @-@ based <unk> products in March 1995 . 
 When the Internet was opened to commercial interests in the mid @-@ 1990s , Delrina started to expand in this nascent market space with their Cyberjack 7 @.@ 0 product , launched in December 1995 . Created by a development team based in South Africa , it included a Web browser , Usenet news reader , <unk> client , IRC and integration with the Microsoft Exchange email program . The program used an interesting variant of the now @-@ common bookmark , using a " Guidebook " to store information for various Internet addresses . 
 <unk> 95 shipped later that same month , bundling WinFax PRO 7 @.@ 0 along with WinComm PRO 7 @.@ 0 , TalkWorks and the Cyberjack suite of Internet components . 
 With the release of Windows 95 in August 1995 , Delrina was now competing directly against Microsoft in the fax / electronic communications marketplace , as Windows 95 included a basic <unk> application as an accessory , along with a licensed version of <unk> 's <unk> communication package , ( which was also used as the basis for Delrina 's own WinComm program ) . While these applications offered only rudimentary fax and online communication services in comparison to the mature Delrina products , Microsoft was perceived as a potentially serious future competitor in the communications market space . The release of the initial version of Microsoft 's Internet Explorer in late 1995 as a free product effectively killed off the early emerging market for non @-@ free browsers , creating a market where Delrina 's Cyberjack browser could not hope to compete . 
 = = = Acquisition by Symantec and aftermath = = = 
 In late Spring of 1995 , Delrina Chairman Dennis Bennie met with Symantec CEO Gordon Eubanks to discuss the possibility of merging the two firms . In September 1995 Delrina 's founders — who owned a controlling interest in the firm — sold the firm to Symantec in a stock deal worth $ 415 million US . The deal was first announced on July 6 of that year , with shareholders from both firms approving the merger on November 20 . The merger was completed on November 22 , 1995 and Delrina officially became part of Symantec . The deal made the merged company the fifth largest American software firm at the time . The firm became the " Delrina Group " within Symantec , which brought under its control other communication software products that belonged to the parent firm , such as <unk> . Bennie joined the Board of Symantec and was also appointed an Executive Vice President . 
 At its height the company employed more than 700 people worldwide , the majority based in Canada . Symantec was following a general trend of large American firms buying smaller Canadian software companies . Other contemporaneous examples include Softimage and Zoom @-@ it being bought by Microsoft , and Alias being bought by Silicon Graphics . 
 Parts of the company were subsequently sold off , such as the sale of Delrina 's Electronic Forms Division to JetForm in September 1996 . JetForm , which later changed its name to <unk> , was in turn bought by Adobe Systems . Adobe officially discontinued the electronic forms products in 2004 . Creative Wonders bought the rights to the Echo Lake multimedia product , which was re @-@ shaped as an introductory program on multimedia and re @-@ released as Family Album Creator . 
 Though the market for fax software would shrink significantly as the use of email became more pervasive , WinFax brought in significant revenue for Symantec ; a year after the merger sales of fax software accounted for 10 % of Symantec 's revenues . 
 = = = Post @-@ Delrina = = = 
 Delrina was a catalyst for entrepreneurial talent and greatness , as many of the principals and employees of Delrina went on to find new successful ventures . With investments from Skapinker and Amato , and Bennie as lead Director , Davis went on to form <unk> , which developed an early Internet " push content " product . This firm and its technology were sold just over a year after its inception to <unk> , a NASDAQ listed software company ; Davis remained president and Bennie was brought on as Director . 
 Skapinker and Davis then went on to found Brightspark , a software venture capital firm . Brightspark Ventures raised a number of VC Funds from Canadian Financial institutions raising $ 60m in 1999 and $ 55m in 2004 . Brightspark employed a number of ex @-@ Delrina employees including Allen Lau , Eva Lau , Sandy Pearlman , Marg Vaillancourt . Brightspark Ventures has twice won the Canadian Venture Capital Association " Deal of the Year Award " , for the sale of <unk> to IBM and for the sale of <unk> to Salesforce.com. 
 Bennie would move on to found XDL Capital , a company which manages venture capital funds . XDL Capital — appropriately named after " Ex Delrina " — raised money for two funds : XDL Ventures ( XDL ) , raising $ 25 million in 1997 , and XDL Intervest ( <unk> ) , raising $ 155 million in 1999 . David <unk> , former legal counsel for Delrina , was a partner in both funds , and Amato ( former partner , Delrina ) was an advisor and major investor to XDL Capital . He also participated in several <unk> companies as a Director and / or Advisor . 
 XDL Intervest focuses primarily on internet @-@ specific entrepreneurial companies and Bennie brought in two new principals : Tony Van Marken , former CEO of <unk> Systems Corp. ( <unk> ) , and Michael Bregman , former CEO of Second Cup Ltd . ( <unk> ) . XDL has assembled an established board and advisory team , which includes Canadian billionaire Robert Young , a native of Hamilton , Ontario , who co @-@ founded Red Hat Inc ( <unk> ) and remains its chairman . Several of XDL 's venture investments were in companies started or run by ex @-@ Delrina employees who founded successful businesses , fostered by the innovative and entrepreneurial environment of Delrina . A few of the successes today are listed below : 
 Delano Founded by Bahman <unk> , another early developer at Delrina , was a company which developed e @-@ business solutions for corporations . XDL Capital provided seed capital prior to Delano listing publicly . Bennie was the Chairman . Delano was listed on NASDAQ ( <unk> ) was subsequently sold to divine in 2003 . 
 Pinpoint Software Corporation a supplier of software solutions for managing networked PCs , was founded in 1992 by Lou Ryan . Ryan was CEO & President with Bennie acting as director . Pinpoint was partially funded by XDL Capital . Pinpoint changed its name to <unk> Software in 1998 . Uniting the company name with the successful <unk> product family name strengthens the product and corporate identity . The company was eventually renamed Entercept Security Technologies Inc . In 2004 , Entercept was sold to Network Associates for $ 120M where they incorporated Entercept 's technology into its McAfee line of antivirus protection and other security products . 
 Protégé Software was formed in 1996 and was founded by Larry Levy , Delrina 's European Managing Director . Levy acted as President and CEO with Bennie as the principal investor . The company raised a $ 120M round of finance with XDL Intervest participating in 2003 . Protégé has successfully launched 20 U.S. companies in Europe , nine of which are among Red Herring Top 50 Private Companies . In addition , five of these companies have gone public during Protégé 's tenure with them . The company was ultimately sold to various buyers including Warburg Pincus after the internet bubble burst . 
 Netect Ltd . , an XDL financed venture developing network security software , was purchased by <unk> Development Corporation ( NASDAQ : <unk> ) in 2001 . Marc Camm ( Ex Delrina GM Desktop Communications Business Unit ) was brought on by Bennie to manage Netect . After the Company was purchased , Camm joined <unk> as the <unk> of Marketing . Prior to joining Netect , Marc was the general manager of Symantec and systems group product manager for Microsoft Canada . 
 Within a few years all of Delrina 's major market focuses — fax and form software — would be overtaken or superseded by email , e @-@ commerce and the Internet . Daily planning software remains a niche market , and the immersive 3D environment used for creating multimedia presentations has ( so far ) fallen by the wayside in favour of more traditional user interfaces . Symantec ended support for its final WinFax PRO product in June 2006 . 
 Delrina is best remembered by its former employees as an incubator for ideas and for providing industry experience to the many people who would go on to work at subsequent software and hardware companies , many in the Toronto region . A forum exists on Yahoo called " <unk> " , where many former employees of the firm continue to keep in contact with each other . 
 = = Delrina software and services = = 
 = = = Forms products = = = 
 The company 's first product was PerForm , an electronic forms software package . PerForm and its sibling product , FormFlow , ( which was aimed at workgroup and enterprise @-@ level electronic forms processing and delivery ) became one of the best selling products in its market . Delrina competed against <unk> 's <unk> package , Microsoft 's Electronic Forms Designer , Novell 's <unk> , Lotus Software 's Forms and JetForm 's JetForm <unk> software . 
 PerForm and FormFlow were designed to allow users to create self @-@ contained form applications which could be passed back and forth across a network . Both PerForm and FormFlow consisted of two distinct parts : " Designer " , which created the form application , and " Filler " , so users could submit the forms either by fax or , later , e @-@ mail . The program could ease repetitive fill tasks , include mandatory fields , and use an input mask to accept only data entered in a valid format . The information could be saved and restored in a <unk> file that used a Public @-@ key cryptography system to encrypt the data running from client to server . 
 The initial version of PerForm was designed for the Graphical Environment Manager ( better known as " GEM " ) , a DOS @-@ based windowing system . Later versions of this program , known as PerForm PRO , were designed to work under Windows 3 @.@ 1 and subsequent Windows operating systems . PerForm PRO 3 @.@ 0 included integration with Delrina 's own WinFax software , and included a range of automation tools . 
 As PerForm captured the retail market , it became apparent that there was a need for electronics forms delivery and processing at the workgroup and enterprise levels . In 1994 Delrina FormFlow was released , which was designed to meet this need . One of the key features of FormFlow 1 @.@ 1 was forms integration with email , and its Filler module was available for DOS , Windows and Unix . 
 = = = WinFax = = = 
 WinFax enabled computers equipped with fax @-@ modems to send faxes directly to stand @-@ alone fax machines or other similarly equipped computers . 
 Several versions of the WinFax product were released over the next few years , initially for Windows 3.x and then a Windows 95 @-@ based version . WinFax PRO 2 @.@ 0 for Windows was released in July 1991 . The Windows versions were also localized to major European and Asian languages . The company made further in @-@ roads by establishing tie @-@ ins with modem manufacturers such as U.S. Robotics and Supra that bundled simple versions of the product ( called " WinFax LITE " ) that offered basic functionality . Those wanting more robust features were encouraged to upgrade to the " PRO " version , and were offered significant discounts over the standalone retail version . All of this rapidly established WinFax as the de facto fax software . By 1994 almost one hundred companies were bundling versions of WinFax in with their own product , including IBM , Compaq , AST Research , Gateway 2000 , Intel and Hewlett @-@ Packard . 
 WinFax PRO 3 @.@ 0 was launched in late 1992 for Windows 3.x machines . This was followed by a version for Macintosh systems . The " Lite " version of WinFax 3 @.@ 0 was bundled as OEM software by a number of fax @-@ modem manufacturers , which was later be superseded by WinFax Lite 4 @.@ 0 a couple of years later . 
 The release of WinFax PRO 4 @.@ 0 in March 1994 brought together a number of key features and technologies . It introduced an improved OCR engine , introduced improvements aimed specifically at mobile fax users , better on @-@ screen fax viewing capabilities and a focus on consistency and usability of the interface . It also included for the first time the ability to integrate directly with popular new email products such as cc : Mail and Microsoft Mail . It was preceded by a <unk> version of the same product , which allowed a number of users to share a single fax modem on a networked system . The stand @-@ alone version of the product was also later bundled with a grayscale scanner , and sold as WinFax Scanner . 
 The final Delrina @-@ branded version of WinFax was WinFax PRO 7 @.@ 0 , which shipped in late 1995 , the subsequent version 8 @.@ 0 being a Symantec product . There was no intervening version 5 @.@ 0 or 6 @.@ 0 , and the jump to version 7 @.@ 0 was purely a marketing decision , based on keeping up with the suite of products in Microsoft Office which were then at the same number . It also reflected the development effort required to develop the first full 32 @-@ bit application version , designed to work with the Windows 95 operating system , which set it apart from its competition at the time . 
 By the time WinFax PRO 7 @.@ 0 was being sold from retail shelves , Delrina had been acquired by Symantec . 
 = = = Multimedia products = = = 
 <unk> were designed to ensure that there would be no phosphor burn @-@ in of images left on a CRT @-@ based screen . Delrina added sound and basic interactivity with its series of screensaver products , arguably qualifying it as an early form of multimedia . 
 Under Delrina several of the already @-@ licensed cartoons brought over from their acquisition of Amaze Inc. were further developed into screensaver applications . The " Opus ' n Bill Brain Saver " , which would land the company in court for copyright violations , was launched in 1993 . Subsequent screensavers include a licensed version based on the first Flintstone live @-@ action movie , and " The Scott Adams Dilbert Screen Saver Collection " which came out in September 1994 . 
 = = = = Echo Lake = = = = 
 A notable multimedia software produced by Delrina was Echo Lake , an early form of scrapbook software that came out in June 1995 . During development it was touted internally as a " cross [ of ] Quark Xpress and Myst " . It featured an immersive 3D environment where a user could manipulate objects within a virtual desktop in a virtual office and assemble video and audio clips along with images , and then send them as either a virtual book other users of the program could then access , or its content could be printed . It was an innovative product for its time , and ultimately was hampered by the inability of many users to easily input or playback their own multimedia content into a computer from that period . 
 = = List of Delrina products = = 
 Electronic Forms Products 
 Delrina PerForm – October 1988 
 Delrina PerForm PRO – August 1990 
 Delrina PerForm Tracer – June 1991 
 Delrina PerForm PRO Plus – August 1992 
 Delrina FormFlow – October 1993 
 Delrina FormFlow 1 @.@ 1 – June 1994 
 PerForm for Windows 3 @.@ 0 – November 1994 
 Multimedia Products 
 The Far Side Daily Planner and Calendar Publisher 3 @.@ 0 – September 1991 
 Delrina Intermission 4 @.@ 0 Screen Saver – November 1990 
 Bill ' n ' Opus <unk> – November 1993 
 Opus ' n Bill On The Road Again <unk> – September 1994 
 The Scott Adams Dilbert Screen Saver Collection – September 1994 
 Echo Lake – June 1995 
 Fax @-@ related Products ( released by Delrina ) 
 WinFax 1 @.@ 0 – December 1990 
 WinFax PRO 2 @.@ 0 – June 1991 
 WinFax Lite – April 1992 
 DosFax Lite – April 1992 
 DosFax PRO 2 @.@ 0 – June 1992 
 WinFax PRO 3 @.@ 0 – November 1992 
 Delrina Fax PRO 1 @.@ 5 for Macintosh – September 1993 
 WinFax PRO for Networks – November 1993 
 WinFax PRO 4 @.@ 0 – March 1994 
 WinFax Scanner – 1994 
 WinFax PRO 7 @.@ 0 – November 1995 
 Fax @-@ related Products ( released by Symantec ) 
 WinFax PRO 7 @.@ 5 ( bundled with TalkWorks ) – October 1996 
 WinFax PRO 8 @.@ 0 ( bundled with TalkWorks PRO ) – March 1997 
 TalkWorks PRO 2 @.@ 0 – August 1998 
 WinFax PRO 9 @.@ 0 – August 1998 
 TalkWorks PRO 3 @.@ 0 – August 1999 
 WinFax PRO 10 @.@ 0 – February 2000 
 Online Communications Products 
 Delrina Communications Suite ( WinComm and WinFax ) – March 1993 
 WinComm ( Standalone ) – March 1994 
 Cyberjack – December 1995 
 <unk> – December 1995 
 = LW12 = 
 LW12 is a para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic sit skiing sport class defined by the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) . An LW12 skier needs to meet a minimum of one of several conditions including a single below knee but above ankle amputation , monoplegia that exhibits similar to below knee amputation , legs of different length where there is at least a 7 centimetres difference , combined muscle strength in the lower extremities less than 71 . For international competitions , classification is done through IPC Alpine Skiing or IPC Nordic Skiing . For sub @-@ international competitions , classification is done by a national federation such as Alpine Canada . For para @-@ Alpine , this class is subdivided into two subclasses . : LW12.1 and <unk> A new sit @-@ skier competitor with only national classification will compete as LW12.2 in international competitions until they have been internationally classified . 
 In para @-@ Alpine skiing , the skier uses a mono @-@ ski , while para @-@ Nordic skiers use a two ski sit @-@ ski . Skiers in this class use outriggers , and are required to wear special helmets for some para @-@ Alpine disciplines . In learning to ski , one of the first skills learned is getting into and out of the ski , and how to position the body in the ski in order to maintain balance . The skier then learns how to fall and to get up . 
 A factoring system is used in the sport to allow different classes to compete against each other when there are too few individual competitors in one class in a competition . The alpine skiing factoring during the 2011 / 2012 skiing season for LW12.1 was 0 @.@ 8031 for Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ 851 for downhill , and for LW12.2 was 0 @.@ 8279 for slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for giant slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill . The percentage for the 2012 / 2013 para @-@ Nordic ski season was 100 % . This classification has been able to compete at different skiing competitions including the Paralympics , IPC Alpine World Championships and the IPC Nordic Skiing World Championships . Competitors in this class include Australians Michael Norton and David Munk , and American Russell Docker . 
 = = Definition = = 
 This is a para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic sit @-@ skiing classification , where LW stands for Locomotor Winter . To generally be eligible for a sit @-@ skiing classification , a skier needs to meet a minimum of one of several conditions including a single below knee but above ankle amputation , monoplegia that exhibits similar to below knee amputation , legs of different length where there is at least a 7 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) difference , combined muscle strength in the lower extremities less than 71 . Skiers in this class " may have Grade 3 @-@ 5 hip flexion and extension ( unilateral or bilateral ) " . This classification is comparable to para classes 5 and 6 . When not skiing , the competitor may be able to walk with or without the use of <unk> devices . This class is the equivalent of LW4 , but skiers must choose to compete in LW4 or LW12 : they cannot compete in both classifications during the same skiing season . 
 For para @-@ Alpine skiing , the Australian Paralympic Committee defined this classification as a sit skiing classification for " athletes with spinal injury or some other disability affecting the function in their lower limbs but they have good sitting balance . " This classification is often subdivided into two separate categories for para @-@ Alpine skiing . In July 1997 , at the World Cup Technical Meeting for para @-@ Alpine skiing , this classes was subdivided into two classes in order to improve factoring for the range of disabilities found within the class at the time . 
 The IPC defines this class for para @-@ Nordic skiing as for " those with impairments in the lower limb ( s ) with normal trunk function . " For the 1998 Winter Paralympics , the classification was defined for para @-@ Nordic skiing as " Disability of the lower limbs and good sitting balance @-@ Paraplegia and Standing classes with LW 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 . " Cross Country Canada defined this para @-@ Nordic classification as " <unk> in the lower limb ( s ) with normal trunk function . " 
 For international para @-@ Alpine skiing competitions , classification is done through International Paralympic Committee Alpine Skiing . A national federation such as Alpine Canada handles classification for domestic competitions . For para @-@ Nordic skiing events , classification is handled by IPC Nordic Skiing Technical Committee on the international level and by the national sports federation such as Cross @-@ Country Canada on a country by country level . When being assessed into this classification , a number of things are considered including reviewing the skiers medical history and medical information on the skier 's disability , having a physical and an in person assessment of the skier training or competing . During the assessment process , a testing board is used for this classification with six different tests being conducted that look for balance on different planes and to test for upper body strength and levels of mobility . The guideline scores for people to be assessed in this classification are 16 - 18 . 
 = = = LW12.1 = = = 
 LW12.1 skiers have a spinal chord injury . The IPC defined this para @-@ Alpine subclass as " athletes with spinal @-@ chord lesion with a function in the lower limbs and a good sitting balance " . Adapted Physical Education and Sport defined this class as " Athletes with disabilities in the lower limbs , paraplegia only with good sitting balance ; point score 16 to 18 points . " 
 = = = LW12.2 = = = 
 LW12.2 skiers in this class have differences in between one limb and another . The IPC defined this para @-@ Alpine classification as " Athletes with amputations of the lower limbs . " Adapted Physical Education and Sport described this class as " Athletes with disabilities in the lower limbs , amputations , and standing L classes L1 , L2 , L3 / 1 , L3 / 2 , L4 , <unk> / 2 with good sitting balance ; point score 16 to 18 points . " This classification is comparable to LW4 but for those who compete while sitting . A new sit @-@ skier competitor with only national classification will compete as LW12.2 in international competitions until they have been internationally classified . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 In para @-@ Alpine skiing , the skier uses a mono @-@ ski , which are required to have breaks on both sides of the ski . The chair can detach from a ski . Helmets are required for this class in para @-@ Alpine competition , with slalom helmets required for slalom and crash helmets required for the giant slalom . The para @-@ Nordic sit @-@ ski configuration has two skis . Skiers in this classification can use a sit @-@ ski and outriggers , which are forearm crutches with a miniature ski on a rocker at the base . In the Biathlon , athletes with amputations can use a rifle support while shooting . 
 = = Technique = = 
 In learning to ski , one of the first skills learned is getting into and out of the ski , and how to position the body in the ski in order to maintain balance . The skier then learns how to fall and to get up . The skier then works with the instructor on learning to ski on flat terrain , with the purpose of this exercise being to learn how to use the outriggers . The skier next learns how to get into and out of a chairlift . After this , the skier learns how to make basic turns , edging , medium radius turns and advance skiing techniques . 
 Skiers use outriggers for balance and as leverage when they fall to right themselves . Outriggers are also used for turning , with the skier using the outrigger and their upper body by leaning into the direction they want to turn . In para @-@ Nordic skiing , outriggers or ski poles are used top propel the skier forward . If a skier falls , they may require assistance in righting themselves to get back to the fall line . Doing this on their own , the skier needs to position their mono @-@ ski facing uphill relative to the fall line . 
 In the Biathlon , all Paralympic athletes shoot from a prone position . 
 = = Sport = = 
 A factoring system is used in the sport to allow different classes to compete against each other when there are too few individual competitors in one class in a competition . The factoring system works by having a number for each class based on their functional mobility or vision levels , where the results are calculated by multiplying the finish time by the factored number . The resulting number is the one used to determine the winner in events where the factor system is used . During the 1997 / 1998 ski season , the percentage for this para @-@ Nordic classification was 100 % ( a factor of 1 @.@ 000 ) . For the 2003 / 2004 para @-@ Nordic skiing season , the percentage for was 100 % . The percentage for the 2008 / 2009 and 2009 / 2010 ski seasons was 100 % . The alpine skiing factoring during the 2011 / 2012 skiing season for LW12.1 was 0 @.@ 8031 for slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for giant slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ 851 for downhill , and for LW12.2 was 0 @.@ 8279 for slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for giant slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill . The percentage for the 2012 / 2013 para @-@ Nordic ski season was 100 % . 
