 The Complete First Season 1 @.@ 33 : 1 aspect ratio 294 @-@ minute two @-@ disc set was released in region 1 on October 10 , 2006 , and in region 2 on July 18 , 2007 . The DVD is in English ( Dolby Digital Stereo ) , and is dubbed in French and Spanish , with subtitles in English , Spanish and French . The set includes special features such as an interview with the creator , " How to make an Ed , Edd n Eddy cartoon " , " How to Draw Eddy " and a Cartoon Network commercial bumper featuring Jimmy and Plank . 
 The season is available for download on the iTunes Store . The Fools ' Per @-@ Ed @-@ Ise and The Complete First Season DVDs can also be purchased on the Cartoon Network Shop . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Note : All episodes were directed by Antonucci 
 = Scottish religion in the seventeenth century = 
 Scottish religion in the seventeenth century includes all forms of religious organisation and belief in the Kingdom of Scotland in the seventeenth century . During the sixteenth century , Scotland had undergone a Protestant Reformation that created a predominately Calvinist national kirk , which was strongly Presbyterian in outlook . James VI favoured doctrinal Calvinism , but also episcopacy . His son Charles I authorised a book of canons that made him head of the Church and enforced the use of a new liturgy , seen as an English @-@ style Prayer Book . In the resulting rebellion the Scottish bishops were formally expelled from the Church and representatives of various sections of Scottish society drew up the National Covenant . In the subsequent Bishop 's Wars the Scottish Covenanters emerged as virtually independent rulers . Charles I 's failure led indirectly to the English civil war ( 1642 – 46 ) . The Covenanters intervened on the side of Parliament , who were victorious , but became increasingly alienated from the Parliamentary regime . The Scottish defeats in the subsequent Second and Third civil wars , led to English occupation and incorporation in a Commonwealth of England , Scotland and Ireland led by Oliver Cromwell from 1652 and the imposition of religious toleration for Protestants . The Scottish Covenanters divided into parties of Resolutioners and Protesters . 
 After the Restoration in 1660 , Scotland regained its national kirk , but also episcopacy . About a third of the clergy refused to accept the new settlement and particularly in the south @-@ west ministers took to preaching in the open fields in conventicles , often attracting thousands of worshippers . The government alternated between accommodation and persecution . There were risings in 1666 and 1679 , which were defeated by government forces . The Society People who continued to resist the government , known as the Cameronians , became increasingly radical . In the early 1680s a more intense phase of persecution began , in what was later to be known in Protestant historiography as " the Killing Time " . With the accession of the openly Catholic James VII , there was increasing disquiet among Protestants . After the Glorious Revolution of 1688 – 89 , William of Orange and Mary , the daughter of James , were , accepted as monarchs . The final settlement restored Presbyterianism and abolished the bishops , who had generally supported James . However , William , who was more tolerant than the kirk tended to be , passed acts restoring the Episcopalian clergy excluded after the Revolution . 
 Protestantism was focused on the Bible and family worship was strongly encouraged . The kirk sessions applied personal and moral discipline . They discouraged group celebrations . Sessions had an administrative burden in the system of poor relief , the administration of the parish school system . They also took over the pursuit of witchcraft cases . The most intense hunt was in 1661 – 62 , but improving economic conditions and increasing scepticism led the practice to peter out towards the end of the century . The numbers of Roman Catholics and the organisation of the Church probably deteriorated , but began to revive with the appointment of a Vicar Apostolic over the mission in 1694 . 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = Background : the Reformation = = = 
 During the sixteenth century , Scotland underwent a Protestant Reformation that created a predominately Calvinist national kirk , which was strongly Presbyterian in outlook ; the Reformation severely reduced the powers of bishops , but did not abolish them . In the earlier part of the century , the teachings of first Martin Luther and then John Calvin began to influence Scotland , particularly through Scottish scholars who had visited continental and English universities and who had often trained in the Catholic priesthood . The influence of the English was also more direct , as they supplied books and distributed Bibles and Protestant literature in the Lowlands when they invaded in 1547 . Particularly important was the work of the Lutheran Scot Patrick Hamilton . His execution with other Protestant preachers in 1528 , and of the Zwingli @-@ influenced George Wishart in 1546 , who was burnt at the stake in St. Andrews on the orders of Cardinal Beaton , did nothing to stem the growth of these ideas . Wishart 's supporters , who included a number of Fife lairds , assassinated Beaton soon after and seized St. Andrews Castle , which they held for a year before they were defeated with the help of French forces . The survivors , including chaplain John Knox , were condemned to be galley slaves , helping to create resentment of the French and martyrs for the Protestant cause . 
 Limited toleration and the influence of exiled Scots and Protestants in other countries , led to the expansion of Protestantism , with a group of lairds declaring themselves Lords of the Congregation in 1557 and representing their interests politically . The collapse of the French alliance and English intervention in 1560 meant that a relatively small , but highly influential , group of Protestants were in a position to impose reform on the Scottish church . A confession of faith , rejecting papal jurisdiction and the mass , was adopted by Parliament in 1560 , while the young Mary , Queen of Scots was still in France . Knox , having escaped the galleys and spent time in Geneva , where he became a follower of Calvin , emerged as the most significant figure . The Calvinism of the reformers led by Knox resulted in a settlement that adopted a Presbyterian system and rejected most of the elaborate trappings of the Medieval church . This gave considerable power within the new kirk to local lairds , who often had control over the appointment of the clergy , and resulting in widespread , but generally orderly , iconoclasm . At this point the majority of the population was probably still Catholic in persuasion and the kirk would find it difficult to penetrate the Highlands and Islands , but began a gradual process of conversion and consolidation that , compared with reformations elsewhere , was conducted with relatively little persecution . 
 The personal reign of the Catholic Mary , Queen of Scots ( 1561 – 67 ) eventually ended in civil war , deposition , imprisonment and execution in England . Her infant son James VI was crowned King of Scots in 1567 . He was brought up as a Protestant , while the country was run by a series of regents . After he asserted his personal rule from 1583 he favoured doctrinal Calvinism , but also episcopacy . 
 = = = Covenants and the Civil Wars = = = 
 James VI 's inheritance of the English crown in 1603 led to rule via the Privy Council from London . He also increasingly controlled the meetings of the Scottish General Assembly and increased the number and powers of the Scottish bishops . In 1618 , he held a General Assembly and pushed through Five Articles , which included practices that had been retained in England but largely abolished in Scotland , most controversially kneeling for the reception of communion . Although ratified , they created widespread opposition and resentment and were seen by many as a step back to Catholic practice . 
 James VI was succeeded by his son Charles I in 1625 . Charles relied heavily on the bishops , particularly John <unk> , Archbishop of St. Andrews , eventually making him chancellor . At the beginning of his reign , Charles ' revocation of alienated lands since 1542 helped secure the finances of the kirk , but it threatened the holdings of the nobility who had gained from the Reformation settlement . Objects were fuelled by a widespread fear of " Popery " , but Catholicism was largely confined to some nobles and the Highlands and Islands . 
 In 1635 , without reference to a general assembly of the Parliament , the King authorised a book of canons that made him head of the Church , ordained an unpopular ritual and enforced the use of a new liturgy . When the liturgy emerged in 1637 it was seen as an English @-@ style Prayer Book , resulting in anger and widespread rioting , said to have been set off with the throwing of a stool by one Jenny Geddes during a service in St Giles Cathedral . The Protestant nobility put themselves at the head of the popular opposition . Representatives of various sections of Scottish society drew up the National Covenant on 28 February 1638 , objecting to the King 's liturgical innovations . The King 's supporters were unable to suppress the rebellion and the King refused to compromise . In December of the same year , at a meeting of the General Assembly in Glasgow , the Scottish bishops were formally expelled from the Church , which was then established on a full Presbyterian basis . 
 The Scots and the King both assembled armies and , after the two Bishop 's Wars of 1639 and 1640 , the Scots emerged the victors . Charles capitulated , leaving the Covenanters in independent control of the country . He was forced to recall the English Parliament , resulting in the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642 . The Covenanters sided with Parliament and in 1643 they entered into a Solemn League and Covenant , guaranteeing the Scottish Church settlement and promising further reform in England . The Westminster Confession of Faith , drawn up by English and Scottish ministers and agreed in 1645 , became the subordinate standard of Covenanter doctrine . By 1646 a Royalist campaign in the Highlands and the Royalists in England had been defeated and the King had surrendered . Relations with the English Parliament and the increasingly independent English New Model Army became strained and control of Scotland country moved away from the hardline " Kirk Party " and fell under the control of those willing to compromise with the King . The resulting Engagement with the King led to a Second Civil War and a defeat for a Scottish invading army at the Battle of Preston , by the New Model Army led by Oliver Cromwell . After the coup of the Whiggamore Raid , the Kirk Party regained control in Scotland . 
 = = = Commonwealth = = = 
 After the execution of the King in January 1649 , England was declared a commonwealth and the Scots declared his son king as Charles II . The English responded with an invasion and , after defeats for the Scots at Dunbar in 1650 and Worcester in 1651 , the English occupied the country in 1652 , declaring Scotland part of the Commonwealth . In the period after the defeat at Dunbar the Kirk became deeply divided , partly in the search for scapegoats for defeat . Different factions and tendencies produced rival resolutions and protests , which gave their names to the two major parties as the Resolutioners , who were willing to make an accommodation with royalism , and the more hard line Protesters who wished to purge the Kirk of such associations . Subsequently the divide between rival camps became almost irrevocable . After 1655 both groups appointed permanent agents in London . 
 The terms of the union promised that the Gospel would be preached and promised freedom of religion . The regime accepted Presbyterianism as a valid system , but did not accept that it was the only legitimate form of church organisation . The result was that although civil penalties no longer backed up its pronouncements , Kirk sessions and synods functioned much as before . The administration tended to favour the Protesters , largely because the Resolutioners were more inclined to desire a restoration of the monarchy and because the General Assembly , where they predominated , claimed independence from the state . The act of holding public prayers for the success of the earl of Glencairn 's insurrection against the regime , led in 1653 , to the largely <unk> members of the Assembly being marched out of Edinburgh by an armed guard . There were no more assemblies in the period of the Commonwealth and the Resolutioners met in informal " Consultations " of clergy . The universities , largely seen as a training school for clergy , were relatively well funded and came under the control of the Protestors , with Patrick Gillespie being made Principal at Glasgow . 
 Toleration did not extend to Episcopalians and Catholics , but if they did not call attention to themselves they were largely left alone . It did extend to sectaries , but the only independent group to establish itself in Scotland in this period were a small number of Quakers . Some attempts were made to extend Protestantism to the largely Catholic , Gaelic @-@ speaking Highlands and Islands . The first Gaelic catechism was published in 1653 and the first Psalm book in 1659 . In general the period of the Commonwealth was looked back on as one where Protestantism flourished . Ministers , now largely barred from politics , spent more time with their flocks and placed an emphasis on preaching that emulated the sectaries . One Presbyterian noted that " there were more souls converted to Christ in that short period of time than in any season since the Reformation " . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 = = = = Restoration settlement = = = = 
 After the Restoration of the Monarchy in 1660 , Scotland regained its kirk , but also the bishops . Under the <unk> Act 1661 , legislation was revoked back to 1633 , removing the Covenanter gains of the Bishops ' Wars . But an act passed later the same day renewed the discipline of kirk sessions , presbyteries and synods , suggesting that a compromise was possible . The restoration of episcopacy was proclaimed by the Privy Council of Scotland on 6 September 1661 . James Sharp , minister of Crail , who was in London to represent the interests of the Resolutioners , changed sides and accepted the position of Archbishop of St. Andrews . He was consecrated along with Robert Leighton as Bishop of Dunblane and two other bishops . Soon an entire bench of bishops had been constructed . During the parliamentary session of 1662 the Church of Scotland was restored as the national church and all office @-@ holders were required to renounce the Covenants . Church ministers were forced to accept the new situation or lose their livings . Up to a third , at least 270 , of the ministry refused . Many ministers chose voluntarily to abandon their own parishes rather than wait to be forced out by the government . Most of the vacancies occurred in the south @-@ west of Scotland , an area particularly strong in its Covenanting sympathies . Some of the ministers also took to preaching in the open fields in conventicles , often attracting thousands of worshippers . 
 = = = = Toleration and persecution = = = = 
 The government responded with alternating policies of force and toleration . In 1663 an act was passed that declared dissenting minsters to be seditious persons and allowed the imposition of heavy fines on those who failed to attend the parish churches of the " King 's curates " . In 1666 a group of men from Galloway captured the government 's local military commander and marched on Edinburgh . They were defeated at the Battle of <unk> Green and 50 prisoners were captured . 33 were executed , two after torture , and the rest were transported to Barbados . There were then a series of arrests of suspected persons . The rising resulted in the fall of the king 's commissioner John Leslie , 1st Duke of Rothes . 
 The new commissioner John Maitland , 1st Duke of Lauderdale attempted a more conciliatory policy , issuing Letters of Indulgence in 1669 , 1672 and 1679 . These allowed evicted ministers to return to their parishes , if they would avoid political dissent . 150 refused to accept the offer and some episcopalians were alienated by the compromise . Leighton , now bishop of Glasgow , attempted to engage with dissenters , but to no avail . The failure to reach an accommodation led to a return to severity . Preaching at a conventicle was made punishable by death and attendance was punishable by severe sanctions . In 1674 heritors and masters were made responsible for their tenants and servants and from 1677 they had to enter bonds for the conduct of everyone living on their land . In 1678 3 @,@ 000 Lowland militia and 6 @,@ 000 Highlanders , known as the " Highland Host " , were billeted in the Covenanting shires as a form of punishment . 
 = = = = Rebellion and the Killing Time = = = = 
 In 1679 a group of Covenanters killed Archbishop Sharp . The incident led to a rising that grew to 5 @,@ 000 men . They were defeated by forces under James , Duke of Monmouth , the King 's illegitimate son , at the Battle of Bothwell Bridge . Two ministers were executed and 250 followers shipped to Barbados , 200 drowning when their ship went down off Orkney . The rebellion eventually led to the fall of Lauderdale , who was replaced by the King 's brother , the openly Catholic James , known in Scotland as the Duke of Albany . The dissenters , led by Donald Cargill and Richard Cameron called themselves the Society People , but would be become known after their leader as the Cameronians . Reduced in number , hiding out in the moors , they became increasingly radical . On 22 June 1680 , the Sanquhar Declaration was posted in Sanquhar , renouncing Charles II as king . Cameron was killed the next month . Cargill excommunicated the King , Duke of Albany and other royalists at the <unk> Conventicle and his followers now separated themselves from all other Presbyterian ministers . Cargill was captured and executed in May 1681 . 
 The government passed a Test Act , forcing every holder of public office to take an oath of non @-@ resistance . Eight Episcopal clergy and James Dalrymple , Lord President of the Court of Session resigned and the leading nobleman Archibald Campbell , 9th Earl of Argyll was forced into exile . In 1684 the remaining Society People posted an <unk> Declaration on several market crosses , which informed servants of the government that they pursued the lives of its members at the risk of their own . In response to this new element of outright political sedition , the Scottish Privy Council authorised extrajudicial field executions of those caught in arms or those who refused to swear loyalty to the King . This more intense phase of persecution , later known in Protestant historiography as " the Killing Time " , led to dissenters being summarily executed by the dragoons of James Graham , Laird of Claverhouse or sentenced to transportation or death by Sir George Mackenzie , the Lord Advocate . 
 = = = Glorious Revolution = = = 
 = = = = Regime change = = = = 
 Charles died in 1685 and his brother succeeded him as James VII of Scotland ( and II of England ) . James put Catholics in key positions in the government and even attendance at a conventicle was made punishable by death . He disregarded parliament , purged the Council and forced through religious toleration for Roman Catholics , alienating his Protestant subjects . The failure of an invasion , led by the Earl of Argyll and timed to co @-@ ordinate with the Duke of Monmouth 's rebellion in England , demonstrated the strength of the regime . However a riot in response to Louis XIV 's Revocation of the Edict of Nantes indicated the strength of anti @-@ Catholic feeling . The King 's attempts to obtain toleration for Catholics led to the issuing of Letters of Indulgence in 1687 , which also allowed freedom of worship to dissident Protestants , allowing " outed " Presbyterian ministers to return to their parishes . This did not extend to field conventicles and the Society People continued to endure hardship , with their last minister , James Renwick , being captured and executed in 1688 . 
 It was believed that the King would be succeeded by his daughter Mary , a Protestant and the wife of William of Orange , Stadtholder of the Netherlands , but when in 1688 , James produced a male heir , James Francis Edward Stuart , it was clear that his policies would outlive him . An invitation by seven leading Englishmen led William to land in England with 40 @,@ 000 men on 5 November . In Edinburgh there were rumours of Orange plots and on 10 December the Lord Chancellor of Scotland , the Earl of Perth , quit the capital for Drummond Castle , planning an abortive escape to Ireland ( he was later captured as he embarked for France ) . As rioters approached Holyrood Abbey they were fired on by soldiers , resulting in some deaths . The city guard was called out , but the Abbey was stormed by a large mob . The Catholic furnishings placed there when it was restored as a chapel for James were torn down and the tombs of the Stuart kings desecrated . A crowd of students burnt the Pope in effigy and took down the heads of executed Covenanters that were hanging above the city gates . The crisis was resolved when James fled from England on 23 December , leading to an almost bloodless revolution . Although there had been no significant Scottish involvement in the coup , most members of the Scottish Privy Council went to London to offer their services to William . On 7 January 1689 , they asked William to take over the responsibilities of government . 
 = = = = Revolution settlement = = = = 
 William called a Scottish Convention , which convened on 14 March in Edinburgh . It was dominated by the Presbyterians . There was a faction that supported James , including many episcopalians , but these were divided by James ' attempts to achieve tolerance for Roman Catholics . A letter from James , received on 16 March , contained a threat to punish all who rebelled against him and declaring the assembly illegal , resulted in his followers to abandon the Convention , leaving the Williamites dominant . On 4 April the Convention formulated the Claim of Right and the Articles of Grievances . These suggested that James had forfeited the crown by his actions ( in contrast to England , which relied on the legal fiction of an abdication ) and offered it to William and Mary , which William accepted , along with limitations on royal power . On 11 May William and Mary accepted the Crown of Scotland as co @-@ regents , as William II and Mary II . The final settlement , completed by William 's Second parliament in 1690 , restored Presbyterianism and abolished the bishops , who had generally supported James . Remaining ministers outed in 1662 were restored . The General Assembly of 1692 refused to reinstate even those Episcopalian ministers who pledged to accept Presbyterianism . However , the King issued two acts of indulgences in 1693 and 1695 , allowing those who accepted him as king to return to the church and around a hundred took advantage of the offer . All but the hardened Jacobites would be given toleration in 1707 , leaving only a small remnant of Jacobite episcopalians . 
 = = Popular Protestantism = = 
 Scottish Protestantism in the seventeenth century was highly focused on the Bible , which was seen as infallible and the major source of moral authority . In the early part of the century the Genevan translation was commonly used . In 1611 the Kirk adopted the Authorised King James Version and the first Scots version was printed in Scotland in 1633 , but the Geneva Bible continued to be employed into the late seventeenth century . Many Bibles were large , illustrated and highly valuable objects . They often became the subject of superstitions , being used in divination . Family worship was strongly encouraged by the Covenanters . Books of devotion were distributed to encourage the practice and minsters were encouraged to investigate whether this was being carried out . 
 The seventeenth century saw the high @-@ water mark of kirk discipline . Kirk sessions were able to apply religious sanctions , such as excommunication and denial of baptism , to enforce godly behaviour and obedience . In more difficult cases of immoral behaviour they could work with the local magistrate , in a system modelled on that employed in Geneva . Public occasions were treated with mistrust and from the later seventeenth century there were efforts by kirk sessions to stamp out activities such as well @-@ dressing , bonfires , <unk> , penny weddings and dancing . Kirk sessions also had an administrative burden in the system of poor relief . An act of 1649 declared that local heritors were to be assessed by kirk session to provide the financial resources for local relief , rather than relying on voluntary contributions . By the mid @-@ seventeenth century the system had largely been rolled out across the Lowlands , but was limited in the Highlands . The system was largely able to cope with general poverty and minor crises , helping the old and infirm to survive and provide life support in periods of downturn at relatively low cost , but was overwhelmed in the major subsistence crisis of the 1690s , known as the seven ill years . The kirk also had a major role in education . Statutes passed in 1616 , 1633 , 1646 and 1696 established a parish school system , paid for by local heritors and administered by ministers and local presbyteries . By the late seventeenth century there was a largely complete network of parish schools in the Lowlands , but in the Highlands basic education was still lacking in many areas . 
 In the seventeenth century the pursuit of witchcraft was largely taken over by the kirk sessions and was often used to attack superstitious and Catholic practices in Scottish society . Most of the accused , some 75 per cent , were women , with over 1 @,@ 500 executed , and the witch hunt in Scotland has been seen as a means of controlling women . The most intense witch hunt was in 1661 – 62 , which involved some 664 named witches in four counties . From this point prosecutions began to decline as trials were more tightly controlled by the judiciary and government , torture was more sparingly used and standards of evidence were raised . B. P. <unk> suggests that there may also have been a growing scepticism and with relative peace and stability the economic and social tensions that contributed to accusation may have reduced . There were occasional local outbreaks like that in East Lothian in 1678 and 1697 at Paisley . The last recorded executions were in 1706 and the last trial in 1727 . The British parliament repealed the 1563 Act in 1736 . 
 = = Catholicism = = 
 The numbers of practising Catholics probably continued to reduce in the seventeenth century and the organisation of the Church deteriorated . Some were to convert to Roman Catholicism , as did John Ogilvie ( 1569 – 1615 ) , who went on to be ordained a priest in 1610 , later being hanged for proselytism in Glasgow and often thought of as the only Scottish Catholic martyr of the Reformation era . An Irish Franciscan mission in the 1620s and 1630s claimed large numbers of converts , but these were confined to the Western Isles and had little impact on the mainland . A college for the education of Scots clergy was opened at Madrid in 1633 , and was afterwards moved to Valladolid . In 1653 the remaining five or six clergy were incorporated under William Ballantine as prefect of the mission . There were a small number of Jesuits active in <unk> from the 1670s . The Pope appointed Thomas Nicolson as the first Vicar Apostolic over the mission in 1694 and the situation of Catholicism began to improve . Nicholson divided Scotland into districts , each with its own designated priests and he undertook visitations to ensure the implementation of Papal legislation . In 1700 his <unk> <unk> , which included a code of conduct for priests and laymen , were approved by all the clergy . By 1703 there were 33 Catholic clergy . 
 = Solomon Butcher = 
 Solomon D. Butcher ( January 24 , 1856 – March 18 , 1927 ) was an itinerant photographer who spent most of his life in central Nebraska , in the Great Plains region of the United States . A settler under the Homestead Act , he began in 1886 to produce a photographic record of the history of white settlement in the region . Over 3 @,@ 000 of his negatives survive ; more than 1 @,@ 000 of these depict sod houses . Butcher wrote two books incorporating his photographs : Pioneer History of Custer County and Short Sketches of Early Days in Nebraska ( 1901 ) , and Sod Houses , or the Development of the Great American Plains ( 1904 ) . 
 Butcher was unable to achieve financial success as a farmer , as a photographer , or in a number of other schemes later in his life , and at the time of his death felt that he had been a failure . However , the number and scope of his photographs of Nebraska pioneer life have made them a valuable resource to students of that period of history , and they have become a staple of historical texts and popular works alike . His oeuvre has been described as " the most important chronicle of the saga of homesteading in America " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Solomon D. Butcher was born on January 24 , 1856 , the oldest child of Thomas Jefferson Butcher and Esther ( <unk> ) Butcher , in Burton in Wetzel County , in what was then the state of Virginia but later became part of West Virginia . In 1860 , his family moved to LaSalle County , Illinois , where his father worked for the Illinois Central Railroad . The family remained there for nearly twenty years . Butcher finished high school in 1874 and was briefly apprenticed to a <unk> , who taught him the business of photography . In the winter term of 1875 – 76 , he attended the Henry Military School in Henry , Illinois . He then worked as a travelling salesman for a firm in Clyde , Ohio until 1880 . 
 In 1880 , Thomas Jefferson Butcher announced that he was leaving his secure job with the railroad and moving west , to establish a homestead in Custer County , Nebraska . Although Solomon Butcher had a good job , he had grown tired of his work , and " had already thought seriously of seeking my fortune in the great west " . In March 1880 , a party consisting of Butcher , his father , his brother George , and his brother @-@ in @-@ law J. R. <unk> started westward in two covered wagons . After seven weeks , they arrived in northeastern Custer County , where they occupied homesteads near the north bank of the Middle Loup River , west @-@ northwest of present @-@ day Sargent . 
 The party began construction of a sod house , and Butcher quickly came to rue his decision to go west : " I soon came to the conclusion that any man that would leave the luxuries of a boarding house , where they had hash every day , and a salary of $ 125 a month to lay Nebraska sod for 75 cents a day ... was a fool . " Upon the completion of the house , Butcher and his father returned to Illinois to bring his mother and his youngest brother to Nebraska . However , Butcher did not return with them : he stayed in Illinois for several months , returning to Nebraska with only three days left to construct a dwelling on his homestead ; failure to do so would mean forfeiting his claim . Butcher , his father , and two of his brothers built and occupied a dugout , saving the claim . Two weeks later , however , he once again went back east , moving to Milwaukee , Wisconsin and abandoning his homestead . " I would not have remained and kept batch for five years for the whole of Custer county , " he declared . 
 Butcher attended medical college in Minneapolis in the winter and spring of 1881 – 2 . There , he met Lillie M. ( Barber ) Hamilton , a young widow working as a nurse at the hospital . The two were married in May 1882 . 
 Soon thereafter , Butcher once again decided that the West was the place for him . " I had just seen enough of the wild west to unfit me for living contentedly in the East " , he wrote . In October 1882 , the couple returned to Custer County , where they moved in with his father . During that winter , he worked as a schoolteacher . 
 = = Photographer on the Plains = = 
 Butcher was able to save some of his teacher 's salary , and to borrow enough more to open the first photography studio in Custer County . The studio was housed in a lath @-@ and @-@ adobe building , measuring 18 by 28 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m × 8 @.@ 5 m ) , with a dirt floor and with cotton sheeting in lieu of glass to cover the windows and the skylights . As a backdrop for the photos , he used an old cloth wagon cover . The cloth had been gnawed by rats and was full of holes , which Lillie patched . To keep the patches from showing up in photographs , Butcher attached two coil springs from an old bed to the ceiling , then hung the backdrop from them . Before taking a picture , he plucked the backdrop so that it oscillated on the springs ; the motion , combined with the long exposure time required , blurred the backdrop so that the patches would not be visible in the photograph . 
 Photography alone was not enough to pay the bills . Butcher opened a post office in his studio , which he named " Jefferson " after his father . This proved less than lucrative : his postal income came from stamp cancellations , and in the first three months amounted to 68 cents . He also did farm work for his father , at a wage of 50 to 75 cents per day . 
 In December 1884 , the town of Walworth was established near Butcher 's homestead . Butcher , his wife , and their two children moved there and built a sod house . In Walworth , Butcher found a business partner , A. W. Darling , who supplied the money to put up a frame building for a studio . However , Walworth did not last : it had been established at a time when rains had been unusually good , and the resumption of normal dry conditions led to the town 's demise . Butcher 's family had to leave their sod house after six weeks of residence . He and Darling were forced to sell their building , which was moved to the town of West Union ; there , they rented it for five years . 
 = = Pioneer History = = 
 In the spring of 1886 , Butcher conceived the idea of writing an illustrated history of Custer County . This , he thought , would be the key to fame and riches . " At last , Eureka ! Eureka ! I had found it . I was so elated that I lost all desire for rest and had to take morphine to make me sleep . " To embark upon this project , he needed financing . Unlike Butcher , his father had succeeded as a farmer , running a gristmill and a freighting business as well ; it was to him that Butcher turned for assistance . Thomas Jefferson Butcher was initially skeptical ; but after his son had arranged to photograph 75 homesteads , he agreed to provide a team and wagon for the project . 
 In June 1886 , Butcher took the first photograph for the book . He met a certain amount of skepticism — " Some called me a fool , others a crank ... " He began his work only thirteen years after the establishment of the first homestead in the county , when it could hardly be said to have a history . He persevered : from 1886 to 1892 , he took over 1 @,@ 500 photographs and recorded over 1 @,@ 500 narratives . 
 Hard times struck Custer County in the early 1890s . Crops failed in 1890 ; good crops in the following two years were offset by low prices . The harvest was small in 1893 , and the spring and summer of 1894 were almost entirely devoid of rain . The county also partook of the nationwide depression that began with the Panic of 1893 . Butcher was an early victim of this agricultural and economic collapse : in 1892 , he lost his farm , and was forced to suspend his history project . 
 The Populist Party and its predecessor , the Farmers ' Alliance , were strong in Custer County in the 1890s , carrying elections for a decade beginning in 1889 . Butcher attached himself to the movement and , in 1896 , was elected Justice of the Peace and Clerk of the Election for West Union . Rising farm prices and a generally improving economy allowed him to secure a home and to get himself nearly out of debt , and in 1899 he was about to resume work on the history . 
 In 1899 , however , Butcher 's house burned down , destroying its entire contents , including the pioneer narratives and the photographic prints . Fortunately for the history project , the glass negatives were stored in a granary , and escaped the fire . The house had carried no insurance , however , and Butcher was once again left penniless . 
 Butcher persevered , again setting himself to the task of compiling pioneer narratives . He secured the assistance of George B. Mair , the editor of the Callaway Chronicle , in editing these accounts and in preparing the manuscript . To cover the cost of engraving , typesetting , and publishing , he recruited Ephraim Swain Finch , an early settler of Custer County and now a wealthy rancher . Finch , whom Butcher knew through his Populist activities , agreed to underwrite these expenses ; moreover , he placed an advertisement in the Custer County Chief , assuring readers that orders for Butcher 's forthcoming book would be filled . 
 Orders for the book began flowing in . The first edition of 1000 copies sold out before its delivery date , in the summer of 1901 ; a second printing , of either 500 or 1000 copies , was issued before Christmas of that year . The book , titled Pioneer History of Custer County and Short Sketches of Early Days in Nebraska , included 200 engravings in its more than 400 pages . 
 = = Later career = = 
 Encouraged by the success of Pioneer History , Butcher began planning similar photographic histories of Buffalo and Dawson counties , which border Custer County on the south . He moved to Kearney , the county seat of Buffalo County , in 1902 ; there , he opened a photography studio together with his son Lynn . He roamed more widely still , through Colorado , Utah , and Wyoming ; carrying his equipment in a wagon , he made negatives on the site , then shipped these to Kearney , where Lynn and several women employees made the prints and mailed them back to the customers . Butcher <unk> et fils also ran a postcard business , making over 2 million cards for the local trade . In 1904 , he published a second book , Sod Houses ; or , The Development of the Great American Plains , at the urging of a lawyer who hoped to use Butcher 's photographs and accounts to sell land in Nebraska . In 1909 , he visited Yellowstone National Park and produced a set of 100 stereographic postcards . 
 Butcher abandoned the history of Buffalo and Dawson counties after spending more than a thousand dollars on the project . <unk> with his profession as photographer , which had failed to make him a fortune or even to put him on a sound financial footing , he turned his efforts elsewhere . In 1911 , he turned the Kearney studio over to his son and began work as an agent for the Standard Land Company . He gave stereopticon lectures throughout Buffalo and Dawson counties promoting the company 's irrigated lands in south Texas , and made plans to move there himself . 
 Before he could move , however , he had to dispose of his thousands of 6 @.@ 5 @-@ by @-@ 8 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 170 mm × 220 mm ) glass @-@ plate negatives . He also had to get himself out of debt once again . In an attempt to accomplish both of these at once , he offered his collection of negatives to the Nebraska State Historical Society . To Addison Sheldon , head of the Society 's Legislative Reference Bureau , he wrote , " Now is the time to buy me cheap , when I need the money so badly . " In November 1911 , he and Sheldon signed a contract for the sale of the negatives for $ 1000 . Butcher was to receive $ 100 down ; the rest would be paid after the Nebraska legislature passed a bill appropriating funds for the purchase . 
 Unfortunately for Butcher , a feud was raging between Sheldon and Clarence S. Paine , secretary of the Historical Society . Sheldon was an ardent Populist ; Paine , a follower of conservative Democrat J. Sterling Morton . Sheldon believed that Paine had used underhanded tactics to displace his predecessor as secretary ; Paine believed that Sheldon was scheming to bring the Society under control of the University of Nebraska regents . At the legislature 's next biennial session , in 1913 , Sheldon had an appropriations bill introduced to pay for the Butcher purchase . The bill passed the House unanimously , but ran into stiff opposition in the Senate , probably at Paine 's instigation . In the end , Butcher was forced to accept a compromise payment of only $ 600 . 
 Butcher 's Texas land deals came to nothing . In 1915 , he moved to Broken Bow , back in Custer County . In December of that year , Lillie Butcher , who had suffered ill health for many years , died . For a short time in early 1916 , Butcher worked for Sheldon , annotating his collection of negatives and adding narratives that had not been included in Pioneer History . In 1917 , he married Mrs. Laura M. ( <unk> ) Nation . 
 Butcher briefly worked as a travelling salesman for a grain and flour mill . However , he abandoned this for less practical schemes . He invented what he described as an " electromagnetic oil detector " , applying the principles of dowsing to the discovery of oil . In 1921 , he planned a photographic expedition to Central America to produce material for a series of travelogue lectures , and tried to interest Sheldon in it ; Sheldon was skeptical , and the expedition was never launched . In about 1924 , he began marketing a patent medicine , consisting chiefly of alcohol , dubbed " Butcher 's Wonder of the Age " . 
 In 1926 , the Butchers moved to Greeley , Colorado ; Butcher died there on March 18 , 1927 . 
 = = Works = = 
 Butcher 's work received little notice outside of Nebraska during his lifetime . Although there was a market for photos depicting the romance of the Wild West , the public preferred mountains and canyons to open prairie . Later in his life , popular taste inclined toward the modern and the sophisticated ; images of rustics gathered around sod houses were out of fashion . His photographs had little to recommend them from an artistic standpoint . Biographer John Carter describes him as unconcerned with aesthetics , and with no more than adequate technical abilities . " Unquestionably he was not a prairie Stieglitz . " 
 Recognition of Butcher 's work came only later , when the history of the settlement of the Plains began to be written . His photographs became staples of textbooks and popular works dealing with the homestead era . According to Carter , " They are the images that we conjure up when we think of plains settlement . " 
 Butcher has been compared to painter George Catlin , who painted Native Americans in the 1830s , and to Nebraska writer and photographer Wright Morris , who depicted rural Nebraska in the 1930s and 1940s . Like them , Butcher recognized that an era in Plains history was passing , and tried to document it visually before it was gone . Even during his short career , the face of Nebraska changed ; the sod houses of his earlier photographs are increasingly supplanted by frame buildings in his later ones . 
 Butcher did not confine himself to recording events that took place when he was present . He was not above re @-@ enacting historical events for a photo : for example , the 1878 lynching of two Custer County homesteaders at the behest of rancher Print Olive , or the cutting of another rancher 's fences by homesteaders . The latter photograph has been uncritically accepted by many historians as documentation of the actual event , although a closer examination reveals that the wire @-@ cutters are made out of wood . Butcher also did not <unk> to retouch photos . He photographed a hill in Cherry County that had been important to early setters because of its cedar trees ; since the trees had been cut long before he got there with his camera , he scratched trees on the bare hill on his negative . To illustrate Ephraim Swain Finch 's account of how he had battled an 1876 infestation of grasshoppers , he posed Finch in his cornfield , then incised scores of dots and specks into the negative to depict the flying insects . When he sought to illustrate a large flock of ducks , but realized that the birds were flying too fast for his camera to record , he photographed the scene without the waterfowl and then scratched dozens of ducks into the negative . 
 Butcher retouched for his own purposes as well . On one occasion , he damaged a spot on a negative , producing a hole in a photograph of a sod house . Rather than undertaking a round trip of sixty miles ( 100 km ) to re @-@ shoot the scene , he concealed the damage by inking a crudely drawn turkey on the negative . Upon seeing the finished product , the homesteader expressed wonderment , declaring that he owned no white turkeys ; but he was persuaded to put aside his doubts , since the camera was incapable of lying . 
 Butcher 's determination to record a vanishing era led him to photograph every detail of life in the homestead era . According to the editor of a 1965 edition of Pioneer History , " There was nothing too inconsequential for him to direct his camera upon . " The Butcher collection at the Nebraska State Historical Society consists of nearly 3 @,@ 500 negatives ; nearly 1 @,@ 500 were taken in Custer County , and more than 1 @,@ 000 show sod houses . 
 The number and scope of Butcher 's photographs has made them a valuable resource to the historian of the period . Nebraska folklorist Roger Welsch conducted a detailed analysis of Butcher 's sod @-@ house photos , including furnishings , farm equipment , animals , etc . , for his 1968 Sod Walls , which initiated present @-@ day investigations of sod @-@ house construction and living . Studies based on the photographs continue : in the 21st century , digital image processing enabled researchers to see details inside doors and windows , which appeared as nothing more than dark oblongs in the original prints . 
 Although Butcher never achieved financial success or artistic recognition , and died believing himself a failure , his work has endured . According to one writer , " No other photographer captured settlement in the Great Plains with such insight into the experience of homesteading . " 
 = Holden = 
 GM Holden Ltd , commonly known as Holden , is an Australian automobile manufacturer that operates in Australasia and is headquartered in Port Melbourne , Victoria . The company was founded in 1856 as a saddlery manufacturer in South Australia . In 1908 it moved into the automotive field , before becoming a subsidiary of the United States @-@ based General Motors ( GM ) in 1931 . After becoming a subsidiary of GM , the company was named General Motors @-@ Holden 's Ltd , becoming Holden Ltd in 1998 — the current name was adopted in 2005 . 
 Holden is responsible for GM vehicle operations in Australasia , and on their behalf , held partial ownership of GM Daewoo in South Korea between 2002 and 2009 . Holden has offered a broad range of locally produced vehicles , supplemented by imported GM models . Holden has offered the following badge engineered models in sharing arrangements : Chevrolet , Isuzu , Nissan , Opel , Suzuki , Toyota and Vauxhall Motors . As of 2013 , the vehicle lineup consists of models from GM Korea , GM Thailand , GM in the US , and self @-@ developed Commodore , Caprice , and Ute . Holden also distributed the European Opel brand in Australia in 2012 until the brand 's Australian demise in mid @-@ 2013 . 
 All Australian @-@ built Holden vehicles are manufactured at Elizabeth , South Australia , and engines are produced at the Fishermans Bend plant in Port Melbourne , Victoria . Historically , production or assembly plants were operated in all mainland states of Australia , with GM 's New Zealand subsidiary Holden New Zealand operating a plant until 1990 . The consolidation of car production at Elizabeth was completed in 1988 , but some assembly operations continued at Dandenong until 1994 . 
 Although Holden 's involvement in exports has fluctuated since the 1950s , the declining sales of large cars in Australia has led the company to look to international markets to increase profitability . On 11 December 2013 , Holden announced that it will cease vehicle and engine production by the end of 2017 , however , the company will continue to have a large and ongoing presence in Australia importing and selling cars as national sales company . Holden will retain their design centre , but with reduced staffing . In the last few years , Holden incurred losses due to the strong Australian dollar , with government grants being reduced in future . In May 2014 GM reversed their decision to abandon the Lang Lang Proving Ground and have decided to keep it as part of their engineering capability in Australia . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 In 1852 , James Alexander Holden emigrated to South Australia from Walsall , England and in 1856 established J.A. Holden & Co , a saddlery business in Adelaide . In 1885 , German @-@ born H. A. Frost joined the business as a junior partner and J.A. Holden & Co became Holden & Frost Ltd . Edward Holden , James ' grandson , joined the firm in 1905 with an interest in automobiles . From there , the firm evolved through various partnerships and , in 1908 , Holden & Frost moved into the business of minor repairs to car upholstery . The company began to produce complete motorcycle sidecar bodies in 1913 , and Edward experimented with fitting bodies to different types of carriages . After 1917 , wartime trade restrictions led the company to start full @-@ scale production of vehicle body shells . J.A. Holden founded a new company in 1919 , Holden 's Motor Body Builders Ltd ( HMBB ) specialising in car bodies and utilising a facility on King William Street in Adelaide . 
 By 1923 , HMBB were producing 12 @,@ 000 units per year . During this time , HMBB was the first company to assemble bodies for Ford Australia until their Geelong plant was completed . From 1924 , HMBB became the exclusive supplier of car bodies for GM in Australia , with manufacturing taking place at the new Woodville , South Australia plant . These bodies were made to suit a number of chassis imported from manufacturers such as Chevrolet and Dodge . In 1926 General Motors ( Australia ) was established with assembly plants at Newstead , Queensland ; Marrickville , New South Wales ; City Road , Melbourne , Victoria ; Birkenhead , South Australia ; and Cottesloe , Western Australia utilising bodies produced by Holden Motor Body Builders and imported complete knock down ( CKD ) chassis . In 1930 alone , the still independent Woodville plant built bodies for Austin , Chrysler , DeSoto , Morris , Hillman , Humber , Hupmobile and Willys @-@ Overland as well GM cars . The last of this line of business was the assembly of Hillman Minx sedans in 1948 . The Great Depression led to a substantial downturn in production by Holden , from 34 @,@ 000 units annually in 1930 to just 1 @,@ 651 units one year later . In 1931 General Motors purchased Holden Motor Body Builders and merged it with General Motors ( Australia ) Pty Ltd to form General Motors @-@ Holden 's Ltd ( GM @-@ H ) . Throughout the 1920s Holden also supplied tramcars to Melbourne and Metropolitan Tramways Board . Several have been preserved in both Australia and New Zealand . 
 = = = 1940s = = = 
 Holden 's second full @-@ scale car factory , located in Fishermans Bend ( Port Melbourne ) , was completed in 1936 , with construction beginning in 1939 on a new plant in Pagewood , New South Wales . However , World War II delayed car production with efforts shifted to the construction of vehicle bodies , field guns , aircraft and engines . Before the war ended , the Australian Government took steps to encourage an Australian automotive industry . Both GM and Ford provided studies to the Australian Government outlining the production of the first Australian @-@ designed car . Ford 's proposal was the government 's first choice , but required substantial financial assistance . GM 's study was ultimately chosen because of its low level of government intervention . After the war , Holden returned to producing vehicle bodies , this time for Buick , Chevrolet , Pontiac and Vauxhall . The Oldsmobile Ace was also produced from 1946 to 1948 . 
 From here , Holden continued to pursue the goal of producing an Australian car . This involved compromise with GM , as Holden 's managing director , Laurence Hartnett , favoured development of a local design , while GM preferred to see an American design as the basis for " Australia 's Own Car " . In the end , the design was based on a previously rejected post @-@ war Chevrolet proposal . The Holden was launched in 1948 , creating long waiting lists extending through 1949 and beyond . The name " Holden " was chosen in honour of Sir Edward Holden , the company 's first chairman and grandson of J.A. Holden . Other names considered were " <unk> " , " Austral " , " Melba " , " <unk> " , " Boomerang " , " Emu " and " <unk> " , a phonetic spelling of Canberra . Although officially designated " 48 @-@ 215 " , the car was marketed simply as the " Holden " . The unofficial usage of the name " FX " originated within Holden , referring to the updated suspension on the 48 @-@ 215 of 1953 . 
 = = = 1950s = = = 
 During the 1950s , Holden dominated the Australian car market . GM invested heavily in production capacity , which allowed the company to meet increased post @-@ war demand for motor cars . Less expensive four @-@ cylinder cars did not offer Holden 's ability to deal with rugged rural areas . 48 @-@ 215 sedans were produced in parallel with the 50 @-@ <unk> coupé utility from 1951 ; the latter was known colloquially as the " ute " and became ubiquitous in Australian rural areas as the workhorse of choice . Production of both the utility and sedan continued with minor changes until 1953 , when they were replaced by the facelifted FJ model , introducing a third panel van body style . The FJ was the first major change to the Holden since its 1948 introduction . Over time it gained iconic status and remains one of Australia 's most recognisable automotive symbols . A new horizontally slatted grille dominated the front @-@ end of the FJ , which received various other trim and minor mechanical revisions . In 1954 Holden began exporting the FJ to New Zealand . Although little changed from the 48 @-@ 215 , marketing campaigns and price cuts kept FJ sales steady until a completely redesigned model was launched . At the 2005 Australian International Motor Show in Sydney , Holden paid homage to the FJ with the <unk> concept car . 
 Holden 's next model , the FE , launched in 1956 ; offered in a new station wagon body style dubbed " Station Sedan " in the company 's sales literature . In the same year Holden commenced exports to Malaya , Thailand and North Borneo . Strong sales continued in Australia , and Holden achieved a market share of more than 50 percent in 1958 with the revised FC model . This was the first Holden to be tested on the new Holden Proving Ground based in Lang Lang , Victoria . 1957 saw Holden 's export markets grow to 17 countries , with new additions including Indonesia , Hong Kong , Singapore , Fiji , Sudan , the East Africa region and South Africa . The opening of the Dandenong , Victoria , production facility in 1956 brought further jobs ; by 1959 Holden employed 19 @,@ 000 workers country @-@ wide . In 1959 complete knock down assembly began in South Africa and Indonesia . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 In 1960 , Holden introduced its third major new model , the FB . The car 's style was inspired by 1950s Chevrolets , with tailfins and a wrap @-@ around windshield with " dog leg " A @-@ pillars . By the time it was introduced , many considered the appearance dated . Much of the motoring industry at the time noted that the adopted style did not translate well to the more compact Holden . The FB became the first Holden that was adapted for left @-@ hand @-@ drive markets , enhancing its export potential , and as such was exported to New Caledonia , New Hebrides , the Philippines , and Hawaii . 
 In 1960 , Ford unveiled the new Falcon in Australia , only months after its introduction in the United States . To Holden 's advantage , the Falcon was not durable , particularly in the front suspension , making it ill @-@ suited for Australian conditions . In response to the Falcon , Holden introduced the facelifted EK series in 1961 ; the new model featured two @-@ tone paintwork and optional <unk> automatic transmission . A restyled EJ series came in 1962 , debuting the new luxury oriented Premier model . The EH update came a year later bringing the new Red motor , providing better performance than the previous Grey motor . The HD series of 1965 saw the introduction of the Powerglide automatic transmission . At the same time , an " X2 " performance option with a more powerful version of the 179 @-@ cubic @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 9 L ) six @-@ cylinder engine was made available . In 1966 , the HR was introduced , including changes in the form of new front and rear styling and higher @-@ capacity engines . More significantly , the HR fitted standard front seat belts ; Holden thus became the first Australian automaker to provide the safety device as standard equipment across all models . This coincided with the completion of the production plant in Acacia Ridge , Queensland . By 1963 , Holden was exporting cars to Africa , the Middle East , South @-@ East Asia , the Pacific Islands , and the Caribbean . 
 Holden began assembling the compact HA series Vauxhall Viva in 1964 . This was superseded by the Holden Torana in 1967 , a development of the Viva ending Vauxhall production in Australia . Holden offered the LC , a Torana with new styling , in 1969 with the availability of Holden 's six @-@ cylinder engine . In the development days , the six @-@ cylinder Torana was reserved for motor racing , but research had shown that there was a business case for such a model . The LC Torana was the first application of Holden 's new three @-@ speed Tri @-@ Matic automatic transmission . This was the result of Holden 's A $ 16 @.@ 5 million transformation of the Woodville , South Australia factory for its production . 
 Holden 's association with the manufacture of Chevrolets and <unk> ended in 1968 , coinciding with the year of Holden 's next major new model , the HK . This included Holden 's first V8 engine , a Chevrolet engine imported from Canada . Models based on the HK series included an extended @-@ length prestige model , the Brougham , and a two @-@ door coupé , the Monaro . The mainstream Holden Special was rebranded the Kingswood , and the basic fleet model , the Standard , became the Belmont . On 3 March 1969 Alexander Rhea , managing director of General Motors @-@ Holden 's at the time , was joined by press photographers and the Federal Minister of Shipping and Transport , Ian Sinclair as the two men drove the two millionth Holden , an HK Brougham off the production line . This came just over half a decade since the one millionth car , an EJ Premier sedan rolled off the Dandenong line on 25 October 1962 . Following the Chevrolet V8 fitted to the HK , the first Australian @-@ designed and mass @-@ produced V8 , the Holden V8 engine debuted in the Hurricane concept of 1969 before fitment to facelifted HT model . This was available in two capacities : 253 cubic inches ( 4 @.@ 1 L ) and 308 cubic inches ( 5 @.@ 0 L ) . Late in HT production , use of the new Tri @-@ Matic automatic transmission , first seen in the LC Torana was phased in as Powerglide stock was exhausted , but Holden 's official line was that the HG of 1971 was the first full @-@ size Holden to receive it . 
 Despite the arrival of serious competitors — namely , the Ford Falcon , Chrysler Valiant , and Japanese cars — in the 1960s , Holden 's locally produced large six- and eight @-@ cylinder cars remained Australia 's top @-@ selling vehicles . Sales were boosted by exporting the Kingswood sedan , station wagon , and utility body styles to Indonesia , Trinidad and Tobago , Pakistan , the Philippines , and South Africa in complete knock down form . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 Holden launched the new HQ series in 1971 . At this time , the company was producing all of its passenger cars in Australia , and every model was of Australian design ; however , by the end of the decade , Holden was producing cars based on overseas designs . The HQ was thoroughly re @-@ engineered , featuring a perimeter frame and semi @-@ monocoque ( unibody ) construction . Other firsts included an all @-@ coil suspension and an extended wheelbase for station wagons , while the utilities and panel vans retained the traditional coil / leaf suspension configuration . The series included the new prestige Statesman brand , which also had a longer wheelbase , replacing the Brougham . The Statesman remains noteworthy because it was not marketed as a " Holden " , but rather a " Statesman " . 
 The HQ framework led to a new generation of two @-@ door <unk> , and , despite the introduction of the similar sized competitors , the HQ range became the top @-@ selling Holden of all time , with 485 @,@ 650 units sold in three years . 14 @,@ 558 units were exported and 72 @,@ 290 CKD kits were constructed . The HQ series was facelifted in 1974 with the introduction of the HJ , heralding new front panel styling and a revised rear fascia . This new bodywork was to remain , albeit with minor upgrades through the HX and HZ series . <unk> engines adhering to government emission standards were brought in with the HX series , whilst the HZ brought considerably improved road handling and comfort with the introduction of " Radial Tuned Suspension " ( RTS ) . As a result of GM 's toying with the Wankel rotary engine , as used by Mazda of Japan , an export agreement was initiated in 1975 . This involved Holden exporting with powertrains , HJ , and later , HX series Premiers as the Mazda <unk> AP . Mazda then fitted these cars with the <unk> rotary engine and three @-@ speed automatic transmission . Production ended in 1977 , after just 840 units sold . 
 During the 1970s , Holden ran an advertising jingle " Football , Meat Pies , Kangaroos and Holden cars " , based on the " Baseball , Hot Dogs , Apple Pies and Chevrolet " jingle used by Chevrolet in the United States . Also , development of the Torana continued in with the larger mid @-@ sized LH series released in 1974 , offered only as a four @-@ door sedan . The LH Torana was one of the few cars worldwide engineered to occupy four- , six @-@ and eight @-@ cylinder engines . This trend continued until Holden introduced the Sunbird in 1976 ; essentially the four @-@ cylinder Torana with a new name . Designated LX , both the Sunbird and Torana introduced a three @-@ door hatchback variant . A final UC update appeared in 1978 . During its production run , the Torana achieved legendary racing success in Australia , achieving victories at the Mount Panorama Circuit in Bathurst , New South Wales . 
 In 1975 , Holden introduced the compact Gemini , the Australian version of the " T @-@ car " , based on the Opel <unk> C. The Gemini was an overseas design developed jointly with Isuzu , GM 's Japanese affiliate ; and was powered by a 1 @.@ 6 @-@ litre four @-@ cylinder engine . Fast becoming a popular car , the Gemini rapidly attained sales leadership in its class , and the nameplate lived on until 1987 . 
 Holden 's most popular car to date , the Commodore , was introduced in 1978 as the VB . The new family car was loosely based on the Opel Rekord E body shell , but with the front from the Opel Senator grafted to accommodate the larger Holden six @-@ cylinder and V8 engines . Initially , the Commodore maintained Holden 's sales leadership in Australia . However , some of the compromises resulting from the adoption of a design intended for another market hampered the car 's acceptance . In particular , it was narrower than its predecessor and its Falcon rival , making it less comfortable for three rear @-@ seat passengers . With the abandonment of left @-@ hand drive markets , Holden exported almost 100 @,@ 000 Commodores to markets such as New Zealand , Thailand , Hong Kong , Malaysia , Indonesia , Malta and Singapore . 
 Holden discontinued the Torana in 1979 and the Sunbird in 1980 . After the 1978 introduction of the Commodore , the Torana became the " in @-@ between " car , surrounded by the smaller and more economical Gemini and the larger , more sophisticated Commodore . The closest successor to the Torana was the Camira , released in 1982 as Australia 's version of GM 's medium @-@ sized " J @-@ car " . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 The 1980s were challenging for Holden and the Australian automotive industry . The Australian Government tried to revive the industry with the Button car plan , which encouraged car makers to focus on producing fewer models at higher , more economical volumes , and to export cars . The decade opened with the shut @-@ down of the Pagewood , New South Wales production plant and introduction of the light commercial Rodeo , sourced from Isuzu in Japan . The Rodeo was available in both two- and four @-@ wheel drive chassis cab models with a choice of petrol and diesel powerplants . The range was updated in 1988 with the TF series , based on the Isuzu TF . Other cars sourced from Isuzu during the 1980s were the four @-@ wheel drive <unk> ( 1981 ) , the Shuttle ( 1982 ) van and the Piazza ( 1986 ) three @-@ door sports hatchback . The second generation Holden Gemini from 1985 was also based on an Isuzu design , although , its manufacture was undertaken in Australia . 
 While GM Australia 's commercial vehicle range had originally been mostly based on Bedford products , these had gradually been replaced by Isuzu products . This process began in the 1970s and by 1982 Holden 's commercial vehicle arm no longer offered any Bedford products . 
 The new Holden WB commercial vehicles and the Statesman WB limousines were introduced in 1980 . However , the designs , based on the HQ and updated HJ , HX and HZ models from the 1970s were less competitive than similar models in Ford 's lineup . Thus , Holden abandoned those vehicle classes altogether in 1984 . Sales of the Commodore also fell , with the effects of the 1979 energy crisis lessening , and for the first time the Commodore lost ground to the Ford Falcon . Sales in other segments also suffered when competition from Ford intensified , and other Australian manufacturers : Mitsubishi , Nissan and Toyota gained market share . When released in 1982 , the Camira initially generated good sales , which later declined because buyers considered the 1 @.@ 6 @-@ litre engine underpowered , and the car 's build and ride quality below @-@ average . The Camira lasted just seven years , and contributed to Holden 's accumulated losses of over A $ 500 million by the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 In 1984 Holden introduced the VK Commodore , with significant styling changes from the previous VH . The Commodore was next updated in 1986 as the VL , which had new front and rear styling . Controversially , the VL was powered by the 3 @.@ 0 @-@ litre Nissan <unk> six @-@ cylinder engine and had a Nissan @-@ built , electronically controlled four @-@ speed automatic transmission . Holden even went to court in 1984 to stop local motoring magazine Wheels from reporting on the matter . The engine change was necessitated by the legal requirement that all new cars sold in Australia after 1986 had to consume unleaded petrol . Because it was unfeasible to convert the existing six @-@ cylinder engine to run on unleaded fuel , the Nissan engine was chosen as the best engine available . However , changing exchange rates doubled the cost of the engine and transmission over the life of the VL . The decision to opt for a Japanese @-@ made transmission led to the closure of the Woodville , South Australia assembly plant . Confident by the apparent sign of turnaround , GM paid off Holden 's mounted losses of A $ 780 million on 19 December 1986 . At GM headquarters ' request , Holden was then reorganised and recapitalised , separating the engine and car manufacturing divisions in the process . This involved the splitting of Holden into Holden 's Motor Company ( HMC ) and Holden 's Engine Company ( HEC ) . For the most part , car bodies were now manufactured at Elizabeth , South Australia , with engines as before , confined to the Fishermans Bend plant in Port Melbourne , Victoria . The engine manufacturing business was successful , building four @-@ cylinder Family II engines for use in cars built overseas . The final phase of the Commodore 's recovery strategy involved the 1988 VN , a significantly wider model powered by the American @-@ designed , Australian @-@ assembled 3 @.@ 8 @-@ litre Buick V6 engine . 
 Holden began to sell the <unk> Suzuki Swift @-@ based Barina in 1985 . The Barina was launched concurrently with the Suzuki @-@ sourced Holden Drover , followed by the Scurry later on in 1985 . In the previous year , Nissan Pulsar <unk> were rebadged as the Holden Astra , as a result of a deal with Nissan . This arrangement ceased in 1989 when Holden entered a new alliance with Toyota , forming a new company : United Australian Automobile Industries ( UAAI ) . UAAI resulted in Holden selling rebadged versions of Toyota 's Corolla and Camry , as the Holden Nova and Apollo respectively , with Toyota re @-@ branding the Commodore as the Lexcen . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 The company changed throughout the 1990s , increasing its Australian market share from 21 percent in 1991 to 28 @.@ 2 percent in 1999 . Besides manufacturing Australia 's best selling car , which was exported in significant numbers , Holden continued to export many locally produced engines to power cars made elsewhere . In this decade , Holden adopted a strategy of importing cars it needed to offer a full range of competitive vehicles . During 1998 , General Motors @-@ Holden 's Ltd name was shortened to " Holden Ltd " . 
 On 26 April 1990 , GM 's New Zealand subsidiary Holden New Zealand announced that production at the assembly plant based in Trentham would be phased out and vehicles would be imported duty @-@ free — this came after the 1984 closure of the <unk> assembly line due to low output volumes . During the 1990s , Holden , other Australian automakers and trade unions pressured the Australian Government to halt the lowering of car import tariffs . By 1997 , the federal government had already cut tariffs to 22 @.@ 5 percent , from 57 @.@ 5 percent ten years earlier ; by 2000 , a plan was formulated to reduce the tariffs to 15 percent . Holden was critical , saying that Australia 's population was not large enough , and that the changes could tarnish the local industry . 
 Holden re @-@ introduced its defunct Statesman title in 1990 — this time under the Holden marque , as the Statesman and Caprice . For 1991 , Holden updated the Statesman and Caprice with a range of improvements , including the introduction of four @-@ wheel anti @-@ lock brakes ( ABS ) ; although , a rear @-@ wheel system had been standard on the Statesman Caprice from March 1976 . ABS was added to the short @-@ wheelbase Commodore range in 1992 . Another returning variant was the full @-@ size utility , and on this occasion it was based on the Commodore . The VN Commodore received a major facelift in 1993 with the VR — compared to the VN , approximately 80 percent of the car model was new . Exterior changes resulted in a smoother overall body and a " twin @-@ kidney " grille — a Commodore styling trait that remained until the 2002 VY model and , as of 2013 , remains a permanent staple on HSV variants . 
 Holden introduced the all @-@ new VT Commodore in 1997 , the outcome of a A $ 600 million development programme that spanned more than five years . The new model featured a rounded exterior body shell , improved dynamics and many firsts for an Australian @-@ built car . Also , a stronger body structure increased crash safety . The locally produced Buick @-@ sourced V6 engine powered the Commodore range , as did the 5 @.@ 0 @-@ litre Holden V8 engine , and was replaced in 1999 by the 5 @.@ 7 @-@ litre LS unit . 
 The UAAI badge @-@ engineered cars first introduced in 1989 sold in far fewer numbers than anticipated , but the Holden Commodore , Toyota Camry , and Corolla were all successful when sold under their original nameplates . The first generation Nova and the donor Corolla were produced at Holden 's Dandenong , Victoria facility until 1994 . UAAI was dissolved in 1996 , and Holden returned to selling only GM products . The Holden Astra and Vectra , both designed by Opel in Germany , replaced the Toyota @-@ sourced Holden Nova and Apollo . This came after the 1994 introduction of the Opel Corsa replacing the already available Suzuki Swift as the source for the Holden Barina . Sales of the full @-@ size Holden Suburban SUV sourced from Chevrolet commenced in 1998 — lasting until 2001 . Also in 1998 , local assembly of the Vectra began at Elizabeth , South Australia . These cars were exported to Japan and Southeast Asia with Opel badges . However , the Vectra did not achieve sufficient sales in Australia to justify local assembly , and reverted to being fully imported in 2000 . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Holden 's market surge from the 1990s reversed in the 2000s decade . In Australia , Holden 's market share dropped from 27 @.@ 5 percent in 2000 to 15 @.@ 2 percent in 2006 . From March 2003 , Holden no longer held the number one sales position in Australia , losing ground to Toyota . 
 This overall downturn affected Holden 's profits ; the company recorded a combined gain of A $ 842 @.@ 9 million between 2002 and 2004 , and a combined loss of A $ 290 million between 2005 and 2006 . Factors contributing to the loss included the development of an all @-@ new model , the strong Australian dollar and the cost of reducing the workforce at the Elizabeth plant , including the loss of 1 @,@ 400 jobs after the closure of the third @-@ shift assembly line in 2005 , after two years in operation . Holden fared better in 2007 , posting an A $ 6 million loss . This was followed by an A $ 70 @.@ 2 million loss in the 2008 , an A $ 210 @.@ 6 million loss in 2009 , and a profit of A $ 112 million in 2010 . On 18 May 2005 , " Holden Ltd " became " GM Holden Ltd " , coinciding with the resettling to the new Holden headquarters on 191 Salmon Street , Port Melbourne , Victoria . 
 Holden caused controversy in 2005 with their Holden Employee Pricing television advertisement , which ran between October and December 2005 . The campaign publicised , " for the first time ever , all Australians can enjoy the financial benefit of Holden Employee Pricing " . However , this did not include a discounted dealer delivery fee and savings on factory fitted options and accessories that employees received . At the same time , employees were given a further discount between 25 and 29 percent on selected models . 
 Holden revived the Monaro coupe in 2001 . Based on the VT Commodore architecture , the coupe attracted worldwide attention after being shown as a concept car at Australian auto shows . The VT Commodore received its first major update in 2002 with the VY series . A mildly facelifted VZ model launched in 2004 , introducing the High Feature engine . This was built at the Fishermans Bend facility completed in 2003 , with a maximum output of 900 engines per day . This has reportedly added A $ 5 @.@ 2 billion to the Australian economy ; exports account for about A $ 450 million alone . After the VZ , the High Feature engine powered the all @-@ new Holden Commodore ( VE ) . In contrast to previous models , the VE no longer utilised an Opel @-@ sourced platform adapted both mechanically and in size , but was based on the GM Zeta platform that was earmarked to become a " Global RWD Architecture " , until plans were cancelled due to the 2007 / 08 global financial crisis . 
 Throughout the 1990s , Opel had also been the source of many Holden models . To increase profitability , Holden looked to the South Korean Daewoo brand for replacements after acquiring a 44 @.@ 6 percent stake — worth US $ 251 million — in the company in 2002 as a representative of GM . This was increased to 50 @.@ 9 percent in 2005 , but when GM further increased its stake to 70 @.@ 1 percent around the time of its 2009 Chapter 11 reorganisation , Holden 's interest was relinquished and transferred to another ( undisclosed ) part of GM . 
 The commencement of the Holden @-@ branded Daewoo models began with the 2005 Holden Barina , which based on the Daewoo <unk> , replaced the Opel Corsa as the source of the Barina . In the same year , the Viva , based on the Daewoo <unk> , replaced the entry @-@ level Holden Astra Classic , although the new @-@ generation Astra introduced in 2004 continued on . The Captiva crossover SUV came next in 2006 . After discontinuing the Frontera and <unk> models in 2003 , Holden was only left with one all @-@ wheel drive model : the Adventra , a Commodore @-@ based station wagon . The fourth model to be replaced with a South Korean alternative was the Vectra by the mid @-@ size Epica in 2007 . As a result of the split between GM and Isuzu , Holden lost the rights to use the " Rodeo " nameplate . Consequently , the Holden Rodeo was facelifted and relaunched as the Colorado in 2008 . Following Holden 's successful application for a A $ 149 million government grant to build a localised version of the Chevrolet Cruze in Australia from 2011 , Holden in 2009 announced that it would initially import the small car unchanged from South Korea as the Holden Cruze . 
 Following the government grant announcement , Kevin Rudd , Australia 's Prime Minister at the time , stated that production would support 600 new jobs at the Elizabeth facility ; however , this failed to take into account Holden 's previous announcement , whereby 600 jobs would be shed when production of the Family II engine ceased in late 2009 . In mid @-@ 2013 , Holden sought a further A $ 265 million , in addition to the A $ 275 million that was already committed by the governments of Canberra , South Australia and Victoria , to remain viable as a car manufacturer in Australia . A source close to Holden informed the Australian news publication that the car company is losing money on every vehicle that it produces and consequently initiated negotiations to reduce employee wages by up to A $ 200 per week to cut costs , following the announcement of 400 job cuts and an assembly line reduction of 65 ( 400 to 335 ) cars per day . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 In March 2012 , Holden was given a $ 270 million lifeline by the Gillard , Weatherill and Baillieu ministries . In return , Holden planned to inject over $ 1 billion into car manufacturing in Australia . They estimated the new investment package would return around $ 4 billion to the Australian economy and see GM Holden continue making cars in Australia until at least 2022 . 
 Industry Minister Kim Carr confirmed on 10 July 2013 that talks had been scheduled between the Australian government and Holden . On 13 August 2013 , 1 @,@ 700 employees at the Elizabeth plant in northern Adelaide voted to accept a three @-@ year wage freeze in order to decrease the chances of the production line 's closure in 2016 . Holden 's ultimate survival , though , depended on continued negotiations with the Federal Government — to secure funding for the period from 2016 to 2022 — and the final decision of the global headquarters in Detroit , US . 
 On 10 December 2013 , General Motors announced that Holden would cease engine and vehicle manufacturing operations in Australia by the end of 2017 . As a result , 2 @,@ 900 jobs would be lost over four years . Beyond 2017 Holden 's Australian presence will consist of : a national sales company , a parts distribution centre and a global design studio . 
 In 2015 , Holden again began selling a range of Opel @-@ derived cars comprising the Astra VXR and Insignia VXR ( both based on the OPC models sold by Vauxhall ) and Cascada . Later that year , Holden also announced plans to sell the European Astra and the Korean Cruze alongside each other from 2017 . 
 In December 2015 , Belgian entrepreneur Guido Dumarey commenced negotiations to buy the Commodore manufacturing plant in South Australia , with a view to continue producing a rebadged Zeta @-@ based premium range of rear and all @-@ wheel drive vehicles for local and export sales . The proposal was met with doubt in South Australia , and it later came to nothing . 
 = = Corporate affairs and identity = = 
 As of 8 May 2015 , Jeff Rolfs , Holden 's CFO , is interim chairman and managing director . Holden announced on 6 February 2015 that Mark Bernhard would return to Holden as chairman and managing director , the first Australian to hold the post in 25 years . Vehicles are sold countrywide through the Holden Dealer Network ( 310 authorised stores and 12 service centres ) , which employs more than 13 @,@ 500 people . 
 In 1987 , Holden Special Vehicles ( HSV ) was formed in partnership with Tom Walkinshaw , who primarily manufactures modified , high @-@ performance Commodore variants . To further reinforce the brand , HSV introduced the HSV Dealer Team into the V8 Supercar fold in 2005 under the naming rights of Toll HSV Dealer Team . 
 The logo , or " Holden lion and stone " as it is known , has played a vital role in establishing Holden 's identity . In 1928 , Holden 's Motor Body Builders appointed Rayner Hoff to design the emblem . The logo refers to a prehistoric fable , in which observations of lions rolling stones led to the invention of the wheel . With the 1948 launch of the 48 @-@ 215 , Holden revised its logo and commissioned another redesign in 1972 to better represent the company . The emblem was reworked once more in 1994 . 
 = = = Exports = = = 
 Holden began to export vehicles in 1954 , sending the FJ to New Zealand . Exports to New Zealand have continued ever since , but to broaden their export potential , Holden began to cater their Commodore , Monaro and Statesman / Caprice models for both right- and left @-@ hand drive markets . The Middle East is now Holden 's largest export market , with the Commodore sold as the Chevrolet Lumina since 1998 , and the Statesman since 1999 as the Chevrolet Caprice . Commodores are also sold as the Chevrolet Lumina in Brunei , Fiji and South Africa , and as the Chevrolet Omega in Brazil . Pontiac in North America also imported Commodore sedans from 2008 through to 2009 as the G8 . However , Pontiac went bankrupt in late 2009 and GM had to shut down Pontiac in 2010 . The G8 's cessation was a consequence of GM 's Chapter 11 bankruptcy resulting in the demise of the Pontiac brand . 
 Sales of the Monaro began in 2003 to the Middle East as the Chevrolet Lumina Coupe . Later on that year , a modified version of the Monaro began selling in North America as the Pontiac GTO , and under the Monaro name through Vauxhall dealerships in the United Kingdom . This arrangement continued through to 2005 when the car was discontinued . The long @-@ wheelbase Statesman sales in the Chinese market as the Buick <unk> began in 2005 , before being replaced in 2007 by the Statesman @-@ based Buick Park Avenue . Statesman / Caprice exports to South Korea also began in 2005 . These Korean models were sold as the Daewoo Statesman , and later as the Daewoo Veritas from 2008 . Holden 's move into international markets has been profitable ; export revenue increased from A $ 973 million in 1999 to just under $ 1 @.@ 3 billion in 2006 . 
 Since 2011 the WM Caprice has been exported to North America as the Chevrolet Caprice PPV , a version of the Caprice built exclusively for law enforcement in North America sold only to police . Since 2007 , the HSV @-@ based Commodore has been exported to the United Kingdom as the Vauxhall VXR8 . 
 In 2013 , it was announced that exports of the Commodore would resume to North America in the form of the VF Commodore as the Chevrolet SS sedan for the 2014 model year . The Chevrolet SS Sedan was imported to the United States again for 2015 with only minor changes , notably the addition of Magnetic Ride Control suspension and a Tremec TR @-@ <unk> manual transmission . For the 2016 model year , the SS sedan received a facelift based on the VF Series II Commodore unveiled in September 2015 . 
 = = = Leadership = = = 
 Edward Holden ( 1917 – 1934 ) 
 Laurence Hartnett ( 1934 – 1946 ) 
 Harold E. <unk> ( 1946 – 1953 ) 
 Earl C. Daum ( 1953 – 1959 ) 
 Harlow C. Gage ( 1959 – 1962 ) 
 David L. <unk> ( 1962 – 1966 ) 
 Max C. Wilson ( 1966 – 1968 ) 
 Alexander D. Rhea ( 1968 – 1970 ) 
 A. C. " Bill " Gibbs ( 1970 – 1973 ) 
 Damon Martin ( 1973 – 1976 ) 
 Charles S. " Chuck " Chapman ( 1976 – 1987 ) 
 John G. Bagshaw ( 1987 – 1990 ) 
 William J. Hamel ( 1990 – 1997 ) 
 James R. <unk> ( 1997 – 1999 ) 
 Peter <unk> ( 1999 – 2003 ) 
 Denny Mooney ( 2003 – 2007 ) 
 Chris <unk> ( 2007 – 2008 ) 
 Mark Reuss ( 2008 – 2009 ) 
 Alan Batey ( 2009 – 2010 ) 
 Michael Devereux ( 2010 – 2014 ) 
 Gerry <unk> ( 2014 – 2014 ) 
 Jeff Rolfs ( Interim chairman and managing director ) ( 2014 – 2015 ) 
 Mark Bernhard ( 2015 – present ) 
 = = Motorsport = = 
 Holden has been involved with factory backed teams in Australian touring car racing since 1968 . The main factory @-@ backed teams have been the Holden Dealer Team ( 1969 – 1987 ) and the Holden Racing Team ( 1990 – present ) . Holden has won the Bathurst 1000 thirty times , more than any other manufacturer , and has won the Australian Touring Car and Supercars Championship title nineteen times . Along with the Holden Racing Team , Holden also supports Triple Eight Race Engineering in Supercars , while Brad Jones Racing , <unk> Motorsport , Charlie <unk> Racing , Erebus Motorsport , Lucas <unk> Motorsport and Tekno <unk> run Holden Commodores in the series . 
 = Nemesis ( Resident Evil ) = 
 The Nemesis , also called the Pursuer or Chaser ( <unk> , <unk> ) , is a fictional character in Capcom 's Resident Evil franchise . Although smaller than other tyrant models , the creature dwarfs a typical human , and possesses vastly superior intelligence and physical dexterity than its undead peers . It features in Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis as a titular main villain before later emerging in other titles and cameo roles . It is also featured on various merchandise and in the 2004 film Resident Evil : Apocalypse . The character is voiced by Tony Rosato in the game , and portrayed by Matthew G. Taylor in the film . 
 Since the Nemesis ' introduction , the character has received a positive reception , and has come to be regarded as one of the series ' most popular characters . Some publications have praised its role as an intimidating villain , while others have noted it as one of their favourite and most terrifying monsters in video games . 
 = = Conception and design = = 
 Introduced in Resident Evil 3 , the Nemesis was designed under the concept of a " huge , overpowering monster that could use weapons and intelligently track you anywhere " . During development , many different designs were considered . Although some elements remained constant among them , the early designs featured several different degrees of surface damage , as well as different options for clothing such as a protective vest instead of a coat or a nude design similar to the original Tyrant from Resident Evil . 
 In the series ' story , the Nemesis is the result of infecting a Tyrant — a humanoid bio @-@ weapon created to be the ultimate lifeform — with a parasitic organism designed to increase its intelligence . Upon infection , the parasite takes control of the Tyrant 's nervous system , forming its own brain and enabling it to follow precise instructions and make decisions without a need for constant direction . Clothed in black trousers , an overcoat , boots , and gloves , the Nemesis is armed with a rocket launcher mounted on its left arm . To emphasize its design as a prototype , the game developers left exposed muscles on its body and added stitches to cover the right eye . Upon spotting its target , it says the target 's name out loud and attacks . 
 The secretions from the parasite give the Nemesis massively heightened regenerative abilities , which result in the creature being almost impervious to damage ; although it can be put down with enough fire from small arms , eventually it will repair itself and resume the pursuit of its targets . However , this resulted in unexpected side effects , including damage to the skin and the emergence of additional tentacles , as well as unpredictable mutations caused by further attacks . In Resident Evil 3 , the creature 's survival instincts eventually override Nemesis ' programming , causing the host 's body to reject the parasite and transform into a giant digestive organ . Featuring large central bone protrusions and elongated tentacles , it crawls looking for prey , yet continues trying to complete its mission despite its now diminished intelligence . This design proved to be the most difficult for the game 's development team , as they worked to try to make it appear as unique as possible . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 The Nemesis , named after the Goddess of Vengeance from Greek mythology , first appears in the 1999 PlayStation game Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis as the game 's title character and primary antagonist . The product of years of research , the prototype is deployed by the Umbrella Corporation to hunt and kill the STARS police team as a field test , and as revenge for the destruction of the original Tyrant . The game ’ s protagonist , Jill Valentine , first encounters the Nemesis outside Raccoon City ’ s police station where it kills Brad Vickers and then pursues her , uttering " STARS ... " on sight . The Nemesis continues to stalk Valentine throughout the game , attacking with physical blows and grabs , and later , armed with a rocket launcher . After losing its overcoat as a result of heavy damage , the Nemesis mutates , and gains the ability to attack with long , extendable tentacles . Despite later being doused in acid , the Nemesis continues its pursuit , and mutates into a much larger monster after absorbing a dead Tyrant , gaining the ability to spew poison . Jill finally defeats the Nemesis using a rail cannon , and then depending on the choice of the player , she either kills it once and for all by unloading her weapons into it , or leaves it to die in the nuclear explosion that destroys Raccoon City . 
 The Nemesis also appears in Resident Evil Survivor 2 Code : Veronica , chasing the player if they fail to complete a level before the time limit expires and killing them instantly if it hits them ; it can also be fought as a secret boss armed with a rocket launcher if the player has met the proper conditions upon completing the game . The Nemesis returns for the Resident Evil 3 chapter of Resident Evil : The Umbrella Chronicles , in which it pursues Jill in the same manner as the original game and mutates into its secondary form as a boss . Alongside Jill , the Nemesis also appears in the Capcom title Under the Skin , and serves as a boss the player must steal coins from in a Raccoon City @-@ inspired level . Character cards for the Nemesis additionally appear in SVC : Card Fighters ' Clash 2 Expand Edition and its Nintendo DS sequel . In an interview , Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds producer Ryouta Niitsuma stated a desire to use the Nemesis in the title as a " monster @-@ type " character from the Resident Evil series , but was dropped after considering it too " grotesque and disgusting " and in consideration of ESRB ratings . The character would instead appear briefly in the game 's ending sequence for the Hulk . However , despite the initial concerns about his inclusion , the Nemesis appears as a playable character in Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , an updated version of Marvel vs. Capcom 3 . The Nemesis also appears in Resident Evil : Operation Raccoon City . In the game , the Nemesis ' programming is damaged and the USS is tasked with finding a parasite to repair it . Once the parasite is found , the players must defeat the Nemesis and inject it with the parasite . The Nemesis in the game uses a <unk> gun for the fight and is mainly based on his film counterpart , however once the mission is completed , the Nemesis awakes to find his rocket launcher and utters his famous line , " STARS ... " The Nemesis also appears in the tactical role @-@ playing game Project X Zone as a rival unit . 
 = = = In film = = = 
 The Nemesis is featured in the 2004 film , Resident Evil : Apocalypse , portrayed by Matthew G. Taylor . The character 's design was left relatively unchanged , brandishing a rocket launcher and similar attire , but with the addition of a forearm @-@ mounted rail gun , modeled after a heavily modified minigun . Director Paul W. S. Anderson noted that the gun 's addition was inspired by the idea of the Nemesis " walking around with a gigantic , powerful weapon in each hand and almost indecisive as to which one to use " . The costume for Nemesis was created by <unk> Inc. and <unk> Studios , and stands roughly 7 feet 3 inches ( 2 @.@ 21 m ) tall , weighing nearly 100 pounds ( 45 kg ) . After production of Apocalypse was completed , the costume was restored and put on display at <unk> 's offices . 
 While The Nemesis ' design remained similar , the character itself was expanded upon , now portrayed as a tragic villain . Formerly Matt Addison ( portrayed by Eric Mabius ) , a survivor of the events of the first film , he was infected with the T @-@ virus after being scratched by a Licker and later captured and experimented upon by the Umbrella Corporation . Transformed into the Nemesis , it is sent to kill the surviving members of STARS , but remembers its humanity after fighting Alice , and fights alongside the protagonists towards the film 's conclusion . The Nemesis is eventually crushed beneath a crashing helicopter , and is later killed by the nuclear explosion that destroys Raccoon City . 
 = = = In printed adaptations = = = 
 The Nemesis appears in a 1999 Hong Kong manhua adaptation of Resident Evil 3 by Lee Chung Hing , Biohazard 3 : Last Escape , which is named after the game 's Japanese title . The 27 @-@ issue series adds to the Nemesis ' backstory , detailing its origin by showing the infection and transformation of the original Tyrant by the Nemesis parasite . Some elements are changed for its design , such as the Nemesis retaining both eyes initially , and then losing the right eye and gaining cranial staples only after an encounter with Jill . The comic also introduces characters from Resident Evil 2 into the storyline , which results in a face @-@ off between the Nemesis and the mutated William Birkin towards the end of the series . 
 In 2000 , Simon & Schuster published a novelization of Resident Evil 3 , written by S. D. Perry . Though left unchanged for the most part , the Nemesis is immediately recognized as a modified Tyrant in the novel , which Jill Valentine dubs the " Nemesis " after thinking about why it hunts her . Instead of mutating due to having taken damage , the Nemesis transforms voluntarily towards the conclusion of the story in its pursuit of Jill , with its second form from the game being its actual appearance beneath the coat . 
 A novelization of Apocalypse was released in 2004 , written by Keith R. A. DeCandido . In the book , Matt and the Nemesis act as separate personalities in the same body , both aware , but with the Nemesis dominant . Matt eventually regains control after his body is impaled on a metal shard while fighting Alice , by showing the Nemesis his memories of Umbrella 's experimentation upon " them " . The Nemesis is later mentioned in the 2007 novelization of Resident Evil : Extinction , in which antagonist Doctor Isaacs considers the Nemesis both his greatest success and his greatest failure , hating mention of it and blaming its defection and destruction upon Umbrella 's desire to immediately field test it . 
 = = Promotion and merchandise = = 
 Nemesis appears on the cover of every version of Resident Evil 3 , and is mentioned prominently on flyers for Resident Evil : Survivor 2 . Capcom has also released commercial products modeled on the character , such as an adult size Halloween mask , and later a silver ring modeled after Nemesis 's head available for purchase through their Japanese online store . Palisades Toys used its likeness to create a posable action figure , which was released alongside several other Resident Evil @-@ based action figures , packaged with a base and equipable rocket launcher . Moby Dick released its own line of Resident Evil action figures bundled in pairs of a playable character and enemy . Included in the series were Nemesis 's first and second form , with the first form featuring an alternate head and equipable rocket launcher . Each set additionally includes a part of an action figure of Nemesis 's third form , which measures 24 inches ( 60 cm ) long when completed . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Following the game 's debut in 1999 , the Nemesis became one of the most recognizable and popular characters in the Resident Evil series . G4 's Filter named the Nemesis one of the top ten videogame villains of all time as selected by viewers , placing fifth on the list . IGN noted it as their favorite aspect of Resident Evil 3 , stating , " The point is , he 's a bad @-@ ass , and he 's got plenty of surprises in store for you besides just fast feet and a big gun " . In another article , IGN noted the Nemesis as one of their favorite video game monsters of all time , but felt disdain for its presentation in the film . They also named him one of the series ' best bosses , calling it " what may be Umbrella 's most fearsome creation ever " and comparing it to Terminator 2 : Judgment Day 's T @-@ 1000 , and later one of the top 100 video game villains of all time , placing 59th and described as horrific not for its appearance or attacks but its persistence . 1UP.com named the battle against the Nemesis one of the " 25 of the Most Badass Boss Fights of All Time " , saying " There are plenty of bosses worth mentioning from the Resident Evil series ... but the one that to this day most people point to as the biggest badass of the bunch is Nemesis [ sic ] " . 
 GamePro ranked the Nemesis 29th on their list of the " 47 Most Diabolical Video Game Villains of All Time " , noting the character " made <unk> memorable even among the other , superior installments in the series " . It ranked fourth on Electronic Gaming Monthly 's " Top Ten Badass Undead " article , which described its role as a simple , yet effective villain . GameSpot featured Nemesis in a " Reader 's Choice " edition of their " Top 10 Video Game Villains " article , placing eighth on the list and noting the character 's high popularity among fans when compared to the Tyrant . He has also been voted by GamesRadar 's readers as the 99th " most dastardly ne 'er @-@ do @-@ wells " villain in video games in their " top 100 " . GameDaily listed it as one of their favorite Capcom characters of all time , stating " The Resident Evil series has a slew of memorable bad guys to choose from ... but Nemesis is our favorite . " The Nemesis additionally ranked fifth on their list of " Top 25 Scariest Video Game Monsters " . 
 = Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) = 
 " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Janet Jackson with Carly Simon from Jackson 's seventh studio album , All for You ( 2001 ) . It was written and produced by Jackson , Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , with additional lyrics by Simon . The R & B and hip hop song is built around a sample of 1972 's " You 're So Vain " by Simon , who also added some new spoken parts into the song ; it talks about an unidentified man who attempted to extort money from Jackson . An official remix featuring Missy Elliott was released as the third single from the album on December 11 , 2001 by Virgin Records . 
 The album version of " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " received mixed reviews from music critics , with some calling it a highlight from the album , while others criticized Simon 's rapping . The remix version also received a mixed reaction from reviewers . The song reached number 28 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Jackson 's lowest @-@ charting single since 1983 , and also reached low positions worldwide . Its accompanying music video directed by Francis Lawrence depicts Jackson stalking a man in a hotel . " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " was performed on the 2001 – 02 All for You Tour . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 According to Jackson , she phoned American singer @-@ songwriter Carly Simon , asking for permission to use samples of her song " You 're So Vain " , but Simon wanted to re @-@ record her vocals . She agreed , with Simon wanting to write new lines . Jackson 's producer Jimmy Jam sent her the tracks they were already working on , and she went into a studio on Martha 's Vineyard to record some material . She rapped , initially thinking that Jackson and the producers would not use it , but they eventually liked it . They decided to marry both tracks , as the singers thought it " worked perfectly " , and it became a duet . Simon expressed that Jackson " could not have been sweeter or more appreciative " . 
 " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " generated media speculation of who exactly the man described in the song was . Many journalists believed the song was about Jackson 's ex @-@ husband René Elizondo , Jr . Jackson responded : " Everybody says that . Actually , that song 's about a few people , not one person in particular . Everyone likes to [ say ] , ' Ah , I know that 's about Rene . ' It 's about a few people that have entered and exited my life . " Simon created a similar controversy when she released " You 're So Vain " . It was speculated to be about Warren Beatty or Mick Jagger , both of which she denied . 
 In 2000 , Jackson called American rapper Missy Elliott to reveal that she loved her work . She asked the rapper to work with her on a remix of the song " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " . Elliott then wrote and rapped for the remix , and became the third single from All for You on December 11 , 2001 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " is an R & B and hip hop song which features a " rap poem " from Simon and samples her song " You 're So Vain " . Its composition excoriates an unfaithful lover for attempting to extort money , described as a " mean @-@ spirited duet that rails against enemies . " Jackson unveils anger and deceit , saying " Thought you 'd get the money too / Greedy motherfuckers try to have their cake and eat it too " . She also offers a comeuppance to a " baby gigolo " who hollers at " everything that walks / No substance , just small talk . " Simon also cited the claims of sampled song " You 're So Vain " to be written about Mick Jagger , singing " The apricot scarf was worn by Nick / There 's nothing in the words that refer to Mick " . In response to critics regarding it about her divorce , Jackson explained it was directed towards several people , while Jimmy Jam revealed it to be written in regards to music executives and lawyers . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Both the album and remix versions of " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " received mixed reviews from music critics . While reviewing All for You , Dan Aquilante from New York Post commented that the track would be remembered as one of the highlights from the album . Michael Paoletta from Billboard magazine called the song a " clever sister @-@ to @-@ sister " song . The New Rolling Stone Album Guide called the duet between Jackson and Simon " harsh " , and found Simon 's rap " silly " . John Mulvey of Yahoo ! Music referred to it as " bizarre " , and criticized Simon 's rap , classifying it as " incompetent " . AllMusic 's contributor Stephen Thomas Erlewine also was one of the reviewers who were unsatisfied with rapping by Simon . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine considered the song the album 's biggest misstep . He likened it to a car wreck : " impossible not to be horrified yet strangely intrigued " , and called Simon 's spoken @-@ word verses " embarrassing " . 
 Chuck Taylor from Billboard reviewed the remix version of " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " and considered it " more of a breakdown than anything we might regard as a standard composition , but the ingredients somehow make musical gumbo " . Contactmusic.com criticized the number of guests on the single version , but said it created a " soulful and very catchy version " , and noted that its " Grover Washington style sax break and the kind of infectious percussion vibe that Masters at Work are so adept at making " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " debuted at number 72 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , before reaching a peak of number 28 . This peak became her lowest since 1983 , when " Come Give Your Love to Me " reached number 58 . Since the release of Control in 1986 , every single released by the singer had peaked within the top 10 , with the exception of " The Pleasure Principle " . The song additionally reached numbers 7 , 20 and 26 on the Hot Dance Club Play , Mainstream Top 40 and Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs component charts , respectively . In the United Kingdom , the song peaked at number 13 , remaining for 10 weeks inside the chart . The song debuted at its peak of number 20 in Australia , and reached number 49 in New Zealand . In Europe , " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " failed to gain success . It peaked at number 69 in Germany , 54 in Romania , and 56 in Switzerland , although it achieved moderate success in Denmark , reaching the top 20 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " was directed by Francis Lawrence , with The Original Flyte Tyme Remix of the song being used . It was filmed at the Millennium Biltmore Hotel in Downtown Los Angeles . In the video , Jackson is stalking a man ( played by <unk> Scott ) in an abandoned hotel . She summons Elliott and a legion of zombies , including one that was created from a toilet . Jackson is also seen eating a spider , smashing jugs of water with a baseball bat , and taunting the man using telekinetic powers . Simon does not appear in the music video . A video for the P. Diddy Remix also was released , and uses the same footage of The Original Flyte Tyme Remix , with P. Diddy appearing in some parts . 
 The video was nominated for " Best Cinematography " at the MVPA Awards in 2002 . It was also placed as the seventh best music video of 2001 by Slant Magazine , who said " it 's been a while since we 've seen the reigning Jackson crank up a little attitude . It 's her own <unk> ' Thriller ' , if you will " . The video was included on the 2004 video compilation From Janet to Damita Jo : The Videos . In 2002 , American singer Britney Spears referenced and was inspired by " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " music video in her " Overprotected ( Darkchild Remix ) " video . It is seen in scenes of Spears walking down the hotel lobby and while in the elevator . Both videos also use the same hotel setting . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " was performed by Jackson during the All for You Tour in 2001 and 2002 . Gina <unk> from St. Petersburg Times , while reviewing the concert , noted that fans cheered with the performance . The February 16 , 2002 final date of the tour at the Aloha Stadium in Hawaii , was broadcast by HBO , and had an appearance by Elliott on the performance of the song . This rendition was also added to the setlist at its DVD release , Janet : Live in Hawaii , in 2002 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Japanese promo CD single liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Park Safety = 
 " Park Safety " is the 19th episode of the second season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 25th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 18 , 2010 . In the episode , Jerry is apparently mugged , which forces his co @-@ workers to be nicer to him , and prompts Leslie to seek stronger safety measures for the city 's parks . 
 The episode was written by Aisha Muharrar and directed by Michael Trim . The writers sought to establish in " Park Safety " that the other characters liked Jerry , even though they often make jokes at his expense . It featured a guest appearance by comedian Andy Samberg , who previously worked with Parks star Amy Poehler on the sketch comedy series Saturday Night Live , as a parks ranger named Carl . It also featured Mo Collins in her recurring guest role as Joan Callamezzo , host of the morning news program Pawnee Today . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , " Park Safety " was seen by 4 @.@ 7 million household viewers . Among audiences between ages 18 and 49 , it experienced a slightly lower rating than the previous week 's episode , " The Possum " , in part due to competition from the 2010 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . " Park Safety " received generally positive reviews , with several reviewers praising the comedic scene in which Jerry gives an embarrassing presentation to his co @-@ workers . Samberg 's performance , however , received mostly negative reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) holds a drawing to determine who will fill the park 's hummingbird feeders , a job reviled by the parks and recreation department . Jerry ( Jim O 'Heir ) , who is often mocked by his co @-@ workers , is chosen because everybody writes down Jerry 's name instead of their own . Later , Leslie receives a call from Ann ( Rashida Jones ) that Jerry is in the hospital with a dislocated shoulder . Jerry claims to have been mugged in the park , and Leslie decides nobody should tease Jerry anymore . When Jerry returns , he acts particularly buffoonish during a slideshow presentation , and ends up farting and splitting his pants , but everyone holds back laughter at Leslie 's request . Leslie meets with Carl <unk> ( Andy Samberg ) , a park security ranger who is incredibly loud but oblivious to the fact . Leslie suggests Carl get more help for the park to be safe . Meanwhile , Ron ( Nick Offerman ) teaches a self @-@ defense course to the rest of the department so they don 't end up like Jerry . 
 Leslie , Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) , and Jerry join Carl to take a tour of the park where Jerry was mugged . Carl says the area is largely unprotected due to budget cuts , so Leslie vows to get more funding . She appears on Pawnee Today , the local news show , saying the Pawnee government failed the parks and that security is poor . Paul ( Phil Reeves ) , the city manager , is angry over the television appearance , but informs Leslie the stunt worked and the mayor is offering $ 2 @,@ 500 to help fix the park . While at a press conference about the money , Jerry confesses to Leslie that he wasn 't mugged : he dropped a breakfast burrito in a creek , then fell while trying to grab it and dislocated his shoulder . He fabricated the mugger story because he was embarrassed and didn 't want everyone to make fun of him . Leslie angrily relates Jerry 's story to Mark , but he stops her short when he says that Jerry was too scared of his co @-@ workers to be honest with them . Leslie soon discovers Carl was offended by Leslie 's statements about park security and plans to show footage of Jerry falling into the creek on Pawnee Today . Leslie negotiates with Carl to not show the event , and instead they talk during the show about how much they enjoyed the film Avatar , much to the anger of host Joan Callamezzo ( Mo Collins ) . As part of their deal to not show the tape , Leslie buys Carl a brand new security cart . Carl hands over the tape , which she agrees to throw away after she watches it one last time . The office goes back to mocking Jerry , but with less venom than before , while Jerry confides that he doesn 't really care because he 's just two years away from retiring on a full pension and enjoying a peaceful retirement . 
 In a side plot , a love triangle develops between Andy ( Chris Pratt ) , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) and Ann . In an interview , Ann says Andy is a fun person but was a terrible boyfriend because he is completely reliant on others . When learning self @-@ defense from Ron , Ann takes down Andy with a wrist grab , impressing Andy but making April jealous . After Andy is accidentally knocked out by Ron , Ann later approaches Andy at his shoe shine stand and brings him gifts to help him feel better . April arrives and Andy gives her a vegetarian muffin . Surprised Andy got something for someone other than himself , Ann believes Andy has changed . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Park Safety " was written by Aisha Muharrar and directed by Michael Trim . It featured a guest appearance by comedian Andy Samberg as Carl , the park ranger . Samberg and Parks and Recreation star Amy Poehler previously appeared together as regular cast members in the NBC sketch comedy series , Saturday Night Live . The role of Carl was written with Samberg in mind because the writing staff knew they could get him as a guest appearance as long as filming corresponded with his Saturday Night Live schedule , although the character was tweaked slightly when it was confirmed Samberg would definitely play him . Samberg also knew most of the supporting cast , writers and staff when the episode was filmed . During an interview about his performance in the episode , Samberg jokingly responded : 
 " Well , I don 't want to jinx it , but I 'm pretty sure it 's the best episode , and maybe not just of this show but of any show on television ever , any theater show , any staged show , movie , or any , like , campfire ritual performed by cavemen . Take it all the way back . I think this is going to be the thing everyone talks about for the rest of their lives , and it will live on in infamy and history . If aliens came down and wanted one artifact to learn about human life , I think it would be this episode of Parks and Recreation . And you can take that to the bank . " 
 The idea of a Jerry @-@ centered episode arose when the writers decided one of the characters would get mugged . Muharrar said , " Once we thought about it , it was obvious it had to be Jerry . He 's the Parks Department punching bag , and it seemed like it was time for Jerry 's revenge . " Muharrar said the script tried to convey that although his co @-@ workers mock him , they do not hate him , and that Jerry does not take the jokes against him personally . Series co @-@ creator Michael Schur said once it was established in the episode " Practice Date " that Jerry was the co @-@ worker everyone else picked on , he felt it was important to write an episode that established the other characters actually liked Jerry , despite their jokes at his expense . 
 For the scenes involving self @-@ defense courses , the supporting cast underwent stunt training with the help of stunt coordinator Sean Graham . Ron wears a back support belt during the course , which was actor Nick Offerman 's idea . Offerman has many fight choreography skills from his past work in the Chicago theater , and he combined those skills with his training in Kabuki dance and theater . Offerman said , " I threw in a couple of Kabuki moves that we all had a hard time keeping a straight face through . " It was a reference to the episode " The Stakeout " , in which Ron suffered a hernia , and Muharrar said , " The idea [ is ] that Ron has the belt in his car trunk and is ready to go at a moment 's notice . " 
 " Park Safety " also featured Mo Collins as Pawnee Today host Joan Callamezzo , who previously appeared in the episodes " Pawnee Zoo " and " Christmas Scandal " . Poehler was pregnant when " Park Safety " was filmed , and some commentators said it was visibly clear in certain scenes . A newspaper clipping with a story and photo of Andy is taped to the wall of his shoeshine stand . This is a reference to the Pawnee Journal article written about him in the previous episode , " The Possum " . A stand selling Sweetums nutrition bars is visible during one of the park scenes . This is a reference to the previous episode " Sweetums " , where the company lobbies to sell its unhealthy snacks at the parks . A downloadable version of the " Safe Parks Now ! " poster Leslie made in the episode , which featured a photo of Jerry with a black eye , was also featured on the website . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Leslie and Carl agree not to discuss Jerry on Pawnee Today , they instead discuss the quality of the film Avatar , the 2009 James Cameron epic science fiction film released a few months before the episode first aired . Ann explains her proficiency during Ron 's self @-@ defense training courses results from her strong interest in female @-@ centric original movies on the women 's television network Lifetime . While describing how Tom would react to the news that Jerry dislocated his shoulder reaching for a breakfast burrito , Leslie said , " What would you do for a Klondike bar ? Kill your wife ? " This is a reference to the commercial jingle for the ice cream snack : " What would you do for a Klondike bar ? " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on March 18 , 2010 , " Park Safety " was seen by 4 @.@ 7 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . Although an increase in viewership over the 4 @.@ 6 million household viewers of the previous episode , " The Possum " , " Park Safety " marked a five percent drop in the Nielsen rating itself . It drew a 2 @.@ 0 rating / 6 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , compared to 2 @.@ 1 rating / 6 share the previous week . " Park Safety " suffered from competition from CBS footage of the first round of the 2010 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , which drew 10 @.@ 32 million household viewers during the 8 : 30 p.m. <unk> it shared with Parks and Recreation . " Park Safety " also drew less viewers ( although a higher Nielsen rating ) than the ABC drama series FlashForward , which drew 6 @.@ 3 million households , and a repeat of the Fox crime drama Bones , which drew 6 @.@ 6 million household viewers . Parks and Recreation outperformed a repeat of the CW supernatural – fantasy horror series The Vampire Diaries , which drew 1 @.@ 49 million household viewers . 
 " Park Safety " received generally positive reviews , with several reviewers particularly praising the scene in which Jerry gives an embarrassing presentation to his co @-@ workers . Andy Samberg 's performance , however , received mostly negative reviews . Entertainment Weekly writer Sandra Gonzalez called " Park Safety " a great episode , and complimented the scenes involving Jerry and the growing romance between Andy and April . Gonzalez said the only negative aspect was Samberg , of whom she said , " the scream @-@ talking gag got old fast " . Alan Sepinwall , television columnist with The Star @-@ Ledger , also enjoyed the scene with Jerry 's presentation , and praised the show for fleshing out its minor characters , comparing it to The Office and its similar treatment of supporting characters during its second season . Sepinwall said Samberg 's character was " a little too broad for the show 's buttoned @-@ down style " but led to some funny moments . 
 Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club called Jerry 's presentation " one of the most amazing scenes in Parks & Rec history " . Heisler also praised Pratt 's performance and felt Ann was unusually sympathetic in " Park Safety " , but felt Samberg was poorly used and his loud talking quickly grew tiresome . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell said " Park Safety " continued an ongoing development of the mythology of the Pawnee community , comparing it to " a live @-@ action Springfield " , the setting of the animated comedy series The Simpsons . Kandell said Samberg 's character " could have been irritating but somehow wasn 't " . Matt Fowler of IGN called Jerry 's presentation " one of the best , most pointed moments of crude humor that we 've ever seen on the show " . Fowler also said Swanson 's expertise in self @-@ defense " fits perfectly " to his character . Kona Gallagher of TV Squad said the constant mocking of Jerry made him feel uncomfortable , and that Samberg " just seemed like the personification of an SNL skit instead of a real character " . But Gallagher praised Ron Swanson 's role in the episode , as well as the apparent rekindling of Ann 's feelings for Andy . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Park Safety " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = The Allman Brothers Band ( album ) = 
 The Allman Brothers Band is the debut studio album by American rock band the Allman Brothers Band . It was released in the United States by Atco Records and Capricorn Records on November 4 , 1969 and produced by Adrian Barber . Formed in 1969 , the Allman Brothers Band came together following various musical pursuits by each individual member . Following his session work in Muscle Shoals , Alabama , Duane Allman moved to Jacksonville , Florida where he led large jam sessions with his new band , one he had envisioned as having two guitarists and two drummers . After rounding out the lineup with the addition of his brother , Gregg Allman , the band played free shows in public parks and moved to Macon , Georgia , where they were to be one of the premiere acts on Capricorn . 
 The album was recorded and mixed in two weeks at Atlantic Studios in New York City . Much of the material presented was premiered live over the preceding months and combines blues , jazz and country music to varying degrees . It includes re @-@ workings of " Trouble No More " and " Don 't Want You No More , " as well as notable originals such as " Dreams " , which highlighted the band 's jazz influence , and " Whipping Post " , which soon became a crowd favorite . Although the group was arranged to work with producer Tom Dowd ( whose credits included Cream and John Coltrane ) , he was unavailable , and they instead recorded with house engineer Adrian Barber . The album 's artwork was photographed at various places in Macon and surrounding areas . 
 The record initially received a poor commercial response , charting in the lower levels of Billboard 's Top 200 Pop Albums chart . Despite this , the album received critical acclaim from publications such as Rolling Stone , who called it " consistently [ ... ] subtle , and honest , and moving . " Following the release of the album , the band remained on the road for an extended period of time . They chose to remain in Macon , despite suggestions from label executives to move to larger cities for a better shot at commercial acceptance . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Allman Brothers Band was formed in March 1969 , during large jam sessions with various musicians in Jacksonville , Florida . Duane Allman and Jai Johanny Johanson ( Jaimoe ) had recently moved from Muscle Shoals , where Duane participated in session work at FAME Studios for artists such as Aretha Franklin , King Curtis , and Wilson Pickett , with whom he recorded a cover of the Beatles ' " Hey Jude " that went to number 23 on the national charts . Duane began to put together a new band , and invited bassist Berry Oakley to jam with the new group ; the pair had met in a Jacksonville , Florida club some time earlier , and became quick friends . The group had immediate chemistry , and Duane 's vision for a " different " band — one with two lead guitarists and two drummers — began evolving . Meanwhile , Phil Walden , the manager of the late Otis Redding and several other R & B acts , was looking to expand into rock acts . Rick Hall became frustrated with the group ’ s recording methods , and offered the tracks recorded and their contract to Walden and Jerry Wexler of Atlantic Records , who purchased them for $ 10 @,@ 000 . Walden intended the upcoming group to be the centerpiece of his new Atlantic @-@ distributed label , Capricorn . 
 After the duo moved to Jacksonville , they began to put together large jam sessions . Dickey Betts had played in Oakley ’ s previous band , the Second Coming , and became the group ’ s second lead guitarist , while Butch Trucks , with whom Duane and Gregg had cut a demo less than a year prior , fulfilled the role of the second drummer . The Second Coming ’ s Reese Wynans played keyboards , and Duane , Oakley and Betts all shared vocal duties . The unnamed group began to perform free shows in Willow Branch Park in Jacksonville , with an ever @-@ changing , rotating cast of musicians . Duane felt strongly his brother should be the vocalist of the new group ( which effectively eliminated Wynans ' position , as Gregg also played keyboards ) . Gregg accepted the invitation and entered rehearsal on March 26 , 1969 , when the group was rehearsing " Trouble No More " by Muddy Waters . Although initially intimidated by the musicians , Duane pressured his brother " into singing [ his ] guts out . " Four days later , the group made their début at the Jacksonville Armory . Although many names were suggested including Beelzebub , the six @-@ piece eventually decided on the Allman Brothers Band . 
 The group moved to Macon , Georgia by May 1 , where Walden was establishing Capricorn Records . The band performed locally , as well as eighty miles north in Atlanta 's Piedmont Park , and practiced at the newly minted Capricorn nearly each day . The group forged a strong brotherhood , spending countless hours rehearsing , consuming psychedelic drugs , and hanging out in Rose Hill Cemetery , where they would write songs . Their first performances outside the South came on May 30 and 31 in Boston , opening for the Velvet Underground . In need of more material , the group remade old blues numbers like “ Trouble No More ” and “ One Way Out ” , in addition to improvised jams such as “ Mountain Jam . ” Gregg , who had struggled to write in the past , became the band ’ s sole songwriter , composing songs such as “ Whipping Post " and “ Black @-@ Hearted Woman . ” Much of the material collected on The Allman Brothers Band was written between the period of May to August 1969 and premiered live . According to Johanson , the group gauged crowd reaction to the numbers and adjusted the songs accordingly . " Before we went into the studio , we had a very clear idea of what we were all trying to do musically and that it was unique , totally different from anything else that anyone was playing , " said Betts . " From the earliest rehearsals , we all had the same mind @-@ set . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The band set off from Macon for New York City in August 1969 , and faced setbacks along the way , such as their equipment truck breaking down in South Carolina . In addition , they had arranged to work with Cream producer Tom Dowd , who was unavailable ; Atlantic Records house engineer Adrian Barber recorded the sessions instead , and was credited as producer . Recalled Dowd , " I was supposed to have done the first album with the band up in New York , but some way or other I got detoured . Jerry Wexler made a deal to keep them in the studio for three or four days when they were supposed to be with me . " The band had no commercial success in mind , having had troublesome experiences individually in the past with producers and labels that pushed for radio hits . The band felt that with time they would develop a small , devoted following and be strong enough to collect $ 3 – 4 @,@ 000 dollars per night . 
 The Allman Brothers Band was recorded and mixed in two weeks , and according to biographer Alan Paul , " virtually no outtakes exist from the sessions . " The band had performed their songs countless times in the preceding months and " [ had ] them down cold . " Numerous artists , including Ray Charles , had recorded on the studio 's house Hammond organ , but Gregg Allman set up his own instead , feeling unable to play on the same instrument as Charles . A red light on the recording board would go on when the band began recording , and it made Gregg Allman nervous ; in order to perform takes as needed , he unscrewed the light . The two @-@ week booking was initially designed for laying down basic tracks , with overdubs following later , but the group ended up cutting the entire record in six non @-@ consecutive days . They first entered Atlantic Studios that Sunday night ( August 3 ) to " get sounds " ; the band laid down the album 's openers , " Don ’ t Want You No More " and " It 's Not My Cross to Bear " , as well as " Dreams , " which the band set aside . " Dreams " had previously been recorded as a demo at Macon ’ s new <unk> Studios in April . 
 On August 5 , the band cut " Black Hearted Woman " and " Trouble No More " , and the group completed " Whipping Post " after another day off on August 7 ( it took the entirety of that day ’ s session to complete the recording , despite the fact that they had performed the number countless times ) . The next day , the band attempted to record " Statesboro Blues , " which was the song that influenced Duane Allman to begin slide playing . Unable to achieve the same energy as it would performed live , the band scrapped the recording and session for the day . " Every Hungry Woman " was recorded on August 11 , and their last day in the studio on Tuesday , August 12 produced a final version of " Dreams " . Johnson remembered the process as only taking four days ; " We went in there , played our asses off , and that was it ; we were done in four days and they spent the rest of the time mixing , " said Johnson . 
 Although Butch Trucks recalls the entire ensemble as comfortable with studio recording , another source claims that Johnson , Betts and Oakley were unfamiliar with studio recording , but nevertheless not intimidated . " They were out of their element in New York , hustled by a chap with an English accent , " said Dowd of Barber . He spoke of Barber 's direction as " perhaps intimidating , or push @-@ push , shove @-@ shove . ' Do what the guy says and let ’ s get out of here . ' " " Dreams " , which later gained regard among band members as the high point of the record , was the only song in which the group got stuck , due to Duane Allman 's displeasure with his guitar solo . The performance captured on record came when Duane instructed the other members to turn off all the lights in the studio after the day 's session , and sat in a corner beside his amp and baffle . Allman played slide guitar ( which was not employed in previous attempts ) and improvised the overdubbed performance , bringing all of the members to tears . " It was unbelievable , " recalled Trucks . " It was just magic . It ’ s always been that the greatest music we played was from out of nowhere , that it wasn ’ t practiced , planned , or discussed . " 
 During their tenure in New York , the group made their debut over three non @-@ consecutive nights at Ungano 's in Manhattan , a club that would eventually become regarded within the ensemble as their " second home . " Gregg Allman felt the band had rushed through their debut recording and was later unhappy with his vocal sound on the record ; " They were recorded with the regular old tape echo " Heartbreak Hotel " setting , " he recalled . Barber disagreed with this assessment , and , not wanting to cause any quarrels , Allman backed away . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The songs on the album were largely arranged after Gregg Allman joined the band in Jacksonville , Florida in March 1969 . Most of the songs were devised from longer , impromptu jam sessions . The group 's style evolved from a mix of jazz , country music , blues and rock , which was the result of each individual member turning the others onto their particular interests . Trucks introduced Johnson to the Grateful Dead and the Rolling Stones ; Johnson likewise introduced the group to jazz musicians such as Miles Davis and John Coltrane , and Betts did the same with country music and Chuck Berry . Duane Allman had previously listened to Davis and Coltrane before Johnson 's suggestion , and his two favorite songs — Coltrane 's version of " My Favorite Things " and Miles Davis ' " All Blues " — were the basis for the majority of the band 's modal jamming , " without a lot of chord changes . " 
 The album opens with an instrumental , a cover of Spencer Davis ' " Don 't Want You No More , " which had previously been employed on set lists of the Second Coming , Oakley and Betts ' former band . Allman and Betts ' guitars perform in unison on a five @-@ note melody while Johnson concentrates on his hi @-@ hat , and the song includes an organ solo . The song contains two guitar solos , with the latter " [ coming ] in behind the first one for a darting buildup that sound [ s ] like something taken from Brahms . " It segues into a " lazy blues shuffle " titled " It 's Not My Cross to Bear , " which Allman had written in Los Angeles for a former lover . " Black Hearted Woman , " also penned on the same subject , follows , and the album returns to a blues @-@ based sound with a cover of " Trouble No More , " featuring Duane ’ s debut bottleneck guitar performance . Songs such as " Black Hearted Woman " and " Every Hungry Woman " were written about Allman 's experiences with a girl named Stacy in Los Angeles . 
 Among the most changed were two songs that would become the basis for two of the Allman Brothers ' most famed epic concert numbers : " Dreams " and " Whipping Post " . Oakley " played a huge role in the band ’ s arrangements , " changing numbers such as " Whipping Post " from a ballad structure to a more hard @-@ rocking song . " Dreams " developed from a jam in which the band toyed with the theme to the film 2001 : A Space Odyssey , and has been referred to by Johnson as Coltrane 's " My Favorite Things " with lyrics . Johnson 's drum fills were pulled from Jimmy Cobb 's performance on " All Blues " ; he later commented that he " did a lot of copying , but only from the best . " " Dreams " begins with " intricate , subdued drums playing under a soft organ with only the hint of guitars before Gregg begins singing about disillusionment and broken dreams . " 
 The final song on the record , " Whipping Post , " was written shortly after Allman returned to Jacksonville . The song came to him shortly before bed , but he was unable to acquire a pencil and paper to write down his ideas , as there was a child asleep in the room and he could not turn on the lights . Turning to his next best alternative , he struck two kitchen matches ( one for light and one , later blown out , as a charcoal writing utensil ) and wrote down his lyrics on a bedside ironing board . " Whipping Post " was similar in composition to " Dreams " in its first incarnation , with Oakley later creating the heavy bassline that starts off the track . Duane and Betts take quick solos before the track builds to an " anguished climax , " leading to Gregg Allman 's solo voice , singing the song 's refrain : " Good Lord , I feel like I 'm <unk> ' . " Allman had no idea the intro was written in 11 / 4 time — " I just saw it as three sets of three , and then two to jump on the next three sets with " — until his brother pointed it out for him . " My brother told me — I guess the day I wrote it — he said , ' That 's good , man . I didn ’ t know you understood 11 / 4 . ' Of course I said something intelligent like , ' What 's 11 / 4 ? ' Duane just said , ' Okay , dumbass , I 'll try to draw it up on paper for you . ' " 
 Gregg Allman 's lyrical contributions to the band 's debut album have been called " remarkably mature lyrical conceptions for such a young man , expertly executed in a minimalist , almost haiku style . " Allman 's inspiration came from his time in Los Angeles as a part of Hour Glass , " getting fucked by different land sharks in the business , " experiencing great frustration among fierce competition . The traditional blues songs were , likewise , regarded as " songs that were so good they couldn ’ t be left off the album . " On the writing of the record , Allman wrote in his memoir My Cross to Bear , " I wrote most of that whole first record in that one week . I had total peace of mind . L.A. and all its changes didn ’ t even cross my mind . I felt like I was starting all over , which I was . " Most of the songs on the album were written at Rose Hill Cemetery . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 The cover for the album was taken by photographer Stephen Paley . Paley had gotten to know Duane Allman during photo shoots for Atlantic . Paley stayed for " about a week " in Macon with the band , partying with the group . They approached any areas about the town that appeared photogenic , such as " fields , old houses , railroad tracks , [ and ] the cemetery . " The front album cover photo was taken at the entrance of the College House ( now owned by Mercer University ) next door at 315 College Street . The back cover photo of the album was taken at the Bond Tomb at Rose Hill Cemetery , located at 1091 Riverside Drive in Macon . 
 The gatefold cover of the vinyl LP features the band posing nude in a brook . The shot was original manager Phil Walden 's idea , and the brook was on his brother Alan 's property . Alan later recalled , " The [ inner sleeve ] photo was taken in Round Oak , Georgia , down behind my log cabin there , which is also the back of Otis Redding 's Big O Ranch " . Rolling Stone editor Jann Wenner was present with Boz Scaggs , whom he was producing at the time . They brought bubbles to cover themselves up , but the bubbles were washed away by the stream . Trucks had sliced his leg open earlier that day , requiring thirteen stitches , and was unable to get in the water ; he is standing behind Oakley in the shot . Walden suggested the band take a few shots standing full @-@ frontal ; the band was reluctant but he assured them they would never see the light of day . At their first performance at the Fillmore East that December , Trucks discovered the full @-@ frontal shots were printed in a broadsheet alternative newspaper . 
 Paley later said of the cover shoot , " I never liked a band more . I was one of them . It was like being a rock star . I hung out with a lot of rock stars but no one ever did that to the same extent . There was just an ease to the whole thing . They really were the kindest , most fun band I ever worked with . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The Allman Brothers Band was released in November 1969 through Atco and Capricorn Records . Atco was a subsidiary label of Atlantic Records , and Walden had not even created a logo for Capricorn Records ; instead , the LP featured an Atco label with a " barely noticeable " line reading " Capricorn Records Series . " The record received a poor commercial response , selling fewer than 35 @,@ 000 copies upon initial release . Executives suggested to Walden that he relocate the band to New York or Los Angeles to " acclimate " them to the industry . " They wanted us to act " like a rock band " and we just told them to fuck themselves , " remembered Trucks . For their part , the members of the band remained optimistic , electing to stay in the South . " Everyone told us we ’ d fall by the wayside down there , " said Gregg Allman , but the collaboration between the band and Capricorn Records " transformed Macon from this sleepy little town into a very hip , wild , and crazy place filled with bikers and rockers . " 
 The band played shows along the East Coast in December 1969 , attempting to kick @-@ start the record onto Billboard 's Top 200 Pop Albums chart . In January , the band performed at the Electric Factory in Philadelphia and the Fillmore West in San Francisco before debuting at the Whisky a Go Go in Los Angeles , representing the Allmans ' first engagement there since their days in the Hour Glass . On the third day of their Whisky residency , the album logged at number 188 on the top 200 , " enough to prove that the ABB was more than a regional outfit . " Capricorn issued " Black Hearted Woman " as the album ’ s single , edited down to nearly two minutes shorter in an effort to place on top 40 radio . Despite Ed Och 's rave review in Billboard , the single failed to register on pop radio . Rather than employing the standard cover shot for the advertising campaign , marketing rather emphasized the nude group shot , alongside a quote from Och 's Billboard review , describing the group as a " bad bunch of electric Southern longhairs . " 
 Rolling Stone 's Lester Bangs called the album " consistently [ ... ] subtle , and honest , and moving , " describing the band as " a white group who 've transcended their schooling to produce a volatile blues @-@ rock sound of pure energy , inspiration and love . " A retrospective review from Bruce Eder at Allmusic stated it " might be the best debut album ever delivered by an American blues band , a bold , powerful , hard @-@ edged , soulful essay in electric blues with a native Southern ambience . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Gregg Allman , except where noted . 
 Side one 
 " Don 't Want You No More " ( Spencer Davis , Edward Hardin ) – 2 : 25 
 " It 's Not My Cross to Bear " – 5 : 02 
 " Black Hearted Woman " – 5 : 08 
 " Trouble No More " ( McKinley Morganfield aka Muddy Waters ) – 3 : 45 
 Side two 
 " Every Hungry Woman " – 4 : 13 
 " Dreams " – 7 : 18 
 " Whipping Post " – 5 : 17 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All credits adapted from liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = 1905 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1905 Atlantic hurricane season featured five known tropical cyclones , two of which made landfall in the United States . The first system was initially observed near the Windward Islands on September 6 . The last system to dissipate , the fourth storm , transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on October 11 , while located well southeast of Newfoundland . These dates fall within the period with the most tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic . Between October 5 and October 10 , the fourth and fifth system existed simultaneously . 
 Of the season 's five tropical cyclones , only one reached hurricane status , the fewest since 1890 . Furthermore , that storm strengthened into major hurricane , which is Category 3 or higher on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . This storm , which was the fourth and strongest hurricane of the season , peaked at Category 3 strength with 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) winds . It was also attributed to at least six fatalities after sending a rogue wave across the steerage of the steamer Campania . The first storm also resulted in two deaths after a schooner wrecked in Barbados . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 28 , the lowest value since 1864 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 The first storm of the season , already at tropical storm intensity , was identified on September 6 to the east of Grenada . A small storm , it quickly passed through the southern Lesser Antilles early on September 7 . The next day , the storm weakened to a tropical depression before dissipating as a shallow but large system . A schooner sailing from Bridgetown to Suriname encountered heavy seas just a day out of port and turned back . It was thrown onto the pierhead and wrecked . The captain and a crewman were swept overboard and drowned . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Two = = = 
 HURDAT indicates that a tropical storm originated to the northeast of the Windward Islands on September 11 . Steadily tracking towards the west @-@ northwest , the storm gradually intensified , reaching its peak intensity with winds estimated at 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) on September 13 . After turning northwestward , the system slowed and began to weaken . By September 16 , the storm weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated shortly thereafter . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 Based on weather reports from the Weather Bureau Office in New Orleans , Louisiana , a tropical storm was first observed about 20 miles ( 30 km ) north @-@ northwest of Swan Island on September 24 . The storm strengthened slightly before making landfall near Punta Allen , Quintana Roo around 1200 UTC on September 25 . Early on the following day , the system emerged into the Gulf of Mexico and headed north @-@ northwestward . At midday on September 26 , it peaked with sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . The storm re @-@ curved north @-@ northeastward late on September 28 , while approaching the Gulf Coast of the United States . At 1000 UTC the next day , this system made landfall in extreme southwest Vermilion Parish , Louisiana at the same intensity . The storm slowly weakened inland and dissipated over Arkansas on September 30 . Strong winds and rough seas were reported along the central Gulf Coast of the United States , forcing ships to remain in port . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 On October 1 , a tropical depression developed in the southwestern Caribbean Sea . Moving slowly north @-@ northeastward , it reached tropical storm status early on October 3 . The following day , the storm curved northeastward . Kingston , Jamaica recorded rainfall as the system bypassed the island . Late on October 5 and early on October 6 , the storm passed through the Windward Passage . Eastern Cuba was affected " with some force " , but damage was not significant . Entering the Atlantic Ocean , the system passed through the southeastern Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands without causing damage . While centered about halfway between Bermuda and Turks and Caicos Islands , the storm strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . 
 Later on October 8 , it deepened to a Category 2 hurricane , while passing south of Bermuda . The island experienced gale force winds with gusts reaching hurricane force , but damage was apparently minimal . Early on October 9 , the storm intensified into a Category 3 hurricane and peaked with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . On October 10 , it weakened to a Category 2 and then became extratropical early the next day . The steamer Campania encountered the remnants of the storm and was reported to have been struck by a large rogue wave , which was described as " disastrous . " The ship roll and water moved across the steerage , sweeping five passengers into the ocean , they presumably drowned . At least 30 other people were injured , one of them fatally . The extratropical remnants dissipated over the Labrador Sea on October 13 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed in the Gulf of Mexico on October 5 , while located about 105 miles ( 170 km ) north of the Yucatán Peninsula . The storm strengthened slowly while crossing the Gulf of Mexico and peaked with sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) early on October 8 . At 1700 UTC on the following day , it made landfall near Morgan City , Louisiana at the same intensity . The system quickly weakened inland and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone over Mississippi on October 10 . The extratropical remnants dissipated over Virginia on October 11 . The remnants of this storm brought heavy rains to the Eastern United States and Atlantic Canada . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 663 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 663 ( PA 663 ) is a 22 @.@ 98 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 36 @.@ 98 km ) state highway in Bucks and Montgomery counties in southeast Pennsylvania . Its northern terminus is at PA 309 and PA 313 in Quakertown , where it continues eastward as PA 313 , and its southern terminus is at PA 100 in Pottstown . Along the way , PA 663 also passes through the town of Pennsburg . It is called John Fries Highway between Pennsburg and Quakertown . It has an interchange with Interstate 476 ( I @-@ 476 , the Northeast Extension of the Pennsylvania Turnpike ) at exit 44 west of Quakertown . The route was assigned in 1930 , and it has had several realignments since its commissioning , including two major ones . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 663 begins at an intersection with PA 100 in Pottstown , Montgomery County , heading east on four @-@ lane undivided West King Street . The road passes through commercial areas and crosses the Colebrookdale Railroad and <unk> Creek . The route becomes two @-@ lane undivided King Street and is lined with residences . PA 663 turns north onto Charlotte Street and continues past homes , curving to the northeast . The road crosses into Upper <unk> Township and runs through a mix of residential and commercial areas as North Charlotte Street . The route turns east before it curves back to the northeast . PA 663 continues through wooded areas with a few homes and enters New Hanover Township . The road runs through more rural areas with some development and passes to the east of New Hanover Airport at the Swamp Pike intersection . 
 Farther northeast , PA 663 intersects PA 73 and turns east to form a concurrency with that route on Big Road . The road crosses Swamp Creek before PA 663 splits from PA 73 by heading northeast on Layfield Road . The route runs through farmland and woodland with some development . Farther northeast , the road heads into Upper Hanover Township and crosses the Green Lane Reservoir along the Perkiomen Creek . PA 663 heads into Pennsburg , where it becomes Pottstown Avenue and runs past homes and a few businesses . In the center of town , the route intersects PA 29 . Past this intersection , the road becomes Quakertown Avenue and passes more development before leaving Pennsburg for Upper Hanover Township again . At this point , the route becomes John Fries Highway and heads through farm fields and woods . 
 Past the <unk> Pike intersection , PA 663 enters Milford Township in Bucks County and continues through more rural areas . The road passes to the southeast of Spinnerstown and widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway at the Spinnerstown Road / <unk> Road intersection , where it curves to the east . The route becomes undivided and comes to an interchange with I @-@ 476 ( Pennsylvania Turnpike Northeast Extension ) . PA 663 becomes a divided highway again and passes businesses . The route becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road again and continues back into rural areas , where it crosses Allentown Road . The road passes to the north of Milford Square and passes near some development . The route enters Richland Township at the <unk> Road intersection and passes homes , becoming the border between Richland Township to the north and Quakertown to the south at the Milford Square Pike intersection . PA 663 heads into commercial areas and fully enters Quakertown , where it widens back into a four @-@ lane divided highway and comes to its northern terminus at an intersection with PA 309 . Past this intersection , the road continues east as PA 313 . 
 = = History = = 
 PA 663 was once part of the <unk> and Milford Square Turnpike . The turnpike was chartered in March 1858 . When Pennsylvania legislated routes in 1911 , what is now PA 663 was not given a number . PA 663 was designated in 1930 to run from in US 422 ( High Street ) in Pottstown north to PA 73 in New Hanover Township . At this time , the entire length of the route was paved , along with the unnumbered road between PA 73 and Quakertown . In 1936 , PA 663 was extended north to an intersection with PA 309 and PA 313 in Quakertown . The route followed its current alignment between PA 73 and Pennsburg before it followed Quakertown Road and Sleepy Hollow Road to Spinnerstown , where it turned east and followed Spinnerstown Road and Milford Square Pike to Quakertown . By 1967 , the southern terminus of PA 663 was rerouted to PA 100 in Pottstown , heading west on King Street . In the 1960s , PA 663 was shifted from Milford Square Pike to a new alignment to the north between the Northeast Extension and Quakertown . After construction began in 1973 , a new alignment of PA 663 to the south from Pennsburg to the Northeast Extension opened a year later , with the route moved off Quakertown Road , Sleepy Hollow Road , and Spinnerstown Road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = PA 663 Alternate Truck = = 
 Pennsylvania Route 663 Alternate Truck is a truck route around a weight @-@ restricted bridge over the <unk> Creek in Pottstown , on which trucks over 25 tons and combination loads over 28 tons are prohibited . It follows PA 100 and PA 73 and was signed in 2013 . 
 = <unk> = 
 Phagocytes are cells that protect the body by ingesting ( <unk> ) harmful foreign particles , bacteria , and dead or dying cells . Their name comes from the Greek phagein , " to eat " or " devour " , and " <unk> " , the suffix in biology denoting " cell " , from the Greek <unk> , " hollow vessel " . They are essential for fighting infections and for subsequent immunity . Phagocytes are important throughout the animal kingdom and are highly developed within vertebrates . One litre of human blood contains about six billion phagocytes . They were first discovered in 1882 by Ilya Ilyich Mechnikov while he was studying starfish larvae . Mechnikov was awarded the 1908 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his discovery . Phagocytes occur in many species ; some amoebae behave like macrophage phagocytes , which suggests that phagocytes appeared early in the evolution of life . 
 Phagocytes of humans and other animals are called " professional " or " non @-@ professional " depending on how effective they are at phagocytosis . The professional phagocytes include many types of white blood cells ( such as neutrophils , monocytes , macrophages , mast cells , and dendritic cells ) . The main difference between professional and non @-@ professional phagocytes is that the professional phagocytes have molecules called receptors on their surfaces that can detect harmful objects , such as bacteria , that are not normally found in the body . Phagocytes are crucial in fighting infections , as well as in maintaining healthy tissues by removing dead and dying cells that have reached the end of their lifespan . 
 During an infection , chemical signals attract phagocytes to places where the pathogen has invaded the body . These chemicals may come from bacteria or from other phagocytes already present . The phagocytes move by a method called chemotaxis . When phagocytes come into contact with bacteria , the receptors on the phagocyte 's surface will bind to them . This binding will lead to the engulfing of the bacteria by the phagocyte . Some phagocytes kill the ingested pathogen with oxidants and nitric oxide . After phagocytosis , macrophages and dendritic cells can also participate in antigen presentation , a process in which a phagocyte moves parts of the ingested material back to its surface . This material is then displayed to other cells of the immune system . Some phagocytes then travel to the body 's lymph nodes and display the material to white blood cells called lymphocytes . This process is important in building immunity , and many pathogens have evolved methods to evade attacks by phagocytes . 
 = = History = = 
 The Russian zoologist Ilya Ilyich Mechnikov ( 1845 – 1916 ) first recognized that specialized cells were involved in defense against microbial infections . In 1882 , he studied motile ( freely moving ) cells in the larvae of <unk> , believing they were important to the animals ' immune defenses . To test his idea , he inserted small thorns from a tangerine tree into the larvae . After a few hours he noticed that the motile cells had surrounded the thorns . Mechnikov traveled to Vienna and shared his ideas with Carl Friedrich Claus who suggested the name ‘ ‘ phagocyte ’ ’ ( from the Greek words phagein , meaning " to eat or devour " , and <unk> , meaning " hollow vessel " ) for the cells that Mechnikov had observed . 
 A year later , Mechnikov studied a fresh water crustacean called Daphnia , a tiny transparent animal that can be examined directly under a microscope . He discovered that fungal spores that attacked the animal were destroyed by phagocytes . He went on to extend his observations to the white blood cells of mammals and discovered that the bacterium Bacillus <unk> could be engulfed and killed by phagocytes , a process that he called phagocytosis . Mechnikov proposed that phagocytes were a primary defense against invading organisms . 
 In 1903 , Almroth Wright discovered that phagocytosis was reinforced by specific antibodies that he called opsonins , from the Greek <unk> , " a dressing or relish " . Mechnikov was awarded ( jointly with Paul Ehrlich ) the 1908 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his work on phagocytes and phagocytosis . 
 Although the importance of these discoveries slowly gained acceptance during the early twentieth century , the intricate relationships between phagocytes and all the other components of the immune system were not known until the 1980s . 
 = = Phagocytosis = = 
 Phagocytosis is the process of taking in particles such as bacteria , parasites , dead host cells , and cellular and foreign debris by a cell . It involves a chain of molecular processes . Phagocytosis occurs after the foreign body , a bacterial cell , for example , has bound to molecules called " receptors " that are on the surface of the phagocyte . The phagocyte then stretches itself around the bacterium and engulfs it . Phagocytosis of bacteria by human neutrophils takes on average nine minutes . Once inside this phagocyte , the bacterium is trapped in a compartment called a phagosome . Within one minute the phagosome merges with either a lysosome or a granule to form a phagolysosome . The bacterium is then subjected to an overwhelming array of killing mechanisms and is dead a few minutes later . Dendritic cells and macrophages are not so fast , and phagocytosis can take many hours in these cells . Macrophages are slow and untidy eaters ; they engulf huge quantities of material and frequently release some undigested back into the tissues . This debris serves as a signal to recruit more phagocytes from the blood . Phagocytes have voracious appetites ; scientists have even fed macrophages with iron filings and then used a small magnet to separate them from other cells . 
 A phagocyte has many types of receptors on its surface that are used to bind material . They include <unk> receptors , scavenger receptors , and Toll @-@ like receptors . <unk> receptors increase the phagocytosis of bacteria that have been coated with immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) antibodies or with complement . " Complement " is the name given to a complex series of protein molecules found in the blood that destroy cells or mark them for destruction . Scavenger receptors bind to a large range of molecules on the surface of bacterial cells , and Toll @-@ like receptors — so called because of their similarity to well @-@ studied receptors in fruit flies that are encoded by the Toll gene — bind to more specific molecules . Binding to Toll @-@ like receptors increases phagocytosis and causes the phagocyte to release a group of hormones that cause inflammation . 
 = = Methods of killing = = 
 The killing of microbes is a critical function of phagocytes that is performed either within the phagocyte ( intracellular killing ) or outside of the phagocyte ( extracellular killing ) . 
 = = = Oxygen @-@ dependent intracellular = = = 
 When a phagocyte ingests bacteria ( or any material ) , its oxygen consumption increases . The increase in oxygen consumption , called a respiratory burst , produces reactive oxygen @-@ containing molecules that are anti @-@ microbial . The oxygen compounds are toxic to both the invader and the cell itself , so they are kept in compartments inside the cell . This method of killing invading microbes by using the reactive oxygen @-@ containing molecules is referred to as oxygen @-@ dependent intracellular killing , of which there are two types . 
 The first type is the oxygen @-@ dependent production of a superoxide , which is an oxygen @-@ rich bacteria @-@ killing substance . The superoxide is converted to hydrogen peroxide and singlet oxygen by an enzyme called superoxide dismutase . <unk> also react with the hydrogen peroxide to produce hydroxyl radicals , which assist in killing the invading microbe . 
 The second type involves the use of the enzyme myeloperoxidase from neutrophil granules . When granules fuse with a phagosome , myeloperoxidase is released into the phagolysosome , and this enzyme uses hydrogen peroxide and chlorine to create hypochlorite , a substance used in domestic bleach . <unk> is extremely toxic to bacteria . <unk> contains a heme pigment , which accounts for the green color of secretions rich in neutrophils , such as pus and infected sputum . 
 = = = Oxygen @-@ independent intracellular = = = 
 Phagocytes can also kill microbes by oxygen @-@ independent methods , but these are not as effective as the oxygen @-@ dependent ones . There are four main types . The first uses electrically charged proteins that damage the bacterium 's membrane . The second type uses <unk> ; these enzymes break down the bacterial cell wall . The third type uses <unk> , which are present in neutrophil granules and remove essential iron from bacteria . The fourth type uses proteases and hydrolytic enzymes ; these enzymes are used to digest the proteins of destroyed bacteria . 
 = = = Extracellular = = = 
 Interferon @-@ gamma — which was once called macrophage activating factor — stimulates macrophages to produce nitric oxide . The source of interferon @-@ gamma can be CD4 + T cells , CD8 + T cells , natural killer cells , B cells , natural killer T cells , monocytes , macrophages , or dendritic cells . Nitric oxide is then released from the macrophage and , because of its toxicity , kills microbes near the macrophage . Activated macrophages produce and secrete tumor necrosis factor . This cytokine — a class of signaling molecule — kills cancer cells and cells infected by viruses , and helps to activate the other cells of the immune system . 
 In some diseases , e.g. , the rare chronic granulomatous disease , the efficiency of phagocytes is impaired , and recurrent bacterial infections are a problem . In this disease there is an abnormality affecting different elements of oxygen @-@ dependent killing . Other rare congenital abnormalities , such as <unk> @-@ Higashi syndrome , are also associated with defective killing of ingested microbes . 
 = = = Viruses = = = 
 Viruses can reproduce only inside cells , and they gain entry by using many of the receptors involved in immunity . Once inside the cell , viruses use the cell 's biological machinery to their own advantage , forcing the cell to make hundreds of identical copies of themselves . Although phagocytes and other components of the innate immune system can , to a limited extent , control viruses , once a virus is inside a cell the adaptive immune responses , particularly the lymphocytes , are more important for defense . At the sites of viral infections , lymphocytes often vastly outnumber all the other cells of the immune system ; this is common in viral meningitis . Virus @-@ infected cells that have been killed by lymphocytes are cleared from the body by phagocytes . 
 = = Role in apoptosis = = 
 In an animal , cells are constantly dying . A balance between cell division and cell death keeps the number of cells relatively constant in adults . There are two different ways a cell can die : by necrosis or by apoptosis . In contrast to necrosis , which often results from disease or trauma , apoptosis — or programmed cell death — is a normal healthy function of cells . The body has to rid itself of millions of dead or dying cells every day , and phagocytes play a crucial role in this process . 
 Dying cells that undergo the final stages of apoptosis display molecules , such as phosphatidylserine , on their cell surface to attract phagocytes . Phosphatidylserine is normally found on the cytosolic surface of the plasma membrane , but is redistributed during apoptosis to the extracellular surface by a hypothetical protein known as <unk> . These molecules mark the cell for phagocytosis by cells that possess the appropriate receptors , such as macrophages . The removal of dying cells by phagocytes occurs in an orderly manner without eliciting an inflammatory response and is an important function of phagocytes . 
 = = Interactions with other cells = = 
 Phagocytes are usually not bound to any particular organ but move through the body interacting with the other phagocytic and non @-@ phagocytic cells of the immune system . They can communicate with other cells by producing chemicals called cytokines , which recruit other phagocytes to the site of infections or stimulate dormant lymphocytes . Phagocytes form part of the innate immune system , which animals , including humans , are born with . Innate immunity is very effective but non @-@ specific in that it does not discriminate between different sorts of invaders . On the other hand , the adaptive immune system of jawed vertebrates — the basis of acquired immunity — is highly specialized and can protect against almost any type of invader . The adaptive immune system is not dependent on phagocytes but lymphocytes , which produce protective proteins called antibodies , which tag invaders for destruction and prevent viruses from infecting cells . Phagocytes , in particular dendritic cells and macrophages , stimulate lymphocytes to produce antibodies by an important process called antigen presentation . 
 = = = Antigen presentation = = = 
 Antigen presentation is a process in which some phagocytes move parts of engulfed materials back to the surface of their cells and " present " them to other cells of the immune system . There are two " professional " antigen @-@ presenting cells : macrophages and dendritic cells . After engulfment , foreign proteins ( the antigens ) are broken down into peptides inside dendritic cells and macrophages . These peptides are then bound to the cell 's major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) glycoproteins , which carry the peptides back to the phagocyte 's surface where they can be " presented " to lymphocytes . Mature macrophages do not travel far from the site of infection , but dendritic cells can reach the body 's lymph nodes , where there are millions of lymphocytes . This enhances immunity because the lymphocytes respond to the antigens presented by the dendritic cells just as they would at the site of the original infection . But dendritic cells can also destroy or pacify lymphocytes if they recognize components of the host body ; this is necessary to prevent autoimmune reactions . This process is called tolerance . 
 = = = Immunological tolerance = = = 
 Dendritic cells also promote immunological tolerance , which stops the body from attacking itself . The first type of tolerance is central tolerance , that occurs in the thymus . T cells that bind ( via their T cell receptor ) to self antigen ( presented by dendritic cells on MHC molecules ) too strongly are induced to die . The second type of immunological tolerance is peripheral tolerance . Some self reactive T cells escape the thymus for a number of reasons , mainly due to the lack of expression of some self antigens in the thymus . Another type of T cell T regulatory cells can down regulate self reactive T cells in the periphery . When immunological tolerance fails , autoimmune diseases can follow . 
 = = Professional phagocytes = = 
 Phagocytes of humans and other jawed vertebrates are divided into " professional " and " non @-@ professional " groups based on the efficiency with which they participate in phagocytosis . The professional phagocytes are the monocytes , macrophages , neutrophils , tissue dendritic cells and mast cells . One litre of human blood contains about six billion phagocytes . 
 = = = Activation = = = 
 All phagocytes , and especially macrophages , exist in degrees of readiness . Macrophages are usually relatively dormant in the tissues and proliferate slowly . In this semi @-@ resting state , they clear away dead host cells and other non @-@ infectious debris and rarely take part in antigen presentation . But , during an infection , they receive chemical signals — usually interferon gamma — which increases their production of MHC II molecules and which prepares them for presenting antigens . In this state , macrophages are good antigen presenters and killers . However , if they receive a signal directly from an invader , they become " <unk> " , stop proliferating , and concentrate on killing . Their size and rate of phagocytosis increases — some become large enough to engulf invading protozoa . 
 In the blood , neutrophils are inactive but are swept along at high speed . When they receive signals from macrophages at the sites of inflammation , they slow down and leave the blood . In the tissues , they are activated by cytokines and arrive at the battle scene ready to kill . 
 = = = Migration = = = 
 When an infection occurs , a chemical " SOS " signal is given off to attract phagocytes to the site . These chemical signals may include proteins from invading bacteria , clotting system peptides , complement products , and cytokines that have been given off by macrophages located in the tissue near the infection site . Another group of chemical <unk> are cytokines that recruit neutrophils and monocytes from the blood . 
 To reach the site of infection , phagocytes leave the bloodstream and enter the affected tissues . Signals from the infection cause the endothelial cells that line the blood vessels to make a protein called <unk> , which neutrophils stick to on passing by . Other signals called <unk> loosen the junctions connecting endothelial cells , allowing the phagocytes to pass through the wall . <unk> is the process by which phagocytes follow the cytokine " scent " to the infected spot . Neutrophils travel across epithelial cell @-@ lined organs to sites of infection , and although this is an important component of fighting infection , the migration itself can result in disease @-@ like symptoms . During an infection , millions of neutrophils are recruited from the blood , but they die after a few days . 
 = = = Monocytes = = = 
 Monocytes develop in the bone marrow and reach maturity in the blood . Mature monocytes have large , smooth , lobed nuclei and abundant cytoplasm that contains granules . Monocytes ingest foreign or dangerous substances and present antigens to other cells of the immune system . Monocytes form two groups : a circulating group and a marginal group that remain in other tissues ( approximately 70 % are in the marginal group ) . Most monocytes leave the blood stream after 20 – 40 hours to travel to tissues and organs and in doing so transform into macrophages or dendritic cells depending on the signals they receive . There are about 500 million monocytes in one litre of human blood . 
 = = = Macrophages = = = 
 Mature macrophages do not travel far but stand guard over those areas of the body that are exposed to the outside world . There they act as garbage collectors , antigen presenting cells , or ferocious killers , depending on the signals they receive . They derive from monocytes , granulocyte stem cells , or the cell division of pre @-@ existing macrophages . Human macrophages are about 21 micrometers in diameter . 
 This type of phagocyte does not have granules but contains many lysosomes . Macrophages are found throughout the body in almost all tissues and organs ( e.g. , microglial cells in the brain and alveolar macrophages in the lungs ) , where they silently lie in wait . A macrophage 's location can determine its size and appearance . Macrophages cause inflammation through the production of interleukin @-@ 1 , interleukin @-@ 6 , and TNF @-@ alpha . Macrophages are usually only found in tissue and are rarely seen in blood circulation . The life @-@ span of tissue macrophages has been estimated to range from four to fifteen days . 
 Macrophages can be activated to perform functions that a resting monocyte cannot . T helper cells ( also known as effector T cells or Th cells ) , a sub @-@ group of lymphocytes , are responsible for the activation of macrophages . Th1 cells activate macrophages by signaling with IFN @-@ gamma and displaying the protein CD40 ligand . Other signals include TNF @-@ alpha and lipopolysaccharides from bacteria . Th1 cells can recruit other phagocytes to the site of the infection in several ways . They secrete cytokines that act on the bone marrow to stimulate the production of monocytes and neutrophils , and they secrete some of the cytokines that are responsible for the migration of monocytes and neutrophils out of the bloodstream . Th1 cells come from the differentiation of CD4 + T cells once they have responded to antigen in the secondary lymphoid tissues . Activated macrophages play a potent role in tumor destruction by producing TNF @-@ alpha , IFN @-@ gamma , nitric oxide , reactive oxygen compounds , cationic proteins , and hydrolytic enzymes . 
 = = = Neutrophils = = = 
 Neutrophils are normally found in the bloodstream and are the most abundant type of phagocyte , constituting 50 % to 60 % of the total circulating white blood cells . One litre of human blood contains about five billion neutrophils , which are about 10 micrometers in diameter and live for only about five days . Once they have received the appropriate signals , it takes them about thirty minutes to leave the blood and reach the site of an infection . They are ferocious eaters and rapidly engulf invaders coated with antibodies and complement , and damaged cells or cellular debris . Neutrophils do not return to the blood ; they turn into pus cells and die . Mature neutrophils are smaller than monocytes and have a segmented nucleus with several sections ; each section is connected by chromatin filaments — neutrophils can have 2 – 5 segments . Neutrophils do not normally exit the bone marrow until maturity but during an infection neutrophil precursors called <unk> and <unk> are released . 
 The intra @-@ cellular granules of the human neutrophil have long been recognized for their protein @-@ destroying and bactericidal properties . Neutrophils can secrete products that stimulate monocytes and macrophages . Neutrophil secretions increase phagocytosis and the formation of reactive oxygen compounds involved in intracellular killing . Secretions from the primary granules of neutrophils stimulate the phagocytosis of IgG @-@ antibody @-@ coated bacteria . 
 = = = Dendritic cells = = = 
 Dendritic cells are specialized antigen @-@ presenting cells that have long outgrowths called dendrites , that help to engulf microbes and other invaders . Dendritic cells are present in the tissues that are in contact with the external environment , mainly the skin , the inner lining of the nose , the lungs , the stomach , and the intestines . Once activated , they mature and migrate to the lymphoid tissues where they interact with T cells and B cells to initiate and orchestrate the adaptive immune response . Mature dendritic cells activate T helper cells and cytotoxic T cells . The activated helper T cells interact with macrophages and B cells to activate them in turn . In addition , dendritic cells can influence the type of immune response produced ; when they travel to the lymphoid areas where T cells are held they can activate T cells , which then differentiate into cytotoxic T cells or helper T cells . 
 = = = Mast cells = = = 
 Mast cells have Toll @-@ like receptors and interact with dendritic cells , B cells , and T cells to help mediate adaptive immune functions . Mast cells express MHC class II molecules and can participate in antigen presentation ; however , the mast cell 's role in antigen presentation is not very well understood . Mast cells can consume and kill gram @-@ negative bacteria ( e.g. , salmonella ) , and process their antigens . They specialize in processing the <unk> proteins on the surface of bacteria , which are involved in adhesion to tissues . In addition to these functions , mast cells produce cytokines that induce an inflammatory response . This is a vital part of the destruction of microbes because the cytokines attract more phagocytes to the site of infection . 
 = = Non @-@ professional phagocytes = = 
 Dying cells and foreign organisms are consumed by cells other than the " professional " phagocytes . These cells include epithelial cells , endothelial cells , fibroblasts , and mesenchymal cells . They are called non @-@ professional phagocytes , to emphasize that , in contrast to professional phagocytes , phagocytosis is not their principal function . <unk> , for example , which can phagocytose collagen in the process of remolding scars , will also make some attempt to ingest foreign particles . 
 Non @-@ professional phagocytes are more limited than professional phagocytes in the type of particles they can take up . This is due to their lack of efficient phagocytic receptors , in particular opsonins — which are antibodies and complement attached to invaders by the immune system . Additionally , most nonprofessional phagocytes do not produce reactive oxygen @-@ containing molecules in response to phagocytosis . 
 = = <unk> evasion and resistance = = 
 A pathogen is only successful in infecting an organism if it can get past its defenses . Pathogenic bacteria and protozoa have developed a variety of methods to resist attacks by phagocytes , and many actually survive and replicate within phagocytic cells . 
 = = = Avoiding contact = = = 
 There are several ways bacteria avoid contact with phagocytes . First , they can grow in sites that phagocytes are not capable of traveling to ( e.g. , the surface of unbroken skin ) . Second , bacteria can suppress the inflammatory response ; without this response to infection phagocytes cannot respond adequately . Third , some species of bacteria can inhibit the ability of phagocytes to travel to the site of infection by interfering with chemotaxis . Fourth , some bacteria can avoid contact with phagocytes by tricking the immune system into " thinking " that the bacteria are " self " . Treponema pallidum — the bacterium that causes syphilis — hides from phagocytes by coating its surface with <unk> , which is produced naturally by the body and plays a crucial role in wound healing . 
 = = = Avoiding engulfment = = = 
 Bacteria often produce proteins or sugars that coat their cells and interfere with phagocytosis ; these are called capsules . Some examples are the K5 capsule and <unk> O antigen found on the surface of Escherichia coli , and the <unk> capsules of Staphylococcus epidermidis . Streptococcus pneumoniae produces several types of capsule that provide different levels of protection , and group A streptococci produce proteins such as M protein and <unk> proteins to block engulfment . Some proteins hinder <unk> @-@ related ingestion ; Staphylococcus aureus produces Protein A to block antibody receptors , which decreases the effectiveness of opsonins . 
 = = = Survival inside the phagocyte = = = 
 Bacteria have developed ways to survive inside phagocytes , where they continue to evade the immune system . To get safely inside the phagocyte they express proteins called " <unk> " . When inside the cell they remain in the cytoplasm and avoid toxic chemicals contained in the <unk> . Some bacteria prevent the fusion of a phagosome and lysosome , to form the phagolysosome . Other pathogens , such as Leishmania , create a highly modified vacuole inside the phagocyte , which helps them persist and replicate . Some bacteria are capable of living inside of the phagolysosome . Staphylococcus aureus , for example , produces the enzymes catalase and superoxide dismutase , which break down chemicals — such as hydrogen peroxide — produced by phagocytes to kill bacteria . Bacteria may escape from the phagosome before the formation of the phagolysosome : Listeria monocytogenes can make a hole in the phagosome wall using enzymes called <unk> O and phospholipase C. 
 = = = Killing = = = 
 Bacteria have developed several ways of killing phagocytes . These include <unk> , which form pores in the phagocyte 's cell membranes , <unk> and <unk> , which cause neutrophils ' granules to rupture and release toxic substances , and <unk> that reduce the supply of a phagocyte 's ATP , needed for phagocytosis . After a bacterium is ingested , it may kill the phagocyte by releasing toxins that travel through the phagosome or phagolysosome membrane to target other parts of the cell . 
 = = = Disruption of cell signaling = = = 
 Some survival strategies often involve disrupting cytokines and other methods of cell signaling to prevent the phagocyte 's responding to invasion . The protozoan parasites Toxoplasma gondii , Trypanosoma cruzi , and Leishmania infect macrophages , and each has a unique way of taming them . Some species of Leishmania alter the infected macrophage 's signalling , repress the production of cytokines and microbicidal molecules — nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species — and compromise antigen presentation . 
 = = Host damage by phagocytes = = 
 Macrophages and neutrophils , in particular , play a central role in the inflammatory process by releasing proteins and small @-@ molecule inflammatory mediators that control infection but can damage host tissue . In general , phagocytes aim to destroy pathogens by engulfing them and subjecting them to a battery of toxic chemicals inside a phagolysosome . If a phagocyte fails to engulf its target , these toxic agents can be released into the environment ( an action referred to as " frustrated phagocytosis " ) . As these agents are also toxic to host cells , they can cause extensive damage to healthy cells and tissues . 
 When neutrophils release their granule contents in the kidney , the contents of the granule ( reactive oxygen compounds and proteases ) degrade the extracellular matrix of host cells and can cause damage to glomerular cells , affecting their ability to filter blood and causing changes in shape . In addition , phospholipase products ( e.g. , leukotrienes ) intensify the damage . This release of substances promotes chemotaxis of more neutrophils to the site of infection , and glomerular cells can be damaged further by the adhesion molecules during the migration of neutrophils . The injury done to the glomerular cells can cause renal failure . 
 Neutrophils also play a key role in the development of most forms of acute lung injury . Here , activated neutrophils release the contents of their toxic granules into the lung environment . Experiments have shown that a reduction in the number of neutrophils lessens the effects of acute lung injury , but treatment by inhibiting neutrophils is not clinically realistic , as it would leave the host vulnerable to infection . In the liver , damage by neutrophils can contribute to dysfunction and injury in response to the release of <unk> produced by bacteria , sepsis , trauma , alcoholic hepatitis , ischemia , and hypovolemic shock resulting from acute hemorrhage . 
 Chemicals released by macrophages can also damage host tissue . TNF @-@ α is an important chemical that is released by macrophages that causes the blood in small vessels to clot to prevent an infection from spreading . However , if a bacterial infection spreads to the blood , TNF @-@ α is released into vital organs , which can cause vasodilation and a decrease in plasma volume ; these in turn can be followed by septic shock . During septic shock , TNF @-@ α release causes a blockage of the small vessels that supply blood to the vital organs , and the organs may fail . Septic shock can lead to death . 
 = = Evolutionary origins = = 
 Phagocytosis is common and probably appeared early in evolution , evolving first in unicellular eukaryotes . <unk> are unicellular protists that separated from the tree leading to metazoa shortly after the divergence of plants , and they share many specific functions with mammalian phagocytic cells . Dictyostelium discoideum , for example , is an amoeba that lives in the soil and feeds on bacteria . Like animal phagocytes , it engulfs bacteria by phagocytosis mainly through Toll @-@ like receptors , and it has other biological functions in common with macrophages . Dictyostelium discoideum is social ; it aggregates when starved to form a migrating <unk> or slug . This multicellular organism eventually will produce a fruiting body with spores that are resistant to environmental dangers . Before the formation of fruiting bodies , the cells will migrate as a slug @-@ like organism for several days . During this time , exposure to toxins or bacterial pathogens has the potential to compromise survival of the species by limiting spore production . Some of the amoebae engulf bacteria and absorb toxins while circulating within the slug , and these amoebae eventually die . They are genetically identical to the other amoebae in the slug ; their self @-@ sacrifice to protect the other amoebae from bacteria is similar to the self @-@ sacrifice of phagocytes seen in the immune system of higher vertebrates . This ancient immune function in social amoebae suggests an evolutionarily conserved cellular foraging mechanism that might have been adapted to defense functions well before the diversification of amoebae into higher forms . However , a common ancestry with mammalian phagocytes has not been proven . Phagocytes occur throughout the animal kingdom , from marine sponges to insects and lower and higher vertebrates . The ability of amoebae to distinguish between self and non @-@ self is a pivotal one , and is the root of the immune system of many species of amoeba . 
 = Puerto Rican Campaign = 
 The Puerto Rican Campaign was an American military sea and land operation on the island of Puerto Rico during the Spanish – American War . The offensive began on May 12 , 1898 , when the United States Navy attacked the archipelago 's capital , San Juan . Though the damage inflicted on the city was minimal , the Americans were able to establish a blockade in the city 's harbor , San Juan Bay . On June 22 , the cruiser Isabel II and the destroyer Terror delivered a Spanish counterattack , but were unable to break the blockade and the Terror was damaged . 
 The land offensive began on July 25 , when 1 @,@ 300 infantry soldiers led by Major General Nelson A. Miles disembarked off the coast of Guánica . After controlling the first skirmish , the Americans advanced to Coamo , where they engaged Puerto Rican and Spanish troops in battle . The battle concluded when the allied soldiers retreated after the battle left two dead on their side , and four on the American side . The United States was able to seize control of Fajardo on August 1 , but were forced to withdraw on August 5 after a group of 200 Puerto Rican @-@ Spanish soldiers led by Pedro del Pino gained control of the city , while most civilian inhabitants fled to a nearby lighthouse . The Americans encountered larger opposition as they advanced towards the main island 's interior . They engaged in two <unk> in <unk> River and Coamo , both of which were inconclusive as the allied soldiers retreated . A battle in San Germán concluded in a similar fashion with the Spanish retreating to Lares . 
 On August 9 , 1898 , American troops that were pursuing units retreating from Coamo encountered heavy resistance in Aibonito and retreated after six of their soldiers were injured . They returned three days later , reinforced with artillery units and attempted a surprise attack . In the subsequent crossfire , confused soldiers reported seeing Spanish reinforcements nearby and five American officers were gravely injured , which prompted a retreat order . All military actions in Puerto Rico were suspended on August 13 , after U.S. President William McKinley and French Ambassador Jules Cambon , acting on behalf of the Spanish government , signed an armistice whereby Spain relinquished its sovereignty over the territories of Puerto Rico , Cuba , the Philippines and Guam . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In 1890 , Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan , a member of the Navy War Board and leading U.S. strategic thinker , wrote a book titled The Influence of Sea Power upon History in which he argued for the creation of a large and powerful navy modeled after the British Royal Navy . Part of his strategy called for the acquisition of colonies in the Caribbean Sea which would serve as coaling and naval stations , and which would serve as strategical points of defense upon the construction of a canal in the Isthmus . 
 This idea was not new , since William H. Seward , the former Secretary of State under the administrations of various presidents , among them Abraham Lincoln and Ulysses Grant , had stressed that a canal be built either in Honduras , Nicaragua or Panama and that the United States annex the Dominican Republic and purchase Puerto Rico and Cuba . The idea of annexing the Dominican Republic failed to receive the approval of the U.S. Senate and Spain did not accept the 160 million dollars which the U.S. offered for Puerto Rico and Cuba . Mahan made the following statement to the War Department : 
 Since 1894 , the Naval War College had been formulating plans for war with Spain . By 1896 , the Office of Naval Intelligence had prepared a plan which included military operations in Puerto Rican waters . Not only was Puerto Rico considered valuable as a naval station , Puerto Rico and Cuba were also abundant in a valuable commercial commodity which the United States lacked : sugar . 
 Following the sinking of the battleship Maine in Havana harbor , Cuba , the United States forwarded an ultimatum to Spain to withdraw from Cuba . In response , Spain broke off diplomatic relations with the United States , and on April 23 , 1898 , Spain declared war . On April 25 , the U.S. Congress declared that a state of war between the United States and Spain had existed since April 20 . One of the United States ' principal objectives in the Spanish – American War was to take control of Spanish possessions in the Atlantic — Puerto Rico and Cuba — and their possessions in the Pacific — the Philippines and Guam . 
 On April 27 , U.S. ships , the monitor USS Puritan , the armored cruisers USS New York , and the USS Cincinnati , bombarded the Spanish fortifications at Matanzas Bay in Cuba . By July 16 , an armistice was signed at the <unk> de La Paz ( a large ceiba tree ) in Santiago de Cuba by U.S. and Spanish forces ending hostilities in Cuba and its waters . The United States then directed its undivided military resources to Puerto Rico . Two leaders of the Puerto Rican section of the Cuban Revolutionary Party , Dr. Julio J. Henna and Roberto H. Todd , had written to U.S. President McKinley asking that Puerto Rico be included in whatever intervention was planned for Cuba as early as March 10 . They even provided the U.S. government with information about the Spanish military presence on the island . 
 = = = Spanish preparations = = = 
 With the outbreak of war , the Spanish Crown sent the 1st , 2nd and 3rd Puerto Rican provisional battalions to defend Cuba against the American invaders , depleting the Puerto Rican troops in the island . The 1st Puerto Rican Provisional Battalion , composed of the Talavera Cavalry and Krupp artillery , was sent to Santiago de Cuba where they battled the American forces in the Battle of San Juan Hill . After the battle , the Puerto Rican battalion suffered a total of 70 casualties which included their dead , wounded , MIA 's and prisoners . The Spanish appointed Governor of Puerto Rico , Manuel Macías y Casado , declared martial law , resolving to resist the American forces . He declared : ' Providence will not permit that in these countries which were discovered by the Spanish nation the echo of our language should ever cease to be heard , nor that our flag should disappear before the eyes … . Long live Puerto Rico , always Spanish . Long live Spain . " Macías y Casado hoped that a grant of autonomy would ensure that Puerto Ricans would remain loyal to the Spanish crown . 
 = = = American preparations = = = 
 The Spanish Crown was unaware that , at the time , the United States had successfully infiltrated the island with a number of spies , among them Henry Howard Whitney , Henry Ward , George Bronson Brea , William Freeman , James <unk> , Frederick Ober and Edwin Emerson , Jr . 
 According to a story published in Century magazine in September 1898 , Edwin Emerson , Jr . , was pretending to be a German journalist . He presented himself to the German Consul in St. Thomas and asked for the names of Puerto Ricans of German descent whom he could interview . Among the names which the consul gave him were that of the Riefkohl family of the town of Maunabo . Upon his arrival in the town of Maunabo he met 14 @-@ year @-@ old Rudolph W. Riefkohl and asked the lad in German if he had a map of Puerto Rico ( Emerson had lost his ) . Riefkohl answered that he did , however it was decidedly too big for Emerson 's use . Riefkohl returned home , not knowing that Emerson was a spy , and quickly drew another with a depiction of the major ports and harbors of Puerto Rico . Emerson used the map and it is believed by some that he may have given the map to the U.S. Army Commanding General , Nelson A. Miles , influencing Mile 's decision on the landing points for the invasion of Puerto Rico . A <unk> copy of Riefkohl 's map was published in the Century article . 
 = = The naval campaign in Puerto Rico ( May 8 – August 13 ) = = 
 = = = First actions = = = 
 The first engagement between the belligerents occurred on May 8 , 1898 , when the converted liner USS Yale captured a Spanish freighter , the Rita in San Juan Bay . On May 9 , Yale fought a brief battle with an unknown Spanish auxiliary cruiser , resulting in a Spanish victory . Around this time , Captain Ángel Rivero Méndez was assigned the command of the Spanish forces at the fortress of San Cristóbal in San Juan . On May 10 , when Yale returned to San Juan Bay , Rivero @-@ Méndez ordered his men to open fire on the steamer with an <unk> 15 centimeter cannon , in the first attack against American forces in Puerto Rico during the Spanish – American War . For his actions , Rivero @-@ Mendez was awarded the " Cruz de la Orden de Merito Militar " ( The Cross of the Order of the Military Merit ) first class . 
 = = = Bombardment of San Juan = = = 
 The Bombardment of San Juan or the First Battle of San Juan ( not to be confused with the Battle of San Juan Hill or the Battle for the Río San Juan de Nicaragua ) refers to an American naval attack on the fortifications of San Juan , Puerto Rico during the Spanish – American War . The American Naval commanders believed the bulk of the Spanish Fleet under Admiral Pascual Cervera y Topete was steaming from the Cape Verde Islands to the Antilles and ultimately to Puerto Rico . With this understanding , Rear Admiral William T. Sampson and a squadron of ten American warships , the battleships USS Iowa , Indiana , New York , cruisers USS Montgomery and Detroit , monitors USS Amphitrite and Terror , torpedo boat USS Porter , two unidentified auxiliary cruisers , and an unarmed collier had stood out from Havana at noon on May 2 bound for Puerto Rico . Sampson intended to intercept and destroy the Spanish squadron and then move on to attack secondary shore <unk> San Juan 's castles , forts and batteries and was unaware that Topete had already eluded them and slipped his squadron into the Bay of Santiago . 
 On May 12 , Sampson 's squadron arrived at San Juan , finding an empty harbor instead of the anticipated Spanish fleet . Making the best of the situation and as an exercise for his untested gunners , Sampson ordered the bombardment of the city 's citadels . Captains Ramón Acha Caamaño and José Antonio Iriarte were among those who defended the city form Fort San Felipe del Morro . They had three batteries under their command , which were armed with at least three 15 cm Ordóñez cannons . The battle lasted three hours and resulted in the death of Justo <unk> , the first Puerto Rican soldier to die in the Puerto Rican Campaign . Caamaño was awarded the " Cruz de la Orden de Merito Militar " ( The Cross of the Order of the Military Merit ) first class for his actions . 
 After causing much damage to the Spanish defenses and receiving minor damage , low on coal and ammunition , Sampson ordered a cease fire and returned to Havana , Cuba and then on to Key West , Florida for repairs and supplies . 
 = = = Second Battle of San Juan = = = 
 On June 22 , 1898 , the USS Saint Paul under the command of Captain Charles <unk> arrived at San Juan Bay from Cuba and joined the blockade . Shortly after midday the old Spanish cruiser Isabel II set off from San Juan to engage the Saint Paul with support from shore batteries . Isabel opened fire on Saint Paul at long range without success in an attempt to break the blockade . Terror , a Spanish destroyer docked in San Juan for repairs , attempted to cover the cruiser 's escape with a torpedo attack but was thwarted when her rudder was damaged by a direct hit from the Saint Paul . Losing steerage , Terror inadvertently turned broadside , allowing Saint Paul to score direct hits near Terror 's waterline , disabling one of her engines and causing her to list . Terror abandoned the attack and returned to port , followed by Isabel II . On June 26 , USS Saint Paul was relieved by USS Yosemite , which continued the blockade of San Juan Bay . 
 = = = Third Battle of San Juan = = = 
 On June 28 , 1898 , the American auxiliary cruiser USS Yosemite fought with a squadron of Spanish warships . This squadron consisted of one cruiser , two gunboats and one blockade runner . During the engagement , the SS Antonio López , a transoceanic steamer belonging to the Compañía <unk> Española carrying a cargo of needed military supplies , was pursued by Yosemite until and the Spanish freighter ran aground at Ensenada Honda , Puerto Rico with her valuable cargo . Capt. Caamaño was in charge of retrieving the ship 's cargo and the men under his command quickly removed as much of the stranded ship 's cargo as possible . The desperate efforts proved fruitful , and nearly the entire cargo was salvaged from the hulk with only minor articles and a cannon that had fallen overboard during salvage attempts being lost . 
 On 15 July , the cruiser USS New Orleans arrived to relieve Yosemite , and the quickly finished off the Antonio Lopez the next day by firing twenty incendiary shells into the vessel and sinking it . Though Antonio Lopez had been sunk , her cargo was successfully delivered and ensured that any American assault on San Juan would be met with stronger resistance . Caamaño was awarded the " Cruz de la Orden de Merito Naval " ( The Cross of the Order of the Naval Merit ) by the Spanish government . 
 The residents of San Juan were furious with Capt. Rivero @-@ Méndez and blamed him for the destruction wreaked on their city by American bombardments . Nothing came of those recriminations and Capt. Rivero @-@ Méndez was ordered to turn over the keys of all the military installations in San Juan to Captain Henry A. Reed of the U.S. Army after the Treaty of Paris of 1898 was signed . 
 = = The land campaign in Puerto Rico ( July 25 – August 13 ) = = 
 = = = Landing in Guánica = = = 
 The Spanish forces expected the Americans to attack the northern region of the island and concentrated their defenses around San Juan and Arecibo . The Spanish government was also aware of a planned landing by the Americans at Fajardo , located on the east coast and had that town fortified . However , the southern and western regions of Puerto Rico were left with little or no defenses at all . 
 After Cuba was taken , President William McKinley approved the land invasion of Puerto Rico by way of Fajardo , taking into consideration that the Spaniards had fortified San Juan , where they expected the initial attack . A convoy of ships left Tampa , Florida and on July 21 another convoy , which included the USS Yale , USS Massachusetts , USS Gloucester and the USS Dixie , departed from Guantánamo for a 4 @-@ day journey to Puerto Rico . 
 Major General Miles traveled aboard the USS Yale . While approaching the Mona Passage that separates Puerto Rico from the island of Hispaniola to the east , Miles opted to land his troops in the southern region of the island , choosing Guánica as his landing zone . Miles dispatched patrol boats to notify all other convoys of his decision and to order them to proceed to Guanica . Miles ' decision to change the invasion site was based on his belief that the town of Fajardo would be fortified and he feared that Spanish coastal gun boats would disrupt a landing at Fajardo . 
 On July 25 , General Miles , 1 @,@ 300 infantry soldiers of the 3 @,@ 300 total that were assigned for the initial invasion and a convoy of ships , under the command of Naval Captain Francis J. Higginson of the USS Massachusetts arrived at Guánica Bay . The following Navy ships and Army troopships were part of the convoy : USS Yale with Generals Miles and George A. Garretson embarked , USS Windom carrying General Guy V. Henry , USS Columbia , USS Gloucester , USS Dixie , USS Wasp and the U.S. Army transports <unk> , Unionist , Stillwater and Specialist . Two captured Spanish ships , Nueces and Rita that had been confiscated by USS Yale as war prizes were also used . 
 In 1898 , Guánica was a small barrio within the jurisdiction of the town of Yauco . It had 60 houses in all and its only defense was eleven members of the 4th Volante de Yauco , a Puerto Rican militia unit , under the command of Lieutenant Enrique Méndez López . When the Guánica lighthouse keeper <unk> Rivera spotted the approaching convoy , he immediately gave the alert to the residents of the barrio . All of the residents , with the exception Agustín <unk> , Vicente Ferrer , Juan María <unk> , Simón <unk> , Salvador Muñoz , Cornelio Serrano and Pascual Elena who welcomed the invaders , abandoned their homes and joined Rivera on his journey to Yauco where he broke the news of the invading forces to the city 's mayor . 
 = = = First skirmish = = = 
 The Gloucester was the first ship to set anchor in the Bay of Guánica . Twenty @-@ eight sailors and Marines , under the command of Lieutenants H. P. <unk> and Wood , departed from the ship on rafts and landed on the beach . The Marines lowered the Spanish flag from the beach flagpole and replaced it with the American flag . They then proceeded to set up a machine gun nest and placed barbed wire around their perimeter . The first land skirmish in Puerto Rico between the Puerto Rican militia and the American forces occurred when Lt. Méndez López and his men attacked and opened fire on the Americans . During the small battle which followed , the Americans returned fire with their machine gun and the Gloucester began to bombard the Spanish position . Lt. Méndez López and three of his men were wounded and the militia unit was forced to retreat to the town of Yauco . 
 = = = Invasion = = = 
 After the skirmish was over , men from the <unk> landed on the beach to secure the area and to build a landing dock . 3 @,@ 300 American soldiers under the command of General Miles landed . The units that landed were the 6th Volunteer Regiments of Illinois and Massachusetts , an Artillery battalion , five battery companies , two engineer companies and a medical unit . The men who had not abandoned the barrio of Guanica swore allegiance to the United States . Garretson named Agustín <unk> mayor of Guanica and Simón <unk> the chief of police . On the afternoon of the 25th , Garretson left Guánica with seven companies of the 6th Massachusetts and one company of the 6th Illinois and headed towards Yauco . 
 Secretary of War Russell A. Alger learned about the landing at Guanica the next day when he read an Associated Press report in a local Washington , D.C. newspaper . The War Department had ordered Miles to invade Puerto Rico by way of San Juan and therefore Alger was completely surprised with the report . Miles would have been subject to disciplinary actions had the invasion not gone so smoothly . Alger received the following cable from Miles three days after the invasion : 
 = = = Battle of Yauco = = = 
 After Rivera , the keeper of the Guánica lighthouse , notified <unk> Gaztambide , the mayor of the town of Yauco , located six miles ( 10 km ) north of Guánica , of the American invasion of Guánica , the mayor in turn notified Governor Macías via telegraph . Governor Macías ordered Captain Salvador Meca and his 3rd company of the 25th Patria Battalion from Yauco to head for Guánica . Meca and his men were joined by Lieutenant Colonel Francisco Puig , who assumed command of the Spanish forces at Hacienda Desideria two miles ( 3 km ) from Guánica . Puig arrived with two companies known as " Cazador Patria Battalion " , and they were joined by Puerto Rican volunteers , the Civil Guards , and mounted guerrillas from the towns of Yauco and Sabana Grande . Puig had the men positioned on both sides of the road that ran from Guánica to the coffee Hacienda Desideria ( owned by Antonio Mariani ) in Yauco , as well as an infantry company positioned on a hill south of the hacienda . 
 In the meantime , Garretson , set out of Guánica with his men towards Yauco with the intention of capturing the Yauco rail terminus that ran between that town and the City of Ponce , the largest city in the southern region of the island . Garretson and his men arrived in the darkness of night and was informed by his scouts of the possibility of a hostile situation at the Hacienda Desideria . He ordered the Illinois company and two companies ( companies L and M ) of the 6th Massachusetts to occupy a small hill on his right that overlooked the hacienda . 
 Captain San Pedro detected the movements of the American troops from his positions on a nearby hill and ordered his men to open fire . Garretson then ordered a direct attack on the Spanish and Puerto Rican forces in the hacienda . At day break , the 6th Massachusetts overran the Spanish forces and suffered four casualties . Puig was expecting reinforcements from Yauco which did not arrive and was ordered to disengage and retreat . Before retreating the right wing of the Spanish force , which was not overrun , initiated a flanking attack against two positions held by the Illinois and Massachusetts companies . The unexpected strength of the Spanish force caused some of the 6th Massachusetts troops to momentarily panic , but the Spanish forces were eventually driven off . Puig and his forces suffered two officers and three soldiers wounded and two soldiers dead . 
 Puig and his men retreated towards Yauco , but failed to destroy the rail terminus which connected the town to the city of Ponce , and proceeded to march towards the town of Peñuelas . Garretson 's troops entered Yauco in the afternoon of July 26 and on July 27 Puig 's men continued their march , leaving their artillery and heavy equipment behind , passing the towns of Adjuntas and Utuado and finally arriving at the town of Arecibo on the northern coast of the island on July 29 . Col. Puig , believing that he would be dishonored and accused by the Spanish Government of abandoning military equipment during his retreat , committed suicide on August 2 . 
 Miles , upon learning about the lack of discipline of the 6th Massachusetts during the battle , ordered an investigation . The 6th Massachusetts was sent on a hard march from Guánica to Ponce as punishment and the regimental commander , a lieutenant colonel , a major , and a captain resigned upon request . 
 = = = Battle of Fajardo = = = 
 On August 1 , the monitors USS Puritan , USS Amphitrite , armed tug USS Leyden , and collier USS Hannibal were sailing off the coast of Fajardo on the northeast corner of Puerto Rico , when Captain Frederick W. Rodgers , Puritan 's commanding officer and senior officer afloat , spotted the " Faro de Las Cabezas de San Juan " ( Cape San Juan Lighthouse ) that had been designated the landing site for the US Army 's invasion of Puerto Rico . Rodgers ordered a reconnaissance landing party ashore , including Puerto Rican volunteers . The sailors advanced to within a half mile of Fajardo , about five miles from the coast , but withdrew when they encountered Spanish troops . 
 The 25 @-@ man Spanish garrison stationed in Fajardo was alerted to the American presence and ordered to withdraw after notifying their superiors in San Juan . When Dr. Santiago Veve <unk> , a <unk> , realized that the garrison was abandoned and his town defenseless against the invading Americans , he implored the Spanish authorities in San Juan to dispatch troops to defend Fajardo . Losing hope that Spanish troops would come to the town 's aid , Veve went to the lighthouse to seek protection for the town from the Americans . On the afternoon of August 5 , Veve entered Fajardo with a contingent of bluejackets and United States flags were hoisted over the Fajardo Customs House at the harbor and City Hall . On the evening of August 6 , Captain Charles J. Barclay of Amphitrite ordered 28 sailors and 7 officers commanded by Lt. Charles N. Atwater and Assistant Engineer David J. Jenkins ashore to relight and occupy the Fajardo Light . They were also ordered to quarter 60 women and children of the town 's families that were deemed in danger for having sided with the Americans . As the first group of sailors was entering the darkened lighthouse , Naval Cadet William H. Boardman was mortally wounded when his revolver fell from a faulty holster and discharged into his thigh , cutting the femoral artery . His was one of only two Navy deaths during the Puerto Rican campaign . 
 On August 4 , Governor General Manuel Macías y Casado sent Colonel Pedro del Pino and about 220 troops , including civil guardsmen to recapture the city . When Colonel Pino entered Fajardo on August 7 , he found it nearly deserted because the residents , fearing a battle , had fled to the Fajardo Light and the surrounding hills . At close to midnight on August 8 , Pino 's troops began their assault on the lighthouse . The landing party of Amphitrite 's sailors occupying the lighthouse doused the light and signaled the ships offshore , initiating shore bombardment as the naval guns began firing a protective pattern . After two hours , the Spanish forces retreated back to the town . The Americans suffered no casualties , despite a close call when a wayward naval shell smashed through the 2 @-@ foot thick walls of the lighthouse within touch of 6 men but failed to explode . The Spanish losses were 2 dead and 3 wounded , including a lieutenant . 
 Early the next morning , Barclay decided the continued occupation of the lighthouse was of marginal value and ordered his men back to the ship . A landing party of 30 sailors from Amphitrite and a similar number of U.S. Marines from the USS Cincinnati under Lieutenant John A. Lejeune came ashore to secure the area while the 60 <unk> civilians boarded the Leyden for passage to Ponce and the lighthouse was abandoned to the Spaniards . In Fajardo , Pino 's men tore down the U.S. flags that flew over the harbor Customs House and City Hall , returning to San Juan after verifying that the lighthouse was abandoned . The contingent of about 20 civil guards that had accompanied Pino , were left to maintain order in the town . The skirmish at Fajardo was the only time that American forces withdrew from a position during the Puerto Rican Campaign . 
 = = = Battle of Guayama = = = 
 After the town of Yauco was taken , Miles decided to attack the City of Ponce by sea and by land . Garretson 's 6th Illinois and 6th Massachusetts had returned to Guanica and after the troops rested , Garretson and his men were ordered to move eastward to Ponce . Lt. Col. Rafael Martinez <unk> , in charge of the Spanish forces in that city , had pulled out , leaving behind a small garrison of 300 volunteers to hold the town . When the American forces arrived in Ponce they met no resistance and the Spanish volunteers surrendered to the invaders . The American forces were not the only ones who participated in the taking of Ponce . Members of the Puerto Rican Commission , which included the leader of the Intentona de Yauco revolt , Antonio Mattei <unk> and his group , arrived in Ponce aboard the USS St. Louis and were assigned to the headquarters of General Miles . From this group Miles organized the " Porto Rican Scouts " , which was later assigned to General Theodore Schwan , under the command of <unk> Lugo Viñas . Miles then ordered Brigadier General Peter G. Hains and the men of the 3rd Illinois , 4th Ohio and 4th Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry Regiments to take Arroyo , a small port 60 miles east of Ponce that served the larger , nearby coastal town of Guayama . Arroyo was taken on August 2 and on August 5 Hanes ordered the 4th Ohio , the 3rd Illinois and a battery of Sims @-@ Dudley guns , manned by Company G of the 4th Ohio , to capture Guayama . 
 Spanish forces were entrenched on the crest of two small hills , between which the road from Arroyo to Guayama ran . The Americans had crossed a stream in front of the hills when suddenly the Spanish opened fire . The Americans protected their position by the stream and increased their firepower as more reinforcements arrived . The outnumbered Spanish troops retreated to Guayama as the Americans made their advance on the hills . The firefight , which lasted half an hour , left three American wounded . When the 4th Ohio entered the town they discovered that the Spaniards had fled north and abandoned the city , ending the Battle of Guayama . General John Rutter Brooke used the <unk> Residence ( Casa <unk> ) by the town square in Guayama as his military headquarters . 
 = = = = Battle of the Guamaní River Bridge = = = = 
 On August 6 , Colonel Coit sent two companies of the 4th Ohio on a reconnaissance mission across and beyond a cast iron bridge that crossed the Río Guamaní ( Guamaní River ) . The road beyond the bridge was essential for General Hains ' projected advance to the town of Cayey . The 4th Ohio observed elements of Spain 's 6th Provisional Battalion under the command of Julio Cervera <unk> entrenched in Guamaní Heights , six miles north of the bridge . The 4th felt that they were too strongly entrenched to attempt an assault at the time . The 4th Ohio requested reinforcements and on August 9 , attacked the Spaniards and a short firefight erupted . The numerical superiority of the Americans forced the Spanish to retreat from Guamaní Heights . This battle was the costliest battle yet for the Americans since their landing at Guánica , as it resulted in seven wounded . The Spanish forces suffered 2 dead and 15 wounded . 
 = = = Battle of Coamo = = = 
 Shortly after the American soldiers disembarked , a group of Spanish and Puerto Rican units began moving from Ponce to Aibonito , marching through the <unk> Central ( Central Road ) . The caravan was composed of two companies of the Batallón de Cazadores de la Patria ( Battalion of the Motherland 's Hunters ) and some members of the Civil Guard and a Puerto Rican guerilla force . A total of 248 infantry men and 42 members of the cavalry formed the battalions under the command of Lt. Col. Rafael Martínez Illescas , the same commander who was in charge of the Ponce garrison . Traveling by foot , the journey would last two days . The group decided to spend one night in the resort of the town of Coamo known as the Baños de Coamo before continuing their march in the morning . Martínez Illescas immediately ordered the construction of several trenches ; while building these , the soldiers were ambushed by an anti @-@ Spanish guerilla force , led by Pedro María Descartes , who managed to kill a member of the Civil Guard . 
 Meanwhile , two battalions of volunteers from Wisconsin and Pennsylvania , led by Generals Oswald H. Ernst and James H. Wilson , settled on opposite sides of the road to Coamo . On August 9 , 1898 , the Americans began their offensive , opening cannon fire against the city and completing their attack with artillery fire , the 3rd and 4th Regular Pennsylvania Artillery to provide artillery support for the frontal assault on the Baños , damaging the resort . The Americans intended to encircle and defeat the defenses in the city . A group of soldiers entered the city from the backside , having advanced through a river nearby . The rear assault was reinforced by Wilson 's army under General Ernst , attempting to trap the allied soldiers in a crossfire , employing a tactic known as the pincer movement . Martínez Illescas was surprised by the attack and led an improvised attack , but he was killed in the crossfire along with his second @-@ in @-@ command , leaving Captain <unk> in charge ; he ordered his men to surrender . Half of the allied troops ignored the order , and continued the attack , Troop C galloped at top speed north from the Baños de Coamo , after finding the resort abandoned by the Spanish . <unk> 's men were sent to a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp located at Río <unk> , while the men who continued to attack retreated to Aibonito when they realized that the Americans were using a pincer movement . 
 = = = Battle of Silva Heights = = = 
 Brigadier General Theodore Schwan and 2 @,@ 896 men of his Independent Brigade had landed in Guanica and marched towards occupied Yauco . Schwan and his men were ordered to move westward and to capture the city of Mayagüez . Colonel Julio Soto Villanueva ordered 1 @,@ 500 Spanish Regulars of the 24th Rifle Battalion , six companies of the Alfonso XIII auxiliaries , and other scattered Spanish and Puerto Rican guerilla forces dispatched from the garrison at Mayagüez to meet and defeat Schwan . The Spanish forces entrenched themselves at a high ridge called Silva Heights , located at a road near the town of Hormigueros . 
 Schwan 's troops arrived in the town of San Germán and continued the march towards their objective . Troop A of Schwan 's 5th Cavalry approached Silva Heights and were soon engaged in a firefight when the Spanish forces opened fire . The Americans were aided by two companies of the 19th Infantry , supported by artillery and Gatling guns , as well as the 11th Infantry . The Spanish forces retreated after the American reinforcements brought them under intense fire . Schwan 's men set up camp on Silva Heights for the night and the following day they continued their drive to Mayagüez . They arrived the following morning to find that the Spanish forces had abandoned the city to retreat to the east towards Lares . Schwan did not follow Soto Villanueva , but instead was ordered to take the town of Las Marías . The outcome of the Silva Heights Battle left 3 Spanish dead , 6 wounded , and 136 prisoners . Schwan 's brigade suffered 15 wounded and 2 killed in action . 
 = = = Battle of Asomante = = = 
 The American cavalry pursued the soldiers that had retreated from Coamo , but were not able to reach them until the units had entered Aibonito Pass , a region more commonly known as Asomante . The region had been prepared by allied Puerto Rican and Spanish troops , who had built a trench and placed soldiers and equipment around the foliage . As soon as the soldiers noticed the presence of the invading unit they opened cannon fire . The cavalry received infantry reinforcements , which were received by battery fire . Six American soldiers were injured in the crossfire , prompting a retreat order . The allied units ( Spanish and Puerto Rican ) lost five soldiers and two civil guards . During the following two days the Americans decided to do a battlefield reconnaissance and Colonel S. Reber , developed a croquis of the Aibonito Pass . Spies were deployed throughout Coamo , including a Puerto Rican separatist named Carlos <unk> , who was able to enter the city without suspicion and contact Rufino Huertas , a separatist teacher . Huertas gave <unk> a series of defense plans that were previously developed and organized by Martínez Illescas . While inactive , the Puerto Rican soldiers deployed in Asomante completed rounds every two hours , working four hours daily . They mostly ate beans , some rice and meat , while conserving several cracker packs for Spanish reinforcements that were supposed to arrive . They slept in improvised huts that did not protect them from the rain . 
 The American commanders decided to attack the trenches with artillery , while sending a large group to Barranquitas , from which they would try to attack the allied troops from the back . At 10 : 30 a.m. Captain R.D. Potts led part of the 3rd Wisconsin Volunteer Infantry Regiment through the central highway to Aibonito . Lieutenants Bliss and O 'Hern led two units with similar equipment . At 1 : 00 p.m. the allied troops opened cannon fire as the Americans entered their range . Potts ordered the deployment of two batteries while O 'Hern received orders from Commander Landcaster to set a cannon at a distance of a 100 yards to the vanguard 's right . They intended to defeat a small group led by Captain Hernaíz . Shrapnel from allied cannon fire was falling close to Lancaster 's location , and he asked Potts to help him by deploying a battery nearby . One of Hernaíz 's <unk> cannons overheated , which forced him to order a temporary cease to the offensive . Landcaster believed that the opposition had been annihilated , ordered an advance . However the allied fire was renewed , this time supported by Mauser rifle fire . The sudden attack caused confusion among some soldiers , who reported seeing a second Spanish unit nearby . Fearing that the allied units could capture the American equipment , Landcaster ordered a retreat . Lieutenant Hains was gravely injured by a Mauser bullet , being replaced by Sergeant John Long . Meanwhile , most of Potts ' men fled the battlefield . In the crossfire the allied forces overpowered the American infantry , using Mauser fire to disorganize their artillery , during which time four American officials were gravely injured including Long , Lieutenant Harris , Captain E.T. Lee and Corporal Oscar <unk> . Private Frederick <unk> , Corporal August Yank , George J. Bruce and Private <unk> also received injuries , with <unk> subsequently dying . Harris ' position was filled by O 'Hern , while <unk> was fatally shot while trying to support the artillery . In total the allied units had only an injured artillery man , while the American side had two dead and five injured . Wilson 's camp was the first to receive a telegram from General Miles notifying him that the war had ended . The Americans sent Bliss to Asomante , but <unk> refused to suspend the hostilities after receiving a telegram from Macías denying any peace treaty . All military actions in Puerto Rico were suspended August 13 , after President William McKinley and French Ambassador Jules Cambon , acting on behalf of the Spanish government , signed an armistice whereby Spain relinquished its sovereignty over the territory of Puerto Rico . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Treaty of Paris of 1898 = = = 
 The Puerto Rico Campaign , which began with the <unk> 's capture of the Rita on May 8 and ended on August 13 after the Treaty of Paris was signed , was short compared to the other campaigns in the Spanish – American War , because the war came to an end before the military objective of the campaign was completed . Among the factors which benefited the invaders in the short campaign was that the Puerto Ricans who resided in the southern and western towns and villages resented Spanish rule and tended to view the Americans as their liberators . Some Puerto Rican leaders such as José de Diego and Eugenio María de Hostos expected the United States to grant the island its independence and in the case of Rosendo <unk> Cintrón and the committee which he headed , greeted General Miles and the invaders in Ponce with banquets . Believing that Puerto Rico would gain its independence , a group of men staged an uprising in Ciales which became known as " El <unk> de Ciales " or the " Ciales Uprising of 1898 " and proclaimed Puerto Rico to be a republic . The Spanish authorities who were unaware that the cease fire had been signed brutally suppressed the uprising Another reason which can explain why the campaign was short and not as violent as the others is that the 1st , 2nd and 3rd Puerto Rican Provisional Battalions were in Cuba defending that island against the American invaders . 
 As stated in the introduction , the Puerto Rican Battalion suffered a total of 70 casualties which included their dead , wounded , MIA 's and prisoners . The Spanish , Puerto Ricans and Americans that participated in the campaign totaled 33 @,@ 472 . Of this total 18 @,@ 000 were Spanish , 10 @,@ 000 were Puerto Rican and 15 @,@ 472 were American military personnel . The Spanish and Puerto Rican suffered 429 casualties which included 17 dead , 88 wounded and 324 captured . The American forces suffered 43 casualties : 3 dead and 40 wounded . The commander of Spain 's 6th Provisional Battalion , Julio Cervera <unk> gained notoriety as the author of a pamphlet called La defensa de Puerto Rico , which supported Governor General Manuel Macías y Casado and in an attempt to justify Spain 's defeat against the United States , falsely blamed the Puerto Rican volunteers in the Spanish Army of the fiasco A group of angry <unk> agreed to challenge Cervera to a duel if the commander did not retract his pamphlet . The men drew lots for this honor ; it fell to José <unk> y Soler and was seconded by Cayetano Coll y Toste y Leonidas Villalón . Cervera 's seconds were Colonel Pedro del Pino and Captain Emilio Barrera . The duel never took place , as Cervera explained his intentions in writing the pamphlet , and all parties were satisfied . 
 Under the terms of the Treaty of Paris of 1898 , ratified on December 10 , 1898 , Puerto Rico was ceded to the United States . Spain had lost its last colony in the Western Hemisphere and the United States gained imperial strength and global presence . The United States established a military government and appointed Miles the first head of the military government established on the island , acting as both head of the army of occupation and administrator of civil affairs . Members of the Spanish forces and civilians who were loyal to the Spanish Crown were allowed to return to Spain . By October 18 , the Spanish withdrawal from Puerto Rico was completed as the final troops left San Juan for Spain . Those who belonged to the Spanish military who decided to stay in Puerto Rico were offered the option by the United States to serve in the newly formed " Porto Rico Regiment " . Some took the offer , such as Teófilo Marxuach , a former Lieutenant in the Spanish Army who joined the regiment , and others , such as Capt. Angel Rivero Méndez , declined the offer and retired from the military . 
 = = = ' Americanization " of Puerto Rico = = = 
 From 1898 to 1900 , Puerto Rico was governed by four military officers , Commanding General Nelson A. Miles ( 1898 ) , Major General John R. Brooke ( 1898 – 1898 ) , Major General Guy Vernon Henry ( 1898 – 1899 ) and Major General George Whitefield Davis ( 1899 – 1900 ) . Some of these men , such as Miles , Brooke and Henry were experienced veterans of the Indian Wars and , even though they were accustomed to the pacification and administration of the Native Americans , the U.S. Army had no previous experience in the administration of overseas territories . Henry stated : " It was an entirely new duty for American Army officers . There was no precedent in the experience of these so suddenly placed in charge of this our first real colony , upon which their policy could be based . " 
 The administration of Puerto Rico was the responsibility of the United States Department of War 's Division of Insular Affairs which was molded after the Bureau of Indian Affairs . Almost immediately , the United States began the ' Americanization " process of Puerto Rico . The U.S. occupation brought about a total change in Puerto Rico 's economy and polity and did not apply democratic principles to the colony . Puerto Rico was classified as an ' unincorporated territory " which meant that the protections of the United States Constitution did not automatically apply because the island belonged to the U.S. , but was not part of the U.S. 
 In 1899 , U.S. Senator George Frisbie Hoar described Puerto Ricans as " uneducated , simple @-@ minded and harmless people who were only interested in wine , women , music and dancing " and recommended that Spanish should be abolished in the island 's schools and only English should be taught . Schools became the primary vehicle of Americanization , and initially all classes were taught in English , which also made for a large dropout rate . 
 On January 15 , 1899 , the military government changed the name of Puerto Rico to Porto Rico ( On May 17 , 1932 , U.S. Congress changed the name back to " Puerto Rico " ) and the island 's currency was changed from the Puerto Rican peso to the American dollar , integrating the island 's currency into the U.S. monetary system . The United States exerted its control over the economy of the island by prohibiting Puerto Rico from negotiating commercial treaties with other nations , from determining tariffs , and from shipping goods to the mainland on other than U.S. carriers . 
 = = = Civil disorder = = = 
 A state of civil disorder existed in the island 's mountainous region after the invasion of the United States . The local Criollo , who now found themselves unemployed and felt that they had been exploited by their former employers , formed bands called ' Partidas " . The Partidas , at first attacked and robbed many of the wealthy plantation owners , who were loyal to the Spanish Crown , in vengeance , however they later began to attack the businesses owned by the local natives . One of the most notable leaders of the Partidas was José Maldonado Román a.k.a. ' Aguila Blanca " . Maldonado , who operated in the areas of Juana Díaz and Ponce , harassed the Spanish Civil Guard and later did the same to the American Forces . Another factor contributing to the state of civil disorder on the island was the lack of discipline of the American troops who were stationed on the island . These troops were not professional soldiers and were composed of volunteers . Many instances were reported where these men would act disorderly , under the influence of alcohol , and get into fights with the local residents . The state of civil disorder came to a halt on the island after the military government began to rebuilt Puerto Rico 's infrastructure , thereby providing employment for many of the discontented and unemployed population , and when the volunteer troops were replaced by the regular Army . 
 = = = End of military rule and rise of the sugar economy = = = 
 Military rule was replaced by a civilian government by way of the Foraker Act of 1900 . However , the Act stipulated that the governor , chief of police and top officials were presidentially appointed and they were all to be Americans . 
 In 1901 , the first civilian U.S. governor of Puerto Rico , Charles Herbert Allen , installed himself as president of the largest <unk> @-@ refining company in the world , the American Sugar Refining Company . This company was later renamed as the Domino Sugar company . In effect , Charles Allen leveraged his governorship of Puerto Rico into a controlling interest over the entire Puerto Rican economy . 
 = = = 54 years after the end of the Puerto Rican Campaign = = = 
 In 1947 , the U.S. granted Puerto Ricans the right to democratically elect their own governor , which it first exercised in 1948 . The Constitution of Puerto Rico was approved by a Constitutional Convention on February 6 , 1952 , ratified by the U.S. Congress , and approved by President Truman on July 3 of that year . Puerto Rico adopted the name of Estado Libre <unk> ( literally translated as " Free Associated State " ) , officially translated into English as Commonwealth , for its body politic . 
 = = Markers , monuments and tombstones = = 
 In Puerto Rico there are no monuments to commemorate the Spanish – American War as such . There are various markers where some of the historical events took place and some tombstones which honor both the American invaders and the Spanish and Puerto Rican defenders of the island . In the town of Guánica there is a rock on the coastal port with an inscription indicating that Major General Nelson A. Miles and his men landed on that spot . There is also a monument in the town dedicated to the veterans of the Spanish – American War , however said monument fails to specify to which veterans it is dedicated to , the Americans or the Spanish / Puerto Ricans . In Yauco there is a monument / tombstone dedicated to an unknown Spanish soldier who had fallen in combat and was left there on that very spot . In Coamo there are two markers that indicate where Rafael Martínez Illescas and Frutos López died . López 's tomb is located in the old cemetery of Coamo next to that of the tomb of the three unknown Puerto Rican soldiers who perished in that conflict . Martínez Illescas ' body was transferred in 1916 , to his hometown Cartagena in Spain where he is buried . The town of Guayama has a monument dedicated to the members of the 4th Ohio Infantry . In Asomante , there is a marker which indicates the place where the " Battle of Asomante " took place . 
 = Thrive ( Casting Crowns album ) = 
 Thrive ( stylized as <unk> ) is the sixth studio album by American contemporary Christian music band Casting Crowns . Released on January 28 , 2014 through Beach Street and Reunion Records , the album was produced by Mark A. Miller . Musically , the album , whose concept was inspired by Psalms 1 from the Bible , has a rock and contemporary Christian sound with influences from folk and bluegrass . The album received mostly positive reviews from music critics for its lyrics and musical diversity , but some critics felt that some songs were too similar to the work of other artists or to their own previous work . 
 Thrive sold 43 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in its first week of release ; although this was short of projections to sell 75 @,@ 000 copies , it peaked at No. 6 on the Billboard 200 and No. 1 on the Billboard Christian Albums chart , while also charting in Australia , Canada , the Netherlands , and the UK . The album was preceded by the lead single " All You 've Ever Wanted " , which peaked at No. 3 on the Billboard Christian Songs chart . It has been certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Thrive was recorded at Zoo Studio in Franklin , Tennessee , with producer Mark A. Miller . According to lead vocalist Mark Hall , the idea behind Thrive came from the student ministry he is involved in . As a youth pastor , Hall frequently uses Psalms 1 , which metaphorically compares the concept of a righteous man to a prosperous tree planted by a river . Hall said that many people he has talked with are simply surviving , which he feels contrasts with this — he felt that , although hard times can come upon anyone , people are not put in these situations to simply survive through them , but rather to thrive through the adversity . Using the metaphor , Hall noted that , if one were to pull away all the dirt from around a tree , one would find roots digging into the ground in addition to the limbs of the tree reaching out . Hall elaborated that " you need to get your strength from God ; you don ’ t get it on your own . If you ’ re all limbs , the thorns of life will knock you over . You need to dig your roots in and let God reach out through you " . Accordingly , half of the record focuses on ' reaching out ' , while the other half focuses on ' digging deep ' . Hall described the record as being " an effort to draw a picture of what a believer , a follower of Jesus , would look like if they dug into their roots and understood God and themselves more , and then instead of trying to go be Christian for God , they just let God give them chances to be a Christian " . 
 The music on Thrive has been described as contemporary Christian ; and rock it was also described as " mid ' 90s grunge rock with country flair " and the album as having " rock , pop , and worship " songs . Thrive was also noted to have influences from folk and bluegrass at times . The main instruments used on the album include the electric guitar , acoustic guitar , and piano . The songs have been called anthems that are intended for people in both jovial and trying times . 
 The first song on the album , the title track " Thrive " , has been described as having a folk pop sound similar to Mumford and Sons or Phillip Phillips . The banjo and mandolin are used in its arrangement in addition to electric guitars and backing vocals . " All You 've Ever Wanted " is led by a piano riff , and displays an adult contemporary sound similar to much of the rest of the band 's discography . " Just Be Held " also incorporates adult contemporary elements , with one critic comparing the song 's string arrangement to those on Downton Abbey , while " You Are the Only One " is a worship song . " Broken Together " , described as " Coldplay pop " , is a piano ballad ; the song 's protagonist " smashes the facade of a fairy @-@ tale relationship , forgoing the happy ending with the realization that ' maybe you and I were never meant to be complete ' " . 
 " Love You with the Truth " is a orchestral rock song , and has been described as a softer version of the music of Skillet . " This Is Now " and " Dream for You " utilize a mix of electric and acoustic guitars , with the latter noted as having a " bluesy " sound . " Follow Me " , a ballad with folk influences , is sung by Megan Garrett . " House of Their Dreams " thematically revolves around a family that has pursued material interests at the expense of being together ; musically , the song was compared to a softer version of the band 's song " American Dream " . " Waiting on the Night to Fall " is a warning against Satan , urging listeners not to become complacent . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Prior to the release of Thrive , " All You 've Ever Wanted " was released as the album 's lead single . The song was released to Christian AC radio on September 14 , 2013 and as a digital download on September 24 , 2013 . The song has peaked at No. 3 on the Billboard Christian Songs chart , No. 10 on the Christian Airplay chart , and No. 2 on the Christian Digital Songs chart . Two other songs were released as downloads prior to the album 's release : " Thrive " , which peaked at No. 10 on the Christian Songs chart and No. 3 on the Christian Digital Songs chart , and " This Is Now " , which peaked at No. 15 on the Christian Songs chart and No. 3 on the Christian Digital Songs chart . Following the release of the album , two other songs ( " Broken Together " and " Just Be Held " ) charted on the Christian Songs chart at No. 45 and 50 , respectively . 
 Thrive was released on January 28 , 2014 . Billboard projected the album would sell around 75 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in its first week , enough for a top @-@ ten debut on the Billboard 200 and a No. 1 debut on the Christian Albums chart . The album ultimately sold 43 @,@ 000 units , debuting at No. 1 on the Christian Albums chart , No. 6 on the Billboard 200 , and No. 8 on the Digital Albums chart . It went on to become the best @-@ selling Christian album of 2014 , shifting 339 @,@ 000 copies throughout the year . 
 The album also charted internationally . It debuted at No. 23 on the Billboard Canadian Albums Chart and No. 52 on the Dutch Albums chart . Although it did not chart on the main UK Albums Chart , it did reach No. 1 on the UK 's Official Christian & Gospel Albums Chart ; it also appeared on the Australia Hitseekers Albums chart , which ranks the top albums by artists who have not yet reached the top 50 on the main Australian Albums Chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Thrive received mostly positive reviews from music critics . The album 's songwriting and musical diversity were generally praised . Joshua Andre of Christian Music Zine awarded the album four and a half out of five stars , describing the lyrics as " profound " while praising the music as the most innovative and varied the band had put out to date . <unk> Honeyman of Cross Rhythms rated the album nine out of ten squares , calling it " outstanding " and praising its musically diversity . He also praised the band , saying they were " refreshingly willing to take a chance and most certainly at the top of the game " . Jonathan Andre of Indie Vision Music rated Thrive four out of five stars , calling it the band 's " most personal and musically diverse album to date " . Kate Padilla of The Daily Reporter praised both the album 's songwriting and sound , and felt that the album could be appreciated , regardless of whether or not the buyer listens to Christian radio . 
 Other critics praised the album 's overall quality , both in comparison to the band 's previous work and the Christian music genre . Ed Cardinal of Crosswalk.com described Thrive as " top quality " and described the majority of the album was marked by " intensity " , and said " It may not be the easiest , <unk> listen ... but this album can help fight that dark enemy with every play " . Kevin Davis of New Release Tuesday rated Thrive four and a half stars , ranking the album 's songs as among the best he had heard from group and saying that it is " sure to be one of the year 's best [ albums ] " . Laura Chambers of Christian Music Review rated the album 4 @.@ 9 out of 5 , describing it as " one of the best albums I ’ ve heard in a long time " . Although she noted the album covered some lyrical topics the band had discussed before , she felt this was not a bad thing , considering it " less of a rehash and more of a reminder " . Jeremy Armstrong of Worship Leader rated Thrive three and a half out of five stars , praising the band as having a " broad appeal " and describing the album as a " fine release " . At CM Addict , Brianne Bellomy rated the album four stars out of five , remarking that the release " is another power packed album full of songs that speak to everyone " . At About.com , Kim Jones rated Thrive four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , praising the album as being " delivered with [ ... ] passion " and saying that it has " arrows [ pointed ] straight to the heart " . 
 Other critics presented a more mixed response ; Mark Rice of Jesus Freak Hideout rated the album three out of five stars , arguing it was an improvement over their previous efforts in some respects but feeling it was , for the most part , either " stagnation or regression " . Although Piet Levy of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel praised the songwriting , saying it " stands out [ ... ] at times featuring troubled protagonists and earned redemption " , he felt several songs sounded too similar to the work of other artists . Brian Mansfield of USA Today rated it two and a half out of four stars , describing the band as " chameleonic " but praising " House of Their Dreams " and " Broken Together " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel and credits = = 
 Credits taken from Allmusic 
 = = Charts = = 
 Billboard named the album No. 1 for 2014 on its Christian Albums chart . 
 = = = Single charts = = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = Ampelosaurus = 
 Ampelosaurus ( / <unk> / AM @-@ pi @-@ lo @-@ SAWR @-@ əs ; meaning " vine lizard " ) is a titanosaurian sauropod dinosaur hailing from the Late Cretaceous Period of what is now Europe . Its type species is A. atacis , named by Le Loeuff in 1995 . A possible unnamed species has given Ampelosaurus an age reaching to the latest Cretaceous , from about 70 to 66 million years ago . 
 Like most sauropods , it would have had a long neck and tail but it also carried armor in the form of osteoderms . Over 500 bones have been assigned to Ampelosaurus and all but the braincase ( assigned to A. sp . ) has been assigned to A. atacis . They are assigned to the same species because all the differences in the limb proportions have been linked to individual variation . A. atacis is known from a few , well @-@ preserved teeth and some cranial material . A right scapula was discovered associated with a coracoid . The blade of the scapula , contrary to most titanosaurs , is triangular . The blade narrows at one end instead of showing an expansion like most other genera . A. atacis is also known from a pubis about 75 centimetres ( 30 in ) long and an ilium . Aside from that , it is known from a partial forelimb , and many femora . 
 <unk> were a flourishing group of sauropod dinosaurs during Cretaceous times . The Spanish locality from the latest Cretaceous of “ Lo Hueco ” yielded a relatively well preserved , titanosaurian braincase , which shares a number of unique features with A. atacis from France . However , it appeared to differ from A. atacis in some traits also . The specimen has been provisionally identified as Ampelosaurus sp .. A. sp. is most likely a mature titanosaurian since the bones of the braincase have largely fused together . 
 Ampelosaurus lived alongside many other animals . Over 8500 specimens have been found alongside it , including gastropods , bivalves , crocodiles , other sauropods , plants and invertebrates in the Villalba de la Sierra , Gres de Saint @-@ Chinian , Marnes Rouges Inférieures and Gres de <unk> formations . Recent attention has made Ampelosaurus one of the most well @-@ known dinosaurs known from France . 
 = = Description = = 
 Like most sauropods , Ampelosaurus would have had a long neck and tail , but it also carried armor in the form of osteoderms 25 to 28 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 8 to 11 @.@ 0 in ) long . The four osteoderms found have three different morphologies , they are plate , bulb , and spine @-@ shaped . This dinosaur would have stretched up to about 15 metres ( 49 ft ) from snout to tail . Ampelosaurus atacis is known from many unattached bones and teeth . It is one of the best @-@ known dinosaurs from France . It is considered to be a dwarf sauropod by Coria et al . ( 2005 ) because it has a smaller size in comparison with its ancestors . 
 = = = Skeleton = = = 
 Ampelosaurus is one of the most completely known titanosaurian sauropods from Europe . Since 1989 , over 500 bones discovered at the Upper Cretaceous Bellevue locality of southern France have been assigned to A. atacis . An abundant amount of well @-@ preserved elements have been uncovered at Bellevue . In the original description , only a tooth and some vertebrae were examined . In 2005 , a complete description was made by Le <unk> of all known material , allowing Ampelosaurus to be much better understood . All the material has been assigned to the species , and even though there are some differences in limb proportions , it has all been linked to individual variation . 
 A. atacis is known from a few , well @-@ preserved teeth and some cranial material , a tooth of which was described in its original description . The teeth differentiate Ampelosaurus from Magyarosaurus and Lirainosaurus , both of which are also from Europe . The teeth are different from the two later genera as Ampelosaurus has teeth that are roughly cylindrical in the top with thin expansions at the bottom . They are 21 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 83 in ) high and about 6 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 24 in ) wide . Those expansions give its teeth a slight constriction between the root and the crown . The teeth are also quite different from the peg @-@ like teeth of <unk> . The teeth , have a general morphology similar to titanosaurians <unk> and a braincase from <unk> . Another skull was described from southern France , but showed some differences , meaning there could have been at least two different titanosaurians in France during the Late Cretaceous . 
 The scapula was found attached to a coracoid . In the longer direction , the bone is 72 centimetres ( 28 in ) long . The blade of the scapula , contrary to titanosaurs , is triangular , larger closer to the base . The blade narrows distally instead of showing an expansion . Differing from Magyarosaurus and Saltasaurus , the scapula does not have the dorsal crest at the base of the scapular blade . The shape of the coracoid is quadrangular , and the coracoid has a thickened cranial margin . 
 Ampelosaurus is also known from a pubis , about 75 centimetres ( 30 in ) long . It has a strong distal expansion , that is similar to a titanosaur from Brazil , and a large foramen . Contrary to the South American titanosaurs , the ilium does not have an expansion on the side . The ischium , known from a shaft , is unexpanded distally and very well developed . It is also very flat . An incomplete radius is also known . It lacks the proximal and distal ends , and possesses a very prominent ridge along it . The largest and best @-@ preserved specimens are both <unk> . The right ulna has a total length of 395 millimetres ( 15 @.@ 6 in ) . The right ulna is small and slender , is missing an olecranon , and has a well @-@ marked ridge . The left ulna is larger , with a length of 725 millimetres ( 28 @.@ 5 in ) . The ulna has a deep radial fossa . 
 About 27 femora are known from Bellevue , making them the most common bone , most of them more @-@ or @-@ less complete . They are very flat <unk> but otherwise , lack any unusual features . In a study of its bone physiology , it was found that the maximum known femur length was 1 @,@ 100 millimetres ( 43 in ) , which is much larger than previously known ( 802 millimetres ( 31 @.@ 6 in ) ) . That means , that the ancestors Ampelosaurus were slightly smaller than itself . 18 humeri are also known , but none of them approach the size of the largest femur . The humeri do not have a free medullary cavity . The humeri are robust , about 63 centimetres ( 25 in ) long , with very expanded distal and proximal ends . 
 Three different types of osteoderms have been recovered at Bellevue . Two with large spines have been uncovered . At the base of each spine , which is about 12 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) tall , are two large foramina . The internal faces are all <unk> @-@ convex and have a ridge opposite the spine . In side view , they have two sections , a low half that progressively thickens , and a spine . 
 = = = = Vertebrae = = = = 
 The holotype specimen of A. atacis is a group of three connected dorsal vertebrae . Cervical vertebrae are uncommon from Bellevue and most of them are poorly preserved . The vertebrae are opisthocoelous , with centra that lengthen toward the rear . Neural spines have been preserved on the vertebrae , and they face toward the rear . Two dorsal vertebrae were preserved with a complete , but very crushed neural arch , a neural spine with a characteristic shape : it is very widened distally and narrows downwards . The vertebrae also have an internal structure that is spongy , with very large cells . The caudal vertebrae are all strongly procoelous and are compressed on the sides . The neural spines of the caudal vertebrae are very narrow and very tall and point toward the rear . The middle caudal vertebrae are more compressed on the sides that the others . Also , the centrum of middle caudal vertebrae is longer proportionally . Two sacral vertebrae were known from Bellevue . They are poorly preserved , and are thought to belong to a juvenile . A complete sacrum was also found in 2002 . 
 = = = Distinguishing anatomical features = = = 
 This set of characters was identified by Le Loeuff in his description of Ampelosaurus to distinguish it from all other genera : teeth that weakly spatulate ; a laterally widening distal extremity of neural spines on the dorsal vertebrae ; neural arch of the dorsal vertebrae inclining strongly towards the rear ; the lack of a distal expansion on the scapular blade ; the presence of a light , ventral crest on top of the scapula ; the presence of plate , bulb , and spine shaped osteoderms ; and , in 2005 , Le Loeuff added that the constriction of the neural spine on the dorsal and cervical vertebrae was also probably a characteristic of Ampelosaurus . 
 = = = Ampelosaurus sp . = = = 
 A fossil braincase from Lo Hueco was tentatively assigned to an unnamed species of Ampelosaurus , A. sp . , in a 2013 article in the journal PLoS ONE . The braincase was found to share many features with A. atacis , such as a back of the skull that is flat . The braincase , MCCM @-@ HUE @-@ 8741 , is small in size overall , with a front @-@ to @-@ back length of 100 @.@ 8 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 97 in ) , and the maximum width of the left half being 64 @.@ 3 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 53 in ) . Parts of the bottom half of the braincase are missing . Even though section are missing , the specimen does not appear to have been deformed much , as the left and right halves are not very different . 
 Two frontals are preserved . They are each 57 @.@ 3 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 26 in ) long and 64 @.@ 3 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 53 in ) wide . The upper surface of each frontal is not smooth . One crest runs along the each frontal , and the together the two crests make up the orbital roof . Both parietals have also been found . The connection between them is marked by a ω @-@ shaped crest . Viewed from the side , the parietal has two extensions . These extensions are not fully preserved , but they would have been on the border of the upper temporal fenestrae in their middle . Each parietal was preserved as 79 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 13 in ) wide . The <unk> of the specimen from Lo Hueco is unique as it has an occipital condyle that is much wider than tall . The occipital condyle has an irregular surface that was probably caused by the loss of the original cartilaginous covering . The complete braincase was especially low in the skull , and was oriented to the side . The occipital condyle is 28 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 13 in ) wide and 15 @.@ 8 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 62 in ) tall . The braincase floor is made by the <unk> . The <unk> is a tall but not long bone . The <unk> is mostly on the side of it , along with the <unk> , the parietal , and the <unk> . The length of the <unk> from the front to the back is around 10 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 42 in ) . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Compared with the <unk> , the inner ear of A. sp. shows a more basal morphology . That feature is possibly related to a restricted range of possible movements that involve head @-@ turning . 
 Like in Jainosaurus and most other non @-@ avian archosaurs , the hindbrain and midbrain of A. sp. is relatively poorly preserved in the endocast . In contrast with TMM <unk> and a few other taxa such as cf . Cetiosaurus <unk> and Giraffatitan , no characteristic " nub " of the cerebellum can be seen . As in TMM <unk> and many other archosaurs , the back of the brain is especially narrow in A. sp . 
 The cerebral region of the brain is separated from the rest of the brain by a distinct compression caused in the endocranial cavity . The rearmost part of the cerebral region of the braincase has a top with a small expansion . This is different from Jainosaurus . However , relatively much larger expansions are known in the diplodocoid sauropods Dicraeosaurus and Diplodocus . In MCCM @-@ HUE @-@ 8741 , the small opening in the skull roof middle is responsible for a swelling on the endocast that is suggestive of a pineal system . It is in the exact position where the pineal gland is expected to have been , between the forebrain and the midbrain . 
 The semicircular canals are contracted , and they are highly curved . The semicircular system of MCCM @-@ HUE @-@ 8741 shows also a basal morphology , because the semicircular canals do not attach to each other . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 Ampelosaurus was originally found near the commune of Campagne @-@ sur @-@ Aude in the Aude département of France . It was recovered in the lower levels of the Marnes Rouges Inférieures Formation , which belong to the early Maastrichtian epoch of the Late Cretaceous Period , ~ 70 million years ago . These sediments represent an ancient floodplain with numerous river channels . French paleontologist Jean Le Loeuff first described and named this dinosaur in 1995 . Ampelosaurus is derived from the Greek <unk> , " the vineyard " and the Latin saurus , " reptile " . Therefore , Ampelosaurus means " vineyard lizard " after the Blanquette de Limoux vineyard . The vineyard is located on the south side of the region Ampelosaurus was found in . The specific name is based on the Latin ajax , the " Aude river " . 
 The first remains were found in a bonebed discovered in 1989 , which produced numerous ribs and vertebrae from the back and tail , as well as many limb bones , but no skull material aside from one tooth . Four osteoderms of different sizes and shapes were also recovered from this bonebed . This material comes from several different individuals . Since 1989 , more material has been uncovered in the same region of France , including a relatively complete skeleton with some elements of the skull and lower jaw . 
 Later , in 2001 , the Campagne @-@ sur @-@ Aude site was explored again , this time by Gerard Chauvet , Jean @-@ Luc Le <unk> , Colette Rives and Yvonne <unk> . After 13 years of searching , they had uncovered a mostly complete skeleton that contained much more material , including bones unknown from the holotype . The material all went to the Musee des <unk> , and together took about 10 years to assemble . 
 The A. sp. was discovered in 2007 . It was found in the course of the construction of a high @-@ speed rail track connecting Madrid with Valencia , in a fossil site that many animals were found in , in the Villalba de la Sierra Formation . The site was at a locality named “ Lo Hueco , ” near the village of Fuentes , Castile @-@ La Mancha , Spain . Over the course of several months , a large @-@ scale emergency excavation by over 60 paleontologists and 100 manual workers allowed thousands of specimens of plants , invertebrates , and vertebrates of late Campanian @-@ early Maastrichtian age to be saved , including A. sp . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Characteristics of the tail vertebrae and the presence of osteoderms indicate that Ampelosaurus belongs to Lithostrotia , a group of derived titanosaurians which also includes Alamosaurus and Saltasaurus . Many other <unk> have classified Ampelosaurus as belonging to Titanosauria , Saltasauridae , and Titanosauridae . Ampelosaurus may have an uncertain classification , but it is clearly a titanosaur , with many features found in titanosaurs . 
 Below is a cladogram by Klein et al. in 2012 , placing Ampelosaurus as a derived titanosaur : 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 Ampelosaurus seems to have grown in a way similar to more basal sauropods . After a certain point in its development , the microscopic material of the bone became very different from more basal Sauropoda . Ampelosaurus grew more slowly once the bone microstructure became unique among sauropods . Although Diplodocoidea and basal Macronaria also show an increase in bone growth and a decrease in growth rate around the presumed onset of sexual maturity , it is much more gradual than Ampelosaurus . The process of growing , which in other sauropods started around sexual maturity , was clearly delayed in Ampelosaurus . The period of growth after sexual maturity seems to be shortened in Ampelosaurus and is dominated by slow bone building instead of fast growth . Growth marks are generally rare in sauropods or appearing only late in ontogeny , if at all . The lack of growth marks is suggestive of fast and continuous growth in sauropods , which supports the hypothesis that they achieved large body size through because of fast growth . Ampelosaurus does not show growth marks on any bone sample . This is unusual to be found with the apparently reduced growth rate and high level of bone growth seen in it , as those features are often associated with the occurrence of growth marks . 
 = = = Histology = = = 
 EFS , a system found on the surface of bones , is thought to show a growth plateau which indicates that maximum body size and skeletal maturity is reached in an individual . Ampelosaurus has not been known to have EFS , found on most non @-@ titanosaurian sauropods . Magyarosaurus , a closely related titanosaur , Lirainosaurus , a titanosaur related to <unk> , Alamosaurus , a <unk> , and <unk> , a very basal titanosaur , were also found to have lacked EFS . However , the basal <unk> <unk> has been shown to have had EFS , so it was likely just titanosaurians that did not have them . The outer edge of the bones , were EFS would have been found , was well @-@ preserved , and still lacked any fossilized proof of them being present for Ampelosaurus . However , in the PLoS ONE study that found the lack of EFS , the larger specimens were not tested , so Ampelosaurus might have had EFS . This is characteristic of titanosaurs , as diplodocoids and basal macronarians seem to have EFS . A majority of all Ampelosaurus specimens have been found with secondary osteons placed densely in the inner regions of bones , and lightly in outer regions . The osteon orientation found in Ampelosaurus of osteons not only facing across the bone is not typical of <unk> . Also , there is no medullary cavity in any bones of Ampelosaurus . Ampelosaurus seems to have had many ontogenetic stages in its life based on its bone histology . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Ampelosaurus atacis is known from a specimen from the Marnes Rouges Inférieures Formation . More specifically , it is known from the Bellevue layer , which has produced many vertebrate fossils . Even though it produced many vertebrates , the formation only has a few elements of plants and invertebrates . The vertebrates consist of numerous remains of Ampelosaurus , scales of Lepisosteus , shell fragments of an indeterminate turtle , cranial fragments and teeth of a crocodile , isolated theropod teeth , classified as Dromaeosauridae indet . , an indeterminate ankylosaur , and a dentary and many postcranial elements of Rhabdodon priscus . The bird <unk> <unk> , and dinosaur eggs have also been recovered . 
 Another formation A. atacis is known from is Gres de Saint @-@ Chinian . Along with Ampelosaurus , Rhabdodon priscus , Rhabdodon <unk> , dinosaur eggs , a Nodosauridae indet . ( previously known as <unk> <unk> ) , " Megalosaurus " <unk> , <unk> <unk> , an Avialae indet . , an Enantiornithes indet . , and a possible Abelisauridae <unk> are known from this formation . 
 A. atacis is one of few vertebrates known from the Gres de <unk> Formation . The only other fossils from the formation belong to Rhabdodon priscus and a <unk> indet . 
 = = = Villalba de la Sierra Formation = = = 
 The A. sp. is from the latest Cretaceous aged Lo Hueco region in the Villalba de la Sierra Formation . A study shows that the area around Lo Hueco dates to the late Campanian and early Maastrichtian , although a more recent study revised the later date to the latest Maastrichtian . The study showed that Lo Hueco was near the coast of the Tethys Sea , a large seaway through southern Europe and northern Africa . The area directly on the coast was shown to be a brackish @-@ freshwater aquatic environment , with a muddy flood @-@ plain beside it . Lo Hueco was found to be inside the flood @-@ plain . The flood plain was found to have distributary channels of sand and terrigenous material . 
 About 8500 different <unk> have been found in Lo Hueco . Sauropods make up the largest amount of the remains with many articulated individuals , caudal vertebrae and teeth . The caudal vertebrae have been identified as being from a titanosaur closely related to <unk> , but with some differences . The teeth , were assigned to Ampelosaurus atacis . Apart from sauropods , the Villalba de la Sierra Formation has a good representation of carbonized plants , mostly known from branches and leaves , and invertebrates , mostly bivalves and gastropods . Fishes from the formation include <unk> , which have plenty of material , and unidentified actinopterygians and <unk> . Turtle fossils are very common , even more common than fishes . Of all this material , only two different groups have been identified , the <unk> <unk> and <unk> , along with an uncommon undetermined <unk> . <unk> lizards are known only from a few undetermined specimens , and eusuchian crocodiles are known from a specimen with similarities to <unk> and <unk> . <unk> and theropod dinosaurs are not as common as sauropods but still consist of much material . Basal <unk> and probable ankylosaurians are known from Lo Hueco . The ankylosaurian remains consist of a few vertebrae . Rhabdodon sp. is known from the formation , and is known from a fair amount of elements . Only two theropods have been identified , both Dromaeosauridae indet . , one <unk> and one <unk> . 
 = = = Biogeography = = = 
 <unk> were a flourishing group of sauropod dinosaurs during Cretaceous times . Fossils of titanosaurians have been found on all continents and their remains are abundant in a number of Late Cretaceous sites . Nonetheless , the cranial anatomy of titanosaurians is still very poorly known . Ampelosaurus is now the best known sauropod from Europe . Others include Magyarosaurus from Hungary and an unnamed species from Catalonia , Spain . Numerous other fragments and isolated bones may or may not belong to any of these forms . While most titanosaurs are found in the southern continents of Gondwana , several derived species are known from Maastrichtian sediments in the Northern Hemisphere , including Alamosaurus in North America and Opisthocoelicaudia in Asia , indicating that there must have been at least intermittent connections between the northern and southern continents . This seems to be corroborated by the European find of <unk> , a Late Cretaceous theropod dinosaur similar to the abelisaurids , otherwise known only from the southern continents . 
 Ampelosaurus sp. is a distinct sauropod as it is known from just a braincase . Although the number of sauropod <unk> from the Late Cretaceous European archipelago found to date is limited , it shows a significant diversity . The specimen from Lo Hueco resembles the braincase of A. atacis <unk> C3 – 761 . 
 = Quinn Fabray = 
 Quinn Fabray is a fictional character from the Fox musical comedy @-@ drama series Glee . The character is portrayed by actress Dianna Agron , and has appeared in Glee since its pilot episode , first broadcast on May 19 , 2009 . She is a former cheerleader at the fictional William McKinley High School in Lima , Ohio , as well as a member of school 's glee club . In the first episode , Quinn is introduced as an antagonistic queen bee stock character . She joins the school glee club to keep an eye on her boyfriend Finn ( Cory Monteith ) and becomes a spy for cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) ; she remains part of the club after she is removed from the cheerleading team , the " Cheerios " , due to her pregnancy . Over the course of the first season , her character matures and builds friendships with the other outcasts who make up the glee club . Quinn gives birth to a baby girl , Beth , whom she gives up for adoption . 
 In the second season , she forms a bond with newcomer Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , and later romances her first boyfriend Finn , reigniting her animosity with club co @-@ captain Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) . In the third season , Quinn intends to get full custody of her daughter , Beth , and her attempts to prove Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) — the adoptive mother of Beth — an unfit mother fail ; eventually , she realizes that Shelby is Beth 's true mother . Quinn subsequently receives a college acceptance letter from Yale , and while driving to Finn and Rachel 's wedding , her car is struck by a truck and she suffers a spinal injury that requires her to use a wheelchair for many weeks . She is eventually able to walk again . 
 Quinn was developed by Glee creators Ryan Murphy , Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan . The last character to be cast , initial responses to her were positive , though they soured during season one as the pregnancy storyline continued . Songs performed by Agron as Quinn have been released as singles , available for download , and also feature on the show 's soundtrack albums . The role saw Agron nominated for the Teen Choice Award for " Breakout Female Star " in 2009 , and a Screen Actors Guild award that same year . She was initially described by Agron as Rachel 's enemy , and " terrible , the meanest girl " . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Season 1 = = = 
 Quinn is introduced as the captain of the cheerleading squad at William McKinley High School , the " Cheerios " , coached by Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) . She comes from a conservative Christian family , and is president of the celibacy club . When her teenage boyfriend Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) joins the glee club , New Directions , Quinn worries about his interaction with the group 's star , Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) , and joins New Directions herself along with her fellow Cheerios Santana ( Naya Rivera ) and Brittany ( Heather Morris ) . Sue then enlists the three of them to help her destroy the glee club from the inside . 
 Upon discovering her pregnancy , Quinn convinces Finn that he is the father , despite the fact that they never actually had a sexual encounter . Quinn claims that due to his premature ejaculation problem , and during their time in a hot @-@ tub , Finn had ejaculated in the tub and Quinn had received the sperm . The real father is Finn 's best friend Puck ( Mark Salling ) , who offers to support Quinn and the baby , but is rejected for his irresponsibility . Quinn decides to have the baby adopted , and agrees to give it to Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , the wife of glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) , who is faking a pregnancy . When news of her pregnancy is revealed to the school , Quinn is cut from the cheerleading squad and her popularity declines . Her parents evict her , and Quinn moves in with Finn and his mother . She begins to reconsider having the baby adopted , and gives Puck a chance to prove himself , but he is not reliable so she returns to her plan of giving the baby to Terri . Quinn blackmails Sue into letting her rejoin the Cheerios , but ultimately decides against it , preferring to remain with the glee club , where she feels accepted . Finn learns the truth about the baby 's paternity from Rachel , and breaks up with Quinn . Puck again offers to support her , but she turns him down and tells him that she wants to handle the pregnancy by herself . She moves in with Puck 's family , but after forming a friendship with fellow New Directions member Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) , Quinn lives with her family instead . She gives birth to a daughter , named Beth by Puck , who is adopted by Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) , coach of rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline and Rachel 's biological mother . 
 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 At the beginning of the new school year , Quinn is reinstated as head cheerleader . She begins dating new glee club member Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , and later accepts a promise ring from him . When Sue forces Quinn , Santana and Brittany to choose between cheerleading and the glee club , all three initially go with the Cheerios to retain their popularity , but are later convinced by Finn to defect to New Directions . Quinn cheats on Sam with Finn , and Sam dumps Quinn after she lies to him about her time with Finn . She and Finn reunite , and Quinn starts campaigning for junior prom king and queen elections . Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) , Puck 's new girlfriend and one of Quinn 's rivals for prom queen , discovers that before transferring to McKinley High , Quinn was known by her first name , Lucy . She was overweight and unpopular , and after slimming down and having rhinoplasty , reinvented herself as Quinn , using her middle name . At prom , Finn is thrown out for fighting with Rachel 's date Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) . Quinn is not named prom queen , and blames Rachel for her loss . She slaps her , but immediately regrets it and apologizes . Finn later breaks up with Quinn when he realizes he has a deeper connection with Rachel . 
 = = = Season 3 = = = 
 At the start of her senior year , Quinn has completely reinvented herself and refuses to rejoin either the Cheerios or New Directions . Shelby lets Puck see Beth , but rejects Quinn 's desire to do likewise due to Quinn 's bad @-@ girl attitude , appearance and behavior . After seeing a picture of a happy Beth and Puck , Quinn resumes her normal appearance , and Will and the New Directions welcome her back into the club , but Quinn reveals to Puck she is only pretending to behave in order to take Beth back from Shelby , and intends to pursue full custody . After Puck tells Shelby of Quinn 's true intentions , Shelby informs Quinn that she does not want her in Beth 's life . Quinn later reveals a desire to have a second baby with Puck . Puck refuses , and tries to comfort her ; he offers to share an important secret if she promises not to tell anyone , which ultimately results in Quinn planning to get Shelby fired for sleeping with a student , Puck . Quinn decides not to reveal Shelby 's secret for Beth 's sake . 
 Quinn advises Rachel to refuse Finn 's marriage proposal and leave her past behind . Quinn has done so , and she has been accepted at Yale . Quinn asks to allow her to rejoin the Cheerios , but Sue refuses . However , following Regionals , she changes her mind . Quinn also changes her mind about Finn and Rachel 's marriage and supports it . Rachel is reluctant to start the subsequent wedding without Quinn , and texts Quinn . Quinn is responding to Rachel 's text when a truck crashes into the driver 's side of her car . 
 Quinn 's car accident has left her in a wheelchair , suffering from a severely compressed spine . By " Prom @-@ asaurus " she is able to stand and to walk a few steps in the sessions . When Quinn is nominated for prom queen , Finn agrees to campaign with her , but is outraged when he discovers that she has been hiding the fact that she can now stand for the sympathy vote . When Quinn and Santana count the votes , they discover that Finn has won and so has Quinn . Quinn realizes that the victory means nothing . She and Santana falsely report the prom queen results as a write @-@ in victory for Rachel . Her recovery is rapid enough to allow her to dance in the " Nationals " competition episode , which New Directions wins . Quinn helps Puck study for the test he needs to pass in order to graduate . She tells him that with all they went through , they are bonded for life , and she kisses him . Emboldened , Puck passes his test . Later , Quinn returns her cheerleading uniform to Sue , and the two have a tearful farewell . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 Quinn returns to Lima for Thanksgiving in the eighth episode of the season , and helps to mentor the new members of New Directions as they prepare for Sectionals competition . Quinn is partnered with Kitty Wilde ( Becca Tobin ) . Kitty convinces Quinn , whom she idolizes , that Jake Puckerman ( Jacob Artist ) , Puck 's half brother , is pressuring Marley into having sex with him . Quinn becomes hostile towards Jake , Santana confronts Quinn about having discovered that Kitty has given Marley laxatives in order to further Marley 's bulimia . Quinn , who is dating one of her teachers at Yale , accuses Santana of being jealous of her and projecting her hostility in their surrogates , leading to a fight before Quinn storms out of the choir room . Quinn travels to New York to give Rachel helpful advice over whether or not to do a nude scene in a short film in " Naked " . Quinn returns to Lima for Will and Emma 's wedding in " I Do " , and evidently single again , vents her frustrations about men . She and Santana get drunk at the wedding reception and sleep together , which they agree was a fun one @-@ time , and then two time , experimentation for Quinn . 
 = = = Season 5 = = = 
 Quinn returns to Lima with a new boyfriend , Biff , for the special 100th episode . Puck is jealous of their relationship , because he still loves her . Quinn is lying to him because she does not want him to know about her past yet . Puck convinces her to tell Biff the truth , which she does . Biff reacts wrongly and insults her , which causes a fight between Puck and Biff . They later break @-@ up . Puck and Quinn talk about Finn and their relationship , and she realizes that she still loves him . They later start a relationship again , which is later confirmed in the next episode . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 Quinn along with the New Directions alumni return in the episode " Homecoming " to help Rachel and Kurt rebuild the New Directions . Quinn , Santana , and Brittany attempt to recruit new members by performing in Cheerios Alumni outfits , but only recruit twins Mason and Madison when former Glee new member , Kitty , who was the only member not to be transferred as Sue saw her as a star player , announced she wouldn 't return because of the way Artie treated her and everyone else when he left . Puck is still her boyfriend . She appears in " Jagged Little Tapestry " along with Tina to help Becky convince her new boyfriend that she is in every club of the school . Quinn , Tina , Sue , and Coach Roz get a huge surprise when they find out that Becky 's boyfriend , Darrell , does not have Down syndrome like Becky does . They all get a big lesson when they confront him and realize that a person with Down syndrome should be treated like everyone else . Despite being Santana and Brittany 's best friend , she is notably absent during their wedding in " A Wedding " . She is mentioned several times during the Pilot 's parallel episode " 2009 " , as Finn 's cheerleader girlfriend . She is later seen during Don 't Stop Believin ' watching the performance with Sue and Santana . She returns in the last minutes of the series finale " Dreams Come True " performing backing vocals for I Lived with the rest of the Glee Cast for the re @-@ dedication of the Auditorium . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Quinn is portrayed by actress Dianna Agron . In casting Glee , series creator Ryan Murphy sought out actors who could identify with the rush of starring in theatrical roles . Instead of using traditional network casting calls , he spent three months on Broadway looking for unknown actors . Agron was the last primary actor to be cast , having won the role only days before the pilot began filming . Agron auditioned for Glee coming from a background in dancing and acting . She has been taking dance classes since the age of three , appeared in many music theatre productions and has appeared in television roles for <unk> , CSI : NY , and Heroes . Agron said in a 2009 interview pertaining to her casting session : " I nearly bailed on my audition for the show . I was so nervous " . With her wholesome good looks , Agron certainly looked the part , but the producers wondered if she appeared too innocent . Agron said in an interview : " They told me to come back with straight hair and to dress sexier . Later that week , I started work . " Agron auditioned with Frank Sinatra 's " Fly Me to the Moon " . The Glee producers said " we really lucked out in finding Agron to play Quinn " . 
 In December 2010 , Ryan Murphy announced that the cast of Glee would be replaced at the end of the third season to coincide with their graduation . Murphy said : " Every year we 're going to populate a new group . There 's nothing more depressing than a high schooler with a bald spot . " He also revealed that some of the original cast will leave as early as 2012 : " I think you have to be true to the fact that here is a group of people who come and go in these teachers ' lives . " Although four graduating seniors were confirmed in January 2012 as returning in the fourth season — Rachel , Finn , Kurt and Santana — there had been no announcement regarding Quinn or any other seniors as of the end of February 2012 . As of May 2012 , Murphy stated that all graduating seniors will come back for season 4 but , not all will be doing " all 22 episodes " . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Quinn is described by Agron as Rachel Berry 's ( Lea Michele ) enemy , and " terrible , the meanest girl " . Agron said that her favorite part of Quinn is that " she 's smart . But she 's also human , and through her tough exterior , she 's often a little girl lost . " <unk> 's Lauren Waterman has described her as being " lovable , but occasionally a manipulative deposed queen bee . " Agron commented : " Yes , there is a stereotype with these characters and it wouldn 't be fair if [ those stereotypes ] didn 't exist a little bit . But [ co @-@ creator ] Ryan Murphy has a way of taking everything and turning it upside down . That 's the great thing about this show and these characters : nobody is one note , which is amazing . " Quinn was originally conceived as the antagonistic queen bee head cheerleader , a departure from Agron 's actual high school experience . Agron said in an interview with HitFix : " I definitely wasn 't cool in high school . I really wasn 't . I did belong to many of the clubs and was in leadership on yearbook and did the musical theater route , so I had friends in all areas , but I certainly did not know what to wear , did not know how to do my hair , all those things . " She added : " I think that it shows that regardless of who you are and what group you belong to , that there are so many emotions behind each person in high school . Sometimes with teens , writers or directors , anybody , short @-@ changes them and makes them be simple , simple individuals , you 're either the jock or the popular kid or the nerd . They don 't show those shades . Everybody has those shades to them . This show , it really expands upon vulnerability and excitement and anger all the experiences that you probably actually go through in high school . " 
 Quinn 's role as head cheerleader is central to understanding her character . Agron said that she had never had any prior cheer experience before the Pilot . " If I had been [ a cheerleader ] , I would 've ended up on crutches , " she told Emmy magazine . In an interview with HitFix she said , " I have new respect for the craft , because I slightly hurt myself during the pilot , coming down from one of the stunts . It 's better now . I didn 't tear something in my knee , but I strained it . Knees are very sensitive , I 've learned . It 's crazy , because I 've been dancing since I was three on my toes and all these things . And you should never say this , but I 've never injured myself ever . I 'd seen gnarly injuries with dance and all these things . You shouldn 't say that , though , because every day is an opportunity to fall , hurt yourself , so that was my experience . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Quinn has received positive reviews from critics . The role saw Agron nominated for the Teen Choice Award for " Female Breakout Star " in 2009 . She and the other cast members were awarded the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series in 2010 , and nominated in the same category the following year . 
 The character 's accidental pregnancy storyline received mixed reviews from critics . Tim Stack for Entertainment Weekly deemed it " a good dramatic twist " , but hoped that it would not be a long @-@ lasting storyline . Reviews of her storyline became increasingly negative , though Agron was praised for her dramatic acting during the confrontation scene with Quinn 's parents in " Ballad " . Gerrick D. Kennedy , writing for the Los Angeles Times , was critical of the ongoing pregnancy plot in the episode " Hairography " , and noted that he cringed whenever Quinn appeared on screen . Conversely , Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle enjoyed Quinn in the episode , and wrote : " I love that she can keep her Mean Girls edge while being heartbreakingly sad or as joyful as she was singing " Papa Don 't Preach " . Reviewing the episode " Journey to Regionals " , Entertainment Weekly 's Darren Franich called Quinn 's birthing scenes — interspersed with Vocal Adrenaline performing Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody " — both " brilliant " and " terrible " . He wrote , " If nothing else , it was definitely the most visually arresting way to represent the birthing process I 've ever seen outside of The Miracle of Life . But I kind of liked it . Somewhere , Freddie Mercury is nodding proudly , and saying , ' World , I forgive you for We Will Rock You . ' " 
 Brett Berk , writing for Vanity Fair , was positive about the scripting of the Quinn character in the second season premiere , now that the pregnancy storyline was over , and was happy to see the return of " evil Quinn " . Joel Kelly of TV Squad criticized the decision to pair Quinn with Finn again in the Valentine 's Day oriented episode . He saw it as a regression of the characters , and commented : " Yes , it feels like Glee Classic , because the series started with the two of them together . But both of them have changed — Quinn more so than Finn — and having them dating again seems like they 're going back to the days when Quinn was the icy lead Cheerio and Finn was the nice but dumb star quarterback . " 
 Quinn 's season three reinvention attracted mixed reviews . Lesley Goldberg of The Hollywood Reporter listed her change as a highlight of the episode , and hoped to see more of her new attitude . The Atlantic 's Kevin Fallon called it " the most interesting thing Quinn has done since giving birth to a baby to the soundtrack of ' Bohemian Rhapsody ' " , but VanDerWerff suggested the development hinged on the fact the producers no longer knew how to utilize Agron . 
 She was ranked No. 13 in AfterEllen.com 's Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters . 
 = = = Musical performances = = = 
 Several songs performed by Agron as Quinn have been released as singles , available for digital download , also featured on the show 's soundtrack albums . Agron made her musical debut at the end of the episode " Showmance " where she performed Dionne Warwick 's " I Say a Little Prayer " . Quinn 's next solo was in the episode " Throwdown " , where she performed The Supremes ' " You Keep Me Hangin ' On " . The song was released on Glee : The Music , Volume 1 . Flandez deemed the cover of " Keep Holding On " , the ensemble performance on the episode , an " emotionally satisfying showstopper " , however was critical of Quinn 's cover of " You Keep Me Hangin ' On " , which he called " thin and jarring " . Aly Semigran of MTV observed that Quinn spontaneously bursting into song brought Glee " dangerously close to High School Musical territory " . Agron later performed a solo in the episode " Hairography " singing Madonna 's " Papa Don 't Preach " after her father learns she is pregnant . This performance by Agron was released as a single . She performed a rendition of James Brown 's " It 's a Man 's Man 's Man 's World " in the episode " Funk " . CNN 's Lisa Respers France was " slightly disturbed " by Quinn 's " weird " performance of " It 's a Man 's Man 's Man 's World " using pregnant teenagers as backing dancers . 
 In season two , Quinn performs " Lucky " with Sam Evans in the episode " Duets " , which was named by some critics as " the most impressive number of the evening " ; others called it " absolutely fantastic " with particular praise for Agron , who was said to be often overlooked . " Lucky " debuted at number twenty @-@ seven on the Billboard Hot 100 ; it was at number seventeen on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 . Quinn 's duet performance with Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) of the mash @-@ up " I Feel Pretty / Unpretty " was the highest charted single featured in the episode " Born This Way " , debuting at number twenty @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 . It also peaked at number thirteen on the Digital 100 charts and sold 112 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States in its first week of release . It was the highest charting Glee single on the Billboard charts since " Loser Like Me " , which debuted at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 and sold over 210 @,@ 000 downloads in its first week . 
 In season three , Quinn sings her first solo number since the first season , " Never Can Say Goodbye " by The Jackson 5 , which received mostly positive reviews . Jen Chaney of The Washington Post gave the song a " B − " , and said it " worked much better than every track that preceded it " because it adapted the song to the show " instead of trying to out @-@ Jackson Jackson " . Entertainment Weekly 's Joseph Brannigan Lynch called it " a nice summation of her character 's journey , but not vocally impressive enough to justify listening to outside of the episode " and gave it a " B " . Crystal Bell of HuffPost TV described it as a " blah performance " , but Kate Stanhope of TV Guide said it was " sweet and reflective " . Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone wrote that it was " a tune well @-@ suited for Quinn 's sultry voice and the flipped meaning she gives the lyrics " , and TVLine 's Michael Slezak had a similar take : he gave it an " A " and called it a " remarkably lovely fit " for her voice . 
 = National War Memorial ( South Australia ) = 
 The National War Memorial is a monument in the city centre of Adelaide , South Australia , commemorating those who served in the First World War . Opened in 1931 , the memorial is located on the corner of North Terrace and Kintore Avenue , on the edge of the central business district and adjacent to the grounds of Government House . Memorial services are held at the site throughout the year , with major services on both Anzac Day ( 25 April ) and Remembrance Day ( 11 November ) . 
 First proposed in 1919 , the memorial was funded by the Parliament of South Australia , making it the first Australian state war memorial to be confirmed after the war . The design of the memorial was selected through two architectural competitions . The first competition , in 1924 , produced 26 designs — all of which were lost before judging could be completed after fire destroyed the building in which they were housed . A second competition , in 1926 , produced 18 entries , out of which the design by the architectural firm Woods , Bagot , Jory & Laybourne @-@ Smith was selected as the winner . 
 The design — effectively a frame for two scenes depicted through Rayner Hoff 's marble reliefs and bronze statues — shows the prelude and the epilogue to war , depicting both the willingness of youth to answer the call of duty and the extent of the sacrifices which they made . In this , the work is not displaying a material victory , but instead a victory of the spirit . At the insistence of W. F. J. McCann , president of the Returned Soldiers ' League , bronze tablets were cast to line the walls of an inner shrine , on which are listed the names of all South Australians who died during the Great War . 
 = = History = = 
 Almost 35 @,@ 000 South Australians served in the First World War . This number amounted to 8 @.@ 5 % of the South Australian population at the time , or 37 @.@ 7 % of men between the ages of 18 and 44 . Of those who served , over 5 @,@ 000 South Australians died . In response to these deaths , Archibald Peake , the premier of South Australia , asked the state parliament to fund a memorial commemorating the victory and the sacrifice of those who had fought and fallen . The motion was presented in March 1919 , and it received unanimous support in the House of Assembly and the Legislative Council . With the passing of this motion , the South Australian Government became the first in Australia to elect to build a memorial to the soldiers of the First World War . 
 It was decided by parliament that the new memorial should be referred to as the " National War Memorial " , even though it was to be a purely South Australian monument , and in spite of the term already being used to describe the memorial to the South African War of 1899 – 1902 . There have been at least two perspectives offered as to why the term National was employed . First , as Donald Richardson observed , the name may have been chosen to emphasise the government 's intention that the memorial should commemorate all who served during the war , not just those who came from South Australia ; and second , Ken Inglis argued that the name may have reflected the perception ( still held in spite of federation ) that the " province is a nation " . 
 = = = 1924 competition = = = 
 The National War Memorial Committee was formed in order to bring the proposal to fruition , and in February 1924 the committee announced an architectural competition to find the design of the new memorial . In the preamble to the conditions of entry , it was stated that the new memorial was to serve the purpose of " perpetually commemorating the Victory achieved in the Great War , 1914 – 1918 , the Supreme and personal sacrifice of those who participated in that War , and the National effort involved in such activities " . 
 Entry was open to South Australians who were British subjects , and those intending to submit designs were required to file a statement of intent prior to 29 February 1924 . The competition closed on 30 September 1924 , and there was a one @-@ guinea entry fee . Three assessors were nominated to judge the entries : the South Australian Architect @-@ in @-@ Chief , A. E. Simpson ; local architect Herbert Louis Jackman ( representing the South Australian Institute of Architects ) ; and Sir William Sowden . 
 The committee specified a budget of £ 25 @,@ 000 ( previously figures of both £ 5 @,@ 000 and £ 100 @,@ 000 had been discussed ) , and the conditions of entry stated that the memorial was to be situated at the entrance to Government House on the corner of King William Street and North Terrace , placing it just behind the existing memorial to the South African War . This location was counter to previous suggestions : a 1919 survey of architects had proposed that the memorial should be built on Montefiore Hill , while in 1923 the plans for the memorial involved erecting it at the rear of Government House , rather than at the front . 
 The committee left open the form that the memorial would take , beyond stating that the memorial was not to be " utilitarian in character " , and debate over the form led to the emergence of a number of suggestions , many of which were covered in the media of the day . These included Dame Nellie Melba 's proposal to build a carillon of bells ; a suggestion by Simpson Newland to turn Anzac Highway into a " Way of Honour " by adding triumphal arches to each end ; and Walter Charles <unk> 's plan to build a 30 meter high " metal and marble " monument on the top of Mount Lofty with an electric car to carry people to the summit . 
 In the end a total of 28 architectural firms registered their intent to submit entries to the competition — a lower number than expected , but Richardson suggests this may have been due to work on proposals for the new Adelaide railway station . Out of those 28 , a total of 26 firms submitted designs by the deadline . On 10 November 1924 , before judging could be completed , the Richards Building in Currie Street was destroyed by fire , taking with it all 26 proposals . 
 Although most of the judging had been completed before the fire , suggestions at the time that the committee could use what they had learned from the entrants to propose a new competition with greater clarity as to the requirements led to naught : a 1925 letter to the then Premier John Gunn reveals that there was little to be learned from the competition , as the assessors had found that none of the designs were suitable . 
 = = = 1926 competition = = = 
 Little progress had been made on the memorial by 1926 . While some debate occurred in respect to the form that the memorial would take , the focus of the discussions concerned the location of the memorial , and this centered on the future of Government House and the role of the Governor . A number of left @-@ wing politicians argued that the grounds of Government House should be turned over to the State and used to build the memorial while the conservatives desired to retain the status quo . By 1925 the National War Memorial committee was prepared to accept the Government House grounds as the site of the memorial , but they delayed making an announcement . This proved to be fortuitous , as legal issues prevented the plan from going ahead . Instead a portion of the grounds , located at the corner of North Terrace and Kintore Avenue , was put aside for the purpose . ( The plan to move the Governor and to use the grounds as part of a larger war memorial were revisited , over 80 years later , in 2007 ) . 
 In 1926 , after pressure from the returned soldiers , a second competition was announced . Once again the budget was set at £ 25 @,@ 000 . As per the first competition , all entrants had to be South Australian British subjects , and all entries were to be judged anonymously , but this time there was to be only one assessor : John Smith Murdoch , the chief architect for the Commonwealth of Australia . In deference to the previous competition , the top five entrants from 1924 were each given £ 75 upon the submission of a new design , and all of the designs were insured by the government for £ 100 each . 
 With entries restricted to South Australians , only 18 designs were received — a figure that was " correspondingly fewer " than those received in other states where the competitions were open to all Australians . Nevertheless , in his Assessor 's Report , Murdoch acknowledged that the quality of some of the proposals was such that they " probably would not have been exceeded had the competition been more open " . After examining the submissions , on 15 January 1927 , the design by Louis Laybourne Smith , ( one of the principals at the architectural firm Woods , Bagot , Jory & Laybourne – Smith ) , was selected by Murdoch as the winner . 
 Woods , Bagot , Jory & Laybourne @-@ Smith had entered the 1924 competition with an arch designed by Walter Bagot , but in 1926 Bagot was away in Europe . Thus Laybourne @-@ Smith was responsible for drawing and submitting the final design , although he was clear to highlight the role Bagot played in the " architectural conception " of the monument . While the firm was to be awarded 6 % of the cost of the memorial , they refused all but enough to cover their own expenses , asking instead that residues ( approximately £ 1000 ) be placed in a trust fund to pay for the upkeep of the work . While this is seen as an altruistic act , Richardson noted that Laybourne @-@ Smith was both a member of the National War Committee and sat on the sub @-@ committee which drafted the rules of the competition , and thus it may have been considered " improper " to accept the money . 
 When announced to the public the design was " universally hailed as a masterpiece " . Nevertheless , in writing his report on the result of the judging , Murdoch stated of the winning architect that he " depends almost entirely on the sculptor to tell the story of the memorial , employing in his design no more architecture than that required to successfully frame and set his sculptural subjects , and to provide accommodation to the extent asked for by the conditions " . This view was echoed by Inglis , who described the architecture as " essentially a frame for statuary " — an approach that he felt was " unusual " for an architect . As a result of this dependency on the sculpture , some of the other contestants expressed concerns , arguing that the contest was about architectural works rather than sculptural ones , even though the conditions of the competition specifically allowed for sculpture in the proposals . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Construction of the memorial began in 1928 with the cut and placement of marble blocks from Macclesfield and Angaston . The South Australian Monumental Works were chosen to work on the construction , with Alan Tillett as the principal . Although no sculptor was named in the winning proposal , it did make mention of a possible candidate — who later proved to be Rayner Hoff , a Sydney @-@ based sculptor born in England . Rayner Hoff produced the designs for the sculptures from his Sydney studio , with the bronze castings from Hoff 's plaster models being produced by the South Australian firm A. W. Dobbie and Company . ( Hoff had expressed reservations that a South Australian company would be capable of handling bronzes of the required size , but a test casting of the lion 's head from the memorial was sufficient to overcome his concerns ) . The two angel reliefs sculpted from the Angaston marble were produced by Julius Henschke in situ from Hoff 's designs , expressed through one @-@ third sized plaster models which Henschke then scaled to suit . 
 Significant delays occurred during construction after a strike by the stonemasons . The stonemasons were demanding a 44 @-@ hour week and to be paid at " outside rates " , ( rates of pay for stonemasons were based on whether or not the work was to be constructed on site in the open air , or inside under cover — Tillet was paying the lower " inside rates " , even though most of the work was to be conducted on the site ) . However , Tillet had tendered on the basis of a 48 @-@ hour week at inside rates , and paying extra would have caused significant financial problems . Tillet eventually won after the dispute went before the courts , but the strike had caused considerable financial damage to Tillet 's company , which went into receivership in 1930 and stayed in that state until after the memorial was completed . 
 The South Australian Government had dedicated £ 25 @,@ 000 for the memorial . It was estimated that bulk of the expense would be masonry at £ 15 @,@ 300 with sculptural work and landscaping requiring £ 8 @,@ 500 and £ 1 @,@ 200 respectively . However , the final cost of construction pushed this out to approximately £ 30 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 The National War Memorial in South Australia became the fourth state World War I memorial to be opened when it was unveiled in 1931 . Inglis notes that this is in keeping with the size of the constituency , arguing that " [ t ] he larger the constituency that each of these collective tributes had to represent , the later it was built " . It was unveiled before a crowd of almost 75 @,@ 000 on Anzac Day , 25 April 1931 , ( the 16th anniversary of the Gallipoli landing ) , by the Governor Sir Alexander Hore @-@ Ruthven . The crowd , " as huge a crowd as anyone could remember assembling in the city " , was unable to fit in front of the memorial , so many thousands assembled at the Cross of Sacrifice in Pennington Gardens to await a later ceremony . Hore @-@ Ruthven was introduced by the acting state premier , Bill Denny MC , whose involvement in the unveiling , according to Inglis , was unusual for a Labor politician . 
 = = = Commemorative activities = = = 
 The first dawn service to be conducted at the memorial was held on Anzac Day 1935 , and was attended by 200 – 300 people . 
 = = = Restoration work = = = 
 In 2001 , the memorial 's 70th anniversary year , a three @-@ month remedial project was undertaken , restoring the bronze and stonework details and reinforcing the foundations . The work was completed just days before the Remembrance Day services . In 2002 the architects responsible for the restoration , Bruce Harry & Associates , were awarded a Heritage merit award for their work on the memorial by the Royal Australian Institute of Architects . 
 = = Design = = 
 The rules of the competition limited the space for the memorial to the " one half acre " of land that was excised from the grounds of Government House . The design submitted by Woods , Bagot , Jory & Laybourne Smith easily met this requirement , as the memorial was designed to fit on an ellipse with a major axis of 18 @.@ 3 m ( 60 ft ) in length and a minor axis of 15 @.@ 5 m ( 51 ft ) . Standing at a height of over 14 m ( 46 ft ) , the structure was carefully placed back from North Terrace to provide space for " public gatherings of a ceremonial nature " and to allow for the proposed widening of the street . 
 The monument has two sides , referred to by the architects as the reverse and the obverse of the work , which they likened to the two sides of a coin . These two aspects represent the prologue and the epilogue of war . Each side features a relief carved from Angaston marble and framed by the " rough @-@ hewn " arch carved out of marble from Macclesfield , while the granite steps leading up to the monument are constructed of Harcourt granite , as specified in the original proposal . ( The architects had preferred the local West Island granite , but acknowledged that the Harcourt granite was " the best available " unless the government would agree to reopen the quarry on West Island ) . The materials were chosen in order to provide continuity with Parliament House , located a short distance away along North Terrace . 
 To represent the prologue to the war , the obverse of the monument ( the side facing North Terrace ) features a relief of the Spirit of Duty appearing as a vision before the youth of South Australia , represented in the work by a sculptural group consisting of a girl , a student and a farmer abandoning the " symbols of their craft " . The three are depicted in normal dress , as they are not yet soldiers and are currently unprepared for the war that is to come , and they are facing away from the world as they look to the vision before them . In Bagot 's original plan , submitted for the 1924 competition , there was to be but a single nude figure kneeling before the vision ( for which Bagot posed while in Europe ) , but Laybourne @-@ Smith 's 1926 submission became grander in its scope . In addition , Bagot 's original designs were naturalistic , with the Spirit of Duty depicted as a female figure , but under Hoff 's direction the figure was changed to male , and the style of the reliefs was changed to Art Deco — a " radically new " art style for Australia at the time . Hoff , however , presented the sculptural group in the original naturalistic style , thus providing a " bridge between the Renaissance @-@ style architecture and the Art Deco of the reliefs " . 
 On the reverse side of the monument , facing away from the traffic , is a relief carved into the marble representing the epilogue of the war and depicting the Spirit of Compassion as a winged spirit of womanhood bearing aloft a stricken youth . Beneath the figure is situated the Fountain of Compassion , the flow of water representing the " constant flow of memories " , while the lion 's head from which it emerges , ( and which bears the Imperial Crown ) , is representative of the British Commonwealth of Nations . 
 The designers acknowledged that the symbolism — especially that of the reverse side — does not represent " victory " in the traditional sense . They stated that the " Arch of Triumph which was built in honour of a Caesar , a Napoleon , no longer expresses the feelings of modern democracy after an international struggle " . Instead , the memorial represented a spiritual victory , in which was displayed a " willingness to serve and to sacrifice " . 
