 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 In early October 2007 , a Radiohead spokesperson reported that most downloaders paid " a normal retail price " for the download version , and that most fans had pre @-@ ordered the " discbox " edition . Citing a source close to the band , Gigwise.com reported that the album had sold 1 @.@ 2 million digital copies before its retail release ; however , this was dismissed by Radiohead manager Bryce Edge as " exaggerated " . In December 2007 , Yorke stated that Radiohead had made more money from digital sales of In Rainbows than the digital sales of all previous Radiohead albums combined . 
 In October 2008 , one year after the album 's release , Warner Chappell reported that although most people paid nothing for the download , pre @-@ release sales for In Rainbows were more profitable than the total sales of Hail to the Thief , and that the " discbox " had sold 100 @,@ 000 copies . In 2009 , Wired reported that Radiohead had made an " instantaneous " £ 3 million from the album . In 2016 , Pitchfork wrote this " proved Radiohead could release a record on the most secretive terms , basically for free , and still be wildly successful , even as industry profits continued to plummet . They were able to take that risk partly due to the fan sites and their communities , which offered a solid bedrock of support . " 
 Because inrainbows.com is not a chart @-@ registered retailer , In Rainbows download and " discbox " sales were not eligible for inclusion in the UK Albums Chart . On the week of its retail release , In Rainbows peaked at number one on the UK Album Chart , with first week sales of 44 @,@ 602 copies . After some record stores broke street date agreements , the album entered the Billboard 200 at number 156 , but in the first week of its official release reached number one and sold 122 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , making it the 10th independently distributed album to reach number 1 on the Billboard 200 . In October 2008 , Warner Chappell Music Publishing reported that In Rainbows had sold three million copies ( 1 @.@ 75 million of which were physical format sales ) since its physical release in January . The vinyl edition of In Rainbows was the best @-@ selling vinyl album of 2008 . 
 In the US , " Nude " reached number 35 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and was also Radiohead 's first single to appear on the Billboard Pop 100 chart . " Bodysnatchers " reached number eight on the US Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart . " Jigsaw Falling into Place " peaked at number 69 in airplay on alternative rock @-@ oriented stations . " All I Need " was serviced to US adult album alternative radio by TBD Records on 5 January 2009 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In Rainbows received widespread critical acclaim , earning a rating of 88 out of 100 on Metacritic , which indicates " universal acclaim " . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone felt that the album contained " no wasted moments , no weak tracks : just primo Radiohead . " A review by NME described the album as " Radiohead reconnecting with their human sides , realising you [ can ] embrace pop melodies and proper instruments while still sounding like paranoid androids ... this [ is ] otherworldly music , alright . " Will Hermes , writing in Entertainment Weekly , called the album " the gentlest , prettiest Radiohead set yet " and stated that it " uses the full musical and emotional spectra to conjure breathtaking beauty " . Andy Kellman of AllMusic , in a positive review , wrote that the album " will hopefully be remembered as Radiohead 's most stimulating synthesis of accessible songs and abstract sounds , rather than their first pick @-@ your @-@ price download . " Robert Christgau , writing for MSN Music , gave it a two @-@ star " honourable mention " and noted that the album , having been developed in concert , was " more jammy , less songy and less <unk> , which is good . " 
 Various reviewers , such as The Guardian 's Alexis Petridis , attributed the album 's quality to Radiohead 's performance in the studio and that the band sounded like they were enjoying themselves . Others , such as Billboard 's Jonathan Cohen , commended the album for not being overshadowed by its marketing hype . 
 Blender 's review , although mostly positive , felt the album seemed " to be primarily composed of love songs ... that are starving for human connection but generate all the interpersonal warmth of a GPS system " . The Wire was also critical , finding " a sense here of a group <unk> marking time , shying away ... from any grand , rhetorical , countercultural purpose . " 
 = = = Awards and " best @-@ of " lists = = = 
 In Rainbows was ranked one of the best albums of 2007 by many music publications . It was ranked number one by Billboard , Mojo and PopMatters ; NME and The A.V. Club ranked it third , Pitchfork Media and Q fourth , and Rolling Stone and Spin sixth . It was also ranked one of the best albums of the decade by several publications : the NME ranked it 10th , Paste ranked it 45th , Rolling Stone ranked it 30th , and the Guardian ranked it 22nd . Newsweek ranked the album fifth on its list of the ten best albums of the decade . In 2012 , Rolling Stone ranked the album number 336 on their updated version of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 In Rainbows was nominated for the short list of the 2008 Mercury Music Prize and was nominated for several awards at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards : Album of the Year , Best Alternative Music Album , Producer of the Year , Non @-@ Classical and Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package . Three Grammy nominations also went to " House of Cards " and its video . In Rainbows won awards for Best Alternative Music Album and Best Special Limited Edition Package . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Radiohead . 
 " 15 Step " – 3 : 58 
 " Bodysnatchers " – 4 : 02 
 " Nude " – 4 : 15 
 " Weird Fishes / Arpeggi " – 5 : 18 
 " All I Need " – 3 : 48 
 " Faust Arp " – 2 : 09 
 " Reckoner " – 4 : 50 
 " House of Cards " – 5 : 28 
 " Jigsaw Falling into Place " – 4 : 09 
 " Videotape " – 4 : 42 
 = = = Bonus disc = = = 
 The original discbox release of the album included a second disc , which contains eight additional tracks . On 9 June 2009 , Radiohead made the tracks from this disc available for download at their " <unk> " online store , and a pressing released contains both CDs without the original box . 
 " MK 1 " – 1 : 03 
 " Down Is the New Up " – 4 : 59 
 " Go Slowly " – 3 : 48 
 " MK 2 " – 0 : 53 
 " Last Flowers " – 4 : 26 
 " Up on the Ladder " – 4 : 17 
 " <unk> + Mash " – 3 : 19 
 " 4 Minute Warning " – 4 : 04 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Radiohead 
 Colin Greenwood 
 Jonny Greenwood 
 Ed O 'Brien 
 Phil Selway 
 Thom Yorke ( also credited for artwork as ' Dr. <unk> ' ) 
 Additional personnel 
 Stanley Donwood – cover art 
 Nigel Godrich – production , mixing , engineering 
 Dan Grech @-@ Marguerat – engineering 
 Bob Ludwig – mastering 
 Matrix Music School children 's choir – choir on " 15 Step " 
 The Millennia Ensemble – strings ( on tracks 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 9 ) 
 Hugo Nicolson – engineering 
 Graeme Stewart – preproduction 
 Richard Woodcraft – engineering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Shades of Cool = 
 " Shades of Cool " is a song by American singer and songwriter Lana Del Rey , taken from her third studio album , Ultraviolence ( 2014 ) . It was written by Del Rey and Rick Nowels , and produced by Dan Auerbach . The song was released on May 26 , 2014 by Interscope Records as the second single from Ultraviolence . Lyrically , the single talks about an " unfixable " man . 
 " Shades of Cool " received general acclaim from music critics , who praised its musical style . A few of whom opined that the track would be appropriate for a James Bond film . Commercially , the single peaking at number 79 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and entered the top @-@ 40 of a few record charts , including Belgium , France , Italy , and Spain . A music video for " Shades of Cool " was directed by Jake Nava and was described as a film noir visual . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Shades of Cool " was written by Del Rey and Rick Nowels , and produced by Dan Auerbach . Composed in the key of D minor , the song runs at a moderate slow tempo of 46 beats per minute . It was described as a waltz instrumented by " slow @-@ burn " bassline , guitar , and string instruments ; the track features a guitar solo delivered by Auerbach . Del Rey 's vocals span from A3 to B5 . Her " operatic " soprano vocals blending with " trademark wailing vibrato " create a ghostly atmosphere on " Shades of Cool " . Chris Coplan from Consequence of Sound described the song as " a slow and slightly gloomy ballad . " Meanwhile , " Shades of Cool " was characterized as a " seeping , atmospheric " ballad that contrasts the more " pop @-@ savvy swaggering ' West Coast ' " by Billboard 's Colin Stutz . On the single , Del Rey sings about an " unfixable " man : " But you are unfixable / I can ’ t break through your world / ‘ Cause you live in shades of cool / Your heart is unbreakable . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Shades of Cool " received positive reviews from music critics . Coplan of Consequence of Sound complimented the song for its " grace and sophistication " . Saran Shetty of Slate called " Shades of Cool " " a beautiful , brooding return to form [ for Del Rey ] " , and opined that the single would " fit perfectly " in a James Bond theme track . Likewise , Rolling Stone 's <unk> Ganz wrote that the track " would be perfect for a James Bond film directed by Quentin Tarantino . " Lathan Ryan from PopMatters positively compared Del Rey 's vocals on " Shades of Cool " to those of Cocteau Twins vocalist Elizabeth Fraser , observing that " Del Rey has never sounded better " . 
 The single peaked at number 79 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . It managed to enter the top 40 of a few record charts : Belgian Wallonia ( number 40 ) , France ( number 37 ) , Hungary ( number 19 ) , and Spain ( number 31 ) . The single peaked at number three on the Greece Digital Songs , a chart operated by Billboard magazine . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Shades of Cool " was directed by Jake Nava and was released on June 17 , 2014 . The video features tattoo artist Mark Mahoney , who also appeared in the music video for " West Coast " , as Del Rey 's love interest . Filmed in Los Angeles , California , the clip is a " romantic " film noir visual depicting the streets of Los Angeles at night , a 1970s @-@ themed neighborhood , and a pool . In the video , Del Rey dances for her love interest in " flowing " dresses . An alternative version of the visual for " Shades of Cool " , which was also directed by Nava , was released in July 2014 . This version , in which Del Rey is seen dead , was described as " darker " than the original video . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Shades of Cool " – 5 : 42 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Ultraviolence . 
 Performance credits 
 Lana Del Rey – vocals 
 Instruments 
 Technical and production 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Aden Jefferies = 
 Aden Jefferies is a fictional character from the Australian Channel Seven soap opera Home and Away , played by Todd Lasance . He debuted on @-@ screen during the episode airing on 4 August 2005 . Aden was introduced in 2005 as a recurring character and as part of Cassie Turner 's ( <unk> Vinson ) storylines . Lasance was offered the role after previously auditioning for a separate character . In 2007 , Lasance was asked to return on another guest contract , though was promoted to the regular cast soon after . 
 Aden is characterised as a " bad boy " who goes on a journey to become one of the " good guys " . Aden 's backstory played a substantial role in his early material . His childhood was plagued with sexual abuse at the hands of his grandfather , while Aden 's father , Larry Jefferies ( Paul Gleeson ) became an alcoholic . Lasance and scriptwriters have both pointed out that these events impacted on Aden 's life and contribute to his destructive personality . As Aden begins to trust others again , he gains a close circle of friends including Nicole Franklin ( Tessa James ) , Roman Harris ( Conrad Coleby ) and Morag Bellingham ( Cornelia Frances ) . He also has a nemesis throughout his tenure in the form of Geoff Campbell ( Lincoln Lewis ) . However , his main relationship is with Belle Taylor ( Jessica Tovey ) ; when the actors first heard that their on @-@ screen counterparts would enter a relationship , they both complained to producers . Both felt like it would not work out and be ill received by viewers . However , the two realised they had chemistry as a duo and took a chance . The couple became popular with viewers and fans coined the term " Adelle " to refer to the pair . 
 Other storylines include holding those closest to him as hostages and being admitted to a psychiatric ward . He is also forced to cope with Belle 's death after their wedding and a subsequent relationship with his best friend Nicole . Certain media outlets enjoyed Aden and Belle 's romance citing the moment they were torn apart as a " sad loss " . Aden also gained recognition as being a popular " bad boy " from Inside Soap . For his portrayal of Aden , Lasance won the award for the " Most Popular Actor " at the 2009 Logie Awards . 
 = = Casting = = 
 In 2005 , Todd Lasance auditioned for the role of Jack Holden ; however , actor Paul O 'Brien secured the role . The serial 's producers called Lasance back , offering him the part of Aden , which was a guest role lasting six weeks . Aden was brought into the serial to play a part of Cassie Turner 's ( <unk> Vinson ) storylines . Lasance had not previously watched the serial , but upon learning of his part he said he watched it " religiously " and carried out research on the net . In April 2007 , The Newcastle Herald announced that Lasance would return to filming with Home and Away . He was signed another guest contract . While filming the stint programme , bosses decided that Aden should become a regular character and Lasance signed a new contract . At the time there was a possibility of Lasance securing a role in the television series The Pacific . However , he chose to re @-@ join Home and Away because did not want to take the risk of losing both roles . 
 In August 2009 , TV Week reported that Lasance had quit Home and Away to pursue a career overseas when he signed with a Los Angeles talent agency . However , a spokesperson for the serial said there were no immediate plans for Lasance to be written out . His official departure was later made public and he filmed his final scenes on 15 January 2010 . Lasance said he was glad Aden was not killed off because it was a " realisation of his potential " . While he had no immediate plans to return , he also said he would like to return one day to " see what Aden 's up to " . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 When Lasance secured the role , he said " Aden causes a bit of mischief in the Bay but he 's really a good guy . " Aden has been described as a " good looking guy with a smile that melts every heart . " Aden is initially portrayed as a " anti @-@ social bully with a huge chip on his shoulder " where authority figures are concerned . Aden 's mother died while he was young and he was raised by his father Larry Jefferies ( Paul Gleeson ) . Aden is a keen football player , though Larry did not approve or support his ambitions . When Lasance returned to the serial in 2007 , he described Aden as being " an absolute bad @-@ arse " . When he read the scripts , he thought Aden seemed like an idiot and that viewers would take a dislike to the character . He added that Aden is a strong character and he enjoyed making him " believable " . Lasance said that he did not want Aden to turn into a " good guy " . The good thing about Aden is the fact " he never quite shakes off the bad @-@ boy image " despite his " different facets " . 
 = = = Abuse = = = 
 One of Aden 's most notable storylines highlighted the issue of sexual abuse . In the story Aden struggles to cope with the sexual abuse inflicted on him by his grandfather . Lasance and the serial 's writing team worked hard to raise awareness of the " taboo issue " . Lasance said he felt he had to do the storyline " one hundred percent justice " because there are people , " more than we probably realise " in real life who have suffered the same as Aden . He felt it was a challenge to play as he did not want victims to think it was unrealistic . Lasance said he had to come onto set each morning in Aden 's frame of mind . To research Aden 's storyline , he spoke to a relative who had been through a similar situation . He drew inspiration for his portrayal from how his relative had coped and the effects it had on him growing up . Lasance said like his relative , Aden goes though " the huge rebellion years " and the subsequent attempts to " reconnect with those people who had betrayed you . " Lasance also received extra training from an acting coach , where he used " haunting " techniques to make himself feel vulnerable like Aden . He also used the storyline to show US agents his acting abilities . 
 Lasance explained that a common theme in Aden 's life is something bad happening just after each time he rebuilds his life . One such bad event is the re @-@ emergence of his alcoholic father , Larry . His arrival sets Aden " on the back foot " again , as most of Aden 's childhood issues stemmed from his father 's addiction to alcohol . He also explained that alcohol abuse is often seen in victims of abuse , so Aden is angered when Larry admits Aden 's grandfather abused him too . " Aden loses it " with Larry , because he has had his last chance in Aden 's view . Aden holds his father hostage and withdraws his medication to punish him . Aden has had so much trouble from Larry that those " experiences have made him the way he is now " , and the story comes to a culmination with Aden giving up on his father . Aden is admitted into psychiatric care after the incident . However he initially makes little progress and prefers to help fellow patient Melody Jones ( Celeste Dodwell ) with her treatment . Lasance said that Aden had been " protective of Melody after Axel Hay ( Trent <unk> ) took advantage of her . " The pair share an " unspoken bond " because of their past experiences and he " understands exactly what she 's going through . " 
 In one storyline Aden 's colleague Joey Collins ( Kate Bell ) is sexually assaulted by Robbo Cruze ( Aidan Gillett ) . Aden and Joey do not get on with each other , however when he finds out about Joey 's rape he becomes protective of her . The incident leaves Aden " tormented by his childhood abuse " and he sets out to gain justice for Joey . <unk> said that Aden nearly gives up until he finds out she is a lesbian , and says " he thinks he can prove her case " . However , when Robbo threatens Joey , " It 's the final straw and Aden snaps " , attacking Robbo . 
 = = = Friends and enemies = = = 
 Aden 's main enemy throughout his duration is Geoff Campbell ( Lincoln Lewis ) . Aden did not like Geoff because he is talented at football . As Geoff is a strict Christian , Aden sees Geoff representing the " hypocrisy of society " . He also believes Geoff is as " full of sin " and " flawed " as everyone else . While their characters clashed on @-@ screen Lasance and Lewis were close friends in real life and learned lines together while they critiqued each other 's performances . 
 In one storyline , Aden loans money from " shady bookie " Clint Mailer ( Matt <unk> ) . Clint then forces Aden to throw football matches so Clint can win bets . Aden is described as being desperate for money so goes along with the plan . Geoff finds out and is " appalled " by Aden 's behaviour , as the storyline progresses Clint tries to force him to end Geoff 's career . Lasance added , " Aden tries to get him off the field , but that backfires - and Geoff scores the winning try . " This results in Aden being badly assaulted by Clint . 
 Aden forms an unlikely friendship with Morag Bellingham ( Cornelia Frances ) . In the storyline , Morag wants to know why he has problems because she had " taken a bit of a shine to him " . Aden initially doesn 't want her help . Whilst interviewed by Digital Spy Frances stated : " There 's lots of lovely dialogue that goes on between him and I - I take him under my wing and I find out what 's wrong with him . " He eventually looks up to her and moves in with her . Frances said : " So I sort of adopt him in a way . " Morag is known for her feisty persona , Lasance said Frances was one of his favourite colleagues to work with because she is the complete opposite of Morag . As a pairing they have " collision chemistry " because " they don 't really get along , but they do have respect for each other . " 
 = = = Relationship with Belle Taylor = = = 
 Aden 's main relationship in the programme is with Belle Taylor ( Jessica Tovey ) . When Lasance and Tovey found out their characters would become involved together , both did not think it would work . They both separately approached producer Cameron Welsh and unbeknownst to each other , told him of their concerns about the pairing . However the pair discovered they shared a " great " dynamic while working together and Lasance said when their storylines intertwined it was " fantastic " . Lasance also said they found much of their early screen time comical because " one minute they 're in bed , the next they 're fighting in the diner . " Aden and Belle became so popular with viewers that they " coined a phrase " to name the couple , which was " Adelle " . Lasance said that " The Adelle mayhem is crazy . I get a lot of feedback on the internet about it . " For the couple to have such a following , he felt like it was a compliment to his and Tovey 's work . 
 After Aden 's breakdown and admission to psychiatric care , Belle grows close to Angelo Rosetta ( Luke Jacobz ) . Tovey said Aden will always be " the love of Belle 's life " , but she is traumatised by the previous events . Aden witnesses Belle kissing Angelo , which destroys their relationship . Belle is left unsure what to do because she sees Angelo has her " safety net " and Aden " brings out the passion in her " . She added that Angelo doesn 't compare with her love for Aden , that her relationship with Aden was the " most beautiful " on the programme and that she would never escape her feelings for Aden . Aden later " jumps on Belle " and tells her they are in love and should be together . Tovey said Belle gets " caught in the moment " and they make love . Tovey was unhappy with the fact that Belle cheated , as she thought it was out of character . When Angelo finds out the truth , he publicly humiliates Belle . He later goes around to her home and becomes violent . Belle is later found badly beaten and although Angelo is not responsible , he gets the blame . Jacobz said the under the circumstances he would have thought the same . He added that Aden " hates " Angelo . After Angelo verbally abused Belle , Aden does not " see eye to eye with Angelo " and decides to testify as a witness against Angelo . 
 Aden and Belle are involved in a storyline where the school 's formal is set on fire . Belle becomes trapped and her injuries have " consequences that change their relationship " forever . Lasance had previously been in caught up in a real house fire ; he said the director of the episode " milked " the fictional situation to make it seem more dramatic than a real fire . He also stated that in the months following there would be a lot of " tense moments " between the pair . Aden and Belle can acknowledge what they have found in each other - so " it would be hard to split them up " . After the attack and fire , Belle refuses to leave the hospital , even with Aden supporting her , because it is the only place she " feels secure " . Belle is prescribed with painkillers to help combat her anxiety disorder . However she becomes addicted to them . Tovey said she does not want Aden to know because of the " shame " and she doesn 't want him to know she has failed . She further explained that " addicts withdraw from those around them - which is exactly what she is doing . " 
 When Aden discovers the truth he ends their relationship . Following on with theme of those closest to him battling addiction , Lasance said it reminds Aden of his father 's relationship with alcohol . Though Lasance previously said it " would take a lot " to break Belle and Aden up forever , he opined addiction might be the one thing that could . Though Aden later gives Belle a second chance when she recovers . With this Lasance later reaffirmed his belief that " no matter what there is always a deep @-@ rooted connection that can 't be broken " between Aden and Belle . Belle is the first person Aden " trusted and fully gave his heart to after the abuse from his grandfather . " Aden gives up the chance of attending university to stay with Belle and takes up a " job of convenience " working on the prawn trawler . 
 = = = Marriage and Belle 's death = = = 
 Belle finds out Aden borrowed money from Clint to pay for her ring . Lasance said it is a " heart @-@ felt moment " and a turning point in their stories , because Belle realises " how far he 's willing to go for her " . Belle asks Aden to marry her , Lasance explained that it is hard for Aden because " he is blown away " as he wants to marry Belle , but he has traditional values and thought that " the man " should have asked . 
 In May 2009 , Tovey announced that she had filmed her final scenes with Home and Away . Lasance said he was sad but " fortunate " to work alongside Tovey . He credited their off @-@ screen friendship as making Aden and Belle 's dynamic develop successfully . In the weeks before filming her final scenes , Tovey asked Welsh how Belle would be written out . It was then she found out that Belle would die shortly after her wedding with Aden . Tovey said she was teary , but pleased with the way Belle would depart . Tovey said that filming her exit scenes were more emotional . Her last scene with Lasance required her to portray Belle 's death scene . She added " I had my eyes closed and he was holding me really tight " , after the director cut the scene they pair could not separate themselves . 
 The storyline played out on @-@ screen when Belle discovers she has cancer . Aden only discovers the truth just before their wedding . Belle refuses treatment because her cancer is so advanced she does not want to " prolong her agony " . Aden is " confused , devastated , and completely and utterly heartbroken " . Lasance said Aden is " destroyed " and feels like he is also dying in the process , because Aden has never given himself to anyone - he feels Belle is a part of him . Tovey explained that Belle is worried about Aden 's frame of mind on their wedding day . The scriptwriters played the scenes in a way that kept viewers unsure whether or not Aden would attend his wedding . While Belle " truly believes he will show up " , Tovey explains the tone and mood of the wedding is unhappy . Aden marries Belle , and she dies a couple of weeks later . 
 = = = Relationship with Nicole Franklin = = = 
 Aden 's best friend during most of his duration was Nicole Franklin ( Tessa James ) . Nicole is the daughter to his surrogate father Roman Harris ( Conrad Coleby ) . When Roman is blinded in a car accident , he takes his anger out on Aden and Nicole . Subsequently they become " each other 's support network " and Lasance said it was not long until they " slipped between the sheets " . One of the conditions of Aden 's tenancy was to never sleep with Nicole , this makes the pair feel guilty that they had deceived Roman . Lasance felt the storyline was controversial because of the strong fan base for his relationship with Belle - which meant he knew it would " cause a stir " and divide the audience . In January 2010 , Nicole and Aden " get up close and personal " and they decided to spend Aden 's remaining time in the Bay together . 
 When the two share another kiss , James told TV Week that there are " a lot of complications " for them . She said that no one knew what was going to happen next and that Nicole felt guilty for betraying Belle because she was her friend . James explained that the pairing with Aden was " a bit more serious and in @-@ depth than Nicole 's usual relationships . " James opined that Aden was also the one of the " nicer guys " for Nicole . When the pair embarked on a relationship . James opined that Aden and Nicole were great together and explained , " they started out having a kind of brother @-@ sister relationship , and that developed into something more . " Nicole declared her love for Aden early on in their romance , so he did not reciprocate the gesture . Lasance described the moment whilst interviewed by TV Week stating : " They 've always had an awesome connection and Nicole gets into a bit of a comfortable state and blurts out that she loves Aden . " Aden appreciated her love for him , however cannot say it back until he felt the same way . It is this that made their relationship " awkward " , Nicole tried to withdraw her declaration though Aden realises she meant it . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Aden meets Cassie and flirts with her . He ensures that her previous relationship with Ric Dalby ( Mark Furze ) is definitely over , then asks Cassie out . Her acceptance makes Ric jealous , so during a game of rugby , he tackles Aden so hard that he is knocked unconscious and hospitalised . Aden 's brother Sean ( Gabriel Egan ) attacks Ric in retaliation , and when Aden recovers , he gives Sean a false alibi . Cassie discovers the truth and breaks up with him . Aden next appears as a rival of Geoff 's on the school football team . Annoyed that PE teacher Tony Holden ( Jon Sivewright ) favours Geoff , Aden spikes Geoff 's drink and locks him in the boot of Tony 's car . Tony throws Aden off the team , so Aden vandalises Geoff 's grandfather 's farm , and bullies Geoff and his younger sister Annie ( Charlotte Best ) . 
 After a party Aden attends with his classmate Matilda Hunter ( Indiana Evans ) , Cassie drives them home . She is under the influence of alcohol , and when Aden becomes high on marijuana and taunts her , she crashes . Aden sustains a leg injury that ends his chance of becoming a professional footballer . When Geoff refuses the chance to take up professional football , Aden intensifies his bullying of him . In return , Geoff punches Aden and knocks him out . Aden later helps an inebriated Annie , who has had her drink spiked . Tony and Geoff presume that Aden was responsible as he was previously involved in similar prank with Tamsyn Armstrong ( Gabrielle Scollay ) , and Annie lies to get Aden into trouble . The rest of the town believe he is to blame , so he seeks help from local lawyer Morag . Annie 's guardian Irene Roberts ( Lynne McGranger ) hits Aden and injures his bad leg , which prompts him to file a claim against her . Annie admits that she lied , hoping that Aden will drop the lawsuit , but he refuses . He speaks to a journalist about Irene , which annoys Belle , Irene 's lodger who is also a journalist . Belle writes an article of her own about Aden 's war veteran grandfather , Stan , much to Aden 's distress . He attacks Belle , sets fire to her article and cries . 
 Alf Stewart ( Ray Meagher ) tells Aden that he should behave in a manner his grandfather would be proud of . This upsets Aden , and he tries to cause trouble at school . When Cassie discovers she has HIV , Aden becomes irate at the prospect that she may have infected him in the car accident . After his tests come back negative , he cries in disappointment . His doctor , Rachel Armstrong ( Amy Mathews ) , suggests that Aden may need counselling , but he refuses . When Aden 's alcoholic father Larry throws him out , he is taken in by his friend Roman . Aden is upset to learn that Roman was in the army like his grandfather , and visits the structurally damaged local diner to be alone . The ceiling collapses and Aden is seriously injured . In the aftermath , Larry tells Rachel that Aden was abused by his grandfather as a child . Aden cannot face going home , so moves in with Roman more permanently . He is attracted to Roman 's daughter Nicole , but does not pursue her out of respect for Roman . Instead , Aden kisses Belle , but deflects her attempts to take things further . She goes on a date with Angelo Rosetta ( Luke Jacobz ) , which prompts a jealous Aden to admit that he could not sleep with her because of the abuse he suffered as a child . When Larry injures himself while drunk , he is found by his son , and admits that Aden 's grandfather also abused him . Aden holds Larry , Rachel and Belle hostage so that his father cannot receive medical assistance , but they are rescued by Angelo . Aden is forced into counselling , and begins to come to terms with his abuse . 
 Belle and Aden grow close again , and begin seeing one another in secret , as Belle is still dating Angelo . Aden 's relationship with her deteriorates when Belle develops post @-@ traumatic stress disorder after being attacked . She later refuses to leave hospital after being injured in a fire , and becomes addicted to the prescription medication that she takes for anxiety . Aden 's feelings for Nicole are reignited , and they have sex several times before being caught together by Belle . Roman throws Aden out for sleeping with his daughter . Drug addict Liam Murphy ( Axle Whitehead ) deepens the rift between Aden and Belle , but they eventually reconcile and become engaged . In order to pay for a wedding ring , Aden takes a loan from corrupt bookmaker Clint , and loses several football matches on Clint 's instruction . He refuses to ruin Geoff 's career by injuring him , however , so Clint has Aden beaten up . Belle learns that she has terminal cancer and pushes the wedding forward , but does not tell Aden . He is devastated to learn of her condition the day before the ceremony , but is convinced to go ahead with the wedding by Roman . He and Belle spend four weeks together as husband and wife before she dies . Following her death , Aden becomes reclusive . He eventually returns to work , and is saved by Geoff when he almost drowns in an accident , which results in them becoming friends . 
 Several months after Belle 's death , Aden and Nicole begin a relationship , which becomes strained when Nicole tells him that she loves him , but Aden does not return the sentiment . A repentant Aden pays Nicole more attention and they are able to get their romance back on track . Aden 's brother Justin ( Matthew Walker ) is involved in a car accident , which causes short @-@ term memory loss , but prompts him to admit that he too was abused by their grandfather . He regains his memory , and recalls that Larry was in the car at the time of the accident . He and Aden find their father dead . Convinced that the police will think Justin killed him , Aden decides that they should bury Larry . The police become suspicious nonetheless , and the two are arrested for murder , until a phone call made to Aden 's phone from Larry confirms that he caused his own death by irresponsible driving . Justin convinces Aden to move to the city . When Nicole refuses to go with him , he leaves anyway . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Lasance was nominated in the category of " Best Bad Boy " at the 2008 Inside Soap Awards . Lasance won the award for " Most Popular Actor " at the 2009 Logie Awards , for his portrayal of Aden . He was nominated in the same category at the 2010 ceremony . The Daily Record said that Aden and Belle were " star @-@ crossed lovers " . That if " there 's one thing guaranteed to ruin a wedding it 's the news that the bride has got weeks to live . " They opined that Aden was " blissfully unaware " for weeks and it " burst his bubble " , which led them to question if he would actually turn up for the wedding . They later said they felt sympathy for Aden and Justin , because they have been " through an awful lot " . They added Aden should feel " slightly relieved " when Charlie questions him about his car accident . Also adding that they were " thankful " Aden was there to give Justin some " much needed support " . 
 Amy Edwards of The Newcastle Herald opined that Aden and Belle 's wedding was a " tear @-@ jerker of an episode " . She added that losing Belle was a " sad loss for many fans " because Aden and Belle were a popular couple of the show . While Victoria Jack from the publication said Aden is the serial 's " bad @-@ boy @-@ turned @-@ good " . TV Week readers voted Aden as the character they were most concerned about in the aftermath of the formal explosion . Holy Soap said Aden 's most memorable moment was " having a breakdown and threatening to kill his father while holding Belle and Rachel hostage . " 
 = USS Catawba ( 1864 ) = 
 USS Catawba was a single @-@ turreted Canonicus @-@ class monitor built for the Union Navy during the American Civil War . Completed shortly after the end of the war , Catawba was laid up until sold to her builders in 1868 , and then resold to Peru . Renamed Atahualpa , the ship participated in the defense of Callao during the War of the Pacific . When the town was taken by Chilean troops in 1881 , she was scuttled to prevent her capture . Atahualpa was later refloated and used as a storage hulk until scrapped in the early 20th century . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 The ship was 225 feet ( 68 @.@ 6 m ) long overall , had a beam of 43 feet 3 inches ( 13 @.@ 2 m ) and had a maximum draft of 13 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 1 m ) . Catawba had a tonnage of 1 @,@ 034 tons burthen and displaced 2 @,@ 100 long tons ( 2 @,@ 100 t ) . Her crew consisted of 100 officers and enlisted men . 
 Catawba was powered by a two @-@ cylinder horizontal vibrating @-@ lever steam engine that drove one propeller using steam generated by two Stimers horizontal fire @-@ tube boilers . The 320 @-@ indicated @-@ horsepower ( 240 kW ) engine gave the ship a top speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . She carried 140 – 150 long tons ( 140 – 150 t ) of coal . Catawba 's main armament consisted of two smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading , 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) Dahlgren guns mounted in a single gun turret . Each gun weighed approximately 43 @,@ 000 pounds ( 20 @,@ 000 kg ) . They could fire a 350 @-@ pound ( 158 @.@ 8 kg ) shell up to a range of 2 @,@ 100 yards ( 1 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of + 7 ° . 
 The exposed sides of the hull were protected by five layers of 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) wrought iron plates , backed by wood . The armor of the gun turret and the pilot house consisted of ten layers of one @-@ inch plates . The ship 's deck was protected by armor 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) thick . A 5 @-@ by @-@ 15 @-@ inch ( 130 by 380 mm ) soft iron band was fitted around the base of the turret to prevent shells and fragments from jamming the turret as had happened to earlier monitors during the First Battle of Charleston Harbor in April 1863 . The base of the funnel ( ship ) was protected to a height of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) by 8 inches ( 203 mm ) of armor . A " rifle screen " of 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ inch ( 13 mm ) armor 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) high was installed on the top of the turret to protect the crew against Confederate snipers based on a suggestion by Commander Tunis A. M. Craven , captain of her sister ship Tecumseh . 
 The contract for Catawba , the first Navy ship to be named after the Catawba River in North Carolina , was awarded to Alexander Swift & Company ; the ship was laid down in 1862 at their Cincinnati , Ohio shipyard . She was launched on 13 April 1864 and turned over to the Navy on 7 June 1865 . The ship 's construction was delayed by multiple changes ordered while she was being built that reflected battle experience with earlier monitors . This included the rebuilding of the turrets and pilot houses to increase their armor thickness from 8 inches ( 203 mm ) to 10 inches and to replace the bolts that secured their armor plates together with rivets to prevent them from being knocked loose by the shock of impact from shells striking the turret . Other changes included deepening the hull by 18 inches ( 457 mm ) to increase the ship 's buoyancy , moving the position of the turret to balance the ship 's trim and replacing all of the ship 's deck armor . Completion of the ship was further delayed by the low depth of the Ohio River , which prevented its movement from Cincinnati in December 1864 to finish its fitting out . The river finally rose in March 1865 , allowing the ship to reach Mound City , Illinois , on 7 March . Catawba was placed in ordinary there after completion , together with two of her sisters . 
 The ships needed a deep @-@ water berth and were moved opposite Cairo , Illinois , in mid @-@ 1865 even though they still had to be anchored in the main channel , where they were often struck by debris , drifting ice , and vulnerable to accidents . Tippecanoe 's anchor chain was broken on 27 March 1866 when she was struck by a steamboat towing barges ; the monitor collided with Oneota and the two ships were dragged 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) downstream before they could be brought under control . This was a persistent problem and the Navy finally decided to move the ships down to New Orleans in May 1866 . In August 1867 , the Navy turned over Catawba and Oneota to Swift & Co. contingent on a guarantee that they would be returned in good shape if they could not be sold , and the company began refitting them for Peruvian service . 
 In October 1867 , an agent for Swift & Co. negotiated a deal with Peru to purchase Catawba and her sister for a million dollars apiece . Gideon Welles , Secretary of the Navy , initially indicated that the company could repurchase the pair if it refunded the government 's costs to build them , but changed his mind and said that he had no authority to do that . Congress debated the issue and ultimately decided that they would be appraised by a board of officers and that the highest competitive bid in equal to or in excess of the appraised value would be accepted . The ship was appraised at $ 375 @,@ 000 and sold for that amount , possibly after a rigged bid , on 11 April 1868 . 
 = = BAP Atahualpa = = 
 Catawba was renamed Atahualpa , after the Emperor Atahualpa , the last ruler of the Inca Empire . To prepare the ship for her lengthy voyage to Peru around Cape Horn , Swift & Co. added a breakwater on the bow , stepped two masts with a fore @-@ and @-@ aft rig to supplement her engine , and provided closures to make vents and deck openings water tight . 
 While this was going on , the United States was negotiating with Great Britain over compensation for losses inflicted by British ships knowingly sold to the Confederacy during the Civil War ( the Alabama Claims ) . Peru had been involved in an undeclared war with Spain ( the Chincha Islands War ) in 1864 – 66 and the US was not willing to prejudice its claims against the United Kingdom by performing a similar action for a belligerent power . Negotiations over the issue delayed the departure of the two monitors until January 1869 , after Peru bought two steamers , Reyes and Marañon to tow the monitors . They only reached Pensacola , Florida , before machinery breakdowns forced them to wait 30 days for repairs to be completed . En route from Key West to the Bahamas , the ships were separated in heavy weather . Atahualpa reached Great Inagua in the Bahamas and was able to resupply , although her officers had to pay for themselves . The ships finally reunited at St. Thomas in the Virgin Islands and had to wait for the <unk> to arrive from Peru to tow Manco Cápac , as the monitor had accidentally rammed and sunk Reyes during the storm . While entering Rio de Janeiro on the night of 15 September , Manco Cápac ran aground ; she was refloated the following day , but the damage required three months to repair . The ships were joined by the steam corvette Unión during this time . They reached the Strait of Magellan on 29 January 1870 and Callao on 11 May . 
 Atahualpa was towed from Callao to Iquique , then part of Peru , from 11 – 22 May 1877 to defend that port from the rebel ironclad <unk> during the Peruvian Civil War . When the War of the Pacific with Chile began in 1879 , Atahualpa was stationed in Callao . On 11 December 1880 , the Chilean fleet started firing at Callao at ranges of up to 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) . Atahualpa , escorted by a tug , sortied to fight a long @-@ range battle with the Chilean fleet , but failed to inflict any damage on the Chilean ships . On 16 January 1881 , her crew was forced to scuttle the ship to prevent her capture by Chilean forces as they advanced into the city . After the war , the monitor was salvaged and she became a storage hulk until she was finally broken up sometime in the early 20th century . 
 = Operation Vrbas ' 92 = 
 Operation Vrbas ' 92 ( Serbian : Операција <unk> ' 92 ) was a military offensive undertaken by the Army of Republika Srpska ( Vojska Republike Srpske – VRS ) in June – October 1992 , during the Bosnian War . The goal of the operation was the destruction of a salient around the central Bosnian town of Jajce , which was held by the Croatian Defence Council ( Hrvatsko vijeće obrane – HVO ) and the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Armija Republike Bosne i Hercegovine – ARBiH ) . The intensity of fighting varied considerably and involved several major VRS offensive efforts interspersed by relative lulls in fighting . Jajce fell to the VRS on 29 October 1992 , and the town 's capture was followed by the destruction of all its mosques and Roman Catholic churches . 
 The fighting improved the safety of VRS lines of communication south of the Bosnian Serb capital of Banja Luka , and displaced between 30 @,@ 000 and 40 @,@ 000 people , in what foreign observers called " the largest and most wretched single exodus " of the Bosnian War . The ARBiH and the HVO in Jajce were not only outnumbered and outgunned , but their units were also plagued by inadequate staff work , compounded by lack of coordination between separate command and control structures maintained by the two forces throughout the battle . The defence of Jajce also suffered from worsening Croat – Bosniak relations and skirmishes between the ARBiH and the HVO along the resupply route to Jajce . Ultimately , the outcome of the battle itself fueled greater Bosniak – Croat animosities , which eventually led to the Croat – Bosniak War . The VRS saw the cracking of the ARBiH – HVO alliance as a very significant outcome of the operation . 
 = = Background = = 
 As the Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska narodna armija – JNA ) withdrew from Croatia following the acceptance and start of implementation of the Vance plan , its 55 @,@ 000 officers and soldiers born in Bosnia and Herzegovina were transferred to a new Bosnian Serb army , which was later renamed the Army of Republika Srpska ( Vojska Republike Srpske – VRS ) . This reorganisation followed the declaration of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992 , ahead of the 29 February – 1 March 1992 referendum on the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina . This declaration would later be cited by the Bosnian Serbs as a pretext for the Bosnian War . On 4 April , JNA artillery began shelling Sarajevo . At the same time , the JNA and the Bosnian Serb forces clashed with the HVO at the Kupres Plateau , capturing Kupres by 7 April . 
 The JNA and the VRS in Bosnia and Herzegovina faced the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Armija Republike Bosne i Hercegovine – ARBiH ) and the Croatian Defence Council ( Hrvatsko vijeće obrane – HVO ) , reporting to the Bosniak @-@ dominated central government and the Bosnian Croat leadership respectively , as well as the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) , which occasionally supported HVO operations . In late April , the VRS was able to deploy 200 @,@ 000 troops , hundreds of tanks , armoured personnel carriers ( APCs ) and artillery pieces . The HVO and the Croatian Defence Forces ( Hrvatske obrambene snage – HOS ) could field approximately 25 @,@ 000 soldiers and a handful of heavy weapons , while the ARBiH was largely unprepared with nearly 100 @,@ 000 troops , small arms for less than a half of their number and virtually no heavy weapons . Arming of the various forces was hampered by a UN arms embargo introduced in September 1991 . By mid @-@ May 1992 , when those JNA units which had not been transferred to the VRS withdrew from Bosnia and Herzegovina to the newly declared Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , the VRS controlled approximately 60 percent of Bosnia and Herzegovina . 
 Even though the Graz agreement , negotiated by Bosnian Serbs and Bosnian Croats aiming to partition Bosnia and Herzegovina in early May , proclaimed cessation of hostilities between the two groups , heavy fighting broke out between the HVO and the VRS in June , in eastern Herzegovina ( Operation Jackal ) , and in the Sava River basin ( Operation Corridor 92 ) , in the north of Bosnia and Herzegovina . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 While the fighting related to Operation Corridor 92 was still in progress , the VRS prepared to attack and destroy a salient around the town of Jajce in central part of Bosnia and Herzegovina , held jointly by the HVO and the ARBiH . The salient threatened Bosnian Serb lines of communication south of VRS @-@ held Banja Luka and contained two hydroelectric power plants critical for electrical supply of Banja Luka region . The salient was held by between 3 @,@ 400 and 5 @,@ 500 HVO and ARBiH troops manning strong fortifications in difficult terrain . The VRS committed 7 @,@ 000 – 8 @,@ 000 troops of the 30th Infantry Division of the 1st Krajina Corps to the offensive codenamed Operation Vrbas ' 92 . The 30th Division was under command of Colonel Stanislav <unk> , until he was replaced by Colonel Dragan <unk> in early September . The VRS troops included the 1st , 11th and 17th Light Infantry Brigades and 1st Mixed Antitank Artillery Battalion . Besides the numerical superiority , the VRS held a clear advantage in armour , deploying 20 – 30 tanks and adding 30 – 50 heavy artillery pieces to the force . Defence of Jajce was organised at municipal crisis headquarters level by mayor <unk> Karadžić , while the HVO force in Jajce was commanded by Stjepan Blažević . 
 = = = Initial combat = = = 
 The Jajce salient was supported via a 40 @-@ kilometre ( 25 mi ) road running through a narrow corridor to the town of Travnik . In July , the VRS attempted to cut the supply corridor and isolate Jajce from Travnik before any effort was made to capture the salient , but the attacks failed to accomplish any significant headway . This prompted the VRS to switch to a gradual advance along three separate axes converging on Jajce directly instead . The move was designed to minimize VRS casualties and allow a systematic elimination of HVO and ARBiH defences around the town . ARBiH @-@ HVO successfully defended Jajce from the VRS , in part thanks to the area 's mountainous surroundings . In the same month , feuding between the Croatian Democratic Union ( HDZ ) and the Party of Democratic Action ( SDA ) over political control began and the HVO forcibly disbanded the Bosniak @-@ led war presidency in Jajce in exchange for one that was pro @-@ Croat . 
 The VRS launched the first major attack along the western approach to Jajce in mid @-@ August . The attack pushed through the town 's defences and the VRS arrived to within two kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 miles ) of Jajce . After this breakthrough , the frontline stabilised for nearly a month before the VRS made another push towards Jajce . The advance came from the southwest of the town and the defenders were pushed back to within one kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 miles ) from the town . In order to relieve Jajce , the ARBiH and the HVO launched a joint attack north of Bugojno and Novi Travnik against a flank of the VRS force attacking Jajce , but the offensive failed — gaining no ground at all and hardly making any impact on the VRS deployments around Jajce . The VRS continued shelling Jajce and started small @-@ scale airstrikes in the area . That led the United Nations ( UN ) to declare the whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina a no @-@ fly zone . A Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) analysis concluded that it is possible that the failure of the ARBiH – HVO counterattack prompted the HVO to agree on a truce with the VRS on 9 October . Besides a ceasefire , the agreement promised the Bosnian Serbs unrestricted power supply from the hydroelectric power plants in Jajce salient . The agreement was signed by Mate Boban , president of the self @-@ proclaimed Croatian Republic of Herzeg @-@ Bosnia , and Radovan Karadžić , president of the self @-@ proclaimed Republika Srpska , and the ARBiH took no part . 
 = = = The final attack = = = 
 The distrust generated by the separate agreement was compounded by deteriorating relations between the ARBiH and the HVO in the area of nearby town of Prozor , and Novi Travnik in late summer . The strained relations escalated rapidly and led to an armed clash between the two forces in Novi Travnik on 18 October . Low @-@ scale conflicts spread in the region , and the two forces engaged each other along the supply route to Jajce three days later , on 21 October , as a result of an ARBiH roadblock set up the previous day on authority of the " Coordinating Committee for the Protection of Muslims " rather than the ARBiH command . Just as the roadblock was dismantled , a new skirmish occurred in the town of Vitez the following day . The developments also meant that supply of ammunition for Jajce defenders was unable to move further than Prozor , and prompted the commander of the HVO Central Bosnia Operational Zone Colonel Tihomir Blaškić to consider pulling a part of the HVO troops from Jajce to reopen the Jajce – Prozor route . Blaškić 's position was weakened by the HVO headquarters since 18 October , when a quarter of heavy weapons at his disposal were removed to Čapljina , ahead of HV 's Operation Vlaštica aimed at Dubrovnik hinterland . The overall poor situation culminated in the Battle of Prozor fought between the HVO and the ARBiH . The battle began on 23 October , just after the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) managed to calm the situation in Vitez and Novi Travnik . End of fighting in and around Prozor was arranged on 26 October , coming into effect two days later . 
 The VRS seized the opportunity to launch a fresh advance towards Jajce amid ARBiH – HVO clashes , attacking along three axes towards the town on 25 October . Putting their conflict aside , the HVO and the ARBiH deployed in Jajce fought back for four days before the VRS entered the town on 29 October . As the VRS capture of the town appeared inevitable , the defending force pulled out . Following its capture , Serb radio and television declared Jajce a " liberated town " and a part of " the free Serbian republic " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Exodus and destruction of religious sites = = = 
 After the VRS entered Jajce , the HVO and the ARBiH pulled out from the remainder of the salient towards Travnik . They were joined by the civilian population of Jajce , forming a column of between 30 @,@ 000 and 40 @,@ 000 refugees that stretched 16 kilometres ( 10 miles ) , and among which thousands were vulnerable to VRS sniping and shelling . Foreign observers described this as " the largest and most wretched single exodus " of the Bosnian War . Upon their arrival in Travnik , the refugees were attended to by UNHCR staff assisted by UNPROFOR troops . At least seven died at the Travnik hospital , while about 60 were treated for injuries . Approximately 20 @,@ 000 Bosniak refugees from Jajce were resettled in central Bosnia , providing manpower for several new ARBiH brigades . Croat refugees headed toward Croatia due to rising tensions between Bosniaks and Croats in central Bosnia and overcrowding in Travnik . By November the pre @-@ war population of Jajce had shrunk from 45 @,@ 000 to just several thousand . Bosniaks had previously accounted for 39 percent of the population , Croats 35 percent , and Serbs 19 percent . 
 In the weeks following its capture , all of the mosques and Roman Catholic churches in Jajce were demolished as retribution for the HVO 's destruction of the town 's only Serbian Orthodox monastery in mid @-@ October . The VRS converted the town 's Franciscan monastery into a prison and its archives , museum collections and artworks were looted ; the monastery church was completely destroyed . By 1992 , all religious buildings in Jajce had been destroyed , save for two mosques whose perilous positioning on a hilltop made them unsuitable for demolition . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 While the conflict between the HVO and the ARBiH contributed to the weakening defence of Jajce , the military superiority of the VRS was the principal reason behind the town 's capture . Besides the advantage in troop size and firepower , VRS staff work and planning was significantly superior to the organisational efforts of the defenders of Jajce . The principal problem for the defence of Jajce was that the town was defended by two separate command structures , one having authority over ARBiH troops and the other over HVO units . 
 Humanitarian workers and foreign military observers had suspicions that the Croats deliberately abandoned Jajce , as well as territories lost in Operation Corridor 92 , to the VRS in exchange for the Prevlaka Peninsula south of Dubrovnik . Even though Croatia and several Western diplomats denied this claim , European Community envoy David Owen urged the UN to impose sanctions against Croatia . The suspicion was fueled by an October 1992 agreement between Croatian President Franjo Tuđman and Yugoslav President Dobrica Ćosić to withdraw the JNA from Prevlaka . However , the JNA withdrawal from Croatian soil had also been a part of the Vance plan , which was accepted by both Croatia and Yugoslavia . 
 It is unclear who pulled out of Jajce first and it remains a point of " mutual recrimination " . Bosniaks complained that the HVO was to blame for the loss of Jajce since its units were the first to pull out when the VRS entered the town . Conversely , the Bosnian Croat leader , Božo <unk> , publicly complained about the conduct of the ARBiH in central Bosnia , blaming extremists among the ARBiH personnel for hindering the resupply of Jajce . His stance was reflected in the Croatian daily Večernji list . The newspaper assumed a confrontational position regarding Bosniaks while maintaining that the Bosniak leadership was not entirely anti @-@ Croat . Croat – Bosniak relations gradually deteriorated , leading to the Croat – Bosniak War in 1993 . In October 1993 , VRS Major General Momir Talić , commander of the 1st Krajina Corps during Operation Vrbas ' 92 , said that the capture of Jajce was the first step in dismantling of the alliance between the Bosnian Croats and Bosniaks . The Croat – Bosniak rift would not be mended before the Washington Agreement signed in March 1994 , but not completely . After the HVO recaptured Jajce in the HV @-@ led Operation Mistral 2 on 13 September 1995 , the town was <unk> , and Bosniak refugees were not allowed to return . By 1998 , most Croat refugees had returned to Jajce , while only 5 @,@ 000 Bosniaks did so . 
 The ARBiH and HVO lost 103 soldiers defending Jajce ; a further 492 were wounded and five remain missing . In 2008 , the Prosecutor 's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina indicted two members of the VRS for war crimes committed against Bosniaks in September 1992 , citing the killing of 23 Bosniak civilians and wounding of a number of others . In 2010 , the Prosecutor 's Office began an investigation against seven members of the ARBiH , HVO , and HOS on suspicion that they committed war crimes between 27 May and 29 October 1992 against 35 Serb civilians , including the murder of at least 15 . 
 = Marquinhos = 
 Marcos <unk> Corrêa ( born 14 May 1994 ) , commonly known as Marquinhos , is a Brazilian professional footballer who plays as a defender for French club Paris Saint @-@ Germain and the Brazil national team . Mainly a central defender , he can also play as right @-@ back . 
 He began his career at Corinthians , and after winning the 2012 Copa Libertadores he moved to Roma for an eventual fee of € 3 million . Marquinhos was a regular in his only season as Roma reached the Coppa Italia Final . In July 2013 he moved to Paris Saint @-@ Germain for € 31 @.@ 4 million on a five @-@ year contract , one of the highest fees for a player under the age of 20 . He won ten items of silverware at the club , including the Ligue 1 title in each of his first three seasons , but played less frequently after the acquisition of compatriot David Luiz . 
 Marquinhos made his full international debut for Brazil in 2013 , and was part of their Under @-@ 21 side which won the 2014 Toulon Tournament . He also represented the nation at the 2015 Copa América and the following year 's Copa América Centenario , as well as the 2016 Olympics . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Corinthians = = = 
 Marquinhos joined Corinthians at the age of eight in 2002 . After winning the state junior cup , he was first included in a senior matchday squad on 29 January 2012 , remaining an unused substitute in their 1 – 0 home win over Clube Atlético <unk> in the Campeonato Paulista . He made his professional debut in the competition on 18 February , playing the full 90 minutes of a victory by the same score at Associação <unk> São Caetano . He made eight appearances across the season , as the <unk> topped the table in the regular season but were defeated by Associação <unk> Ponte Preta in the play @-@ offs quarter @-@ finals . 
 After the conclusion of the state championship , Marquinhos made his Campeonato Brasileiro Série A debut on 20 May 2012 , playing from start to finish in a 0 – 1 loss to Fluminense at the Paulo Machado de Carvalho Stadium ; both teams were resting players in the first game of the season due to concentration on the Copa Libertadores . He played six games in the national championship , and was an unused substitute as the club won the 2012 Copa Libertadores Finals against Boca Juniors . 
 = = = Roma = = = 
 In July 2012 Marquinhos was signed by Roma from Corinthians . The transfer was initially a one @-@ year loan for a fee of € 1 @.@ 5 million , rising to € 3 million after he made 8 first @-@ team appearances of at least 45 minutes each . At Roma , he wore the number 3 and played under the name " Marcos " . 
 He made his debut on 16 September in a 2 – 3 loss against Bologna at the Stadio Olimpico , sent on by manager Zdeněk Zeman to replace Iván <unk> for the final 15 minutes . By October , Zeman decided to partner Marquinhos for his speed alongside former Corinthians teammate and fellow Brazilian Leandro <unk> in central defence , demoting former starter Nicolás <unk> to the substitutes ' bench . He given a straight red card in a 4 – 2 victory over AC Milan on 22 December when he was judged to have denied Stephan El <unk> a clear goalscoring opportunity . 
 Marquinhos played 26 Serie A games in his only season , and four in the Coppa Italia . This included the full 90 minutes of the final on 26 May , playing at right back as Roma lost 0 – 1 to rivals Lazio . 
 = = = Paris Saint @-@ Germain = = = 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 season = = = = 
 On 19 July 2013 , Marquinhos signed a five @-@ year deal with French side Paris Saint @-@ Germain for a fee of € 31 @.@ 4 million . According to BBC Sport , this was then the highest transfer fee for a teenager , although Sky Sports report it as then the fifth @-@ highest such transfer , and France 's Le 10 Sport record it as the third @-@ highest . French news channel BFM TV described the transfer as the fifth most expensive of all time for a defender , after those of Rio Ferdinand , Thiago Silva , Lilian Thuram and Daniel Alves . 
 His transfer was threatened by anomalies in his medical exam , and he missed the team 's pre @-@ season visit to Sweden . His mother said that he had caught a virus , with PSG denying claims circulated by Le Parisien that he had hepatitis . 
 On his official debut for the club on 17 September , he scored his first professional goal to confirm a 4 – 1 win against Olympiacos at the Karaiskakis Stadium in the group stage of the 2013 – 14 UEFA Champions League . Five days later , Marquinhos made his Ligue 1 debut as a starter in a 1 – 1 draw against AS Monaco . His first league goal for the club came on 28 September , the first in a 2 – 0 win over Toulouse . On 2 October he scored the second goal in a 3 – 0 Champions League group victory against Benfica . Marquinhos , who was playing due to injury to Thiago Silva , expressed surprise at his goalscoring form at the start of his PSG career . 
 Marquinhos scored the last goal of PSG 's 6 – 1 aggregate win over Bayer Leverkusen in the last 16 of the Champions League on 12 March 2014 , and was an unused substitute as they won the Coupe de la Ligue Final against Lyon on 19 April . On 10 May , he scored the opening goal of a 3 – 1 win over Lille , which put by @-@ then league champions PSG to a record league points tally of 86 with a game left to play . 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 season = = = = 
 Marquinhos began the 2014 – 15 season on 2 August in the Trophée des Champions , playing the whole 90 minutes as PSG won 2 – 0 against Guingamp at the Workers Stadium in Beijing . In the 32nd minute , he gave away a penalty kick by fouling Claudio <unk> , but Salvatore <unk> saved the penalty shot from Mustapha <unk> . His first goal of the season came in a 2 – 0 win at Caen on 24 September , heading in Javier Pastore 's corner . 
 On 26 March 2015 , he signed a one @-@ year contract extension to keep him at the team until 2019 . Club President Nasser Al @-@ <unk> said that " The biggest European clubs were interested in signing Marquinhos , so this contract extension further reinforces Paris Saint @-@ Germain ’ s ambitious long @-@ term project . " As the left @-@ back in an all @-@ Brazilian defence ( alongside Maxwell , Silva and David Luiz ) , Marquinhos featured in PSG 's 3 – 2 win at Marseille in Le Classique , scoring the equaliser . Six days later he started in the 4 – 0 victory over Bastia in the 2015 Coupe de la Ligue Final , his 34th consecutive game without a defeat for the club , surpassing a record set by George Weah . On 16 May , PSG won their third consecutive league title with a 2 – 1 victory at Montpellier HSC , Marquinhos playing the final twelve minutes in place of Yohan Cabaye . Two weeks later , he was an unused substitute as the team finished a perfect domestic season with victory in the Coupe de France Final against Auxerre . 
 = = = = 2015 – 16 season = = = = 
 PSG began the season with a 2 – 0 victory over Lyon in the 2015 Trophée des Champions , with Marquinhos an unused substitute as Serge Aurier played at right back . At the end of the summer transfer window , Chelsea had two bids rejected for his signature , of amounts between £ 25 @.@ 7 – £ 40 @.@ 4 million . 
 Marquinhos played rarely during the season , due to the partnership of his compatriots Silva and David Luiz in the centre of the PSG defence . One of the team 's former defenders , Alex , recommended that Marquinhos leave the team , as he was in demand from big teams in which he would have an opportunity to play . In February 2016 , Silva criticised the agency representing Marquinhos and David Luiz for having led two players of the same position to the same club , thus limiting Marquinhos ' opportunities ; Silva mentioned FC Barcelona 's interest in the player . Blanc stated that he would be open for Marquinhos to leave at the end of the season , while agent Giuliano Bertolucci confirmed that Marquinhos would be leaving . 
 On 2 March , Marquinhos scored his first goal of the season as PSG won 3 – 1 at Saint @-@ Étienne in the cup quarter @-@ finals . Following Aurier 's expulsion from the team , he took over at right @-@ back , earning praise for his performances against Chelsea in the last 16 of the Champions League . On 23 April , he played the entirety of a 2 – 1 win over Lille in the 2016 Coupe de la Ligue Final , and he did so again on 21 May in the Coupe de France Final , a 4 – 2 win over Marseille , as PSG won all four domestic trophies for the second consecutive season . 
 = = International career = = 
 Marquinhos played every minute of Brazil 's campaign at the 2011 South American Under @-@ 17 Football Championship , as they won and qualified for that year 's World Cup in that category . He was again an undisputed starter except for one match at that tournament , as the team took fourth place in Mexico . 
 In October 2013 , Marquinhos , who is of dual Portuguese and Brazilian nationality , stated that he would be open to representing the Portugal national team . However , later that month , he received his first call @-@ up for Brazil when Luiz Felipe Scolari named his squad for friendly matches against Honduras and Chile to be played that November . He made his debut against Honduras in Miami on 17 November , replacing David Luiz for the last 20 minutes of a 5 – 0 win . 
 Marquinhos played for Brazil Under @-@ 21 at the 2014 Toulon Tournament , featuring in all 5 of their matches as the country won the tournament . He scored to put Brazil 3 – 2 up in their eventual 5 – 2 win in the final over France . 
 After missing the 2014 FIFA World Cup on home soil , Marquinhos returned to the senior side in September 2014 under new manager Dunga . He featured in friendly wins over Colombia and Ecuador in Miami , making his first start against the latter . Marquinhos was included in the Brazilian squad for the 2015 Copa América in Chile , his first major international tournament . He made his competitive debut – and only appearance in the tournament – on 21 June in their final group match at the Estadio Monumental David Arellano , replacing Robinho for the final 14 minutes of a 2 – 1 win over Venezuela which sent Brazil into the quarter @-@ finals as group winners . 
 In 2016 , Marquinhos was named in the Brazilian squad for the Copa América Centenario in the United States , an " experimental " selection lacking his club defensive partners Thiago Silva and David Luiz . He played in the first two games at centre @-@ back alongside Gil before being replaced by Miranda for the last group game , a 1 – 0 loss to Peru at Gillette Stadium that eliminated his team . Later that year , he was included in the squad for the team 's hosting of the Olympic tournament . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 In terms of position , Marquinhos is predominantly a central defender , but as also been used at right @-@ back , and in defensive midfield . 
 On signing for Roma , Marquinhos described himself as a quick player with a good sense of position who knew how to impose himself on a game . He named his new teammate Thiago Silva as his role model . In March 2015 , Marquinhos told FourFourTwo that despite his average height , he compensated with honing his strength and timing , attributes he learnt from PSG assistant manager Claude Makélélé . He praised manager Laurent Blanc , a former defender himself , for encouraging the PSG defenders to attack in set pieces and teaching them the correct positioning in that situation . 
 Fellow Roma defender Nicolás <unk> said in August 2012 that Marquinhos was " a little phenomenon . He has speed , heading ability , he knows what to do , he is humble . He is a little Thiago Silva " . 
 In January 2014 , Marquinhos was named by British newspaper The Observer as one of the ten most promising young players in Europe . They wrote " He has the temperament to remain undaunted , the talent to succeed , and could benefit from playing alongside his club team @-@ mate , Thiago Silva , with whom he enjoys a solid understanding at wealthy Paris Saint @-@ Germain " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In May 2015 , Marquinhos told Le Parisien that he had become engaged to Brazilian singer and reality television contestant Carol <unk> . He proposed to her underneath the Eiffel Tower . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of match played 14 May 2016 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of match played 9 June 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Corinthians 
 Copa Libertadores : 2012 
 Roma 
 Coppa Italia : Runner @-@ up 2012 – 13 
 Paris Saint @-@ Germain 
 Ligue 1 : 2013 – 14 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 Coupe de France : 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 Coupe de la Ligue : 2013 – 14 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 Trophée des Champions : 2014 , 2015 
 = = = International = = = 
 Brazil U17 
 South American Under @-@ 17 Football Championship : 2011 
 Brazil U21 
 Toulon Tournament : 2014 
 = Crash Nitro Kart = 
 Crash Nitro Kart , released in Japan as Crash Bandicoot : <unk> ! Nitro Kart ( <unk> ： <unk> ！ <unk> Kurasshu <unk> : <unk> ! <unk> Kāto lit . " Crash Bandicoot : Let 's Go ! Nitro Kart ! " ) , is a 2003 racing video game developed by Vicarious Visions and Universal Interactive . It is published by Vivendi Universal Games ( along with Konami in the Japanese release ) for the PlayStation 2 , Nintendo GameCube , Xbox , Game Boy Advance and N @-@ Gage . The home console and Game Boy Advance versions were released in North America on November 11 , 2003 , in Europe on November 28 , 2003 , in Australia on December 4 , 2003 ; and in Japan on July 8 , 2004 for the PlayStation 2 and Nintendo Gamecube and August 26 , 2004 for the Game Boy Advance version . The PlayStation 2 version was rereleased for the Sony Greatest Hits line @-@ up on December 2004 and for the Platinum Range on August 27 , 2004 . The Xbox version was rereleased for the Platinum Family Hits line @-@ up in 2005 . The N @-@ Gage version of the game was released in Europe on June 30 , 2004 and in North America on July 28 , 2004 . The mobile phone version was released on September 20 , 2004 . The PlayStation 2 version was re @-@ released in the three @-@ disc " Crash Bandicoot Action Pack " compilation ( alongside Crash Twinsanity and Crash Tag Team Racing ) in the United States on June 12 , 2007 and in Europe on July 20 , 2007 . 
 The game is the ninth installment in the Crash Bandicoot series . It is an indirect sequel to Crash Team Racing and the first game in the series to have full motion video . The game 's story centers on the abduction of Crash Bandicoot , along with other characters in the series , by the ruthless dictator Emperor Velo XXVII . Threatening to destroy the Earth if they refuse , he forces them all to race in his gigantic coliseum for the entertainment of his subjects . Crash Nitro Kart received mixed reviews , with reviews varying from version to version . The home console version was met with generally fair reviews . Reviewers dismissed the game as a generic kart racer , but commented positively on its " power slide " system . The Game Boy Advance version earned slightly better reviews than the console version , while reviews for the N @-@ Gage version were middling , with much of the criticism going to the game 's " tunnel vision " . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Crash Nitro Kart is a racing game in which the player controls characters from the Crash Bandicoot universe , most of whom race in karts . While racing , the player can accelerate , steer , reverse , brake , hop or use weapons and power @-@ ups with the game controller 's analog stick and buttons . Four distinct types of crates are scattered throughout the tracks and arenas of Crash Nitro Kart . " Item Crates " are marked with a question mark ( ? ) and usually come in sets of four . The player can obtain a weapon or power @-@ up by driving through an Item Crate and breaking it apart . The player can only carry one weapon or power @-@ up at a time . " Multiplier Crates " are marked with an " X " and are usually found in hard @-@ to @-@ reach spots on the tracks . These special crates contain three of a certain weapon or power @-@ up . " Wumpa Crates " are unmarked and carry " Wumpa Fruit " that strengthens the player 's weapons and power @-@ ups if ten of them are obtained . " Activation Crates " are marked with an exclamation point ( ! ) and don 't give the player anything when they are driven through ; instead , they activate either a trap that can slow down the other racers or a boost pad . 
 Boosting is an important part of Crash Nitro Kart 's gameplay . When the player boosts , their kart will momentarily go slightly faster than its normal top speed . Boosts are achieved by driving over boost pads scattered across the tracks , pumping the gas at the starting line , and holding the gas button at the right time when being reset on the track . Another technique used for boosting is the " power slide " . To execute a power slide , the player holds down one of the shoulder buttons to perform a hop and steer before the kart lands . While sliding , a curved " boost gauge " appears next to the player 's kart . When the gauge goes from green to red , the player presses the opposite shoulder button to obtain a boost . The higher the boost gauge goes , the more powerful the boost will be . 
 = = = Racing modes = = = 
 Crash Nitro Kart features six racing modes : Adventure , Race Time Trial , Lap Time Trial , Quick Race , Team Race and Cup Tournament . Some modes are free @-@ for @-@ all , while others can be played as a team . The " Adventure Mode " is a single @-@ player game in which the player must race through all of the tracks and arenas in the game and collect as many Trophies , Relics , Boss Keys , CNK Tokens and Gems as possible . The objective of the Adventure Mode is to win all the races of the five different worlds and win the freedom of the playable characters from the tyrannical Emperor Velo XXVII . The hub world of the game is Velo 's Coliseum , from which the player can access any of the five other worlds through special gates . Most of these gates are initially locked ; the player must complete the races of one world to gain access to the next world . When inside a world , the player may access a race by driving the selected character onto a " Warp Pad " . By winning a race , the player will receive a Trophy . When the player receives all three Trophies in a world , the player will be able to race against that world 's champion , who acts as a boss character . If the player manages to defeat the world 's champion , the champion will relinquish a World Key . This allows the player to engage in the special modes of that world and enables access to the next world . 
 The special modes of each race consist of the " Relic Race " , the " CNK Challenge " , the " Crystal Arena " and the " Gem Cups " . In the Relic Race , the player must race through a track alone and complete three laps in the fastest time possible . To aid the player , " Time Crates " are spread throughout the track . When the player drives the character through a Time Crate , the clock freezes for whatever number of seconds are indicated on the Crate . If all of the Time Crates on a track are destroyed , the player 's final time will be reduced by ten seconds . The player wins a Relic by beating the time indicated on the screen . The CNK Challenge is played like a normal race , except that the player must also collect the letters C , N and K scattered throughout the track . If the player manages to collect all three letters and come in first place , a " CNK Token " is awarded . These tokens come in four different colors . If the player collects four tokens of the same color , the player will be able to access the Gem Cup of the corresponding color . Gem Cups are racing tournaments held against computer @-@ controlled opponents , and are accessible through a special gate at Velo 's Coliseum . If one of these cups is won , a Gem is awarded . When the player collects all the Trophies , World Keys and Relics , the player will be able to race against Emperor Velo on his personal racing track . If the player manages to defeat Velo in this race , the game is won . 
 The " Race Time Trial " is a single @-@ player mode where the player attempts to set the best time on any of the tracks in the game . There are no other racers to hinder the player , but no item @-@ bearing crates are present to aid the player . When the three @-@ lap race is finished , the player can save a " ghost " , a replay of that race . The next time that track is accessed in this mode , the player can load the ghost , allowing the player or others to compete with the ghost in a race . If the player finishes each of the tracks in a set time , the player will be able to compete against the ghosts of the game 's boss characters . The " Lap Time Trial " plays like the Race Time Trial except that the player races to get the best time for a single lap around the track . When one lap is finished , the player 's " ghost " ( a replay of the lap that was just completed ) will appear . Whenever a better time on the lap is accomplished , the old ghost will be replaced by the faster one . In the " Quick Race " , the player selects a character , a track and races . The player can adjust the computer 's skill level and the number of laps . 
 In the " Team Race " , the player joins forces with a computer @-@ controlled partner to win a race . When the player and the partner are in close proximity of each other , the " Team Meter " will rise . When the Team Meter is full , the player may activate the " Team Frenzy " , in which the player and partner have temporary access to unlimited weapons and power @-@ ups . In the " Cup Tournament " , the player competes against other racers on three different tracks . At the end of a track , the racer in first place gets nine points , the second place racer is awarded six points , third place gets three points and fourth place gets one point ; the rest get no points . When all three tracks are completed , the racer with the most points wins . This is the only racing mode that can be played by more than one human player . 
 = = = Battle modes = = = 
 In the battle modes , instead of racing on tracks , the player speeds around battle arenas while collecting weapons and attacking opponents . There are five battle modes in Crash Nitro Kart . Each mode can be played by two to four players . In the " Limit Battle " , the objective is to attack opponents with weapons and traps while avoiding attacks unleashed by the opponents . Offensive and defensive weapons can be collected by smashing special crates . A point and time limit can be set by the player before the game begins . Whoever earns enough points or has enough points when time runs out wins . This mode can be played free @-@ for @-@ all or with teams . In " Last Kart Driving " , the contestants compete until they run out of lives . A contestant loses a life every time they are hit by a weapon or hazard or fall into a pit . A contestant who runs out of lives will be eliminated . As the title suggests , the last kart driving wins . This mode can be played free @-@ for @-@ all or with teams . 
 In " Crystal Grab " , the contestants must fight to collect all the Crystals in the arena . When a contestant is attacked , they will drop any Crystals they 've gathered , allowing opponents to steal them . This mode can be played free @-@ for @-@ all or with teams . In " Capture the Flag " , two teams attempt to capture each other 's flag and bring it back to their respective flags . Players must race to their opponents ' side of the map and drive over their flag to grab it . They must then drive over their own flag 's base to score a point from the flag they 've captured . A flag that has been stolen can be dropped if the thief is hit with any weapon . Stolen flags that have been dropped can be returned to their respective bases . Due to the weight of the flags , any kart with a flag will be slowed down . The game ends when time runs out or when one of the teams has gotten enough points . This mode can only be played in teams . " Steal the Bacon " is a variation of " Capture the Flag " in which two teams fight over one flag that is situated in the middle of the arena . The teams must attempt to take the flag and bring it to their respective base . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Crash Nitro Kart features around twenty @-@ seven characters , sixteen of which are playable . The sixteen characters are split into four teams of four with each team driving karts of a matching color . 
 " Team Bandicoot " , which pilots blue karts , is led by Crash Bandicoot , the titular protagonist of the series . His kart is an all @-@ round performer with exceptional acceleration . Coco Bandicoot , Crash 's younger genius sister , programmed her kart 's wheels to balance their speed better , improving her kart 's turning ability . Crunch Bandicoot , a member of the Bandicoot family originally created by Doctor Neo Cortex to destroy Crash , pilots a kart with amazing momentum and speed but slow acceleration . Fake Crash , an imperfect duplicate of Crash , becomes accessible as a playable character if the player performs 50 consecutive speed boosts on any track in Adventure Mode as a member of Team Cortex . 
 " Team Cortex " , which pilots red karts , is led by Doctor Neo Cortex , Crash 's archenemy and main antagonist of the series . Like Crash , Cortex pilots a kart that excels in acceleration . Doctor N. Gin , Doctor Cortex 's right @-@ hand man , is a mechanical genius who pilots a kart that specializes in turning ability . Tiny Tiger , Doctor Cortex 's most faithful henchman , is a hulking giant who pilots a kart with a high top speed like Crunch . Doctor Nefarious Tropy , the self @-@ proclaimed master of time , becomes accessible as a playable character if the player beats all the time records in Race Time Trial Mode . 
 " Team Oxide " , which pilots yellow karts , is led by Crash Team Racing 's main antagonist Nitrous Oxide . His henchmen , Zam and <unk> , becomes accessible as playable characters if the player wins the Purple and Green Gem in Adventure Mode respectively . " Real Velo " , the form Emperor Velo is seen at the end of Adventure Mode , is a part of the Yellow Team and becomes accessible as a playable character if the player wins the Adventure Mode twice : once as a member of Team Bandicoot and once as a member of Team Cortex . 
 " Team Trance " , which pilots green karts , is led by N. Trance , the egg @-@ like master of hypnotism . Dingodile and Polar , whom N. Trance has hypnotised , becomes accessible as playable characters if the player wins the Red and Blue Gem in Adventure Mode respectively . Pura , whom Trance has also hypnotised , becomes accessible as a playable character if the player performs 50 consecutive speed boosts on any track in Adventure Mode as a member of Team Bandicoot . Pura was replaced in the GBA version by fellow Universal / Sierra character Spyro the Dragon . 
 The main antagonist of the story , Emperor Velo XXVII , is the confident , dominating , bullying and contemptuous ruler of his own galaxy ; he threatens to destroy Earth if Crash and Cortex 's teams refuse to compete in his Galaxy Circuit . Velo is the final boss character of the game and races alongside two advisors who lay down offensive measures to slow the player down . Preceding Velo are four boss characters who possess " World Keys " that are needed to race against Velo . In order , the bosses consist of the following : Krunk , a hulking creature who feels that Earth is a copy of his home planet and races to prove which planet is superior ; Nash , a genetically engineered shark @-@ like creature who was created to always move ; Norm , a goblin @-@ like mime who races alongside a larger and more obnoxious version of himself ; and Geary , a robot as much obsessed with perfection as he is with cleaning . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Crash , Coco and Crunch Bandicoot are relaxing while their nemesis , Doctor Neo Cortex , ponders his next course of action in regards to defeating the Bandicoots and achieving world domination . Suddenly , both groups are abducted by a mysterious white light that takes them to a large coliseum somewhere in another galaxy . This galaxy is ruled by Emperor Velo XXVII , who plans on having the teams race for the entertainment of his subjects . He promises the Earthlings that winning the races will win their freedom , but threatens them with the destruction of Earth if they refuse to race . 
 After both teams accept the challenge , Velo explains that the racers will compete on four worlds of his choosing , and promises a race against the galactic champion if the champions of those worlds are defeated . When Krunk , Nash , Norm , and Geary , the champions of Terra , Barin , <unk> , and <unk> respectively , are defeated , the Earth racers go up against the galactic champion : Emperor Velo himself . The racers defeat Velo , but he refuses to send them back to Earth unless they win all of the time relics and defeat him again . Velo loses again to the Earth racers and literally explodes in a bout of fury , revealing himself to be a robot suit controlled by a small gremlin @-@ like version of himself . 
 If Crash , Coco or Crunch win the race , Velo , having lost his influence over his subjects , dejectedly relinquishes his empire to the Bandicoots . Crash considers becoming the next emperor of the galaxy , but decides otherwise and gives control back to Velo in exchange for sending the Bandicoots back to Earth . If Cortex , N. Gin or Tiny win the race , Velo struggles with Cortex over the possession of his scepter , only to be stopped by Tiny . Cortex uses the scepter 's power in an attempt to return to Earth , but the scepter breaks and sends Cortex , N. Gin and Tiny to Terra instead . When they are confronted by the natives ( all of which resemble Krunk ) , Tiny repairs the scepter and is subsequently revered as a king , much to Cortex 's annoyance . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was tentatively titled Crash Team Racing 2 during its pre @-@ production phase . The characters of the game were designed by series veteran Charles Zembillas , while the environments were designed by Joe Pearson ( another veteran of the series ) , John Nevarez , Alan Simmons and Di Davies . The karts were designed by Perry <unk> Jr. and Andy <unk> . Recognizing that full motion video sequences have become the new norm in state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art video games , Universal Interactive decided that Crash Nitro Kart would be the first game in the Crash Bandicoot series to feature such cinematics . The cutscenes of Crash Nitro Kart were created by Red Eye Studios ; pre @-@ production of the cutscenes was handled by Epoch Ink . The screenplay of the cutscenes was written by Dan Tanguay . The studio 's eight artists were given four months to create 32 minutes of pre @-@ rendered cinematics . The actual animation phase was to be completed in 15 weeks , breaking down to almost five shots a day or 15 seconds of animation per day for each artist . The in @-@ game versions of the character models were built using 3ds Max and were outfitted with full inverse kinematic setups , morph targets and UV texture maps by Vicarious Visions . These models could not be ported directly into the cinematics due to their lower resolution for optimal real @-@ time interactivity . Instead , the artists of Red Eye Studios worked from concept sketches provided by Vicarious Visions and used Alias Systems ' Maya ( with which the artists were more familiar ) to enhance the detail of the 27 character models in the game , including the Crash Bandicoot character . 
 Given the task of forming the personalities of the Crash Nitro Kart cast through the full @-@ motion videos , the Red Eye Studio artists set certain rules for how each character would carry itself by default . As animator Thomas Happ noted , " N. Gin , for example , would always default to twitchy , side @-@ to @-@ side glances , while Tiny would often scratch his head in confusion . There were a lot of scenes where the characters are just standing around listening to Emperor Velo talk , and we had to invent ways to personalize their mannerisms and create a uniquely ' thinking character ' . " To achieve the bold and deeply saturated colors and textures for the characters and environments , the artists used Maya as well as Adobe Photoshop and Corel Painter . While the artists adapted many of the sets and props in the cinematics from in @-@ game counterparts , they recreated the majority of these objects from scratch in order to add surrealism to the scenery . The cinematics were completed well in advance of the four @-@ month deadline . The console version of Crash Nitro Kart was announced by Vivendi Universal prior to the Electronic Entertainment Expo of 2003 , while the N @-@ Gage version was announced on February 16 , 2004 . 
 The soundtrack of the game was composed by <unk> <unk> and Todd Masten of Womb Music , while the sound design was created by New Media Audio , a subsidiary of Technicolor Creative Services . Masten was contracted to create the score for the game after leaving Vicarious Visions and returning to California from New York . Based on his research of the Crash Bandicoot series ' " very recognizable " sound palette , Masten incorporated numerous percussive tonal instruments into the score of Crash Nitro Kart . Masten extensively used the then @-@ recently released Reason program by <unk> Software in the writing of his score for the game , making Crash Nitro Kart Masten 's first entirely digital score . Universal Interactive was so satisfied with the score Masten created that he was asked to remix a custom soundtrack disc as part of a special package deal with Walmart ; Crash Nitro Kart is the second video game composed by Masten to receive a soundtrack release . The game is also among the first to support the 5 @.@ 1 surround sound format . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 Steven Blum as Crash Bandicoot and Emperor Velo XXVII 
 Debi Derryberry as Coco Bandicoot and Polar 
 Kevin Michael Richardson as Crunch Bandicoot and an advisor of Velo 
 Mel Winkler as Aku Aku 
 Clancy Brown as Dr. Neo Cortex and Uka Uka 
 Quinton Flynn as Doctor N. Gin and Nitrous Oxide 
 John DiMaggio as Tiny Tiger 
 Dwight Schultz as Dingodile and Fake Crash 
 Michael Ensign as Dr. Nefarious Tropy 
 Tom Bourdon as N. Trance and an advisor of Velo 
 Marshall R. Teague as Krunk 
 Billy West as Nash and Zam 
 André Sogliuzzo as Norm and <unk> 
 Paul Greenberg as Geary and Pura 
 = = Reception = = 
 The console version of Crash Nitro Kart received mixed to positive reviews upon release . Manny LaMancha of GamePro concluded that the gameplay of Crash Nitro Kart was addictive though not innovative . PlayStation : The Official Magazine said that Crash Nitro Kart was " satisfying and challenging at the same time " and " a great way to fill that need for speed . " Nintendo Power praised the karts as " fast " and the power @-@ ups as " creative " . Official PlayStation Magazine concluded that " Vicarious Visions did all it could to emulate the Naughty Dog classic ( Crash Team Racing ) and just added a PS2 coat of paint . " Play magazine said that the game was " a little generic and heavily recycled , but the powerslide system from CTR pulls it together . " Matt Helgeson of Game Informer dismissed the game as " probably one of the least exciting racing titles I 've played recently . " Demian Linn of Electronic Gaming Monthly noted that the gameplay was " nearly identical to Crash Team Racing 's , even down to the speed @-@ boosting <unk> fruits , so if you loved it before , you 'll still love it , and if not ... not . " 
 The game 's controls were well received . Manny LaMancha of GamePro concluded that the controls were easy to pick up , but hard to master . Official Xbox Magazine praised the game 's " solid control " and " innovative boost system " . Michael <unk> of GameZone said that the interface was " simple to use " and that the game requires no learning curve . Tony Guidi of TeamXbox noted that the " simplistic " controls allowed the game to be played by anyone and that due to the different boosting and sliding techniques , " mastering the control will separate the great racers from the <unk> . " Ryan Davis of GameSpot stated that while the powerslide system " can give you a serious advantage in the race ... [ it ] is also very difficult to pull off , requiring flawless timing . " Steven Rodriquez of Nintendo World Report said that the karts " control pretty nicely , but can be hard to handle consistently at top speed , " and added that power sliding was " easy to do " . 
 The graphics of the game were positively received . Manny LaMancha of GamePro said that the visuals were brightly colored and smoothly animated and noted that the Xbox version 's graphics were slightly cleaner than the PlayStation 2 version . Michael Lafferty of GameZone praised the environments as " lush and richly textured " and the cutscenes as " very well done " . Tony Guidi of TeamXbox commended the graphics as " clean and crisp " and added that the cutscenes were " beautifully polished " . Ryan Davis of GameSpot noted that " Crash Nitro Kart maintains the brightly colored , cartoony look that has been the hallmark of past Crash Bandicoot games , though with slightly upgraded graphics . Ed Lewis of IGN said that the graphics for the single @-@ player modes were " bright and cheery and smooth " , but decreased in quality in the multiplayer modes . Kristan Reed of Eurogamer concluded that " CNK stays in exactly the cutesy ballpark you 'd expect from the Day @-@ Glo series , neither straying in any way from the generic cartoon worlds of old nor providing any graphical trickery that surprises hardened gamers looking for a splash of eye candy with their cartoon <unk> . " Steven Rodriquez of Nintendo World Report noted that " if you 've played any of the other Crash Bandicoot games out there , then you have a pretty good idea what this one looks like . " Russ Fischer of GameSpy said that the game " some nice graphics , which use a solid framerate and loads of color to capture the old Crash magic . " 
 The audio received mixed reception . Manny LaMancha of GamePro said that the in @-@ game voice acting ( provided by such stars as Debi Derryberry and Billy West ) was " clear and entertaining " . Tony Guidi of TeamXbox also noted that the character voices were " done well " and that the music " isn 't annoying " . However , Michael Lafferty of GameZone stated that the music can become " a little tiring " and " annoying " after a while . Ryan Davis of GameSpot concluded that the sound was " respectable " , but added that the " attitude " of the character sounds bites seemed " forced " . Ed Lewis of IGN said that the " saving grace " of the " Looney Tunes @-@ style repartee and sound effects " is that " it was done professionally and while it 's pretty silly if you listen to it , it doesn 't grate and get under the skin as other games can . " He added that the music was " bouncy and peppy and , once again , cartoony " . Steven Rodriguez of Nintendo World Report described the music and sound effects as " generic " and " plain " respectively , and noted that the best part of the game 's audio was " that sexy talking mask that gives you advice between races , but even he gets rather annoying . " 
 The Game Boy Advance version was reviewed positively . Frank Provo of GameSpot stated that " the characters aren 't nearly as popular as those in Nintendo 's Mario Kart game , but the deeper gameplay makes up for that to an extent . " Craig Harris of IGN criticized the patches of slowdown in the game , but thought that otherwise it " would be a close contender for best kart racer on the handheld . " Nintendo Power concluded that " although Crash Nitro Kart doesn 't bring anything new to the kart @-@ racing genre , it 's a fast and amusing play that Crash Bandicoot fans will enjoy . " 
 The N @-@ Gage version received middling reviews . Levi Buchanan of IGN , in a positive review , praised the game 's large selection of characters , tracks and gameplay modes . Ryan Davis of GameSpot commended the game for its fundamentally solid gameplay , smooth and sharp graphics and the amount of " stuff to do " , but stated that " the narrow field of vision has a dramatically negative effect on the whole experience , cross @-@ canceling many of the game 's positive traits . " Louis Bedigian of GameZone felt that " the variety of courses , power @-@ ups , and the decent sense of speed are not enough to make up for a camera , which literally makes you feel sick . " Justin Leeper of GameSpy criticized the <unk> framerate and tunnel vision of the screen and delivered a final message of " If the N @-@ Gage library was a classroom , then Crash Nitro Kart would be the cross @-@ eyed kid who eats paste and thinks the answer to every math problem is ' cat ' " . 
 = Beautiful ( Christina Aguilera song ) = 
 " Beautiful " is a song recorded by American singer Christina Aguilera for her fourth studio album , Stripped ( 2002 ) . It was released as the album 's second single on November 16 , 2002 . A pop ballad , " Beautiful " was written and produced by Linda Perry . Lyrically , it discusses inner beauty , as well as self @-@ esteem and insecurity issues . Aguilera commented that she put " her heart and her soul " into the track , which she felt represented the theme of Stripped . The song was later re @-@ recorded in an electronic style for her first greatest hits album Keeps Gettin ' Better : A Decade of Hits ( 2008 ) . 
 Upon its release , " Beautiful " received universal acclaim from music critics , who have ranked it among Aguilera 's strongest material . It won a Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance and was also nominated for Song of the Year at the 2004 ceremony . " Beautiful " was also a commercial success , topping the charts in Australia , Belgium , Canada , Ireland , New Zealand and the United Kingdom . The song peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 in the United States , where it was certified Gold for 500 @,@ 000 units shipped . 
 " Beautiful " has been widely embraced as an anthem by the LGBT community for its message of self @-@ empowerment and inner beauty . An accompanying music video was directed by Jonas Åkerlund , and earned Aguilera a GLAAD Media Award for its positive portrayal of gay and transgender people . In 2011 , UK LGBT rights organization Stonewall named " Beautiful " the most empowering song of the previous decade for gay , lesbian , and bisexual people . In 2009 , Rolling Stone and VH1 listed it as one of the best songs of the 2000s ( decade ) . The song is widely recognized as one of Aguilera 's signature songs and has been covered on numerous occasions and featured on several television shows . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 " Beautiful " was written and produced by Linda Perry . Aguilera recorded the song at two studios : The Enterprise Studios in Burbank , California , and Conway Recording Studios in Hollywood . Prior to the collaboration with Aguilera , Perry had written the song and originally wished to keep the " personal " record for her own singing career . Perry initially previewed the song for Pink during the recording sessions of Pink 's second studio album Missundaztood ( 2001 ) , on which Perry is a producer . However , after hearing Aguilera sing the song at Perry 's house to " break the ice " , Perry was very impressed and allowed Aguilera to include the track on her then upcoming record Stripped , effectively deciding not to pursue a solo career . The choice resulted in a feud between Pink against Aguilera and Perry , with the former commenting that it was " annoying " for the latter to collaborate with artists " [ she ] didn 't like " . Perry later revealed to ASCAP , " When Christina came over to my house to start working , she asked me to play some songs to break the ice . [ ... ] I had a long conversation with my manager about it . We both decided to hear Christina sing it . We demoed the song with her singing it , and I was like , ' Wow ' . That rough vocal is what is out there on radio . It was that vocal that got her the song " . Perry 's wife Sara Gilbert confirmed on her show The Talk that the final version was " just a demo " and Aguilera wanted to rerecord the song which Perry denied the request because the song is supposed to be about imperfection and being vulnerable . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Beautiful " is a gentle pop ballad that discusses issues of self @-@ esteem and insecurity , promoting a message of self @-@ empowerment and embracing inner beauty . Larry Flick of Billboard added that the song talks about " overcoming life 's trials " , Chuck Taylor also of Billboard observed that it has a message of " holding oneself up against criticism from the outside , " and Todd Burns of Stylus noted that the song " also explores the main theme of the record , being stripped bare in front of the public . " Its instrumentation incorporates bass guitar , cello , drum kits , keyboards , piano , and violin . " Beautiful " was composed in the key of E ♭ major and moving at a slow 76 beats per minute . Aguilera 's vocal range spans over two octaves from E ♭ 3 to G5 ; she uses several melismas in the song , fitting as many as seven notes in one syllable . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Beautiful " was released as the second single from Stripped . It was first sent to American contemporary hit and rhythmic radio stations on November 16 , 2002 . The song was later released as a CD single on January 27 , February 24 , and February 25 , 2003 , in Germany , the United Kingdom , and France , respectively . Also on February 25 , a digital remix EP of " Beautiful " was released worldwide . Two days later , the single was released as a maxi single in Canada . On March 11 , 2003 , the single was released as a CD in the United States . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Upon its release , " Beautiful " received universal acclaim from music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic complimented the song for not following the " club and street @-@ level R & B , which fit her poorly " . Similarly , a reviewer from Billboard recognized " Beautiful " as a " single @-@ worthy ballad " from a record of " pleasantly surprising depth " . In a separate review , Chuck Taylor from the same magazine labeled the song " breathtaking " , and recognized its melody and lyrical message . Entertainment Weekly 's David Browne called the song one of Stripped 's " moments " , noting that it is " more restrained " than the other songs from the album . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine commented that the collaboration with Linda Perry found Aguilera " truly naked " and reflective of the album 's title . Stylus Magazine 's Todd Burns gave Stripped a negative review , but complimented " Beautiful " for " tastefully [ reining ] in Aguilera 's frequent vocal acrobatics " . Jane Dark of The Village Voice compared the song to the works of Mariah Carey " made back when she was a natural " . In contrast , Amanda Murray from Sputnikmusic criticized the " platitude @-@ drenched " lyrics but praised the overall production . At the 2004 Grammy Awards , " Beautiful " won the award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance and was nominated for Song of the Year . 
 " Beautiful " is considered to be Aguilera 's signature song and has been recognized as being among her strongest tracks . The song was recognized as her third @-@ best single by Rachel <unk> of Wetpaint , who commented that " Xtina 's inspiration ballad motivated an entire generation " . PopCrush 's Alexandra Capotorto named it as her favorite track by Aguilera , opining that the song is " definitely one of the most memorable and greatest Christina Aguilera songs to date " . Rolling Stone ranked " Beautiful " at number 52 on their list of the 100 best songs of the 2000s ( decade ) , elaborating that it is " delivered with full @-@ fathom force by the bottle @-@ blond with the biggest voice " . Similarly , VH1 positioned the track at number 18 on their list of the 100 greatest songs of the past decade . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Beautiful " was quickly released after the underperformance of the album 's first single , " Dirrty " . It achieved international success and was the highest @-@ charting single from Stripped in several territories . The song peaked at number 2 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and became Aguilera 's longest @-@ charting solo track , spending twenty @-@ seven weeks on the chart . The song additionally topped Billboard Adult Contemporary , Hot Dance Club Songs , and Pop Songs component charts . By March 2006 , it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies .. As of August 2014 , the single has sold 1 @,@ 512 @,@ 000 digital copies in that country . In Canada , the song reached number 1 on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 . 
 " Beautiful " proved similarly successful in Europe , where it peaked within the top five of most markets in which it was released . Spending a total of fifty @-@ one weeks on the UK Singles Chart , the song eventually peaked atop the chart ; it was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry . It peaked at numbers 3 and 18 on the Belgian Ultratop 50 and Ultratop 40 , respectively . In Germany , the song peaked at number 9 after charting for thirteen weeks on the Media Control Charts . However , " Beautiful " proved less successful on the French Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique , where it reached number 27 . In the Pacific regions , the song failed to chart in any Asian markets , but maintained a strong performance in Oceania . It peaked at number 1 on the Australian ARIA Charts , where it spent a total of thirteen weeks . " Beautiful " was later certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 70 @,@ 000 units . The song also charted on the New Zealand Top 40 Singles Chart for twenty @-@ three weeks , during which period it peaked at number 1 . After passing 7 @,@ 500 shipments , " Beautiful " was recognized with a gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Beautiful " was directed by Jonas Åkerlund and premiered on December 9 , 2002 . It opens with Aguilera speaking the line " Don 't look at me " , followed by scenes of her singing alone in a room intercut with self @-@ image @-@ related sequences of other people . An anorexic girl examines herself in a mirror , eventually punching through it ; a thin teenage boy stands lifting weights in a room plastered with images of bodybuilders ; and an African @-@ American girl rips out pages of women 's magazines including photos of only white women and throws them into a fire . In one sequence , a girl is physically bullied by several peers , and in another , a goth man sits at the back of a bus while several people get up and move . The video also touches on LGBT issues ; one scene features a gay couple , portrayed by Jordan Shannon and Justin Croft , kissing on a bench and ignoring the stares of people who pass them . Another shows a transgender person , played by Robert Sherman , putting on makeup , a wig , and women 's clothing . The music video debuted at number 2 on Total Request Live , spending a total of fifty days on the chart and retiring at number 6 . It topped MuchMusic 's Countdown for two consecutive weeks and remained on the countdown for fifteen weeks . The video received a Special Recognition award , presented by David LaChapelle , from the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation at its 14th GLAAD Media Awards . After an a cappella performance of the song , Aguilera stated in her acceptance speech that " this song is definitely a universal message that everybody can relate to – anyone that 's been discriminated against or <unk> , unappreciated or disrespected just because of who you are . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Recognized as one of her signature songs , Aguilera has performed " Beautiful " at a number of venues and events . During the promotion of Stripped , she appeared on VH1 's Big In Awards , Top of the Pops , and the 46th Grammy Awards . The song was included on the setlists of The Stripped Tour , the Justified and Stripped Tour in 2003 and the Back to Basics Tour in 2006 . " Beautiful " was also sung on the television special VH1 Storytellers in 2010 . " Beautiful " has also been performed on charity events and <unk> , such as CNN Heroes introduced by Anderson Cooper saying , " It 's my pleasure to introduce a performer with unparalleled range and passion ; her song is a reminder that out of great trials and tribulations we can all create something beautiful " ; Justin Timberlake & Friends in 2010 , and Hurricane Sandy : Coming Together in 2012 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 " Beautiful " has been embraced by the LGBT community as an anthem . On October 5 , 2010 , several hundred people gathered in front of the Massachusetts State House and sang " Beautiful " as a tribute to the teenagers who had committed suicide due to anti @-@ gay bullying during the previous months . In March 2011 , the Columbus Children 's Choir and Columbus Gay Men 's Chorus joined to perform the song as a contribution to the It Gets Better Project . UK LGBT rights charity Stonewall named " Beautiful " the most empowering song of the decade for lesbian , gay and bisexual people ; media personality and Stonewall contributor Paul Gambaccini called the song " a major achievement that has inspired millions of young people around the world . " The result is based on the choice from 1 @,@ 007 readers . Aguilera commented of the song 's reception , " I cannot express in words how much the LGBT community means to me . On my darkest day their support lifts me up . I feel honored that some of my songs become anthems to them as well . " 
 = = = Cover versions = = = 
 Since its release , " Beautiful " has been covered by many performers . In 2003 , indie rock band Clem Snide released the song as part of their A Beautiful EP recording . Kidz Bop covered the original version for Kidz Bop 4 in 2003 , and later recorded a dance edit three years later for Kidz Bop 6 . Kenny G and Chaka Khan performed the song for the former 's 2003 project At Last ... The Duets Album . In 2004 , it appears on the French girl band L5 's live album Le Live , recorded during their concert tour in 2003 . In 2012 David Archuleta included his rendition on his fifth studio album Begin . Other performers that have recorded their own versions of the song are G4 in 2005 , Girl Authority in 2006 , The Lemonheads in 2009 , Zebrahead in 2009 , The <unk> Project in 2010 , Insane Clown Posse in 2012 , Me First and the Gimme Gimmes in 2014 , and Jordan Smith in 2016 . Many performers have also played " Beautiful " live on shows and concerts . British rock band The Zutons performed the song on their BBC Radio 1 Live Launch show , on May 28 , 2008 ; this version of the song was later released as part of the compilation album Radio 1 's Live Lounge – Volume 3 . In 2011 , child singer Savannah Robinson performed the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , and in 2012 American singer Kelly Clarkson sang " Beautiful " during her Stronger Tour , by audience request . Other notable performers that have covered the song are Gloria Gaynor , Jason Mraz , Brett Anderson , and The All @-@ American Rejects . 
 The song has also been performed by contestants on televised talent competitions . In 2003 , Alex Parks , the eventual winner of the first season of Fame Academy , covered the song on the series and re @-@ recorded a version for her debut studio album Introduction . In 2007 , <unk> Fernández sang " Beautiful " during the inaugural season of Factor X in Spain . In 2010 , Sally Chatfield chose the song during the second season of the Australian version of The X Factor . The following year , Aguilera performed the song alongside her finalist Beverly McClellan on the first season finale of The Voice . The following week , it debuted at number 74 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and peaked at number 52 on the Hot Digital Songs diagram with first @-@ week sales of 42 @,@ 000 downloads on the iTunes Store . Later in 2011 , both Janet Devlin and Little Mix covered the song during the eighth series of The X Factor in the United Kingdom . Additionally , cover versions of the song have been featured on scripted television series such as <unk> Farm , Glee , House , Smash , and Orange Is the New Black . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording locations 
 Mixed at The Enterprise Studios , Burbank , CA 
 Engineered at Mad Dog Studios , Burbank , CA 
 Additional recording at The Enterprise Studios , Burbank , CA 
 Mastered at Bernie Grundman Mastering 
 Personnel 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Elvis Is Back ! = 
 Elvis Is Back ! is the tenth studio album by Elvis Presley . It was released on RCA Victor Records in mono and stereo in April 1960 . Recorded over two sessions in March and April , the album marked Presley 's return to recording after his discharge from the U.S. Army . 
 In 1957 , as Presley 's fame was soaring , he received a draft notice from the Memphis Draft Board , but was given a deferment so he could finish his latest film production , King Creole . During Presley 's two @-@ year military service in Germany , RCA Victor and Paramount Pictures progressively released material he had completed prior to enlistment . During his last months in the Army , Presley experimented with new sounds and worked on further improving his performance . He also prepared material for his first session in Nashville , which was scheduled to take place upon his return . Presley returned to the United States on March 2 , 1960 . The singer reunited with his original band The Blue Moon Boys , excepting bassist Bill Black . The first session was held on March 20 – 21 and the second session was held on April 3 – 4 , completing the album . 
 Elvis Is Back ! topped the UK Albums Chart and reached number two in Billboard 's Top LP 's . Initially , the release received mixed reviews , but over subsequent years its critical reception became progressively more positive . The album was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America in 1999 . 
 = = Background and Army years = = 
 Following his third and last appearance on the Ed Sullivan Show , Presley received a notice from the Memphis draft board on January 8 , 1957 . The board announced his 1A classification and his possible draft before the end of the year . During the first half of 1957 , Presley had three number one hits with " Too Much " , " All Shook Up " , and " ( Let Me Be Your ) Teddy Bear " . His second film , Loving You , opened on July 30 to box office success . His Christmas album was released on October 15 and his third film , Jailhouse Rock , opened on October 17 . 
 On December 20 , Presley received his draft notice . He was granted a deferment so he could to finish the forthcoming film King Creole , which had already received an investment of $ 350 @,@ 000 from Paramount Pictures and producer Hal Wallis . At the beginning of 1958 , Presley 's single " Don 't " topped the charts . 
 Presley was inducted into the Army on March 24 , 1958 . Soon after starting basic training at Fort Hood , Texas , he received a visit from Eddie Fadal , a businessman he had met on tour in January 1956 . According to Fadal , Presley " firmly believed " his career was finished . After completing training , he joined the 3rd Armored Division in Friedberg , Germany , on October 1 . 
 Media reports echoed Presley 's concerns about his career , but RCA producer Steve Sholes and Freddy Bienstock of Hill and Range had carefully prepared for his two @-@ year absence . Prepared with unreleased material , they kept up a stream of regular , successful releases . Between his induction and discharge , Presley had ten top 40 hits , including " Wear My Ring Around Your Neck " , the best @-@ selling " Hard Headed Woman " , and " One Night " in 1958 , and " ( Now and Then There 's ) A Fool Such as I " and the number one hit " A Big Hunk o ' Love " in 1959 . RCA also released four albums compiling old material during this period , most successfully Elvis ' Golden Records ( 1958 ) ( which rose to third position on the LP chart ) and 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Elvis Fans Can 't Be Wrong . 
 = = Return to music = = 
 During his final months in the Army , Presley started to experiment with new material and thinking ahead to his anticipated return to recording . For his first scheduled recording session , Presley considered The Four Fellow 's " Soldier Boy " , the Golden Gate Quartet 's " I Will Be Home Again " , The Drifters ' " Such a Night " and Jesse Stone 's " Like a Baby " . His friend Charlie Hodge taught Presley techniques to improve his breathing and expand his range . For inspiration , Presley used Roy Hamilton 's " I Believe " and his version of " Unchained Melody " , the traditional Irish song " Danny Boy " , and Tony Martin 's " There 's No Tomorrow " ( an English adaptation of " ’ O sole mio " ) . Presley also studied the phrasing and notes of records by The <unk> and the Mills Brothers . By the end of his time in Germany , Presley had added a full octave to his vocal range . 
 Presley returned to the United States on March 2 , 1960 , and was honorably discharged with the rank of sergeant on March 5 . While Presley was in Germany , manager Colonel Tom Parker negotiated new terms with RCA Victor for Presley to fulfill his contractual obligations with film soundtracks . Parker also obtained an increase in Presley 's salary and a profit share from producer Wallis , and negotiated an appearance on The Frank Sinatra Show . Meanwhile , to assure publishing royalties , Bienstock commissioned new lyrics for " O Sole Mio " since the tune was already in the public domain . 
 = = Recording = = 
 On March 20 , Parker sent a chartered Greyhound bus to transport Presley and his entourage from Memphis , Tennessee to Nashville . The session personnel consisted of guitarist Scotty Moore , drummer D.J. Fontana , pianist Floyd Cramer , guitarist Hank Garland , bassist Bobby Moore , percussionist Buddy Harman and the backing group The Jordanaires . Presley 's original bassist Bill Black declined to join the sessions as he was enjoying success with the Bill Black Combo . To prevent possible disruption by fans , the musicians were initially told they were going to play on a Jim Reeves session . RCA executives Sholes and Bill Bullock were joined in the control booth by Parker , his assistant Tom Diskin , A & R head Chet Atkins , engineer Bill Porter and Hill and Range 's Bienstock . 
 RCA 's Studio B had recently been equipped with a new three @-@ track recorder . To further improve the recording of Presley 's voice , Porter had Telefunken U @-@ 47 microphones placed in the studio . The U @-@ 47 was the first condenser microphone that could switch between omnidirectional and cardioid patterns . The microphone could be used for vocals , instruments and full area coverage . The first song recorded was Otis Blackwell 's " Make Me Know It " , which was mastered in nineteen takes . " Soldier Boy " was later recorded in fifteen takes , followed by the non @-@ album cuts " Stuck on You " and " Fame and Fortune " . The last song recorded during the March session was a non @-@ album cut , " A Mess of Blues " . A new session was arranged for April . Presley then left for Miami , Florida , where he taped The Frank Sinatra Timex Show : Welcome Home Elvis . 
 The original musicians returned to the studio on the evening of April 3 ; they were joined by saxophonist Boots Randolph . Presley started the session with " Fever " , accompanied only by the bass and drums . He followed with the reworded version of " O Sole Mio " , now titled " It 's Now or Never " . After Presley failed several times to achieve the full voice ending of the song , Porter offered to splice it for him . Presley refused and tried the song until he archived the desired ending . " Girl Next Door Went A @-@ Walking " , was recorded in ten takes , followed by " Thrill of Your Love " . The non @-@ album cut " Are You Lonesome Tonight " was followed by " I Will Be Home Again " — a duet with Hodge . For the last song of the session , Lowell <unk> 's " Reconsider Baby " , Presley played the lead using his Gibson Super 400 guitar . 
 = = Content = = 
 Elvis is Back ! represented a new sound for Presley ; it moved him further toward pop music , a direction he continued to take over much of the decade . The album features a mixture of genres , including rock , rhythm and blues and pop ballads . Critics generally agreed that Presley had acquired a " deeper , harder voice quality " , and said his interpretations were " increasingly sophisticated " . The album includes a variety of material ; Presley and the session musicians , known as the " The Nashville A @-@ Team " , had the benefit of recording equipment that was state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art for its time . Elvis is Back ! was the first Presley album to be released in stereo . The album 's front cover shows Presley standing in front of a blue stage curtain , dressed in an Army trench coat and smiling as he glances to his left . The back cover features an image of Presley grinning ; he is dressed in an Army regulation fatigue jacket and cap . The inside of the gatefold cover features fifteen photographs of Presley taken at various times during his Army service . 
 The album contains twelve tracks ; it opens with " Make Me Know It " . The second track is a cover of " Fever " , which Presley based on Peggy Lee 's version , although his recording incorporates finger @-@ snapping and the sounds of the two percussionists are divided between the two channels of the stereo mix . On " The Girl of My Best Friend " , Presley is supported with doo @-@ wop backing vocals by The Jordanaires . The fourth track is " I Will Be Home Again " , a slow ballad performed as a duet with Charlie Hodge . The fifth track is " Dirty , Dirty Feeling " , a song characterized by its " raunchy rock sound " and satirical humor ; it was written by Leiber and Stoller , and had been previously discarded from the soundtrack of King Creole . The final track on side one is " Thrill of Your Love " , on which Presley is accompanied by Cramer on the piano . 
 The second side opens with " Soldier Boy " , which featuring a change of key in the chorus . This is followed by " Such a Night " , which has saxophone accompaniment by Randolph . The next track is the blues number " It Feels So Right " , which features lead guitar and heavy use of percussion . The following track is " Girl Next Door Went A @-@ Walking " , which was brought in by Moore . The album closes with the rhythm and blues songs " Like a Baby " and " Reconsider Baby " . Presley played the lead guitar on both tracks , the latter of which features long saxophone and piano solos . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The first single from Elvis Is Back ! , " Stuck on You " , was released two days after its recording with " Fame and Fortune " on the B @-@ side , attracting 1 @.@ 4 million advanced orders . The pre @-@ printed single sleeve said , " Elvis ' 1st New Recording For His 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Fans All Over The World " . It was the first Presley single to be released in stereo . 
 Elvis Is Back ! was released on April 8 , 1960 , in stereo and monaural versions . The album reached number two on Billboard 's Top LP 's and topped the UK Albums Chart . Despite this , its commercial performance was a disappointment , with fewer than 300 @,@ 000 copies sold in the United States . 
 = = = Initial reviews = = = 
 Billboard magazine said , " Elvis is back and singing better than ever in the rock and roll style he made famous " . The New York Times called the record " drab and lackluster " . Referencing Presley 's change of style , High Fidelity magazine said : " Presley obviously finds it hard to record his old gusto ... Perhaps [ the recordings ] are the first attempts to master new styles " . Hi @-@ Fi Stereo Review magazine also remarked on the change in Presley 's style , calling the album " musically schizoid " despite deeming the overall recording " good " . The review said Presley 's ballads were " the worst he 's ever made " but lauded " his former vitality " in the " commercial rockabilly romps " . 
 = = = Retrospective reviews = = = 
 In his review for AllMusic , Bruce Eder wrote that the album " shows a mature Elvis Presley [ who ] displayed the rich , deep vocalizing that would challenge critics ' expectations of Elvis Presley playing rhythm guitar throughout " . Eder concluded : " [ Elvis is Back ! ] comes off better than on any of his other albums since arriving at RCA " . Will Hermes of Rolling Stone praised its " wildly varied material , revelatory singing , impeccable stereo sound " . Writing for Rough Guides in 2004 , Paul Simpson commented : " Among the 1800 or so records in Elvis 's collection at Graceland is a copy of Elvis Is Back ! , almost white from the number of times it was played . You can understand why this would be his favourite album . " Simpson admired Presley 's blues singing on " Like a Baby " and " Reconsider Baby " , and added , " it 's hard to believe that this commitment and exhilaration was to be heard only fitfully for most of the 1960s , often on songs buried on B @-@ sides or as bonuses on dodgy soundtrack albums . " 
 PopMatters ' Steve Horowitz said the album helped Presley grow from " teen idol " to " adult entertainer " . Horowitz continued : " Presley ’ s voice was still strong and clear . He could belt out the blues one minute ... and then sound sophisticated the next ... without changing character . " The Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer also gave a favorable review , saying , " Elvis is Back ! finds [ Presley ] demonstrating both versatility and an affinity for handling a range of song styles " . 
 Writing in The Daily Telegraph in January 2015 , Neil McCormick included Elvis Is Back ! among the artist 's essential works . McCormick wrote : " It is almost universally accepted that Elvis , who never saw active service , ' died ' in the army . Yet Elvis Is Back … is arguably Presley 's masterpiece , in which he tackles ballads , blues , rock , pop and gospel with a quality of control that somehow makes his innate sensuality even more potent . " Simon Gage of Britain 's Daily Express described the album as " [ Presley 's ] finest " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Elvis is Back ! was certified Gold on July 15 , 1999 , by the Recording Industry Association of America . Critic Robert Dimery included the album in his book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . RCA reissued the original album on Compact Disc in 1990 , and in 1999 re @-@ released it with bonus tracks . In 2005 Elvis is Back ! was reissued on the Follow That Dream label in a 2 @-@ disc CD collection . This edition contains previously unreleased outtakes of the studio album and combines all previously released versions of the masters and outtakes . Legacy Recordings released a remastered version of the album together with Something for Everybody in 2011 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Original release = = = 
 = = = 1999 reissue bonus tracks = = = 
 = = = 2005 Follow That Dream reissue = = = 
 = = = 2011 Legacy edition reissue = = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Cyclone Lin ( 2009 ) = 
 Tropical Cyclone Lin ( RSMC Nadi designation : 14F , JTWC Designation : 15P ) formed on March 31 , 2009 as a tropical depression within a monsoon trough to the northwest of Fiji . Over the next few days , the depression moved towards the southeast through the Fijian archipelago until late on April 3 , when the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in Nadi reported that the depression had intensified into a category one cyclone , and named it Lin . The JTWC did not start issuing warnings on Lin until the next day as it was approaching its 10 @-@ minute peak windspeeds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) and 1 @-@ minute peak windspeeds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) . Cyclone Lin then reached its peak windspeeds early on April 5 as it passed directly over Tonga . Later that day as it approached the edge of RSMC Nadi 's area of responsibility Lin started to go through an extratropical transition with the JTWC issuing their last advisory on it . As it crossed into TCWC Wellington 's area of responsibility the cyclone was declared extratropical , however TCWC Wellington kept issuing warnings on Lin until late on April 8 . 
 In Tonga initial reports , suggested that only vegetation had been impacted . However , it was later reported that power lines had been knocked down by high winds and the heavy rains triggered minor flooding in Nuku 'alofa . Power stations in Tongatapu were also forced to close to protect the system . No one was injured by the storm but there were reports of significant crop losses . The Tongan Meteorological Service also reported that about $ 2 @,@ 000 2009 TOP , ( $ 1 @,@ 000 2009 USD ) worth of damage had been done to property owned by the service . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 During April 1 , RSMC Nadi reported that Tropical Disturbance 14F , had developed along an active monsoon trough to the north of Fiji . During the next day the disturbance gradually developed into a tropical depression , as it moved eastwards and interacted with a shallow tropical disturbance that was located to the east of 14F . The disturbance was subsequently absorbed by 14F ’ s circulation early on April 3 , while the system was located between Tonga and Fiji . Overall organization at this time was still poor with convection struggling to consolidate under shear and diurnal influences . Overnight of the 3rd , though , convection erupted over the centre with the primary band to the east wrapping tightly around the centre . On re @-@ analysis , <unk> attained cyclone status around <unk> UTC while located to the north @-@ northwest of Nukualofa and gradually accelerating towards the southeast . Through April 4 , the cyclone moved into minimal shear with good outflow channels aloft . 12 hours later , at <unk> UTC , Lin was upgraded to a storm with 50 knots close to the centre . The cyclone intensified further under favourable conditions and reached a peak intensity of 60 knots while located about 15 nautical miles south @-@ southeast of Nukualofa . As it left Tonga , interaction with drier air and shear increased . This was aided by an approaching upper @-@ trough from the west . At <unk> UTC , intensity was reduced to 45 knots with further weakening anticipated due to stronger shear and cooler waters . Wellington took over warnings for the cyclone from <unk> UTC and downgraded Lin to an extra @-@ tropical system in their first warning . TCWC Wellington subsequently continued to monitor the system until it was last noted on April 8 . 
 = = = Differences among warning centers = = = 
 The Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in Nadi , Fiji uses the Australian Tropical Cyclone Intensity Scale which is based on 10 @-@ minute sustained winds and three second gusts for its tropical cyclone tracking information , while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center uses 1 @-@ minute sustained winds . The conversion factor between the two is 1 @.@ 14 . RSMC Nadi 's peak intensity for Lin was 110 km / h , ( 70 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained , or 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) 1 @-@ minute sustained . The JTWC 's peak intensity for Lin was 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) 1 @-@ minute sustained , or 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Late on April 2 , RSMC Nadi reported that a tropical cyclone alert had been issued for Wallis and Futuna and for the whole of Tonga this came as the tropical depression was located about 500 km ( 310 mi ) to the west of Nukualofa . Early the next day RSMC Nadi reported that a tropical cyclone alert had been declared for Vanua Levu , the Lau Islands , Taveuni , as well as other nearby islands , while later that morning Wallis and Futuna were placed under a tropical cyclone warning . Later that day RSMC Nadi reported that Northern Tonga had now been placed under a tropical cyclone warning , while the tropical cyclone alert for Vanua Levu and the cyclone warning for Wallis had been canceled . Later that day as the depression had been relocated and had been named as Cyclone Lin , RSMC Nadi canceled the tropical cyclone alert for Taveuni , and other nearby islands as well as the tropical cyclone warning for Futuna . RSMC Nadi also reported at this time that a tropical cyclone gale warning had been declared for the Lau group and the whole of Tonga . During the next morning the tropical cyclone warnings for the Lau group and the Niuas in Tonga were canceled , while the gale warnings for Tonga were upgraded to storm warnings . Over the next 24 hours the remaining warnings for Tonga were gradually canceled , with the last warning being issued at 1100 UTC on April 5 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 On April 4 , Lin passed directly over Tonga with winds up to 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) and heavy rains . Initial reports of damage stated that only vegetation had been impacted . However , later reports stated that power lines had been knocked down by high winds and the heavy rains triggered minor flooding in Nuku 'alofa . Some houses lost their rain gutters from the storm . Due to strong winds , officials were forced to shut down power stations in Tongatapu to protect the system . Most of the power lines in Tonga were either downed or damaged by the storm and numerous trees fell across the island . Several roads were also blocked by downed trees and billboards were broken . No one was injured by the storm but there were reports of significant crop losses . 
 The Tongan Meteorological Service reported that some of its property and equipment had been damaged . The property damage had an approximate value of about $ 2 @,@ 000 ( 2009 TOP , $ 1 @,@ 000 2009 USD ) . This included a Stevenson screen , office guttering , a HF radio antennae , signal processor , and satellite receiver . They also reported that the National weather forecasting center in <unk> ’ <unk> had experienced power failure on April 4 at 1600 UTC ; for this reason the center operated using a small portable generator until early the next day when they stopped issuing warnings as Lin was no longer a threat to Tonga . Power was eventually restored later that day . 
 = Bachata Number 1 's , Vol . 3 = 
 Bachata # 1 's , Vol . 3 is a compilation album released by Machete Music on March 30 , 2010 . The album includes tracks recorded by several artists from the bachata genre , such as Aventura , Héctor Acosta , Xtreme , Ivy Queen , Grupo Rush , Andy Andy , Carlos & Alejandra , and Marcy Place . It also features select bachata versions of songs by reggaetón and Latin pop artists including R.K.M & Ken @-@ Y , Alejandro Fernández , Luis Fonsi , and Cristian Castro . 
 Upon release , the album peaked at number forty @-@ one on the Billboard Latin Albums chart and number four on the Billboard Tropical Albums chart . It became the twentieth best @-@ selling Tropical Album of 2010 . Several songs included on the album were released as singles from their respective parent albums including the opening " El Perdedor " by Aventura , " No Me Doy Por Vencido " by Luis Fonsi , and " Dime " by Ivy Queen . The fourth volume in the Bachata # 1 's series was released in 2011 . 
 = = Background and repertoire = = 
 The Bachata # 1 's series are several compilation albums of various artists centered on the genre of bachata . The first two in the series were released in 2008 and 2009 , respectively . Bachata # 1 's , Vol . 3 was released by Machete Music digitally and physically on March 30 , 2010 in the United States . " El Perdedor " , written by Anthony " Romeo " Santos and performed by Aventura , was released as the third and final single from the group 's second live album , <unk> Live ( 2006 ) . The song peaked at number five on the Billboard Latin Songs chart , topping both the Billboard Tropical Songs and Billboard Latin Rhythm Songs charts . The bachata @-@ infused @-@ R & B number has been named one of their biggest hits along with " Los <unk> " , " Un Beso " , and " Mi <unk> " among others . 
 The second track , " Se Me Va La Voz " by Mexican singer Alejandro Fernández was released as the lead single from his fourteenth studio album Dos <unk> : Evolución ( 2009 ) . It was named the highlight of the album by Jason Birchmeier of Allmusic . It topped the Billboard Latin Songs , Billboard Latin Pop Songs , and Billboard Tropical Songs charts . The bachata version , which is included on this release , features Héctor Acosta " El <unk> " . " No Me Doy Por Vencido " is originally from Puerto Rican singer Luis Fonsi 's seventh studio album Palabras Del <unk> ( 2008 ) , which includes " unexpected musical styles " including the ranchera accents that can be found on " No Me Doy Por Vencido " and its " breathtaking chorus " . It topped the Billboard Latin Songs , Tropical Songs , and Latin Pop Songs charts . Xtreme performs " <unk> y <unk> " from their second studio album Chapter Dos ( 2008 ) . It , along with the album , takes influence of contemporary hip @-@ hop and R & B. " Dime " was written by Puerto Rican singer Ivy Queen along with the producers Monserrate & DJ Urba . It was serviced to radio as the lead single from Queen 's first live album , Ivy Queen 2008 World Tour LIVE ! ( 2008 ) in both bachaton and bachata versions . It peaked at number eight on the Billboard Latin Songs chart , number four on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart , and number one on the Billboard Latin Rhythm Songs chart . It spent seven consecutive weeks atop the chart . 
 Héctor Acosta 's " Sin Perdon " originates from his second studio album <unk> / <unk> ( 2008 ) . It reached twenty @-@ six on the Billboard Latin Songs chart , however topped the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . " Jasmine " is performed Dominican bachata group Grupo Rush 's , which is composed of Damian , <unk> , Lenny , and Khriz . It is a single from their debut album We On Fire ( 2009 ) . The song became a top ten hit on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . Dominican Bachata singer Andy Andy performs " Agua <unk> " which is from his seventh studio album Placer y <unk> ( 2009 ) . It reached number eleven on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . Puerto Rican reggaetón duo R.K.M & Ken @-@ Y recorded " <unk> Del Pecado " in bachata in collaboration with Héctor Acosta , who makes his third appearance on this release . It was previously featured on the duo 's second studio effort , The Royalty : La <unk> ( 2008 ) . Carlos & Alejandra 's " <unk> Duele " appears on their debut album La <unk> ( 2009 ) and the tenth track on this release . It reached number six on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . " El <unk> Soy Yo " by Cristian Castro is from the album of the same name . It reached the top ten of both the Billboard Latin Songs and Tropical Songs chart . " Dame Un Chance ( Nena ) " is performed by urban bachata group Marcy Place from their debut album B From Marcy Place ( 2008 ) . It peaked at number twenty @-@ three on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . 
 = = Reception and commercial performance = = 
 Upon release , the album debuted at number forty @-@ five on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart for the week of April 17 , 2010 . Sales increased slightly and the album rose two positions to number forty @-@ one for the week of April 24 , 2010 It spent an additional week at that position before falling to number fifty @-@ six , two weeks later on the issue date May 15 , 2010 . In its sixth week , the album again fell to number seventy . The recording ended its reign on the chart a week later at number seventy @-@ four for the issue dated May 29 , 2010 . 
 On the Billboard Tropical Albums chart , the album debuted at number five behind Aventura 's The Last , El Gran Combo de Puerto Rico 's Sin Salsa No Hay Paraiso , Prince Royce 's debut studio album and <unk> by Luis Enrique for the week of April 17 , 2010 . In its second week , it rose to number four replacing <unk> . It remained at the number four spot for four weeks . It spent nine weeks within the top ten of the chart . Bachata # 1 's , Vol . 3 became the twentieth best @-@ selling Tropical Album of 2010 . Five of the songs included on this release are number @-@ one singles , these include " El Perdedor " , " Se Me Va La Voz " , " No Me Doy Por Vencido " , " Dime " , and " Sin Perdon " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Track listing adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Campaign of Grodno = 
 The Campaign of Grodno was a plan developed by Johann Patkul and Otto Arnold von Paykull during the Swedish invasion of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , a part of the Great Northern War . Its purpose was to crush Charles XII 's army with overwhelming force in a combined offensive of Russian and Saxon troops . The campaign , executed by Peter I of Russia and Augustus II of Saxony , began in July 1705 and lasted almost a year . In divided areas the allies would jointly strike the Swedish troops occupied in Poland , in order to neutralize the influence the Swedes had in the Polish politics . However , the Swedish forces under Charles XII successfully outmaneuvered the allies , installed a Polish king in favor of their own and finally won two decisive victories at Grodno and Fraustadt in 1706 . This resulted in the Treaty of Altranstädt ( 1706 ) in which Augustus renounced his claims to the Polish throne , broke off his alliance with Russia , and established peace between Sweden and Saxony . 
 The campaign led to Sweden gaining control over the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , until the Swedish defeat at Battle of Poltava and the Treaty of Thorn ( 1709 ) which restored the Russian @-@ backed Augustus to the Polish throne and forced the remaining Swedes out of the Commonwealth . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1700 Sweden was attacked by a coalition of Saxony , Russia , and Denmark – Norway . Saxony , under Augustus II , invaded Swedish oversea dominions in Livonia and quickly attacked the city of Riga . Meanwhile , Frederick IV of Denmark attacked the Swedish allied duchies of Holstein and Gottorp in order to secure his rear , before commencing with the planned invasion of Scania , which had been previously annexed by Sweden in the Treaty of Roskilde in 1658 . A short time later , Russia under Peter I swept into Swedish Ingria and besieged the strategic city of Narva . Unprepared for these developments , the Swedes were forced into a war on three fronts . 
 = = = First year = = = 
 Despite their significant military advantage the allied armies encountered immediate setbacks . Denmark – Norway was quickly knocked out of the war by a bold Swedish landing on Humlebæk resulting in the Peace of <unk> . After this development , the Swedish army under Charles XII was free to sail east across the Baltic sea to tackle the remaining opponents , Russia and Saxony . In response to this threat , Augustus lifted the siege of Riga and marched back across the Düna river in order to observe the Swedish movements . Charles then decided to march against Peter I of Russia , who was besieging Narva , with the aim of saving the city . Shortly later the two armies met in the battle of Narva . This ended in a decisive Swedish victory which greatly crippled the Russian army , forcing them to abandon their campaign in Swedish territory and withdraw to Russia . 
 = = = Invasion of Poland = = = 
 Having secured two quick and decisive victories over his opponents which greatly increased his reputation , Charles marched against the Saxon forces in early 1701 . These were camped on the opposite bank of the Düna . The clash occurred in the battle of Düna , ending in another Swedish victory . However , the outcome was not as decisive as Charles had hoped for . A large part of Augustus ' army survived and marched into neutral Prussia . As a consequence , Charles was not able to capitalize on the previous Russian setback at Narva , but was forced to postpone the planned invasion . Instead he decided to chase the Saxon army into the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , where Augustus was also king . Thus far , technically , Poland @-@ Lithuania had stayed neutral in the conflict since Augustus began the war with Sweden in his capacity as Elector of Saxony rather than as king of Poland . Charles ' purpose was to remove Augustus from the Polish throne . The subsequent conflict became known as the Swedish invasion of Poland . 
 In 1702 , after having seized the Polish capital of Warsaw , Charles caught up and won a battle against Saxon and Polish armies at <unk> . Even though the Swedish victory was not decisive , factions within the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth began supporting the Swedish cause , in opposition to Augustus . This triggered the Polish civil war of 1704 @-@ 1706 . The reputation of Charles and his army grew and they soon took Kraków , the " second Polish capital " . Minor operations and skirmishes followed , as the Saxon and Polish – Lithuanian armies preferred to avoid facing the Swedes in direct battle . 
 After engagements at <unk> and Toruń in 1703 Augustus was finally forced to abdicate the Polish throne in 1704 , in favor of a monarch installed by the Swedes , Stanisław I Leszczyński . Charles and Leszczyński were supported by the Warsaw Confederation of Polish nobles . In opposition to these developments the Sandomierz Confederation was created by other nobles in support of Augustus . The latter could call on about 75 % of the military capacity of the Polish army . Some smaller engagements at Poznań , Lwów , Warsaw and <unk> followed in 1704 as a consequence of Augustus ' attempts to retake the throne . 
 = = The campaign = = 
 Up until early 1705 , Peter 's efforts were focused on Livonia and Ingria , and there were few direct confrontations against the Swedish main army in Poland . After the initial outcomes in the Polish theater however , Peter assembled his army closer to the Commonwealth in order to provide assistance to Augustus against Charles , and to put pressure on the local nobility in an attempt to restore Augustus to the Polish throne . The Swedish army in turn , spent the first half of the year close to Rawicz in order to secure the coronation of Stanisław Leszczyński . 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 The Russian – Saxon – Polish allies assembled their armies in Lithuania for a joint offensive against the Swedes . Their troops consisted of four contingents ; the main Russian army of 50 @,@ 000 men under Georg Benedict Ogilvy near Polotsk , another 8 @,@ 000 Russians and 10 @,@ 000 Lithuanians loyal to Augustus close to Vilnius , about 6 @,@ 000 Poles and 3 @,@ 500 Saxons under Otto Arnold von Paykull at Brest @-@ Litovsk and 20 @,@ 000 Cossacks under Ivan Mazepa in Volhynia . In Saxony close to 20 @,@ 000 men were recruited for the main Saxon army under Johann Matthias von der Schulenburg . In all , the allied forces enjoyed a massive advantage as their forces counted almost 120 @,@ 000 men against the 35 @,@ 000 Swedes and 10 @,@ 000 Poles and Lithuanians in Poland under Charles and the 6 @,@ 000 men in Courland under Adam Ludwig Lewenhaupt . 
 = = = Plan of attack = = = 
 In early March 1705 the Russian Field Marshal Boris Sheremetyev set up a meeting with the Saxon general Otto Arnold von Paykull in order to agree to a common course of action in the ensuing campaign . The basis for the strategy was a plan developed by Johann Patkul as early as 1703 , which envisioned a joint strike which would neutralize the Swedish <unk> von Paykull , inspired by Patkul 's blueprint , advocated it as a way to lure Charles and the main Swedish army out of Greater Poland eastward towards Brest @-@ Litovsk . This was to be accomplished by having the combined forces of the main Russian army under Ogilvy and von Paykull 's troops stationed at Brest , which would force Charles to meet them in battle . At the same time the main Saxon army would attack Charles from the rear by sweeping through Poland out of Saxony , ultimately catching the Swedish army exposed . The plan seemed rather daring to Patkul and he suggested that the allies should first crush Lewenhaupt 's army , before Ogilvy 's troops approached Charles . Otherwise Ogilvy 's rear would be threatened . A compromise was made between the two strategies and it was decided that Sheremetyev should engage Lewenhaupt at the same time as Ogilvy marched towards the strongly fortified city of Grodno . The belief was that there , behind fortifications , <unk> would be able to withstand Charles long enough for the main Saxon army to arrive from Kraków . Meanwhile , von Paykull would attack with his combined Saxon – Polish force towards Warsaw in order to interrupt the coronation of Stanisław I. 
 = = = Campaign begins = = = 
 The Saxon – Russian plans were put into action in early July as Sheremetyev began his march towards Lewenhaupt in Courland . The two armies met on July 26 , at the battle of <unk> where the Russians were defeated . Despite the outcome Lewenhaupt chose to withdraw back to Riga having suffered notable losses himself , leaving Courland open for Peter I to occupy with freshly arrived reinforcements . This worked in favor of the allies as the rear of Ogilvy 's army which was marching towards Grodno was now secured accordingly . 
 Only five days later , on July 31 , Paykull reached the outskirts of Warsaw with his army and in a surprise attack attempted to interrupt the coronation of Stanisław . In the ensuing battle of Warsaw the much smaller Swedish force under Carl Nieroth guarding the city won a decisive victory . Paykull was captured along with secret documents which informed the Swedes of a possible attack on Warsaw by a larger Russian army under Peter . 
 It now seems , as if the war will begin for real and have every Swede at once , by the great number of nations surrounding him , engrossed .... 
 After having received this information while at Rawicz , Charles struck camp on August 8 and marched closer to Warsaw in order to fully protect the city until the coronation of Leszczyński was completed . He left General Carl Gustaf Rehnskiöld with 10 @,@ 000 men at Poznań to guard against the main Saxon army under Schulenburg which threatened to enter Poland . On September 15 , Peter I seized the town of Mitau in Courland . However , the allied successes were limited as the coronation of Leszczyński as Stanisław I of Poland was completed on October 4 . 
 Later the same month , on October 25 , the allies made a quick push to destroy the bridge going over the Vistula , from Warsaw to Praga , in order to slow down the Swedish troop movements . However , the attack was repulsed by a handful of men . A month later , on November 28 , Sweden and Poland made peace in the Treaty of Warsaw through the Warsaw Confederation which increased Sweden 's position even further . Charles could now march , after having waited more than a year since Augustus was dethroned , against the Russian army under Ogilvy which had already by this time reached Grodno . 
 Being somewhat delayed , Charles broke up his winter quarters at <unk> on January 9 , 1706 and approached Grodno with the main Swedish army of 20 @,@ 000 men and the 10 @,@ 000 Poles and Lithuanians . A Russian army of 28 @,@ 000 men was stationed there . Bad weather prevented him from marching out earlier . <unk> seeking battle Charles seemed to walk straight into the trap the allies had set for him , according to their initial plan . In Saxony , Schulenburg still waited with his 20 @,@ 000 men to cross the Polish border and engage Rehnskiöld . He planned to move with his army as soon as he got word of Charles crossing the Vistula river . However , Charles commenced with a rapid winter march ; this was typical for the Swedes , dating back to the time of Gustavus Adolphus , but quite unusual for continental armies . This in turn surprised the allies as they believed Charles would not begin his march before spring . Having received word of his approach however , they considered three alternatives ; to meet Charles ' army in the open field , fortify in Grodno , or retreat . While they disagreed among themselves about their course of action Charles ' army appeared before the fortifications of Grodno on January 24 , after a quick march , forcing the allies to stay in the city . Prior to the Swedish arrival , Augustus who had thus far accompanied the Russian army , broke away with 5 @,@ 000 cavalry . He strove to increase his troops with another 3 @,@ 000 men before uniting forces with <unk> and the Saxon main army whose only obstacle in order to attack Charles ' army in the rear , accordingly , were the 10 @,@ 000 men under Rehnskiöld stationed at Poznań . 
 = = = Main confrontation = = = 
 After having scouted the Russian fortifications at Grodno , Charles realized a frontal assault would be impossible . At the same time , the Russians would not let themselves be provoked out into the field . Charles instead decided to try and starve them out by crossing the Neman river in January 15 , encircling the city from the east , forcing 15 @,@ 000 Russian cavalry to withdraw . In doing this he blocked the Russian communication lines , and also cut off their resources and supplies . Smaller Swedish parties were sent towards Vilnius in order to prevent General Christian Felix Bauer from supplying the trapped Russians . One of these , commanded by Jan Kazimierz Sapieha and Józef Potocki managed to beat 3 @,@ 000 Russians at the Battle of Olita on February 9 . Meanwhile , on February 7 Schulenburg had received word of Charles ' crossing of the Vistula , and begun his march with the Saxon army in order to beat Rehnskiöld 's smaller force near Poznań . Rehnskiöld , however , did not wait to be defeated and instead strove to engage Schulenburg before the arrival of <unk> 8 @,@ 000 men . By using a daring feint Rehnskiöld managed to lure Schulenburg into a more disadvantageous position near Wschowa ( Fraustadt ) , where the two armies clashed on February 13 . Here , the Swedish general won a decisive victory killing or capturing up to 75 % of Schulenburg 's force . Crippled by this setback , the main Saxon army had no choice but to retreat . The whole allied plan collapsed , as the opportunity for the allies to destroy Charles ' army in the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth with a sweeping movement from behind , vanished . 
 Shortly after , on February 22 , Carl Gustaf <unk> with 1 @,@ 000 dragoons fought off 7 @,@ 000 Poles and Russians under Christian Felix Bauer at <unk> near Vilnius , capturing and killing hundreds of allied troops . He also seized the Lithuanian capital and secured the Swedish connection to Livonia . The situation in Grodno soon became unsustainable for the Russians as the soldiers began to die of starvation and disease . In order to save his army , Peter I ordered his ally Ivan Mazepa and his Cossacks to carry out continuous harassing attacks on the back of the Swedes . Mazepa dispatched 14 @,@ 000 men for this purpose . However , the Swedes countered the move , sending large contingents of troops from Grodno to assault Mazepa 's nearby outposts . Mazepa sustained large casualties at both Nesvizh on March 23 , where Johan Reinhold <unk> and his 500 Swedish dragoons killed and captured around 700 out of 1 @,@ 200 Cossacks , and at Lyakhavichy in late March , where Carl Gustaf Creutz held 1 @,@ 400 men trapped inside the fortress . 
 On March 27 , the Russians received word about the earlier disastrous defeat at Wschowa . Peter I realized that the chances of a combined attack on Charles were now minimal . He ordered Ogilvy to attempt an escape from the encirclement at Grodno and a retreat towards Brest @-@ Litovsk . Ogilvy carried out the order on April 4 and managed to break out unseen with his reduced army , leaving 8 @,@ 000 men behind at Grodno who had died of starvation and sickness . Another 9 @,@ 000 men were lost during the retreat as the Swedes pursued the Russians as far as <unk> , where they finally gave up the chase . Mazepa met a similar defeat , as he sent 4 @,@ 700 men in an attempt to save the Cossacks trapped inside Lyakhavichy . Instead these were annihilated in the battle of <unk> on April 30 , after which the garrison in Lyakhavichy surrendered to the Swedes on May 12 and the fortress was destroyed . In total , almost 10 @,@ 000 Cossacks were killed , out of the initial 14 @,@ 000 who actively participated in the campaign . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Charles had won one of his greatest victories at Grodno 1706 , by simply cutting off his opponents ' resources and supplies . Later , in a letter to his ally Frederick IV of Denmark , Peter I confirmed losses of up to 17 @,@ 000 men during the encirclement and retreat . After his pursuit of the Russian army , having chased them out of Lithuania , Charles saw his opportunity to march back to Poland in order to meet up with Rehnskiöld , in preparation for the invasion of Saxony . He arrived there in August 5 . Meanwhile , Schulenburg did what he could in an attempt to increase the Saxon army to measure the expected invasion from the Swedes , something which was proven close to impossible after the battle of Fraustadt . In a last attempt to stop the invasion , Augustus II of Saxony offered Courland to Sweden and Lithuania to the newly crowned king Stanisław I of Poland . The generous offer was , however denied by Charles who crossed the Saxon border in September 5 . As Saxony was close to defenseless , the Swedes could easily push away any resisting troops . In September 19 , they occupied the city of Leipzig which finally forced Augustus into unconditional peace under Swedish terms . Among other things , the traitor and second principal behind the Grodno campaign , Johann Patkul was turned into Swedish custody . 
 = = = Outcome = = = 
 The campaign of Grodno proved disastrous to the allies who did not manage to attain any of their goals , while the Swedish army reached almost all of theirs ; Stanisław Leszczyński was crowned king of Poland , the Saxon and Russian armies in Poland were beaten , and peace was forced upon Augustus who renounced all his claims to the Polish throne . The two traitors and principal designers of the campaign , Johann Patkul and Otto Arnold von Paykull were also taken prisoner by the Swedes and executed in 1707 . However , the Great Northern War was far from being won . Charles reorganized his forces to march against his last remaining opponent , Peter the Great and the Tsardom of Russia . The Swedish invasion of Russia began in 1707 and ended with the disastrous Swedish defeat at Poltava . This marked a decisive turn in the war with Saxony and Denmark rejoining the alliance . 
 = D 'oh @-@ in ' in the Wind = 
 " D 'oh @-@ in ' in the Wind " is the sixth episode of The Simpsons ' tenth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 15 , 1998 . In the episode , Homer Simpson travels to a farm owned by Seth and Munchie , two aged hippies who were friends with Homer 's mother . After finding out his middle name is " Jay " , Homer is drawn to the care @-@ free lifestyle of hippies , and decides to become one himself . 
 The episode was written by Donick Cary and directed by Mark Kirkland , with a couple of scenes being directed by Matthew Nastuk . Kirkland , who was going through a divorce during the episode 's production , assigned Nastuk , his assistant director , to take over direction in his stead . However , after Nastuk had directed a scene , Kirkland felt better and returned to direct the rest of the episode . The episode features the revelation of Homer 's middle name , " Jay " , which is a tribute to characters from The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show who got their middle initial from Jay Ward . 
 The episode features comic actors George Carlin as Munchie and Martin Mull as Seth . Carlin was suggested by Simpsons writer Ron Hauge , who " really wanted to meet him " , although he did not attend the recording session with Carlin and Mull . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 8 @.@ 4 million viewers . Following the tenth season 's home release on August 7 , 2007 , " D 'oh @-@ in ' in the Wind " received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mr. Burns plans on eating a jar of pickles for lunch , but is unable to open the jar . Nobody else in the plant is able to open it , either . As a result , Mr. Burns decides he needs tougher employees , so he directs Lenny , Carl and Homer in an advertisement to promote the plant . When Homer sees what a good job he did in the commercial , even though no one read the script , he plans on becoming an actor . As he fills out his Screen Actors Guild form , Lisa points out that he has not filled in his middle name , having just put the initial " J " . Homer admits that he does not know his middle name . He consults Grandpa about it , who does not remember its origin ( he was " in it for the spanking " ) , but suggests where it might be . They drive to a farm run by two middle @-@ aged hippies , Seth and Munchie , who were friends of Homer 's mother back when she had been a hippie . They point out a mural she painted ( based on an incident at Woodstock where a very young Homer ran around naked in the mud ) , which reveals Homer 's middle name : " Jay " , which makes no difference to his name 's pronunciation . Homer sees how care @-@ free his life would be if he were a hippie , and thus decides to become one . 
 Homer dons a filthy old poncho left behind by Mona and carries around a frisbee ( which has " Homer Jay " enscribed on it ) as part of his hippie guise . He visits Groovy Grove Natural Farm , where he joins Seth and Munchie in their game of <unk> @-@ sack . The fun soon ends when Seth and Munchie have to go back to work , as they operate the most popular organic juice company in Springfield out of their barn . Because of this , Homer believes that they are not hippies and so convinces them to join him on an " old @-@ time freak @-@ out " . After their little luck freaking out ordinary people , they return to the barn , only to find that it is flooded with Seth and Munchie 's juice and broken bottles — revealed to be caused by Homer 's <unk> ending up inside the " <unk> " machine , jamming it and thus ruining Seth and Munchie 's shipment . In fury , they remind Homer that he is not , never was and at the rate he is going , never will be a hippie , before telling him to leave them alone . A dejected Homer walks away , right before tossing his frisbee behind him , only for it to land in the factory again . Homer quickly leaves . 
 At night , Homer plans on making it up to Seth and Munchie by taking the crops from their garden and making the juice with them , which he then distributes to every store in town . However , due to a shortage of juicing crops , he also finds and uses some of their " personal vegetables " . As a consequence , anyone who drinks the juice has crazy hallucinations . Chief Wiggum catches on , and soon the police surround the farm . Homer comes out front to defend Seth and Munchie and hippie honor by reminding the police of the morals taught by the 1960s , planting a flower in each of their guns as he does so . However , Wiggum discharges his gun , lodging the flower from it in Homer 's forehead . At the hospital , Dr. Hibbert says he cannot remove the flower , as he claims " I 'm a doctor not a gardener " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " D 'oh @-@ in ' in the Wind " was written by Donick Cary and directed by Mark Kirkland and Matthew Nastuk . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on November 15 , 1998 . The idea for the episode was pitched by Cary , who thought it would be fun to see the citizens of Springfield hallucinating . He then fleshed it out , forming its current iteration . The episode features the revelation of Homer 's middle name , " Jay " , which is a " tribute " to animated characters such as Bullwinkle J. Moose and Rocket J. Squirrel from The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show who got their middle initial from Jay Ward . The name was pitched on for three days by the writers . 
 Originally , Kirkland was supposed to be the sole director for the episode , however , at the time , he was going through a divorce that he " did not see coming " . Because of this , Kirkland assigned his assistant director , Matthew Nastuk , to direct the episode in his stead . However , after having directed a scene , Nastuk claimed that he was " terrified " and wanted Kirkland to continue the direction . Kirkland returned to direct the episode , feeling better after getting over the divorce . Despite the circumstances , Kirkland stated that he " loved " working on the episode , and could relate to the story since he had grown up in a " sort of hippie commune school " in the late ' 60s and early ' 70s . Kirkland based a lot of the scenery designs in the episode on the state Vermont where , according to him , a lot of " ex @-@ hippies " live . 
 The two hippies , Seth and Munchie , were portrayed by comic actors Martin Mull and George Carlin respectively . For a while , the staff were not sure of who would play Munchie . Although they had decided on Mull to play Seth , the staff were " kind of stuck " on who would play Munchie . Carlin was suggested by Ron Hauge , one of the Simpsons writers , who " really wanted to meet [ Carlin ] " but ended up not going to the recording session . Scully stated that Mull and Carlin were " some of the funniest guys that ever lived " , and that recording their lines was " a lot of fun " . Although it does not occur with most other guest stars in the series , Mull and Carlin recorded their lines together . While the designs of Seth and Munchie were not modeled after anyone in particular , their hair @-@ styles were slightly based on those of Jerry Greenfield and Ben Cohen , owners of the ice cream company Ben & Jerry 's . Comedian Bob Hope was portrayed by series regular cast member Dan Castellaneta , who plays Homer among many other characters in the series . Jill St. John and Phyllis Diller were both voiced by American voice actress Tress MacNeille . The psychedelic version of The Simpsons ' main theme that plays during the end credits was performed by Yo La Tengo , an American alternative rock band who are friends of Cary 's . 
 The episode makes multiple references to 1960s culture , including films such as The Love @-@ Ins ( 1967 ) . The episode features the theme from the musical Hair , " Incense and Peppermints " by Strawberry Alarm Clock ( 1967 ) , " White Rabbit " by Jefferson Airplane ( 1967 ) and " Time of the Season " by The Zombies ( 1968 ) . In a flashback to Woodstock in 1969 , Jimi Hendrix 's performance of " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " is shown , as is a recreation of the photograph of embracing couple Nick and Bobbi <unk> taken at the festival and used as a poster for the film Woodstock ( 1970 ) . 
 Additionally , Homer sings Billy Joel 's 1983 song " Uptown Girl " . After drinking the tainted juice , Grampa and Jasper sit on a bench , laughing like the title characters from the series Beavis and Butt @-@ head , while Flanders hallucinates skeletons and dancing bears ( images associated with the Grateful Dead ) , marching hammers ( from Pink Floyd 's 1982 film Pink Floyd — The Wall ) and The Rolling Stones ' lips and tongue logo . Mr. Burns ' film is credited as " An Alan Smithee Film " , a reference to the Alan Smithee pseudonym credit used by directors who wanted to be disassociated from a film on which they had lost creative control , to the detriment of the final product . When Barney drinks alcohol to prevent the bad effects from the tainted juice , a pink elephant comes to his rescue , referencing the scene in Dumbo where Dumbo and Timothy drink alcohol and see pink elephants . Seth and Munchie 's dog is named Ginsberg , thought to be a reference to beat poet Allen Ginsberg . Homer putting the flowers in the policemen 's rifles is a reference to the iconic October 22 , 1967 Life magazine picture , " Flower Power " by Bernie Boston . 
 The phrase used by Dr. Hibbert regarding Homer 's condition ( " I 'm a doctor , not a gardener " ) is a reference to a recurring Star Trek gag , when Doctor Leonard McCoy retorts , mostly to Spock , that he is a doctor and not a [ whatever the situation refers to ] . 
 Additionally , the end credit theme music is presented in a style that parodies " Tomorrow Never Knows " by The Beatles , and as the credits end , Homer says " I buried Flanders " , a reference to the Paul Is Dead myth . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on November 15 , 1998 , " D 'oh @-@ in ' in the Wind " received an 8 @.@ 5 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 8 @.@ 3 million viewers . The episode finished in 40th place in the ratings for the week of November 9 – 15 , 1999 . On August 7 , 2007 , the episode was released as part of The Simpsons - The Complete Tenth Season DVD box set . Matt Groening , Mike Scully , George Meyer , Donick Cary , Ron Hauge and Mark Kirkland participated in the DVD 's audio commentary of the episode . 
 Following its home video release , " D 'oh @-@ in ' in the Wind " received mixed reviews from critics . Giving the episode a positive review , Aaron Roxby of Collider wrote that , even though he felt that the jokes about hippies were " a bit overplayed " , he still considered it to be one of the best episodes of the season . James Plath of DVD Town thought fondly of the episode as well , calling it " funny " . Writing for DVD Movie Guide , Colin Jacobson stated that , even though he feels the sixties have been lampooned " many , many times over the years " , he considered " D 'oh @-@ in ' in the Wind " to be a successful spoof of the era . He enjoyed the way the episode portrayed and mocked the ways aging hippies " didn 't live up to their youthful ideas " . He concluded his review by writing that " D 'oh @-@ in ' in the Wind " is one of the first great episodes of the season . 
 On the other hand , Jake McNeill of Digital Entertainment News did not enjoy the episode . Considering it to be one of the worst episodes of the season , he found the " jabs " at the hippie culture to be dated , writing that the episode is " a quarter century too late " . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood of I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide were negative as well , calling the episode " dreadful " . They wrote that , aside from a couple of references to sixties psychedelia and the hippie movement , the only significant part of the episode is the revelation of Homer 's middle name . They concluded by writing that the episode is " humourless " . 
 = Susan Kennedy = 
 Susan Wendy Kennedy ( also Smith and Kinski ) , is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Neighbours , played by Jackie Woodburne . The character and her family were created by storyliners in an attempt to bring the show back to its roots . Susan made her first screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 3 October 1994 , along with her eldest son and daughter . The storyliners made Susan a teacher at Erinsborough High to give her immediate links with other characters . Since her introduction , Susan 's personality and appearance have been through several changes . 
 Her storylines have seen her begin a relationship with a Priest , being married , divorced and widowed . Susan has become a stepmother and a grandmother and she has been central to three plots revolving around health issues : Retrograde amnesia , Multiple sclerosis and <unk> . She has also been central to a cyber @-@ bullying plot . In October 2009 , Susan became the longest @-@ running female character in the show 's history , having been in Neighbours for over fifteen years . Woodburne has garnered various award nominations for her portrayal of Susan and the character has been well received by viewers and television critics . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 In 1994 , the Neighbours storyliners decided to introduce a new " solid " family called the Kennedys . The family , which consisted of five members – a mother , father , two sons and a daughter – moved into Number 28 Ramsay Street . The storyliners felt that they needed to take the show back to its roots , as it seemed that all the houses on the street were populated with misfits and distant relatives . Alan Fletcher was cast in the role of Karl Kennedy and Benjamin McNair , Kym Valentine and Jesse Spencer were cast as teenagers Malcolm , Libby and Billy respectively . Woodburne was cast in the role of Susan , the matriarch of the family . The actress revealed that she only intended to play the part of Susan for twelve months , but she fell in love with the show and stayed . In 1997 , it was revealed that Ailsa Piper ( Ruth Wilkinson ) was considered for the role of Susan . 
 When asked if she remembered her first day of filming , Woodburne recalled " Yes - I remember it perfectly . We were unpacking stuff from the car and moving into No 28 . I already knew Alan , but I didn 't know the kids . It all just meshed , though , and we knew immediately what type of family we were going to be . " Susan was given a teaching job at the local high school and Karl became the local GP , giving the family immediate links with other characters . In 1995 , Rainey Mayo portrayed a teenage Susan in a daydream . In October 2009 , Woodburne became the longest @-@ serving actress in the show 's history , having appeared on @-@ screen as Susan for fifteen years . Of her television milestone , Woodburne said , " It seems both bizarre and wonderful to me that I 'm coming up to 15 years on the show , even though the world of Neighbours feels instinctive and familiar , I 'm still challenged and rewarded by the work . " 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 On her arrival , Susan was described as being " staid " and more open @-@ minded than her husband , Karl . Woodburne told the Soap Show that Susan is a " good mum " who means well . Her children are her number one priority and she overcompensate 's for her husband 's disciplinarian style . This has led to a Holy Soap writer describing Susan as " the mother hen of the street " . Network Ten say that Susan is the " heart and soul of Erinsborough " , with a good sense of humour and the skills of a ninja . Susan has been through a " rough ride " . She has had to cope with Karl 's infidelity , a divorce , her second husband dying hours after their wedding , being betrayed by her nephew and revealing that she killed her mother . TV Week said " But , through it all , Susan has often provided a home for people in trouble , including a number of the Timmins kids and the kids of her dead husband . " This has made her one of the most " enigmatic and appealing characters " within the show . 
 In 2003 , Susan 's appearance changed and she was seen having her long hair cut when she wanted a fresh start following a split from Karl . Woodburne has revealed that there is no chance of Susan growing her long hair back . She said " I could never grow it long again . I love the ease of having short hair . Back when it was long , I used to wash and dry my hair every morning at home before going into work . That added an extra half @-@ hour to my day " . She also added that the Neighbours ' bosses at the time believed that women should have long hair . In April 2012 , Susan debuted " a stylish new haircut " representing her single status . 
 Woodburne has said she never gets bored of playing Susan as she changes all the time . She added " One of the <unk> of this job is that in a week you might be doing absolute slapstick comedy , you might be doing high drama / tragedy and in between maybe some nice subtle interesting stuff as well , the character keeps changing and evolving depending on who she is interacting with " . Woodburne has said that her favourite storyline has been the Susan , Karl and Izzy love triangle . As Susan is normally a good person , it gave her a chance to have a character ( Izzy ) that she could hate . Woodburne added " It was good to play those much meaner , darker , angrier , cruel moments than always to be the kind character . It was good to see those dents in her armour I think " . 
 Towards the end of 2009 , a change occurred in Susan 's personality . During the surrogacy storyline , viewers saw Susan become the " mother @-@ in @-@ law from hell " . <unk> said that it was challenging trying to change the character of Susan . During clashes with her son @-@ in @-@ law Daniel Fitzgerald ( Brett Tucker ) , Susan was seen becoming controlling and bossy . Woodburne said " As the story progressed it became apparent that we were going to have to go to the extremes of the less attractive qualities of our characters . We talked about it and decided to go for it – he would be the overbearing husband and Susan the mother @-@ in @-@ law from hell " . Woodburne added that Susan is acting out of love for her daughter and for Libby 's desire to have a child . In July 2011 , Woodburne told a writer for Channel 5 that she still found the role of Susan challenging . She explained that she likes Susan because she adapts well and takes all the things that happen to her in her stride . Woodburne said Karl and Susan are now less naive and exuberant due to the things they have gone through . When asked what the future holds for her character , Woodburne stated " You know , I 'm kind of with Susan . I like the Kennedy house when it 's full of noisy kids , being naughty and creating havoc . I like it loud and messy . So that would be my hope , that we get a bit of that happening again . " 
 = = = Marriage to Karl Kennedy = = = 
 Susan and Karl were childhood sweethearts who married in 1978 , before they both graduated from university . Karl has cheated on Susan twice with Sarah Beaumont ( Nicola Charles ) and Izzy Hoyland ( Natalie Bassingthwaighte ) and the couple have broken up and divorced , but have later reunited and remarried . Woodburne has named the Karl , Susan and Izzy love triangle as one of her favourite storylines . Woodburne believes that Karl and Susan have a strong connection that is " based upon such a good grounding " . Karl and Susan are best friends who enjoy each other 's company , share a deep connection and take joy in each other 's quirks and ways . Woodburne described them as having a " really solid foundation for a marriage " and she has said that she does not want to see Susan and Karl 's relationship break up again . Holy Soap have called Susan and Karl " contenders for the <unk> couple on Ramsay Street " . Following their " passionate arguments " , the couple enjoy making up together . They have a healthy attraction for each other . Fletcher says he and Woodburne find the scenes " funny " . Fletcher said " Karl and Susan every now and again do go through a phase where they become slightly more amorous than in their tougher times and tougher storylines – suffice to say it 's not bawdy , but I think the audience will enjoy the fun aspect " . Karl and Susan have been caught in the nude together on three occasions ; at the beach , in Lou Carpenter 's ( Tom Oliver ) spa and when they went skinny @-@ dipping in the bush . When asked what makes Karl and Susan popular with viewers , Woodburne said " Because I think they 're so flawed . There 's two things : they make horrendous mistakes , both of them , but they both are coming from a place of well meaning . They 're both wanting to try and do the right thing and be helpful , but so often they get it so terribly wrong , and I think we can all relate to that . " 
 In May 2011 , it was revealed that Susan and Karl 's marriage would be run into trouble , when Susan becomes emotionally involved with another man . Susan strikes up a friendship with local builder , Jim Dolan ( Scott Parmeter ) , as he fights cancer , causing problems between herself and Karl . When asked by Channel 5 about her reaction to the storyline , Woodburne said " I think it 's a great story . Karl and Susan are both in their 50s ; they 've been married together ; they 've raised a bunch of kids ; they ’ ve had careers and jobs . And to use the popular term ' empty nesters ' , that 's what they ’ re looking at . For him he thinks , ' That 's great , terrific ! More time for us ; we can travel . ' But for her it 's , ' Well , I don 't know how to be that person . I know how to be this person , who 's someone who 's wrangling kids and busy doing things . ' But her challenge I think is going to be to find out who she is as one half of a couple , as opposed to being the hub of a wheel . " The actress revealed she and Fletcher were both worried about Susan and Karl breaking up and having to work with new people , but they believe any new development for the characters is good . Woodburne told Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy that she thought the new storyline was great and said any relationship which has been going for as long as the Kennedys ' has , will have its " turbulent patches " . Woodburne said Susan develops a very strong attachment to Jim because of her desire to help and be needed . When asked if she was worried about revisiting old ground with the storyline , Woodburne said the new conflict , which arises within Karl and Susan 's relationship , is " very appropriate " for the time of their lives and where they are at . 
 Susan meets Jim at the hospital and remembers him from the work he did on Lyn Scully 's ( Janet Andrewartha ) house . They get talking and Jim reveals he just had a melanoma removed and he is a bit " bewildered " by the hospital process and Susan helps him out . Jim 's condition grows worse and he is diagnosed with terminal cancer . Susan learns he has no family and Woodburne said she instinctively wants to look after him . The actress said Susan crosses boundaries as she starts to neglect certain areas of her life , like her marriage . She tells Karl not to be selfish and that the situation is not about him or her , it is about Jim . Woodburne explained to Channel 5 that Karl 's reaction to Susan 's friendship with Jim changes and he starts thinking he should not be selfish . However , when he notices his wife becoming more involved with Jim and neglecting her responsibilities , Karl gets angry as she is not thinking about anything else . Susan and Karl 's eldest son , Malcolm , returns to Erinsborough to help his parents work through their issues . Woodburne thought Malcolm was initially on Susan 's side because he can see she is helping someone who is ill , but as he looks more closely he understands why his father is so upset with Susan 's behavior . Susan is upset when she misses Jim 's last moments and blames Karl . They begin rowing , which becomes worse due to Susan 's grief . Susan Hill of the Daily Star revealed Karl and Susan were to separate following a make @-@ or @-@ break holiday . Their decision leaves Malcolm devastated and he takes his anger out on his mother , but Karl then admits it was his decision to end the marriage . Woodburne said the Jim Dolan plot was " a tremendous story which highlighted problems with Susan and Karl 's marriage . " The actress said the storyline was challenging to play because it was emotional and she had to slap Fletcher . Of Susan 's future , Woodburne said " 2012 will be a huge year of adjustment for Susan . She is now single and moves into an apartment of her own – and she has to find her own way . She discovers things about herself that will surprise people . " 
 = = = Other relationships = = = 
 Following Karl 's affair with Sarah , Susan goes out to dinner with Martin Chester ( Gil Tucker ) , a former boyfriend and member of Karl 's university band . Woodburne told Annette <unk> of Inside Soap that Karl knows Martin is taking Susan to dinner and he does not think she would be capable of any " misconduct " with him . The actress explained " Susan is very attracted to Martin , but she wouldn 't be aware of it if her marriage was more solid and she wasn 't feeling so unloved . " Woodburne stated that Susan is tempted to have a fling , but she ultimately decides that she wants to save her marriage . Despite Karl 's affair , she still loves him and they need to work through their problems . Woodburne was good friends with Tucker as they previously worked together on Cop Shop . 
 In 2004 , Susan became involved with Tom Scully ( Andrew Larkins ) , a Priest . Susan and Tom caused a scandal when they began a relationship . Television critic Andrew Mercado said that 2004 went down as " a watershed year for controversy " after Susan had sex with Tom . Woodburne told Jackie Brygel from TV Week that it was a " very hot affair " . Tom left the priesthood for Susan and she confessed her love for him . However , the relationship soon ended . Woodburne commented " It becomes apparent to both of them that it is just not meant to be . They both reach a period in their life when they are feeling low and lonely and aren 't feeling very good about themselves . They just realise that there is no future . " Tom returned in 2007 and he became Principal of Erinsborough High . He told Susan that he never stopped loving her and wanted her back . However , by then she was back with Karl . 
 Susan has a fling with Bobby Hoyland ( Andrew McFarlane ) in early 2005 . Bobby turns out to be a womaniser after beginning relationships with both Janelle Timmins ( Nell Feeney ) and Lyn Scully . Fergus Shiel of The Age said Bobby provided an outlet for Janelle , Susan and Lyn 's " extramarital desires . " The women later get revenge on Bobby . That same year saw Susan meet widower Alex Kinski ( Andrew Clarke ) and his children . Alex and Susan soon begin a relationship . When Alex is diagnosed with terminal cancer , he and Susan marry , and he dies shortly after . Susan then takes custody of his children . 
 In 2008 , Susan joined the Erinsborough News and became a journalist . She began working for Paul Robinson ( Stefan Dennis ) . Susan and Paul are enemies , but they have a " grudging respect or interest in each other " . Paul has a shady past and Karl does not trust Paul , so Susan uses her new job to wind Karl up . Susan works closely with Paul and his reputation with the ladies gives Woodburne the opportunity to bring Susan 's sadistic side . Woodburne has said that she wishes for more of that storyline as she and Dennis found it " fun " . She added that " There was a lot of conflict and comedy and it kind of ran its natural course over several weeks . She still works there so the potential for further stories is still there . " 
 Following her split from Karl in 2012 , Susan meets yoga teacher Bernard Cabello ( Bruce Alexander ) at a gym class . Bernard asks her out for a drink , but Susan turns him down . Susan Hill of the Daily Star said Susan then realises that she needs to start living again and changes her mind . Susan and Bernard 's date coincides with Karl 's first gig with his new band and a show spokesperson explained " Susan has already agreed to be at the gig for moral support and doesn 't think twice about taking Bernard along with her . But Karl is mortified . He 's nervous about the gig so having Susan there on a date makes it even worse for him . " 
 = = = Retrograde amnesia = = = 
 In 2002 , Susan developed retrograde amnesia . The storyline saw Susan slip on some spilt milk and sustain a minor head injury . After she goes to sleep , she wakes up and has lost three decades of her life . Woodburne told Inside Soap 's Jason Herbison that Susan believes the year is 1972 and the night before was her sixteenth birthday , where she drank too much champagne . She does not recognise her house and thinks she passed out and ended up somewhere else . Susan 's family take her to the hospital , where she is diagnosed with retrograde amnesia . Karl becomes determined to tell her the truth about her condition , while her nephew , Darcy ( Mark <unk> ) , insists they treat her " with kid gloves . " Woodburne revealed " Susan keeps asking when she 's going to be allowed home to see her parents , and eventually Karl breaks the news - her parents are long dead and she 's actually 45 , not 16 as she believes . And on top of that , Karl is her husband ! " Susan turns to her daughter Libby – who she believes is her sister Carmel ( Kirsty Child ) – for comfort . But when Libby confirms what Karl has told her , Susan leaves the hospital . Susan spots some students in Seventies clothes and she follows them to a Seventies themed party at Erinsborough High . However , the students recognise Susan as their principal , which distresses her . Susan ends up in the bathroom and she sees herself in the mirror for the first time since the accident , and is shocked to see a middle @-@ aged woman staring back at her . 
 As she struggles with her condition , doctors suggest to Karl that going back to familiar surroundings may trigger the return of her memories . Susan is brought to Ramsay Street , but nothing happens . Woodburne stated that Susan hates her hair and her clothes and wants to change everything . Karl takes her to Lyn Scully 's salon and manages to persuade her to have her hair styled rather than cut short . While she is at the salon , Susan remembers her high school sweetheart , Craig Benson ( Tim Hughes ) , and decides to find him . Woodburne told Herbison " As far as she 's concerned , Craig is her boyfriend and they 're in love . So she looks him up in the phone book and sets off to find him . " Woodburne added that there was a danger the storyline could cross a line and become silly , but the crew tried to portray the fear a person would feel when everything is suddenly unfamiliar . Susan falls in love with Karl and her memories return during their vow renewal service . During a 2012 interview , Woodburne told a What 's on TV reporter that she and the writers initially joked about the storyline , but they found some truth in it . She explained " It was actually based on a story of a woman who lived in England . The same thing happened to her . She fell over in a supermarket . Between leaving the supermarket and getting home , she 'd lost 30 years . I don 't think she recovered . She had a husband and grown @-@ up children and she had no idea who they were . Imagine the terror and the fear of being surrounded by these people who tell you that they are your family . But you feel nothing . " 
 = = = Multiple sclerosis = = = 
 Susan was diagnosed with Multiple sclerosis in 2007 . Two years prior , MS Australia pitched a storyline to the Neighbours team asking for a character to be diagnosed with MS and for them to then show the impact MS can have on a community . The society contacted a producer and discussed a possible storyline for a young character in her twenties who had a promising career and family ahead of her . In 2006 , the society received a phone call from one of the writers who revealed that they had chosen to write an MS story into the show and they had selected Susan Kennedy to be the character that was going to be diagnosed . The society was initially disappointed , as Susan was older than the typical person diagnosed with the condition . However , they were pleased that a permanent character and not an extra was chosen . MS Australia attended a meeting with the Neighbours writers to help develop a realistic and true portrayal of the diagnosis , symptoms and treatments . On @-@ screen Susan was seen displaying unusual symptoms , including black outs and loss of sight and sensation in her hands . She was then seen undergoing an MRI scan , before she was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis . 
 Woodburne was initially against Susan developing the condition , but when she started researching it , she realised how much of a challenge the storyline would be and she changed her mind . The actress and the shows writers worked closely with the MS Society to make the storyline as realistic as possible and it was praised by both the society and viewers who have the condition . Jenna Litchfield of the MS Society said soap opera storylines in which characters are diagnosed with MS helped to highlight the condition and its effects . She added that the storyline had " sparked interest . " Of the <unk> , Woodburne stated " It 's a massive story and to take a character that has always been so strong and to challenge them physically and emotionally was terrific . I know that the writing department did an enormous amount of research . " Woodburne also explained that as Susan is such a strong person mentally , she goes through an emotional struggle when her body lets her down . Woodburne commented that she found the scenes distressing to play as she is so attached to her character . She told a writer for Inside Soap that it was a difficult storyline , but " ultimately rewarding " . On screen , Susan learnt how to keep her symptoms under control and Woodburne said she would occasionally have a relapse , as the condition does not go away . In 2011 , Woodburne commented on the MS storyline , which she enjoyed , saying it was very challenging to tell a good story and make it authentic and real for people who have the condition . 
 In April 2012 , Susan starts to struggle with her MS again , following her split from Karl and her promotion to editor of the Erinsborough News . Jackie Brygel of TV Week said Susan has a lot to prove with Paul breathing down her neck , but her new role puts her health in jeopardy when she begins displaying signs of an MS relapse . Woodburne explained " She 's working 24 hours a day to try to get the paper to take on a different form and is running herself into the ground . She 's unable to stop the trembling in her hand , is quite dizzy and her vision becomes blurred - all indications of an MS relapse , which would be her worst nightmare . " Susan Hill of the Daily Star reported Susan refuses to turn to Karl , who always helped her with an episode , and instead she relies on help from Rhys Lawson ( Ben Barber ) . Woodburne revealed Karl asks Susan to slow down , but she ignores him . The actress said Karl is looking at the situation from the perspective of an ex @-@ husband who has feelings for her , but also as a doctor . Susan finds herself unable to do the housework , but Rhys understands that she wants to keep her independence . A spokesperson told Hill " She always knew it was going to be hard living alone but Karl is the last person she wants to turn to . She doesn 't want to admit she needs him but she does . In the end she confides in Dr Rhys . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In 2009 , Susan was seen offering to become a surrogate for her daughter Libby . Following a fight with the hospital board , Susan became pregnant . However , this causes friction with her son @-@ in @-@ law . Following a fall , Susan loses the baby . Woodburne called the scenes " difficult " to film . Alan Fletcher said the storyline " could have been dreadful in the wrong hands " , but he was pleased at the way the scenes were handled . He added " The notion of a mother being a surrogate for their daughter is something you can 't pretend is not controversial . The writers embraced that and showed how Susan 's decision divided the community , and has potential to divide the family " . Neighbours ' timeslot presented difficulties for the storyline . The writers were forced to tone the plot down to comply with guidelines . Woodburne said " Because of the time of day that our show is on — it 's on at 6 @.@ 30 here and day time in the UK — obviously doing something as controversial as surrogacy at that time slot we would be so restricted by censorship " . The storyline received mixed reactions from viewers . Woodburne said that people believe Susan is " such a good mother and it 's awesome she 's prepared to do this for Libby and Dan " . Other viewers have said that Susan should not have got involved and that the storyline was ridiculous as Susan is too old . Neighbours executive producer Susan Bower also spoke out about the storyline and said " I 've had quite a few letters from people in England who 'd heard about it before it was even in the papers in Australia saying they disagree and think it 's shocking " . 
 = = = Cyber @-@ bullying = = = 
 Following the failed surrogacy , Susan decides to enroll on a media course at Eden Hills University . In June 2010 , she begins receiving threats via text messages and emails , telling her to stay away from the university . She is later followed by an unseen person in a car . Susan later spots the car outside her house and she is very frightened . The cyber bully brings up some of Susan 's personal issues within their threats and this make her feel vulnerable . They also make places that Susan has previously felt safe in , feel unsafe . Of this Woodburne said " To feel so vulnerable in your own neighbourhood would be just awful . I think I would be equally frightened " . As Susan suffers from multiple sclerosis , the stress has a big impact upon her health . Woodburne said that Susan is usually a very strong person mentally , but she feels out of control because the situation is distressing her . She becomes a victim . Susan tries to stand up to the bully and refuses to stay away from the university . However , when she arrives for her lesson , she receives another threatening message . This terrifies her and she locks herself in the toilets . 
 Eventually Susan learns her tutor , John Bradley ( Laurence Brewer ) , is behind the threats . Susan had trusted John , so she is shocked to find that he is her bully . Of Susan 's discovery , Woodburne said " It 's so unexpected because it 's somebody she believed to be of great integrity and someone who she thought was on her side " . John , who is described as a " seriously unhinged individual " , kidnaps Susan when she confronts him . He holds her captive and becomes very angry . He confesses to Susan that he is behind the threats . He tells her that in 1995 , when Susan was a teacher at Erinsborough High , she gave him a bad report and he failed his teaching course . Susan is compassionate , but she does not let him get away with his crime and he is arrested . By standing up to him , Susan loses her anxiety . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 When Susan 's husband , Karl , is suspected of causing the death of a patient , he decides to move their family to Erinsborough for a fresh start . As Susan settles into Ramsay Street , she hopes to get back into teaching . Susan gets involved in the drama society and works at the Coffee Shop for Annalise Hartman ( Kimberley Davies ) . Karl wants to have another child , but Susan is opposed to the idea . She later decides that she wants to return to teaching and is given a job at Erinsborough High . Susan chaperones Brett Stark ( Brett Blewitt ) on a trip to South Africa and she confesses to him that she helped her mother to die . Susan invites Billy 's best friend , Toadfish Rebecchi ( Ryan Moloney ) to move in and he becomes a surrogate son after Malcolm leaves . Susan is offered the position of principal at a school in Wangaratta and she accepts , knowing that she will have to leave her family . After a few months , Susan is offered the job of principal at Erinsborough High . While Susan is away , Karl kisses his receptionist , Sarah Beaumont ( Nicola Charles ) . Susan learns the truth about the kiss several months later from Billy and she confronts Karl . He admits to the kiss and Susan slaps him ; she then throws him out . It takes months before Susan forgives Karl , but they work on trying to save their marriage by attending counselling . Susan and Libby befriend new neighbours Lyn and Stephanie Scully ( Carla Bonner ) . 
 Libby is involved in a motorbike accident that leaves her with a small chance of carrying a baby to full term . Susan and Karl break the news to her . Libby later falls pregnant and gives birth to Susan and Karl 's first grandchild , Ben ( Noah Sutherland ) . Susan almost loses her job as principal when a student reports her for assault ; however , the case is later dropped . Susan 's nephew Darcy Tyler becomes partner in Karl 's surgery and plots to sell the business to a clinic chain . Darcy tells Karl and Susan what he is doing , and Susan is furious with her nephew . Susan 's sister , Liz ( Christine Keogh ) , leaves her daughter Elly ( Kendell Nunn ) with the Kennedys for a brief time ; Elly later joins her mother in Sweden . Susan slips on some spilt milk and wakes up with retrograde amnesia . She loses thirty years of her memory and believes she is sixteen and the year is 1972 . Susan goes through months of counselling to try and regain her memory . During this time , she tells Karl that she does not like him and she goes missing when she tries to find an old boyfriend . Susan begins having flashbacks and starts to regain her memory . Libby 's husband Drew Kirk ( Dan Paris ) dies and Susan finds it hard to comfort her daughter . Susan grows closer to Karl and he asks her to renew their vows . During the ceremony , Susan 's memory returns . 
 Karl tells Susan that he no longer loves her after his drinking puts their marriage under strain . They separate , and Karl begins a relationship with Izzy Hoyland ( Natalie Bassingthwaighte ) . Susan begins dating again and she falls for Lyn 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Tom Scully , a Catholic Priest . Lyn and Libby are unhappy about the relationship and it eventually ends . Karl and Susan divorce , but they remain friends . Susan begins a relationship with Alex Kinski ( Andrew Clarke ) after he enrolls his children Rachel ( Caitlin Stasey ) and Zeke ( Matthew Werkmeister ) at Erinsborough High . Alex is diagnosed with Lymphoma and he asks Susan to marry him ; she accepts . Alex 's condition deteriorates and they decide to marry right away . The marriage is witnessed by Karl , Rachel , Zeke , and Alex 's older daughter , Katya ( Dichen Lachman ) . Alex passes away shortly after . Susan begins to fall for Karl again and she declares her love for him . They get back together in secret , but Rachel and Zeke find out the truth and believe that Susan did not love their father . They later give Karl and Susan their blessings . While Susan and Karl are on holiday in London , Karl proposes for a third time . Susan immediately accepts and they remarry on a boat on the Thames . The ceremony is interrupted when Izzy goes into labour and Karl delivers her daughter , Holly ( Chaya <unk> ) . Susan discovers that Karl is Holly 's father and she tells him when they get back home . 
 During a period of ill health , Susan hits Bridget Parker ( Eloise Mignon ) with her car after passing out . Susan is unaware that she has struck Bridget and she leaves the scene . When she realises that she is responsible , Susan confesses and it causes a bitter feud between the Kennedys and the Parkers . However , during Susan 's trial , Bridget remembers falling into the path of the car and that the collision was unavoidable . Soon afterwards , following a series of incorrect diagnoses , Susan is diagnosed with multiple sclerosis . Susan is shocked and scared , and Karl and Libby try to help her . Susan collapses at Toadie and Steph 's wedding rehearsal and she goes to a multiple sclerosis retreat for professional help . Susan takes sick leave from the school and becomes a journalist for the Erinsborough News . After Libby is told she cannot have any more children , she and Dan decide to try surrogacy . Susan offers to be their surrogate , despite Karl 's objections . Paul Robinson finds out about the surrogacy and writes a newspaper article about it , without knowing the identity of the family involved . When he finds out that Susan is the surrogate , he makes it public . The family face abuse and the hospital board decide to end the programme . 
 Libby and Dan protest against the decision and Susan tries blackmailing a senior board member . The board change their minds and Susan becomes pregnant . Dan finds it hard to relate to Susan and begins to question her part in his and Libby 's lives . Karl books a holiday for them all to get away and talk . Dan and Susan argue about where the baby will be brought up and Dan says that he regrets agreeing to the surrogacy . When Dan goes for a walk , Susan follows him and they continue to argue . Dan walks away and Susan tries running after him , but she trips and falls . She calls out , but Dan does not hear her and he walks off . Libby and Karl find Susan and rush her to the hospital , where Susan miscarries . Susan attends the memorial for Libby and Dan 's baby and during Dan 's speech , she lashes out at him . As everyone leaves the park , Susan collapses and reveals that she cannot feel her legs . Susan has an MS relapse , but she recovers . Susan and Karl take up golf , and Susan also enrols in a media course at Eden Hills University . She begins receiving threats , which tell her to leave the university . Susan is deeply upset by the threats and her family worry that the stress will lead to an MS relapse . 
 Susan discovers her tutor , John Bradley , is behind the threats . When Susan asks John why he threatened her , he tells her she gave him a bad mark when he was a student teacher . Susan supports Libby when she learns that Steph had sex with Dan , and is carrying his child . Susan is angry with Toadie when she discovers he helped Steph cover up the lie . When Paul is pushed off the Lassiter 's Hotel mezzanine , Susan begins investigating who is responsible , and makes Diana Marshall ( Jane Badler ) her prime suspect . Susan then receives text messages from an anonymous person , telling her that Diana was not the one who pushed Paul . Rebecca confesses to Susan that she pushed Paul and Kate Ramsay ( Ashleigh Brewer ) gave her a false alibi . Susan persuades Kate to go to the police . Susan is devastated when Ringo dies and she feels guilty because she was taking care of him for Prue ( Penny Cook ) , Ringo 's mother . When Lyn leaves town , Susan invites Summer Hoyland ( Jordy Lucas ) to stay . Karl tells Susan that he thinks they are heading in different directions and he worries that he is not enough for her . They make up and plan a holiday together . 
 Susan meets Jim Dolan at the hospital and she asks him to talk about the Patient Advocacy Program for a news article . Jim reveals that he has cancer and Susan supports him during his treatments . Malcolm comes to visit his parents and detects all is not well between them . Susan becomes worried when Jim does not answer her calls and Karl confesses that he asked Jim to keep his distance , which angers Susan . She accuses Karl of being jealous . Karl invites Jim over for lunch and he notices the map and leaflets for Peru . Jim works out Susan is delaying the holiday for him . He then collapses and Susan begs Karl to save him . Susan comforts Jim when he realises he is going to die and she tries to take him out of the hospital , so they can visit his childhood home , as promised . Karl stops her and when they step outside to talk , Jim dies . Susan is devastated and blames Karl for keeping her from Jim . She then leaves to arrange Jim 's funeral . On her return , Susan and Karl announce that they are separating . Malcolm initially blames Susan for the split , but Karl confesses it was his idea . Karl tells Susan that he cannot be just friends with her and he looks for somewhere else to live . Susan starts a book group with Kate and Sonya Mitchell ( Eve Morey ) . 
 Susan suspects Karl is having an affair with Jade Mitchell ( Gemma Pranita ) , but is disappointed to learn that it was Malcolm . Karl and Susan get stuck in a storage shed and they reminisce about their past . They share a kiss goodbye and Susan goes to stay with Toadie and Sonya . Susan notices Audrey is not herself and she and Karl learn Audrey is dying . They care for her before she is put to sleep . When Karl goes to bury Audrey in the garden , Susan stops him and says she wants Audrey to be buried somewhere that she can visit often . They argue , but put aside their differences when Audrey 's body , which was placed in an <unk> , is collected by a hard rubbish collector . Karl rescues the <unk> and he and Susan bury Audrey at Sonya 's nursery . Susan soon finds an apartment to move into . Susan accompanies Karl to the funeral of an old friend and they share a drink together . Paul asks Susan to write a negative article about Ajay Kapoor ( Sachin Joab ) and the community centre plans , but she refuses . She later discovers Paul sabotaged Natasha Williams 's ( Valentina Novakovic ) party by inviting gatecrashers to it , so he could continue his vendetta against Ajay and the police station merger . Susan tells Paul to publish a retraction or she will write an exposé . 
 Paul blackmails Susan into keeping quiet by threatening to fire Summer . However , Summer finds out what Paul has done and Susan reveals the truth in front of council members and the press . Paul stands down as editor and gives the job to Susan . Susan fires an employee when she discovers they have been spying for Paul and she takes on extra work . Karl expresses his concern for her health , but Susan reassures him she is fine . However , she suffers an MS relapse and is treated by Rhys . Susan attends a yoga class and befriends the teacher , Bernard Cabello . Bernard asks Susan out for a drink , but she declines . However , she changes her mind and asks Bernard to dinner instead . Susan invites Bernard to go and see Karl 's band play at Charlie 's . At the end of the night , Bernard shocks Susan by suddenly kissing her . Susan then tries to avoid Bernard and Vanessa Villante ( Alin Sumarwata ) tells him that Susan is not interested in dating him . Susan befriends Rhys 's mother , Elaine ( <unk> Robinson ) , but Rhys angrily tells Susan to stay away from Elaine . He later apologises . Susan goes to Montreal for a course , but returns home early to discover that Paul was planning to take back his job as editor . 
 Susan hires Bradley Fox ( Aaron Jeffery ) as deputy editor to take on some of her workload . She also begins attending a pole dancing class at the community centre . Susan becomes concerned when Bradley and Summer start dating , especially when they use the newspaper office for a late night hook @-@ up . Susan checks Bradley 's references and discovers that he has lied . She also learns that he was fired from his last job for dating his boss ' daughter . Susan briefly falls out with Summer when she tries to warn her about Bradley . Susan 's sister , Carmel , comes to visit and she develops feelings for Karl . Carmel makes sexual advances towards Karl , which he rejects . Susan is angry with Carmel , but eventually forgives her . Susan is shocked when she learns Paul has sold the Erinsborough News , without consulting her . Things become worse for Susan when she learns that Sarah Beaumont is overseeing the sale of the paper . Sarah apologises to Susan for everything that happened in the past , but Susan struggles to deal with her presence . When Karl tells her that he loves her , Susan rejects him . She later hands him divorce papers and confronts Sarah . 
 Karl admits to Susan that he and Sarah had sex all those years ago and she tells him that she already knew in her heart , Karl then signs the divorce papers . Susan realises that she does not want to get divorced and hurries to find Karl , before he can lodge the papers . Susan tracks him down and they forgive each other for their past mistakes , before kissing in the street . Susan then moves back into Number 28 . After Priya is suspended from her job as principal of Erinsborough High , Susan is offered the job . She initially decides not to tell Priya about the offer , which causes them to briefly fall out . Susan helps Priya to get her job back by blackmailing Brian O 'Loughlin ( Paul Denny ) into withdrawing his false accusations of harassment against her . Following Priya 's death , Susan is again offered her job as principal and she accepts . Karl 's daughter , Holly ( Lucinda Armstrong Hall ) comes to stay , while Izzy goes on a cruise with her new partner . Holly is initially rude to Susan , who becomes exasperated when Karl refuses to see that she is running rings around them . However , they later realise that Holly 's issues are due to Izzy 's abandonment of her . Karl asks Holly to stay with him and Susan , but Susan senses that Holly misses her mother and Karl takes her back to England . 
 When Susan suspects that Imogen Willis ( Ariel Kaplan ) might have an eating disorder , she raises the issue with Imogen 's mother , Terese ( Rebekah Elmaloglou ) , who dismisses her suspicions . Susan reopens the PirateNet radio station for the students , after Jack Lassiter ( Alan Hopgood ) donates money to the school . Susan has doubts about employing Gemma Reeves ( Kathryn Beck ) , but Toadie persuades her to give his cousin a chance . Susan and Karl allow Rhiannon ( <unk> Liane ) and Jackson Bates ( Finn <unk> ) to stay with them and Susan tries to help Rhiannon better herself . Susan suffers an MS relapse , but hides it from Karl as he is preoccupied by the local mayoral election . Susan confides in Kate instead . As the election heats up , Paul discovers Susan 's MS relapse and reveals it to everyone , including Karl , during his campaign announcement , leaving Karl upset to why she did not confide in him . They soon make up , and Susan recovers from her relapse to support Karl through the election ; however , Paul ultimately beats him to becoming mayor . When Georgia Brooks ( Saskia Hampele ) discovers she is pregnant , Susan supports her as she decides not to confide in her family and the baby 's father Kyle Canning ( Chris Milligan ) . 
 Zeke returns for a visit and he reveals that he is getting married . After the wedding , Susan decides to become a marriage celebrant . Following Kate 's death , Susan , at Imogen 's suggestion , organises a celebration of Kate 's life at Lassiter 's Lake . A grieving Paul forbids this and the memorial is held at the high school instead . Susan comforts Paul when he breaks down . Susan performs the vow renewal of Matt ( Josef Brown ) and Lauren Turner ( Kate Kendall ) . Susan brings Holly back to Erinsborough for a visit to surprise Karl . Libby and Ben ( now Felix Mallard ) also return . When Susan falls ill , she asks Libby to become acting principal . Libby later realises that Karl and Susan have been trying to trick her into staying in Erinsborough , and they apologise . Susan reads an erotic novel written by " E. M. Williams " , who has obvious knowledge of Ramsay Street . She discovers that Karl penned the book . Alex 's nephew , Nate ( <unk> Wyatt ) , moves in with Susan and Karl . Susan gets Nate to open up to her about his time in the army . When a tornado hits Erinsborough , Susan waits it out in Harold 's Store with Lou Carpenter ( Tom Oliver ) . When the roof collapses , Lou is trapped by a beam and he chokes on a piece of food . Guided by Karl over the phone , Susan performs an emergency tracheotomy on Lou . He makes a full recovery , but Susan is traumatised by the event and Nate helps counsel her through post @-@ traumatic stress . 
 Malcolm visits his parents and informs them that Catherine is pregnant . He asks Susan and Karl to relocate to England and help him and Catherine out with the baby . Susan and Karl reminisce about their time on Ramsay Street and they decide to stay . Susan counsels Nate through his PTS , but she is affected by Nate 's stories and becomes depressed herself . She seeks professional counselling at the hospital and tries to find Nate a qualified counsellor . She notices that Nate 's progress has suffered and follows him out to the bush when he acts strangely . She falls in a hole he is digging as therapy and he nearly buries her alive , but sees her in time and rescues her . Susan falls out with Brad Willis ( Kip Gamblin ) when Karl accidentally drinks a chemical catalyst Brad was using in the Men 's Shed . She questions Brad 's commitment to teaching . Susan and Sheila are named judges for the Erinsborough Festival Bake @-@ Off , but decide to enter the competition instead . They compete against Janelle Timmins ( Nell Feeney ) , but after their bakes fall to the floor , Karl is declared the winner . After Karl learns Susan has a secret bank account , which contains her mad money , she dares him to spend big and he buys into the Off Air bar . 
 Susan is asked to act as a marriage celebrant for Coco Lee ( Sophie Cheeseman ) , but she soon learns from Nate that Coco 's fiancé , Alistair Hall ( Nick Cain ) , kissed him . Susan refuses to perform the ceremony and Alistair makes a complaint against her , as he believes Susan told Coco about the kiss . He later drops the complaint . Karl and Susan take in Tyler Brennan ( Travis Burns ) , while Ben comes to stay when Libby goes overseas for work . Susan supports Terese when she and Brad separate due to his affair with Lauren . They briefly fall out when Terese asks Susan to pick a side . Paul informs Susan that Erinsborough High and its grounds are being sold to Eden Hills Grammar . She later learns that she will not be kept on as principal and contemplates retirement . She and Brad then team up to save the school , organising a sleep @-@ out in protest to the council 's plans . A fire breaks out , trapping Susan with a heavily pregnant Amber Turner ( Jenna Rosenow ) , who goes into labour . They are eventually rescued by the fire fighters . After seeing how upset Susan is about the school , Ben confesses to starting the fire . Susan later learns that the school has been saved . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Woodburne has earned various award nominations for her role as Susan . In 2005 , she was nominated for Best Female Performance in a Soap from the Rose d 'Or Awards . At the 2007 Inside Soap Awards , Woodburne was nominated for Best Actress , Best Couple ( with Alan Fletcher ) and Best Storyline for Susan and Karl 's wedding . The following year , Woodburne was again nominated for Best Actress , Best Couple and Best Storyline for Susan 's MS diagnosis . 2009 saw Woodburne again nominated for Best Actress , she was also nominated alongside Fletcher , Valentine , Stasey and Werkmeister for Best Family . 
 At the first Digital Spy Soap Awards ceremony , Woodburne was nominated for Most Popular Actress . She and Fletcher were also nominated for Best On @-@ Screen Partnership and their 2007 storyline in London was nominated for Storyline of the Year . In 2010 , the surrogacy storyline was nominated for best Baby Drama at the All About Soap Awards . That same year saw Woodburne nominated for Best Daytime Star at the Inside Soap Awards . The actress garnered nominations in the same category in 2011 and 2012 . She won the award in 2015 . Woodburne has been nominated for the TV Tonight Award for Most Underrated Performer seven times , and won in 2007 , 2011 and 2012 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 During a feature on fictional television teachers , Susan was praised by teaching website TES Connect . Along with Will Schuester from American television show Glee , TES said that there are some teachers on television who manage to portray " convincing representations of the highs and lows of the job " . They also added " Susan Kennedy from Neighbours manages to be the comforting mother figure as well as coming down hard when necessary " . The Times named Susan 's amnesia storyline as one of their top 15 most memorable Neighbours moments . They said " She slipped on milk , bumped her head and thought she was 16 again . Her failure to understand why she was living with a family on Ramsay Street lasted nearly a year " . Television channel Five 's Holy Soap website also named the storyline as Susan 's most memorable moment , calling it " classic viewing " . 
 TV Scoop praised Woodburne 's performance during the MS storyline . They said , " Susan 's real life alter ego , Jackie Woodburne got to show off her excellent acting . As Susan 's vision went , and later as she was put into the MRI scanner , Woodburne portrayed real fear and panic " . TV Week named Susan as their third " Top Aussie TV Mum " . They said " strong @-@ spirited Susan has always doted on her kids , even while putting up with cheating <unk> Karl ( Alan Fletcher ) . The modern mum has seen it all , and still comes up smiling . In 2010 , Susan was voted the third " Most Popular TV Mum " in a survey carried out by Yahoo ! . Susan was placed seventh in a similar survey carried out by <unk> , to find " Britain 's favourite television mother " . They said " viewers identified with love for her family " . In April 2010 , Sky included Susan in their feature on the twenty @-@ five most memorable Neighbours characters . They stated , 
 " Kindly but strong matriarch Susan may not be the most medically robust woman ( amnesia , multiple sclerosis , frequent questionable haircuts ) , but she gets by thanks to her family . She 's so devoted , in fact , that after Malcolm , Billy and Libby ( sort of ) flew the nest , she went and inherited Zeke and Rachel from second husband Alex . Despite her big heart , she can be counted on to get fierce with anyone who tries to upset the Ramsay Street balance – her frequent fights with Izzy in the middle of the street over Karl cemented her reputation as everyone 's favourite soap mum . " 
 British newspaper , The Sun named Susan a " yummy mummy " and included her in a feature about over @-@ 30s female soap stars . Alan Fletcher has written a song dedicated to his screen wife titled " I 've Got a Crush on Susie K " . Bree Hoskin writing for LGBT website <unk> said the one good thing to come of Izzy 's scheming was Susan finally had her hair cut in an attempt to move on with her life . Sarah Ellis of Inside Soap said that Susan and Karl are Neighbours ' version of Deirdre and Ken Barlow from Coronation Street . Ellis added that they are bound to get back together in the end . Of Susan and Karl 's split , the Daily Mail 's Jaci Stephen wrote " The gorgeous Karl and Susan are meant to be together . Every time they break up , it 's like being torn limb from limb – and that 's just for me . " 
 = Cannons ( house ) = 
 Cannons was a stately home in Little Stanmore , Middlesex , built by James Brydges , 1st Duke of Chandos , between 1713 and 1724 at a cost of £ 200 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 28 @,@ 130 @,@ 000 today ) but which in 1747 was razed and its contents dispersed . 
 The name " Cannons " is an obsolete spelling of " canons " and refers to the Augustinian canons of St Bartholomew 's Hospital , London , which owned the estate before the English Reformation . 
 Cannons was the focus of the first Duke 's artistic patronage – patronage which led to his nickname " The Apollo of the Arts " . Brydges filled Cannons with Old Masters and Grand Tour acquisitions , and also appointed Handel as resident house composer from 1717 to 1718 . Such was the fame of Cannons that members of the public flocked to visit the estate in great numbers and Alexander Pope was unjustly accused of having represented the house as " Timon 's Villa " in his Epistle Of Taste ( 1731 ) . 
 The Cannons estate was acquired by Chandos in 1713 from the uncle of his first wife , Mary Lake . Mary 's great @-@ grandfather Sir Thomas Lake had acquired the manor of Great Stanmore in 1604 . Following the first Duke 's death in 1744 , Cannons passed to his son Henry Brydges , 2nd Duke of Chandos . Due to the cost of building Cannons and significant losses to the family fortune in the South Sea Bubble there was little liquid capital in Henry 's inheritance , so in 1747 he held a twelve @-@ day demolition sale at Cannons which saw both the contents and the very structure of the house itself sold piecemeal leaving little more than a ruin barely thirty years after its inception . The subsequent villa built by William Hallett is now occupied by North London Collegiate School . 
 = = History = = 
 There is archaeological evidence the site was used in Roman times for brick and tile making . 
 In mediaeval times the site was a part of the endowment of the Priory of St Bartholomew 's which operated St Bartholomew 's Hospital in London . This gave it the name Cannons , canon was an archaic term for certain orders of monks including the Augustinians of St Bartholomew 's Priory . At the dissolution of the monasteries the land was sold into private hands in 1543 . A large house was built during the 16th and 17th centuries at one point owned by Thomas Lake , James I 's Chancellor of the Exchequer . 
 James Brydges was an MP for Hereford who achieved the post of Paymaster General to the Forces . He retired in 1713 with a fortune of £ 600 @,@ 000 , worth £ 58 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 today , he had gained by speculation with the money in his care . Brydges had inherited Cannons from his first wife Mary who died in 1712 . In 1713 he married his cousin Cassandra Willoughby and began to enlarge the house . Brydges took personal control of the project and it was the work of a string of architects and landscape gardeners , who changed as they fell into and out of favour . He used the house as a setting for his patronage of the arts stocking it with paintings , sculpture and holding opera performances . It was completed by 1720 . 
 Brydges was made earl of <unk> in 1714 and later became duke of Chandos . His fortunes were damaged by financial losses in the South Sea Bubble of 1720 . However , when his wife died in 1735 , he remarried a wealthy 43 year @-@ old widow , Lady Lydia <unk> , who had £ 40 @,@ 000 to her name . 
 Chandos died in 1744 and his debts were by then so great that his heirs had no choice but to sell the house and contents in a demolition auction of 1747 . The architectural building adornments were sold off to other grand projects . The Palladian columns form the portico of the National Gallery in London . 
 A more modest house was built on the site in 1760 by William Hallet who had acquired wealth through his skill at cabinet making . This was itself enlarged by a succession of owners , notably Dennis O ’ Kelly owner of the outstanding racehorse Eclipse . By 1896 the parkland had begun to be sold off as building plots . Sir Arthur du Cros of Dunlop Rubber became tenant in 1902 and bought it in 1911 . He engaged the celebrated Arts and Crafts architect Charles <unk> to remodel and enlarge the building between 1905 @-@ 1908 . The exterior of the current building is largely his work . 
 In 1929 the house was bought by the North London Collegiate School who still occupy it today . Part of the gardens remain as Canons Park in the care of the London Borough of Harrow . 
 The house gives its name to the modern local district , Canon 's Park , which is largely built upon its parkland and is a wealthy north London suburb . This in turn gave its name to the Underground station of Canons Park on the Jubilee line . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Chandos remodelled the pre @-@ existing Jacobean house built by Thomas Lake ( which is believed to have been designed by John Thorpe ) . The new three @-@ storey house took 10 years to complete and was designed as a square block with four new pedimented facades and a large internal courtyard . 
 The Duke went through several architects beginning with William Talman in 1713 who produced twelve plans but was dismissed in 1714 before starting any building on the main house . Next was John James who designed the north and west ranges ( and also rebuilt the local parish church , St Lawrence , Whitchurch , with a baroque interior ) . On advice from Sir John Vanbrugh the Duke appointed James Gibbs in 1715 . Gibbs is known as an architect who worked in a baroque idiom but incorporated <unk> elements . He designed the chapel ( consecrated 29 August 1720 ) as well as the final designs for the four new facades . The designs for the interiors did not meet with approval from Vanbrugh who commented " The fronts <unk> ... But the inside is of poor Invention " and Gibbs was dismissed in 1719 . Cannons was completed under the supervision of the Duke 's surveyors John Price and latterly Edward Shepard . A contemporary account from a 1722 visitor at the time that the finishing touches were being made to the interiors records : 
 The Salon ... is to be supported by Marble Pillars and painted by <unk> [ sic Bellucci ] ; as is the great Staircase , which is all of Marble ... this Staircase leads you into the Royal Apartments fronting the <unk> and grand canal and consists of a Suite of six noble rooms well proportioned , finely plaister 'd and gilt by <unk> [ sic Giovanni <unk> , a Swiss @-@ Italian plasterer associated with the architect Gibbs ] and the Ceilings painted by <unk> ; from these Apartments you go into my Lords dressing room and Library , fronting the gardens . 
 Due to having five different architects working on the house and the Duke 's constantly changing vision , Cannons encompassed both Palladian and Baroque elements and has been described both as one of the last great Baroque houses and also as contributing towards the development of Palladianism in England . 
 = = Gardens = = 
 The grounds of Cannons extended to 105 acres ( 0 @.@ 42 km2 ) and were renowned for their magnificence . There was a pleasure garden an orchard and a grand terrace opening on to a parterre containing gilded statues . 
 Chandos had a water engineer of international fame in his household – his chaplain , the Rev John Theophilus <unk> , FRS . <unk> created a system of pipes of different materials and bores to feed the water features . In fact , he was better @-@ known for his scientific expertise than his interest in his parishioners . The water gardens , which included a great basin , a canal and numerous ornamental fountains led Nicholas Hawksmoor to comment " I cannot but own that the water at Cannon 's ... is the main beauty of that situation and it cost him dear " . 
 Another FRS associated with the Cannons garden was Richard Bradley , a horticulturalist who was to become the first professor of botany at the University of Cambridge . Bradley , who dedicated a gardening book to the Duke , supplied plants for the gardens . 
 Chandos , together with his head gardener <unk> <unk> , oversaw changes at Cannons reflecting the eighteenth @-@ century movement towards a more naturalistic style of landscape gardening . Some features from the original park survive , including two lakes , the Basin Lake and the Seven Acre Lake . English Heritage has included Canons Park on the National Register of Historic Parks and Gardens . 
 = = Art and music = = 
 Chandos began collecting paintings before Cannons was built . Chandos , who had good contacts in the art market in the Netherlands , sometimes bought works unseen , relying on the judgement of his agents . One of the difficulties he faced in acquiring the best continental art was that the War of the Spanish Succession ( 1701 – 1714 ) , which was a key factor in his great wealth , also made it more difficult to import art directly from Italy . Even so , his collection of Italian paintings included some of the great masters . Chandos also commissioned painters directly , for example , the portraitists Michael Dahl and Sir Godfrey Kneller , and the decorative painters Antonio Bellucci , Louis Laguerre and William Kent who worked on the interiors of the house . Chandos was a patron of the sculptors Grinling Gibbons and John Nost . 
 Chandos maintained a musical establishment ; some of the musicians are known to have doubled as household servants but even so , musical standards were very high . The music director for twenty years was the German composer Johann Christoph Pepusch . He wrote a number of pieces of church music for the Cannons chapel . The size of the musical establishment at Cannons declined in the 1720s in response to the family 's losses in the South Sea Bubble , a financial crash which took place in 1720 . 
 By far the most famous musician associated with Cannons is George Frideric Handel . He attracted the patronage of noblemen such as Richard Boyle , 3rd Earl of Burlington , and he was based at Burlington House before becoming Cannons ’ resident composer from 1717 to 1718 . It has been suggested that the move to Cannons was related to the fact that in 1717 there was reduced demand for his services in central London because operatic productions were experiencing a downturn . 
 Chandos had a taste for Italianate music and in 1719 became a patron of Handel 's opera company in London . At Cannons , as well as employing continental musicians as composers , he also engaged continental instrumentalists . The singers , on the other hand , seem to have been mainly English , rather than the highly trained and expensive Italians who were the stars of the London opera scene . 
 = = Demolition and dispersal = = 
 The Brydges lost a significant part of their fortune when the South Sea Bubble burst and their finances never recovered . Following the death of the first Duke , the very fabric of Cannons , all its contents and every fixture and fitting were auctioned to satisfy debts . A twelve @-@ day sale began on 16 June 1747 and the sale catalogue included works by Titian , Giorgione , Raphael and Guercino . Amongst the most notable paintings were Caravaggio 's Boy Bitten by a Lizard ( wrongly attributed to Guercino in the catalogue ) which the National Gallery in London acquired in 1986 , and Nicolas Poussin 's The Choice of Hercules which was purchased at the sale by Henry Hoare for Stourhead , his house in Wiltshire , where it still hangs . Of the sculptures Grinling Gibbons ' carved panel The Stoning of St Stephen is now in the Victoria and Albert Museum , and a statue of George II attributed to John van Nost is in Golden Square . 
 The portico , railings and marble staircase with bronze balustrade were bought by the 4th Earl of Chesterfield for his new London home , Chesterfield House , South Audley Street , which was built in 1749 but like Cannons is no longer standing having been demolished in 1937 . Another statue attributed to John Van Nost , of George I , was moved to Leicester Square , where , after frequent vandalism , it was removed in 1872 . 
 The rest of the house and contents were dispersed across the country and the location of much has been lost , however some substantial elements can still be seen , including the Ionic columns from the colonnade which some sources now place in front of the National Gallery in London . Elements of the chapel , in particular stained glass windows designed by Sebastiano Ricci and made by glass painter Joshua Price , Bellucci 's ceiling paintings and organ case built by Abraham Jordan were purchased by Thomas , Lord Foley and installed by James Gibbs in the Church of Saint Michael and All Angels , Great Witley , Worcestershire . There is a tradition that the gates were removed to Trinity College , Oxford , but this is incorrect , for the College 's two sets of gates both predate the demolition of Cannons and are well documented . 
 The estate itself was purchased by the cabinet maker William Hallett who in 1760 built a large villa on the site which today houses the North London Collegiate School , where part of the original temple can still be seen , and is known by the modern spelling , Canons . Hallett 's villa was mentioned by John Byng , 5th Viscount Torrington , in 1788 as being of a more appropriate size for the location than Cannons : " the situation is too near London for such [ former ] display ; being better suited for this present villa , sprung from the former demolition " . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Such was the fame of the house that the Duke had to introduce crowd control measures – including a one @-@ way system – to manage the large numbers of visitors who flocked to the estate . Cannons was featured in early travel guides including a 1725 travelogue by Daniel Defoe where he described Cannons extravagance thus : 
 This palace is so beautiful in its situation , so lofty , so <unk> the appearance of it , that a pen can but ill describe it ... ' tis only fit to be talk 'd of upon the very spot ... The whole structure is built with such a Profusion of Expense and finished with such a Brightness of Fancy and <unk> of Judgment . 
 A few years later Alexander Pope was seen as satirising Cannons in his poem Of Taste ( 1731 ) , which ridicules the villa of an aristocrat called " Timon " and includes the lines : 
 Light quirks of music , broken and uneven , 
 Make the soul dance upon a jig to heaven , 
 On painted ceilings you devoutly stare 
 Where sprawl the saints of Verrio or Laguerre ... 
 Timon , like Chandos , is a patron of the painter Louis Laguerre and listens to elaborate music in his chapel . After adverse comment , including a caricature by William Hogarth of Pope splattering Chandos ' carriage , the poet apologised to the Duke , denying that any comparison with Cannons was intended , but it has been suggested that Pope could have anticipated that some people would see a connection . Within a few years another point of comparison had emerged – Pope had prophesied the demolition of Timon 's villa . 
 = Lion and Sun = 
 The Lion and Sun ( Persian : <unk> <unk> خورشید , <unk> o <unk> ) is one of the main emblems of Iran , and between 1846 and 1980 was an element in Iran 's national flag . The motif , which illustrates ancient and modern Iranian traditions , became a popular symbol in Iran in the 12th century . The lion and sun symbol is based largely on astronomical and astrological configurations : the ancient sign of the sun in the house of Leo , which itself is traced back to Babylonian astrology and Near Eastern traditions . 
 The motif has many historical meanings . First , as a scientific and secular motif , it was only an astrological and zodiacal symbol . Under the Safavid and the first Qajar kings , it became more associated with Shia Islam . During the Safavid era , the lion and sun stood for the two pillars of society , the state and the Islamic religion . It became a national emblem during the Qajar era . In the 19th century , European visitors at the Qajar court attributed the lion and sun to remote antiquity ; since then , it has acquired a nationalistic interpretation . During the reign of Fat ′ h @-@ Ali Shah Qajar and his successors , the form of the motif was substantially changed . A crown was also placed on the top of the symbol to represent the monarchy . Beginning in the reign of Fat ′ h @-@ Ali , the Islamic aspect of the monarchy was de @-@ emphasized . This shift affected the symbolism of the emblem . The meaning of the symbol changed several times between the Qajar era and the 1979 revolution . The lion could be interpreted as a metaphor for Ali , for the heroes of Iran who are ready to protect the country against enemies , or for its ancient meaning as the symbol of kingship . The Sun has alternately been interpreted as symbol of the king , Jamshid , the mythical king of Iran , and the motherland . 
 The many historical meanings of the emblem have provided rich ground for competing symbols of Iranian identity . In the 20th century , some politicians and scholars suggested that the emblem should be replaced by other symbols such as the Derafsh Kaviani . However , the emblem remained the official symbol of Iran until the 1979 revolution , when the " Lion and Sun " symbol was removed from public spaces and government organizations , and replaced by the present @-@ day Coat of arms of Iran . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The lion and sun motif is based largely on astronomical and astrological configurations , and the ancient zodiacal sign of the sun in the house of Leo . This symbol , which combines " ancient Iranian , Arab , Turkic and Mongol traditions " , first became a popular symbol in the 12th century . According to <unk> Najmabadi , the lion and sun motif has had " a unique success " among icons for signifying the modern Iranian identity , in that the symbol is influenced by all significant historical cultures of Iran and brings together Zoroastrian , Shia , Jewish , Turkic and Iranian symbolism . 
 = = = Zodiacal and Semitic roots = = = 
 According to <unk> , the astrological combination of the sun above a lion has become the coat of arms of Iran . In Islamic astrology the zodiacal Lion was the ' house ' of the sun . This notion has " unquestionably " an ancient Mesopotamian origin . Since ancient times there was a close connection between the sun gods and the lion in the lore of the zodiac . It is known that , the sun , at its maximum strength between July 20 and August 20 was in the ' house ' of the Lion . 
 <unk> reviews the ancient Near Eastern tradition and how sun gods and divinities were closely connected to each other , and concludes that " the Persian solar lion , to this day the coat @-@ of @-@ arms of Iran , is evidently derived from the same ancient [ Near Eastern ] sun god " . As an example , he notes that in Syria the lion was the symbol of the sun . In Palestine a lion slayer hero was the son of Baa 'l Shamash , the great Semitic god of the sun . Interestingly , this lion slayer was originally a lion . Another example is the great Semitic solar divinity Shamash , who could be portrayed as a lion . The same symbolism is observed in Ancient Egypt where in the temple of Dendera , Ahi the Great is called " the Lion of the Sun , and the lion who rises in the northern sky , the brilliant god who bears the sun " . 
 According to Kindermann the Iranian Imperial coat of arms had its predecessor in numismatics , which itself is based largely on astronomical and astrological configurations . The constellation of Leo contains 27 stars and 8 shapeless ones . Leo is " a fiction of grammarians ignorant of the skies , which owes its existence to false interpretations and arbitrary changes of the older star @-@ names . " It is impossible to determine exactly what was the origin of such interpretation from stars . The Babylonians observed a heavenly hierarchy of kings in the zodiacal sign of Leo . They put the lion , as the king of their animal kingdom , into the place in the zodiac in which the summer solstice occurs . In the Babylonian zodiac , it became the symbol of the victory of the sun . Just as Jesus is called the Lion of Judah , and in Islamic traditions Ali Ibn Abu Talib is called the " Lion of God " ( Asadullah ) by Shiite Muslims , Hamzah , the uncle of the Islamic prophet Muhammad , was also called Lion of God . 
 = = = Iranian background = = = 
 The male sun had always been associated with Iranian royalty : Iranian tradition recalls that <unk> had a golden sun as their emblem . From the Greek historians of classical antiquity it is known that a crystal image of the sun adorned the royal tent of Darius III , that the Arsacid banner was adorned with the sun , and that the Sassanid standards had a red ball symbolizing the sun . The Byzantine chronicler Malalas records that the salutation of a letter from the " Persian king , the Sun of the East , " was addressed to the " Roman Caesar , the Moon of the West " . The <unk> king <unk> is recalled as saying : " I have heard from wise men that when the Moon of the Turan rises up it will be harmed by the Sun of the Iranians . " The sun was always imagined as male , and in some banners a figure of a male replaces the symbol of the sun . In others , a male figure accompanies the sun . 
 Similarly , the lion too has always had a close association with Iranian kingship . The garments and throne decorations of the Achaemenid kings were embroidered with lion motifs . The crown of the half @-@ Persian Seleucid king Antiochus I was adorned with a lion . In the investiture inscription of Ardashir I at <unk> @-@ e Rustam , the breast armour of the king is decorated with lions . Further , in some Iranian dialects the word for king ( shah ) is pronounced as <unk> , homonymous with the word for lion . Islamic , Turkish , and Mongol influences also stressed the symbolic association of the lion and royalty . The earliest evidence for the use of a lion on a standard comes from the Shahnameh , which noted that the feudal house of <unk> ( presumably a family of Parthian or Sassanid times ) adopted a golden lion for its devices . 
 = = = Islamic , Turkic , Mongolic roots = = = 
 Islamic , Turkic , and Mongol traditions stressed the symbolic association of the lion and royalty in the lion and sun motif . These cultures reaffirmed the charismatic power of the sun and the Mongols re @-@ introduced the veneration of the sun , especially the sunrise . The lion is probably represented more frequently and diversely than any other animal . In most forms , the lion has no apotropaic meaning and was merely decorative . However , it sometimes has an astrological or symbolic meaning . One of the popular forms of the lion is explicitly heraldic form , including in the Persian coat of arms ( the lion and sun ) ; the animal in the coat of arms of the Mamluk Baybars and perhaps also in that of the Rum <unk> of the name of <unk> Arslan ; and in numismatic representations . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Persian and Turkic Dynasties = = = 
 Ahmad <unk> , Mojtaba <unk> and Saeed <unk> 's vast amount of literary and archaeological evidence show that the ancient zodiacal sign of the sun in the house of Leo become a popular emblematic figure in the 12th century . ( cf . Zodiacal origin , above ) Fuat Köprülü suggests that the lion and sun on the Turkic and Mongolic flags and coins of these times are merely astrological signs and do not exemplify royalty . 
 The lion and sun symbol first appears in the 12th century , most notably on the coinage of Kaykhusraw II , who was Sultan of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm from 1237 to 1246 . These were " probably to exemplify the ruler 's power . " The notion that " the sun [ of the symbol ] symbolized the Georgian wife of the king , is a myth , for on one issue ' the sun rests on the back of two lions rampant with their tails interlaced ' [ ... ] and on some issues the sun appears as a male bust . " Other chief occurrences of 12th- to 14th @-@ century usage include : an early 13th @-@ century luster tile now in the Louvre ; a c . 1330 Mamluk steel mirror from Syria or Egypt ; on a ruined 12th- to 14th @-@ century <unk> bridge near Baghdad ; on some Ilkhanid coins ; and on a 12th- or 13th @-@ century bronze ewer now in the <unk> palace museum . In the latter , a rayed nimbus enclosing three female faces rests on a lion whose tail ends in a winged monster . 
 The use of the lion and sun symbol in a flag is first attested in a miniature painting illustrating a copy of Shahnameh Shams al @-@ Din <unk> , an epic on Mongol conquest , dated 1423 . The painting depicts several ( <unk> ? ) horsemen approaching the walled city of Nishapur . One of the horsemen carries a banner that bears a lion passant with a rising sun on its back . The pole is tipped with a crescent moon . By the time of the Safavids ( 1501 – 1722 ) , and the subsequent unification of Iran as a single state , the lion and sun had become a familiar sign , appearing on copper coins , on banners , and on works of art . The Lion and Sun motif was also used on banners of the Mughals of India , notably those of Shah Jahan . 
 = = = Safavid Dynasty = = = 
 In Safavid times , the lion and sun stood for two pillars of the society , state and religion . It is clear that , although various <unk> and banners were employed by the Safavids during their rule , especially the earlier Safavid kings . By the time of Shah Abbas , the lion and sun symbol had become one of the most popular emblems of Persia . 
 According to Najmabadi , the Safavid interpretation of this symbol was based on a combination of <unk> @-@ histories and tales such as the Shahnameh , stories of Prophets , and other Islamic sources . For the Safavids , the Shah had two roles : king and holy man . This double meaning was associated with the genealogy of Iranian kings . Two males were key people in this paternity : Jamshid ( mythical founder of an ancient Persian kingdom ) , and Ali ( Shi 'te first Imam ) . Jamshid was affiliated with the sun and Ali was affiliated with the lion ( <unk> @-@ faqar ) . 
 Shahbazi suggest that the association may originally have been based on a learned interpretation of the Shahnameh 's references to ' the Sun of Iran ' and ' the Moon of the <unk> . ( cf : the " Roman " — i.e. , Byzantine — king as the " Moon of the West " in the Iranian <unk> section ) . Since Ottoman sultans , the new sovereigns of ' Rûm ' , had adopted the moon crescent as their dynastic and ultimately national emblem , the Safavids of Persia , needed to have a their own dynastic and national emblem . Therefore , Safavids chose the lion and sun motif . Besides , the Jamshid , the sun had two other important meanings for the Safavids . The sense of time was organized around the solar system which was distinct from the Arab @-@ Islamic lunar system . Astrological meaning and the sense of cosmos was mediated through that . Through the zodiac the sun was linked to Leo which was the most auspicious house of the sun . Therefore , for the Safavids , the sign of lion and sun condensed the double meaning of the Shah — king and holy man ( Jamshid and Ali ) — through the auspicious zodiac sign of the sun in the house of Leo and brought the cosmic @-@ earthy pair ( king and Imam ) together . 
 In seeking the <unk> interpretation of the lion and sun motif , Shahbazi suggests that the Safavids had reinterpreted the lion as symbolizing Imam ʿAlī and the sun as typifying the " glory of religion " , a substitute for the ancient farr @-@ e <unk> . They reintroduced the ancient concept of God @-@ given Glory ( farr ) , reinterpreted as " light " in Islamic Iran , and the Prophet and Ali " had been credited with the possession of a divine light of lights ( <unk> al @-@ <unk> ) of leadership , which was represented as a blazing halo . " They attributed such qualities to Ali and sought the king 's genealogy through the Shia Fourth Imam 's mother to the royal Sassanian house . 
 = = = <unk> and Zand Dynasties = = = 
 The royal seal of Nadir Shah in 1746 was the lion and sun motif . In this seal , the sun bears the word Al @-@ <unk> ( Arabic : The earth of God ) . Two swords of Karim Khan Zand have gold @-@ inlaid inscriptions which refer to the : " ... celestial lion ... pointing to the astrological relationship to the Zodiac sign of Leo ... " Another record of this motif is the Lion and Sun symbol on a tombstone of a Zand soldier . 
 = = = Qajar and Pahlavi Dynasties = = = 
 = = = = Islamic @-@ Iranian Interpretation = = = = 
 The earliest known Qajar lion and sun symbol is on the coinage of <unk> Mohammad Shah Qajar , minted in 1796 on the occasion of Shah 's coronation . The coin bears the name of the new king underneath the sun and Ali ( the first Shi 'ite Imam ) underneath the lion 's belly . Both names are invoked and this coin suggest that this motif still stands for the king ( sun ) and religion ( lion ) , " <unk> and <unk> of sovereignty " . In the Qajar period the emblem can be found on Jewish marriage certificates ( <unk> ) and Shi 'ite mourning of <unk> banners . 
 = = = = Nationalistic Interpretation = = = = 
 During the reign of the second Qajar shah , Fat ′ h Ali Shah Qajar , we observe the beginning of a shift in political culture from the <unk> concept of rule . The Islamic component of the ruler was de @-@ emphasized , if not completely abounded . This shift coincides with the first archaeological surveys of Europeans in Iran and the re @-@ introduction of the past glorious pre @-@ Islamic history of Iran to Iranians . Fat 'h Ali Shah tried to affiliate his sovereignty with the glorious years of pre @-@ Islamic Iran . Literary evidence and documents from his time suggest that the sun in the lion and sun motif was the symbol of the king and a metaphor of Jamshid . Referring to Rostam , the mythical hero of Iran in Shahnameh , and the fact that lion was the symbol of Rostam , the lion received a nationalistic interpretation . The lion was the symbol of heroes of Iran who are ready to protect the country against enemies . Fat 'h Ali Shah addresses the meanings of the signs in two of his poems : 
 Also : 
 It was also during this time that he had the Sun Throne constructed , which is the imperial throne of Persia . 
 In the 19th century , European visitors at the Qajar court attributed the lion and sun to remote antiquity , which prompted Mohammad Shah Qajar to give it a " nationalistic interpretation . " In a decree published in 1846 , it is stated that " For each sovereign state an emblem is established , and for the august state of Persia , too , the Order of Lion and Sun has been in use , an ensign which is nearly three thousand years old — indeed dating from before the age of Zoroaster . And the reason for its currency may have been as follows . In the religion of Zoroaster , the sun is considered the revealer of all things and <unk> of the universe [ ... ] , hence , they venerated it " . This is followed by an astrological rationale for having selecting the " selected the sun in the house of Leo as the emblem of the august state of Persia . " The decree then claims that use of Order of the Lion and Sun had existed in pre @-@ Islamic Zoroastrian Iran until the worship of the sun was abolished by Muslims . Piemontese suggests that in this decree , " native political considerations and anachronistic historical facts are mixed with curious astrological arguments " At the time , the lion and sun symbol stood the state , the monarchy , and the nation of Iran , associated all with a pre @-@ Islamic history . 
 = = = = Order of the Lion and the Sun = = = = 
 The Imperial Order of the Lion and the Sun was instituted by Fat ’ h Ali Shah of the Qajar Dynasty in 1808 to honour foreign officials ( later extended to Persians ) who had rendered distinguished services to Persia . 
 = = = = Substantial changes in the motif = = = = 
 Another change under the second and third Qajar king was the Africanization of the motif . At this time , the lion was an African lion which had a longer mane and bigger body compared to the Persian lion . Yahya <unk> suggests that this modification was influenced by contact with Europeans . 
 According to <unk> the Zu 'l @-@ faqar and the lion decorated the Iranian flags at the time . It seems that towards the end of Fath ' Ali Shah ’ s reign the two logos were combined and the lion representing Ali was given Ali 's saber , Zu 'l @-@ faqar . 
 According to Najmabadi , occasionally we come across the lion and sun with a sword in the lion 's paw and with a crown during this period . The Mohammad Shah 's decree in 1836 states that the lion must <unk> stand , bear a saber ( " to make it explicitly stands for the military prowess of the state " ) . The crown was also added as a symbol of royalty rather than for any particular Qajar monarch . The decree states that the emblem is at once the national , royal , and the state emblem of Iran . In this period the lion was depicted as more masculine and the sun was female . Before this time the sun could be male or female and the lion was represented as a <unk> , friendly and subdued seated animal . 
 The crown over the lion and sun configuration consolidated the association of the symbol with the monarchy . The sun lost its importance as the icon of kingship and the <unk> Crown became the primary symbol of the Qajar monarchy . Under Nasir al @-@ Din Shah , logos varied from seated , <unk> lions to standing and sword @-@ bearing lions . In February 1873 , the decree for Order of Aftab ( Nishan @-@ i <unk> ) was issued by Nasi @-@ al Din Shah . 
 = = = = After the Persian Constitutional Revolution = = = = 
 In the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of 1906 , the lion and sun motif in the flag of Iran was described as a passant lion that holds a saber in its paw and with the sun in its background . A decree dated September 4 , 1910 specified the exact details of the logo , including the lion 's tail ( " like an italic S " ) , the position and the size of the lion , his paw , the sword , and the sun . 
 Najmabadi observes a parallel symbolism on wall hangings produced between the lion / sun and Reza Khan / motherland , after Reza Khan 's successful coup . The coy sun is protected by the lion and <unk> is the hero who should protect the motherland . Under Reza Shah the sun 's female facial features were removed and the sun was portrayed more realistically and merely with rays . In the military contexts the Pahlavi crown was added to the motif . 
 The <unk> adopted the lion and sun emblem from <unk> , but they replaced the Qajar Crown with the Pahlavi Crown . <unk> reintroduced the Persian symbolism to the motif . As is discussed in Persian traditions , the lion had been the symbol of kingship and symbol of Rustam 's heroism in Shahnameh . 
 The many historical meanings of the emblem , while provide a solid ground for its power as the national emblem of Iran , have also provided the rich ground for competing symbols of Iranian identity . One important campaign to abolish the emblem was initiated by Mojtaba <unk> in 1929 . In a report prepared at the request of the Iranian embassy in London , he insisted that the lion and sun is Turkic in origin . He recommended that the government replaces it with Derafsh @-@ e @-@ Kaviani : " One cannot attributed a national historical story to the lion @-@ and @-@ sun emblem , for it has no connection to ancient pre @-@ Islamic history , there is no evidence that Iranians designed or created it .... We might as well get rid of this remnant of the Turkish people and adopt the flag that symbolizes our mythical grandeur , that is Derafsh @-@ e @-@ Kaviani " . His suggestion was ignored . The symbol was challenged during World War I , while Hasan <unk> was publishing the Derafsh @-@ e @-@ Kaviani newspaper in Berlin . In his newspaper , he argued that the lion and sun is neither Iranian in origin nor very ancient as people assume . He insisted that the lion and sun should be replaced by the more Iranian symbol of Derafsh @-@ e @-@ Kaviani . 
 = = = After the 1979 revolution = = = 
 The Lion and Sun remained the official emblem of Iran until after the 1979 revolution , when the " Lion and Sun " symbol was — by decree — removed from public spaces and government organizations and replaced by the present @-@ day Coat of arms of Iran . For the Islamic revolution , the lion and sun symbol " allegedly " resembled the " oppressive Westernizing monarchy " that had to be replaced , despite the fact the symbol had old Shi 'a meanings and the lion was associated with Ali . In the present day , the lion and the sun emblem is still used by a segment of the Iranian community in exile as the symbol of opposition to the Islamic Republic . Several exiled opposition groups , including the monarchists , and People 's of <unk> continue to use the lion and sun emblem . In Los Angeles and cities with large Iranian communities the lion and sun emblem is largely used on mugs , Iranian flags , and souvenirs to an extent that far surpasses its display during the years of monarchy in the homeland . 
 = = International recognition = = 
 The Lion and Sun is an officially recognized but currently unused emblem of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement . The Red Lion and Sun Society of Iran ( <unk> <unk> <unk> خورشید <unk> <unk> ) was admitted to the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement in 1929 . 
 On September 4 , 1980 , the newly proclaimed Islamic Republic of Iran replaced the Red Lion and Sun with the Red Crescent , consistent with most other Muslim nations . Though the Red Lion and Sun has now fallen into disuse , Iran has in the past reserved the right to take it up again at any time ; the Geneva Conventions continue to recognize it as an official emblem , and that status was confirmed by Protocol III in 2005 even as it added the Red Crystal . 
 = = In literature = = 
 Anton Chekhov has a short story titled " The Lion and the Sun " . The story is about a mayor who had " long been desirous of receiving the Persian order of The Lion and the Sun " . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = Other ( non @-@ Iranian ) variants = = 
 = She 's like a Star = 
 " She 's like a Star " is a song written , produced and performed by British singer and songwriter Taio Cruz . It was released on 18 August 2008 as the fifth single from his debut studio album Departure ( 2008 ) . An R & B ballad , the lyrics of " She 's like a Star " are about the theme of parenthood , an idea which inspired Cruz to compose the song . The song was remixed to feature vocals from English girl group Sugababes and American rapper Busta Rhymes . It received generally mixed reviews from critics , who were ambivalent towards the composition . Upon release , it peaked at number twenty on the UK Singles Chart . The song 's music video features Hollyoaks actress Roxanne McKee as Cruz 's love interest . Cruz performed the song with the Sugababes at the 2008 MOBO Awards ceremony , and at Radio 1 's Big Weekend 2011 . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " She 's Like a Star " was written and produced by Taio Cruz for his debut studio album Departure ( 2008 ) . He composed the song in the middle of 2007 , towards the completion of the album 's recording , and was inspired to write it based on the idea of parenthood . During an interview with Sugar , Cruz explained that the song has a double meaning behind it : 
 It 's about my girlfriend but it 's also about how you would feel if you had a child and how strongly you would feel if you had a daughter and how overwhelming the love would be and they would kind of be like a star , you know like she ’ s my everything , she ’ s an angel . 
 " She 's like a Star " is an R & B ballad , and according to the digital sheet music published by Hal Leonard Publishing , was composed in the key of C major at a tempo of 100 beats per minute . It contains synthesizers and uses a sample of a child 's voice in the vocal " Like a star " , which is repeated several times throughout the song . According to Jon O 'Brien of AllMusic , the song is reminiscent of American rapper Kanye West 's older material . British soul singer Corinne Bailey Rae claimed that Cruz sampled her voice with her song " Like a Star " . Cruz denied the accusation and stated that a musicologist was able to prove that he did not sample Rae 's voice . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " She 's like a Star " is the fifth single from Departure , and was released in the United Kingdom on 18 August 2008 . There are several remixes of the song , including one by Cahill which is more uptempo than the original version . A remix that features vocals from English girl group Sugababes and American rapper Busta Rhymes was also released . According to the Daily Mirror , the collaboration came about when they ran into each other at the Hot 97 studios in New York City . The remix appears on the Sugababes ' sixth studio album Catfights and Spotlights ( 2008 ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Alex Fletcher of Digital Spy rated the song three out of five stars and stated that it is " undoubtedly " one of the album 's low points . Additionally , he criticised the song 's lack of " bravado and <unk> " in comparison to Cruz 's previous singles " I Can Be " and " Come On Girl " . Andy Welch of the Halesowen News described it as " a fine example of a Brit doing R & B as well as the Americans " , but was unimpressed with the child 's voice sample . Hazel Robinson from the BBC Chart Blog gave the song a full five @-@ star rating , and wrote that its composition and musical arrangement produced a song that sounds natural and " pretty extraordinary " . The reviewer admitted that while " She 's like a Star " was not the best track from Departure , it sounds " infinitely cooler " than the album 's previous single " I Can Be " . Daily Record 's Rick Fulton praised " She 's like a Star " as " one of the best R & B sounds to come out of the UK " . " She 's like a Star " earned Cruz a MOBO Award nomination for Best UK Male . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 The song debuted at number 44 on the UK Singles Chart in the issue dated 16 August 2008 . It peaked at number 20 three weeks later , and spent a total of 15 weeks on the chart . " She 's like a Star " became Cruz 's fifth consecutive top @-@ thirty hit in the United Kingdom , and <unk> the album 's first two singles " I Just Wanna Know " and " Moving On " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " She 's like a Star " was filmed in Spain . It features an appearance from the actress Roxanne McKee , known for her role as Louise in the British television soap opera Hollyoaks , in which she plays Cruz 's love interest . Cruz , who is friends with McKee , explained how the collaboration came about , saying : 
 Why Roxanne ? She 's fit and I wanted her in my video ! I 'm only joking . I 've known Roxanne for some time , although I don 't watch Hollyoaks so I don 't know about the character she plays . We needed an actress who wouldn 't feel awkward doing the mock love scenes so I just rang her and she agreed to do it . It was a case of <unk> for a few hours in sunny Spain . 
 Most scenes of the video take place in a large house . Throughout the video , the pair are touching and kissing with each other , and McKee is shown in the bathtub . In the concluding scenes , she leaves the house and is depicted as a bright star that travels towards the sky , while Cruz stands in front of the house by the pool . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 The singer performed " She 's like a Star " at the O2 Academy Sheffield , England in August 2008 along with many other tracks from Departure . The Sugababes , along with Cruz , performed the song as part of a medley with their single " Girls " at the 2008 MOBO Awards ceremony . Cruz performed it on MTV Live Sessions along with many of his previous and follow @-@ up singles . He performed " She 's like a Star " on 15 May 2011 at Radio 1 's Big Weekend , as the fourth song on the set list , which included his hits " Break Your Heart " , " Higher " and " Dynamite " . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = James Sloan Kuykendall = 
 James Sloan Kuykendall ( December 9 , 1878 – February 28 , 1928 ) was an American farmer , lawyer , and Democratic politician in the U.S. state of West Virginia . Kuykendall was twice elected as a member of the West Virginia House of Delegates representing Hampshire County ( 1907 – 1908 and 1919 – 1920 ) . Kuykendall also served three terms as the mayor of Romney and later fulfilled the position of city attorney . 
 Kuykendall was born in 1878 in Hampshire County , West Virginia , into one of the oldest families in the county , which was of Dutch descent . He was raised on his family 's farm , where he engaged in agricultural pursuits . Kuykendall was educated in Hampshire County 's rural public schools and subsequently completed his post @-@ secondary education at Hampden – Sydney College and Washington and Lee University . In 1901 , he graduated from the Cumberland School of Law , then completed a course in jurisprudence at the University of North Carolina School of Law . 
 Kuykendall first practiced law in Greensboro , North Carolina , before establishing a law practice in Romney , West Virginia . He was elected to represent Hampshire County in the West Virginia House of Delegates for one term in 1906 and another term in 1918 , each consisting of two years . He was the mayor of Romney for three terms , and in 1922 he served as Romney 's city attorney . Kuykendall was elected to three terms as a member of the Hampshire County Board of Education ; he also served as a Chancery Commissioner for the county . During World War I , Kuykendall was a member of the Legal Advisory Board of Hampshire County ; he also participated in Liberty bond drives and directed sales to raise American Red Cross funds . Kuykendall was engaged in the management of a commercial peach orchard near Romney known as Sherman Orchard . He died in 1928 and was interred at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 James Sloan Kuykendall was born on December 9 , 1878 , in the Springfield <unk> District of Hampshire County , West Virginia . He was the eldest child and son of William Kuykendall and his wife Hannah Pierce Sloan Kuykendall . Kuykendall 's family was of Dutch descent and was one of the oldest families residing in Hampshire County . He was probably named for his maternal grandfather , James Sloan . Kuykendall had two younger brothers and one younger sister : Michael Blue Kuykendall , Richard Sloan Kuykendall , and Nellie Frank Kuykendall . For the first 20 years of his life , Kuykendall resided on his family 's farm , where he engaged in agricultural pursuits . 
 = = Education = = 
 Kuykendall was raised in Romney and received his primary education in Hampshire County 's rural public schools . He commenced his higher education studies at Hampden – Sydney College in Hampden Sydney , Virginia , and later attended Washington and Lee University in Lexington , Virginia . Kuykendall subsequently engaged in the study of jurisprudence at the Cumberland School of Law of Cumberland University in Lebanon , Tennessee , from which he received a diploma in 1901 . He then completed a similar course in law at the University of North Carolina School of Law in Chapel Hill , North Carolina . Following this course at the University of North Carolina , Kuykendall passed his bar examination before the North Carolina Supreme Court and was admitted to the bar in North Carolina in September 1903 . 
 = = Law career = = 
 Following his admission to the North Carolina bar , Kuykendall commenced practicing law in Greensboro , where he practiced for a little over a year before returning to West Virginia . Kuykendall established his law practice in Romney and made his permanent residence there . Kuykendall argued his first case before the Hampshire County Circuit Court in defense of a Mr. Miller , who had been charged with petit larceny . Kuykendall secured the acquittal of his client , which further encouraged the young lawyer . Following this case , Kuykendall continued to perform as a criminal defense lawyer . According to historian James Morton Callahan , Kuykendall " adhered to his rule to take part only on the side of the defense , and he has a merited reputation or skill and ability in that particular field . " By 1923 , Kuykendall had been a defense attorney in three murder cases : State v. Hetrick , State v. Averell , and State v. Gardner . Kuykendall secured acquittals for his clients in State v. Hetrick and State v. Averell , but in State v. Gardner , his client was found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In 1906 , Kuykendall was elected to his first term as a member of the West Virginia House of Delegates , representing Hampshire County from 1907 through 1908 in the Twenty @-@ eighth West Virginia Legislative Session . During his first term in the West Virginia House of Delegates , Kuykendall was a member of the following standing committees : Education ; Counties , Districts , and Municipal Corporations ; Private Corporations and Joint Stock Companies ; Arts , Science , and General Improvement ; and State Boundaries . Kuykendall was elected to a second term in the West Virginia House of Delegates in 1918 and served in the Thirty @-@ fourth West Virginia Legislative Session from 1919 through 1920 . 
 Kuykendall was the mayor of Romney for three terms , and in 1922 he served as Romney 's city attorney . Kuykendall took an interest in the Hampshire County Schools and was elected to three terms as a member of the Hampshire County Board of Education . Kuykendall served alongside Robert White and Joshua Soule Zimmerman as a Chancery Commissioner for Hampshire County . 
 Kuykendall was a lifelong Democrat , and he cast his first vote for Democratic Party presidential nominee William Jennings Bryan in the United States presidential election of 1900 . Kuykendall served one term as the chairman of the Executive Committee of West Virginia 's 2nd congressional district and was elected to three terms as the chairman of the Hampshire County Democratic Party Central Committee . In 1916 , Kuykendall was a delegate to the West Virginia Democratic Party State Convention at Parkersburg that nominated John J. Cornwell as the party 's gubernatorial candidate . He was also both a delegate and chairman of the West Virginia Democratic Party 's Congressional Convention that nominated William Gay Brown , Jr . , as a candidate for the United States House of Representatives . Kuykendall was a strong proponent of Brown , whom he supported in subsequent conventions and elections . He was also a presidential elector in the Electoral College during the reelection of Woodrow Wilson . 
 During World War I , Kuykendall was a member of the Legal Advisory Board of Hampshire County , during which time he assisted in producing several hundred questionnaires for the county 's prospective soldiers . He also participated in Liberty bond drives and directed sales to raise funds for the American Red Cross . 
 = = Agricultural pursuits = = 
 According to The Census of the Peach Crop of 1907 in West Virginia published by the West Virginia Department of Agriculture , Kuykendall was engaged in the management of a commercial peach orchard near Romney known as Sherman Orchard . In 1907 , Kuykendall 's orchard produced Carman , Champion , Elberta , <unk> , <unk> , and Heath Cling peach varieties , totaling 5 @,@ 800 baskets in all . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Kuykendall died on February 28 , 1928 , and he was interred at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney . His wife Bertha died on March 4 , 1962 , and was interred beside Kuykendall . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kuykendall was married in Hampshire County on April 5 , 1905 , to Bertha Ray Williams ( November 10 , 1883 – March 4 , 1962 ) , born in Fairfax County , Virginia , and the daughter of Reverend James P. Williams and his wife Mary S. Williams . Williams 's father was the presiding elder of the Moorefield District of the Methodist Episcopal Church , South . Kuykendall and his wife Mary had three children together including two daughters and one son : 
 Alma Elizabeth Kuykendall Sheehan ( January 14 , 1906 – December 6 , 1970 ) , married on June 31 , 1928 , to William Terrell Sheehan ( December 5 , 1902 – June 16 , 1957 ) 
 James Sloan Kuykendall , Jr . ( December 11 , 1906 – February 17 , 1995 ) , married Emily Light ( June 29 , 1911 – June 19 , 1982 ) 
 Mary Ray Kuykendall Armstrong ( January 5 , 1909 – May 15 , 1996 ) , married Robert W. Armstrong ( April 11 , 1905 – June 16 , 1958 ) 
 While Kuykendall 's wife belonged to the Methodist Episcopal Church , South , he was raised as a Presbyterian , and for five years he was superintendent of the Presbyterian Church 's Sunday school . 
 = Alexander Hamilton = 
