 Alexander Hamilton ( January 11 , 1755 or 1757 – July 12 , 1804 ) was a Founding Father of the United States , chief staff aide to General George Washington , one of the most influential interpreters and promoters of the U.S. Constitution , the founder of the nation 's financial system , the founder of the Federalist Party , the world 's first voter @-@ based political party , the founder of the United States Coast Guard , and the founder of The New York Post newspaper . As the first Secretary of the Treasury , Hamilton was the primary author of the economic policies of the George Washington administration . Hamilton took the lead in the funding of the states ' debts by the Federal government , the establishment of a national bank , a system of tariffs , and friendly trade relations with Britain . He led the Federalist Party , created largely in support of his views ; he was opposed by the Democratic @-@ Republican Party , led by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison , which despised Britain and feared that Hamilton 's policies of a strong central government would weaken the American commitment to Republicanism . 
 Born out of wedlock , raised in the West Indies , and orphaned as a child , Hamilton pursued a college education through the help of local wealthy men . Recognized for his abilities and talent , he was sent to King 's College ( now Columbia University ) in New York City . Hamilton played a major role in the American Revolutionary War . At the start of the war in 1775 , he joined a militia company . In early 1776 , he raised a provincial artillery company , to which he was appointed captain . He soon became the senior aide to General Washington , the American forces ' commander @-@ in @-@ chief . Washington sent him on numerous important missions to tell generals what Washington wanted . After the war , Hamilton was elected to the Congress of the Confederation from New York . He resigned , to practice law , and founded the Bank of New York . Hamilton was among those dissatisfied with the weak national government . He led the Annapolis Convention , which successfully influenced Congress to issue a call for the Philadelphia Convention , in order to create a new constitution . He was an active participant at Philadelphia ; and he helped achieve ratification by writing 51 of the 85 installments of The Federalist Papers , which to this day are the single most important reference for Constitutional interpretation . 
 Hamilton became the leading cabinet member in the new government under President Washington . Hamilton was a nationalist , who emphasized strong central government and successfully argued that the implied powers of the Constitution provided the legal authority to fund the national debt , assume states ' debts , and create the government @-@ backed Bank of the United States . These programs were funded primarily by a tariff on imports , and later also by a highly controversial tax on whiskey . Facing well @-@ organized opposition from Jefferson and Madison , Hamilton mobilized a nationwide network of friends of the government , especially bankers and businessmen . It became the Federalist Party . A major issue splitting the parties was the Jay Treaty , largely designed by Hamilton in 1794 . It established friendly economic relations with Britain to the chagrin of France and the supporters of the French Revolution . Hamilton played a central role in the Federalist party , which dominated national and state politics until it lost the election of 1800 to Jefferson 's Democratic Republicans . 
 In 1795 , he returned to the practice of law in New York . He tried to control the policies of President Adams ( 1797 – 1801 ) . In 1798 and 99 , Hamilton called for mobilization against France after the XYZ Affair and became commander of a new army , which he readied for war . However , the Quasi @-@ War , while hard @-@ fought at sea , was never officially declared and did not involve army action . In the end , Adams found a diplomatic solution which avoided a war with France . Hamilton 's opposition to Adams ' re @-@ election helped cause his defeat in the 1800 election . When Jefferson and Aaron Burr tied for the presidency in the electoral college in 1801 , Hamilton helped to defeat Burr , whom he found unprincipled , and to elect Jefferson despite philosophical differences . Hamilton continued his legal and business activities in New York City , but lost much of his national prominence within the Federalist party . When Vice President Burr ran for governor of New York state in 1804 , Hamilton crusaded against him as unworthy . Taking offense at some of Hamilton 's comments , Burr challenged him to a duel in 1804 and mortally wounded Hamilton , who died the next day . 
 = = Childhood in the Caribbean = = 
 Alexander Hamilton was born in and spent part of his childhood in Charlestown , the capital of the island of Nevis , in the Leeward Islands ; Nevis was one of the British West Indies . Hamilton was born out of wedlock to Rachel Faucette , a married woman of partial British and partial French Huguenot descent , and James A. Hamilton , the fourth son of the Scottish laird Alexander Hamilton of Grange , Ayrshire . 
 His mother moved with the young Hamilton to St. Croix in the Virgin Islands , then ruled by Denmark . It is not certain whether the year of Hamilton 's birth was 1757 or 1755 ; most historical evidence after Hamilton 's arrival in North America supports the idea that he was born in 1757 , and many historians had accepted this birth date . But , Hamilton 's early life in the Caribbean was recorded in documents which were first published in Danish in 1930 ; this evidence has caused historians since then to favor a birth year of 1755 . Hamilton listed his birth year as 1757 when he first arrived in the Thirteen Colonies . He celebrated his birthday on January 11 . In later life , he tended to give his age only in round figures . Probate papers from St. Croix in 1768 , after the death of Hamilton 's mother , list him as then 13 years old , a date that would support a birth year of 1755 . Historians have posited reasons for the different dates of birth being used : If 1755 is correct , Hamilton may have been trying to appear younger than his college classmates or perhaps wished to avoid standing out as older ; if 1757 is correct , the probate document indicating a birth year of 1755 may have been in error , or Hamilton may have been attempting to pass as 13 , in order to be more employable after his mother 's death . 
 Hamilton 's mother had been married previously to Johann Michael <unk> of St. Croix . Faucette left her husband and first son , Peter , traveling to St. Kitts in 1750 , where she met James Hamilton . Hamilton and Faucette moved together to her birthplace , Nevis , where she had inherited property from her father . The couple 's two sons were James Jr. and Alexander . Because Alexander Hamilton 's parents were not legally married , the Church of England denied him membership and education in the church school . Hamilton received " individual tutoring " and classes in a private school led by a Jewish headmistress . Hamilton supplemented his education with a family library of 34 books . 
 James Hamilton abandoned Rachel Faucette and their sons , allegedly to " spar [ e ] [ her ] a charge of bigamy ... after finding out that her first husband intend [ ed ] to divorce her under Danish law on grounds of adultery and desertion . " Thereafter , she supported her children in St. Croix , keeping a small store in Christiansted . She contracted a severe fever and died on February 19 , 1768 , 1 : 02 am , leaving Hamilton orphaned . This may have had severe emotional consequences for him , even by the standards of an 18th @-@ century childhood . In probate court , Faucette 's " first husband seized her estate " and obtained the few valuables she had owned , including some household silver . Many items were auctioned off , but a friend purchased the family 's books and returned them to the young Hamilton . 
 Hamilton became a clerk at a local import @-@ export firm , Beekman and Cruger , which traded with New England ; he was left in charge of the firm for five months in 1771 , while the owner was at sea . He and his older brother James Jr. were adopted briefly by a cousin , Peter Lytton ; but when Lytton committed suicide , the brothers were separated . James apprenticed with a local carpenter , while Alexander was adopted by a Nevis merchant , Thomas Stevens . According to the writer Ron Chernow , some evidence suggests that Stevens may have been Alexander Hamilton 's biological father ; his son , Edward Stevens , became a close friend of Hamilton . The two boys were described as looking much alike , were both fluent in French , and shared similar interests . 
 Hamilton continued clerking , but he remained an avid reader , later developing an interest in writing , and began to desire a life outside the small island where he lived . He wrote an essay published in the Royal Danish @-@ American Gazette , a detailed account of a hurricane which had devastated Christiansted on August 30 , 1772 . His biographer says that , " Hamilton 's famous letter about the storm astounds the reader for two reasons : for all its bombastic excesses , it does seem wondrous the 17 @-@ year @-@ old self @-@ educated clerk could write with such verve and gusto . Clearly , Hamilton was highly literate and already had considerable fund of verbal riches . " The essay impressed community leaders , who collected a fund to send the young Hamilton to the North American colonies for his education . 
 = = Education = = 
 In the autumn of 1772 , Hamilton arrived at Elizabethtown Academy , a grammar school in Elizabethtown , New Jersey . In 1773 he studied with Francis Barber at Elizabethtown in preparation for college work . He came under the influence of William Livingston , a leading intellectual and revolutionary , with whom he lived for a time at his Liberty Hall . Hamilton entered King 's College in New York City ( now Columbia University ) in the autumn of 1773 " as a private student " and officially matriculated in May 1774 . In what is credited as his first public appearance , on July 6 , 1774 at the liberty pole at King 's College , Hamilton 's friend Robert Troup spoke glowingly of Hamilton 's ability to clearly and concisely explain the rights and reasons the patriots have in their case against the British . Hamilton , Troup and four other undergraduates formed an unnamed literary society that is regarded as a precursor of the Philolexian Society . 
 When the Church of England clergyman Samuel Seabury published a series of pamphlets promoting the Loyalist cause in 1774 , Hamilton responded anonymously with his first political writings , A Full Vindication of the Measures of Congress and The Farmer <unk> . Seabury essentially tried to provoke fear into the colonies and his main objective was to stopgap the potential of a union among the colonies . Hamilton published two additional pieces attacking the Quebec Act and may have also authored the fifteen anonymous installments of " The Monitor " for Holt 's New York Journal . Although Hamilton was a supporter of the Revolutionary cause at this prewar stage , he did not approve of mob reprisals against Loyalists . On May 10 , 1775 , Hamilton won credit for saving his college president Myles Cooper , a Loyalist , from an angry mob by speaking to the crowd long enough for Cooper to escape . 
 = = During the Revolutionary War = = 
 = = = Early military career = = = 
 In 1775 , after the first engagement of American troops with the British at Lexington and Concord , Hamilton and other King 's College students joined a New York volunteer militia company called the <unk> , later renamed or reformed as the Hearts of Oak . He drilled with the company , before classes , in the graveyard of nearby St. George 's Chapel . Hamilton studied military history and tactics on his own and was soon recommended for promotion . Under fire from HMS Asia , he led a successful raid for British cannons in the Battery , the capture of which resulted in the Hearts of Oak becoming an artillery company thereafter . Through his connections with influential New York patriots such as Alexander McDougall and John Jay , he raised the New York Provincial Company of Artillery of sixty men in 1776 , and was elected captain . It took part in the campaign of 1776 around New York City , particularly at the Battle of White Plains ; at the Battle of Trenton , it was stationed at the high point of town , the meeting of the present Warren and Broad Streets , to keep the Hessians pinned in the Trenton Barracks . 
 = = = George Washington 's staff = = = 
 Hamilton was invited to become an aide to William Alexander , Lord Stirling and one other general , perhaps Nathanael Greene or Alexander McDougall . He declined these invitations , believing his best chance for improving his station in life was glory on the battlefield . Hamilton eventually received an invitation he felt he could not refuse : to serve as Washington 's aide , with the rank of Lieutenant Colonel . Washington felt , " Aides de camp are persons in whom entire confidence must be placed and it requires men of abilities to execute the duties with propriety and dispatch . " Hamilton served for four years as Washington 's chief staff aide . He handled letters to Congress , state governors , and the most powerful generals in the Continental Army ; he drafted many of Washington 's orders and letters at the latter 's direction ; he eventually issued orders from Washington over Hamilton 's own signature . Hamilton was involved in a wide variety of high @-@ level duties , including intelligence , diplomacy , and negotiation with senior army officers as Washington 's emissary . 
 During the war , Hamilton became close friends with several fellow officers . His letters to the Marquis de Lafayette and to John Laurens , employing the sentimental literary conventions of the late eighteenth century and alluding to Greek history and mythology , have been read by Jonathan Katz as revealing a homosocial or perhaps homosexual relationship , but few historians agree . 
 While on Washington 's staff , Hamilton long sought command and a return to active combat . As the war drew nearer to an end , he knew that opportunities for military glory were diminishing . In February 1781 , Hamilton was mildly reprimanded by Washington and used this as an excuse to resign his staff position . He asked Washington and others for a field command . This continued until early July 1781 , when Hamilton submitted a letter to Washington with his commission enclosed , " thus tacitly threatening to resign if he didn 't get his desired command . " 
 On July 31 , 1781 , Washington relented and assigned Hamilton as commander of a New York light infantry battalion . In the planning for the assault on Yorktown , Hamilton was given command of three battalions , which were to fight in conjunction with the allied French troops in taking Redoubts No. 9 and No. 10 of the British fortifications at Yorktown . Hamilton and his battalions fought bravely and took Redoubt No. 10 with bayonets in a nighttime action , as planned . The French also fought bravely , suffered heavy casualties , and took Redoubt No. 9 . These actions forced the British surrender of an entire army at Yorktown , Virginia , effectively ending their major British military operations in North America . 
 = = = Congress of the Confederation = = = 
 After the Battle of Yorktown , Hamilton resigned his commission . He was appointed in July 1782 to the Congress of the Confederation as a New York representative for the term beginning in November 1782 . Before his appointment to Congress in 1782 , Hamilton was already sharing his criticisms of Congress . He expressed these criticisms in his letter to James Duane dated September 3 , 1780 . In this letter he wrote , " The fundamental defect is a want of power in Congress … the confederation itself is defective and requires to be altered ; it is neither fit for war , nor peace . " While on Washington 's staff , Hamilton had become frustrated with the decentralized nature of the wartime Continental Congress , particularly its dependence upon the states for voluntary financial support . Under the Articles of Confederation , Congress had no power to collect taxes or to demand money from the states . This lack of a stable source of funding had made it difficult for the Continental Army both to obtain its necessary provisions and to pay its soldiers . During the war , and for some time after , Congress obtained what funds it could from subsidies from the King of France , from aid requested from the several states ( which were often unable or unwilling to contribute ) , and from European loans . 
 An amendment to the Articles had been proposed by Thomas Burke , in February 1781 , to give Congress the power to collect a 5 % impost , or duty on all imports , but this required ratification by all states ; securing its passage as law proved impossible after it was rejected by Rhode Island in November 1782 . Madison joined Hamilton in persuading Congress to send a delegation to persuade Rhode Island to change its mind . Their report recommending the delegation argued the federal government needed not just some level of financial autonomy , but also the ability to make laws that superseded those of the individual states . Hamilton transmitted a letter arguing that Congress already had the power to tax , since it had the power to fix the sums due from the several states ; but Virginia 's rescission of its own ratification ended the Rhode Island negotiations . 
 = = = Congress and the army = = = 
 While Hamilton was in Congress , discontented soldiers began to pose a danger to the young United States . Most of the army was then posted at Newburgh , New York . Those in the army were paying for much of their own supplies , and they had not been paid in eight months . Furthermore , the Continental officers had been promised , in May 1778 , after Valley Forge , a pension of half their pay when they were discharged . By the early 1780s , due to the structure of the government under the Articles of Confederation , it had no power to tax to either raise revenue or pay its soldiers . In 1782 after several months without pay , a group of officers organized to send a delegation to lobby Congress , led by Capt. Alexander MacDougall . The officers had three demands : the Army 's pay , their own pensions , and commutation of those pensions into a lump @-@ sum payment if Congress were unable to afford the half @-@ salary pensions for life . Congress rejected the proposal . 
 Several Congressmen , including Hamilton , Robert Morris and Gouverneur Morris , attempted to use this Newburgh Conspiracy as leverage to secure support from the states and in Congress for funding of the national government . They encouraged MacDougall to continue his aggressive approach , threatening unknown consequences if their demands were not met , and defeated proposals that would have resolved the crisis without establishing general federal taxation : that the states assume the debt to the army , or that an impost be established dedicated to the sole purpose of paying that debt . Hamilton suggested using the Army 's claims to prevail upon the states for the proposed national funding system . The Morrises and Hamilton contacted Knox to suggest he and the officers defy civil authority , at least by not disbanding if the army were not satisfied ; Hamilton wrote Washington to suggest that Hamilton covertly " take direction " of the officers ' efforts to secure redress , to secure continental funding but keep the army within the limits of moderation . Washington wrote Hamilton back , declining to introduce the army ; after the crisis had ended , he warned of the dangers of using the army as leverage to gain support for the national funding plan . 
 On March 15 , Washington defused the Newburgh situation by giving a speech to the officers . Congress ordered the Army officially disbanded in April 1783 . In the same month , Congress passed a new measure for a twenty @-@ five @-@ year impost — which Hamilton voted against — that again required the consent of all the states ; it also approved a commutation of the officers ' pensions to five years of full pay . Rhode Island again opposed these provisions , and Hamilton 's robust assertions of national prerogatives in his previous letter were widely held to be excessive . 
 In June 1783 , a different group of disgruntled soldiers from Lancaster , Pennsylvania , sent Congress a petition demanding their back pay . When they began to march toward Philadelphia , Congress charged Hamilton and two others with intercepting the mob . Hamilton requested militia from Pennsylvania 's Supreme Executive Council , but was turned down . Hamilton instructed Assistant Secretary of War William Jackson to intercept the men . Jackson was unsuccessful . The mob arrived in Philadelphia , and the soldiers proceeded to harangue Congress for their pay . The President of Congress , John Dickinson , feared that the Pennsylvania state militia was unreliable , and refused its help . Hamilton argued that Congress ought to adjourn to Princeton , New Jersey . Congress agreed , and relocated there . 
 Frustrated with the weakness of the central government , Hamilton while in Princeton drafted a call to revise the Articles of Confederation . This resolution contained many features of the future U.S. Constitution , including a strong federal government with the ability to collect taxes and raise an army . It also included the separation of powers into the Executive , Legislative , and Judicial branches . 
 = = = Return to New York = = = 
 Hamilton resigned from Congress , and in July 1783 was authorized to practice law in New York after several months of self @-@ directed education . He practiced law in New York City in partnership with Richard <unk> . He specialized in defending Tories and British subjects , as in Rutgers v. Waddington , in which he defeated a claim for damages done to a brewery by the Englishmen who held it during the military occupation of New York . He pleaded for the Mayor 's Court to interpret state law consistent with the 1783 Treaty of Paris which had ended the Revolutionary War . 
 In 1784 , he founded the Bank of New York which became one of the longest operating banks in American history , it stayed in business for over 220 years before it merged with another bank in 2007 . Hamilton was one of the men who restored King 's College , which had been suspended since 1776 and severely damaged during the War , as Columbia College . Long dissatisfied with the weak Articles of Confederation , he played a major leadership role at the Annapolis Convention in 1786 . He drafted its resolution for a constitutional convention , and in doing so brought his longtime desire to have a more powerful , more financially independent federal government one step closer to reality . 
 = = Constitution and The Federalist Papers = = 
 = = = Constitutional Convention and ratification of the Constitution = = = 
 In 1787 , Hamilton served as assemblyman from New York County in the New York State Legislature and was chosen as a delegate for the Constitutional Convention by his father @-@ in @-@ law Philip Schuyler . Even though Hamilton had been a leader in calling for a new Constitutional Convention , his direct influence at the Convention itself was quite limited . Governor George Clinton 's faction in the New York legislature had chosen New York 's other two delegates , John Lansing , Jr. and Robert Yates , and both of them opposed Hamilton 's goal of a strong national government . Thus , whenever the other two members of the New York delegation were present , they decided New York 's vote , to ensure that there was no major alterations to the Articles of Confederation . 
 Early in the Convention he made a speech proposing a President @-@ for @-@ Life ; it had no effect upon the deliberations of the convention . He proposed to have an elected President and elected Senators who would serve for life , contingent upon " good behavior " and subject to removal for corruption or abuse ; this idea contributed later to the hostile view of Hamilton as a monarchist sympathizer , held by James Madison . According to Madison 's notes , Hamilton said in regards to the executive , " The English model was the only good one on this subject . The hereditary interest of the king was so interwoven with that of the nation , and his personal emoluments so great , that he was placed above the danger of being corrupted from abroad … Let one executive be appointed for life who dares execute his powers . " Hamilton argued , " And let me observe that an executive is less dangerous to the liberties of the people when in office during life than for seven years . It may be said this constitutes as an elective monarchy … But by making the executive subject to impeachment , the term ' monarchy ' cannot apply … " During the convention , Hamilton constructed a draft for the Constitution based on the convention debates , but he never presented it . This draft had most of the features of the actual Constitution . In this draft , the Senate was to be elected in proportion to the population , being two @-@ fifths the size of the House , and the President and Senators were to be elected through complex multistage elections , in which chosen electors would elect smaller bodies of electors ; they would hold office for life , but were removable for misconduct . The President would have an absolute veto . The Supreme Court was to have immediate jurisdiction over all law suits involving the United States , and state governors were to be appointed by the federal government . 
 At the end of the Convention , Hamilton was still not content with the final form of the Constitution , but signed it anyway as a vast improvement over the Articles of Confederation , and urged his fellow delegates to do so also . Since the other two members of the New York delegation , Lansing and Yates , had already withdrawn , Hamilton was the only New York signer to the United States Constitution . He then took a highly active part in the successful campaign for the document 's ratification in New York in 1788 , which was a crucial step in its national ratification . He first used the popularity of the Constitution by the masses to compel George Clinton to sign , but was unsuccessful . The state convention in Poughkeepsie in June 1788 pitted Hamilton , Jay , James Duane , Robert Livingston , and Richard Morris against the <unk> faction led by <unk> Smith , Lansing , Yates , and Gilbert Livingston . Hamilton 's faction were against any conditional ratification , under the impression that New York would not be accepted into the Union , while Clinton 's faction wanted to amend the Constitution , while maintaining the state 's right to secede if their attempts failed . During the state convention , New Hampshire and Virginia becoming the ninth and tenth states to ratify the Constitution , respectively , had ensured any adjournment would not happen and a compromise would have to be reached . Hamilton 's arguments used for the ratifications were largely iterations of work from The Federalist Papers , and Smith eventually went for ratification , though it was more out of necessity than Hamilton 's rhetoric . The vote in the state constitution was ratified 30 to 27 , on July 26 , 1788 . 
 In 1788 , Hamilton served yet another term in what proved to be the last session of the Continental Congress under the Articles of Confederation . When the term of Philip Schuyler was up in 1791 , elected in his place was the attorney general of New York , one Aaron Burr . Hamilton blamed Burr for this result , and ill characterizations of Burr appear in his correspondence thereafter . The two men did work together from time to time thereafter on various projects , including Hamilton 's army of 1798 and the Manhattan Water Company . 
 = = = The Federalist Papers = = = 
 Hamilton recruited John Jay and James Madison to write a series of essays defending the proposed Constitution , now known as The Federalist Papers , and made the largest contribution to that effort , writing 51 of 85 essays published ( Madison wrote 29 , Jay only five ) . Hamilton supervised the entire project , enlisted the participants , wrote the majority of the essays , and oversaw the publication . During the project each person was responsible for their areas of expertise ; Jay covered foreign relations , Madison covered the history of republics and confederacies , along with the anatomy of the new government and Hamilton covered the branches of government most pertinent to him : the executive and judicial branches , with some aspects of the Senate , as well as covering military matters and taxation . The papers first appeared in The Independent Journal in October 27 , 1787 . 
 Hamilton wrote the first paper signed as Publius , and all of the subsequent papers were signed under the name . Jay wrote the next four papers to elaborate on the confederation 's weakness and the need for unity against foreign aggression and against splitting into rival confederacies , and , except for Number 64 , was not further involved . Hamilton 's highlights included discussion that although republics have been culpable for disorders in the past , advances in the " science of politics " had fostered principles that ensured that those abuses could be prevented , such as the division of powers , legislative checks and balances , an independent judiciary , and legislators that were represented by electors ( Numbers 7 – 9 ) . Hamilton also wrote an extensive defense of the constitution ( No. 23 – 36 ) , and discussed the Senate and executive and judicial branches in Numbers 65 – 85 . Hamilton and Madison worked to describe the anarchic state of the confederation in numbers 15 – 22 , and have been described as not being entirely different in thought during this time period in contrast to their stark opposition later in life . Subtle differences appeared with the two when discussing the necessity of standing armies . 
 = = Reconciliation between New York and Vermont = = 
 In 1764 King George III had ruled in favor of New York in a dispute between New York and New Hampshire over the region that later became the state of Vermont . New York refused to recognize claims to property derived from grants by New Hampshire governor Benning Wentworth during the preceding 15 years when the territory had been governed as a de facto part of New Hampshire . Consequently , the people of the disputed territory , called the New Hampshire Grants , resisted the enforcement of New York 's laws within the Grants . Indeed , Ethan Allen 's militia called the Green Mountain Boys , noted for successes in the war against the British in 1775 , was originally formed for the purpose of resisting the colonial government of New York . In 1777 the statesmen of the Grants declared it a separate state to be called Vermont , and by early 1778 had erected a state government . During 1777 – 1785 , Vermont was repeatedly denied representation in the Continental Congress , largely because New York insisted that Vermont was legally a part of New York . Vermont took the position that because its petitions for admission to the Union were denied , it was not a part of the United States , not subject to Congress , and at liberty to negotiate separately with the British . The latter Haldimand negotiations led to some exchanges of prisoners of war . The peace treaty of 1783 that ended the war included Vermont within the boundaries of the United States . 
 By 1787 the government of New York had almost entirely given up plans to subjugate Vermont , but still claimed jurisdiction . As a member of the legislature of New York , Hamilton argued forcefully and at length in favor of a bill to recognize the sovereignty of the State of Vermont , against numerous objections to its constitutionality and policy . Consideration of the bill was deferred to a later date . In 1788 and 1789 extensive negotiations were carried out between Hamilton and Nathaniel Chipman , a lawyer representing Vermont . Among the topics were the location of the border between Vermont and New York , and financial compensation of New York land @-@ grantees whose grants Vermont refused to recognize because they conflicted with earlier grants from New Hampshire . In 1788 the new Constitution of the United States went into effect , with its plan to replace the unicameral Continental Congress with a new Congress consisting of a Senate and a House of Representatives . Hamilton wrote : 
 One of the first subjects of deliberation with the new Congress will be the independence of Kentucky [ at that time still a part of Virginia ] , for which the southern states will be anxious . The northern will be glad to find a counterpoise in Vermont . 
 In 1790 the legislature of New York agreed to give up that state 's claim to jurisdiction in Vermont on condition that Congress would admit Vermont state to the Union . 
 = = Secretary of the Treasury = = 
 President George Washington appointed Hamilton as the first United States Secretary of the Treasury on September 11 , 1789 . He left office on the last day of January 1795 . Much of the structure of the government of the United States was worked out in those five years , beginning with the structure and function of the cabinet itself . Biographer Forrest McDonald argues that Hamilton saw his office , like that of the British First Lord of the Treasury , as the equivalent of a Prime Minister ; Hamilton would oversee his colleagues under the elective reign of George Washington . Washington did request Hamilton 's advice and assistance on matters outside the purview of the Treasury Department . In 1791 , while Secretary , Hamilton was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Hamilton submitted various financial reports to Congress . Among these are the First Report on the Public Credit , Operations of the Act Laying Duties on Imports , Report on a National Bank , On the Establishment of a Mint , Report on Manufactures , and the Report on a Plan for the Further Support of Public Credit . So , the great enterprise in Hamilton 's project of an administrative republic is the establishment of stability . 
 = = = Report on Public Credit = = = 
 Before the adjournment of the House in September 1789 , they requested Hamilton to make a report on suggestions to improve the public credit by January 1790 . Hamilton had written to Robert Morris as early as 1781 that fixing the public credit will win their objective of independence . The sources that Hamilton used ranged from Frenchmen such as Jacques Necker and Montesquieu to British writers such as Hume , Hobbes , and Malachy <unk> . While writing the report he also sought out suggestions from contemporaries such as John Knox Witherspoon , and Madison . Although they agreed on additional taxes such as distilleries and duties on imported liquors and land taxes , Madison feared that the securities from the government debt would fall in foreign hands . 
 In the report , Hamilton felt that the debt that the United States had accrued during the Revolutionary War was the price it paid for its liberty . He argued that liberty and property security were inseparable and that the government should honor the contracts , as they formed the basis of public and private morality . To Hamilton , the proper handling of the government debt would also allow America to borrow at affordable interest rates and would also be a stimulant to the economy . Hamilton divided the debt into national and state , and further divided the national debt into foreign and domestic debt . While there was agreement on how to handle the foreign debt ( especially with France ) , there was not with regards to the national debt held by domestic creditors . During the Revolutionary War , affluent citizens had invested in bonds , and war veterans had been paid with promissory notes and IOUs that plummeted in price during the Confederation . In response , the war veterans sold the securities to speculators for as little as fifteen to twenty cents on the dollar . Hamilton felt the money from the bonds should not go to the soldiers , but the speculators that had bought the bonds from the soldiers , as they had little faith in the country 's future . The process of attempting to track down the original bond holders along with the government showing discrimination among the classes of holders if the war veterans were to be compensated also weighed in as factors for Hamilton . As for the state debts , Hamilton suggested to consolidate it with the national debt and label it as federal debt , for the sake of efficiency on a national scale . The last portion of the report dealt with eliminating the debt by utilizing a sinking fund that would retire five percent of the debt annually until it was paid off . Due to the bonds being traded well below their face value , the purchases would benefit the government as the securities rose in price . 
 When the report was submitted to the House of Representatives , detractors soon began to speak against it . The notion of programs that resembled British practice were wicked along with the power of balance being shifted away from the Representatives to the executive branch were some of the prejudices that resided within the House . William Maclay suspected that that several congressmen were involved in government securities , saw Congress in an unholy league with New York speculators . Congressman James Jackson also spoke against New York with allegations of speculators attempting to swindle those who had yet heard about Hamilton 's report . The involvement of those in Hamilton 's circle such as Schuyler , William Duer , James Duane , Gouverneur Morris , and Rufus King as speculators was not favorable to those against the report , either , though Hamilton personally did not own or deal a share in the debt . Madison eventually spoke against it by February 1790 . Although he was not against current holders of government debt to profit , he wanted the windfall to go to the original holders . Madison did not feel that the original holders had lost faith in the government , but sold their securities out of desperation . The compromise was seen as egregious to both Hamiltonians and their dissidents such as Maclay , and Madison 's vote was defeated 36 votes to 13 on February 22 . 
 The fight for the national government to assume state debt was a longer issue , and lasted over four months . During the period , the resources that Hamilton was to apply to the payment of state debts was requested by Alexander White , and was rejected due to Hamilton 's not being able to prepare information by March 3 , and was even postponed by his own supporters in spite of configuring a report the next day ( which consisted of a series of additional duties to meet the interest on the state debts ) . Some of the other issues involving Hamilton were bypassing the rising issue of slavery in Congress after Quakers petitioned for its abolition ( though he returned to the issue the following year ) , having Duer resign as Assistant Secretary of the Treasury , and the vote of assumption being voted down 31 votes to 29 on April 12 . The temporary location of the capital from New York City also played a role , as Tench Coxe was sent to speak to Maclay to bargain about the capital being temporarily located to Philadelphia , as a single vote in the Senate was needed and five in the House for the bill to pass . The bill passed in the Senate on July 21 and in the House 34 votes to 28 on July 26 , 1790 . 
 = = = Report on a National Bank = = = 
 Hamilton 's Report on a National Bank was a projection from the first Report on the Public Credit . Although Hamilton had been forming ideas of a national bank as early as 1779 , he gathered ideas in various ways over the past eleven years . These included theories from Adam Smith , extensive studies on the Bank of England , the blunders of the Bank of North America and his experience in establishing the Bank of New York . He also used American records from James Wilson , <unk> Webster , Gouverneur Morris , and from his assistant Treasury secretary Tench Coxe . 
 Hamilton suggested that Congress should charter the National Bank with a capitalization of $ 10 million , one @-@ fifth of which would be handled by the Government . Since the Government did not have the money , it would borrow the money from the bank itself , and repay the loan in ten even annual installments . The rest was to be available to individual investors . The bank was to be governed by a twenty @-@ five member board of directors that was to represent a large majority of the private shareholders , which Hamilton considered essential for his being under a private direction . Hamilton 's bank model had many similarities to that of the Bank of England , except Hamilton wanted to exclude the Government from being involved in public debt , but provide a large , firm , and elastic money supply for the functioning of normal businesses and usual economic development , among other differences . For tax revenue to ignite the bank , it was the same as he had previously proposed ; increases on imported spirits : rum , liquor , and whiskey . 
 The bill passed through the Senate practically without a problem , but objections of the proposal increased by the time it reached the House of Representatives . It was generally held by critics that Hamilton was serving the interests of the Northeast by means of the bank , and those of the agrarian lifestyle would not benefit from it . Among those critics was James Jackson of Georgia , who also attempted to refute the report by quoting from The Federalist Papers . Madison and Jefferson also opposed the bank bill ; however , the potential of the capital not being moved to the Potomac if the bank was to have a firm establishment in Philadelphia ( the current capital of the United States ) was a more significant reason , and actions that Pennsylvania members of Congress took to keep the capital there made both men anxious . Madison warned the Pennsylvania congress members that he would attack the bill as unconstitutional in the House , and followed up on his threat . Madison argued his case of where the power of a bank could be established within the Constitution , but he failed to sway members of the House , and his authority on the constitution was questioned by a few members . The bill eventually passed in an overwhelming fashion 39 to 20 , on February 8 , 1791 . 
 Washington hesitated to sign the bill , as he received suggestions from Attorney @-@ General Edmund Randolph and Thomas Jefferson . Jefferson dismissed the ' necessary and proper ' clause as reasoning for the creation of a national bank , stating that the enumerated powers " can all be carried into execution without a bank . " Along with Randolph and Jefferson 's objections , Washington 's involvement in the movement of the capital from Philadelphia is also thought to be a reason for his hesitation . In response to the objection of the ' necessary and proper ' clause , Hamilton stated that " Necessary often means no more than needful , requisite , incidental , useful , or conductive to " , and the bank was a " convenient species of medium in which they ( taxes ) are to be paid . " . Washington would eventually sign the bill into law . 
 = = = Establishing the U.S. Mint = = = 
 In 1791 , Hamilton submitted Report on the Establishment of a Mint to the House of Representatives . Most of Hamilton 's ideas for this report were from European economists , resolutions from Continental Congress meetings from 1785 and 1786 , and from people such as Gouverneur Morris and Thomas Jefferson . Due to the Spanish coin being the most circulated coin in the United States at the time , Alexander Hamilton proposed that the minting of the United States dollar weighing almost as much as the Spanish peso would be the simplest way to introduce a national currency . Hamilton wanted the U.S. dollar system to be set for decimals rather than the eights like the Spanish mint . In spite of preferring a <unk> gold standard , he issued a bimetallic currency at ratio that was to be similar to most European countries . What was different from the European currencies was his desire to <unk> the gold on the grounds that the United States would always receive an influx of silver from the West Indies . Hamilton desired the minting of small value coins such as silver ten @-@ cent , copper , and half @-@ cent pieces , for reducing the cost of living for the poor . One of his main objectives was for the general public to become accustomed to handling money on a frequent basis . 
 By 1792 , Hamilton 's principles were adopted by Congress , resulting in the Coinage Act of 1792 , and the creation of the United States Mint . There was to be a ten dollar Gold Eagle coin , a silver dollar , and fractional money ranging from one @-@ half to fifty cents . The coining of silver and gold was issued by 1795 . 
 = = = Revenue Cutter Service = = = 
 Smuggling off American coasts was an issue before the Revolutionary War , and after the Revolution it was more problematic . Along with smuggling , lack of shipping control , pirating , and a revenue unbalance were also major problems . In response , Hamilton proposed to Congress to enact a naval police force called revenue cutters in order to patrol the waters and assist the custom collectors with confiscating contraband . This idea was also proposed to assist in tariff controlling , boosting the American economy , and promote the merchant marine . It is thought that his experience obtained during his apprenticeship with Nicholas Kruger was influential in his decision @-@ making . 
 Concerning some of the details of the " System of Cutters " , Hamilton wanted the first ten cutters in different areas in the United States , from New England to Georgia . Hamilton also wanted those cutters to be armed with ten muskets and bayonets , twenty pistols , two chisels , one broad @-@ ax and two lanterns . Hamilton also wanted the fabric of the sails to be domestically manufactured . Hamilton was also concerned of the employees ' food supply and etiquette when boarding ships , and made provisions for each . Congress established the Revenue Cutter Service on August 4 , 1790 , which is viewed as the birth of the United States Coast Guard . 
 = = = Whiskey as tax revenue = = = 
 One of the principal sources of revenue Hamilton prevailed upon Congress to approve was an excise tax on whiskey . In his first Tariff Bill in January of 1790 , Hamilton proposed to raise the three million dollars needed to pay for government operating expenses and interest on domestic and foreign debts by means of an increase on duties on imported wines , distilled spirits , tea , coffee , and domestic spirits . It failed , with Congress complying with most recommendations excluding the excise tax on Whiskey ( Madison 's tariff of the same year was a modification of Hamilton 's that involved only imported duties and was passed in September ) . 
 In response of diversifying revenues , as three @-@ fourths of revenue gathered was from commerce with Great Britain , Hamilton attempted once again during his Report on Public Credit when presenting it in 1790 to implement an excise tax both imported and domestic spirits . The taxation rate was graduated in proportion to the whiskey proof , and Hamilton intended to equalize the tax burden on imported spirits with imported and domestic liquor . In lieu of the excise on production citizens could pay 60 cents by the gallon of dispensing capacity , along with an exemption on small stills used exclusively for domestic consumption . He realized the loathing that the tax would receive in rural areas , but thought of the taxing of spirits more reasonable than land taxes . 
 Opposition initially came from Pennsylvania 's House of Representatives protesting the tax . William Maclay had noted that not even the Pennsylvanian legislators had been able to enforce excise taxes in the western regions of the state . Hamilton was aware of the potential difficulties and proposed inspectors the ability to search buildings that distillers were designated to store their spirits , and would be able to search suspected illegal storage facilities to confiscate contraband with a warrant . Although the inspectors were not allowed to search houses and warehouses , they were to visit twice a day and file weekly reports in extensive detail . Hamilton cautioned against expedited judicial means , and favored a jury trial with potential offenders . As soon as 1791 locals began to shun or threaten inspectors , as they felt the inspection methods were intrusive . Inspectors were also tarred and feathered , blindfolded , and whipped . Hamilton had attempted to appease the opposition with lowered tax rates , but it did not suffice . 
 Strong opposition to the whiskey tax by cottage producers in remote , rural regions erupted into the Whiskey Rebellion in 1794 ; in Western Pennsylvania and western Virginia , whiskey was the basic export product and was fundamental to the local economy . In response to the rebellion , believing compliance with the laws was vital to the establishment of federal authority , Hamilton accompanied to the rebellion 's site President Washington , General Henry " Light Horse Harry " Lee , and more federal troops than were ever assembled in one place during the Revolution . This overwhelming display of force intimidated the leaders of the insurrection , ending the rebellion virtually without bloodshed . 
 = = = Manufacturing and industry = = = 
 Hamilton 's next report was his Report on Manufactures . Although he was requested by Congress on January 15 , 1790 for a report for manufacturing that would expand the United States ' independence , the report was not submitted until December 5 , 1791 . In the report , Hamilton quoted from Wealth of Nations and used the French physiocrats as an example for rejecting agrarianism and the physiocratic theory ; respectively . Hamilton also refuted Smith 's ideas of government noninterference , as it would have been detrimental for trade with other countries . Hamilton also thought of the United States being a primarily agrarian country would be a disadvantage in dealing with Europe . In response to the agrarian detractors , Hamilton stated that the agriculturists ' interest would be advanced by manufactures , and that agriculture was just as productive as manufacturing . 
 Among the ways that the government could assist in manufacturing , Hamilton mentioned levying protective duties on imported foreign goods that were also manufactured in the United States , to withdraw duties levied on raw materials needed for domestic manufacturing , pecuniary boundaries , and encouraging immigration for people to better themselves in similar employment opportunities . Congress shelved the report without much debate ( except for Madison 's objection to Hamilton 's formulation of the General Welfare clause , which Hamilton construed liberally as a legal basis for his extensive programs ) . 
 Subsequently in 1791 , with his ideas for manufacturing being a major influence , Hamilton , along with Coxe and several entrepreneurs from New York and Philadelphia helped form the Society for the Establishment of Useful Manufactures , a private industrial corporation . The location at Great Falls of the Passaic River in New Jersey was selected due to access to raw materials , it being densely inhabited , and having access to water power from the falls of the Passaic . The factory town was named Paterson after New Jersey 's Governor William Paterson , who signed the charter . The profits were to derive from specific corporates rather than the benefits to be conferred to the nation and the citizens , which was unlike the report . Hamilton also suggested the first stock to be offered at $ 500 @,@ 000 and to eventually increase to $ 1 million , and welcomed state and national government subscriptions alike . The company was never successful : numerous shareholders reneged on stock payments , some members soon went bankrupt , and William Duer , the governor of the program , was sent to debtors ' prison . In spite of Hamilton 's efforts to mend the disaster , the company would expire by 1796 . 
 = = = Emergence of parties = = = 
 During Hamilton 's tenure as Treasury Secretary , political factions began to emerge . A Congressional caucus , led by James Madison and William Branch Giles , began as an opposition group to Hamilton 's financial programs , and Thomas Jefferson joined this group when he returned from France . Hamilton and his allies began to call themselves Federalists . The opposition group , now called the Democratic @-@ Republican Party by political scientists , was at the time known as Republicans . 
 Hamilton assembled a nationwide coalition to garner support for the Administration , including the expansive financial programs Hamilton had made Administration policy and especially the president 's policy of neutrality in the European war between Britain and France . Hamilton 's public relations campaign attacked the French minister Edmond @-@ Charles Genêt ( he called himself " Citizen Genêt " ) who tried to appeal to voters directly , which Federalists denounced as foreign interference in American affairs . If Hamilton 's administrative republic was to succeed , Americans had to see themselves as nation citizens , and experience an administration that proved firm and demonstrated the concepts found within the United States Constitution . The Federalists did impose some internal direct taxes but they departed from the most implications of the Hamilton administrative republic as risky . 
 The Jeffersonian Republicans opposed banks and cities , and favored France . They built their own national coalition to oppose the Federalists . Both sides gained the support of local political factions ; each side developed its own partisan newspapers . Noah Webster , John Fenno , and William Cobbett were energetic editors for the Federalists ; Benjamin Franklin Bache and Philip Freneau were fiery Republican editors . All the newspapers were characterized by intense personal attacks , major exaggerations and invented claims . In 1801 , Hamilton established a daily newspaper , the New York Evening Post and brought in William Coleman as editor . It is still publishing ( as the New York Post ) . 
 The quarrel between Hamilton and Jefferson is the best known and historically the most important in American political history . Hamilton 's and Jefferson 's incompatibility was heightened by the <unk> wish of each to be Washington 's principal and most trusted advisor . 
 = = = Jay Treaty and Britain = = = 
 When France and Britain went to war in early 1793 , all four members of the Cabinet were consulted on what to do . They and Washington unanimously agreed to remain neutral , and to send Genêt home . However , in 1794 policy toward Britain became a major point of contention between the two parties . Hamilton and the Federalists wished for more trade with Britain , the new nation 's largest trading partner . The Republicans saw Britain as the main threat to republicanism and proposed instead a trade war . 
 To avoid war , Washington sent Chief Justice John Jay to negotiate with the British ; Hamilton largely wrote Jay 's instructions . The result was Jay 's Treaty . It was denounced by the Republicans but Hamilton mobilized support up and down the land . The Jay Treaty passed the Senate in 1795 by exactly the required two @-@ thirds majority . The Treaty resolved issues remaining from the Revolution , averted war , and made possible ten years of peaceful trade between the United States and Britain . Historian George Herring notes the " remarkable and fortuitous economic and diplomatic gains " produced by the Treaty . 
 Several European nations had formed a League of Armed Neutrality against incursions on their neutral rights ; the Cabinet was also consulted on whether the United States should join it , and decided not to . It kept that decision secret , but Hamilton revealed it in private to George Hammond , the British Minister to the United States , without telling Jay or anyone else . ( His act remained unknown until Hammond 's dispatches were read in the 1920s ) . This " amazing revelation " may have had limited effect on the negotiations ; Jay did threaten to join the League at one point , but the British had other reasons not to view the League as a serious threat . 
 = = = Second Report on Public Credit = = = 
 Before leaving his post in 1795 , Hamilton submitted Report on a Plan for the Further Support of Public Credit to Congress to curb the debt problem . Hamilton grew dissatisfied with what he viewed as a lack of a comprehensive plan to fix the public debt . He wished to have new taxes passed with older ones made permanent and stated that any surplus from the excise tax on liquor would be pledged to lower public debt . His proposals were included into a bill by Congress within slightly over a month after his departure as treasury secretary . 
 = = Post @-@ Secretary years = = 
 = = = The Reynolds affair = = = 
 In 1791 , Hamilton became involved in an affair with Maria Reynolds over a nine @-@ month period that would be revealed to the public several years afterward . Reynolds appeared to Hamilton as a woman who had been abandoned by her husband , James , at New York and wished to return to there . Hamilton did not have any money on his person , so he retrieved her address in order to deliver the funds in person . After the brief dialogue in Reynolds ' bedroom , he had frequent meetings with her . Hamilton then received two letters on December 15 , 1791 , one from both Mr. and Mrs. Reynolds . The first letter was Maria warning of her husband 's knowledge and of James attempting to blackmail Hamilton . By this point Hamilton contemplated ending the relationship , and briefly ceased to visit , but both apparently were involved in the blackmailing scheme as both sent letters , and at one point James Reynolds requested to ' befriend ' her . By May of 1792 , James Reynolds had requested for Hamilton to no longer see his wife , but not before receiving fifty and two hundred dollars out of over $ 1300 in blackmail . Hamilton possibly was aware of both Reynolds ' being involved before the blackmailing incident . 
 When under suspicion of illegal actions while Secretary of the Treasury by associating with William Duer from John J. Beckley and Jacob Clingman , the latter also had alleged evidence of James Reynolds being an agent of Hamilton 's , with accompanying letters gathered from Maria Reynolds that were from Hamilton . This information was relayed to James Monroe , who consulted with Congressmen Muhlenberg and Venable on what actions to take . When it was suggested by Clingman that James Reynolds had evidence that would incriminate Hamilton , after both were arrested for counterfeiting and Clingman was released , Monroe and the Congressmen soon confronted Hamilton on 15 December 1792 . After Hamilton discussed the affair , the trio were to keep the documents privately with the utmost confidence . 
 In 1797 , however , when " notoriously scurrilous journalist " James T. Callender published A History of the United States for the Year 1796 , it contained accusations of James Reynolds being an agent of Hamilton using documents from the confrontation on December 15 , 1792 . On July 5 , 1797 , Hamilton wrote to all three men to confirm that there was nothing that would damage the perception of his integrity while Secretary of Treasury . All complied but Monroe , and after several rounds of argument , the two almost resorted to a duel . When Hamilton did not obtain an explicit response from Monroe , he published a pamphlet in order to preserve his public reputation , and discussed the affair in exquisite detail . His wife forgave him , but not Monroe . Though he faced ridicule from the Democratic @-@ Republican faction , he maintained his availability for public service . 
 = = = 1796 presidential election = = = 
 Hamilton 's resignation as Secretary of the Treasury in 1795 did not remove him from public life . With the resumption of his law practice , he remained close to Washington as an advisor and friend . Hamilton influenced Washington in the composition of his Farewell Address by writing drafts for Washington to compare with the latter 's draft , although when Washington contemplated retirement in 1792 , he had consulted James Madison for a draft that was used in a similar manner to Hamilton 's . 
 In the election of 1796 , under the Constitution as it stood then , each of the presidential electors had two votes , which they were to cast for different men . The one who received most votes would become President , the second @-@ most , Vice President . This system was not designed with the operation of parties in mind , as they had been thought disreputable and factious . The Federalists planned to deal with this by having all their Electors vote for John Adams , the Vice President , and all but a few for Thomas Pinckney of South Carolina . 
 Adams resented Hamilton 's influence with Washington and considered him overambitious and scandalous in his private life ; Hamilton compared Adams unfavorably with Washington and thought him too emotionally unstable to be President . Hamilton took the election as an opportunity : he urged all the northern electors to vote for Adams and Pinckney , lest Jefferson get in ; but he cooperated with Edward Rutledge to have South Carolina 's electors vote for Jefferson and Pinckney . If all this worked , Pinckney would have more votes than Adams , Pinckney would become President , and Adams would remain Vice President , but it did not work . The Federalists found out about it ( even the French minister to the United States knew ) , and northern Federalists voted for Adams but not for Pinckney , in sufficient numbers that Pinckney came in third and Jefferson became Vice President . Adams resented the intrigue since he felt his service to the nation was much more extensive than Pinckney 's . 
 = = = Quasi @-@ War = = = 
 During the Quasi @-@ War of 1798 – 1800 , and with Washington 's strong endorsement , Adams reluctantly appointed Hamilton a major general of the army ; at Washington 's insistence , Hamilton was made the senior major general , prompting Henry Knox to decline appointment to serve as Hamilton 's junior ( Knox had been a major general in the Continental Army and thought it would be degrading to serve beneath him ) . Hamilton served as inspector general of the United States Army from July 18 , 1798 , to June 15 , 1800 ; because Washington was unwilling to leave Mount Vernon unless it were to command an army in the field , Hamilton was the de facto head of the army , to Adams 's considerable displeasure . If full @-@ scale war broke out with France , Hamilton argued that the army should conquer the North American colonies of France 's ally , Spain , bordering the United States . 
 To fund this army , Hamilton wrote regularly to Oliver Wolcott , Jr . , his successor at the Treasury ; William Loughton Smith , of the House Ways and Means Committee ; and Senator Theodore Sedgwick of Massachusetts . He directed them to pass a direct tax to fund the war . Smith resigned in July 1797 , as Hamilton scolded him for slowness , and told Wolcott to tax houses instead of land . 
 The eventual program included a Stamp Act like that of the British before the Revolution and other taxes on land , houses , and slaves , calculated at different rates in different states , and requiring difficult and intricate assessment of houses . This provoked resistance in southeastern Pennsylvania , led primarily by men such as John Fries who had marched with Washington against the Whiskey Rebellion . 
 Hamilton aided in all areas of the army 's development , and after Washington 's death he was by default the Senior Officer of the United States Army from December 14 , 1799 , to June 15 , 1800 . The army was to guard against invasion from France . Adams , however , derailed all plans for war by opening negotiations with France . Adams had held it proper to retain the members of Washington 's cabinet , except for cause ; he found , in 1800 ( after Washington 's death ) , that they were obeying Hamilton rather than himself , and fired several of them . 
 = = = 1800 presidential election = = = 
 In the 1800 election , Hamilton worked to defeat not only the rival Democratic @-@ Republican candidates , but also his party 's own nominee , John Adams . In November 1799 , the Alien and Sedition Acts had left one Democratic @-@ Republican newspaper functioning in New York City ; when the last , the New Daily Advertiser , reprinted an article saying that Hamilton had attempted to purchase the Philadelphia Aurora and close it down , Hamilton had the publisher prosecuted for seditious libel , and the prosecution compelled the owner to close the paper . 
 Aaron Burr had won New York for Jefferson in May ; now Hamilton proposed a rerun of the election under different rules — with carefully drawn districts and each choosing an elector — such that the Federalists would split the electoral vote of New York . ( John Jay , a Federalist who had given up the Supreme Court to be Governor of New York , wrote on the back of the letter the words , " Proposing a measure for party purposes which it would not become me to adopt , " and declined to reply . ) 
 John Adams was running this time with Charles Cotesworth Pinckney of South Carolina ( the elder brother of candidate Thomas Pinckney from the 1796 election ) . Hamilton now toured New England , again urging northern electors to hold firm for Pinckney in the renewed hope of making Pinckney president ; and he again intrigued in South Carolina . Hamilton 's ideas involved coaxing middle @-@ state Federalists to assert their non @-@ support for Adams if there was no support for Pinckney and writing to more of the modest supports of Adams concerning his supposed misconduct while president . Hamilton expected to see southern states such as the Carolinas cast their votes for Pinckney and Jefferson , and would result in the former being ahead of both Adams and Jefferson . 
 In accordance with the second of the aforementioned plans , and a recent personal rift with Adams , Hamilton wrote a pamphlet called Letter from Alexander Hamilton , Concerning the Public Conduct and Character of John Adams , Esq . President of the United States that was highly critical of him , though it closed with a tepid endorsement . He mailed this to two hundred leading Federalists ; when a copy fell into the Democratic @-@ Republicans ' hands , they printed it . This hurt Adams 's 1800 reelection campaign and split the Federalist Party , virtually assuring the victory of the Democratic @-@ Republican Party , led by Jefferson , in the election of 1800 ; it destroyed Hamilton 's position among the Federalists . 
 Jefferson had beaten Adams , but both he and his running mate , Aaron Burr , had received 73 votes in the Electoral College ( Adams finished in third place , Pinckney in fourth , and Jay received one vote ) . With Jefferson and Burr tied , the United States House of Representatives had to choose between the two men . Several Federalists who opposed Jefferson supported Burr , and for the first 35 ballots , Jefferson was denied a majority . Before the 36th ballot , Hamilton threw his weight behind Jefferson , supporting the arrangement reached by James A. Bayard of Delaware , in which five Federalist Representatives from Maryland and Vermont abstained from voting , allowing those states ' delegations to go for Jefferson , ending the impasse and electing Jefferson President rather than Burr . Even though Hamilton did not like Jefferson and disagreed with him on many issues , he viewed Jefferson as the lesser of two evils . Hamilton spoke of Jefferson as being " by far not so a dangerous man " , and that Burr was a " mischievous enemy " to the principle measure of the past administration . There is strong circumstantial evidence , however , that what Hamilton really feared was Burr 's appeal to the members of the Federalist Party and loss of his control over them . Many Federalists viewed Burr as a moderate who was willing to dialogue with them . It was for that reason , along with the fact that Burr was a northerner and not a Virginian , that many Federalist Representatives voted for him . Hamilton wrote an exceeding number of letters to friends in Congress to convince the members to see otherwise . However , the Federalists rejected Hamilton 's diatribe as reasons to not vote for Burr . Nevertheless , Burr would become Vice President of the United States . When it became clear that Jefferson had developed his own concerns about Burr and would not support his return to the Vice Presidency , Burr sought the New York governorship in 1804 with Federalist support , against the Jeffersonian Morgan Lewis , but was defeated by forces including Hamilton . 
 = = Duel with Burr and death = = 
 Soon after the 1804 gubernatorial election in New York — in which Morgan Lewis , greatly assisted by Hamilton , defeated Aaron Burr — the Albany Register published Charles D. Cooper 's letters , citing Hamilton 's opposition to Burr and alleging that Hamilton had expressed " a still more despicable opinion " of the Vice President at an upstate New York dinner party . Cooper claimed that the letter was intercepted after relaying the information , but stated he was ' unusually cautious ' in recollecting the information from the dinner . Burr , sensing an attack on his honor , and recovering from his defeat , demanded an apology in letter form . Hamilton wrote a letter in response and ultimately refused because he could not recall the instance of insulting Burr ; also , Hamilton would have been accused of recanting Cooper 's letter out of cowardice . After a series of attempts to reconcile were to no avail , the duel was accepted through liaisons on June 27 , 1804 . 
 The night before the duel , Hamilton wrote a defense of his decision to duel . Hamilton viewed his roles of being a father and husband , putting his creditors at risk , placing his family 's welfare in jeopardy and his moral and religious stances as reasons not to duel , but he felt it impossible to avoid due to having made attacks on Burr which he was unable to recant , and because of Burr 's behavior prior to the duel . He attempted to reconcile his moral and religious reasons and the codes of honor and politics . He intended to accept the duel and throw his fire in order to satisfy his morals and political codes , respectively . His desire to be available for future political matters also played a factor . 
 The duel began at dawn on July 11 , 1804 , along the west bank of the Hudson River on a rocky ledge in Weehawken , New Jersey . After the seconds measured the paces , Hamilton , according to both William P. Van Ness and Burr , raised his pistol " as if to try the light " and had to wear his spectacles to prevent his vision from being obscured . Hamilton also refused the <unk> set of dueling pistols ( that would make the pulling of the trigger lighter ) when offered by Nathaniel Pendleton . Vice President Burr shot Hamilton , delivering what proved to be a fatal wound . Hamilton 's shot broke a tree branch directly above Burr 's head . Neither of the seconds , Pendleton nor Van Ness , could determine who fired first , as each claimed that the other man had fired first . Soon after , they measured and triangulated the shooting , but could not determine from which angle Hamilton fired . Burr 's shot , however , hit Hamilton in the lower abdomen above the right hip . The bullet ricocheted off Hamilton 's second or third false rib , fracturing it and causing considerable damage to his internal organs , particularly his liver and diaphragm , before becoming lodged in his first or second lumbar vertebra . Biographer Ron Chernow considered the circumstances to indicate that , after taking deliberate aim , Burr fired second , while biographer James Earnest Cooke suggested that Burr took careful aim and shot first , and Hamilton fired while falling , after being struck by Burr 's bullet . 
 The paralyzed Hamilton , who knew himself to be mortally wounded , was ferried to the Greenwich Village home of his friend William Bayard Jr . , who had been waiting on the dock . After final visits from his family and friends and considerable suffering , Hamilton died on the following afternoon , July 12 , 1804 , at Bayard 's home at what is now 80 – 82 Jane Street . Gouverneur Morris gave the eulogy at his funeral and secretly established a fund to support his widow and children . Hamilton was buried in the Trinity Churchyard Cemetery in Manhattan . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 While Hamilton was stationed in Morristown , New Jersey , in the winter of 1779 and 1780 , he met Elizabeth Schuyler , a daughter of Philip Schuyler and Catherine Van Rensselaer . The two were married on December 14 , 1780 , at the Schuyler Mansion in Albany , New York . He and Elizabeth had eight children , including two named Philip . The elder Philip , Hamilton 's first child ( born January 22 , 1782 ) , was killed in 1801 in a duel with George I. Eacker , whom he had publicly insulted in a Manhattan theater . The second Philip , Hamilton 's last child , was born on June 2 , 1802 , after the first Philip was killed . Their other children were Angelica , born September 25 , 1784 ; Alexander , born May 16 , 1786 ; James Alexander ( April 14 , 1788 – September 1878 ) ; John Church , ( August 22 , 1792 – July 25 , 1882 ) ; William Stephen ( August 4 , 1797 – October 9 , 1850 ) ; and Eliza , born November 26 , 1799 . 
 Hamilton was also close to Elizabeth 's older sister , Angelica , who eloped with John Barker Church , an Englishman who made a fortune in North America during the Revolution . She returned with Church to London after the war , where she later became a joint friend of Maria Cosway and Thomas Jefferson . 
 = = = Hamilton 's religion = = = 
 Hamilton , as a youth in the West Indies , was an orthodox and conventional Presbyterian of the " New Light " evangelical type ( as opposed to the " Old Light " Calvinists ) ; he was being taught by a student of John Witherspoon , a moderate of the New School . He wrote two or three hymns , which were published in the local newspaper . Robert Troup , his college roommate , noted that Hamilton was " in the habit of praying on his knees night and morning . " 
 Gordon Wood says that Hamilton dropped his youthful religiosity during the Revolution and became , " a conventional liberal with theistic inclinations who was an irregular churchgoer at best " ; however , he returned to religion in his last years . Chernow says he was nominally an Episcopalian but : 
 he was not clearly affiliated with the denomination and did not seem to attend church regularly or take communion . Like Adams , Franklin , and Jefferson , Hamilton had probably fallen under the sway of deism , which sought to substitute reason for revelation and dropped the notion of an active God that will intervene in human affairs . At the same time , he never doubted God 's existence , embracing Christianity as a system of morality and cosmic justice . 
 Hamilton made jokes about God at the Constitutional Convention . During the French Revolution , he displayed an " opportunistic religiosity " , using Christianity for political ends and insisting that Christianity and Jefferson 's democracy were incompatible . After 1801 , Hamilton further asserted the truth of Christianity ; he proposed a Christian Constitutional Society in 1802 , to take hold of " some strong feeling of the mind " to elect " fit men " to office , and he wrote of " Christian welfare societies " for the poor . He was not a member of any denomination . After being shot , Hamilton spoke of his belief in God 's mercy , and of his desire to renounce dueling ; Bishop Moore administered communion to Hamilton . 
 Hamilton had always had respect for Jews . His birthplace of Charlestown had a large Jewish population with whom Hamilton came into contact on a regular basis . As a boy , he had learned Hebrew and could recite the Ten Commandments in its original language . He believed that Jewish achievement was a result of divine providence and warned that those who discredit the Jews " destroy the Christian religion . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Hamilton 's interpretations of the Constitution set forth in the Federalist Papers remain highly influential , as seen in scholarly studies and court decisions . 
 Though the Constitution was ambiguous as to the exact balance of power between national and state governments , Hamilton consistently took the side of greater federal power at the expense of the states . As Secretary of the Treasury , he established — against the intense opposition of Secretary of State Jefferson — the country 's first national bank . Hamilton justified the creation of this bank , and other increased federal powers , under Congress 's constitutional powers to issue currency , to regulate interstate commerce , and to do anything else that would be " necessary and proper " to enact the provisions of the Constitution . Jefferson , on the other hand , took a stricter view of the Constitution : parsing the text carefully , he found no specific authorization for a national bank . This controversy was eventually settled by the Supreme Court of the United States in McCulloch v. Maryland , which in essence adopted Hamilton 's view , granting the federal government broad freedom to select the best means to execute its constitutionally enumerated powers , specifically the doctrine of implied powers . Nevertheless , the American Civil War and the Progressive Era demonstrated the sorts of crises and politics Hamilton 's administrative republic sought to avoid . 
 Hamilton 's policies as Secretary of the Treasury greatly affected the United States government and still continue to influence it . His constitutional interpretation , specifically of the Necessary and Proper Clause , set precedents for federal authority that are still used by the courts and are considered an authority on constitutional interpretation . The prominent French diplomat Charles Maurice de Talleyrand , who spent 1794 in the United States , wrote , " I consider Napoleon , Fox , and Hamilton the three greatest men of our epoch , and if I were forced to decide between the three , I would give without hesitation the first place to Hamilton " , adding that Hamilton had intuited the problems of European conservatives . 
 Opinions of Hamilton have run the gamut : both John Adams and Thomas Jefferson viewed him as unprincipled and dangerously aristocratic . Hamilton 's reputation was mostly negative in the eras of Jeffersonian democracy and Jacksonian democracy . However , by the Progressive era , Herbert Croly , Henry Cabot Lodge , and Theodore Roosevelt praised his leadership of a strong government . Several nineteenth- and twentieth @-@ century Republicans entered politics by writing laudatory biographies of Hamilton . 
 Historians have generally taken one of two main views of Hamilton . Wilentz says : 
 In recent years , Hamilton and his reputation have decidedly gained the initiative among scholars who portray him as the visionary architect of the modern liberal capitalist economy and of a dynamic federal government headed by an energetic executive . Jefferson and his allies , by contrast , have come across as naïve , dreamy idealists . 
 The older Jeffersonian view attacks him as a <unk> , to the point sometimes of advocating monarchy . 
 = = = Monuments and memorials = = = 
 Since the beginning of the American Civil War , Hamilton has been depicted on more denominations of US currency than anyone else . He has appeared on the $ 2 , $ 5 , $ 10 , $ 20 , $ 50 , and $ 1 @,@ 000 . His likeness also began to appear on US postage in 1870 . His portrait has continued to appear on U.S. postage and currency , and most notably appears on the modern $ 10 bill . On 18 June 2015 it was announced that his portrait would be replaced by that of a woman , to reflect the changing nature of American democracy and society , but it was later decided his portrait would remain and the portrait of a woman was moved to the $ 20 bill . Hamilton also appears on the $ 500 Series EE Savings Bond . The source of the face on the $ 10 bill is John Trumbull 's 1805 portrait of Hamilton , in the portrait collection of New York City Hall . 
 The first postage stamp to honor Hamilton was issued by the U.S. Post Office in 1870 . The portrayals on the 1870 and 1888 issues are from the same engraved die , which was modeled after a bust of Hamilton by Italian sculptor Giuseppe <unk> . The Hamilton 1870 issue was the first U.S. postage stamp to honor a Secretary of the Treasury . The three @-@ cent red commemorative issue , which was released on the 200th anniversary of Hamilton 's birth in 1957 , includes a rendition of the Federal Hall building , located in New York City . On March 19 , 1956 , the United States Postal Service issued the $ 5 Liberty Issue postage stamp honoring Hamilton . 
 The only home Hamilton ever owned was a Federal style mansion designed by John McComb Jr . , which he built on his 32 @-@ acre country estate in Hamilton Heights in upper Manhattan . He named the house , which was completed in 1802 , the " Grange " after his grandfather Alexander 's estate in Ayrshire , Scotland . The house remained in the family until 1833 when his widow sold it to Thomas E. Davis , a British born real estate developer , for $ 25 @,@ 000 . Part of the proceeds were used by Eliza to purchase a new townhouse from Davis ( Hamilton @-@ Holly House ) in Greenwich Village with her son Alexander . The Grange , first moved from its original location in 1889 , was moved again in 2008 to a spot in St. Nicholas Park on land that was once part of the Hamilton estate , in Hamilton Heights , a neighborhood in upper Manhattan . The historic structure was restored to its original 1802 appearance in 2011 , and is maintained by the National Park service as Hamilton Grange National Memorial . 
 Alexander Hamilton served as one of the first trustees of the Hamilton @-@ Oneida Academy in New York state . Later the Academy received a college charter in 1812 , and the school was formally renamed Hamilton College . Columbia University , Hamilton 's alma mater , has official memorials to Hamilton on its campus in New York City . The college 's main classroom building for the humanities is Hamilton Hall , and a large statue of Hamilton stands in front of it . The university press has published his complete works in a multivolume letterpress edition . Columbia University 's student group for ROTC cadets and Marine officer candidates is named the Alexander Hamilton Society . 
 The main administration building of the Coast Guard Academy in New London , Connecticut , is named Hamilton Hall to commemorate Hamilton 's creation of the United States Revenue Cutter Service , one of the predecessor services of the United States Coast Guard . The U.S. Army 's Fort Hamilton in Brooklyn is named after Hamilton . 
 In 1990 , the U.S. Custom House in New York City was renamed after Hamilton . 
 In 1880 , his son John Church Hamilton commissioned Carl <unk> to sculpt a granite statue , now located in Central Park , New York City . 
 One statue honoring Alexander Hamilton in Chicago was mired in controversy , at least concerning the surrounding architecture . Kate Sturges Buckingham ( 1858 – 1937 ) , of the Buckingham Fountain family , commissioned the monument . Its impetus was that Treasury Secretary Hamilton " secured the nation 's financial future " and made it possible for her own family to make its fortune in grain elevators and banking . Consequently , John Angel was hired to model a figurative sculpture and the Finnish architect Eliel Saarinen was to create a " colossal architectural setting " for it . The proposed 80 @-@ foot tall columned shelter was poorly received . By Buckingham 's death in 1937 , the sculpture 's setting , location , and design were uncertain . Conspiracy allegations surfaced , and the matter became mired in litigation . After the courts ordered the construction to be completed by 1953 , the trustees hired architect Samuel A. Marx . The structure was completed , had structural problems , and was eventually demolished in 1993 . The statue was gilded , and is still on display . 
 A statue , by James Earle Fraser , was dedicated on May 17 , 1923 , on the south terrace of the Treasury Building , in Washington . 
 Hamilton County , New York , Hamilton County , Florida , Hamilton County , Illinois , Hamilton County , Indiana , Hamilton County , Kansas , Hamilton County , Nebraska , Hamilton County , Ohio and Hamilton County , Tennessee are all named in his honor . 
 = = = On slavery = = = 
 Until recently the prevailing scholarly view was that Hamilton , like the Founders generally , lacked a deep concern about slavery . John Patrick Diggins traced this animus of historians against Hamilton to Vernon L. Parrington , who , writing in the 1920s to praise Jefferson and the Enlightenment , denounced a reactionary and unenlightened Hamilton as greedy and evil . Sean Wilentz contends that the consensus has changed sharply in Hamilton 's favor in recent years . For example , Michael D. Chan argues that the first U.S. Treasury Secretary was committed to ending slavery , Chernow calls him " a fervent abolitionist " , David O. Stewart states he was a " lifelong opponent of slavery " , and Braun says he " was a leading anti @-@ slavery advocate " . Historian Manning Marable says Hamilton " vigorously opposed the slave trade and slavery 's expansion . " 
 Hamilton 's first polemic against King George 's ministers contains a paragraph that speaks of the evils that " slavery " to the British would bring upon the Americans . McDonald sees this as an attack on the institution of slavery . David Hackett Fischer believes the term is used in a symbolic way at that time . 
 During the Revolutionary War , Hamilton took the lead in proposals to arm slaves , free them , and compensate their masters . In 1779 , Hamilton worked closely with his friend John Laurens of South Carolina to propose that such a unit be formed , under Laurens ' command . Hamilton proposed to the Continental Congress that it create up to four battalions of slaves for combat duty , and free them . Congress recommended that South Carolina ( and Georgia ) acquire up to three thousand slaves for service , if they saw fit . Although the South Carolina governor and Congressional delegation had supported the plan in Philadelphia , they did not implement it . 
 Hamilton believed that the natural faculties of blacks were probably as good as those of free whites , and he warned that the British would arm the slaves if the patriots did not . In his 21st @-@ century biography , Chernow cites this incident as evidence that Hamilton and Laurens saw the Revolution and the struggle against slavery as inseparable . Hamilton attacked his political opponents as demanding freedom for themselves and refusing to allow it to blacks . 
 In January 1785 , Hamilton attended the second meeting of the New York Manumission Society ( <unk> ) . John Jay was president and Hamilton was the first secretary and later became president . Chernow notes how the membership soon included many of Hamilton 's friends and associates . Hamilton was a member of the committee of the society that petitioned the legislature to end the slave trade , and that succeeded in passing legislation banning the export of slaves from New York . In the same period , Hamilton felt bound by the rule of law of the time and his law practice facilitated the return of a fugitive slave to Henry Laurens of South Carolina . He opposed the compromise at the 1787 Constitutional Convention by which the federal government could not abolish the slave trade for 20 years , and was disappointed when he lost that argument . 
 Hamilton never supported forced emigration for freed slaves . Horton has argued from this that he would be comfortable with a multiracial society , and that this distinguished him from his contemporaries . In international affairs , he supported Toussaint L 'Ouverture 's black government in Haiti after the revolt that overthrew French control , as he had supported aid to the slaveowners in 1791 — both measures hurt France . Scant evidence has been interpreted by a few to indicate Hamilton may have owned household slaves , as did many wealthy New Yorkers ( the evidence for this is indirect ; McDonald interprets it as referring to paid employees ) . 
 = = = On economics = = = 
 Hamilton has been portrayed as the " patron saint " of the American School of economic philosophy that , according to one historian , dominated economic policy after 1861 . He firmly supported government intervention in favor of business , after the manner of Jean @-@ Baptiste Colbert , as early as the fall of 1781 . Hamilton opposed the British ideas of free trade , which he believed skewed benefits to colonial and imperial powers , in favor of protectionism , which he believed would help develop the fledgling nation 's emerging economy . Henry C. Carey was inspired by his writings . Hamilton influenced the ideas and work of the German Friedrich List . In Hamilton 's view , a strong executive , linked to the support of the people , could become the linchpin of an administrative republic . The dominance of executive leadership in the formulation and carrying out of policy was essential to resist the deterioration of republican government . Ian Patrick Austin has explored the similarities between Hamiltonian recommendations and the development of Meiji Japan after 1860 . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 Apart from the $ 10 bill and an obscure 1931 film , Hamilton did not attract much attention in American popular culture until the advent of the 2015 hit Broadway musical Hamilton . The musical , which features music , lyrics , and a book by Lin @-@ Manuel Miranda , is based on a biography by Ron Chernow . The New Yorker called the show " an achievement of historical and cultural reimagining . In Miranda 's telling , the headlong rise of one self @-@ made immigrant becomes the story of America . " The off @-@ Broadway production of Hamilton won the 2015 Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Musical as well as seven other Drama Desk Awards . In 2016 , Hamilton received the Pulitzer Prize for Drama and a record 16 Tony nominations , winning 11 of them including Best Musical . 
 Hamilton has also appeared as a significant figure in popular works focusing on other American political figures of his time . He is a major character in Gore Vidal 's 1973 historical novel Burr and in episodes of the 1976 PBS miniseries The Adams Chronicles . 
 = = = Biographies = = = 
 = = = Specialized studies = = = 
 = Kim Davis ( county clerk ) = 
 Kimberly Jean Davis ( née Bailey ; born September 17 , 1965 ) is the county clerk for Rowan County , Kentucky who gained international attention in August 2015 when she defied a U.S. federal court order to issue marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples , following the June 26 , 2015 , U.S. Supreme Court decision in Obergefell v. Hodges . Kim Davis reacted to the decision by denying marriage licenses to all couples , saying she was acting " under God 's authority " . Her defiance led to her jail sentence , while both supporters and detractors hotly debated her stance in the national media . Marriage licenses in Rowan County are now being issued to all citizens as required by law . 
 Davis was born in Jackson , Kentucky . By 1991 , Davis was serving as chief deputy clerk of Rowan County , reporting to her mother , the Rowan County clerk . Davis ' first three marriages ended in divorce in 1994 , 2006 , and 2008 ; she then remarried her second husband in 2009 . She became an Apostolic Christian in 2011 . A court found her salary to be higher than expected and therefore cut her wages in 2012 . Despite complaints of nepotism , Davis was elected county clerk in 2014 and promised to follow the statutes of the office . 
 A few months later , Obergefell v. Hodges was decided and all county clerks were ordered to issue marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples . Davis refused , citing her religious opposition to same @-@ sex marriage . Couples represented by the American Civil Liberties Union who had been denied marriage licenses from Davis filed and won a lawsuit against her , Miller v. Davis , and she was ordered to comply with the decision of the U.S. District Court and start issuing marriage licenses . Her lawyers tried to appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court , but the application to appeal was denied . Davis continued to defy the court order , refusing to issue marriage licenses , and was ultimately jailed for contempt of court . She was released from jail five days later , under the condition that she not interfere with the efforts of her deputy clerks , who had started issuing marriage licenses to all couples . Davis then modified the Kentucky marriage licenses to no longer mention her name . The Attorney General of Kentucky said that because the matter was already being handled by the federal court , there would be no appointment of a special prosecutor to pursue charges of official misconduct against her . Several weeks later , Davis announced she had met with Pope Francis in Washington , D.C. ; the Vatican press office clarified that the Pope met with many others and that the meeting was not a form of support for her actions . 
 Attorney and author Roberta A. Kaplan described Davis as " the clearest example of someone who wants to use a religious liberty argument to discriminate " , yet law professor Eugene Volokh suggested that an employer must try to accommodate religious employees ' beliefs , pointing out that Davis wished only to remove her name from the marriage licenses of same @-@ sex couples . Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee said that Davis ' imprisonment was part of the " criminalization of Christianity " , while columnist Jennifer Rubin compared Davis ' refusal to follow the direction of the U.S. Supreme Court to Alabama Governor George Wallace 's " Stand in the Schoolhouse Door " in 1963 . Popular culture has satirized Davis ; after the same @-@ sex marriage license controversy , she was characterized in a Funny or Die video parody and on Saturday Night Live . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Chief deputy clerk : 1991 – 2015 = = = 
 Kim Davis was born in Jackson , Kentucky . By 1991 , she was serving as chief deputy clerk of Rowan County , Kentucky , reporting to her mother , Rowan County clerk Jean W. Bailey . Davis ' 2011 compensation was an annual wage of $ 51 @,@ 812 and an additional $ 11 @,@ 301 in overtime and other compensation . Chief Deputy Clerk Davis earned more than other chief deputies in the county : Chief Deputy Sheriff Joe Cline received $ 38 @,@ 000 annually and Deputy Judge @-@ Executive Jerry Alderman $ 36 @,@ 000 annually ; neither position qualifies for overtime pay . County residents complained about Davis ' high wages . After the County Fiscal Court reviewed the compensation of clerks in the office , they voted unanimously to cut the county clerk 's office salary budget by one @-@ third for 2012 . 
 = = = County clerk : 2015 – present = = = 
 After her mother announced she would not run for re @-@ election in 2014 , Davis filed as a Democratic candidate for county clerk . At a candidates ' forum , Davis stated she felt she was best qualified for the position because of her 26 years of experience in the clerk 's office . 
 Davis won the Democratic primary election , advancing to the general election against Republican John Cox . Although Cox made complaints of nepotism during the campaign , Davis prevailed . After winning the race , Davis told The Morehead News , " My words can never express the appreciation but I promise to each and every one that I will be the very best working clerk that I can be and will be a good steward of their tax dollars and follow the statutes of this office to the letter . " 
 Davis took the oath of office as the county clerk of Rowan County on January 5 , 2015 , beginning a four @-@ year term slated to end on January 7 , 2019 . As clerk , Davis receives an annual salary of $ 80 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Same @-@ sex marriage license controversy = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 On June 26 , 2015 , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in the landmark case of Obergefell v. Hodges , 576 U.S. _ _ _ ( 2015 ) , holding that the fundamental right to marry is guaranteed to same @-@ sex couples by both the Due Process Clause and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution . Fourteen counties in three Southern states continued to deny marriage licenses for same @-@ sex marriage . The Alabama Supreme Court allowed the probate judges of ten counties in Alabama to deny such marriage licenses , the clerk of one Texas county chose to resign rather than issue such licenses , and the clerks of two counties in Kentucky were not issuing licenses due to paperwork delays . Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear ordered all Kentucky county clerks to begin issuing same @-@ sex marriage licenses immediately . 
 = = = Davis ' reaction to same @-@ sex marriage ruling = = = 
 Kim Davis , county clerk of Rowan County , contacted Beshear , asking for an executive order to protect clerks who have moral objections against personally issuing such marriage licenses , as Kentucky law requires county clerks to issue marriage licenses in their names . She began turning away gay couples from her county office who were seeking marriage licenses . David Ermold and David Moore , a same @-@ sex couple from Morehead , Kentucky and alumni of Morehead State University , released video footage on July 7 , 2015 , of Davis refusing to issue them a marriage license and ordering them to turn off their camera . The video went viral overnight . 
 On August 22 , 2015 , a protest rally against the ruling at the State Capitol in Frankfort , organized by the Family Foundation of Kentucky in support of Davis and other clerks who refused to issue marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples , was attended by several thousand people . The clerks of the two other Kentucky counties declined to speak to the rally crowd , but Davis spoke briefly , saying , " I need your prayers ... to continue to stand firm in what we believe . " At a competing event several blocks away organized by the Fairness Campaign in Louisville , attendees celebrated the Supreme Court 's decision and called upon government officials to uphold the law . 
 Rather than issue marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples , Davis began denying marriage licenses to all couples , same @-@ sex or mixed @-@ sex . 
 = = = Lawsuits against Davis = = = 
 Six couples who were denied marriage licenses from Davis sued her in her official capacity as county clerk . Four couples were represented by the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) of Kentucky and two couples each had separate legal representation . The four couples represented by the ACLU , two same @-@ sex couples and two mixed @-@ sex couples , filed the first lawsuit against Davis ( Miller v. Davis ) on July 2 , 2015 . On July 10 , 2015 , David Ermold and David Moore ( who had shot the viral video ) next filed suit against Davis , represented by Joseph Buckles and Thomas <unk> ( Ermold v. Davis ) ; James Yates and William Smith Jr . , represented by Rene Heinrich of the Heinrich Firm PLLC and Kash <unk> of Roush & <unk> PSC , filed a suit against Davis on August 25 , 2015 ( Yates v. Davis ) . 
 Federal district judge David L. Bunning of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Kentucky , the judge assigned to the cases , held hearings with Davis in Ashland , at which she was the only witness . Davis argued tearfully that issuing licenses under her name violated her beliefs , citing her religious rights under the First Amendment : " It wasn 't just a spur @-@ of @-@ the @-@ moment decision " , she said . " It was thought out , and I sought God on it . " Davis had already decided against resigning from her post , as doing so , she said , would only leave the matter to her deputies : " If I resign , I solve nothing . It helps nobody . " Governor Beshear stated that he would not call a special session of the General Assembly to address Davis ' concerns , while other state legislators believed that such a session could accommodate Davis with possible new legislation . Davis ' attorneys , from the Orlando , Florida @-@ based law firm Liberty Counsel , stated that the plaintiffs were free to drive to other counties to obtain their same @-@ sex marriage licenses , with one adding , " This case is not about these plaintiffs ' desires to get married , the case is about [ their ] desire to force Kim Davis to approve and authorize their marriage in violation of her constitutionally protected religious beliefs . " Davis and her attorneys then sued Governor Beshear for ordering her to violate her religious beliefs instead of trying to accommodate them , arguing that Beshear , not Davis , should be held accountable for any legal damages from the ACLU lawsuit . 
 On August 12 , Judge Bunning issued a temporary stay barring Davis from " applying her ' no marriage licenses ' policy to future marriage license requests " . Before the stay expired , the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit refused to extend that ruling for an appeal . " It cannot be <unk> argued that the holder of the Rowan County clerk 's office ... may decline to act in conformity with the United States Constitution " , the three @-@ judge panel wrote unanimously in their refusal , continuing , " There is thus little or no likelihood that the clerk in her official capacity will prevail on appeal . " 
 = = = Appeal = = = 
 Liberty Counsel and Davis filed an emergency application to appeal with the U.S. Supreme Court . On August 31 , 2015 , in a one @-@ line order , the Supreme Court refused to hear the appeal , preventing Davis from legally continuing to deny marriage licenses . In response to the U.S. Supreme Court 's refusal to grant her stay request , Davis stated : 
 " I never imagined a day like this would come , where I would be asked to violate a central teaching of Scripture and of Jesus Himself regarding marriage . To issue a marriage license which conflicts with God 's definition of marriage , with my name affixed to the certificate , would violate my conscience . " 
 Davis continued to defy Bunning 's court order after the Supreme Court upheld it . Less than a day after the court rejected her request , several couples sought to obtain marriage licenses , but Davis turned them away , saying she was acting " under God 's authority " . Some in the media questioned whether Davis , having been married four times and only recently converted , was acting hypocritically in the application of her beliefs . 
 = = = Contempt of court and jailing = = = 
 Bunning ordered Davis and her six deputy clerks to appear before him on September 3 after the six couples sought to have her held in contempt of court . The ACLU asked the court to fine Davis . Bunning ruled in the plaintiffs ' favor and held Davis in contempt , <unk> her to custody after the hearing . The judge said Davis would remain there until she complied with the court 's order to issue marriage licenses . Bunning reportedly said that fines were not an option " because outsiders would pay them for her " . Bunning then spoke with each of the deputy clerks who reported to Davis . Only her son , Nathan Davis , told the judge he refused to comply with the court 's order to start issuing marriage licenses ; Bunning declined to hold him in contempt . After the hearing , U.S. Marshals transported Davis to the Carter County Detention Center in Grayson . 
 On Friday , September 4 , the first day her office was open during her incarceration , Davis ' deputy clerks began issuing marriage licenses to all couples . James Yates and William Smith Jr . ( independently suing Davis ) were the first couple in Rowan County to receive a marriage license since <unk> . The couple were soon followed by several other plaintiff couples . 
 Through her Liberty Counsel attorneys , Davis filed an appeal of the order holding her in contempt of court , asking that she be released immediately from jail and that her name be removed from marriage licenses , allowing her deputies to issue them . Separately , Davis asked Governor Beshear to free her . The governor 's office said that the conflict was a " matter between her and the courts " and added that the governor had no power to grant her release . Rowan County Democratic Judge @-@ Executive Walter Blevins stated that he did not believe he would need to appoint a replacement for Davis , and that he believed the Attorney General of Kentucky and " the General Assembly will pass something where marriage licenses don 't have anyone 's name on them " . 
 At this point , the Oath Keepers — an armed right @-@ wing group variously described as a vigilante or militia group — offered to provide a " security detail " to Davis in an effort to prevent U.S. Marshals from re @-@ arresting her for contempt . Davis declined the offer . 
 On July 13 , 2016 , her appeal to get her contempt of court judgment vacated was rejected by a Federal appeals court , so the contempt ruling remains on her record . 
 = = = Release and return to work = = = 
 Five days later , on Tuesday , September 8 , Bunning ordered Davis released from jail . The order stated : " Defendant Davis shall not interfere in any way , directly or indirectly , with the efforts of her deputy clerks to issue marriage licenses to all legally eligible couples . If Defendant Davis should interfere in any way with their issuance , that will be considered a violation of this order and appropriate sanctions will be considered . " 
 Bunning 's order also stated that Davis ' deputy clerks must continue to comply with his earlier order to issue marriage licenses and to submit status reports to him every fourteen days confirming their compliance . The deputy clerks released statements pledging to continue issuing licenses after Davis ' release and to ignore any order from her to do otherwise , complying with the federal judge 's order . Licenses issued since Davis ' refusal state that they are authorized by " the office of the Rowan County Clerk " but no longer bear her name . Davis ' supporters , gathered at the Rowan County Courthouse since her first day in custody , said that her deputies were unlawfully issuing licenses and should resign or be fired . 
 Davis returned to work a week later , on September 14 , 2015 . She said that , while she would not interfere with any deputy clerk who issues marriage licenses , she would not personally issue or authorize any of the forms . She created several altered versions of the Kentucky marriage license form and instructed her deputy clerks to use only these forms , which had her name and any reference to the clerk 's office removed . The ACLU sued Davis separately for these form alterations , which they found to be of questionable legality . Governor Steve Beshear was asked by Bunning to brief the court on the validity of the licenses . Governor Beshear acknowledged that Kentucky would recognize the licenses being issued , but he could not verify the legality of the licenses issued or the means by which the marriage licenses were altered . Bunning ultimately denied the ACLU 's separate suit , stating the altered forms were likely legal and that Davis was now abiding by the court 's order . 
 While Davis remained inside her personal office , same @-@ sex couples successfully walked out of the Rowan County clerk 's office with their marriage licenses . One of the applicants said , " My license is valid , and it 's valid because of the court order that 's in effect ... It doesn 't have to have her signature . " 
 = = = Reactions to controversy = = = 
 Davis gained international attention after her refusal to issue marriage licenses and the ensuing controversy her actions caused . Many legal experts spoke out against Kim Davis . Columbia Law School professor Katherine Davis said , " Kim Davis has all sorts of religious liberty rights secured under the First Amendment and under other laws , but they are not at stake in this case . All she 's asked to do with couples that come before her is certify that they 've met the state requirements for marriage , so her religious opposition to same @-@ sex marriage is absolutely irrelevant . " Professor Steve <unk> of American University 's Washington College of Law said that Davis " waived any right to have an objection to issuing same @-@ sex marriage licenses when she ran for the job " . Washington Post columnist Jennifer Rubin and others compared Davis ' refusal to follow orders of the U.S. Supreme Court to Alabama Governor George Wallace 's futile " Stand in the Schoolhouse Door " protest of desegregation in 1963 . The Human Rights Campaign , a national LGBT civil rights group , said , " Ms. Davis has the fundamental right to believe what she likes ... but as a public servant , she does not have the right to pick and choose which laws she will follow or which services she will provide . " Attorney and author Roberta A. Kaplan , who argued for the plaintiffs in United States v. Windsor , wrote that " Kim Davis is the clearest example of someone who wants to use a religious liberty argument to discriminate , yet she swore an oath to uphold the Constitution . It is laughable that she can then decide which laws to enforce , which is why every decision in her case has gone against her . " 
 Opposition to the federal ruling came from political columnists William <unk> of The Wall Street Journal and Ray <unk> of The Christian Post . Law professor Eugene Volokh suggested that the Kentucky 's state religious freedom restoration act might compel the state to accommodate Davis ' religious beliefs and argued that state courts have the authority to order the removal of Davis ' name from marriage licenses . Kentucky Senate President Robert Stivers also came to Davis ' defense ; he stated , in an amicus brief filed in federal court , that the " Supreme Court ruling has completely obliterated the definition of marriage " . Liberty Counsel , the law firm defending Davis , stated , " Kim Davis is being treated as a criminal because she cannot violate her conscience . " They also said she refused to accept a proposed compromise where she would no longer be found in contempt if she agreed not to interfere with her deputies issuing licenses to same @-@ sex couples . 
 Reactions against Davis also came from the White House , from Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear , and from candidates in the race for the 2016 presidential election . White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said , " No public official is above the rule of law . Certainly not the president of the United States , but neither is the Rowan County clerk . " Governor Beshear said the judge 's decision " speaks for itself " , while his attorneys called the legal arguments in her suit against him " absurd " . Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton said , " Officials should be held to their duty to uphold the law – end of story . " Several Republican presidential candidates also called on Davis to comply with court orders . Donald Trump said , " the decision 's been made , and that is the law of the land . " Jeb Bush , former governor of Florida , said Davis " is sworn to uphold the law " , but also suggested that some sort of accommodation be made for her . Republican presidential candidates Carly Fiorina and Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina both suggested that Davis should comply with the court order or resign . Members of the Westboro Baptist Church protested against Davis for her multiple divorces and marriages , saying she is living in adultery . Westboro also stated " God hates oath breakers " , therefore Davis is obligated to follow the nation 's law . 
 Several national Republican politicians supported Davis . Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee , the former governor of Arkansas , said that the Kim Davis affair was part of a " criminalization of Christianity " and organized a rally for Davis outside the jail where she had been held . Senator Ted Cruz of Texas , another Republican presidential candidate , said that Davis was a victim of " judicial tyranny " and attended the same rally . Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal and Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky , also presidential candidates , both voiced their support for Davis . Matt Bevin , the Republican nominee for Kentucky governor in the 2015 election , said a simple solution to Davis ' plight is for the government to stop providing marriage contracts . 
 A survey of American adults conducted by YouGov in September 2015 found that 56 % supported Judge Bunning 's decision to jail Davis for contempt of court , while 31 % of Americans opposed the decision . When asked what Davis should do , 65 % said that Davis should resign from office ; 23 % said that Davis should stay in office and continue to refuse to issue marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples ; and 4 % said that Davis should remain in office but issue licenses to all persons legally entitled to one . 
 = = = Opposition by other court clerks = = = 
 Other court clerks in the U.S. have also refused to issue marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples . The probate judges of several counties in Alabama have stopped issuing marriage licenses to anyone . Probate Judge Nick Williams of Washington County , Alabama , said he stopped issuing licenses altogether to avoid discrimination and said , " I completely disagree with the authority the Supreme Court has . " Probate Judge John <unk> of Elmore County , Alabama , said the federal government , not state probate offices , should be the entity issuing same @-@ sex marriage licenses . Casey Davis ( unrelated to Kim Davis ) , a clerk in Casey County , Kentucky , said , " We 've not tried to prevent same @-@ sex marriages , we 've only tried to exercise our First Amendment rights " , adding that such applicants could apply in other counties . Kay Schwartz , a clerk in Whitley County , Kentucky , felt oppressed : " There 's a law against bullying ... Why take away the majority 's right [ just ] to give the minority their rights ? " She suggested the possibility of other options to meet the needs of same @-@ sex applicants , such as an online service . The ACLU plans no legal action against other court clerks or probate judges . National attention has not been on them as the ACLU brought no case against them , speculated University of Kentucky political science professor D. B. Riggle : " The action in Rowan County may be in part due to the availability of plaintiffs for a case . " 
 = = = Pending decisions and issues = = = 
 Under Kentucky law , a commonwealth 's attorney has the power to indict various local officials including " judges @-@ executives , justices of the peace , sheriffs , coroners , surveyors , jailers , county attorneys and constables " for " malfeasance in office or willful neglect in the discharge of official duties " ( an offense punishable by removal from office and a fine of up to $ 1 @,@ 000 ) , " but for some reason lost to history , the statute doesn 't include county clerks . " Because Davis is an elected official , she cannot simply be fired . For Davis to be removed from the office of county clerk , impeachment proceedings must be initiated by the Kentucky House of Representatives and charges for impeachment brought to the Kentucky Senate . 
 After being denied a license four times , one couple asked the Rowan County Attorney 's Office to investigate Davis for official misconduct , a misdemeanor under Kentucky law . Official misconduct in the first degree is a Class A misdemeanor and is punishable with imprisonment not to exceed 12 months and fines of $ 500 . Official misconduct in the second degree is a Class B misdemeanor and carries a potential punishment of up to 90 days ' imprisonment and fines of $ 250 . Rowan County Attorney Cecil Watkins referred the official misconduct complaint to the Kentucky Attorney General 's office , led by Attorney General Jack Conway , for it to decide whether to file charges against Davis . The Kentucky Attorney General 's office conducted a review , and Conway issued a statement saying , " We are a nation of laws , and no one can defy an order from a federal judge . " Conway then issued a one @-@ sentence statement saying that he would not appoint a special prosecutor to investigate Davis . Conway has noted that the statute of limitations for a charge to be laid against Davis does not expire for a year . 
 Months after Davis ' office was forced to begin issuing same @-@ sex marriage licenses , Davis ' lawyers filed a motion asking the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit to overturn four of Bunning 's decisions , calling them a " rush to judgment " that " imposed direct pressure and substantial burden on Davis , forcing her to choose between her religious beliefs and forfeiting her essential personal freedom on one hand , or abandoning those beliefs to keep her freedom on the other hand " . The court denied the motion on November 5 . Davis ' lawyers filed their last appeal the next day , requesting a delay in issuing marriage licenses to same sex couples , arguing that previous decisions should apply only to the four couples to whom Davis ' office was initially ordered to issue licenses . The appeal also asked the sixth circuit court of appeals to overturn a previous ruling that had sent Davis to jail for failure to comply . This final appeal was denied two days later by the court . 
 One of the first acts of newly elected Kentucky Governor Matt Bevin was an executive order to remove clerks ' names from the state marriage licenses . Bevin expressed his hope on November 6 , 2015 , that the executive order will protect the religious beliefs of officials who are opposed to gay marriage . Kim Davis has since asked her appeal be dismissed to end the case , because the new regulation removes clerks ' names , which provides for a religious accommodation and makes the case moot . 
 = = = Kentucky Attorney General 's finding that Davis violated state Open Records Act = = = 
 In March 2016 , the Campaign for Accountability ( CfA ) , a Washington , D.C.-based nonprofit group , made a request to Davis for access to public records under the Kentucky Open Records Act , seeking copies of retainer agreements and lawyer @-@ client engagement agreements between Davis and Liberty Counsel , the religious advocacy organization that represented Davis in the marriage @-@ license dispute . Liberty Counsel , which responded to the request on Davis ' behalf , refused to comply , arguing that the documents were preliminary and private records not subject to the Act . CfA appealed to the Office of the Kentucky Attorney General , which under Kentucky law has the authority to make binding rulings on the Open Records Act , and resubmitted its request to Davis ' office in April 2016 . 
 In May 2016 , the Attorney General 's Office sought to privately review the records at issue to determine if an exemption applied , but Liberty Counsel refused to make most of the documents available for a private review . In an opinion issued on June 30 , 2016 , the Attorney General 's Office determined that Davis had violated the Open Records Act , saying that her conduct had the effect of " intentionally frustrating the attorney general 's review of an open records request " which " would subvert the General Assembly 's intent behind providing review by the attorney general . " Davis and Liberty Counsel may challenge the AG 's decision in Kentucky Circuit Court , but have not indicated whether they will do so . 
 = = Meeting with Pope Francis controversy = = 
 Within a few weeks of Davis ' release from jail , Davis announced she and her husband had met with Pope Francis on September 24 , 2015 , at the Apostolic Nunciature to the United States in Washington , D.C. , during the Pope 's U.S. visit in September 2015 . According to Davis and her lawyer , the pope told Davis to " stay strong " and gave her two rosaries . <unk> John L. Allen , Jr. said that " there 's no way to view the encounter other than as a broad gesture of support by the pope for conscientious objection from gay marriage laws " and that the gesture strengthened the hand of those who defend religious freedom . 
 Two days later , the Vatican press office issued a statement saying that " the Pope did not enter into the details of the situation of Mrs. Davis and his meeting with her should not be considered a form of support of her position in all of its particular and complex aspects " . According to Vatican spokesman Father Thomas <unk> , the Pope met with several dozen other people , and rosaries were also given to others in attendance ; Davis was not invited by the Pope to the Nunciature and " the meeting may have been manipulated by her and her lawyer " . The only audience given by the Pope while in Washington was with a former student of his , an openly gay Argentine named Yayo Grassi and Grassi 's same @-@ sex partner of 19 years . 
 Observers wondered if the Pope had not been informed of Davis ' controversy or if the Vatican had underestimated the media storm that a meeting with Davis would provoke . Five months later , the Vatican announced that Pope Francis had replaced the retiring diplomat who had arranged the Pope 's meeting with Davis : Archbishop Carlo Maria Viganò , Vatican 's ambassador to the United States and an outspoken opponent of same @-@ sex marriage . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Davis has been married four times to three different men . The first three marriages ended in divorce in 1994 , 2006 , and 2008 . Davis is the mother of twin sons , who were born five months after her divorce from her first husband . Her third husband is the biological father of the twins who were adopted by her second husband , Joe Davis , who is also her fourth and current husband ; he supports her stance against same @-@ sex marriage . One of Davis ' sons , Nathan , works in her office as a deputy clerk and has taken the same position of denying marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples . 
 Davis experienced a religious awakening in 2011 , following her mother @-@ in @-@ law 's dying wish that she attend church . Since then Davis has identified herself as an Apostolic Christian , belonging to the Apostolic Pentecostal denomination known as " Oneness Pentecostalism , " which favors a literal interpretation of the Bible . She worships three times a week at the Solid Rock Apostolic Church near Morehead . 
 Following her conversion , Davis let her hair grow long , stopped wearing makeup and jewelry , and began wearing skirts and dresses that fall below the knee , in keeping with Apostolic / Oneness tenets regarding external holiness and modest dress . She held a weekly Bible study for female inmates at the local jail . In an interview in January 2016 , Davis said that she believed that " we are living in end times . " Davis also expressed her view that the Bible is infallible . 
 Shortly after the same @-@ sex marriage license controversy , Davis said she and her husband switched from the Democratic Party to the Republican Party . While speaking with reporters , Davis expressed confidence in the way marriage licenses were now being issued by her office in Morehead , Kentucky . However , Davis warned that should the current situation become an issue , she was prepared to return to jail . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Davis was the subject of numerous satirical works following her burst of media attention in 2015 . Books , social media profiles , and videos have been created that parody Davis ' refusal to issue marriage licenses in Kentucky . A Twitter account with more than 90 @,@ 000 followers and run by comedian Dave Colan mocks Davis with humorous tweets supposedly from a woman who " Sits Next to Kim Davis " . Funny or Die made a Mashup video featuring characters from Parks and Recreation in video clips that spoof Davis ' refusal to issue marriage licenses , and a parody video of her meeting with Pope Francis . Author Lilith St. Augustine wrote Kim Goes To Jail : An Erotic Story , an erotic novella featuring Davis in a fictional role . La Strega Entertainment created a satirical music video sung to the tune of " Major @-@ General 's Song " from Gilbert and Sullivan 's Pirates of Penzance . Saturday Night Live cast member Aidy Bryant portrayed Davis during the show 's season 41 premiere . Actress Jennifer Lawrence , in the December 2015 issue of Vogue , told Jonathan Van Meter that Kim Davis is a " lady that makes me embarrassed to be from Kentucky . " 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = Barney Gumble = 
 Barnard " Barney " Gumble is a fictional character on the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . The character is voiced by Dan Castellaneta and first appeared in the series premiere episode " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " . He is the town drunk of Springfield , a huge fan of Lord Palmerston , and Homer Simpson 's best friend . His desperation for alcohol is a frequent butt of jokes on the show . Barney sobered up in the episode " Days of Wine and D 'oh 'ses " , which was co @-@ written by Castellaneta , and stayed sober for several seasons . Barney was inspired by the cartoon character Barney Rubble from The Flintstones and by several barflies from other television programs . In 2004 , Castellaneta won an Emmy Award for voicing various characters , including Barney . 
 Barney can be seen in the 2009 @-@ present The Simpsons opening credits , passed out under a pile of leaves ( but still holding his beloved bottle of Duff Beer ) . 
 = = Role in The Simpsons = = 
 Barney 's father , Arnie Gumble , was a World War II veteran who died in 1979 in a parade float accident . Little is known about his mother , except that she lives in Norway and that she served in the United States Navy , including duty on a submarine . She is seen in the season nine episode Simpson Tide . In Treehouse of Horror XVII , Barney stated that he was Polish , after mistakenly saying he was Irish in a drunken stupor . Barney was born on April 20 ( which Homer remembers is also Hitler 's birthday in " Viva Ned Flanders " and Barney 's entry into the Springfield Film Festival in " A Star Is Burns " where Barney states that he is 40 years old ) . In the episode " $ pringfield " , he claims that he studied dance for several years , including modern and tap . 
 Two episodes give different reasons for his alcoholism . " Mr. Plow " suggests that Barney was a dedicated student looking forward to a bright future . He had his mind set on going to Harvard University , until Homer introduced him to beer the day before the SATs . Season 16 's " She Used to Be My Girl " attributes his drinking to his high school girlfriend Chloe Talbot leaving Springfield to pursue a journalism career . 
 In " Homer 's Barbershop Quartet " , Barney formed a barbershop quartet with Homer , Apu Nahasapeemapetilon , and Seymour Skinner called the Be Sharps . Barney was asked to join when the other members heard him singing in a beautiful tenor voice in the restroom of Moe 's Tavern , replacing the group 's original fourth member , Chief Wiggum , who was kicked out . In 1986 , the Be Sharps won a Grammy Award for Outstanding Soul , Spoken Word , or Barbershop Album of the Year . Soon , creative disputes arose , and Barney left the group in all but name when he began dating a Japanese conceptual artist . The group realized that they were no longer popular and split up . 
 Barney was rescued from a tar pit by Bart 's pet elephant Stampy in Bart Gets An Elephant and he also started a snowplowing business rivaling Homer 's in " Mr. Plow " . Barney 's commercial defamed Homer , causing Homer to lose his customers . As revenge , Homer fooled Barney into plowing a driveway on Widow 's Peak , a treacherous mountain just outside Springfield . When Homer saw a news report showing that Barney had become trapped in an avalanche , Homer immediately drove to the mountain and rescued Barney . The friends resolved their differences and agreed to work together . However , a heat wave hit Springfield at that exact moment , driving them both out of business . However , in the episodes " O Brother , Where Bart Thou ? " and " Miracle on Evergreen Terrace " it is shown that Barney still drives his Plow King truck . 
 After being forced to spend a sober night at Moe 's Tavern serving as designated driver , Barney left town in Homer Simpson 's car to , among other things , give a guest lecture at Villanova ( although , by his own admission , the guest lecture could just have likely occurred on a street corner ) . A gag in " Selma 's Choice " suggests that Barney is the father of many local babies born through ( presumably , paid ) donation of semen and the resulting artificial insemination . 
 Barney made a documentary film about his life as an alcoholic , titled Pukahontas . It won the top prize at the Springfield Film Festival . He was ready to quit drinking after winning the Festival , but unfortunately , the prize he received was a lifetime supply of Duff Beer . In " Deep Space Homer " , Barney trained to become an astronaut for NASA . Under their alcohol @-@ ban , he quickly regained his balance and diction and was quite appropriately selected to fly with Buzz Aldrin . However , he reverted to his old ways when he was presented with a bottle of non @-@ alcoholic champagne . Barney served in the United States Navy Reserve as a submariner on the USS Jebediah , alongside his mother , in " Simpson Tide " . 
 In " Days of Wine and D 'oh 'ses " , after watching a video of his drunken antics at his birthday party , Barney resolves to get sober . He attends Alcoholics Anonymous meetings , cleans up his appearance , and attends helicopter @-@ flying lessons . It was revealed in the fourteenth season episode " I 'm Spelling as Fast as I Can " that he had relapsed . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 Barney was inspired by Barney Rubble , Fred Flintstone 's best friend and next @-@ door neighbor from the animated series The Flintstones . The writers originally wanted the character to be Homer Simpson 's sidekick and next @-@ door neighbor , but instead , while still portraying him as Homer 's best friend , they decided to make him an alcoholic . Ned Flanders would become the next @-@ door neighbor instead . " Barney was taking the standard sitcom sidekick and just making him as pathetic as possible , " said Matt Groening , the creator of The Simpsons . The writers drew further inspiration from Crazy Guggenheim , a character played by comedian Frank Fontaine on The Jackie Gleason Show . Part of the reason the writers went in that direction , according to Groening , was because of " a sort of unspoken rule about not having drinking on television as a source of comedy . So , of course , we went right for it . " The writers also patterned the character after Norm Peterson ( George Wendt ) , a character from the sitcom Cheers . 
 In some early first season episodes , Barney had yellow hair . Later in the production of that season , the producers had it changed to brown , because they thought that his hair looked like his skin ; as well , during an artistic convention of the show , Groening stated that he wanted only the Simpsons to have yellow hair . Animation director Rich Moore modeled Barney 's apartment on one he and several other animators who worked on the show shared , particularly the Farrah Fawcett poster and the cable spool table . The writers originally intended for the character to be the owner of Barney 's Bowl @-@ A @-@ Rama . However , after making him " pathetic " , they could not regard him as a business owner any longer , and it was explained seasons later in " And Maggie Makes Three " that his Uncle Al owns the alley and named it after him . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Barney Gumble is voiced by Dan Castellaneta . Early on the show , Castellaneta discovered that it was not easy for him to do Barney 's trademark belch every time a script called for it , so he identified his best belch and told the producers to make that the standard . Castellaneta has voiced Barney every time he has appeared in the series , with the exception of the episode " Homer 's Barbershop Quartet " , in which some of Barney 's singing is provided by a member of The Dapper Dans , who recorded lines for all four members of the Be Sharps . Their recordings were intermixed with the cast 's , often with a cast member singing the melody and the Dapper Dans providing backup . 
 = = = Sobriety = = = 
 Castellaneta thought of the idea of Barney sobering up early in the series . He wrote a script together with his wife Deb Lacusta . They offered their script to showrunner Al Jean . Jean liked the story , but felt that it was too similar to a script the writers were already working on , " Duffless " , so he turned it down . Castellaneta and Lacusta waited several years and offered their script , which they updated , to then @-@ show runner Mike Scully , who liked it and had them make a few changes . Their script became the eleventh season episode " Days of Wine and D 'oh 'ses " , which first aired April 9 , 2000 . The episode was directed by Neil Affleck , who said that he had " a vested interest in getting Barney sober . " However , some of the writing staff was opposed to the episode as they felt Barney sober would not be funny . Castellaneta commented , " He 's still a goofy man @-@ child ... he 's still got 15 years of booze left in his veins . " 
 After a long discussion about how the episode should end , the writers decided that they did not want Barney to return to being drunk at the end of the episode . Barney stayed sober for several seasons . The animators modified the appearance of the character , straightening his hair , among other things , to indicate his sobriety . Castellaneta altered his voice for the character by no longer slurring . Barney was still seen at Moe 's Tavern , but only drinking lattes . The character 's new addiction to coffee was suggested by writer @-@ producer David Mirkin , who has friends who stopped drinking alcohol and became addicted to coffee . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Filmcritic.com ranked Barney 18th on their 2008 list of " The 21 Best Movie Alcoholics of All Time " . Recognizing the character for his appearance in The Simpsons Movie , Filmcritic called him " the most awesomely funny town drunk in pop culture " . IGN ranked Barney fifth on their list of the " Top 25 Simpsons Peripheral Characters " in 2006 , stating that , " he 's been a dependable source of humor through his many drunken asides , burps included ... Occasionally he 's sobered up ... But let 's face it , for comedy 's sake , The Simpsons is better off with a drunken Barney mouthing off at Moe 's . " Author Chris Turner ( Planet Simpson ) said , " Making [ Barney ] sober falls into the trap of all the stuff The Simpsons satirizes , all those simple sitcom narratives where everything is wrapped up in half an hour and everyone learns a lesson in the end . " 
 Britain 's The Guardian said that Barney " should be hailed for making compulsive drinking a source of comedy on US TV , a hitherto impossible dream . " Entertainment Weekly placed " Mr. Plow " sixth on their list of the best 25 Simpsons episodes in 2003 . In 2004 , Dan Castellaneta won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for voicing several characters , including Barney , in the episode " Today I Am a Clown " . " Days of Wine and D 'oh 'ses " was nominated for a PRISM Award in 2001 . 
 = = = Merchandising = = = 
 Playmates Toys created three Barney Gumble action figures as part of the World of Springfield toy line . The first one , released in August 2000 , depicts Barney in his usual appearance . The second , Barney in his Plow King jacket from " Mr. Plow " , was released in January 2003 . The third , a Toys " R " Us retail exclusive , was released in July 2003 as part of a Be Sharps play set . The song " A <unk> named Barney " from the episode " Simpsoncalifragilisticexpiala ( Annoyed Grunt ) cious " was included on the Go Simpsonic with The Simpsons album . Barney plays a role in The Simpsons Ride , launched in 2008 at Universal Studios Florida and Hollywood . 
 = The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons = 
 " The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons " is the seventh episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 16 , 1997 . It was written by Richard Appel and directed by Steven Dean Moore . The episode sees Apu Nahasapeemapetilon marry Manjula , and incorporates several aspects of Hindu wedding ceremonies , which the writers researched during the episode 's production . Appel pitched the episode several years before season nine but the idea was not used until Mike Scully became showrunner . The episode 's subplot , which sees Homer stay at the Springfield Retirement Castle , was initially conceived as a separate episode , but could not be developed in enough detail . The episode received mixed critical reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a bachelor auction , the available bachelors on display are deemed undesirable , and the auction generates no money at all . Marge then nominates Apu , who is deemed a success by the women at the auction . He goes out on dates with many of the town 's women , and begins to enjoy his bachelor lifestyle . However , he receives a letter from his mother in India , reminding him of his arranged marriage to Manjula , the daughter of a family friend . Not wanting to get married , Apu asks Homer for advice , who suggests Apu tell his mother that he is already married . Days later , Apu thinks that he has escaped the marriage until he sees his mother walking towards the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart . To cover him , Homer tells Apu to pretend that Marge is his wife . 
 At the Simpson residence , Marge disapproves of the plan , but decides to do it for Apu 's sake . While the plan is under way Homer decides to stay in the Springfield Retirement Castle with his father , posing as resident Cornelius <unk> . Homer enjoys his stay at the home immensely , until the real Cornelius returns , at which point he flees . He returns home and gets into bed with Marge . Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilon enters to say goodbye , but is shocked to see Marge in bed with another man , and Apu on the floor . Tired of the whole charade , Marge forces Apu to tell his mother the truth , who declares that the arranged marriage will proceed as planned . 
 The wedding is held in the Simpsons ' backyard , but Apu still has second thoughts about it . However , when he sees Manjula for the first time in years , he realizes how beautiful she really is and feels less reluctant . The pair decide that perhaps the marriage can work after all . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Richard Appel pitched " The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons " at a story retreat several years before the ninth season , but it could not be fitted into a season at that point . Mike Scully liked the idea and so decided to use it in his first season as showrunner . Homer 's subplot at the Retirement Castle was an idea that Scully had for a long time . The plot could not be sustained for a whole episode , so it was fitted into this one . 
 The bachelor auction was created solely to provide more evidence that Apu is the best bachelor in Springfield . Appel found that the scene " wrote itself " , as every other man in Springfield is essentially a loser compared to Apu . The scene acted as the episode 's opening set piece , a concept that Scully liked to use in every episode . The montage of Apu getting several different hair styles originally included three more , but they ended up being cut for time . The shot in which Apu 's mother falls to the ground , a joke that the staff love , was inspired by an incident when Moore saw a man fall in much the same way . The joke was only inserted to buy Apu and Homer more time to come up with a lie . Before the wedding , Bart fuels a " sacred fire " with pages from a hymn book . Originally , he used pages from The Bible , but after the scene had been animated , Scully found the joke " horrible " and changed the book title to " Hymns " . 
 Andrea Martin provided the voice of Apu 's mother , recording her part in New York . She wanted to get the voice perfect , so in between takes she listened to tapes of Hank Azaria reading lines for Apu , to make sure her voice could realistically be Apu 's mother 's . During the flashback to Apu 's childhood , the animators made sure not to show Manjula , as they wished to reveal her at the end of the episode . 
 The staff researched into arranged Hindu marriages , learning about ideas such as the lotus flower being used as a message , but a majority of the information turned out " not to be as hilarious [ as the writers ] had hoped " , and so was dropped . Steven Dean Moore , the episode 's director , researched into the design of every aspect of Indian culture shown in the episode . The events of the wedding , as well as many of the items present , were all taken from traditional Hindu marriage ceremonies . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The Foreigner song " Hot Blooded " plays over Apu 's bachelor binge , and he dances in a manner similar to Riverdance . Additionally , an Indian version of The Carpenters ' song " ( They Long to Be ) Close to You " is sung at the wedding ; an Indian vocal group was hired to sing , while Alf Clausen wrote the instrumental part . The scene where Moe walks on and off the stage without breaking his stride was loosely based on a moment that occurred during a stand up show of comedian Redd Foxx . During a show in Las Vegas , Foxx came on stage to the Sanford and Son theme song , only to find that there were very few people in the audience . Foxx reacted angrily refusing to do a show with such a small audience and walked off . The house orchestra , puzzled by Foxx 's leave simply played him off with the Sanford and Son theme song again . This incident was also referenced in the later episode " Trash of the Titans " , when Ray Patterson is reinstated , although the reference is more similar to the real event then . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons " finished 22nd in ratings for the week of November 10 @-@ 16 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 6 , equivalent to approximately 11 @.@ 4 million viewing households . It was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files and King of the Hill . 
 Todd Gilchrist of IGN named the episode as one of his favorites of the ninth season in his review of the DVD boxset , while Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , called it " a good fun episode " . Ian Jones and Steve Williams criticized the episode , calling it " a messy , unfocused lampooning " of arranged Hindu marriages . Homer writing " Where are the sticky buns " on a sheet of paper after Apu asks him for advice is one of Mike Scully 's favorite jokes . 
 = The Cost of Living ( Lost ) = 
 " The Cost of Living " is the 5th episode of the third season of Lost , and the 54th episode overall . It aired on November 1 , 2006 , in the US , averaging 16 @.@ 07 million viewers , and on December 5 , 2006 , in the UK , being watched by 1 @.@ 15 million viewers . The episode was written by Monica Owusu @-@ Breen and Alison Schapker and directed by Jack Bender . The plot centers on the character of Mr. Eko ( Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje ) , who in flashbacks shows how he became a priest replacing his dead brother Yemi ( Adetokumboh M 'Cormack ) , and in the present day events is haunted by visions of Yemi while other castaways decide to visit a Dharma Initiative station . 
 The episode was written to finish Eko 's character arc as Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje had requested to leave the show while finishing the second season . Reviewers subsequently praised " The Cost of Living " while considering that the departure of Eko made Lost lose one of its best characters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Shortly after the death of his brother Yemi , Eko is driven back to Yemi 's village . Inside the church , Eko announces to the altar boy Daniel and his mother Amina that he will be taking his brother 's place at the church . When Amina also inquires about Yemi 's upcoming trip to London , a surprised Eko states that he would also replace him there . 
 Some time later , after Eko has become established in his new role as priest , he is confronted by militiamen , who Amina reveals that had a deal with Yemi to get most of the clinic 's vaccines . Eko soon develops a plan to sell the vaccine on the black market before he leaves the country that coming weekend . 
 As the militiamen learn of Eko 's deal , they attack him inside the church , but end up getting killed . The villagers respond by closing the church as they felt it was desecrated . Amina calls out Eko , saying she had been aware of the vaccine deal , and advises him to repent and make his peace with God , telling Eko that he " owes " Yemi one church . 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 A delirious Eko has a vision of his brother Yemi ( Adetokumboh M 'Cormack ) holding a cigarette lighter , who says it was Eko 's time to confess his sins and , he knew where to find him . Afterwards , Eko 's shelter catches fire , and Eko is rescued by Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) and Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) . As John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) arrives to ask what happened , Eko has vanished . 
 The next morning , Locke suggests to Desmond Hume ( Henry Ian Cusick ) that he visit the Pearl station . Joined by Charlie , Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) , Nikki and Paulo ( Kiele Sanchez and Rodrigo Santoro ) , the group finds Eko on their way to the Pearl . Upon arrival , Eko does not find Yemi 's body on the airplane atop the entrance , and decides to remain outside while Locke and the others enter the hatch . Inside the Pearl , Sayid tinkers first with the communication lines , and following a suggestion from Nikki , the monitors . Then one of the screens gets a live video feed of what appears to be another hatch , revealing a man with an eyepatch ( Andrew Divoff ) who then turns off the camera . 
 Meanwhile , outside the Pearl , Eko sees Yemi and follows him into an open field , where Yemi tells him it is time for Eko to confess his sins . Eko says he has not sinned , having not chosen the life he was given and that Eko had only done what he needed to do to survive . An angry @-@ looking Yemi replies , " You speak to me as if I were your brother " as he retreats into the jungle . Eko follows him asking " Who are you ? ! " , and then finds the smoke monster . An arm of smoke attacks Eko , beating him into trees before he is slammed into the ground . Locke and the others rush out of the station to find a bloodied Eko . Locke approaches Eko , who whispers his dying words into Locke 's ears . Sayid asks what he said , and Locke replies , " We 're next . " 
 = = = On Hydra Island = = = 
 At The Hydra , Jack is invited by Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) to attend a memorial service being held for Colleen . On the way , Jack asks about the symptoms of Ben 's spinal tumor , particularly pointing out that it will kill him . Ben professes not to know what Jack is talking about . Privately , Ben asks Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) why she showed his X @-@ rays to Jack . Juliet replies that she never told Jack whose X @-@ rays they were , and remarks that Ben must have inadvertently confirmed Jack 's guess . 
 The following day , Ben tells Jack that they had a perfect plan to convince Jack to operate on Ben 's spine , but it failed when Jack saw the X @-@ rays . Afterwards , Juliet brings to Jack 's cell a movie , which consists of Juliet speaking through cue cards . As Juliet discusses how the surgery will proceed , on the tape she tells Jack that Ben is a liar and very dangerous , and thus the surgery should be intentionally botched to kill Ben , and that she will protect Jack if he does so . 
 = = Production = = 
 Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje signed to Lost on a one @-@ year contract , as he did not want to make a long @-@ term commitment to the series . As Michelle Rodriguez signed under similar conditions that lead to her character Ana @-@ Lucia Cortez only appearing in the show 's second season , show runners Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse negotiated with Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje to make his character , Mr. Eko , to appear in the third season as well , adding some space between the two character deaths to develop Eko 's closure better . As filming of season 2 ended , conversations between the actor and the writers ended setting Eko 's departure during the first six episodes , prior to mid @-@ season break , with " a shocking and emotional death " . To make sure the sequence was " big and impressive " , effects supervisor Kevin Blank decided to set the death at the Jackass Ginger in <unk> , a large space that allowed to make the Smoke Monster " flip him around in weird physical positions " . A stunt double was dragged through cables , and along with the digital monster and wire removal , fast editing made the scene akin to " a magician 's trick " , in Blank 's opinion . The episode was written by Monica Owusu @-@ Breen and Alison Schapker , who had previously worked in another series by Lost production company Bad Robot Productions , Alias . 
 Cuse and Lindelof stated that Nikki and Paulo served as a red herring as rumors were raised of an incoming character death , and the fanbase would expect this to happen to the newcomers " who were sort of just there all along " instead of a prominent and popular character as Eko . Juliet 's message to Jack is an homage to Bob Dylan 's video for " Subterranean Homesick Blues " , where the musician flips cue cards while looking at the camera . 
 = = Reception = = 
 This episode attracted 16 @.@ 07 million American viewers in its original broadcast on November 1 , 2006 , standing as the tenth most watched program of the week . In the United Kingdom , the episode had 1 @.@ 247 million viewers , ranking third in multichannel shows after Ford Super Sunday and The Simpsons . In Canada , " The Cost of Living " had 1 @.@ 15 million viewers , ranking as the 26th highest @-@ rated program of the week . 
 Reviews were positive , though most critics found that the character of Eko was killed too soon in the show . Writing for Zap2it , Rick Porter said that while " The Cost of Living " was the best episode of season 3 thus far with " an illuminating flashback , some heavy island juju and a nice mix of the campers and the Others " , the death of Eko removed from Lost " one of its most compelling characters and best actors , which just flat @-@ out sucks . " Kristin dos Santos of E ! Online called Mr. Eko " the best character of the show " , and was therefore very disappointed with his death . Christine Fenno of Entertainment Weekly stated that she would miss Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje , and found Juliet 's message to be the best part of the episode , that like the rest of season three " answered a few questions ( whose tumor ? ) , raised a few questions ( who 's the eye @-@ patch guy ? ) , and ignored many long @-@ standing questions ( how did Yemi and Eko crash on the same island ? ) . " 
 IGN 's Chris Carabott ranked the episode 9 @.@ 3 out of 10 , saying it was " one of the series ' best efforts " exploring the series ' mythology and providing new paths , while also featuring Eko in " one of the most refreshing flashbacks that the series has produced thus far " and " a shocking confrontation " with the Smoke Monster . The reviewer still complained about Nikki and Paulo 's participation , considering them " poorly developed " and giving " the sense that they are being shoehorned in " . The website later ranked " The Cost of Living " as the 25th best episode of the series , saying that while early Season 3 " might have dragged a bit " , " The Cost of Living " " saw the excitement and drama ramp up considerably . The only thing marring this otherwise excellent episode was the presence of Nikki and Paolo . " On the other hand , a similar list by the Los Angeles Times ranked it 96th , considering that despite being " actually a pretty good piece of TV " , the episode was " just marred by the fact that the show was forced into killing Mr. Eko , a character whose story was far from over . " 
 = Philostrate = 
 Philostrate ( meaning " lover of battle " ) is a fictional character in a number of literary works , including William Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream ( 1596 ) . In that play , he is the Master of Revels at Theseus ' court , meaning he is in charge of his lord 's entertainments , making recommendations to Theseus , as well as altering the text of some of the plays performed in his court . Shakespeare may have used this character to poke fun at play censorship in London at the time . In early performances of the play , the actor who played this character probably also played the part of Egeus , Hermia 's strict father . There is only one scene in Act V where both Egeus and Philostrate are present , and in this scene Egeus ' character would have taken all of Philostrate 's lines as his own . 
 = = Role in the play = = 
 As Theseus 's head guard , Philostrate is asked to defend his Lord and also makes recommendations for plays to help while away the time . Theseus rejects all of the plays except " Pyramus and Thisbe " , which Philostrate has given a particularly bad review . He advises the betrothed king not to choose " The Mechanicals ' " ( the workers ' ) play because it is badly rehearsed : 
 Theseus , eager to please his fiancee , Hippolyta , and the rest of his court , chooses Pyramus and Thisbe despite Philostrate 's efforts . Because of its <unk> , the play turns out to be humorous . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 In most contemporary performances Philostrate 's name is usually pronounced : <unk> @-@ uh @-@ straight , ( to rhyme with " illustrate " ) with a short " uh " rather than a long " oo " because the medial vowel is unaccented . 
 However , a variation to this would be based on the conventions of classical Greek . In this case , the final " e " would be pronounced ( as an " ee " or " aye " ) , giving the name four syllables , and the accent would shift from the first syllable , to either the second or third syllable , depending on whether the medial syllables are considered short or long . It would then be pronounced : fill @-@ uh @-@ <unk> @-@ tay . 
 = = Context = = 
 Shakespeare is known for borrowing plots and characters from other stories , but the source of A Midsummer Night 's Dream has proved difficult to trace . There is no clear parallel to its plot in the literature of his time . However , many of its characters ' names and relationships are borrowed from Chaucer 's Canterbury Tales and Philostrate is no exception . His name is the pseudonym adopted by <unk> upon covertly returning to Athens in The Knight 's Tale to work for Theseus . ( A Knight 's Tale was dramatized nearly twenty years later by Shakespeare and Fletcher as The Two Noble Kinsmen . ) Chaucer himself took the name Philostrate from Boccaccio 's poem Il Filostrato , a story about Troilus and Criseyde . Because Chaucer 's <unk> adopts this identity to become a servant at Theseus ' court , it is possible that the Midsummer Night 's Dream character is meant to be the same person in a continuation of the story . However , the two characters have little else in common . Another candidate for the source of Philostrate 's character is Philostratus the Elder , the author of Comus , a play which has similarities to Midsummer Night 's Dream . 
 Philostrate 's duty in Theseus ' court is to examine the play that Nick Bottom and the others are about to perform and to make suggestions for improvement . It is also his duty to advise Theseus on matters of entertainment . Theseus calls him " our usual manager of mirth " . The official term for Philostrate 's position in the Court is the Master of Revels . 
 In Shakespeare 's day , the Queen of England had her own Master of Revels — appointed to oversee all entertainment in London . Before a play could be performed , its script had to go through him , and whenever the Queen wanted to see a play , he would make recommendations . By 1581 ( over a decade before the writing of Dream ) , all plays had to be approved by the Master of Revels prior to being performed . Shakespeare seems to be poking fun at the profession through Philostrate . At one point , when Theseus asks Philostrate to recommend a play to help pass the time , he lists several which sound ridiculous , such as " the battle with the centaurs to be sung by an Athenian eunuch to the harp . " These names are humorous examples of the types of plays that were actually being performed around the time of Dream . They were becoming old however , and , like Theseus , monarchs were searching for something new , refreshing , and sophisticated . 
 = = Performances = = 
 In original performances of A Midsummer Night 's Dream , the actor who played Egeus and the actor who played Philostrate were probably one and the same . This can be gathered through discrepancies between the First Folio and earlier quarto versions of the play . In Act V , scene 1 , for example , the quartos say " Call Philostrate " in several places where the 1623 Folio says " Call Egeus " . This would be an easy mistake to make if one actor had spoken both parts in this scene . One actor filling both roles explains the jumbled dialogue in this scene . Howard Furness , editor of several Shakespeare editions , interprets this a little differently , saying that Shakespeare may not have originally intended both roles to be played by the same person , but that directors combined the roles to save money . In any case , Act V , scene 1 is the only scene in which both men are present at the same time . In cases where one actor was playing both roles , Egeus ' character would probably have filled both roles in this scene , absorbing Philostrate 's lines into his own . 
 However , during Act V , there is no mention of Egeus , nor does he have a speaking role . It is logical , however , that he would have been in attendance since it is also his daughter Hermia 's wedding that the group if there to celebrate . 
 = Francis Tresham = 
 Francis Tresham ( c . 1567 – 23 December 1605 ) , eldest son of Sir Thomas Tresham and <unk> Throckmorton , was a member of the group of English provincial Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605 , a conspiracy to assassinate King James I of England . 
 Tresham joined the Earl of Essex 's failed rebellion against the government in 1601 , for which he was imprisoned . Only his family 's intervention and his father 's money saved him from attainder . Despite this , he became involved in two missions to Catholic Spain to seek support for English Catholics ( then heavily persecuted ) , and finally with the Gunpowder Plotters . 
 According to his confession , Tresham joined the plot in October 1605 . Its leader , Robert Catesby , asked him to provide a large sum of money and the use of Rushton Hall , but Tresham apparently provided neither , instead giving a much smaller amount of money to fellow plotter Thomas Wintour . Tresham also expressed concern that if the plot was successful , two of his brothers @-@ in @-@ law would be killed . An anonymous letter delivered to one of them , William Parker , 4th Baron Monteagle , found its way to the English Secretary of State , Robert Cecil , an event which eventually proved decisive in the conspiracy 's failure . 
 Historians have long suspected that Tresham wrote the letter , a hypothesis that remains unproven . Catesby and Wintour shared the same suspicion and threatened to kill him , but he was able to convince them otherwise . He was arrested on 12 November and confined to the Tower of London . In his confession , he sought to allay his involvement in the plot , but never mentioned the letter . He died of natural causes on 23 December 1605 . 
 = = Family and life before 1605 = = 
 Born in about 1567 , Francis Tresham was the eldest son of Sir Thomas Tresham , of Rushton Hall in Northamptonshire , and Meriel Throckmorton , daughter of Sir Robert Throckmorton of Coughton in Warwickshire . According to the antiquary Anthony Wood , Tresham was educated in Oxford at either St John 's College or Gloucester Hall or both , although biographer Mark Nicholls mentions that there appears to be no other evidence to corroborate that claim . He married Anne Tufton , daughter of Sir John Tufton of Hothfield in Kent , in 1593 . The couple had three children , twins Lucy and Thomas ( <unk> ) , and Elizabeth . Thomas died in infancy , Lucy became a nun in Brussels , and Elizabeth married Sir George Heneage of <unk> , Lincolnshire . 
 Tresham 's father , born near the end of Henry VIII 's reign , was regarded by the Catholic community as one of its leaders . Thomas was received into the Catholic Church in 1580 , and in the same year he allowed the Jesuit Edmund Campion to stay at his house in Hoxton . For the latter , following Campion 's capture in 1581 , he was tried in Star Chamber . Thomas 's refusal to fully comply with his interrogators was the beginning of years of fines and spells in prison . He proclaimed the accession of James I to the English throne , but the king 's promises to Thomas of forestry commissions and an end to recusancy fines were not kept . His finances were seriously depleted by fines of £ 7 @,@ 720 for recusancy , and the spending of £ 12 @,@ 200 on the marriages of six daughters meant that when he died in 1605 , his estate was £ 11 @,@ 500 in debt . 
 Author Antonia Fraser suggests that as a young man Francis became " resentful of his father 's authority and profligate with his father 's money . " Authors Peter Marshall and Geoffrey Scott describe him as possessing a " somewhat hot @-@ headed nature " , while another source calls him a " wild <unk> man " . The Jesuit priest Oswald Tesimond wrote that he was " a man of sound judgement . He knew how to look after himself , but was not much to be trusted " . While still young he assaulted a man and his pregnant daughter , claiming that their family owed his father money . Tresham spent time in prison for this offence . 
 On 8 February 1601 he joined the Earl of Essex in open rebellion against the government . Essex 's aim was to secure his own ambitions , but the Jesuit Henry Garnet described the young men who accompanied him as being interested mostly in furthering the Catholic cause . Captured and imprisoned , Tresham appealed to Katherine Howard , but was rebuked . His sister , Lady <unk> , alerted his cousin John Throckmorton , who turned to " three most honorable parsons and one <unk> instrument " for help . The identity of these individuals is unclear , but Tresham was promised freedom on the condition that over the next three months his father pay £ 2 @,@ 100 to William <unk> , to " save his <unk> attainder in <unk> . " He was released on 21 June . The experience did not dissuade him from engaging in further conspiracies ; in 1602 and 1603 he was involved in the missions to Catholic Spain made by Thomas Wintour , Anthony Dutton ( possibly an alias of Christopher Wright ) and Guy Fawkes , later dubbed by the English government as the Spanish Treason . However , upon James 's accession to the throne , he told Thomas Wintour ( secretary to Tresham 's brother @-@ in @-@ law William Parker , 4th Baron Monteagle ) , that he would " stand wholly for the King " , and " to have no speech with him of Spain . " 
 = = Introduction = = 
 English Catholics had hoped that the persecution of their faith would end when James succeeded Elizabeth I , as he appeared to hold more moderate views toward Catholics than his predecessor . But Robert Catesby , a religious zealot also imprisoned for his involvement in the Essex rebellion , had grown tired of James 's supposed perfidy and planned to kill the king . He hoped to achieve this by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder and inciting a popular revolt to install James 's daughter Princess Elizabeth as titular Queen . 
 Catesby had recruited 11 fellow Catholics to his cause but was running out of money . Even with his debts , with an annual income of over £ 3 @,@ 000 Tresham was one of the wealthiest people known to the plotters , and Catesby 's mother was Anne Throckmorton , an aunt of Tresham 's . The two cousins had been raised together and shared a close relationship . 
 Despite their shared upbringing and involvement in the Spanish Treason , the conspirators chose not to reveal the plot to him until 14 October 1605 , shortly after his father died , and just weeks before the planned explosion . According to his confession , the meeting took place at the home of Tresham 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Lord Stourton , in Clerkenwell . Tresham claimed to have questioned Catesby on the morality of the plot , asking if it was spiritually " damnable " . Catesby replied that it was not , at which point Tresham highlighted the danger that all Catholics would face should the plot succeed . Catesby replied , " The necessity of the Catholics " was such that " it must needs be done " . He wanted two things from Tresham : £ 2 @,@ 000 , and the use of Rushton Hall ; Catesby received neither . Tresham had no money to spare , his father 's debts having reduced his inheritance , although he paid a small sum to Thomas Wintour , on the understanding that the latter was to travel to the Low Countries . Following the meeting , he hurried back to Rushton Hall and closed his household , taking care to hide family papers ( not discovered until 1838 ) . He then returned to London with his mother and sisters , and on 2 November acquired a licence to travel abroad with his servants and horses . 
 = = Monteagle letter = = 
 Later in October , during a meeting at which Tresham was present , the conspirators discussed the fates of several notable Catholic peers . Foremost in Tresham 's thoughts were the lives of two brothers @-@ in @-@ law , William Parker , 4th Baron Monteagle , and Edward Stourton , 10th Baron Stourton , but Catesby proclaimed that " the innocent must perish with the guilty , sooner than ruin the chances of success . " As the last few details were being finalised that month , on Saturday 26 October Monteagle received an anonymous letter while at his house in Hoxton . It contained the following message : 
 My Lord , out of the love I bear to some of your friends , I have a care of your preservation . Therefore I would advise you , as you tender your life , to devise some excuse to shift your attendance at this parliament ; for God and man hath concurred to punish the wickedness of this time . And think not slightly of this advertisement , but retire yourself into your country where you may expect the event in safety . For though there be no appearance of any stir , yet I say they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament ; and yet they shall not see who hurts them . This counsel is not to be condemned because it may do you good and can do you no harm ; for the danger is passed as soon as you have burnt the letter . And I hope God will give you the grace to make good use of it , to whose holy protection I commend you . 
 Uncertain of its meaning , Monteagle delivered it to the English Secretary of State , Robert Cecil . 
 Tresham has long been suspected as the letter 's author . Mark Nicholls states that he almost certainly wrote it , pointing to the fact that once Catesby was made aware of its existence he immediately suspected Tresham and went with Thomas Wintour to confront him . The two threatened to " hang him " , but " with such oaths and emphatic assertions " Tresham managed to convince the pair of his innocence , the next day urging them by letter to abandon the plot . Antonia Fraser suggests that Catesby and Wintour 's decision to believe him should not be disregarded . While making his deathbed confession in the Tower of London , Tresham failed to mention the letter ; an omission which in her opinion makes no sense if he is to be regarded as its author , especially considering that its recipient was by then being credited as the country 's saviour . Author Alan Haynes views Tresham as the most likely culprit , but raises the possibility that Cecil penned the letter himself , to protect a source . 
 = = Revealed = = 
 Although he was already aware of certain stirrings even before he received the letter , Cecil did not yet know the exact nature of the plot or who was involved and had elected to watch to see what would happen . When Monteagle 's letter was shown to the king on Friday 1 November , James felt that it hinted at " some strategem of fire and powder " , perhaps an explosion exceeding in violence the one that killed his father , Lord Darnley , in 1567 . The following day , members of the Privy Council visited James to inform him that a search would be made of the Houses of Parliament , " both above and below " . Meanwhile , Tresham again urged Catesby and Wintour to abandon the scheme , but his attempts were in vain . Fellow plotter Thomas Percy said he was ready to " abide the uttermost trial " , and subsequently on 4 November Catesby and several others left London for the Midlands to prepare for the planned uprising . 
 Fawkes was arrested while guarding the explosives shortly after midnight on 5 November 1605 . Calling himself John Johnson , he was at first interrogated by members of the King 's Privy Chamber , but on 6 November James ordered that " John Johnson " be tortured . His will finally broken , he revealed his true identity on 7 November , and on 8 November he began to name some of those with whom he was associated . Tresham 's complicity was not revealed until the following day , although he was attributed with only a minor role . But while his compatriots had fled London the moment they discovered that Fawkes had been captured , Tresham had stayed in the city . He was arrested on 12 November and transferred to the Tower three days later . Catesby and several other plotters were killed on 8 November , during an armed siege at Holbeche House in Staffordshire . 
 = = Death = = 
 Although at first he was uncooperative , on 13 November Tresham confessed to being involved in the plot , outlining his version of events to his interrogators . Moving his family from the safety of Rushton was , he pointed out , not the action of a man who believed he was taking them into " the very mouth and fury " of the plot . He admitted to the government that he was guilty only of the plot 's concealment , denying that he had ever been an active member of the conspiracy , although by the end of the month he had also admitted his involvement in the Spanish Treason of 1602 – 1603 . He claimed to have persuaded Thomas Wintour and Thomas Percy to postpone the explosion , and that he had planned to inform the king 's secretary Thomas Lake of a " Puritan conspiracy " . Fraser views much of his confession as " highly partial ... not only for his own sake but for that of his wife and children " , and important in serving to highlight his unreliability . 
 Tresham suffered from a strangury caused by an inflammation of his urinary tract , and in December 1605 his health began to decline . Lieutenant of the Tower William Waad , wondering if Tresham would live long enough for justice to take its course , described his condition as " worse and worse " . Tresham preferred the services of a Dr Richard Foster over those of the Tower 's regular doctor Matthew <unk> ; apparently Foster understood his case , indicating that it was not the first occasion on which he had treated him . During his last days he was attended by three more doctors and a nurse , along with William Vavasour , a rumoured illegitimate child of Thomas Tresham and possibly Francis 's half @-@ brother . As Tresham 's wife , Anne , was apparently too upset , Vavasour wrote Tresham 's deathbed confession and also an account of his last hours . Tresham apologised to the Jesuit priest Henry Garnet for implicating him in the Spanish Treason , and used the rest of his deathbed confession to protest his innocence . Anne and William read prayers at his bedside ; he died at 2 : 00 am on 23 December . Despite not being tried , his head joined those of Catesby and Percy on display at Northampton , while his body was thrown into a hole at Tower Hill . His estates passed to his brother Lewis . Tresham 's apology never reached its intended target , and his letter , along with the discovery of Garnet 's Of Equivocation , found among the " heretical , treasonable and damnable books " at Tresham 's chamber in the Inner Temple , was used to great effect by Sir Edward Coke in Garnet 's trial . The priest was executed in May 1606 . 
 = Lucy Doesn 't Love You = 
 " Lucy Doesn 't Love You " is a song recorded by American indie rock band Ivy . It was released as the lead single from their third studio album , Long Distance ( 2000 ) . It was issued exclusively in Japan in mid @-@ 2000 by EastWest Japan , whereas the US lead singles were " Disappointed " and ' " Edge of the Ocean " , both released a year later by Unfiltered Records . The track was written by Dominique Durand , Adam Schlesinger and Andy Chase , while production was handled by the latter two . 
 The single received positive reviews from music critics , who noted its simplistic sound and production . Similar to Ivy 's previous material , " Lucy Doesn 't Love You " is an indie pop and indie rock song . It had a strong commercial performance in Japan , but was unsuccessful elsewhere . A promotional music video was filmed for the song in 2000 and displayed Durand singing at a nightclub with several background dancers . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 After being dropped from Epic Records shortly after the reissued edition of Apartment Life ( 1997 ) , Ivy began recording new material for their upcoming studio album . However , the recording process halted after a fire closed down the New York City studio where they regularly recorded . While writing songs for Long Distance , Andy Chase stated that they tried writing " more commercial " material for the album , in hopes that it would " mean the difference between making our next album or not " . 
 Shortly after the studio fire , Schlesinger and Chase discussed trying out new genres for the album , incorporating influences from different types of music . Schlesinger stated : " The first songs [ we ] recorded were jangly and simple and straight @-@ ahead . We started gravitating toward the groovier , slightly more melancholy stuff . It works well with Dominique 's voice " . However , while tracks like " Edge of the Ocean " experimented with new music like trip hop , " Lucy Doesn 't Love You " reflected Ivy 's previous material . 
 = = Composition and release = = 
 Musically , " Lucy Doesn 't Love You " is an indie pop / indie rock song with a " sassy brass and lifting melody " . An electric guitar was also used during production to create an " atmospheric " mood . A reviewer from CMJ New Music Monthly found " the addition of horns a comfortable bounce " in the track . A CD single of " Lucy Doesn 't Love You " was released exclusively in Japan in mid @-@ 2000 and included the B @-@ side " Blame It on Yourself " . A promotional CD was also issued , using the same format as the CD single , but including the bonus track " Digging Your Scene " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 After its release , " Lucy Doesn 't Love You " received favorable reviews from music critics . A critic from E ! Online declared the track a " summer anthem " and predicted that the release would increase Ivy 's popularity . Michael <unk> , writing for Billboard , praised the " effervescent " track for " effortlessly manag [ ing ] to merge guitar leanings for a more rhythmic palette " . In a more mixed review , Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic stated that the production " suggest [ s ] a more satisfying song than it delivers " . 
 = = Music video and promotion = = 
 A music video for the single was filmed and released in 2000 . Filmed inside a nightclub , the video begins with Durand entering the stage while simultaneous images of the band using instruments appear . Durand then stands in front of a microphone , preparing for an upcoming verse . Various shots of an audience , background dancers and singers , and trumpet performers are also shown . After the second chorus , the clip focuses on Durand , who is now mouthing some of the words of the song ; the final chorus resumes the simultaneous images setup . 
 To further promote the song , " Lucy Doesn 't Love You " was featured in the movie I 'm With Lucy . Another song from Long Distance , " One More Last Kiss " , was also featured in the same film . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Long Distance liner notes and Andy Chase 's discography . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Stratosphere Sound , New York City and Sony Music Studios , New York City 
 Personnel 
 = = Release history = = 
 = The Danish Poet = 
 The Danish Poet ( Norwegian : Den <unk> <unk> ) is a 2006 animated short film written , directed , and animated by <unk> Kove and narrated by Liv Ullmann . A co @-@ production of the National Film Board of Canada ( NFB ) and <unk> AS of Norway , it has won both the Academy Award and Genie Award for best animated short film . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The film follows Kaspar Jørgensen , a Danish poet in the 1940s who is seeking inspiration . At the suggestion of his psychiatrist , Dr. Mørk , he travels to Norway to meet the famous author Sigrid Undset . However , after arriving in Norway , he meets Ingeborg , a farmer 's daughter , and they fall in love . He proposes to her , but discovers that she is already engaged , at her father 's wish . She promises not to cut her hair until they are reunited , and Kaspar returns to Denmark . 
 Later , Ingeborg 's husband dies in an accident , and Ingeborg sends a letter to Kaspar . However , it is accidentally dropped by the postman , and never arrives . When Sigrid Undset dies , both Kaspar and Ingeborg travel to the funeral ; they are reunited , and later marry and live in Copenhagen . As Kaspar tells Ingeborg that he loves her long hair , she does not cut it , but when Kaspar trips over it and breaks his thumb , she sends for her hairdresser from Norway . On the way , the hairdresser meets a young man on the train , who was also travelling to Copenhagen to meet Kaspar , his favourite poet . The two fall in love , and are revealed to be the narrator 's parents . 
 = = Production = = 
 Kove first became involved with the National Film Board , an agency of the Government of Canada , after her first year at Concordia University in Montreal . After working there as an assistant for some years , she wrote and pitched a script to the company , which led to her career as a director and animator . She first wrote the script for The Danish Poet some time ago , though she says that she " can ’ t really remember when " . 
 Production was split between Marcy Page , of the National Film Board , and Lise Fearnley , of <unk> AS in Norway , and took roughly three years , although Kove took a year off for maternity leave . 
 The film was made using hand @-@ drawn traditional animation , with pencil on paper , and then scanned and digitally coloured , with about half of the animation by Kove , and the rest divided between animators in Montreal and Norway . Kove 's style is simplistic , which she says is less a specific style choice than " quite simply [ ... ] the only one I know how to do . " The backgrounds were painted by Montreal artist Anne Ashton . 
 Narrator Liv Ullmann was selected for the film because Kove liked her voice and " thought that her delivery would be right for the story " ; she reaffirmed this after the film 's release , stating that Ullmann was " just right " . She thanked Ullmann in her Academy Award acceptance speech , saying that " it was really amazing of her to participate in this . " 
 = = Origins = = 
 Kove 's first ideas for The Danish Poet began when she went through a period of self @-@ assessment ; she wanted to write a story about what she described as when " you reach a turning point or a milestone and you look back and you think ' how in the heck did I get here ? ' [ ... ] And you realize that the answer lies somewhere in a complex web of all kinds of stuff , like genetic make @-@ up , upbringing , coincidences , choices you made along the way , missed opportunities , [ and ] lucky breaks . " She felt that it was a natural choice to centre on a relationship between two people , " because relationships , and especially the romantic ones , play a huge role in shaping our lives , and also , obviously , in creating new ones . " 
 Kove originally wanted to make the film biographical , based on a story her father told her : he had dreamed of being an artist , and made an appointment with an art teacher to ask if he was good enough to make it in the art world . However , he stood at the top of the stairs and decided not to go , eventually deciding to go to architecture school ( as his parents wanted ) where he met his wife . Kove 's inspiration was drawn from the fact that her existence seemed to hinge on that decision , because " if the artist had said , ' Oh , you must paint , ' you know , then in all likelihood he would never have met my mother , and , you know , that would have been it for my chances . " However , Kove felt the story was too personal , and rewrote it to be fictional . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The film 's main theme shows the effect that coincidence and chance can have on the course of life — like the bad weather , angry dog , hungry goats , slippery planks , and careless postman that change the course of both Kaspar 's and Ingeborg 's lives — and shows , as the film 's website states , that " seemingly unrelated factors might play important roles in the big scheme of things after all . " In an interview , Kove said that " what I 'm trying to get across is just that I think life is really a kind of a meandering journey ... a lot is really up to chance " . However , Kove has also said that she 'd like people to be able to interpret the film in different ways : 
 I ’ d like them to walk away thinking it ’ s a film that can be interpreted in more than one way . I ’ m happy when I hear from people who ’ ve seen the short that it makes them think about the kind of strangeness where we find inspiration for art and where we find love , and the kind of <unk> of just being alive and having a life . I ’ m pleased when people get that out of it . 
 She also identifies several subplots of artistic inspiration , as Kaspar " finds [ inspiration ] within himself " , and not within another writer , and a " subtext ... about nationalism and how much emphasis we in the western world put on stereotypes and on which country we 're from " . 
 = = Awards = = 
 The Danish Poet received the Academy Award for Animated Short Film at the 79th Academy Awards in 2007 , a second Oscar nomination ( and first win ) for Kove , who was nominated in 2000 for her first professional film , My Grandmother <unk> the King 's Shirts , also co @-@ produced by the NFB . The win also marked the first Norwegian film to win an Academy Award since Thor Heyerdahl 's Kon @-@ Tiki won for best documentary in 1952 . 
 The Danish Poet also won Best Animated Short at the 27th Genie Awards in 2007 , and a Norwegian @-@ language picture book adaptation was nominated for the 2007 Brage Prize . It was also included in the 2006 Animation Show of Shows . 
 = California State Route 905 = 
 State Route 905 ( SR 905 ) is a state highway in San Diego , California , that connects Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) and Interstate 805 in San Ysidro to the United States – Mexico border at Otay Mesa . The entire highway from I @-@ 5 to the international border is a freeway with a few exits that continues east from the I @-@ 805 interchange before turning southeast and reaching the border . 
 SR 905 was formerly routed on Otay Mesa Road , which had been in existence since at least 1927 . Before it was SR 905 , the route was first designated as part of SR 75 , before it was redesignated as SR 117 . The freeway was completed between I @-@ 5 and Otay Mesa Road in 1976 . The border crossing opened in 1985 after several delays in obtaining funding for the construction of what would become SR 905 . After becoming SR 905 in 1986 , the highway was converted to first an expressway in 2000 and then a freeway in 2010 and 2011 . Plans are for this highway to eventually become known as Interstate 905 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 905 begins at the intersection of <unk> Avenue and Oro Vista Road in Nestor . It begins as a freeway , intersecting with I @-@ 5 at a partial cloverleaf interchange . After interchanges with Beyer Boulevard and Picador Boulevard , the freeway then intersects I @-@ 805 . Following this , SR 905 veers southeast to parallel Otay Mesa Road , with interchanges at Caliente Avenue ( in Pacific Gateway Park ) , Britannia Boulevard , and La Media Road . The route interchanges with the SR 11 freeway , which is planned to be a toll facility that will serve a new border crossing east of Otay Mesa . Immediately after , SR 905 turns south to its final interchange at Siempre Viva Road before the route ends at the Otay Mesa Port of Entry , which truck traffic must use to cross the border . 
 SR 905 is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System and part of the National Highway System . In 2013 , SR 905 had an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) of 58 @,@ 000 between Beyer Boulevard and I @-@ 805 , and 18 @,@ 400 around the I @-@ 5 junction , the former of which was the highest AADT for the freeway . 
 = = History = = 
 What was known as the " Otay Mesa road " existed as a dirt road by 1927 . A paved road connected San Ysidro to Brown Field and the easternmost ranches in the Otay Mesa area by 1935 . Discussions were held between San Diego County and National City over the maintenance of the road in 1950 , since it was used by trucks travelling to the landfill . The majority of SR 905 , running in parallel with Otay Mesa Road from Interstate 5 to SR 125 , was added to the state highway system and the California Freeway and Expressway System in 1959 as Legislative Route 281 , and became part of SR 75 in the 1964 renumbering . 
 Planning was underway for the extension of SR 75 east to the then @-@ proposed SR 125 by 1963 . The California Highway Commission endorsed the routing for SR 75 in 1965 along Otay Mesa Road , away from future residential developments . There were plans as early as 1970 to have a highway heading southwest to a new border crossing that would bypass the Tijuana area . The next year , James Moe , the state public works director , subsequently asked the California State Legislature to lengthen SR 75 to connect to this new crossing , rather than using I @-@ 5 to make the connection . 
 Following this , in 1972 , the legislature added a new SR 117 , which extended this part of SR 75 southwest to the Mexican border near Border Field State Park , to the state highway system , and a southerly extension of SR 125 to the border at Otay Mesa to the state highway and Freeway and Expressway systems . Two years later , planning began for the construction of the Otay Mesa crossing and the construction of SR 75 to connect it to I @-@ 5 and I @-@ 805 . Later , the Comprehensive Planning Organization ( CPO ) , the local association of municipal governments , recommended using $ 4 million of federal funding for the construction of SR 75 . The CPO later endorsed expediting construction of the freeway before completion of the border crossing , so that the freeway would primarily serve border traffic , thus preventing land speculation in Otay Mesa . While Mexican authorities wanted the crossing constructed in 1975 , the CPO indicated that the funding for SR 75 would not be available until at least 1980 , or even 1985 . Following this , Representative Lionel Van <unk> attempted to accelerate the construction of the crossing , even though there was no funding for the highway . 
 Construction began on the southern portion of SR 75 in mid @-@ 1974 . In January 1976 , the part of SR 75 between I @-@ 805 and Otay Mesa Road was opened to traffic . On April 6 , the next portion of the freeway opened . However , there were concerns about what to call the freeway , citing confusion with the northern portion of SR 75 . The entire cost of the project was $ 6 @.@ 3 million . SR 117 was extended east to SR 125 , replacing the southerly segment of SR 75 , by the Legislature in 1976 ; this took effect at the beginning of 1977 . Estimates for completing the freeway ran from $ 13 @.@ 8 million to $ 28 @.@ 5 million . 
 In late 1977 , the CPO made plans to push for adding SR 117 to the Interstate Highway System , to obtain additional federal funding . By 1979 , both San Diego city and county had allocated $ 6 million to construct a temporary way to access the border crossing along Otay Mesa and Harvest Roads . Two years later , the City of San Diego indicated that the upgrade of Otay Mesa Road to a four @-@ lane road would be the preferred option ; the state agreed to allocate $ 2 million towards the $ 10 million project , with the city contributing $ 6 @.@ 4 million and the county adding $ 2 @.@ 3 million . The Federal Highway Administration approved the continuous roadway via SR 117 and SR 125 from I @-@ 5 to the border at Otay Mesa as a non @-@ chargeable ( not eligible for federal Interstate Highway construction dollars ) part of the Interstate Highway System in October 1984 . The Otay Mesa border crossing opened on January 24 , 1985 . The route number was legislatively changed to 905 in 1986 , and signs were updated in 1988 . This change was to apply for other federal funding . The original piece of SR 117 , west of I @-@ 5 , also became SR 905 with the rest of SR 117 , but Caltrans has not constructed it . 
 Efforts were underway in 1997 to secure federal funding for the highway and other infrastructure near the Mexican border , largely supported by Senator Barbara Boxer and Representative Bob Filner , and Representative Bud Schuster , the chairman of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee , visited the region before giving informal approval to the proposal . In 1999 , Governor Gray Davis approved allocating $ 27 million in federal funding to complete the freeway . Concerns were expressed by local residents and municipal officials regarding the apparent priority of SR 125 over SR 905 in terms of funding , especially since SR 125 was to be constructed as a toll road , and SR 905 would compete with the toll road enterprise . In May 1998 , Congress approved $ 54 million in funding for the completion of SR 905 . 
 Otay Mesa Road was widened to six lanes in 2000 , at a cost of $ 20 @.@ 5 million . Before , it had 50 percent more traffic than it was designed to handle ; it was considered by the San Diego Union @-@ Tribune as " California 's busiest trade route with Mexico " , and traffic had increased by a factor of ten , with the number of people dying in traffic accidents approaching five times the state average . The widening of Otay Mesa Road was considered a temporary fix for the problem . The next year , the California Transportation Commission allocated $ 25 million of state funding towards completing the freeway . The interchange with Siempre Viva Road opened on December 8 , 2004 . Delays in the U.S. Congress approving federal funding in 2005 resulted in a delayed start to construction for the rest of SR 905 . 
 Construction began on the part of SR 905 between Britannia Boulevard and Siempre Viva Road in April 2008 , and from Brittania Boulevard to I @-@ 805 in July 2009 . Efforts were made to keep construction going despite a shortfall in funding from state bonds in 2009 . The part between Britannia Boulevard and Siempre Viva Road opened in December 2010 . The interchange with I @-@ 805 began to be upgraded in April 2011 , and the construction , which used $ 20 million in federal funding , finished in February 2012 . The final freeway segment of SR 905 between I @-@ 805 and Britannia Boulevard opened on July 30 , 2012 . The entire cost of the project connecting I @-@ 805 to the border crossing was $ 441 million . 
 = = Future = = 
 Plans are for SR 905 to become Interstate 905 ; however , it could not be constructed with the same funds that were used for constructing the rest of the Interstate Highway System . Previously , SR 905 had a direct connection with SR 125 via two at @-@ grade intersections on Otay Mesa Road . With the completion of the newest freeway segment of SR 905 and the freeway @-@ to @-@ freeway connection to SR 125 unconstructed , traffic on SR 905 must exit at La Media Road ( exit 7 ) , head north on La Media and head east on Otay Mesa Road to make the connection . A freeway @-@ to @-@ freeway interchange is planned for the connection between SR 125 and SR 905 , and an additional interchange is planned for Heritage Road . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was when the route was established , based on the unconstructed western end at the Mexican border and the rest of the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The entire route is in San Diego , San Diego County . 
 = Demographics of Croatia = 
 The demographic characteristics of the population of Croatia are known through censuses , normally conducted in ten @-@ year intervals and analysed by various statistical bureaus since the 1850s . The Croatian Bureau of Statistics has performed this task since the 1990s . The latest census in Croatia was performed in April 2011 . The permanent population of Croatia at the 2011 census had reached 4 @.@ 29 million . The population density is 75 @.@ 8 inhabitants per square kilometre , and the overall life expectancy in Croatia at birth was 78 years in 2012 . The population rose steadily ( with the exception of censuses taken following the two world wars ) from 2 @.@ 1 million in 1857 until 1991 , when it peaked at 4 @.@ 7 million . Since 1991 , Croatia 's death rate has continuously exceeded its birth rate ; the natural growth rate of the population is negative . Croatia is in the fourth or fifth stage of the demographic transition . In terms of age structure , the population is dominated by the 15 ‑ to 64 ‑ year ‑ old segment . The median age of the population is 41 @.@ 4 , and the gender ratio of the total population is 0 @.@ 93 males per 1 female . 
 Demographics professors from Zagreb Faculty of Economics predict that the population will decrease by 350 @.@ 000 people by 2030 , based on current number of children born and people emigrating . Population going below 4 million people in the next 15 years can be avoided in only two ways - if 350 @.@ 000 more people immigrate than the number of people who emigrate or if the number of children born almost doubles . Experts believe both options are unlikely . 
 Croatia is inhabited mostly by Croats ( 90 @.@ 4 % ) , while minorities include Serbs ( 4 @.@ 5 % ) , and 21 other ethnicities ( less than 1 % each ) . The demographic history of Croatia is marked by significant migrations , including the arrival of the Croats in the area growth of Hungarian and German speaking population since the union of Croatia and Hungary , and joining of the Habsburg Empire , migrations set off by Ottoman conquests and growth of Italian speaking population in Istria and in Dalmatia during Venetian rule there . After the collapse of Austria @-@ Hungary , the Hungarian population declined , while the German @-@ speaking population was forced or compelled to leave after World War II and similar fate was suffered by the Italian population . Late 19th century and the 20th century were marked by large scale economic migrations abroad . The 1940s and the 1950s in Yugoslavia were marked by internal migrations in Yugoslavia , as well as by urbanisation . The most recent significant migrations came as a result of the Croatian War of Independence when hundreds of thousands were displaced . 
 The Croatian language is the official language , but minority languages are officially used in some local government units . Croatian is declared as the native language by 95 @.@ 60 % of the population . A 2009 survey revealed that 78 % of Croatians claim knowledge of at least one foreign language — most often English . The main religions of Croatia are Roman Catholicism ( 86 @.@ 28 % ) , Eastern Orthodoxy ( 4 @.@ 44 % ) and Islam ( 1 @.@ 47 % ) . Literacy in Croatia stands at 98 @.@ 1 % . The proportion of the population aged 15 and over attaining academic degrees grew rapidly since 2001 , doubling and reaching 16 @.@ 7 % by 2008 . An estimated 4 @.@ 5 % of the GDP is spent for education . Primary and secondary education are available in Croatian and in languages of recognised minorities . Croatia has a universal health care system and in 2010 , the nation spent 6 @.@ 9 % of its GDP on healthcare . Net monthly income in September 2011 averaged 5 @,@ 397 kuna ( c . 729 euro ) . The most significant sources of employment in 2008 were manufacturing industry , wholesale and retail trade and construction . In October 2011 , unemployment rate was 17 @.@ 4 % . Croatia 's median equivalent household income tops average Purchasing Power Standard of the ten countries which joined the EU in 2004 , while trailing the EU average . 2011 census recorded a total of 1 @.@ 5 million private households , which predominantly owned their own housing . Average urbanisation rate in Croatia stands at 56 % , with augmentation of urban population and reduction of rural population . 
 = = Population = = 
 With a population of 4 @.@ 29 million in 2011 , Croatia ranks 125th in the world by population . Its population density is 75 @.@ 8 inhabitants per square kilometre . The overall life expectancy in Croatia at birth is 78 years . The total fertility rate of 1 @.@ 50 children per mother is one of the lowest in the world . Since 1991 , Croatia 's death rate has nearly continuously exceeded its birth rate . The Croatian Bureau of Statistics forecast that the population may even shrink to 3 @.@ 1 million by 2051 , depending on the actual birth rate and the level of net migration . The population of Croatia rose steadily from 2 @.@ 1 million in 1857 until 1991 , when it peaked at 4 @.@ 7 million , with the exception of censuses taken in 1921 and 1948 , i.e. following two world wars . The natural growth rate of the population is negative . Croatia started advancing from the first stage of the demographic transition in the late 18th and early 19th centuries ( depending on where in Croatia is being discussed ) . Croatia is in the fourth or fifth stage of the demographic transition . 
 One explanation for the recent population decrease is the Croatian War of Independence . During the war , large sections of the population were displaced and emigration increased . In 1991 , in predominantly Serb areas , more than 400 @,@ 000 Croats and other non @-@ Serbs were either removed from their homes by the Croatian Serb forces or fled the violence . In 1995 , during the final days of the war , more than 120 @,@ 000 and perhaps as many as 200 @,@ 000 Serbs fled the country before the arrival of Croatian forces during Operation Storm . Within a decade following the end of the war , only 117 @,@ 000 Serb refugees returned out of the 300 @,@ 000 displaced during the entire war . Most of Croatia 's remaining Serbs never lived in areas occupied in the Croatian War of Independence . Serbs have been only partially re @-@ settled in the regions they previously inhabited , while some of the settlements previously inhabited by Serbs were settled by Croat refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina , mostly from Republika Srpska . 
 In 2014 , there were 39 @,@ 566 live births in Croatia , comprising 20 @,@ 374 male and 19 @,@ 192 female children . Virtually all of those were performed in medical facilities ; only 19 births occurred elsewhere . Out of the total number , 32 @,@ 677 children were born in wedlock or within 300 days after the end of the marriage , and the average age of mothers at the birth of their first child was 28 @.@ 4 years . General fertility rate , i.e. number of births per 1 @,@ 000 women aged 15 – 49 is 42 @.@ 9 , with the age specific rate peaking at 101 @.@ 0 per million for women aged 25 – 29 . In 2009 , 52 @,@ 414 persons died in Croatia , 48 @.@ 5 % of whom died in medical facilities and 90 @.@ 0 % of whom were receiving medical treatment at the time . Cardiovascular disease and cancer were the primary causes of death in the country , with 26 @,@ 235 and 13 @,@ 280 deaths respectively . In the same year , there were 2 @,@ 986 violent deaths , including 2 @,@ 121 due to accidents . The latter figure includes 616 deaths in traffic accidents . In 2014 , the birth rate was 9 @.@ 3 per mille , exceeded by the mortality rate of 12 @.@ 0 per mille . The infant mortality rate was 5 @.@ 0 per mille in 2014 . In terms of age structure , the population of Croatia is dominated by the 15 – 64 year older segment ( 68 @.@ 1 % ) , while the size of the population younger than 15 and older than 64 is relatively small ( 15 @.@ 1 % and 16 @.@ 9 % respectively ) . The median age of the population is 41 @.@ 4 . The sex ratio of the population is 1 @.@ 06 males per 1 female at birth and up to 14 years of age , and 0 @.@ 99 males per 1 female between the ages of 15 and 64 . But at ages over 64 the ratio is 0 @.@ 64 males per 1 female . The ratio for the total population is 0 @.@ 93 males per 1 female . 
 In contrast to the shrinking native population , since the late 1990s there has been a positive net migration into Croatia , reaching a level of more than 7 @,@ 000 net immigrants in 2006 . In recent years , the Croatian government has been pressured each year to add 40 % to work permit quotas for foreign workers . In accordance with its immigration policy , Croatia is also trying to entice emigrants to return . 
 There were 8 @,@ 468 immigrants in Croatia in 2009 , more than half of them ( 57 @.@ 5 % ) coming from Bosnia and Herzegovina , a sharp decline from the previous year 's 14 @,@ 541 . In the same year , there were 9 @,@ 940 emigrants from the country , 44 @.@ 8 % of them leaving to Serbia . The number of emigrants represents a substantial increase compared to the figure of 7 @,@ 488 recorded in 2008 . In 2009 , the net migration to and from abroad peaked in the Sisak @-@ Moslavina County ( <unk> persons ) and the city of Zagreb ( + 830 persons ) . 
 In 2009 , a total of 22 @,@ 382 marriages were performed in Croatia as well as 5 @,@ 076 divorces . The 2001 census recorded 1 @.@ 47 million households in the country . 
 = = = Census data = = = 
 The first modern population census in the country was conducted in 1857 , and 15 more have been performed since then . Since 1961 the censuses are conducted in regular ten @-@ year intervals , with the latest one in 2011 . The first institution set up in the country specifically for the purposes of maintaining population statistics was the State Statistical Office , founded in 1875 . Since its founding , the office changed its name and structure several times and was alternately subordinated to other institutions and independent , until the most recent changes in 1992 , when the institution became the Croatian Bureau of Statistics . The 2011 census was performed on 1 – 28 April 2011 , recording situation as of 31 March 2011 . The first census results , containing the number of the population by settlement , were published on 29 June 2011 , and the final comprehensive set of data was published in December 2012 . The 2011 census and processing of the data gathered by the census was expected to cost 171 @.@ 9 million kuna ( 23 @.@ 3 million euro ) . The 2011 census was performed using new methodology : the permanent population was determined as the enumerated population who lived in the census area for at least 12 months prior to the census , or plans to live in the same area for at least 12 months after the census . This method was also retroactively applied to the 2001 census data . 
 = = Vital statistics = = 
 = = Ethnic groups = = 
 Croatia is inhabited mostly by Croats ( 90 @.@ 42 % ) , while minority groups include Serbs ( 4 @.@ 36 % ) , Bosniaks , Hungarians , Italians , Albanians , Slovenes , Germans , Czechs , Romani people and others ( 5 @.@ 22 % ) . The Constitution of the Republic of Croatia specifies 22 minorities explicitly . Those are Serbs , Czechs , Slovaks , Italians , Hungarians , Jews , Germans , Austrians , Ukrainians , Ruthenians , Macedonians , Bosniaks , Slovenes , Montenegrins , Russians , Bulgarians , Poles , Romani , <unk> , Turks , Vlachs and Albanians . 
 = = = Significant migrations = = = 
 The demographic history of Croatia is characterised by significant migrations , starting with the arrival of the Croats in the area . According to the work De Administrando Imperio written by the 10th @-@ century Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII , the Croats arrived in the area of modern @-@ day Croatia in the early 7th century . However , that claim is disputed , and competing hypotheses date the event between the 6th and the 9th centuries . Following the establishment of a personal union of Croatia and Hungary in 1102 , and the joining of the Habsburg Empire in 1527 , the Hungarian and German speaking population of Croatia began gradually increasing in number . The processes of Magyarization and Germanization varied in intensity but persisted to the 20th century . The Ottoman conquests initiated a westward migration of parts of the Croatian population ; the Burgenland Croats are direct descendants of some of those settlers . To replace the fleeing Croats the Habsburgs called on the Orthodox populations of Bosnia and Serbia to provide military service in the Croatian Military Frontier . Serb migration into this region peaked during the Great Serb Migrations of 1690 and 1737 – 39 . Similarly , Venetian Republic rule in Istria and in Dalmatia , following the Fifth and the Seventh Ottoman – Venetian Wars ushered gradual growth of Italian speaking population in those areas . Following the collapse of Austria @-@ Hungary in 1918 , the Hungarian population declined , especially in the areas north of the Drava river , where they represented the majority before World War I. 
 The period between 1890 and World War I was marked by large economic emigration from Croatia to the United States , and particularly to the areas of Pittsburgh , Cleveland and Chicago . Besides the United States , the main destination of the migrants was South America , especially Argentina , Chile , Bolivia and Peru . It is estimated that 500 @,@ 000 people left Croatia during this period . After World War I , the main focus of emigration shifted to Canada , where about 15 @,@ 000 people settled before the onset of World War II . During World War II and in the period immediately following the war , there were further significant demographic changes as the German @-@ speaking population , the Volksdeutsche , were either forced or otherwise compelled to leave — reducing their number from the prewar German population of Yugoslavia of 500 @,@ 000 , living in parts of present @-@ day Croatia and Serbia , to the figure of 62 @,@ 000 recorded in the 1953 census . A similar fate was suffered by the Italian population in Yugoslavia populating parts of present @-@ day Croatia and Slovenia , as 350 @,@ 000 left for Italy . The 1940s and the 1950s in Yugoslavia were marked by colonisation of settlements where the displaced Germans used to live , by people from the mountainous parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia and Montenegro , and migrations to larger cities spurred on by the development of industry . In the 1960s and 1970s , another wave of economic migrants left Croatia . They largely moved to Canada , Australia , New Zealand and Western Europe . During this period , 65 @,@ 000 people left for Canada , and by the mid @-@ 1970s there were 150 @,@ 000 Croats who moved to Australia . Particularly large European emigrant communities of Croats exist in Germany , Austria and Switzerland , which largely stem from the 1960s and 1970s migrations . 
 The most recent significant migrations came as a result of the 1991 – 1995 Croatian War of Independence . In 1991 , more than 400 @,@ 000 Croats and other non @-@ Serbs were displaced by the Croatian Serb forces or fled the violence in areas with significant Serb populations . During the final days of the war , in 1995 , between 120 @,@ 000 and 200 @,@ 000 Serbs fled the country before the arrival of the Croatian forces during Operation Storm . Ten years after the war , only 117 @,@ 000 Serb refugees returned out of the 300 @,@ 000 displaced during the entire war . Most of the Serbs in Croatia who remained never lived in areas occupied during the Croatian War of Independence . Serbs have been only partially re @-@ settled in the regions they previously inhabited , but some of the areas previously inhabited by Serbs were later settled by Croat refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina , largely from the Republika Srpska . 
 = = = Demographic losses in the 20th century wars and pandemics = = = 
 In addition to demographic losses through significant migrations , the population of Croatia suffered significant losses due to wars and epidemics . In the 20th century alone , there were several such events . The first was World War I , when the loss of the population of Croatia amounted to an estimated 190 @,@ 000 persons , or about 5 @.@ 5 % of the total population recorded by the 1910 census . The 1918 flu pandemic started to take its toll in Croatia in July 1918 , with peaks of the disease occurring in October and November . Available data is scarce , but it is estimated that the pandemic caused at least 15 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 deaths . During World War II , nearly 195 @,@ 000 people died in the territory of present @-@ day Croatia . The surrender of the armed forces of the Independent State of Croatia and of the civilians accompanying the troops of the British Army at the end of World War II was followed by repatriation and subsequent events that became known as the Bleiburg tragedy . A substantial number of people were executed , but the exact number is disputed . The claims range from 12 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 to as many as 80 @,@ 000 killed in May 1945 . Finally , approximately 20 @,@ 000 were killed or went missing during the 1991 – 1995 Croatian War of Independence . The figure pertains only to those persons who would have been recorded by the 1991 census as living in Croatia . 
 = = Languages = = 
 The Croatian language is the official language of Croatia , and one of 24 official languages of the European Union since 2013 . Minority languages are in official use in local government units where more than a third of the population consists of national minorities or where local legislation mandates their use . These languages are Czech , Hungarian , Italian , Ruthenian , Serbian and Slovak . According to the 2011 Census , 95 @.@ 60 % of citizens of Croatia declared Croatian as their native language , 1 @.@ 23 % declared Serbian as their native language , while no other language is represented in Croatia by more than 0 @.@ 5 % of native speakers among the population of Croatia . 
 Croatian replaced Latin as the official language of the Croatian government in 1847 . It is a South Slavic language , and most Croatian vocabulary is derived from the Slavic branch of the Indo @-@ European language family . Croatian is written using the Latin alphabet and has three major dialects , with <unk> dialect used as the standard Croatian , and Chakavian and Kajkavian dialects distinguished by their lexicon , phonology , and syntax . 
 From 1961 to 1991 , the official language was Serbo @-@ Croatian or Croato @-@ Serbian . Even during socialist rule , Croats often referred to their language as Croato @-@ Serbian ( instead of Serbo @-@ Croatian ) or as Croatian . Croatian and Serbian variants of the language were not officially recognised as different at the time , but referred to as the west and east version , and had different alphabets : the Latin alphabet and Serbian Cyrillic . Croatians are protective of their language from foreign influences , as the language was under constant change and threats imposed by previous rulers ( i.e. Austrian German , Hungarian , Italian and Turkish words were changed and altered to " Slavic " looking / sounding ones ) . Efforts made to impose policies to alter Croatian into " Serbo @-@ Croatian or Croato @-@ Serbian " or a " South Slavic " language met resistance from Croats in the form of Croatian linguistic purism . 
 A 2009 survey revealed that 78 % of Croatians claim knowledge of at least one foreign language . According to a survey ordered by the European commission in 2005 , 49 % of Croatians speak English as their second language , 34 % speak German , and 14 % speak Italian . French and Russian are spoken by 4 % each , and 2 % of Croatians speak Spanish . A substantial proportion of Slovenes ( 59 % ) have a certain level of knowledge of the Croatian language . 
 = = Religions = = 
 The main religions of Croatia are Roman Catholicism 86 @.@ 28 % , Eastern Orthodoxy 4 @.@ 44 % , Protestantism 0 @.@ 34 % , other Christianity 0 @.@ 30 % , and Islam 1 @.@ 47 % . In the Eurostat Eurobarometer Poll of 2005 , 67 % of the population of Croatia responded that " they believe there is a God " and 7 % said they do not believe " there is any sort of spirit , God , or life force " , while 25 % expressed a belief in " some sort of spirit or life force " . In a 2009 Gallup poll , 70 % answered affirmatively when asked " Is religion an important part of your daily life ? " Significantly , a 2008 Gallup survey of the Balkans indicated church and religious organisations as the most trusted institutions in the country . The survey revealed that 62 % of the respondents assigned " a lot " or " some " trust to those institutions , ranking them ahead of all types of governmental , international or non @-@ governmental institutions . 
 Public schools allow religious education , in cooperation with religious communities that have agreements with the government , but attendance is not mandatory . The classes are organized widely in public elementary and secondary schools . In 2009 , 92 % of elementary school pupils and 87 % of secondary school students attended the religious education classes . Public holidays in Croatia also include the religious festivals of Epiphany , Easter Monday , Corpus Christi Day , Assumption Day , All Saints ' Day , Christmas , and St. Stephen 's or Boxing Day . The religious festival public holidays are based on the Catholic liturgical year , but citizens of the Republic of Croatia who celebrate different religious holidays have the right not to work on those dates . This includes Christians who celebrate Christmas on 7 January per the Julian calendar , Muslims on the days of Ramadan Bayram and <unk> Bayram , and Jews on the days of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur . Marriages performed by the religious communities having agreements with the state are officially recognized , eliminating the need to register the marriages in a registrar office . 
 The legal position of religious communities is defined by special legislation , specifically regarding government funding , tax benefits , and religious education in schools . Other matters are left to each religious community to negotiate separately with the government . Registration of the communities is not mandatory , but registered communities become legal persons and enjoy tax and other benefits . The law stipulates that to be eligible for registration , a religious group must have at least 500 believers and be registered as a civil association for 5 years . Religious groups based abroad must submit written permission for registration from their country of origin . 
 = = Education = = 
 Literacy in Croatia is 98 @.@ 1 percent . The 2001 census reported that 15 @.@ 7 % of the population over the age of 14 has an incomplete elementary education , and 21 @.@ 9 % has only an elementary school education . 42 @.@ 8 % of the population over the age of 14 has a vocational education and 4 @.@ 9 % completed gymnasium . 4 @.@ 2 % of the same population received an undergraduate degree , while 7 @.@ 5 % received an academic degree , and 0 @.@ 5 % received a postgraduate or a doctoral degree . Croatia recorded a substantial growth of the population attaining academic degrees and by 2008 , this population segment was estimated to encompass 16 @.@ 7 % of the total population of Croatians 15 and over . A worldwide study about the quality of living in different countries published by Newsweek in August 2010 ranked the Croatian education system at 22nd , a position shared with Austria . In 2004 , it was estimated that 4 @.@ 5 % of the GDP is spent for education , while schooling expectancy was estimated to 14 years on average . Primary education in Croatia starts at the age of six or seven and consists of eight grades . In 2007 a law was passed to increase free , <unk> education until 18 years of age . Compulsory education consists of eight grades of elementary school . Secondary education is provided by gymnasiums and vocational schools . As of 2010 , there are 2 @,@ 131 elementary schools and 713 schools providing various forms of secondary education . Primary and secondary education are also available in languages of recognised minorities in Croatia , where classes are held in Czech , Hungarian , Italian , Serbian and German languages . 
 There are 84 elementary level and 47 secondary level music and art schools , as well as 92 schools for disabled children and youth and 74 schools for adults . Nationwide leaving exams ( Croatian : državna matura ) were introduced for secondary education students in the 2009 – 2010 school year . It comprises three compulsory subjects ( Croatian language , mathematics , and a foreign language ) and optional subjects and is a prerequisite for a university education . 
 Croatia has eight universities , the University of Zagreb , University of Split , University of Rijeka , University of Osijek , University of Zadar , University of Dubrovnik , University of Pula and Dubrovnik International University . The University of Zadar , the first university in Croatia , was founded in 1396 and remained active until 1807 , when other institutions of higher education took over . It was reopened in 2002 . The University of Zagreb , founded in 1669 , is the oldest continuously operating university in Southeast Europe . There are also 11 polytechnics and 23 higher education institutions , of which 19 are private . In total , there are 132 institutions of higher education in Croatia , attended by more than 145 thousand students . 
 There are 205 companies , government or education system institutions and non @-@ profit organizations in Croatia pursuing scientific research and the development of technology . Combined , they spent more than 3 billion kuna ( 400 million euro ) and employed 10 @,@ 191 full @-@ time research staff in 2008 . Among the scientific institutes operating in Croatia , the largest is the Ruđer Bošković Institute in Zagreb . The Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts in Zagreb is a learned society promoting language , culture , arts and science since its inception in 1866 . Scientists from Croatia include inventors and Nobel Prize winners . 
 = = Health = = 
 Croatia has a universal health care system , the roots of which can be traced back to the Hungarian @-@ Croatian Parliament Act of 1891 , providing a form of mandatory insurance for all factory workers and craftsmen . The population is covered by a basic health insurance plan provided by statute and optional insurance . In 2014 , the annual compulsory healthcare related expenditures reached 21 @.@ 8 billion kuna ( 2 @.@ 9 billion euro ) . Healthcare expenditures comprise only 0 @.@ 6 % of private health insurance and public spending . In 2010 , Croatia spent 6 @.@ 9 % of its GDP on healthcare , representing a decline from approximately 8 % estimated in 2008 , when 84 % of healthcare spending came from public sources . According to the World Health Organization ( WHO ) , Croatia ranks around the 50th in the world in terms of life expectancy . 
 There are hundreds of healthcare institutions in Croatia , including 79 hospitals and clinics with 23 @,@ 967 beds . The hospitals and clinics care for more than 700 thousand patients per year and employ 5 @,@ 205 medical doctors , including 3 @,@ 929 specialists . There are 6 @,@ 379 private practice offices , and a total of 41 @,@ 271 health workers in the country . There are 63 emergency medical service units , responding to more than a million calls . The principal cause of death in 2008 was cardiovascular disease at 43 @.@ 5 % for men and 57 @.@ 2 % for women , followed by tumours , at 29 @.@ 4 % for men and 21 @.@ 4 % for women . Other significant causes of death are injuries , poisonings and other external causes ( 7 @.@ 7 % men / 3 @.@ 9 % women ) , digestive system diseases ( 5 @.@ 7 % men / 3 @.@ 6 % women ) , respiratory system diseases ( 5 @.@ 1 % men / 3 @.@ 5 % women ) and endocrine , nutritional and metabolic diseases ( 2 @.@ 1 % men / 3 @.@ 0 % women ) . There is no other cause of disease affecting more than 3 % of the population . In 2014 only 22 Croatians had been infected with HIV / AIDS and 4 had died from the disease . In 2008 it was estimated by the WHO that 27 @.@ 4 % of Croatians over age of 15 were smokers . According to 2003 WHO data , 22 % of the Croatian adult population is obese . 
 = = Economic indicators = = 
 = = = Personal income , jobs and unemployment = = = 
 Net monthly income in September 2011 averaged 5 @,@ 397 kuna ( c . 729 euro ) , dropping 2 @.@ 1 % relative to the previous month . In the same month , gross monthly income averaged 7 @,@ 740 kuna ( c . 1 @,@ 046 euro ) , and it includes the net salary along with income tax , retirement pension insurance , healthcare insurance , occupational safety and health insurance and employment promotion tax . The average net monthly income grew compared to 5 @,@ 311 kuna ( c . 717 euro ) in 2009 or 3 @,@ 326 kuna ( c . 449 euro ) in 2000 . The highest net salaries were paid in financial services sector , and in April 2011 those averaged 10 @,@ 041 kuna ( c . 1 @,@ 356 euro ) , while the lowest ones , paid in the same month , were in the manufacturing and leather processing industries , averaging at 2 @,@ 811 kuna ( c . 380 euro ) . Since January 2016 , the minimum wage in Croatia is 3 @,@ 120 kuna before tax ( c . 400 euro ) . 
 Number of employed persons recorded steady growth between 2000 and 2008 when it peaked , followed by 4 % decline in 2009 . That year , there were 1 @.@ 499 million employed persons , with 45 % of that number pertaining to women . The total number of employed persons includes 252 @,@ 000 employed in crafts and freelance professionals and 35 @,@ 000 employed in agriculture . The most significant sources of employment in 2008 were manufacturing industry and wholesale and retail trade ( including motor vehicle repair services ) employing 278 @,@ 640 and 243 @,@ 640 respectively . Further significant employment sector was construction industry comprising 143 @,@ 336 jobs that year . In the same year , more than 100 @,@ 000 were employed in public administration , defence and compulsory social insurance sector as well as in education . Since 2009 , negative trends persisted in Croatia with jobs in the industry declined further by 3 @.@ 5 % . Number of unemployed and retired persons combined exceeded number of employed in August 2010 , as it fell to 1 @.@ 474 million . In 2009 , labour force consisted of 1 @.@ 765 million persons out of 3 @.@ 7 million working age population — aged 15 and over . In October 2011 , unemployment rate stood at 17 @.@ 4 % . 7 @.@ 2 % of employed persons hold a second job . 
 In comparison with the member states of the European Union ( EU ) , Croatia 's median equivalent household income in terms of the Purchasing Power Standard ( PPS ) stands at 470 , topping average PPS of the ten countries which joined the EU in 2004 ( <unk> ) , as well as Romania and Bulgaria , while significantly lagging behind the EU average . Within Croatia , the highest PPS is recorded in Istria County ( 769 ) , the City of Zagreb ( 640 ) and the Primorje @-@ Gorski Kotar County ( 576 ) . The lowest PPS is observed in the Bjelovar @-@ Bilogora County and the Virovitica @-@ Podravina County ( 267 ) . 
 = = = Urbanisation and housing = = = 
 2011 census recorded a total of 1 @,@ 534 @,@ 148 private households in Croatia as well as 1 @,@ 487 other residential communities such as retirement homes , convents etc . At the same time , there were 1 @,@ 923 @,@ 522 permanent housing units — houses and apartments . 2001 census recorded 1 @.@ 66 million permanent housing units , including 196 thousand intermittently occupied and 42 thousand abandoned ones . Average size of a permanently used housing unit is 74 @.@ 4 square metres ( 801 square feet ) . The intermittently used housing units include 182 thousand vacation houses and 8 thousand houses used during agricultural works . The same census also recorded 25 thousand housing units used for business purposes only . As of 2007 , 71 % of the households owned their own housing and had no mortgage or other loans to repay related to the housing , while further 9 % were repaying loans for their housing . The households vary by type and include single households ( 13 % ) , couples ( 15 % ) , single parent households ( 4 % ) , couples with children ( 27 % ) and extended family households ( 20 % ) . There are approximately 500 homeless persons in Croatia , largely living in Zagreb . 
 Average urbanisation rate in Croatia stands at 56 % , with the maximum rate recorded within the territory of the City of Zagreb , where it reached 94 @.@ 5 % and Zagreb metropolitan area comprising the City of Zagreb and the Zagreb County , where it stands at 76 @.@ 4 % . Very significant rate of urbanisation was observed in the second half of the 20th century . 1953 census recorded 57 % of population which was active in agriculture , while a census performed in 1991 noted only 9 @.@ 1 % of population active in that field . This points to augmentation of urban population and reduction of rural population . 
 = Hurricane Debbie ( 1961 ) = 
 Hurricane Debbie is the most powerful cyclone on record to strike Ireland in September , and possibly the only tropical cyclone on record to ever strike the British Isles while still tropical . The fourth named storm of the 1961 Atlantic hurricane season , Debbie originated from a well @-@ defined tropical disturbance that was first identified in late August over Central Africa . Tracking generally westward , the system moved off the coast of Senegal on September 5 into the Atlantic Ocean . By this time , it was estimated to have become a tropical storm , but forecasters did not issue advisories on the system until two days later . Late on September 6 , Debbie passed through the southern Cape Verde Islands as a strong tropical storm or minimal hurricane , resulting in a plane crash that killed 60 people in the islands . Once clear of the islands , data on the storm became sparse , and the status of Debbie was uncertain over the following several days as it tracked west @-@ northwestward and later northward . It was not until a commercial airliner intercepted the storm on September 10 that its location became certain . The following day , Debbie intensified and reached its peak intensity as a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale , with maximum winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . 
 Maintaining its peak intensity for over a day , the hurricane gradually slowed its forward motion and weakened . By September 13 , Debbie 's motion became influenced by the Westerlies , causing the system to accelerate east @-@ northeastward . The system passed over the western Azores as a minimal hurricane on September 15 . At this point , there is uncertainty as to the structure of Debbie , whether it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone or maintained its identity as a tropical system . Regardless of which took place , the system deepened as it neared the British Isles , skirting the coast of Western Ireland on September 16 . Shortly thereafter , the system was confirmed to have become extratropical as it continued towards the northeast . The remnants of the storm later turned eastward , striking Norway and Russia , before dissipating on September 19 . 
 Striking Ireland as a powerful storm , Debbie brought record winds to much of the island , with a peak gust of 114 mph ( 183 km / h ) measured just offshore . These winds caused widespread damage and disruption , downing tens of thousands of trees and power lines . Countless structures sustained varying degrees of damage , with many smaller buildings destroyed . Agriculture experienced extensive losses to barley , corn and wheat crops . Throughout Ireland , Debbie killed 18 people ( 12 in the Republic of Ireland and six in Northern Ireland ) . It caused US $ 40 – 50 million in damage in the Republic and at least £ 1 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 4 million ) in Northern Ireland . The storm also battered parts of Great Britain with winds in excess of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 During late August and into early September 1961 , an unusual series of low @-@ level disturbances developed over Central and West Africa and into the eastern Atlantic Ocean . One of these systems , that probably formed over Central Africa at the end of August , became increasingly organized as it moved over Nigeria on September 1 . As the disturbance travelled steadily westward , its mid @-@ level circulation became well defined , and the accompanying low @-@ level centre gradually followed suit . An upper @-@ level anticyclone accompanied the storm during this entire period , providing a favorable upper @-@ air regime for strengthening . According to a post @-@ storm study in 1962 , all the necessary environmental ingredients were available to the disturbance while it was over land ; the only factor inhibiting earlier development was a lack of access to the warm waters . Around 1200 UTC on September 5 , the low emerged off the coast of Senegal as a strong tropical depression or tropical storm . By this time , the system had a central pressure below 1006 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 71 inHg ) , and sustained winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) were reported in Bissau , Guinea @-@ Bissau . As the system neared Cape Verde , it continued to intensify and by the evening of September 6 , reports from the nearby Danish tanker Charlotte Maersk indicated that the system was already at or near hurricane intensity . 
 Late on September 6 , Debbie passed over the southern Cape Verde Islands as a strong tropical storm or low @-@ end hurricane . Continuing on a west @-@ northwest path , mainly in response to a large area of high pressure over the eastern Atlantic , the system continued to intensify . Sea surface temperatures in the region averaged 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) , supportive of tropical development . At 1913 UTC on September 7 , a picture from TIROS @-@ 3 showed that an eye had already developed and banding features covered an area more than 300 mi ( 480 km ) from the centre . Debbie was not classified operationally as a tropical storm until 2200 UTC on September 7 , at which time the centre was estimated to be about 550 mi ( 890 km ) west @-@ southwest of Sal Island . Over the following three days , virtually no data was available on the hurricane and no reliable estimates on its intensity could be made . During this time , the storm was estimated to have taken a more north @-@ westerly course over the open ocean . It was not until a KLM flight encountered the storm on September 10 that an accurate positioning of the hurricane could be made . 
 After maintaining a nearly steady course for three days , Hurricane Debbie turned northward and slowed as it neared a break in the ridge previously steering it west @-@ northwestward . During the evening of September 11 , a United States Navy Aircraft reconnaissance mission into the storm found sustained winds of 110 – 120 mph ( 175 – 195 km / h ) and a central pressure of 976 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 82 inHg ) , reaching its peak intensity as a modern @-@ day Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . After maintaining its windspeeds for over 24 hours , the system weakened and turned sharply towards the east @-@ northeast in response to the upper @-@ level westerlies . By the afternoon of September 13 , Debbie was again a Category 1 storm as it quickly accelerated towards the Azores . Early on September 15 , the storm passed over the easternmost Azores with winds estimated at 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) before turning more northeasterly . Once past the Azores , there is an uncertainty over the structural changes that took place with Debbie . According to the United States Weather Bureau 's preliminary report , the system acquired characteristics of an extratropical cyclone on September 15 , though remained a strong system . This conflicts with the best track supplied by the Bureau and the National Hurricane Center 's hurricane database maintains the system as a tropical cyclone until the afternoon of September 16 . 
 The system moved towards the British Isles and began to deepen . Debbie eventually brushed the coast of Western Ireland near Achill Island during the morning of September 16 with sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Around this time , a pressure of 961 @.@ 4 hPa ( 28 @.@ 39 inHg ) was measured as it passed near <unk> . If the system maintained tropical characteristics at this time , it would have been the first such storm on record to strike Ireland . Shortly after striking Ireland , the system was confirmed to have transitioned into an extratropical cyclone as it re @-@ emerged into the northeast Atlantic Ocean . While passing between Ireland and Scotland , the system continued to deepen , achieving an estimated central pressure of 950 hPa ( 28 @.@ 05 inHg ) . According to a study by Hickey and Connolly @-@ Johnston , this ranked Debbie as the most intense post @-@ hurricane from 1960 to 2012 to move through the British Isles . After clearing the United Kingdom , the hurricane 's remnants turned more easterly , later impacting Norway and Russia before dissipating on September 19 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Republic of Ireland = = = 
 As early as September 13 , residents were made aware that a storm might strike parts of Ireland with hurricane @-@ force winds . Two days later , forecasters believed the storm would take a more southerly course towards France . This forecast was later withdrawn as the storm failed to turn eastward . Consequently , gale warnings were issued for much of western Ireland on the morning of September 16 , hours before the brunt of the storm arrived . Fearing building collapses , officials in County Galway closed markets for the duration of the storm . 
 A powerful tropical or extratropical cyclone , on September 16 Hurricane Debbie became one of the most intense storms on record to strike Ireland . The storm brought hurricane @-@ force winds to a large part of the country , with wind gusts peaking at 114 mph ( 183 km / h ) off the coast of Arranmore . At several locations , all @-@ time wind gusts and ten @-@ minute sustained wind records were broken . Sustained winds at Malin Head stayed at or above 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) for approximately six hours . Debbie was the strongest storm , in terms of atmospheric pressure , to strike Ireland during the month of September , with a pressure of 961 @.@ 4 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 39 inHg ) measured in <unk> . Rainfall from the storm was relatively minor , with rainfall rates peaking at 0 @.@ 35 in ( 9 mm ) per hour at the Valentia Observatory . Though limited , the rain did cause some lakes in the west to flood . 
 The greatest damage occurred in a swath stretching from Kerry to Limerick as well as the counties of Sligo and Donegal . In these areas , the hurricane 's powerful winds damaged or destroyed many buildings and downed trees and power lines . In the hardest hit areas , communication was not restored for over four days . Many roads were blocked by debris for up to two days . Crops and trees were badly damaged . Approximately two percent of the trees in the forestry industry were snapped or uprooted , with some areas losing up to twenty @-@ four percent . In general , corn and wheat crops fared better than expected , with only 25 – 30 percent being lost ; however , some farmers reported barley losses greater than 50 percent . Downed trees from the storm wreaked havoc , leaving considerable damage and loss of life behind . All told , Hurricane Debbie was responsible for 12 deaths in the Republic of Ireland . Four people were killed in County Cavan – a widow , her two daughters and granddaughter – after a tree fell on their car . Five deaths resulted from fallen trees and three others were from building collapses . At least 50 people were injured , few of which were serious . A study in 2012 estimated that damage from the storm was at least US $ 40 – 50 million across Ireland . 
 Newspapers reported that the city of Galway " resembled a bombed area , " referring to the scale of damage caused by the winds . In nearby <unk> , two barns were destroyed , one of which had debris strewn over a wide area . Hurricane @-@ force winds battered Tuam for several hours , leaving most buildings damaged . Nearly every structure in Connemara was damaged and many homes lost their roofs . At Cork Airport , windows at the control tower were blown out and a construction crane was knocked over . Residents in <unk> dubbed Saturday , September 16 , 1961 as " The Day Of The Big Wind " in light of the extensive damage . Damage in Roscommon was " impossible to calculate , " as all power and communication around the town was lost . In Limerick , 15 people were injured . Across County Cavan , thousands of trees were snapped or uprooted , leaving many towns temporarily cut off as roads were blocked and communications lost . Many structures sustained damage , which ranged from broken slate roofing to flattened barns . Most towns across the county were left without power and telephone service . Residents described the storm as " the worst in living memory . " 
 Along the coast , rough seas spurred by the winds damaged docks and flooded some coastal regions . Offshore , waves reached heights of 45 ft ( 14 m ) near Arranmore . Dozens of ships were torn from their moorings and run aground at various ports , some of which were found 200 yd ( 180 m ) inland . In <unk> , three marinas were damaged with forty vessels damaged or sunk . Between 11 : 00 a.m. and 1 : 00 p.m. local time , onshore winds from the storm caused the River Shannon to flow backwards and rise 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) . Hundreds of acres of land , including potato and cabbage plots , were left several feet underwater . Many roads were submerged , making travel impossible in the area . The combination of strong winds and sea spray from the storm caused extensive defoliation of vegetation up to 10 mi ( 16 km ) inland . Spray from the River Foyle reportedly travelled 100 yd ( 91 m ) . 
 In the wake of the storm , more than 1 @,@ 000 Electricity Supply Board ( ESB ) personnel were deployed to restore power . In some areas , locals worked together to provide others with fresh food after electricity was lost . Fire brigades were sent on patrol to quell any looting . In Galway , ESB repair crews worked through labor and supply shortages to restore power and telephone service despite recent strikes in the company . By September 23 , officials in the city appealed to the Government for funding to deal with the aftermath of the hurricane . Uncertainty over whether some of the cost could be footed by landowners themselves resulted in disagreement over how much aid to request . Due to the severity of damage to the electrical grid , there were numerous requests made to the ESB to build underground power cables , especially in Galway . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 Exceptionally strong winds from the storm buffeted parts of Northern Ireland , with gusts of 106 mph ( 171 km / h ) and 104 mph ( 167 km / h ) measured in Ballykelly and Tiree respectively . The winds downed tens of thousands of trees and more than 1 @,@ 000 telephone lines across the region . In the <unk> Forest in County Tyrone , 30 @,@ 000 trees were blown down . Countless roads across Northern Ireland were blocked by debris and major rail lines had to suspend service . There was severe damage in the city of Derry where a newly built school was destroyed . Losses in the city alone amounted to £ 500 @,@ 000 ( US $ 1 @.@ 4 million ) . In Lagan Valley , a brick community hall was destroyed . An estimated 200 homes and two churches in Strabane were damaged . The town 's labour exchange building was severely damaged as well . In a local cemetery , many tombstones were uprooted from concrete foundations and destroyed . A newly built fire station in <unk> collapsed after its roof was blown off . Several people were injured in Belfast after a glass ceiling collapsed in a bus station and a piece of corrugated roofing blew in from a nearby building . 
 Six people were killed in Northern Ireland , mostly due to fallen trees : two in County Fermanagh and one each in Cookstown , Dungannon , Omagh , and elsewhere in Tyrone . The cereal crop in Northern Ireland suffered greatly due to Debbie , with half of the yield being lost . Losses from the crop were estimated at £ 1 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 8 million ) . In the wake of the storm , military ambulances from the Royal Army Medical Corps were dispatched to parts of West Tyrone . Power repair crews were dispatched for nearly a week repairing downed wires across Northern Ireland . Many public authorities paid tribute to the workers for their tireless work . After passing through Ireland , the storm brought strong winds and heavy rain to parts of Scotland and Wales , resulting in some damage and flooding in the region . On the coast of Lancashire and the Isle of Man , sand storms were reported , with significant sand deposits found inland . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Unsettled weather in the Cape Verde Islands brought about by Tropical Storm Debbie was blamed for a plane crash on September 6 that killed 60 people . Although the storm passed over the Azores as a hurricane , no reports of damage were received . Strong winds were also reported from the Bay of Biscay to locations in northern Norway . 
 = 1964 Gabon coup d 'état = 
 The 1964 Gabon coup d 'état was staged between 17 and 18 February 1964 by Gabonese military officers who rose against Gabonese President Léon M 'ba . Before the coup , Gabon was seen as one of the most politically stable countries in Africa . The coup resulted from M 'ba 's dissolution of the Gabonese legislature on 21 January 1964 , and during a takeover with few casualties 150 coup plotters arrested M 'ba and a number of his government officials . Through Radio Libreville , they asked the people of Gabon to remain calm and assured them that the country 's pro @-@ France foreign policy would remain unchanged . A provisional government was formed , and the coup 's leaders installed Deputy Jean @-@ Hilaire Aubame , who was M 'ba 's primary political opponent and had been uninvolved in the coup , as president . Meanwhile , M 'ba was sent to Lambaréné , 250 kilometres ( 155 mi ) from Libreville . There was no major uprising or reaction by the Gabonese people when they received word of the coup , which the military interpreted as a sign of approval . 
 After being informed of the coup by Gabonese Chief of Staff Albert @-@ Bernard Bongo , French President Charles de Gaulle resolved to restore the M 'ba government , honoring a 1960 treaty signed between the deposed government and France when Gabon became independent . With the help of French paratroopers , the provisional government was toppled during the night of 19 February and M 'ba was reinstated as president . Afterward , M 'ba imprisoned more than 150 of his opponents , pledging " no pardon or pity " but rather " total punishment " . Aubame was sentenced to 10 years of hard labor and 10 years of exile , a sentence that was later commuted . During this time , the ageing president became increasingly reclusive , opting to stay in his presidential palace under the protection of French troops . Within three years , M 'ba was diagnosed with cancer ; he died on 28 November 1967 . 
 = = Background and origins = = 
 Gabon gained its independence from France on 17 August 1960 . The country had a relatively high standard of living and was considered one of the more stable countries in West Africa , both politically and economically . At the time of the coup , the country had an estimated US $ 200 average annual income and was one of the few countries in Africa with a positive trade balance , with exports exceeding imports by 30 percent . As of 1964 , the country was among the largest producers of uranium and manganese in French Africa , which Time suggested was one of the reasons for France 's response to the coup . It also had petroleum , iron , and logging interests stationed in Gabon . 
 Léon M 'ba was one of the most loyal allies to France in Africa , even after the country 's independence . In fact , France maintained 600 paratroopers and an air force unit , which included Mirage V and Jaguar jet fighters , at the Camp de Gaulle military base until at least 1987 , a warning to any Gabonese coup plotters . M 'ba famously commented during a 1961 visit to France that " [ a ] ll Gabonese have two fatherlands : France and Gabon " , [ a ] and Europeans enjoyed particularly friendly treatment under his regime . French journalist Pierre Péan asserted that M 'ba secretly tried to prevent Gabonese independence ; instead , he lobbied for it to become an overseas territory of France . He went so far as to say that " Gabon is an extreme case , verging on caricature , of neocolonialism . " 
 M 'ba aspired to establish Gabon as a democracy , which he believed was necessary to attract foreign investors . At the same time , he attempted to reconcile the imperatives of democracy with the necessity for a strong and coherent government . In practice , however , M 'ba showed a weakness in attaining his goal — by this time he was known as " the old man " , or " the boss " — to have a high degree of authority . On 21 February 1961 , a new constitution was unanimously adopted , providing for a " <unk> " regime . M 'ba now had full executive powers : he could appoint ministers whose functions and responsibilities were decided by him ; he could dissolve the National Assembly by choice or prolong its term beyond the normal five years ; he could declare a state of emergency when he believed the need arose , though for this amendment he would have to consult the people via a referendum . This was , in fact , very similar to the constitution adopted in favor of Fulbert <unk> at roughly the same time . A report from the French secret service summarized the situation : 
 He regarded himself as a truly democratic leader ; nothing irritated him more than being called a dictator . Still , [ M 'ba ] wasn 't happy until he had the constitution rewritten to give him virtually all power and transforming the parliament into high @-@ priced scenery that could be bypassed as needed . [ b ] 
 M 'ba 's chief political opponent had been Jean @-@ Hilaire Aubame , a former protégé and his half @-@ brother 's foster son . M 'ba was backed by the French forestry interests , while Aubame was supported by the Roman Catholic missions and the French administration . Aubame , a deputy of the opposition party l ’ Union démocratique et sociale <unk> ( UDSG ) in the National Assembly , had few fundamental ideological differences with the M 'ba @-@ led Bloc Démocratique Gabonais ( BDG ) , including advocating less economic dependence on France and faster " Africanization " of French political jobs . However , the new constitution and the National Union ( a political union they founded ) suspended the quarrels between M 'ba and Aubame from 1961 to 1963 . Despite this , political unrest grew within the population , and many students held demonstrations on the frequent dissolutions of the National Assembly and the general political attitude in the country . The president did not hesitate to enforce the law himself ; with a <unk> , he whipped citizens who did not show respect for him , including passersby who " forgot " to salute him . 
 Aubame served as foreign minister under the coalition government , though in early 1963 he was dropped from the Cabinet for refusing to create a single @-@ party Gabon . To oust Aubame from his legislative seat , M 'ba appointed him President of the Supreme Court on 25 February , practically a powerless post . M 'ba supporters tried to pass a bill that declared that a member of parliament could only hold a single role in government . The president claimed that Aubame had resigned from the National Assembly , citing incompatibility with the functions of the assembly . Aubame , however , unexpectedly resigned from the Supreme Court on 10 January 1964 , complicating matters for M 'ba . In a fit of rage , M 'ba dissolved the National Assembly on 21 January 1964 . The New York Times speculates that this was due to it not supporting M 'ba in Aubame 's removal . 
 The electoral conditions were announced as such : The election 67 districts were reduced to 47 . M 'ba disqualified Aubame by announcing that anyone who had held a post recently was banned . Any party would have to submit 47 candidates who had to pay US $ 160 or none at all . Thus , over US $ 7 @,@ 500 would be deposited without considering campaign expenses . M 'ba 's idea was that no party other than his would have the money to enter candidates . In response to this , the opposition announced its refusal to participate in elections that they did not consider fair . 
 = = Planning = = 
 Little is known of the planning of the coup . No demonstrations followed <unk> 's dissolution of the National Assembly , so the coup could be classified as simply a " palace coup " . The 1964 – 1965 edition of the Adelphi Papers speculates that the continued presence of young French military officers in Gabon may have been an inspiration to the plotters of the coup . Much of the 600 @-@ man Gabonese army had previously served in the French army prior to independence , where they were paid modestly . Like much of the rest of the country , they were displeased by M 'ba 's actions against Aubame , a probable cause for involvement . 
 U.S. Ambassador to Gabon Charles Darlington suggested that the coup plotters may have tried to imitate the style of Colonel Christophe Soglo . Soglo , a commander in Dahomey 's 800 @-@ man army , had deposed President Hubert Maga in October 1963 , ruled for about a month , then resigned in favor of Dahomey 's citizens . The plotters apparently did not consider French involvement , so therefore didn 't take any additional steps to prevent it . They could have created protests to show public support , although the spokesman for the coup plotters , Sub @-@ Lieutenant Daniel Mbene , justified the coup by claiming in a broadcast that the army had to act to avoid the rash of " uncontrollable demonstrations that would have been difficult to halt " . 
 It is unlikely that Aubame participated in the planning of the coup . It appears that he joined the effort after being recruited by the new government . His nephew , Pierre Eyeguet , a former ambassador to the United Kingdom , may have known of the plot beforehand and notified his uncle , although it is unknown whether or not Aubame established contact with the plotters . 
 Lieutenant Valerie Essone only decided to participate on 17 February . This was a crucial decision for he led the First Company of the Gabonese Army , the company of the other officers . Apparently at that moment he told his troops to perform average night maneuvers . That day , Gabonese chief of staff Albert Bernard ( later Omar ) Bongo informed President M 'ba that the number of troops outside Libreville was unusually high . M 'ba , however , did not think much of this anomaly . 
 = = Coup = = 
 During the night of 17 February and the early morning of 18 February 1964 , 150 members of the Gabonese military , gendarmerie , and police , headed by Lieutenant Jacques Mombo and Valére Essone , seized the presidential palace . The gendarmes on duty claimed that this was but a military exercise . However , during the " exercise " the lieutenants dragged President M 'ba from his bed at gunpoint . Bongo heard this noise and telephoned President of the National Assembly Louis Bigmann to find out what had happened . Bigmann arrived at the presidential palace and asked the rebels what Bongo had asked him . At this point they opened the gates and arrested him too . The plotters subsequently arrested every member of the Gabonese cabinet except the respected technician André Gustave <unk> . Apparently , the plotters let him roam free in the hopes of him joining them , although before noon he asked to be arrested . Joseph N <unk> , the Gabonese minister of foreign affairs , was able to tell the French Embassy of this before he was arrested . 
 The insurgents , calling themselves a " revolutionary committee " , spread themselves strategically across the Gabonese capital during the night . They shut down the airport and seized the post office and radio station . On Radio Libreville , the military announced that a coup had taken place and that they required " technical assistance " . They issued radio statements every half @-@ hour promising that " public liberties will be restored and all political prisoners will be freed " and ordered the French not to interfere in the matter , claiming that it would be a violation of their sovereignty . In addition , they decreed the closing of schools and businesses . M 'ba acknowledged his defeat in a radio broadcast , in accordance with orders from his captors . " D @-@ Day is here , the injustices are beyond measure , these people are patient , but their patience has limits " , he said . " It came to a boil . " [ c ] 
 During these events , no gunshots were fired . The public did not react strongly , which , according to the military , was a sign of approval . A provisional government was formed , composed of civilian politicians from the UDSG and BDG such as Philippe N <unk> , editor of Gabon 's literary review <unk> <unk> ; Dr. Eloi <unk> , Gabon 's only physician ; Philippe Maury , a famous Gabonese actor ; and civil servant Paul Gondjout . Mbene stated that the provisional government would not include any members of the M 'ba government . He declared that Gabon 's pro @-@ French foreign policy would remain unchanged and that Mombo would supervise the government until the presidency was given to Aubame . The plotters were content to ensure security for civilians , urging them to remain calm and not hurt anyone . Most of them were junior officers , living in the army barracks . The senior officers did not intervene ; instead , they stayed in their " pleasant " houses . 
 Aubame was unaware of the coup until the French ambassador to Gabon , Paul Cousseran , called him on the telephone roughly a half @-@ hour after sunrise . Cousseran , meanwhile , was awoken by the noisy streets and checked to see what was happening . Aubame replied that he was to find out why there was " no government " , as Cousseran never directly mentioned a coup . However , about midway through the morning an automobile carrying the revolutionary committee arrived at Aubame 's residence and drove him to the governmental offices , where he had been named president . 
 Second Lieutenant Ndo Edou gave instructions to transfer M 'ba to Ndjolé , Aubame 's electoral stronghold . However , due to heavy rain , the deposed president and his captors took shelter in an unknown village . The next morning they decided to take him over the easier road to Lambaréné . Several hours later , they returned to Libreville . 
 = = = French intervention = = = 
 French authorities first received information on the coup not from Cousseran but rather from Bongo , giving him some standing among them . President de Gaulle , upon advice from his chief adviser on African policy , Jacques Foccart , decided that he would restore the legitimate government . This was in accordance with a 1960 treaty between Gabon and the French , which was ironically signed by Aubame in his stint as Foreign Minister . Foccart , on the other hand , had only decided to launch the countercoup to protect the interests of the French petroleum group Elf , which operated in Gabon and was led by a close friend of his . M 'ba was also a close friend of his ; David Yates reports that M 'ba could call Foccart personally , and Foccart would meet with him " at a moment 's notice " . French commentators , however , claimed that if they did not intervene , they would be tempting other dissidents . France had refrained from intervening in recent coups in the French Congo , Dahomey , and Togo , despite being opposed to all of them . However , the Gabon coup differed in that , they claimed , it lacked notable public support . Following the restoration of M 'ba 's government in Gabon , the French intervened militarily in Africa roughly every other year . In 1995 , the French Minister for Foreign Assistance Jacques <unk> explained that Paris " will intervene each time an elected democratic power is overthrown by a coup d 'état if a military cooperation agreement exists " . 
 Shortly after de Gaulle and Foccart 's meeting , French commanders Haulin and Royer were released at the request of the French Embassy . Intervention could not commence without a formal petition to the Head of State of Gabon . Since M 'ba was held hostage , the French contacted the Vice President of Gabon , Paul @-@ Marie Yembit , who had not been arrested . At the time , Yembit was in a car with U.S. ambassador Charles Darlington travelling to N <unk> . This was to officially open a school built by the Peace Corps nearby , in Yembit 's birthplace of <unk> , and completing his electoral campaign . Therefore , they decided to compose a predated letter that Yembit would later sign , confirming their intervention . They sent this to him via a small airplane , since there were no road bridges in Gabon at the time and the only way to cross a river was on a ferry . Yembit did not come back to Libreville on the plane as would be expected , but rather at 8 : 00 WAT on 18 February to read a statement over Radio Libreville that was likely prepared by French officials . Yembit , however , claimed that he called for French intervention while the insurgent troops held M 'ba hostage ; this version of the story was quickly disputed by several diplomats on the scene , as several French troops had arrived before this alleged incident . 
 Less than 24 hours after de Gaulle had been notified , French paratroopers stationed in Dakar and Brazzaville under General René Cogny and a General <unk> were notified that they were going to end the coup . This had come even before the provincial government was formed . Maurice Robert and Guy <unk> , who were among a group Foccart convened to discuss the French intervention , were part of the paratrooper unit . Receiving Foccart 's orders to " normalize " the situation by 19 February or the next day at the latest , at 10 : 50 WAT on 18 February , the first 50 troops landed at the Libreville International Airport . The rebels closed the airport but failed to establish obstacles , allowing the French troops to land unharmed , albeit during a large storm . Throughout that day , more than 600 paratroopers arrived at the airport . 
 Sweeping through Libreville unopposed , the troops easily captured the provincial council , though they met resistance at the Baraka military base in Lambaréné when they attacked at daylight . Upon learning of the impending attack , Aubame called Cousseran and asked him what had been going on . Cousseran dodged answering the question and requested that Aubame release M 'ba uninjured . After receiving the false assurance from the ambassador that the French government had no intention of restoring M 'ba to power , Aubame sent out a military officer to the countryside to find the deposed president . M 'ba was moved to a small village near the Albert Schweitzer Hospital . At dawn on 19 February , French Air Force planes strafed the rebels at Baraka , while the French Army attacked the insurgents with machine gun fire and mortars . The rebels at the military base promptly surrendered once their ammunition supply ran out , and their commander , Lieutenant Ndo Edou , was executed . Later , the French army managed to break through the gate to the village where M 'ba was held and rescued the deposed president . 
 Before the end of the day , the French troops surrounded all of Libreville 's public buildings . Shortly thereafter , Radio Libreville announced the surrender of the rebel forces . <unk> concluded his military operation on 20 February , saluting Cousseran and saying " Mission <unk> " . Over its course , one French soldier was killed and 18 died on the Gabonese side . Unofficial sources said two French soldiers and 25 insurgents were killed , with more than 40 Gabonese and four French troops were wounded . The number of civilian casualties was unknown but numerous , as the straw roofs on their homes were not a good protector against aerial bullets . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Immediate aftermath and riots = = = 
 France 's intervention in the coup was openly applauded by the Central African Republic , Chad , Côte d 'Ivoire , Madagascar , Niger , and Upper Volta . In fact , France was barely criticised at all in Africa , other than a mild response by Dahomey and one by the Democratic Republic of Congo . The matter was not discussed at the next meeting of the Council of Ministers of the OAU , held on 24 February – 29 February in Lagos . The revolutionary movement in French Africa immediately <unk> following the coup . 
 M 'ba was returned to Libreville on 21 February . Shortly after his arrival , the 10 : 00 pm curfew that had been imposed by the French was lifted , and some stores were reopened . Squads of officials , known as " les <unk> " , travelled through Libreville and arrested any suspected M 'ba opposers . After his reinstatement , M 'ba refused to believe that the coup was directed against his regime , instead considering it to be a conspiracy against the state . Nonetheless , following the coup M 'ba dismissed every soldier in the army and started recruiting new men . 
 On 1 March , however , anti @-@ government demonstrations began , with protesters shouting " Léon M 'ba , <unk> des Français ! " ( " Léon M 'ba , President of the French ! " ) and calling for the end of the " dictatorship " . Originating in Libreville , these demonstrations spread to Port @-@ Gentil and N <unk> and lasted into the summer . When 1 @,@ 000 pro @-@ government demonstrators responded by shouting " Long Live Léon M 'ba " outside the presidential palace , they were attacked by dissidents . Among the pro @-@ government demonstrators were an opposition member , Martine <unk> , who had been forcefully undressed following her arrest , beaten by the police , paraded naked throughout Libreville , and forced to shout " Long Live Léon M 'ba " . At the height of these demonstrations , 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 Gabonese protested throughout central Libreville . Protesters also took their anger out against the French in Gabon , stoning more than 30 cars belonging to Frenchmen and chanting " Go home , go home ! " This rioting was so intense that M 'ba announced that whoever went to work would not be paid . The French reacted to these incidents by swinging rifle butts and throwing grenades . The crowds responded by throwing bottles and stones , though they were put down soon after . There were no reports of injured protesters , despite orders to the Gabonese police that they fire at protesters on sight . 
 = = = Allegations of U.S. involvement = = = 
 Some Gabonese mistakenly identified the United States as a co @-@ conspirator in the coup . Time asserted that French officials helped spread the rumor of American involvement . This reached a point which some automobile stations refused to help Darlington and other Americans . After William F. Courtney , deputy chief of the United States Embassy , received a call from a man identifying himself as DuPont and threatening an imminent attack , a hand grenade exploded outside the embassy . The explosion , which occurred at a time when the building was closed and locked on 3 March , resulted in damage to the embassy sign and the cracking of two windows . 
 Following the bombing , French Gabonese made more threatening phone calls to the embassy . A second bomb exploded at the embassy two nights later , causing no damage . A drive @-@ by shooting , during which at least five rounds of buckshot were fired from a 12 @-@ gauge automatic shotgun , riddled the second story windows with over 30 holes . It is likely that its perpetrators were French , as Gabonese have no access to grenades . Following the second bombing a car containing white men was noticed , driving through otherwise empty Shore Boulevard . At the time , practically the only white men in Gabon were French . 
 Two Gabonese policemen were assigned to protect the building , and M 'ba ordered an investigation into the bombings . He denounced the allegations against Americans , saying : 
 Nothing permits to determine that the United States played a role in the recent events . However , relations of friendship existing between members of the United States Embassy and some politicians who participated in the rebellion could have given this impression to some , an impression which I do not share . 
 Many of these attacks against Americans were against Darlington personally . His son Christopher was hit by a grenade in July , though it did not detonate . The ambassador resigned his post on 26 July . It was not until 14 August 1965 that David M. Bane replaced him . 
 = = = 1964 elections = = = 
 Despite these incidents , legislative elections planned before the coup were held in April 1964 . They were originally to be held on 23 February , though he dissolved the National Assembly and rescheduled them for 12 April . Upon insistence of the French , M 'ba allowed opposition candidates to run , which it claimed was the main reason for starting the coup in the first place . However , their leaders were barred from participating because of their involvement in the coup , and known anti @-@ <unk> organizers were deported to remote parts of the country . In addition , M 'ba was known to have bribed voters with banknotes . 
 France closely followed the election , deporting a Peace Corps teacher . The UDSG disappeared from the political scene , and M 'ba 's opposition was composed of parties that lacked national focus and maintained only regional or pro @-@ democracy platforms . Nevertheless , the opposition garnered 46 % of the vote and 16 of 47 seats in the assembly , while the BDG received 54 % of the vote and 31 seats . The opposition disputed this , and held strikes across the country , though these did not have a sizable impact on business . 
 = = = Lambaréné trial and rest of M 'ba 's term = = = 
 Aubame and Gondjout fled Libreville , but were captured sometime before 20 February . Most of the other rebels took refuge at the U.S. Embassy , though they were soon discovered and brought to jail . That August , a trial of the military rebels and provisional government was opened in Lambaréné . A " state of precations " was imposed , which decreed that local government kept surveillance on suspected troublemakers and , if necessary , order curfew , while special permits were required to travel through the town . The trial was held in a school building overlooking the Ogooue River , which was near Albert Schweitzer 's hospital . Space at the hearing was limited , so members of the public were disallowed from attending . Permits were required to attend the trial , and family members were restricted to one permit each . Press coverage was limited , and journalists were allowed only if they represented a high @-@ profile news agency . In addition , there were restrictions on the defence of the accused . 
 The prosecution called 64 separate witnesses . Essone , Mbene , and Aubame claimed that their involvement in the coup was due to a lack of development in the Gabonese army . Judge Leon Auge , the judge in the case , said that if " that is the only reason for your coup d 'état , you deserve a severe penalty . " Essone said that almost all Gabonese military officers knew of an imminent coup beforehand , while Aubame affirmed his position that he did not participate in its planning . According to him , he formed the provisional government in a constitutional manner , and at the request of some " putschists " . He reasoned that the French intervention was effectively an illegal act of interference , an assertion which Gondjout and the former education minister , Jean Marc Ekoh , shared . Ekoh had served as Foreign Minister during the coup . The Gabonese actor said that it should be the French troops being tried , not he and his comrades : " If we 'd been able to put up a few more Gabonese soldiers against the French , we 'd have won — and we shouldn 't be here today . " 
 On 9 September , without consulting M 'ba , Leon Auge handed down a verdict which acquitted both Ekoh and Gondjout ; although the charges carried the death sentence as a maximum . Aubame was sentenced to 10 years of hard labor and 10 years of exile on a remote island off <unk> , 100 miles ( 161 km ) down the coast of Gabon , as were most criminals of the case . He was not particularly popular during his political career , though according to Time , his arrest " ballooned him to heroic proportions in the eyes of the aroused public " . While serving his 10 years of labor , he was beaten regularly by prison guards . Besides Aubame , M 'ba imprisoned more than 150 of his opponents , most of whom were sentenced to 20 years of hard labor . These included the two officers and Aubame 's nephew , Pierre Eyeguet , a former ambassador to the United Kingdom . The actor and the doctor were given 10 years of imprisonment each . While appealing for peace on 18 February , he pledged " no pardon or pity " to his enemies , but rather " total punishment " . 
 Two years after the coup there was still open repression of dissent in Gabon . Following these events M 'ba became increasingly reclusive , staying in his presidential palace protected by French troops known as the " Clan des Gabonais " . Not even Yembit was close to him , but Foccart 's friends <unk> and Robert " were never far " from M 'ba , according to Pean , and provided the aging president with counseling and advice . M 'ba was , however , still convinced of his popularity . Three years later , M 'ba was diagnosed with cancer , and he died on 28 November 1967 . After M 'ba 's death , French @-@ supported Bongo succeeded him as president , and released Aubame in 1972 . 
 = Triangulum = 
 Triangulum is a small constellation in the northern sky . Its name is Latin for " triangle " , derived from its three brightest stars , which form a long and narrow triangle . Known to the ancient Babylonians and Greeks , Triangulum was one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy . The celestial cartographers Johann Bayer and John Flamsteed catalogued the constellation 's stars , giving six of them Bayer designations . 
 The white stars Beta and Gamma Trianguli , of apparent magnitudes 3 @.@ 00 and 4 @.@ 00 , respectively , form the base of the triangle and the yellow @-@ white Alpha Trianguli , of magnitude 3 @.@ 41 , the apex . Iota Trianguli is a notable double star system , and there are three star systems with planets located in Triangulum . The constellation contains several galaxies , the brightest and nearest of which is the Triangulum Galaxy or Messier 33 — a member of the Local Group . The first quasar ever observed , 3C 48 , also lies within Triangulum 's boundaries . 
 = = History and mythology = = 
 In the Babylonian star catalogues , Triangulum , together with Gamma Andromedae , formed the constellation known as <unk> ( <unk> ) " The Plough " . It is notable as the first constellation presented on ( and giving its name to ) a pair of tablets containing canonical star lists that were compiled around 1000 BC , the <unk> The Plough was the first constellation of the " Way of Enlil " — that is , the northernmost quarter of the Sun 's path , which corresponds to the 45 days on either side of summer solstice . Its first appearance in the pre @-@ dawn sky ( heliacal rising ) in February marked the time to begin spring ploughing in Mesopotamia . 
 The Ancient Greeks called Triangulum <unk> ( <unk> ) , as the constellation resembled an upper @-@ case Greek letter delta ( Δ ) . It was transliterated by Roman writers , then later Latinised as <unk> . Eratosthenes linked it with the Nile Delta , while the Roman writer Hyginus associated it with the triangular island of Sicily , formerly known as Trinacria due to its shape . It was also called Sicilia , because the Romans believed Ceres , patron goddess of Sicily , begged Jupiter to place the island in the heavens . Greek astronomers such as <unk> and Ptolemy called it <unk> ( <unk> ) , and later , it was Romanized as <unk> . Other names referring to its shape include <unk> and <unk> . Alpha and Beta Trianguli were called Al <unk> , which is Arabic for " The Scale Beam " . In Chinese astronomy , Gamma Andromedae and neighbouring stars including Beta , Gamma and Delta Trianguli were called Teen Ta <unk> Keun ( <unk> , " Heaven 's great general " ) , representing honour in astrology and a great general in mythology . 
 Later , the 17th @-@ century German celestial cartographer Johann Bayer called the constellation <unk> and Orbis terrarum <unk> , for the three regions Europe , Asia , and Africa . Triangulus <unk> was a name used to distinguish it from Triangulum Australe , the Southern Triangle . Polish astronomer Johannes Hevelius excised three faint stars — 6 , 10 and 12 Trianguli — to form the new constellation of Triangulum Minus in his 1690 Firmamentum Sobiescianum , renaming the original as Triangulum Majus . The smaller constellation was not recognised by the International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) when the constellations were established in the 1920s . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 A small constellation , Triangulum is bordered by Andromeda to the north and west , Pisces to the west and south , Aries to the south , and Perseus to the east . The centre of the constellation lies half way between Gamma Andromedae and Alpha Arietis . The three @-@ letter abbreviation for the constellation , as adopted by the IAU in 1922 , is ' Tri ' . The official constellation boundaries , as set by Eugène Delporte in 1930 , are defined as a polygon of 14 segments . In the equatorial coordinate system , the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 01h <unk> and <unk> <unk> , while the declination coordinates are between 25 @.@ 60 ° and 37 @.@ 35 ° . Covering 132 square degrees and 0 @.@ 320 % of the night sky , Triangulum ranks 78th of the 88 constellations in size . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 Bayer catalogued five stars in the constellation , giving them the Bayer designations Alpha to Epsilon . John Flamsteed added Eta , Iota and four Roman letters ; of these , only Iota is still used as the others were dropped in subsequent catalogues and star charts . Flamsteed gave 16 stars Flamsteed designations , of which numbers 1 and 16 are not used — 1 's coordinates were in error as there was no star present at the location that corresponds to any star in his Catalogus Britannicus ; Baily presumed that the coordinates were <unk> 32s in error by Flamsteed and in fact referred to 7 @.@ 4 magnitude HD <unk> . Baily also noted that 16 Trianguli was closer to Aries and included it in the latter constellation . 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 Three stars make up the long narrow triangle that gives the constellation its name . The brightest member is the white giant star Beta Trianguli of apparent magnitude 3 @.@ 00 , lying 127 light @-@ years distant from Earth . It is actually a spectroscopic binary system ; the primary is a white star of spectral type <unk> with 3 @.@ 5 times the mass of our sun that is beginning to expand and evolve off the main sequence . The secondary is poorly known , but calculated to be a yellow @-@ white F @-@ type main @-@ sequence star around 1 @.@ 4 solar masses . The two orbit around a common centre of gravity every 31 days , and are surrounded by a ring of dust that extends from 50 to 400 AU away from the stars . 
 The second @-@ brightest star , the yellow @-@ white subgiant star Alpha Trianguli ( <unk> ) with a close dimmer companion , is also known as Caput Trianguli or Ras al <unk> , and is at the apex of the triangle . It lies around 7 degrees north @-@ northwest of Alpha Arietis . Making up the triangle is Gamma Trianguli , a white main sequence star of spectral type <unk> of apparent magnitude 4 @.@ 00 about 112 light @-@ years from Earth . It is around double the size of and around 33 times as luminous as the sun and rotates rapidly . Like Beta , it is surrounded by a dusty debris disk , which has a radius 80 times the distance of the Earth from the Sun . Lying near Gamma and forming an optical triple system with it are Delta and 7 Trianguli . Delta is a spectroscopic binary system composed of two yellow main sequence stars of similar dimensions to the Sun that lies 35 light @-@ years from Earth . The two stars orbit each other every ten days and are a mere 0 @.@ 1 AU apart . This system is the closest in the constellation to the Earth . Only of magnitude 5 @.@ 25 , 7 Trianguli is much further away at around 280 light @-@ years distant from Earth . 
 Iota Trianguli is a double star whose components can be separated by medium @-@ sized telescopes into a strong yellow and a contrasting pale blue star . Both of these are themselves close binaries . X Trianguli is an eclipsing binary system that ranges between magnitudes 8 @.@ 5 and 11 @.@ 2 over a period of 0 @.@ 97 days . RW Trianguli is a cataclysmic variable star system composed of a white dwarf primary and an orange main sequence star of spectral type K7 V. The former is drawing off matter from the latter , forming a prominent accretion disc . The system is around 1075 light @-@ years distant . 
 R Trianguli is a long period ( Mira ) variable that ranges from magnitude 6 @.@ 2 to 11 @.@ 7 over a period of 267 days . It is a red giant of spectral type <unk> @-@ <unk> , lying around 960 light @-@ years away . HD <unk> , also known as XX Trianguli , is an orange giant of spectral type K0III around 520 light @-@ years distant with a visual magnitude of 8 @.@ 42 . A huge starspot larger than the diameter of the sun was detected on its surface in 1999 by astronomers using Doppler imaging . 
 Three star systems appear to have planets . HD <unk> is a sun @-@ like star around 171 light @-@ years distant that has two planets of masses 0 @.@ 7 and 1 @.@ 8 times that of Jupiter , with orbital periods of 30 and 193 days respectively . WASP @-@ 56 is a sun @-@ like star of spectral type G6 and apparent magnitude 11 @.@ 48 with a planet 0 @.@ 6 the mass of Jupiter that has a period of 4 @.@ 6 days . HD <unk> is an orange giant of spectral type <unk> about 2 – 7 times as massive as the sun with a planetary or brown dwarf companion between 8 and 20 times as massive as Jupiter , which takes 472 days to complete an orbit . It is one of the largest stars discovered to have a planetary companion . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sky objects = = = 
 The Triangulum Galaxy , also known as Messier 33 , was discovered by Giovanni Battista Hodierna in the 17th century . A distant member of the Local Group , it is about 2 @.@ 3 million light @-@ years away , and at magnitude 5 @.@ 8 it is bright enough to be seen by the naked eye under the darkest skies . Under light @-@ polluted skies , it is challenging or invisible even in a small telescope or binoculars . Because of its low surface brightness , low power is required . It is a spiral galaxy with a diameter of 46 @,@ 000 light @-@ years and is thus smaller than both the Andromeda Galaxy and the Milky Way . A distance of less than 300 kiloparsecs between it and Andromeda supports the hypothesis that it is a satellite of the larger galaxy . Within the constellation , it lies near the border of Pisces , 3 @.@ 5 degrees west @-@ northwest of Alpha Trianguli and 7 degrees southwest of Beta Andromedae . Within the galaxy , NGC 604 is an H II region where star formation takes place . 
 In addition to M33 , there are several NGC galaxies of visual magnitudes 12 to 14 . The largest of these include the 10 arcminute long magnitude 12 NGC 925 spiral galaxy and the 5 arcminute long magnitude 11 @.@ 6 NGC 672 barred spiral galaxy . The latter is close by and appears to be interacting with IC 1727 . The two are 88 @,@ 000 light @-@ years apart and lie around 18 million light @-@ years away . These two plus another four nearby dwarf irregular galaxies constitute the NGC 672 group , and all six appear to have had a burst of star formation in the last ten million years . The group is thought connected to another group of six galaxies known as the NGC 784 group , named for its principal galaxy , the barred spiral NGC 784 . Together with two isolated dwarf galaxies , these fourteen appear to be moving in a common direction and constitute a group possibly located on a dark matter filament . 3C 48 was the first quasar ever to be observed , although its true identity was not uncovered until after that of 3C 273 in 1963 . It has an apparent magnitude of 16 @.@ 2 and is located about 5 degrees northwest of Alpha Trianguli . 
 = George Washington = 
 George Washington ( February 22 , 1732 [ O.S. February 11 , 1731 ] – December 14 , 1799 ) was the first President of the United States ( 1789 – 97 ) , the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War , and one of the Founding Fathers of the United States . He presided over the convention that drafted the current United States Constitution and during his lifetime was called the " father of his country " . 
 Widely admired for his strong leadership qualities , Washington was unanimously elected president by the Electoral College in the first two national elections . He oversaw the creation of a strong , well @-@ financed national government that maintained neutrality in the French Revolutionary Wars , suppressed the Whiskey Rebellion , and won acceptance among Americans of all types . Washington 's incumbency established many precedents , still in use today , such as the cabinet system , the inaugural address , and the title Mr. President . His retirement from office after two terms established a tradition that lasted until 1940 , when Franklin Delano Roosevelt won an unprecedented third term . The 22nd Amendment ( 1951 ) now limits the president to two elected terms . Born into the provincial gentry of Colonial Virginia , his family were wealthy planters who owned tobacco plantations and slaves which he inherited . In his youth he became a senior British officer in the colonial militia during the first stages of the French and Indian War . In 1775 the Second Continental Congress commissioned Washington as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Continental Army in the American Revolution . In that command , Washington forced the British out of Boston in 1776 , but was defeated and nearly captured later that year when he lost New York City . After crossing the Delaware River in the middle of winter , he defeated the British in two battles ( Trenton and Princeton ) , retook New Jersey and restored momentum to the Patriot cause . 
 His strategy enabled Continental forces to capture two major British armies at Saratoga in 1777 and Yorktown in 1781 . Historians laud Washington for the selection and supervision of his generals , preservation and command of the army , coordination with the Congress , state governors and their militia , and attention to supplies , logistics , and training . In battle , however , Washington was repeatedly outmaneuvered by British generals with larger armies . After victory had been finalized in 1783 , Washington resigned as commander @-@ in @-@ chief rather than seize power , proving his opposition to dictatorship and his commitment to American republicanism . Washington presided over the Constitutional Convention in 1787 , which devised a new form of federal government for the United States . Following his election as president in 1789 , he worked to unify rival factions in the fledgling nation . He supported Alexander Hamilton 's programs to satisfy all debts , federal and state , established a permanent seat of government , implemented an effective tax system , and created a national bank . In avoiding war with Great Britain , he guaranteed a decade of peace and profitable trade by securing the Jay Treaty in 1795 , despite intense opposition from the Jeffersonians . Although he remained nonpartisan , never joining the Federalist Party , he largely supported its policies . Washington 's Farewell Address was an influential primer on civic virtue , warning against partisanship , sectionalism , and involvement in foreign wars . He retired from the presidency in 1797 , returning to his home and plantation at Mount Vernon . 
 While in power , his use of national authority pursued many ends , especially the preservation of liberty , reduction of regional tensions , and promotion of a spirit of American nationalism . Upon his death , Washington was eulogized as " first in war , first in peace , and first in the hearts of his countrymen " by Henry Lee . Revered in life and in death , scholarly and public polling consistently ranks him among the top three presidents in American history ; he has been depicted and remembered in monuments , currency , and other dedications through the present day . 
 = = Early life ( 1732 – 1753 ) = = 
 The first child of Augustine Washington ( 1694 – 1743 ) and his second wife , Mary Ball Washington ( 1708 – 1789 ) , George Washington was born on their Pope 's Creek Estate near present @-@ day Colonial Beach in Westmoreland County , Virginia . According to the Julian calendar and Annunciation Style of enumerating years ( then in use in the British Empire ) , Washington was born on February 11 , 1731 ; the Gregorian calendar , adopted later within the British Empire in 1752 , renders a birth date of February 22 , 1732 . 
 Washington was of primarily English gentry descent , especially from Sulgrave , England . His great @-@ grandfather , John Washington , emigrated to Virginia in 1656 and began accumulating land and slaves , as did his son Lawrence and his grandson , George 's father , Augustine . Augustine was a tobacco planter who also tried his hand in iron @-@ mining ventures . In George 's youth , the Washingtons were moderately prosperous members of the Virginia gentry , of " middling rank " rather than one of the leading planter families . At this time , Virginia and other southern colonies had employed slave labor , in which slaveholders ( and the rich in general ) formed the ruling class and much of the economy was based upon slave labor . 
 Six of George 's siblings reached maturity , including two older half @-@ brothers , Lawrence and Augustine , from his father 's first marriage to Jane Butler Washington , and four full siblings , Samuel , Elizabeth ( Betty ) , John Augustine and Charles . Three siblings died before adulthood : his full sister Mildred died when she was about one , his half @-@ brother Butler died in infancy , and his half @-@ sister Jane died at age twelve , when George was about two . His father died of a sudden illness in April 1743 when George was eleven years old , and his half @-@ brother Lawrence became a surrogate father and role model . William Fairfax , Lawrence 's father @-@ in @-@ law and cousin of Virginia 's largest landowner , Thomas , Lord Fairfax , was also a formative influence . 
 Washington 's father was the Justice of the Westmoreland County Court . Young Washington spent much of his boyhood at Ferry Farm in Stafford County near Fredericksburg . Lawrence Washington inherited another family property from his father , a plantation on the Potomac River at Little Hunting Creek , which he named Mount Vernon , in honor of his commanding officer , Admiral Edward Vernon . George inherited Ferry Farm upon his father 's death and eventually acquired Mount Vernon after Lawrence 's death . 
 The death of his father prevented Washington from an education at England 's Appleby School , as his older brothers had received . He achieved the equivalent of an elementary school education from a variety of tutors , as well as from a school run by an Anglican clergyman in or near Fredericksburg . Talk of securing an appointment in the Royal Navy for him when he was 15 was dropped when his widowed mother objected . 
 In 1751 Washington traveled to Barbados with Lawrence , who was suffering from tuberculosis , with the hope that the climate would be beneficial to Lawrence 's health . Washington contracted smallpox during the trip , which left his face slightly scarred , but immunized him against future exposures to the dreaded disease . However , Lawrence 's health failed to improve , and he returned to Mount Vernon , where he died in the summer of 1752 . Lawrence 's position as Adjutant General ( militia leader ) of Virginia was divided into four district offices after his death . Washington was appointed by Governor Dinwiddie as one of the four district adjutants in February 1753 , with the rank of major in the Virginia militia . During this period , Washington became a Freemason while in Fredericksburg , although his involvement was minimal . 
 = = = Surveyor = = = 
 Washington 's introduction to surveying began at an early age through school exercises that taught him the basics of the profession , followed by practical experience in the field . His first experiences at surveying occurred in the surrounding territory of Mount Vernon . Washington 's first opportunity as a surveyor occurred in 1748 when he was invited to join a survey party organized by his neighbor and friend George Fairfax of Belvoir . Fairfax organized a professional surveying party to layout large tracts of land along the border of western Virginia where the young Washington gained invaluable experience in the field . 
 In 1749 , at the age of 17 , Washington began his career as a professional surveyor . He subsequently received a commission and surveyor 's license from the College of William and Mary and became the official surveyor for the newly formed Culpeper County . Thanks to his older brother Lawrence 's connection to the prominent Fairfax family , Washington had been appointed to this well @-@ paid official position . In less than two days he completed his first survey , plotting a 400 acre parcel of land and was well on his way to a promising career . He was subsequently able to purchase land in the Shenandoah Valley , the first of his many land acquisitions in western Virginia . For the next four years Washington worked surveying land in Western Virginia and for the Ohio Company , a land investment company funded by Virginia investors . Thanks to Lawrence 's position as commander of the Virginia militia , Washington came to the notice of the new lieutenant governor of Virginia , Robert Dinwiddie . He was hard to miss : At over six feet , he was taller than most of his contemporaries . In October 1750 , Washington resigned his position as an official surveyor , though he continued to work diligently over the next three years at his new profession . He continued to survey professionally for two more years , mostly in Frederick County before receiving a military appointment as adjutant for southern Virginia . By 1752 , Washington completed close to 200 surveys on numerous properties totaling more than 60 @,@ 000 acres . He would continue to survey at different times throughout his life and as late as 1799 . 
 = = French and Indian War = = 
 Washington began his military service in the French and Indian War as a major in the militia of the British Province of Virginia . In 1753 he was sent as an ambassador from the British crown to the French officials and Indians as far north as present @-@ day Erie , Pennsylvania . The Ohio Company was an important vehicle through which British investors planned to expand into the Ohio Valley , opening new settlements and trading posts for the Indian trade . In 1753 the French themselves began expanding their military control into the Ohio Country , a territory already claimed by the British colonies of Virginia and Pennsylvania . These competing claims led to a war in the colonies called the French and Indian War ( 1754 – 62 ) , and contributed to the start of the global Seven Years ' War ( 1756 – 63 ) . By chance , Washington became involved in its beginning . 
 Robert Dinwiddie , lieutenant governor of colonial Virginia , was ordered by the British government to guard the British territorial claims including the Ohio River basin . In late 1753 Dinwiddie ordered Washington to deliver a letter asking the French to vacate the Ohio Valley ; he was eager to prove himself as the new adjutant general of the militia , appointed by the Lieutenant Governor himself only a year before . During his trip Washington met with Tanacharison ( also called " Half @-@ King " ) and other Iroquois chiefs allied with England at Logstown to secure their support in case of a military conflict with the French — indeed Washington and Tanacharison became friends . He delivered the letter to the local French commander Jacques Legardeur de Saint @-@ Pierre , who politely refused to leave . Washington kept a diary during his expedition which was printed by William Hunter on Dinwiddie 's order and which made Washington 's name recognizable in Virginia . This increased notoriety helped him to obtain a commission to raise a company of 100 men and start his military career . 
 Dinwiddie sent Washington back to the Ohio Country to safeguard an Ohio Company 's construction of a fort at present @-@ day Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . However , before he reached the area , a French force drove out colonial traders and began construction of Fort Duquesne . A small detachment of French troops led by Joseph Coulon de Jumonville , was discovered by Tanacharison and a few warriors east of present @-@ day Uniontown , Pennsylvania . On May 28 , 1754 , Washington and some of his militia unit , aided by their Mingo allies , ambushed the French in what has come to be called the Battle of Jumonville Glen . Exactly what happened during and after the battle is a matter of contention , but several primary accounts agree that the battle lasted about 15 minutes , that Jumonville was killed , and that most of his party were either killed or taken prisoner . Whether Jumonville died at the hands of Tanacharison in cold blood or was somehow shot by an onlooker with a musket as he sat with Washington or by another means , is not completely clear . He was given the epithet Town Destroyer by Tanacharison . 
 The French responded by attacking and capturing Washington at Fort Necessity in July 1754 . However , he was allowed to return with his troops to Virginia . Historian Joseph Ellis concludes that the episode demonstrated Washington 's bravery , initiative , inexperience and impetuosity . These events had international consequences ; the French accused Washington of assassinating Jumonville , who they claimed was on a diplomatic mission . Both France and Great Britain were ready to fight for control of the region and both sent troops to North America in 1755 ; war was formally declared in 1756 . 
 = = = Braddock disaster 1755 = = = 
 In 1755 Washington became the senior American aide to British General Edward Braddock on the ill @-@ fated Braddock expedition . This was the largest British expedition to the colonies , and was intended to expel the French from the Ohio Country ; the first objective was the capture of Fort Duquesne . Washington initially sought an appointment as a major from Braddock , but upon advice that no rank above captain could be given except by London , he agreed to serve as a staff volunteer . During the passage of the expedition , Washington fell ill with severe headaches and fever ; nevertheless , when the pace of the troops continued to slow , Washington recommended to Braddock that the army be split into two divisions – a primary and more lightly , but adequately equipped , " flying column " offensive which could move at a more rapid pace , to be followed by a more heavily armed reinforcing division . Braddock accepted the recommendation ( likely made in a council of war including other officers ) and took command of the lead division . 
 In the Battle of the Monongahela the French and their Indian allies ambushed Braddock 's reduced forces and the general was mortally wounded . After suffering devastating casualties , the British panicked and retreated in disarray ; however , Washington rode back and forth across the battlefield , rallying the remnants of the British and Virginian forces into an organized retreat . In the process , despite his lingering illness , he demonstrated much bravery and stamina — he had two horses shot from underneath him , while his coat was pierced with four bullets . In his report , Washington chiefly blamed the disaster on the conduct of the redcoats while praising that of the Virginia contingent . Whatever responsibility rested on him for the defeat as a result of his recommendation to Braddock , Washington was not included by the succeeding commander , Col. Thomas Dunbar , in planning subsequent force movements . 
 = = = Commander of Virginia Regiment = = = 
 Lt. Governor Dinwiddie rewarded Washington in 1755 with a commission as " Colonel of the Virginia Regiment and Commander in Chief of all forces now raised in the defense of His Majesty 's Colony " and gave him the task of defending Virginia 's frontier . The Virginia Regiment was the first full @-@ time American military unit in the colonies ( as opposed to part @-@ time militias and the British regular units ) . Washington was ordered to " act defensively or offensively " as he thought best . While Washington happily accepted the commission , the coveted redcoat of a British officer as well as the accompanying pay continued to elude him . Dinwiddie as well pressed in vain for the British military to incorporate the Virginia regiment into its ranks . 
 In command of a thousand soldiers , Washington was a disciplinarian who emphasized training . He led his men in brutal campaigns against the Indians in the west ; in 10 months his regiment fought 20 battles , and lost a third of its men . Washington 's strenuous efforts meant that Virginia 's frontier population suffered less than that of other colonies ; Ellis concludes " it was his only unqualified success " in the war . 
 In 1758 Washington participated in the Forbes Expedition to capture Fort Duquesne . He was embarrassed by a friendly fire episode in which his unit and another British unit thought the other was the French enemy and opened fire , with 14 dead and 26 wounded in the mishap . Washington was not involved in any other major fighting on the expedition , and the British scored a major strategic victory , gaining control of the Ohio Valley , when the French abandoned the fort . Following the expedition , he retired from his Virginia Regiment commission in December 1758 . Washington did not return to military life until the outbreak of the revolution in 1775 . 
 = = = Lessons learned = = = 
 Although Washington never gained the commission in the British army he yearned for , in these years the young man gained valuable military , political , and leadership skills . He closely observed British military tactics , gaining a keen insight into their strengths and weaknesses that proved invaluable during the Revolution . Washington learned to organize , train , drill , and discipline his companies and regiments . From his observations , readings and conversations with professional officers , he learned the basics of battlefield tactics , as well as a good understanding of problems of organization and logistics . He gained an understanding of overall strategy , especially in locating strategic geographical points . 
 Washington demonstrated his resourcefulness and courage in the most difficult situations , including disasters and retreats . He developed a command presence , given his size , strength , stamina , and bravery in battle that demonstrated to soldiers he was a natural leader whom they could follow without question . However Washington 's fortitude in his early years was sometimes manifested in less constructive ways . Biographer John R. Alden contends Washington offered " fulsome and insincere flattery to British generals in vain attempts to win great favor " and on occasion showed youthful arrogance , as well as jealousy and ingratitude in the midst of impatience . 
 Historian Ron Chernow is of the opinion that his frustrations in dealing with government officials during this conflict led him to advocate the advantages of a strong national government and a vigorous executive agency that could get results ; other historians tend to ascribe Washington 's position on government to his later American Revolutionary War service . He developed a very negative idea of the value of militia , who seemed too unreliable , too undisciplined , and too short @-@ term compared to regulars . On the other hand , his experience was limited to command of at most 1000 men , and came only in remote frontier conditions that were far removed from the urban situations he faced during the Revolution at Boston , New York , Trenton and Philadelphia . 
 = = Between the wars : Mount Vernon ( 1759 – 1774 ) = = 
 On January 6 , 1759 , Washington married the wealthy widow Martha Dandridge Custis , then 28 years old . Surviving letters suggest that he may have been in love at the time with Sally Fairfax , the wife of a friend . Nevertheless , George and Martha made a compatible marriage , because Martha was intelligent , gracious , and experienced in managing a planter 's estate . 
 Together the two raised her two children from her previous marriage , John Parke Custis and Martha Parke ( Patsy ) Custis ; later the Washingtons raised two of Mrs. Washington 's grandchildren , Eleanor Parke Custis and George Washington Parke Custis . George and Martha never had any children together — his earlier bout with smallpox in 1751 may have made him sterile . The newlywed couple moved to Mount Vernon , near Alexandria , where he took up the life of a planter and political figure . 
 Washington 's marriage to Martha greatly increased his property holdings and social standing , and made him one of Virginia 's wealthiest men . He acquired one @-@ third of the 18 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 73 km2 ) Custis estate upon his marriage , worth approximately $ 100 @,@ 000 , and managed the remainder on behalf of Martha 's children , for whom he sincerely cared . 
 In 1754 Lieutenant Governor Dinwiddie had promised land bounties to the soldiers and officers who volunteered to serve during the French and Indian War . After Washington prevailed upon Lord Botetourt , the new governor , he finally fulfilled Dinwiddie 's promise in 1769 – 1770 , with Washington subsequently receiving title to 23 @,@ 200 acres ( 94 km2 ) where the Kanawha River flows into the Ohio River , in what is now western West Virginia . He also frequently bought additional land in his own name . By 1775 Washington had doubled the size of Mount Vernon to 6 @,@ 500 acres ( 26 km2 ) , and had increased its slave population to over 100 . As a respected military hero and large landowner , he held local office and was elected to the Virginia provincial legislature , representing Frederick County in the House of Burgesses for seven years , beginning in 1758 . 
 Washington lived an aristocratic lifestyle — fox hunting was a favorite leisure activity . He also enjoyed going to dances and parties , in addition to the theater , races , and cockfights . Washington also was known to play cards , backgammon , and billiards . Like most Virginia planters , he imported luxuries and other goods from England and paid for them by exporting his tobacco crop . Washington began to pull himself out of debt in the mid @-@ 1760s by diversifying his previously tobacco @-@ centric business interests into other ventures and paying more attention to his affairs . 
 In 1766 he started switching Mount Vernon 's primary cash crop away from tobacco to wheat , a crop that could be processed and then sold in various forms in the colonies , and further diversified operations to include flour milling , fishing , horse breeding , spinning , weaving and ( in the 1790s ) erected a distillery for whiskey production which yielded more than 1000 gallons a month . After several prior epileptic attacks Patsy Custis died in Washington arms in 1773 . Her early and unexpected death proved to be one of the saddest moments in his life . He intimated his hopes to Martha and others that she had gone to a " happier place " . Washington cancelled all business activity and for the next three months was not away from Martha for one single night . Patsy 's death enabled Washington to pay off his British creditors , since half of her inheritance passed to him . 
 A successful planter of tobacco and wheat , Washington was a leader in the social elite in Virginia . From 1768 to 1775 , he invited some 2000 guests to his Mount Vernon estate , mostly those he considered " people of rank " . As for people not of high social status , his advice was to " treat them civilly " but " keep them at a proper distance , for they will grow upon familiarity , in proportion as you sink in authority " . In 1769 he became more politically active , presenting the Virginia Assembly with legislation to ban the importation of goods from Great Britain . 
 = = American Revolution ( 1775 – 1783 ) = = 
 Washington played a leading military and political role in the American Revolution . His involvement began in 1767 , when he first took political stands against the various acts of the British Parliament . He opposed the 1765 Stamp Act , the first direct tax on the colonies imposed by the British Parliament , which included no representatives from the colonies ; he began taking a leading role in the growing colonial resistance when protests against the Townshend Acts ( enacted in 1767 ) became widespread . In May 1769 Washington introduced a proposal , drafted by his friend George Mason , calling for Virginia to boycott English goods until the Acts were repealed . Parliament repealed the Townshend Acts in 1770 . However , Washington regarded the passage of the Intolerable Acts in 1774 as " an Invasion of our Rights and Privileges " . Washington told friend Bryan Fairfax , " I think the Parliament of Great Britain has no more right to put their hands in my pocket without my consent than I have to put my hands into yours for money . " He also said that Americans must not submit to acts of tyranny " till custom and use shall make us as tame and abject slaves , as the blacks we rule over with such arbitrary sway . " 
 In July 1774 he chaired the meeting at which the " Fairfax Resolves " were adopted , which called for the convening of a Continental Congress , among other things . In August , Washington attended the First Virginia Convention , where he was selected as a delegate to the First Continental Congress . 
 = = = Commander in chief = = = 
 After the Battles of Lexington and Concord near Boston in April 1775 , the colonies went to war . Washington appeared at the Second Continental Congress in a military uniform , signaling that he was prepared for war . Washington had the prestige , military experience , charisma and military bearing of a military leader and was known as a strong patriot . Virginia , the largest colony , deserved recognition , and New England — where the fighting began — realized it needed Southern support . Washington did not explicitly seek the office of commander and said that he was not equal to it , but there was no serious competition . Congress created the Continental Army on June 14 , 1775 . Nominated by John Adams of Massachusetts , Washington was then appointed as a full General and Commander @-@ in @-@ chief . The British then articulated the peril of Washington and his army — on August 23 , 1775 Britain issued a Royal proclamation labeling American rebels as traitors ; if they resorted to force , they faced confiscation of their property . Their leaders were subject to execution upon the scaffold . 
 General Washington essentially assumed three roles during the war . First , in 1775 – 77 , and again in 1781 he provided leadership of troops against the main British forces . Although he lost many of his battles , he never surrendered his army during the war , and he continued to fight the British relentlessly until the war 's end . He plotted the overall strategy of the war , in cooperation with Congress . 
 Secondly , he was charged with organizing and training the army . He recruited regulars and assigned Baron von Steuben , a veteran of the Prussian general staff , to train them . The war effort and getting supplies to the troops were under the purview of Congress , but Washington pressured the Congress to provide the essentials . In June 1776 Congress ' first attempt at running the war effort was established with the committee known as " Board of War and Ordnance " , succeeded by the Board of War in July 1777 , a committee which eventually included members of the military . The command structure of the armed forces was a hodgepodge of Congressional appointees ( and Congress sometimes made those appointments without Washington 's input ) with state @-@ appointments filling the lower ranks and of all of the militia @-@ officers . The results of his general staff were mixed , as some of his favorites ( like John Sullivan ) never mastered the art of command . 
 Eventually , he found capable officers , such as General Nathanael Greene , General Daniel Morgan — " the old wagoner " that he had served with in The French and Indian War , Colonel Henry Knox — chief of artillery , and Colonel Alexander Hamilton — chief @-@ of @-@ staff . The American officers never equaled their opponents in tactics and maneuver , and consequently they lost most of the pitched battles . The great successes , at Boston ( 1776 ) , Saratoga ( 1777 ) and Yorktown ( 1781 ) , came from trapping the British far from base with much larger numbers of troops . Daniel Morgan 's annihilation of Banastre Tarleton 's legion of dragoons at Cowpens in February 1781 , came as a result of Morgan 's employment of superior line tactics against his British opponent , resulting in one of the very few double <unk> in military history , another being Hannibal 's defeat of the Romans at Cannae in 216 <unk> The decisive defeat of Col. Patrick Ferguson 's Tory Regiment at King 's Mountain demonstrated the superiority of the riflery of American " over @-@ mountain men " over British @-@ trained troops armed with musket and bayonet . These " over @-@ mountain men " were led by a variety of elected officers , including the 6 ' 6 " William Campbell who had become one of Washington 's officers by the time of Yorktown . Similarly , Morgan 's Virginia riflemen proved themselves superior to the British at Saratoga , a post @-@ revolutionary war development being the creation of trained " rifle battalions " in the European armies . 
 Washington 's third , and most important role in the war effort , was the embodiment of armed resistance to the Crown — the representative man of the Revolution . His long @-@ term strategy was to maintain an army in the field at all times , and eventually this strategy worked . His enormous personal and political stature and his political skills kept Congress , the army , the French , the militias , and the states all pointed toward a common goal . Furthermore , by voluntarily resigning his commission and disbanding his army when the war was won ( rather than declaring himself monarch ) , he permanently established the principle of civilian supremacy in military affairs . Yet his constant reiteration of the point that well @-@ disciplined professional soldiers counted for twice as much as erratic militias ( clearly demonstrated in the rout at Camden , where only the Maryland and Delaware Continentals under Baron DeKalb held firm ) , helped overcome the ideological distrust of a standing army . 
 = = = Victory at Boston = = = 
 Washington assumed command of the Continental Army in the field at Cambridge , Massachusetts , in July 1775 , during the ongoing siege of Boston . Realizing his army 's desperate shortage of gunpowder , Washington asked for new sources . American troops raided British arsenals , including some in the Caribbean , and some manufacturing was attempted . They obtained a barely adequate supply ( about 2 @.@ 5 million pounds ) by the end of 1776 , mostly from France . 
 Washington reorganized the army during the long standoff , and forced the British to withdraw by putting artillery on Dorchester Heights overlooking the city . The British evacuated Boston in March 1776 and Washington moved his army to New York City . 
 Although highly disparaging toward most of the Patriots , British newspapers routinely praised Washington 's personal character and qualities as a military commander . These articles were bold , as Washington was an enemy general who commanded an army in a cause that many Britons believed would ruin the empire . 
 = = = Defeat at New York = = = 
 In August 1776 British General William Howe launched a massive naval and land campaign designed to seize New York . The Continental Army under Washington engaged the enemy for the first time as an army of the newly independent United States at the Battle of Long Island , the largest battle of the entire war . The Americans were heavily outnumbered , many men deserted , and Washington was badly defeated . After conferring with other generals of the situation a plan of retreat was decided . Washington instructed General Heath to make available every flat bottom river boat and sloop in the area . In little time Washington 's army under the cover of darkness crossed the East River safely to Manhattan Island , and did so without loss of life or materiel . 
 Washington had considered abandoning the island and Fort Washington , but heeding Generals Greene and Putnam 's recommendation to attempt a defense of this fort , he belatedly retreated further across the Hudson to Fort Lee , to avoid encirclement . With the Americans in retreat Howe was then able to take the offensive and on November 16 , landed his troops on the island and surrounded and captured Fort Washington , resulting in high Continental casualties . Biographer Alden opines that " although Washington was responsible for the decision to delay the patriots ' retreat , he tried to ascribe blame for the decision to defend Fort Washington to the wishes of Congress and the bad advice of Nathaniel Greene . " 
 = = = Crossing the Delaware = = = 
 Washington then continued his flight across New Jersey ; the future of the Continental Army was in doubt due to expiring enlistments and the string of losses . On the night of December 25 , 1776 , Washington staged a comeback with a surprise attack on a Hessian outpost in western New Jersey . He led his army across the Delaware River to capture nearly 1 @,@ 000 Hessians in Trenton , New Jersey . Washington followed up his victory at Trenton with another over British regulars at Princeton in early January . The British retreated to New York City and its environs , which they held until the peace treaty of 1783 . Washington 's victories wrecked the British carrot @-@ and @-@ stick strategy of showing overwhelming force then offering generous terms . The Americans would not negotiate for anything short of independence . These victories alone were not enough to ensure ultimate Patriot victory , however , since many soldiers did not reenlist or deserted during the harsh winter . Washington and Congress reorganized the army with increased rewards for staying and punishment for desertion , which raised troop numbers effectively for subsequent battles . 
 In February 1777 , while encamped at Morristown , New Jersey , Washington became convinced that only smallpox inoculation would prevent the destruction of his Army , by using variolation . Washington ordered the inoculation of all troops and by some reports , death by smallpox in the ranks dropped from 17 % of all deaths to 1 % of all reported deaths . 
 Historians debate whether or not Washington preferred a Fabian strategy to harass the British with quick , sharp attacks followed by a retreat so the larger British army could not catch him , or whether he preferred to fight major battles . While his southern commander Greene in 1780 – 81 did use Fabian tactics , Washington did so only in fall 1776 to spring 1777 , after losing New York City and seeing much of his army melt away . Trenton and Princeton were Fabian examples . By summer 1777 , however , Washington had rebuilt his strength and his confidence ; he stopped using raids and went for large @-@ scale confrontations , as at Brandywine , Germantown , Monmouth and Yorktown . 
 = = = 1777 campaigns = = = 
 In late summer of 1777 , British General John Burgoyne led a major invasion army south from Quebec , with the intention of splitting off rebellious New England ; but General Howe in New York took his army south to Philadelphia instead of going up the Hudson River to join with Burgoyne near Albany — a major strategic mistake . Meanwhile , Washington rushed to Philadelphia to engage Howe , while closely following the action in upstate New York , where the patriots were led by General Philip Schuyler and his successor Horatio Gates . The ensuing pitched battles at Philadelphia were too complex for Washington 's relatively inexperienced men and they were defeated . At the Battle of Brandywine on September 11 , 1777 , Howe outmaneuvered Washington , and marched into the American capital at Philadelphia unopposed on September 26 . Washington 's army unsuccessfully attacked the British garrison at Germantown in early October . Meanwhile , to the north , Burgoyne , beyond the reach of help from Howe , was trapped and forced to surrender after the Battles of Saratoga . This was a major turning point militarily and diplomatically — the French responded to Burgoyne 's defeat by entering the war , allying with America and expanding the Revolutionary War into a major worldwide affair . 
 Washington 's loss at Philadelphia prompted some members of Congress to consider removing Washington from command . This movement , termed the Conway Cabal , failed after Washington 's supporters rallied behind him . Biographer Alden relates , " it was inevitable that the defeats of Washington 's forces and the concurrent victory of the forces in upper New York should be compared . " The zealous admiration of Washington indeed inevitably waned . John Adams ( never a fan of the southern delegation to the Continental Congress ) wrote " Congress will appoint a thanksgiving ; and one cause of it ought to be that the glory of turning the tide of arms is not immediately due to the commander @-@ in @-@ chief nor to southern troops . If it had been , idolatry and adulation would have been unbounded ... Now we can allow a certain citizen to be wise , virtuous , and good , without thinking him a deity or a savior . " 
 = = = Valley Forge = = = 
 Washington 's army of 11 @,@ 000 went into winter quarters at Valley Forge north of Philadelphia in December 1777 . Over the next six months , the deaths in camp numbered in the thousands ( the majority being from disease , compounded by lack of food , proper clothing , poor shelter and the extreme cold ) , with historians ' death toll estimates ranging from 2 @,@ 000 to over 3 @,@ 000 men . While the British were comfortably quartered in Philadelphia and paid for their supplies in sterling , Washington had difficulty procuring supplies from the few farmers in the area who would not accept rapidly depreciating American paper currency , while the woodlands about the valley had soon been exhausted of game . As conditions worsened , Washington was faced with the task of maintaining morale and discouraging desertion which by February had become common . Washington had repeatedly petitioned the Continental Congress for badly needed provisions but with no success . Finally , on January 24 , 1778 , five Congressmen came to Valley Forge to examine the conditions of the Continental Army . Washington expressed the urgency of the situation exclaiming , " Something must be done . Important alterations must be made . " At this time he also contended that Congress should take control of the army supply system , pay for its supplies and promptly expedite them as they became necessary . In response to Washington 's urgent appeal , Congress soon gave full support to funding the supply lines of the army , an advent which also resulted in the reorganizing the commissary department , which controlled the gathering of the supplies for the army . By late February , there were adequate supplies flowing throughout camp . 
 The next spring , a revitalized army emerged from Valley Forge in good order , thanks in part to a full @-@ scale training program supervised by General von Steuben . The British evacuated Philadelphia to New York in June , 1778 . After Washington summoned a council of war with Generals Lee , Greene and Wayne and Lafayette , Washington decided to make a partial attack on the retreating British at the Battle of Monmouth . Lee and Lafayette , moving with 4000 men and without Washington 's immediate knowledge , attempted to launch but bungled the first attack at the British rear guard , where Clinton , also with 4000 men and waiting in anticipation , came about and offered stiff resistance , keeping the Americans in check . After sharp words of criticism Washington relieved Lee and continued fighting to an effective draw in one of the war 's largest battles . When night fall came the fighting came to a stop and the British continued their retreat and headed towards New York , where Washington soon moved his army just outside that city . 
 = = = Sullivan Expedition = = = 
 In the summer of 1779 Washington and Congress decided to strike the Iroquois warriors of the " Six Nations " in a campaign to force Britain 's Indian allies out of New York , which they had used as a base to attack American settlements across New England . In June 1779 the warriors had joined with Tory rangers led by Colonel William Butler , using barbarities normally shunned , slew over 200 frontiersmen and laid waste to the Wyoming Valley in Pennsylvania . Indeed , one British officer who witnessed the Tory brutality said the redcoats on return to England would " scalp every son of a bitch of them . " In August of 1779 General John Sullivan led a military operation that destroyed at least 40 Iroquois villages , burned all available crops . Few people were killed as the Indians fled to British protection in Canada . Sullivan later reported that " the immediate objects of this expedition are accomplished , viz : total ruin of the Indian settlements and the destruction of their crops , which were designed for the support of those inhuman barbarians . " 
 = = = Hudson River and Southern battles = = = 
 Washington at this time moved his headquarters from Middlebrook in New Jersey up to New Windsor on the Hudson , with an army of 10 @,@ 000 . The British , led by Howe 's successor , Sir Henry Clinton made a move up the Hudson against American posts at Verplanck 's Point and Stony Point and both places succumbed , but a counter @-@ offensive by the patriots led by General Anthony Wayne was briefly successful . Clinton was in the end able to shut off Kings Ferry but it was a strategic loss ; he could proceed no further up the river , due to American fortifications and Washington 's army . The skirmishes at Verplanck 's Point and at Stony Point demonstrated that the continental infantry had become quite formidable and were an enormous boost to morale . 
 The winter of 1779 – 1780 , when Washington went into quarters at Morristown , represented the worst suffering for the army during the war . The temperatures fell to 16 below zero , the New York Harbor was frozen over , and snow and ice covered the ground for weeks , with the troops again lacking provisions for a time as at Valley Forge . In late 1779 Clinton moved his forces south to Charleston for an offensive against the patriots , led by Benjamin Lincoln . After his success there Clinton returned victorious to New York , leaving Cornwallis in the south . Congress replaced Lincoln with Gates , despite Washington 's recommendation of Greene . When Gates failed in South Carolina , he was then replaced by Greene . The British at the time seemed to have the South almost in their grasp . Despite this news , Washington was encouraged to learn in mid @-@ 1780 that Lafayette had returned from France with additional naval assets and forces . 
 = = = Arnold 's treason = = = 
 Washington was shocked to learn of Benedict Arnold 's treason , someone who had contributed significantly to the war effort . Embittered by his dealings with Congress over rank and finances , as well as the alliance with France , Arnold joined the British cause ; he conspired with the British in a plan to seize the post he commanded at West Point . Washington just missed apprehending him , but did capture his conspirator , Major John André , a British intelligence officer under Clinton , who was later hanged by order of a court @-@ martial called by Washington . 
 Washington 's army went into winter quarters at New Windsor in 1780 and suffered again for lack of supplies . There resulted a considerable mutiny by Pennsylvania troops ; Washington prevailed upon Congress as well as state officials to come to their aid with provisions . He very much sympathized with their suffering , saying he hoped the army would not " continue to struggle under the same difficulties they have hitherto endured , which I cannot help remarking seem to reach the bounds of human patience " . 
 = = = Victory at Yorktown = = = 
 In July 1780 , 5 @,@ 000 veteran French troops led by the comte de Rochambeau arrived at Newport , Rhode Island to aid in the war effort ; French naval forces then landed , led by Admiral François Joseph Paul de Grasse . Though it was Washington 's hope initially to bring the allied fight to New York and to end the war there , de Grasse was advised by Rochambeau that Cornwallis in Virginia was the better <unk> de Grasse followed Rochambeau 's advice and arrived off the Virginia Coast . Washington immediately saw the advantage created , made a feinting move with his force towards Clinton in New York and then headed south to Virginia . 
 Washington 's Continental Army , also newly funded by $ 20 @,@ 000 in French gold , delivered the final blow to the British in 1781 , after a French naval victory allowed American and French forces to trap a British army in Virginia , preventing reinforcement by Clinton from the North . The surrender at Yorktown on October 19 , 1781 , marked the end of major fighting in continental North America . Cornwallis failed to appear at the official surrender ceremony , and sent General Charles <unk> as his proxy ; Washington then assigned his role to Benjamin Lincoln of equal rank . 
 = = = Demobilization = = = 
 Though substantial combat had ended , the war had not , and a formal treaty of peace was months away , creating tension . The British still had 26 @,@ 000 troops occupying New York City , Charleston and Savannah , together with a powerful fleet . The French army and navy departed , so the Americans were on their own in 1782 – 83 . Money matters fed the anxiety — the treasury was empty , and the unpaid soldiers were growing restive , almost to the point of mutiny . At one point the mutineers forced an adjournment of the Congress from Philadelphia to Princeton . Washington dispelled unrest among officers by suppressing the Newburgh Conspiracy in March 1783 , and Congress came up with the promise of a five @-@ year bonus . 
 With the initial peace treaty articles ratified in April , a recently formed Congressional committee under Hamilton was considering needs and plans for a peacetime army . On May 2 , 1783 , the Commander in Chief submitted his Sentiments on a Peace Establishment to the Committee , essentially providing an official Continental Army position . The original proposal was defeated in Congress in two votes ( May 1783 , October 1783 ) with a truncated version also being rejected in April 1784 . 
 By the Treaty of Paris ( signed that September ) , Great Britain recognized the independence of the United States . Washington disbanded his army and , on November 2 , gave an eloquent farewell address to his soldiers . On November 25 , the British evacuated New York City , and Washington and the governor took possession . At Fraunces Tavern on December 4 , Washington formally bade his officers farewell and on December 23 , 1783 , he resigned his commission as commander @-@ in @-@ chief , saying " I consider it an indispensable duty to close this last solemn act of my official life , by commending the interests of our dearest country to the protection of Almighty God , and those who have the superintendence of them , to his holy keeping . " Historian Gordon Wood concludes that the greatest act in his life was his resignation as commander of the armies . King George III called Washington " the greatest character of the age " because of this . 
 Washington later submitted a formal account of the expenses he had personally advanced the army over the eight year conflict , of about $ 450 @,@ 000 . It is said to have been detailed regarding small items , vague concerning large ones and included the expenses incurred from Martha 's visits to his headquarters , as well as his compensation for service , none of which had been drawn during the war . 
 Historian John Shy says that by 1783 Washington was " a mediocre military strategist but had become a master political tactician with an almost perfect sense of timing and a developed capacity to exploit his charismatic reputation , using people who thought they were using him " . 
 = = Constitutional Convention = = 
 Washington 's retirement to personal business at Mount Vernon was short @-@ lived . Making an exploratory trip to the western frontier in 1784 , he inspected his land holdings in Western Pennsylvania that had been earned decades earlier for his service in the French and Indian War . There , he confronted squatters , including David Reed and the Covenanters , who vacated , but only after losing a court decision heard in Washington , Pennsylvania in 1786 . After much reluctance , he was persuaded to attend the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia during the summer of 1787 as a delegate from Virginia , where he was elected in unanimity as president of the Convention . He held considerable criticism of the Articles of Confederation of the thirteen colonies , for the weak central government it established , referring to the Articles as no more than " a rope of sand " to support the new nation . Washington 's view for the need of a strong federal government grew out of the recent war , moreover , the inability of the Continental Congress to rally the states to provide for the needs of the military , as was clearly demonstrated for him during the winter at Valley Forge . The general populace however did not share Washington 's views of a strong federal government binding the states together , comparing such a prevailing entity to the British Parliament that previously ruled and taxed the colonies . 
 Washington 's participation in the debates was minor , although he cast his vote when called upon ; his prestige facilitated the collegiality and productivity of the delegates . After a couple of months into the task , Washington told Alexander Hamilton , " I almost despair of seeing a favorable issue to the proceedings of our convention and do therefore repent having had any agency in the business . " Following the Convention , his support convinced many , but not all of his colleagues , to vote for ratification . He unsuccessfully lobbied anti @-@ federalist Patrick Henry , saying that " the adoption of it under the present circumstances of the Union is in my opinion desirable ; " he declared that the only alternative would be anarchy . Nevertheless , he did not consider it appropriate to cast his vote in favor of adoption for Virginia , since he was expected to be nominated president thereunder . The new Constitution was subsequently ratified by all thirteen states . The delegates to the convention designed the presidency with Washington in mind , allowing him to define the office by establishing precedent once elected . In the end after agreements were hatched however , Washington thought the achievements finally made were monumental . 
 = = Presidency ( 1789 – 1797 ) = = 
 The Electoral College unanimously elected Washington as the first president in 1789 , and again 1792 ; He remains the only president to receive the totality of electoral votes . John Adams , who received the next highest vote total , was elected vice president . On April 30 , 1789 , Washington was inaugurated , taking the first presidential oath of office on the balcony of Federal Hall in New York City . The oath , as follows , was administered by Chancellor Robert R. Livingston : " I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States , and will to the best of my ability , preserve , protect and defend the Constitution of the United States . " Historian John R. Alden indicates that Washington added the words " So help me God . " 
 The 1st United States Congress voted to pay Washington a salary of $ 25 @,@ 000 a year — a large sum in 1789 , valued at about $ 340 @,@ 000 in 2015 dollars . Washington , despite facing financial troubles then , initially declined the salary , valuing his image as a selfless public servant . At the urging of Congress , however , he ultimately accepted the payment , to avoid setting a precedent whereby the presidency would be perceived as limited only to independently wealthy individuals who could serve without any salary . The president , aware that everything he did set a precedent , attended carefully to the pomp and ceremony of office , making sure that the titles and trappings were suitably republican and never emulated European royal courts . To that end , he preferred the title " Mr. President " to the more majestic names proposed by the Senate . 
 Washington proved an able administrator , and established many precedents in the functions of the presidency , including messages to Congress and the cabinet form of government . Despite fears that a democratic system would lead to political violence , he set the standard for tolerance of opposition voices and conducted a smooth transition of power to his successor . An excellent <unk> and judge of talent and character , he talked regularly with department heads and listened to their advice before making a final decision . In handling routine tasks , he was " systematic , orderly , energetic , solicitous of the opinion of others ... but decisive , intent upon general goals and the consistency of particular actions with them . " After reluctantly serving a second term , Washington refused to run for a third , establishing the tradition of a maximum of two terms for a president , which was solidified by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison . 
 = = = Domestic issues = = = 
 Washington was not a member of any political party and hoped that they would not be formed , fearing conflict that would undermine republicanism . His closest advisors formed two factions , setting the framework for the future First Party System . Secretary of Treasury Alexander Hamilton had bold plans to establish the national credit and build a financially powerful nation , and formed the basis of the Federalist Party . Secretary of the State Thomas Jefferson , founder of the Jeffersonian Republicans , strenuously opposed Hamilton 's agenda , but Washington typically favored Hamilton over Jefferson , and it was Hamilton 's agenda that went into effect . Jefferson 's political actions , his support of Philip Freneau 's National Gazette , and his attempt to undermine Hamilton , nearly led George Washington to dismiss Jefferson from his cabinet . Though Jefferson left the cabinet voluntarily , Washington never forgave him , and never spoke to him again . 
 In early 1790 Hamilton devised a plan with the approval of Washington , culminating in The Residence Act of 1790 , that established the creditworthiness of the new government , as well as its permanent location . Congress had previously issued almost $ 22 million in certificates of debt during the war to suppliers ; some of the states had incurred debt as well ( more so in the north ) . In accordance with the plan , Congress authorized the " assumption " and payment of these debts , and provided funding through customs duties and excise taxes . The proposal was largely favored in the north and opposed in the south . Hamilton obtained the approval of the southern states in exchange for an agreement to place the new national capitol on the Potomac River . While the national debt increased as a result during Hamilton 's service as Secretary of the Treasury , the nation established its good credit . Many in the Congress and elsewhere in the government profited from trading in the debt paper which was assumed . Though many of Washington 's fellow Virginians , as well as others , were vexed by this , he considered they had adequate redress through their Congressional representatives . 
 The Revenue Act authorized the president to select the specific location of the seat of the government on the Potomac ; the president was to appoint three commissioners to survey and acquire property for this seat . Washington personally oversaw this effort throughout his term in office . In 1791 the commissioners named the permanent seat of government " The City of Washington in the Territory of Columbia " to honor Washington . In 1800 , the Territory of Columbia became the District of Columbia when the federal government moved to the site according to the provisions of the Residence Act . 
 In 1791 partly as a result of the Copper Panic of 1789 , Congress imposed an excise tax on distilled spirits , which led to protests in frontier districts , especially Pennsylvania . By 1794 after Washington ordered the protesters to appear in U.S. district court , the protests turned into full @-@ scale defiance of federal authority known as the Whiskey Rebellion . The federal army was too small to be used , so Washington invoked the Militia Act of 1792 to summon militias from Pennsylvania , Virginia , Maryland and New Jersey . The governors sent the troops , with Washington taking initial command . He subsequently named Henry " <unk> Harry " Lee as field commander to lead the troops into the rebellious districts . The rebels dispersed and there was no fighting , as Washington 's forceful action proved the new government could protect itself . This represented the premier instance of the federal government using military force to exert authority over the states and citizens and is also the only time a sitting U.S. president personally commanded troops in the field . 
 = = = Foreign affairs = = = 
 In February 1793 the French Revolutionary Wars broke out between Great Britain and its allies and revolutionary France , and engulfed Europe until 1815 ; Washington , with cabinet approval , proclaimed American neutrality . The revolutionary government of France sent diplomat Edmond @-@ Charles Genêt , called " Citizen Genêt " , to America . Genêt was welcomed with great enthusiasm , and began promoting the case for France using a network of new Democratic Societies in major cities . He even issued French letters of marque and reprisal to French ships manned by American sailors so they could capture British merchant ships . Washington denounced the societies and demanded the French government recall Genêt , which they did . 
 Hamilton formulated the Jay Treaty to normalize trade relations with Great Britain , remove them from western forts , and resolve financial debts remaining from the Revolution ; John Jay negotiated and signed the treaty on November 19 , 1794 . Jeffersonians supported France and strongly attacked the treaty . Washington listened to both sides then announced his strong support , which mobilized public opinion and was pivotal in securing ratification in the Senate by the requisite two @-@ thirds majority . 
 The British agreed to depart from their forts around the Great Lakes and the United States @-@ Canadian boundary had to be re @-@ adjusted ; numerous pre @-@ Revolutionary debts were liquidated , and the British opened their West Indies colonies to American trade . Most importantly , the treaty delayed war with Great Britain and instead brought a decade of prosperous trade with the British . The treaty angered the French and became a central issue in many political debates . Relations with France deteriorated after the treaty was signed , leaving the succeeding president , John Adams , with the prospect of war . 
 = = = Farewell Address = = = 
 Washington 's Farewell Address ( issued as a public letter in 1796 ) was one of the most influential statements of republicanism . Drafted primarily by Washington himself , with help from Hamilton , it gives advice on the necessity and importance of national union , the value of the Constitution and the rule of law , the evils of political parties and the proper virtues of a republican people . He referred to morality as " a necessary spring of popular government " , and said , " Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure , reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle . " The address warned against foreign influence in domestic affairs and American meddling in European affairs , and as well against bitter partisanship in domestic politics ; he also called for men to move beyond partisanship and serve the common good . He cautioned against " permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world " , saying the United States must concentrate primarily on American interests . He counseled friendship and commerce with all nations , but advised against involvement in European wars and entering into long @-@ term " entangling " alliances . While advancing the general idea of noninvolvement in foreign affairs the Farewell Address made no clear distinction between domestic and foreign policies — John Quincy Adams interpreted Washington 's policy as advocating a strong nationalist foreign policy while not limiting America 's international activities . The address , however , quickly set American values regarding foreign affairs . Washington 's policy of noninvolvement in the foreign affairs of the old world was largely embraced by the founding generation of American Statesmen , including John Adams , Thomas Jefferson and James Madison . 
 = = Retirement ( 1797 – 1799 ) = = 
 After retiring from the presidency in March 1797 , Washington returned to Mount Vernon with a profound sense of relief . He devoted much time to his plantations and other business interests , including his distillery which produced its first batch of spirits in February 1797 . As Chernow 2010 explains , his plantation operations were only minimally profitable . The lands out west yielded little income because they were under attack by Indians and the squatters living there refused to pay him rent . Most Americans assumed he was rich because of the well @-@ known " glorified façade of wealth and grandeur " at Mount Vernon . Historians estimate his estate was worth about $ 1 million in 1799 dollars , equivalent to about $ 19 @.@ 9 million in 2014 purchasing power . 
 By 1798 relations with France had deteriorated to the point that war seemed imminent , and on July 4 , 1798 , President Adams offered Washington a commission as lieutenant general and Commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the armies raised or to be raised for service in a prospective war . He accepted , and served as the senior officer of the United States Army from July 13 , 1798 until his death seventeen months later . He participated in the planning for a Provisional Army to meet any emergency that might arise , but avoided involvement in details as much as possible ; he delegated most of the work , including leadership of the army , to Hamilton , then serving as a major general in the U.S. Army . 
 = = = Comparisons with Cincinnatus = = = 
 During the Revolutionary and Early Republican periods of American history , many commentators compared Washington with the Roman aristocrat and statesman Cincinnatus . The comparison arose as Washington , like Cincinnatus , remained in command of the Continental Army only until the British had been defeated . Thereafter , instead of seeking great political power , he returned as quickly as possible to cultivating his lands . Remarking on Washington 's resignation in December 1783 , and his decision to retire to Mount Vernon , poet Philip Freneau wrote : Thus He , whom Rome 's proud legions sway 'd / Return 'd , and sought his sylvan shade . Lord Byron 's Ode to Napoleon also lionized Washington as " the Cincinnatus of the West " . 
 = = Death = = 
 On Thursday , December 12 , 1799 , Washington spent several hours inspecting his plantation on horseback , in snow , hail , and freezing rain ; later that evening he ate his supper without changing from his wet clothes . That Friday he awoke with a severe sore throat and became increasingly hoarse as the day progressed , yet still rode out in the heavy snow , marking trees on the estate that he wanted cut . Sometime around 3 a.m. that Saturday , he suddenly awoke with severe difficulty breathing and almost completely unable to speak or swallow . A firm believer in bloodletting , a standard medical practice of that era which he had used to treat various ailments of slaves on his plantation , he ordered estate overseer Albin Rawlins to remove half a pint of his blood . 
 A total of three physicians were sent for , including Washington 's personal physician Dr. James Craik along with Dr. Gustavus Brown and Dr. Elisha Dick . Craik and Brown thought that Washington had " <unk> " or " <unk> " , while Dick , the younger man , thought the condition was more serious or a " violent inflammation of the throat " . By the time the three physicians finished their treatments and bloodletting of the president , there had been a massive volume of blood loss — half or more of his total blood content was removed over the course of just a few hours . Recognizing that the bloodletting and other treatments were failing , Dr. Dick proposed performing an emergency tracheotomy , a procedure that few American physicians were familiar with at the time , as a last @-@ ditch effort to save Washington 's life , but the other two doctors disapproved . 
 Washington died at home around 10 p.m. on Saturday , December 14 , 1799 , aged 67 . In his journal , Lear recorded Washington 's last words as being " ' Tis well . " 
 The diagnosis of Washington 's final illness and the immediate cause of his death have been subjects of debate since the day he died . In the days immediately following his death , Craik and Dick 's published account stated that they felt his symptoms had been consistent with " <unk> <unk> " , a term of that period used to describe severe inflammation of the structures of the upper airway . Even at that early date , there were accusations of medical malpractice , with some believing that Washington had been bled to death . Various modern medical authors have speculated that Washington probably died from a severe case of epiglottitis which was complicated by the given treatments ( all of which were accepted medical practice in Washington 's day ) — most notably the massive deliberate blood loss , which almost certainly caused hypovolemic shock . 
 Throughout the world , people were saddened by Washington 's death . In the United States , memorial processions were held in major cities and thousands wore mourning clothes for months . Martha Washington wore a black mourning cape for one year . In France , First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte ordered ten days of mourning throughout the country ; 
 To protect their privacy , Martha Washington burned the correspondence they had exchanged ; only five letters between the couple are known to have survived , two letters from Martha to George and three from him to Martha . 
 On December 18 , 1799 , a funeral was held at Mount Vernon , where his body was interred . Congress passed a joint resolution to construct a marble monument in the planned crypt below the rotunda of the center section of the Capitol ( then still under construction ) for his body , a plan supported by Martha . In December 1800 , the House passed an appropriations bill for $ 200 @,@ 000 to build the mausoleum , which was to be a pyramid with a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) square base . Southern representatives and senators , in later opposition to the plan , defeated the measure because they felt it was best to have Washington 's body remain at Mount Vernon . 
 In 1831 , for the centennial of his birth , a new tomb was constructed to receive his remains . That year , an unsuccessful attempt was made to steal the body of Washington . Despite this , a joint Congressional committee in early 1832 , debated the removal of President Washington 's body from Mount Vernon to a crypt in the Capitol , built by architect Charles Bulfinch in the 1820s during the reconstruction of the burned @-@ out structure after the British set it afire in August 1814 , during the " Burning of Washington " . Southern opposition was intense , antagonized by an ever @-@ growing rift between North and South . Congressman Wiley Thompson of Georgia expressed the fear of Southerners when he said , " Remove the remains of our venerated Washington from their association with the remains of his consort and his ancestors , from Mount Vernon and from his native State , and deposit them in this capitol , and then let a severance of the Union occur , and behold the remains of Washington on a shore foreign to his native soil . " 
 Washington 's remains were moved on October 7 , 1837 to the new tomb constructed at Mount Vernon , presented by John Struthers of Philadelphia . After the ceremony , the inner vault 's door was closed and the key was thrown into the Potomac . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Along with Martha 's biological family , George Washington had a close relationship with his nephew and heir , Bushrod Washington , son of George 's younger brother , John Augustine Washington . The year before his uncle 's death , Bushrod became an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States . George , however , apparently had difficulty getting along with his mother , Mary Ball Washington ( Augustine 's second wife ) , a very difficult and exacting woman . 
 As a young man , Washington had red hair . A popular myth is that he wore a wig , as was the fashion among some at the time . However , Washington did not wear a wig ; instead , he powdered his hair , as is represented in several portraits , including the well @-@ known , unfinished Gilbert Stuart depiction called the " Athenaeum Portrait . " 
 Washington 's height was variously recorded as 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) to 6 ft 2 in ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) , and he had unusually great physical strength that amazed younger men . Jefferson called Washington " the best horseman of his age " , and both American and European observers praised his riding ; the horsemanship benefited his hunting , a favorite hobby . Washington was an excellent dancer and frequently attended the theater , often referencing Shakespeare in letters . He drank in moderation and precisely recorded gambling wins and losses , but Washington disliked the excessive drinking , gambling , smoking , and profanity that was common in colonial Virginia . Although he grew tobacco , he eventually stopped smoking , and considered drunkenness a man 's worst vice ; Washington was glad that post @-@ Revolutionary Virginia society was less likely to " force [ guests ] to drink and to make it an honor to send them home drunk . " 
 Washington suffered from problems with his teeth throughout his life , and historians have tracked his experiences in great detail . He lost his first adult tooth when he was twenty @-@ two and had only one left by the time he became president . John Adams claims he lost them because he used them to crack Brazil nuts but modern historians suggest the mercury oxide , which he was given to treat illnesses such as smallpox and malaria , probably contributed to the loss . He had several sets of false teeth made , four of them by a dentist named John Greenwood . None of the sets were made from wood . The set made when he became president was carved from hippopotamus and elephant ivory , held together with gold springs . Prior to these , he had a set made with real human teeth , likely ones he purchased from " several unnamed ' Negroes , ' presumably Mount Vernon slaves " in 1784 . Dental problems left Washington in constant pain , for which he took laudanum . This distress may be apparent in many of the portraits painted while he was still in office , including the one still used on the $ 1 bill . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
