 For his entire life Washington was affiliated with the Anglican Church , later called the Episcopal Church . He served as a vestryman and as church warden for both Fairfax Parish in Alexandria and Truro Parish , administrative positions that , like all positions in Virginia while it had an official religion , required one to swear they would not speak or act in a way that did not conform to the tenets of the Church . Numerous historians have suggested that theologically , Washington agreed largely with the Deists . However , he never spoke about any particular Deist beliefs he may of have had . He often used words for the deity , such as " God " and " Providence , " while avoiding using the words " Jesus " and " Christ . " In his collected works , they appear in an official letter to Indians that might have been drafted by an aide . At the time , Deism was a theological outlook , not an organized denomination , and was compatible with being an Episcopalian . Historian Gregg Frazer argues that Washington was not a deist but a " theistic rationalist . " This theological position rejected core beliefs of Christianity , such as the divinity of Christ , the Trinity and original sin . However , unlike the deists , the theological rationalists believed in the efficacy of prayer to God . Historian Peter A. <unk> argues that Washington was neither a deist nor a " theistic rationalist " but a Christian who believed in the core beliefs of Christianity . 
 Washington frequently accompanied his wife to church services . Although third @-@ hand reports say he took communion , he is usually characterized as never or rarely participating in the rite . He would regularly leave services before communion with the other non @-@ communicants ( as was the custom of the day ) , until , after being admonished by a rector , he ceased attending at all on communion Sundays . 
 Washington regarded religion as a protective influence for America 's social and political order , and recognized the church 's " laudable endeavors to render men sober , honest , and good citizens , and the obedient subjects of a lawful government " . 
 While it is generally conceded that Washington was a Christian , the exact nature of his religious beliefs has still been debated by some historians and biographers for over two hundred years . Washington biographer Don Higginbotham notes that in such instances people with diametrically opposing opinions frequently base their views of Washington 's beliefs on their own beliefs . Though Washington was in ways conventionally enlightened about religion , once saying , " being no bigot myself to any mode of worship " he harbored no contempt of organized Christianity and its clergy as did Jefferson . Washington , as commander of the army and as president , was a vigorous promoter of tolerance for all religious denominations . He believed religion was an important support for public order , morality and virtue . He often attended services of different denominations . He suppressed anti @-@ Catholic celebrations in the Army . 
 Michael Novak and Jana Novak suggest that it may have been " Washington 's intention to maintain a studied ambiguity ( and personal privacy ) regarding his own deepest religious convictions , so that all Americans , both in his own time and for all time to come , might feel free to approach him on their own terms — and might also feel like full members of the new republic , equal with every other " . They conclude : " He was educated in the Episcopal Church , to which he always adhered ; and my [ sic ] conviction is , that he believed in the fundamental doctrines of Christianity as usually taught in that Church , according to his understanding of them ; but without a particle of intolerance , or disrespect for the faith and modes of worship adopted by Christians of other denominations . " 
 = = = Freemasonry = = = 
 Washington was initiated into Freemasonry in 1752 . He had a high regard for the Masonic Order and often praised it , but he seldom attended lodge meetings . He was attracted by the movement 's dedication to the Enlightenment principles of rationality , reason and <unk> ; the American lodges did not share the anti @-@ clerical perspective that made the European lodges so controversial . In 1777 a convention of Virginia lodges recommended Washington to be the Grand Master of the newly established Grand Lodge of Virginia ; however , Washington declined , due to his necessity to lead the Continental Army at a critical stage , and because he had never been installed as Master or Warden of a lodge , he did not consider it <unk> legal to serve as Grand Master . In 1788 Washington , with his personal consent , was named Master in the Virginia charter of Alexandria Lodge No. 22 . 
 = = = Slavery = = = 
 Washington was the only prominent Founding Father to arrange in his will for the manumission of all his slaves following his death . He privately opposed slavery as an institution which he viewed as economically unsound and morally indefensible . He also regarded the divisiveness of his countrymen 's feelings about slavery as a potentially mortal threat to the unity of the nation . He never publicly challenged the institution of slavery , possibly because he wanted to avoid provoking a split in the new republic over so inflammatory an issue , but he did pass the Slave Trade Act of 1794 , which limited American involvement in the Atlantic slave trade . Washington had owned slaves since the death of his father in 1743 , when at the age of eleven , he inherited 10 slaves . At the time of his marriage to Martha Custis in 1759 , he personally owned at least 36 slaves , which meant he had achieved the status of a major planter . The wealthy widow Martha brought at least 85 " dower slaves " to Mount Vernon by inheriting a third of her late husband 's estate . Using his wife 's great wealth , Washington bought more land , tripling the size of the plantation at Mount Vernon , and purchased the additional slaves needed to work it . By 1774 he paid taxes on 135 slaves ( this figure does not include the " <unk> " ) . The last record of a slave purchase by him was in 1772 , although he later received some slaves in repayment of debts . Washington also used some hired staff and white indentured servants ; in April 1775 , he offered a reward for the return of two runaway white servants . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 As Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Continental Army , hero of the Revolution and the first president of the United States , George Washington 's legacy remains among the two or three greatest in American history . Congressman Henry " Light @-@ Horse Harry " Lee , a Revolutionary War comrade , famously eulogized Washington , " First in war — first in peace — and first in the hearts of his countrymen " . 
 Lee 's words set the standard by which Washington 's overwhelming reputation was impressed upon the American memory . Biographers hailed him as the great exemplar of republicanism . Washington set many precedents for the national government , and the presidency in particular , and was called the " Father of His Country " as early as 1778 . Washington 's Birthday , is a federal holiday in the United States . In terms of personality , a leading biographer Douglas Southall Freeman concluded , " the great big thing stamped across that man is character . ” By character , says David Hackett Fischer " Freeman meant integrity , self @-@ discipline , courage , absolute honesty , resolve , and decision , but also forbearance , decency , and respect for others . " 
 As the leader of the first successful revolution against a colonial empire in world history , Washington became an international icon for liberation and nationalism . The Federalists made him the symbol of their party but for many years , the Jeffersonians continued to distrust his influence and delayed building the Washington Monument . After Yorktown , his service as Commander in Chief brought him election as a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . 
 During the United States Bicentennial year , George Washington was posthumously appointed to the grade of General of the Armies of the United States by the congressional joint resolution Public Law 94 @-@ 479 passed on January 19 , 1976 , with an effective appointment date of July 4 , 1976 . This restored Washington 's position as the highest @-@ ranking military officer in U.S. history . 
 = = = Papers = = = 
 The serious collection and publication of Washington 's documentary record began with the pioneer work of Jared Sparks in the 1830s , Life and Writings of George Washington ( 12 vols . , 1834 – 1837 ) . The Writings of George Washington from the Original Manuscript Sources , 1745 – 1799 ( 1931 – 44 ) is a 37 volume set edited by John C. Fitzpatrick . It contains over 17 @,@ 000 letters and documents and is available online from the University of Virginia . The definitive letterpress edition of his writings was begun by the University of Virginia in 1968 , and today comprises 52 published volumes , with more to come . It contains everything written by Washington , or signed by him , together with most of his incoming letters . Part of the collection is available online from the University of Virginia . 
 = = = Monuments and memorials = = = 
 Starting with victory in their Revolution , there were many proposals to build a monument to Washington . After his death , Congress authorized a suitable memorial in the national capital , but the decision was reversed when the Democratic @-@ Republicans took control of Congress in 1801 . The Democratic @-@ Republicans were dismayed that Washington had become the symbol of the Federalist Party . Construction of the 554 foot memorial didn 't begin until 1848 . 
 Several naval vessels , including the USS George Washington , are named in Washington 's honor . 
 Washington , together with Theodore Roosevelt , Thomas Jefferson , and Lincoln , is depicted in stone at the Mount Rushmore Memorial . The Washington Monument , one of the best known American landmarks , was built in his honor . The George Washington Masonic National Memorial in Alexandria , Virginia , was constructed between 1922 and 1932 with voluntary contributions from all 52 local governing bodies of the Freemasons in the United States . 
 Many places and entities have been named in honor of Washington . Washington 's name became that of the nation 's capital , Washington , D.C. , one of two national capitals across the globe to be named after an American president ( the other is Monrovia , Liberia ) . The state of Washington is the only state to be named after a United States president . Mount Washington in New Hampshire , the tallest mountain in the Northeastern United States , was named soon after the American Revolution by Colonel John Whipple and others who were the first to climb to the summit for scientific observations in 1784 . 
 There are many other " Washington Monuments " in the United States , including two well @-@ known equestrian statues : one in Manhattan and one in Richmond , Virginia . The first statue to show Washington on horseback was dedicated in 1856 and is located in Manhattan 's Union Square . 
 = = = Postage and currency = = = 
 George Washington appears on contemporary U.S. currency , including the one @-@ dollar bill and the quarter @-@ dollar coin ( the Washington quarter ) . 
 Washington , along with Benjamin Franklin , appeared on the nation 's first postage stamps in 1847 . Since that time Washington has appeared on many postage issues , more than all other presidents combined . 
 Washington 's victory over Cornwallis at the Battle of Yorktown was commemorated with a two @-@ cent stamp on the battle 's 150th anniversary on October 19 , 1931 . The 150th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution with George Washington as presiding officer was celebrated with a three @-@ cent issue on September 17 , 1937 , was adapted from the painting by Julius Brutus Stearns . Washington 's presidential inauguration at Federal Hall in New York City was celebrated on its 150th anniversary on April 30 , 1939 . 
 Selected Issues : 
 Selected currency : 
 = = = Cherry tree = = = 
 Perhaps the best known story about Washington 's childhood is that he chopped down his father 's favorite cherry tree and admitted the deed when questioned : " I can 't tell a lie , Pa . " The anecdote was first reported by biographer Parson Weems , who after Washington 's death interviewed people who knew him as a child over a half @-@ century earlier . The Weems text was very widely reprinted throughout the 19th century , for example in McGuffey Readers . Adults wanted children to learn moral lessons from history , especially as taught by example from the lives of great national heroes like Washington . After 1890 however , historians insisted on scientific research methods to validate every statement , and there was no documentation for this anecdote apart from Weems ' report that he learned it from one of the neighbors who knew the young Washington . Joseph Rodman in 1904 claimed that Weems plagiarized other Washington tales from published fiction set in England , but no one has found an alternative source for the cherry tree <unk> Washington , the great @-@ nephew of George Washington , maintains that it is unlikely that Parson Weems , a man of the clergy , while writing an account about truth and honesty , would then turn around and outright lie about such a story . He further maintains that if Weems was making up a story he would have more dramatically depicted the young Washington ' chopping down ' the cherry tree , not merely " barking it " , ( <unk> some if the bark ) . <unk> never claimed the tree was chopped down . There has been much conjecture and ad hominem attacks from some historians about Weems and his story , but none have proven or disproven the story to this date . 
 = = = Personal property auction record = = = 
 On June 22 , 2012 , George Washington 's personal annotated copy of the " Acts Passed at a Congress of the United States of America " from 1789 , which includes the Constitution of the United States and a draft of the Bill of Rights , was sold at Christie 's for a $ 9 @,@ 826 @,@ 500 ( with fees added to the final cost ) , to The Mount Vernon Ladies ' Association . This was the record for a document sold at auction . 
 = George Bernard Shaw = 
 George Bernard Shaw ( 26 July 1856 – 2 November 1950 ) , known at his insistence simply as Bernard Shaw , was an Irish playwright , critic and polemicist whose influence on Western theatre , culture and politics extended from the 1880s to his death and beyond . He wrote more than sixty plays , including major works such as Man and Superman ( 1902 ) , Pygmalion ( 1912 ) and Saint Joan ( 1923 ) . With a range incorporating both contemporary satire and historical allegory , Shaw became the leading dramatist of his generation , and in 1925 was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature . 
 Born in Dublin , Shaw moved to London in 1876 , where he struggled to establish himself as a writer and novelist , and embarked on a rigorous process of self @-@ education . By the mid @-@ 1880s he had become a respected theatre and music critic . Following a political awakening , he joined the gradualist Fabian Society and became its most prominent pamphleteer . Shaw had been writing plays for years before his first public success , Arms and the Man in 1894 . Influenced by Henrik Ibsen , he sought to introduce a new realism into English @-@ language drama , using his plays as vehicles to disseminate his political , social and religious ideas . By the early twentieth century his reputation as a dramatist was secured with a series of critical and popular successes that included Major Barbara , The Doctor 's Dilemma and Caesar and Cleopatra . 
 Shaw 's expressed views were often contentious ; he promoted eugenics and alphabet reform , and opposed vaccination and organised religion . He courted unpopularity by denouncing both sides in the First World War as equally culpable , and although not a republican , castigated British policy on Ireland in the postwar period . These stances had no lasting effect on his standing or productivity as a dramatist ; the inter @-@ war years saw a series of often ambitious plays , which achieved varying degrees of popular success . In 1938 he provided the screenplay for a filmed version of Pygmalion for which he received an Academy Award . His appetite for politics and controversy remained undiminished ; by the late 1920s he had largely renounced Fabian gradualism and often wrote and spoke favourably of dictatorships of the right and left — he expressed admiration for both Mussolini and Stalin . In the final decade of his life he made fewer public statements , but continued to write prolifically until shortly before his death , aged ninety @-@ four , having refused all state honours including the Order of Merit in 1946 . 
 Since Shaw 's death scholarly and critical opinion has varied about his works , but he has regularly been rated as second only to Shakespeare among English @-@ language dramatists ; analysts recognise his extensive influence on generations of playwrights . The word " Shavian " has entered the language as encapsulating Shaw 's ideas and his means of expressing them . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Shaw was born at 3 Upper Synge Street in Portobello , a lower @-@ middle @-@ class part of Dublin . He was the youngest child and only son of George Carr Shaw ( 1814 – 85 ) and Lucinda Elizabeth ( Bessie ) Shaw ( née Gurly ; 1830 – 1913 ) ; his elder siblings were Lucinda ( Lucy ) Frances ( 1853 – 1920 ) and Elinor Agnes ( 1855 – 76 ) . The Shaw family was of English descent and belonged to the dominant Protestant Ascendancy in Ireland ; George Carr Shaw , an ineffectual alcoholic , was among the family 's less successful members . His relatives secured him a sinecure in the civil service , from which he was pensioned off in the early 1850s ; thereafter he worked irregularly as a corn merchant . In 1852 he married Bessie Gurly ; in the view of Shaw 's biographer Michael Holroyd she married to escape a tyrannical great @-@ aunt . If , as Holroyd and others surmise , George 's motives were mercenary , then he was disappointed , as Bessie brought him little of her family 's money . She came to despise her ineffectual and often drunken husband , with whom she shared what their son later described as a life of " shabby @-@ genteel poverty " . 
 By the time of Shaw 's birth his mother had become close to George John Lee , a flamboyant figure well known in Dublin 's musical circles . Shaw retained a lifelong obsession that Lee might have been his biological father ; there is no consensus among Shavian scholars on the likelihood of this . The young Shaw suffered no harshness from his mother , but he later recalled that her indifference and lack of affection hurt him deeply . He found solace in the music that abounded in the house . Lee was a conductor and teacher of singing ; Bessie had a fine mezzo @-@ soprano voice and was much influenced by Lee 's unorthodox method of vocal production . The Shaws ' house was often filled with music , with frequent gatherings of singers and players . 
 In 1862 Lee and the Shaws agreed to share a large house , No. 1 Hatch Street , in a better part of Dublin , and also a country cottage on Dalkey Hill , overlooking Killiney Bay . Shaw , a sensitive boy , found the less salubrious parts of Dublin shocking and distressing , and he was happier at the cottage . Lee 's students often gave him books , which the young Shaw read avidly ; thus , as well as gaining a thorough musical knowledge of choral and operatic works , he became familiar with a wide spectrum of literature . 
 Between 1865 and 1871 Shaw attended four schools , all of which he hated . His experiences as a schoolboy left him disillusioned with formal education : " Schools and schoolmasters " , he later wrote , were " prisons and turnkeys in which children are kept to prevent them disturbing and chaperoning their parents . " In October 1871 he left school to become a junior clerk in a Dublin firm of land agents , where he worked hard , and quickly rose to become head cashier . During this period he was known as " George Shaw " ; after 1876 he dropped the " George " and styled himself " Bernard Shaw " . 
 In June 1873 Lee left Dublin for London , and never returned . A fortnight later Bessie followed him ; the two girls joined her . Shaw 's explanation of why his mother followed Lee was that without the latter 's financial contribution the joint household had to be broken up . Left in Dublin with his father , Shaw compensated for the absence of music in the house by teaching himself to play the piano . 
 = = = London = = = 
 Early in 1876 Shaw learned from his mother that Agnes was dying of tuberculosis . He resigned from the land agents , and in March travelled to England to join his mother and Lucy at Agnes 's funeral . He never again lived in Ireland , and did not visit it for twenty @-@ nine years . 
 Initially , Shaw refused to seek clerical employment in London . His mother allowed him to live free of charge in her house in South Kensington , but he nevertheless needed an income . He had abandoned a teenage ambition to become a painter , and had no thought yet of writing for a living , but Lee found a little work for him , ghost @-@ writing a musical column printed under Lee 's name in a satirical weekly , The Hornet . Lee 's relations with Bessie deteriorated after their move to London . Shaw maintained contact with Lee , who found him work as a rehearsal pianist and occasional singer . 
 Eventually Shaw was driven to applying for office jobs . In the interim he secured a reader 's pass for the British Museum Reading Room ( the forerunner of the British Library ) and spent most weekdays there , reading and writing . His first attempt at drama , begun in 1878 , was a blank @-@ verse satirical piece on a religious theme . It was abandoned unfinished , as was his first try at a novel . His first completed novel , Immaturity ( 1879 ) was too grim to appeal to publishers and did not appear until the 1930s . He was employed briefly by the Edison Telephone Company in 1879 – 80 , and as in Dublin achieved rapid promotion . Nonetheless , when the Edison firm merged with the rival Bell Telephone Company , Shaw chose not to seek a place in the new organisation . Thereafter he pursued a full @-@ time career as an author . 
 For the next four years Shaw made a negligible income from writing , and was subsidised by his mother . In 1881 , for the sake of economy , and increasingly as a matter of principle , he became a vegetarian . He grew a beard to hide a facial scar left by smallpox . In rapid succession he wrote two more novels : The Irrational Knot ( 1880 ) and Love Among the Artists ( 1881 ) , but neither found a publisher ; each was serialised a few years later in the socialist magazine Our Corner . 
 In 1880 Shaw began attending meetings of the <unk> Society , whose objective was to " search for truth in all matters affecting the interests of the human race " . Here he met Sidney Webb , a junior civil servant who , like Shaw , was busy educating himself . Despite difference of style and temperament , the two quickly recognised qualities in each other and developed a lifelong friendship . Shaw later reflected : " You knew everything that I didn 't know and I knew everything you didn 't know ... We had everything to learn from one another and brains enough to do it " . 
 Shaw 's next attempt at drama was a one @-@ act playlet in French , Un Petit Drame , written in 1884 but not published in his lifetime . In the same year the critic William Archer suggested a collaboration , with a plot by Archer and dialogue by Shaw . The project foundered , but Shaw returned to the draft as the basis of Widowers ' Houses in 1892 , and the connection with Archer proved of immense value to Shaw 's career . 
 = = = Political awakening : Marxism , socialism , Fabian Society = = = 
 On 5 September 1882 Shaw attended a meeting at the Memorial Hall , Farringdon , addressed by the political economist Henry George . Shaw then read George 's book Progress and Poverty , which awakened his interest in economics . He began attending meetings of the Social Democratic Federation ( SDF ) , where he discovered the writings of Karl Marx , and thereafter spent much of 1883 reading Das Kapital . He was not impressed by the SDF 's founder , H. M. Hyndman , whom he found autocratic , ill @-@ tempered and lacking leadership qualities . Shaw doubted the ability of the SDF to harness the working classes into an effective radical movement and did not join it — he preferred , he said , to work with his intellectual equals . 
 After reading a tract , Why Are The Many Poor ? , issued by the recently formed Fabian Society , Shaw went to the society 's next advertised meeting , on 16 May 1884 . He became a member in September , and before the year 's end had provided the society with its first manifesto , published as Fabian Tract No. 2 . He joined the society 's executive committee in January 1885 , and later that year recruited Webb and also Annie Besant , a fine orator . 
 From 1885 to 1889 Shaw attended the fortnightly meetings of the British Economic Association ; it was , Holroyd observes , " the closest Shaw had ever come to university education . " This experience changed his political ideas ; he moved away from Marxism and became an apostle of gradualism . When in 1886 – 87 the Fabians debated whether to embrace anarchism , as advocated by Charlotte Wilson , Besant and others , Shaw joined the majority in rejecting this approach . After a rally in Trafalgar Square addressed by Besant was violently broken up by the authorities on 13 November 1887 ( " Bloody Sunday " ) , Shaw became convinced of the folly of attempting to challenge police power . Thereafter he largely accepted the principle of " permeation " as advocated by Webb : the notion whereby socialism could best be achieved by infiltration of people and ideas into existing political parties . 
 Throughout the 1880s the Fabian Society remained small , its message of moderation frequently unheard among more strident voices . Its profile was raised in 1889 with the publication of Fabian Essays in Socialism , edited by Shaw who also provided two of the essays . The second of these , " Transition " , details the case for gradualism and permeation , asserting that " the necessity for cautious and gradual change must be obvious to everyone " . In 1890 Shaw produced Tract No. 13 , What Socialism Is , a revision of an earlier tract in which Charlotte Wilson had defined socialism in anarchistic terms . In Shaw 's new version , readers were assured that " socialism can be brought about in a perfectly constitutional manner by democratic institutions " . 
 = = = Novelist and critic = = = 
 The mid 1880s marked a turning point in Shaw 's life , both personally and professionally : he lost his virginity , had two novels published , and began a career as a critic . He had been celibate until his twenty @-@ ninth birthday , when his shyness was overcome by Jane ( Jenny ) Patterson , a widow some years his senior . Their affair continued , not always smoothly , for eight years . Shaw 's sex life has caused much speculation and debate among his biographers , but there is a consensus that the relationship with Patterson was one of his few non @-@ platonic romantic liaisons . 
 The published novels , neither commercially successful , were his two final efforts in this genre : Cashel Byron 's Profession written in 1882 – 83 , and An Unsocial Socialist , begun and finished in 1883 . The latter was published as a serial in <unk> magazine in 1884 , although it did not appear in book form until 1887 . Cashel Byron appeared in magazine and book form in 1886 . 
 In 1884 and 1885 , through the influence of Archer , Shaw was engaged to write book and music criticism for London papers . When Archer resigned as art critic of The World in 1886 he secured the succession for Shaw . The two figures in the contemporary art world whose views Shaw most admired were William Morris and John Ruskin , and he sought to follow their precepts in his criticisms . Their emphasis on morality appealed to Shaw , who rejected the idea of art for art 's sake , and insisted that all great art must be didactic . 
 Of Shaw 's various reviewing activities in the 1880s and 1890s it was as a music critic that he was best known . After serving as deputy in 1888 , he became musical critic of The Star in February 1889 , writing under the pen @-@ name Corno di Bassetto . In May 1890 he moved back to The World , where he wrote a weekly column as " G.B.S. " for more than four years . In the 2016 version of the Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , Robert Anderson writes , " Shaw 's collected writings on music stand alone in their mastery of English and compulsive readability . " Shaw ceased to be a salaried music critic in August 1894 , but published occasional articles on the subject throughout his career , his last in 1950 . 
 From 1895 to 1898 , Shaw was the theatre critic for The Saturday Review , edited by his friend Frank Harris . As at The World , he used the by @-@ line " G.B.S. " . He campaigned against the artificial conventions and hypocrisies of the Victorian theatre and called for plays of real ideas and true characters . By this time he had embarked in earnest on a career as a playwright : " I had rashly taken up the case ; and rather than let it collapse I manufactured the evidence " . 
 = = = Playwright and politician : 1890s = = = 
 After using the plot of the aborted 1884 collaboration with Archer to complete Widowers ' Houses ( it was staged twice in London , in December 1892 ) , Shaw continued writing plays . At first he made slow progress ; The Philanderer , written in 1893 but not published until 1898 , had to wait until 1905 for a stage production . Similarly , Mrs Warren 's Profession ( 1893 ) was written five years before publication and nine years before reaching the stage . 
 Shaw 's first box @-@ office success was Arms and the Man ( 1894 ) , a mock @-@ Ruritanian comedy satirising conventions of love , military honour and class . The press found the play overlong , and accused Shaw of mediocrity , sneering at heroism and patriotism , heartless cleverness , and copying W. S. Gilbert 's style . The public took a different view , and the management of the theatre staged extra matinée performances to meet the demand . The play ran from April to July , toured the provinces and was staged in New York . Among the cast of the London production was Florence Farr , with whom Shaw had a romantic relationship between 1890 and 1894 , much resented by Jenny Patterson . 
 The success of Arms and the Man was not immediately replicated . Candida , which presented a young woman making a conventional romantic choice for unconventional reasons , received a single performance in South Shields in 1895 ; in 1897 a playlet about Napoleon called The Man of Destiny had a single staging at Croydon . In the 1890s Shaw 's plays were better known in print than on the West End stage ; his biggest success of the decade was in New York in 1897 , when Richard Mansfield 's production of the historical melodrama The Devil 's Disciple earned the author more than £ 2 @,@ 000 in royalties . 
 In January 1893 , as a Fabian delegate , Shaw attended the Bradford conference which led to the foundation of the Independent Labour Party . He was sceptical about the new party , and scorned the likelihood that it could switch the allegiance of the working class from sport to politics . He persuaded the conference to adopt resolutions abolishing indirect taxation , and taxing unearned income " to extinction " . Back in London , Shaw produced what Margaret Cole , in her Fabian history , terms a " grand <unk> " against the minority Liberal administration that had taken power in 1892 . To Your Tents , O Israel excoriated the government for ignoring social issues and concentrating solely on Irish Home Rule , a matter Shaw declared of no relevance to socialism . In 1894 the Fabian Society received a substantial bequest from a sympathiser , Henry Hunt Hutchinson — Holroyd mentions £ 10 @,@ 000 . Webb , who chaired the board of trustees appointed to supervise the legacy , proposed to use most of it to found a school of economics and politics . Shaw demurred ; he thought such a venture was contrary to the specified purpose of the legacy . He was eventually persuaded to support the proposal , and the London School of Economics and Political Science ( LSE ) opened in the summer of 1895 . 
 By the later 1890s Shaw 's political activities lessened as he concentrated on making his name as a dramatist . In 1897 he was persuaded to fill an uncontested vacancy for a " vestryman " ( parish councillor ) in London 's St Pancras district . At least initially , Shaw took to his municipal responsibilities seriously ; when London government was reformed in 1899 and the St Pancras vestry became the Metropolitan Borough of St Pancras , he was elected to the newly formed borough council . 
 In 1898 , as a result of overwork , Shaw 's health broke down . He was nursed by Charlotte Payne @-@ Townshend , a rich Anglo @-@ Irish woman whom he had met through the Webbs . The previous year she had proposed that she and Shaw should marry . He had declined , but when she insisted on nursing him in a house in the country , Shaw , concerned that this might cause scandal , agreed to their marriage . The ceremony took place on 1 June 1898 , in the register office in Covent Garden . The bride and bridegroom were both aged forty @-@ one . In the view of the biographer and critic St John Ervine , " their life together was entirely felicitous " . There were no children of the marriage , which it is generally believed was never consummated ; whether this was wholly at Charlotte 's wish , as Shaw liked to suggest , is less widely credited . In the early weeks of the marriage Shaw was much occupied writing his Marxist analysis of Wagner 's Ring cycle , published as The Perfect Wagnerite late in 1898 . In 1906 the Shaws found a country home in Ayot St Lawrence , Hertfordshire ; they renamed the house " Shaw 's Corner " , and lived there for the rest of their lives . They retained a London flat in the Adelphi and later at Whitehall Court . 
 = = = Stage success : 1900 – 14 = = = 
 During the first decade of the twentieth century Shaw secured a firm reputation as a playwright . In 1904 J. E. Vedrenne and Harley Granville @-@ Barker established a company at the Royal Court Theatre in Sloane Square , Chelsea to present modern drama . Over the next five years they staged fourteen of Shaw 's plays . The first , John Bull 's Other Island , a comedy about an Englishman in Ireland , attracted leading politicians and was seen by Edward VII , who laughed so much that he broke his chair . The play was withheld from Dublin 's Abbey Theatre , for fear of the affront it might provoke , although it was shown at the city 's Royal Theatre in November 1907 . Shaw later wrote that William Butler Yeats , who had requested the play , " got rather more than he bargained for ... It was uncongenial to the whole spirit of the neo @-@ Gaelic movement , which is bent on creating a new Ireland after its own ideal , whereas my play is a very uncompromising presentment of the real old Ireland . " Nonetheless , Shaw and Yeats were close friends ; Yeats and Lady Gregory tried unsuccessfully to persuade Shaw to take up the vacant co @-@ directorship of the Abbey Theatre after J. M. Synge 's death in 1909 . Shaw admired other figures in the Irish Literary Revival , including George Russell and James Joyce , and was a close friend of Seán O 'Casey , who was inspired to become a playwright after reading John Bull 's Other Island . 
 Man and Superman , completed in 1902 , was a success both at the Royal Court in 1905 and in Robert Loraine 's New York production in the same year . Among the other Shaw works presented by Vedrenne and Granville @-@ Barker were Major Barbara ( 1905 ) , depicting the contrasting morality of arms manufacturers and the Salvation Army ; The Doctor 's Dilemma ( 1906 ) , a mostly serious piece about professional ethics ; and Caesar and Cleopatra , Shaw 's <unk> to Shakespeare 's Antony and Cleopatra , seen in New York in 1906 and in London the following year . 
 Now prosperous and established , Shaw experimented with unorthodox theatrical forms described by his biographer Stanley Weintraub as " discussion drama " and " serious farce " . These plays included Getting Married ( premiered 1908 ) , The Shewing @-@ Up of Blanco Posnet ( 1909 ) , Misalliance ( 1910 ) , and Fanny 's First Play ( 1911 ) . Blanco Posnet was banned on religious grounds by the Lord Chamberlain ( the official theatre censor in England ) , and was produced instead in Dublin ; it filled the Abbey Theatre to capacity . Fanny 's First Play , a comedy about suffragettes , had the longest initial run of any Shaw play — 622 performances . 
 Androcles and the Lion ( 1912 ) , a less heretical study of true and false religious attitudes than Blanco Posnet , ran for eight weeks in September and October 1913 . It was followed by one of Shaw 's most successful plays , Pygmalion , written in 1912 and staged in Vienna the following year , and in Berlin shortly afterwards . Shaw commented , " It is the custom of the English press when a play of mine is produced , to inform the world that it is not a play — that it is dull , blasphemous , unpopular , and financially unsuccessful . ... Hence arose an urgent demand on the part of the managers of Vienna and Berlin that I should have my plays performed by them first . " The British production opened in April 1914 , starring Sir Herbert Tree and Mrs Patrick Campbell as , respectively , a professor of phonetics and a cockney flower @-@ girl . There had earlier been a romantic liaison between Shaw and Campbell that caused Charlotte Shaw considerable concern , but by the time of the London premiere it had ended . The play attracted capacity audiences until July , when Tree insisted on going on holiday , and the production closed . His co @-@ star then toured in the piece in the US . 
 = = = Fabian years : 1900 – 13 = = = 
 In 1899 , when the Boer War began , Shaw wished the Fabians to take a neutral stance on what he deemed , like Home Rule , to be a " non @-@ Socialist " issue . Others , including the future Labour prime minister Ramsay MacDonald , wanted unequivocal opposition , and resigned from the society when it followed Shaw . In the Fabians ' war manifesto , Fabianism and the Empire ( 1900 ) , Shaw declared that " until the Federation of the World becomes an accomplished fact we must accept the most responsible Imperial federations available as a substitute for it " . 
 As the new century began , Shaw became increasingly disillusioned by the limited impact of the Fabians on national politics . Thus , although a nominated Fabian delegate , he did not attend the London conference at the Memorial Hall , Farringdon Street in February 1900 , that created the Labour Representation Committee — precursor of the modern Labour Party . By 1903 , when his term as borough councillor expired , he had lost his earlier enthusiasm , writing : " After six years of Borough <unk> I am convinced that the borough councils should be abolished " . Nevertheless , in 1904 he stood in the London County Council elections . After an eccentric campaign , which Holroyd characterises as " [ making ] absolutely certain of not getting in " , he was duly defeated . It was Shaw 's final foray into electoral politics . Nationally , the 1906 general election produced a huge Liberal majority and an intake of 29 Labour members . Shaw viewed this outcome with scepticism ; he had a low opinion of the new prime minister , Sir Henry Campbell @-@ Bannerman , and saw the Labour members as inconsequential : " I apologise to the Universe for my connection with such a body " . 
 In the years after the 1906 election , Shaw felt that the Fabians needed fresh leadership , and saw this in the form of his fellow @-@ writer H. G. Wells , who had joined the society in February 1903 . Wells 's ideas for reform — particularly his proposals for closer cooperation with the Independent Labour Party — placed him at odds with the society 's " Old Gang " , led by Shaw . According to Cole , Wells " had minimal capacity for putting [ his ideas ] across in public meetings against Shaw 's trained and practised virtuosity " . In Shaw 's view , " the Old Gang did not extinguish Mr Wells , he annihilated himself " . Wells resigned from the society in September 1908 ; Shaw remained a member , but left the executive in April 1911 . He later wondered whether the Old Gang should have given way to Wells some years earlier : " God only knows whether the Society had not better have done it " . Although less active — he blamed his advancing years — Shaw remained a Fabian . 
 In 1912 Shaw invested £ 1 @,@ 000 for a one @-@ fifth share in the Webbs ' new publishing venture , a socialist weekly magazine called The New Statesman , which appeared in April 1913 . He became a founding director , publicist , and in due course a contributor , mostly anonymously . He was soon at odds with the magazine 's editor , Clifford Sharp , who by 1916 was rejecting his contributions — " the only paper in the world that refuses to print anything by me " , according to Shaw . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 After the First World War began in August 1914 , Shaw produced his tract Common Sense About the War , which argued that the warring nations were equally culpable . Such a view was anathema in an atmosphere of fervent patriotism , and offended many of Shaw 's friends ; Ervine records that " [ h ] is appearance at any public function caused the instant departure of many of those present . " 
 Despite his errant reputation , Shaw 's propagandist skills were recognised by the British authorities , and early in 1917 he was invited by Field Marshal Haig to visit the Western Front battlefields . Shaw 's 10 @,@ 000 @-@ word report , which emphasised the human aspects of the soldier 's life , was well received , and he became less of a lone voice . In April 1917 he joined the national consensus in welcoming America 's entry into the war : " a first class moral asset to the common cause against <unk> " . 
 Three short plays by Shaw were premiered during the war . The Inca of Perusalem , written in 1915 , encountered problems with the censor for burlesquing not only the enemy but the British military command ; it was performed in 1916 at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre . O 'Flaherty V.C. , satirising the government 's attitude to Irish recruits , was banned in the UK and was presented at a Royal Flying Corps base in Belgium in 1917 . Augustus Does His Bit , a genial farce , was granted a licence ; it opened at the Royal Court in January 1917 . 
 = = = Ireland = = = 
 Shaw had long supported the principle of Irish Home Rule within the British Empire ( which he thought should become the British Commonwealth ) . He did not support separatism , believing that ties with England were essential . In April 1916 he wrote scathingly in The New York Times about militant Irish nationalism : " In point of learning nothing and forgetting nothing these fellow @-@ patriots of mine leave the Bourbons nowhere . " Total independence , he asserted , was impractical ; alliance with a bigger power ( preferably England ) was essential . The Dublin Easter Rising later that month took him by surprise . After its suppression by British forces , he expressed horror at the summary execution of the rebel leaders , but continued to believe in some form of Anglo @-@ Irish union . In How to Settle the Irish Question ( 1917 ) , he envisaged a federal arrangement , with national and imperial parliaments . Holroyd records that by this time the separatist party Sinn Féin was in the ascendency , and Shaw 's and other moderate schemes were forgotten . 
 In the postwar period , Shaw despaired of the British government 's coercive policies towards Ireland , and joined his fellow @-@ writers Hilaire Belloc and G. K. Chesterton in publicly condemning these actions . The Anglo @-@ Irish Treaty of December 1921 led to the partition of Ireland between north and south , a provision that dismayed Shaw . In 1922 civil war broke out in the south between its pro @-@ treaty and anti @-@ treaty factions , the former of whom had established the Irish Free State . Shaw visited Dublin in August , and met Michael Collins , then head of the Free State 's Provisional Government . Shaw was much impressed by Collins , and was saddened when , three days later , he was ambushed and killed by anti @-@ treaty forces . In a letter to Collins 's sister , Shaw wrote : " I met Michael for the first and last time on Saturday last , and am very glad I did . I rejoice in his memory , and will not be so disloyal to it as to <unk> over his valiant death " . Shaw remained a British subject all his life , but took dual nationality in 1934 . 
 = = = 1920s = = = 
 Shaw 's first major work to appear after the war was Heartbreak House , written in 1916 – 17 and performed in 1920 . It was produced on Broadway in November , and was coolly received : " Mr Shaw on this occasion has more than usual to say and takes twice as long as usual to say it " . After the London premiere in October 1921 The Times concurred with the American critics : " As usual with Mr Shaw , the play is about an hour too long " , although containing " much entertainment and some profitable reflection " . Ervine in The Observer thought the play brilliant but ponderously acted , except for Edith Evans as Lady <unk> . 
 Shaw 's largest @-@ scale theatrical work was Back to Methuselah , written in 1918 – 20 and staged in 1922 . Weintraub describes it as " Shaw 's attempt to fend off ' the bottomless pit of an utterly discouraging pessimism ' " . This cycle of five interrelated plays depicts evolution , and the effects of longevity , from the Garden of Eden to the year 31 @,@ 920 AD . Critics found the five plays strikingly uneven in quality and invention . The original run was brief , and the work has been revived infrequently . Shaw felt he had exhausted his remaining creative powers in the huge span of this " <unk> Pentateuch " . He was now sixty @-@ seven , and expected to write no more plays . 
 This mood was short @-@ lived . In 1920 Joan of Arc was proclaimed a saint by Pope Benedict XV ; Shaw had long found Joan an interesting historical character , and his view of her veered between " half @-@ witted genius " and someone of " exceptional sanity " . He had considered writing a play about her in 1913 , and the canonisation prompted him to return to the subject . He wrote Saint Joan in the middle months of 1923 , and the play was premiered on Broadway in December . It was enthusiastically received there , and at its London premiere the following March . In Weintraub 's phrase , " even the Nobel prize committee could no longer ignore Shaw after Saint Joan " . The citation for the literature prize for 1925 praised his work as " ... marked by both idealism and humanity , its stimulating satire often being infused with a singular poetic beauty " . He accepted the award , but rejected the monetary prize that went with it , on the grounds that " My readers and my audiences provide me with more than sufficient money for my needs " . 
 After Saint Joan , it was five years before Shaw wrote a play . From 1924 , Shaw spent four years writing what he described as his " magnum opus " , a political treatise entitled The Intelligent Woman 's Guide to Socialism and Capitalism . The book was published in 1928 and sold well . At the end of the decade Shaw produced his final Fabian tract , a commentary on the League of Nations . He described the League as " a school for the new international statesmanship as against the old Foreign Office diplomacy " , but thought that it had not yet become the " Federation of the World " . 
 Shaw returned to the theatre with what he called " a political extravaganza " , The Apple Cart , written in late 1928 . It was , in Ervine 's view , unexpectedly popular , taking a conservative , monarchist , anti @-@ democratic line that appealed to contemporary audiences . The premiere was in Warsaw in June 1928 , and the first British production was two months later , at Sir Barry Jackson 's inaugural Malvern Festival . The other eminent creative artist most closely associated with the festival was Sir Edward Elgar , with whom Shaw enjoyed a deep friendship and mutual regard . He described The Apple Cart to Elgar as " a scandalous Aristophanic burlesque of democratic politics , with a brief but shocking sex interlude " . 
 During the 1920s Shaw began to lose faith in the idea that society could be changed through Fabian gradualism , and became increasingly fascinated with dictatorial methods . In 1922 he had welcomed Mussolini 's accession to power in Italy , observing that amid the " indiscipline and muddle and Parliamentary deadlock " , Mussolini was " the right kind of tyrant " . Shaw was prepared to tolerate certain dictatorial excesses ; Weintraub in his ODNB biographical sketch comments that Shaw 's " flirtation with authoritarian inter @-@ war regimes " took a long time to fade , and Beatrice Webb thought he was " obsessed " about Mussolini . 
 = = = 1930s = = = 
 Shaw 's enthusiasm for the Soviet Union dated to the early 1920s when he had hailed Lenin as " the one really interesting statesman in Europe " . Having turned down several chances to visit , in 1931 he joined a party led by Nancy Astor . The carefully managed trip culminated in a lengthy meeting with Stalin , whom Shaw later described as " a Georgian gentleman " with no malice in him . At a dinner given in his honour , Shaw told the gathering : " I have seen all the ' terrors ' and I was terribly pleased by them " . In March 1933 Shaw was a co @-@ signatory to a letter in The Manchester Guardian protesting at the continuing misrepresentation of Soviet achievements : " No lie is too fantastic , no slander is too stale ... for employment by the more reckless elements of the British press . " 
 Shaw 's admiration for Mussolini and Stalin demonstrated his growing belief that dictatorship was the only viable political arrangement . When the Nazi Party came to power in Germany in January 1933 , Shaw described Hitler as " a very remarkable man , a very able man " , and professed himself proud to be the only writer in England who was " scrupulously polite and just to Hitler " . His principal admiration was for Stalin , whose regime he championed uncritically throughout the decade . Shaw saw the 1939 Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact as a triumph for Stalin who , he said , now had Hitler under his thumb . 
 Shaw 's first play of the decade was Too True to be Good , written in 1931 and premiered in Boston in February 1932 . The reception was unenthusiastic . Brooks Atkinson of The New York Times commenting that Shaw had " yielded to the impulse to write without having a subject " , judged the play a " rambling and indifferently tedious conversation " . The correspondent of The New York Herald Tribune said that most of the play was " discourse , unbelievably long lectures " and that although the audience enjoyed the play it was bewildered by it . 
 During the decade Shaw travelled widely and frequently . Most of his journeys were with Charlotte ; she enjoyed voyages on ocean liners , and he found peace to write during the long spells at sea . Shaw met an enthusiastic welcome in South Africa in 1932 , despite his strong remarks about the racial divisions of the country . In December 1932 the couple embarked on a round @-@ the @-@ world cruise . In March 1933 they arrived at San Francisco , to begin Shaw 's first visit to the US . He had earlier refused to go to " that awful country , that uncivilized place " , " unfit to govern itself ... illiberal , superstitious , crude , violent , anarchic and arbitrary " . He visited Hollywood , with which he was unimpressed , and New York , where he lectured to a capacity audience in the Metropolitan Opera House . Harried by the intrusive attentions of the press , Shaw was glad when his ship sailed from New York harbour . New Zealand , which he and Charlotte visited the following year , struck him as " the best country I 've been in " ; he urged its people to be more confident and loosen their dependence on trade with Britain . He used the weeks at sea to complete two plays — The Simpleton of the Unexpected Isles and The Six of Calais — and begin work on a third , The Millionairess . 
 Despite his contempt for Hollywood and its aesthetic values , Shaw was enthusiastic about cinema , and in the middle of the decade wrote screenplays for prospective film versions of Pygmalion and Saint Joan . The latter was never made , but Shaw entrusted the rights to the former to the unknown Gabriel Pascal , who produced it at Pinewood Studios in 1938 . Shaw was determined that Hollywood should have nothing to do with the film , but was powerless to prevent it from winning two Academy Awards ( " Oscars " ) ; he described his award for " best @-@ written screenplay " as an insult , coming from such a source . He became , and at 2016 remains , the only person to have been awarded a Nobel Prize and an Oscar . In a 1993 study of the Oscars , Anthony Holden observes that Pygmalion was soon spoken of as having " lifted movie @-@ making from illiteracy to literacy " . 
 Shaw 's final plays of the 1930s were Cymbeline Refinished ( 1936 ) , Geneva ( 1936 ) and In Good King Charles 's Golden Days ( 1939 ) . The first , a fantasy reworking of Shakespeare , made little impression , but the second , a satire on European dictators , attracted more notice , much of it unfavourable . In particular , Shaw 's parody of Hitler as " Herr Battler " was considered mild , almost sympathetic . The third play , an historical conversation piece first seen at Malvern , ran briefly in London in May 1940 . James Agate commented that the play contained nothing to which even the most conservative audiences could take exception , and though it was long and lacking in dramatic action only " witless and idle " theatregoers would object . After their first runs none of the three plays were seen again in the West End during Shaw 's lifetime . 
 Towards the end of the decade , both Shaws began to suffer ill health . Charlotte was increasingly incapacitated by Paget 's disease of bone , and he developed pernicious anaemia . His treatment , involving injections of concentrated animal liver , was successful , but this breach of his vegetarian creed distressed him and brought down condemnation from militant vegetarians . 
 = = = Second World War and final years = = = 
 Although Shaw 's works since The Apple Cart had been received without great enthusiasm , his earlier plays were revived in the West End throughout the Second World War , starring such actors as Edith Evans , John Gielgud , Deborah Kerr and Robert Donat . In 1944 nine Shaw plays were staged in London , including Arms and the Man with Ralph Richardson , Laurence Olivier , Sybil Thorndike and Margaret Leighton in the leading roles . Two touring companies took his plays all round the country . The revival in his popularity did not tempt Shaw to write a new play , and he concentrated on prolific journalism . A second Shaw film produced by Pascal , Major Barbara ( 1941 ) was less successful , artistically and commercially , than Pygmalion , partly because of Pascal 's insistence on directing , to which he was unsuited . 
 Following the outbreak of war on 3 September 1939 and the rapid conquest of Poland , Shaw was accused of defeatism when , in a New Statesman article , he declared the war over and demanded a peace conference . Nevertheless , when he became convinced that a negotiated peace was impossible , he publicly urged the neutral United States to join the fight . The London blitz of 1940 – 41 led the Shaws , both in their mid @-@ eighties , to live full @-@ time at Ayot St Lawrence . Even there they were not immune from enemy air raids , and stayed on occasion with Nancy Astor at her country house , Cliveden . In 1943 , the worst of the London bombing over , the Shaws moved back to Whitehall Court , where medical help for Charlotte was more easily arranged . Her condition deteriorated and she died in September . 
 Shaw 's final political treatise , Everybody 's Political What 's What , was published in 1944 . Holroyd describes this as " a rambling narrative ... that repeats ideas he had given better elsewhere and then repeats itself " . The book sold well — 85 @,@ 000 copies by the end of the year . After Hitler 's suicide in May 1945 , Shaw approved of the formal condolences offered by the Irish Taoiseach , Éamon de Valera , at the German embassy in Dublin . Shaw disapproved of the postwar trials of the defeated German leaders , as an act of self @-@ righteousness : " We are all potential criminals " . 
 Pascal was given a third opportunity to film Shaw 's work with Caesar and Cleopatra ( 1945 ) . It cost three times its original budget and was rated " the biggest financial failure in the history of British cinema " . The film was poorly received by British critics , although American reviews were friendlier . Shaw thought its lavishness nullified the drama , and he considered the film " a poor imitation of Cecil B. de Mille " . 
 In 1946 , the year of Shaw 's ninetieth birthday , he accepted the freedom of Dublin and became the first honorary freeman of the borough of St Pancras , London . In the same year the government asked Shaw informally whether he would accept the Order of Merit . He declined , believing that an author 's merit could only be determined by the posthumous verdict of history . 1946 saw the publication , as The Crime of Imprisonment , of the preface Shaw had written 20 years previously to a study of prison conditions . It was widely praised ; a reviewer in The American Journal of Public Health considered it essential reading for any student of the American criminal justice system . 
 Shaw continued to write into his nineties . His last plays were Buoyant Billions ( 1947 ) , his final full @-@ length work ; <unk> Fables ( 1948 ) a set of six short plays revisiting several of his earlier themes such as evolution ; a comic play for puppets , Shakes versus Shav ( 1949 ) , a ten @-@ minute piece in which Shakespeare and Shaw trade insults ; and Why She Would Not ( 1950 ) , which Shaw described as " a little comedy " , written in one week shortly before his ninety @-@ fourth birthday . 
 During his later years , Shaw enjoyed tending the gardens at Shaw 's Corner . He died at the age of ninety @-@ four of renal failure precipitated by injuries incurred when falling while pruning a tree . He was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium on 6 November 1950 . His ashes , mixed with those of Charlotte , were scattered along footpaths and around the statue of Saint Joan in their garden . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Plays = = = 
 Shaw published a collected edition of his plays in 1934 , comprising forty @-@ two works . He wrote a further twelve in the remaining sixteen years of his life , mostly one @-@ act pieces . Including eight earlier plays that he chose to omit from his published works , the total is sixty @-@ two . 
 = = = = Early works = = = = 
 Shaw 's first three full @-@ length plays dealt with social issues . He later grouped them as " Plays Unpleasant " . Widower 's Houses ( 1892 ) concerns the landlords of slum properties , and introduces the first of Shaw 's New Women — a recurring feature of later plays . The Philanderer ( 1893 ) develops the theme of the New Woman , draws on Ibsen , and has elements of Shaw 's personal relationships , the character of Julia being based on Jenny Patterson . In a 2003 study Judith Evans describes Mrs Warren 's Profession ( 1893 ) as " undoubtedly the most challenging " of the three Plays Unpleasant , taking Mrs Warren 's profession — prostitute and , later , brothel @-@ owner — as a metaphor for a prostituted society . 
 Shaw followed the first trilogy with a second , published as " Plays Pleasant " . Arms and the Man ( 1894 ) conceals beneath a mock @-@ Ruritanian comic romance a Fabian parable contrasting impractical idealism with pragmatic socialism . The central theme of Candida ( 1894 ) is a woman 's choice between two men ; the play contrasts the outlook and aspirations of a Christian Socialist and a poetic idealist . The third of the Pleasant group , You Never Can Tell ( 1896 ) , portrays social mobility , and the gap between generations , particularly in how they approach social relations in general and mating in particular . 
 The " Three Plays for Puritans " — comprising The Devil 's Disciple ( 1896 ) , Caesar and Cleopatra ( 1898 ) and Captain Brassbound 's Conversion ( 1899 ) — all centre on questions of empire and imperialism , a major topic of political discourse in the 1890s . The three are set , respectively , in 1770s America , Ancient Egypt , and 1890s Morocco . The Gadfly , an adaptation of a popular novel by Ethel Voynich , was unfinished and unperformed . The Man of Destiny ( 1895 ) is a short curtain raiser about Napoleon . 
 = = = = 1900 – 09 = = = = 
 Shaw 's major plays of the first decade of the 20th century address individual social , political or ethical issues . Man and Superman ( 1902 ) stands apart from the others in both its subject and its treatment , giving Shaw 's interpretation of creative evolution in a combination of drama and associated printed text . The Admirable <unk> ( 1901 ) , a blank verse dramatisation of Shaw 's novel Cashel Byron 's Profession , focuses on the imperial relationship between Britain and Africa . John Bull 's Other Island ( 1904 ) , comically depicting the prevailing relationship between Britain and Ireland , was popular at the time but fell out of the general repertoire in later years . Major Barbara ( 1905 ) presents ethical questions in an unconventional way , confounding expectations that in the depiction of an armaments manufacturer on the one hand and the Salvation Army on the other the moral high ground must invariably be held by the latter . The Doctor 's Dilemma ( 1906 ) , a play about medical ethics and moral choices in allocating scarce treatment , was described by Shaw as a tragedy . With a reputation for presenting characters who did not resemble real flesh and blood , he was challenged by Archer to present an on @-@ stage death , and here did so , with a deathbed scene for the anti @-@ hero . 
 Getting Married ( 1908 ) and Misalliance ( 1909 ) — the latter seen by Judith Evans as a companion piece to the former — are both in what Shaw called his " <unk> " vein , with the emphasis on discussion of ideas rather than on dramatic events or vivid characterisation . Shaw wrote seven short plays during the decade ; they are all comedies , ranging from the deliberately absurd Passion , Poison , and <unk> ( 1905 ) to the satirical Press Cuttings ( 1909 ) . 
 = = = = 1910 – 19 = = = = 
 In the decade from 1910 to the aftermath of the First World War Shaw wrote four full @-@ length plays , the third and fourth of which are among his most frequently staged works . Fanny 's First Play ( 1911 ) continues his earlier examinations of middle @-@ class British society from a Fabian viewpoint , with additional touches of melodrama and an epilogue in which theatre critics discuss the play . Androcles and the Lion ( 1912 ) , which Shaw began writing as a play for children , became a study of the nature of religion and how to put Christian precepts into practice . Pygmalion ( 1912 ) is a Shavian study of language and speech and their importance in society and in personal relationships . To correct the impression left by the original performers that the play portrayed a romantic relationship between the two main characters Shaw rewrote the ending to make it clear that the heroine will marry another , minor character . Shaw 's only full @-@ length play from the war years is Heartbreak House ( 1917 ) , which in his words depicts " cultured , leisured Europe before the war " drifting towards disaster . Shaw named Shakespeare ( King Lear ) and Chekhov ( The Cherry Orchard ) as important influences on the piece , and critics have found elements drawing on Congreve ( The Way of the World ) and Ibsen ( The Master Builder ) . 
 The short plays range from genial historical drama in The Dark Lady of the Sonnets and Great Catherine ( 1910 and 1913 ) to a study of polygamy in <unk> ; three satirical works about the war ( The Inca of Perusalem , O 'Flaherty V.C. and Augustus Does His Bit , 1915 – 16 ) ; a piece that Shaw called " utter nonsense " ( The Music Cure , 1914 ) and a brief sketch about a " Bolshevik empress " ( <unk> , 1917 ) . 
 = = = = 1920 – 50 = = = = 
 Saint Joan ( 1923 ) drew widespread praise both for Shaw and for Sybil Thorndike , for whom he wrote the title role and who created the part in Britain . In the view of the commentator Nicholas Grene , Shaw 's Joan , a " no @-@ nonsense mystic , Protestant and nationalist before her time " is among the 20th century 's classic leading female roles . The Apple Cart ( 1929 ) , was Shaw 's last popular success . He gave both that play and its successor , Too True to Be Good ( 1931 ) , the subtitle " A political extravaganza " , although the two works differ greatly in their themes ; the first presents the politics of a nation ( with a brief royal love @-@ scene as an interlude ) and the second , in Judith Evans 's words , " is concerned with the social mores of the individual , and is nebulous . " Shaw 's plays of the 1930s were written in the shadow of worsening national and international political events . Once again , with On the Rocks ( 1933 ) and The Simpleton of the Unexpected Isles ( 1934 ) , a political comedy with a clear plot was followed by an introspective drama . The first play portrays a British prime minister considering , but finally rejecting , the establishment of a dictatorship ; the second is concerned with polygamy and eugenics and ends with the Day of Judgement . 
 The Millionairess ( 1934 ) is a farcical depiction of the commercial and social affairs of a successful businesswoman . Geneva ( 1936 ) lampoons the feebleness of the League of Nations compared with the dictators of Europe . In Good King Charles 's Golden Days ( 1939 ) , described by Weintraub as a warm , discursive high comedy , also depicts authoritarianism , but less satirically than Geneva . As in earlier decades , the shorter plays were generally comedies , some historical and others addressing various political and social preoccupations of the author . Ervine writes of Shaw 's later work that although it was still " astonishingly vigorous and vivacious " it showed unmistakable signs of his age . " The best of his work in this period , however , was full of wisdom and the beauty of mind often displayed by old men who keep their wits about them . " 
 = = = Music and drama reviews = = = 
 = = = = Music = = = = 
 Shaw 's collected musical criticism , published in three volumes , runs to more than 2 @,@ 700 pages . It covers the British musical scene from 1876 to 1950 , but the core of the collection dates from his six years as music critic of The Star and The World in the late 1880s and early 1890s . In his view music criticism should be interesting to everyone rather than just the musical élite , and he wrote for the non @-@ specialist , avoiding technical jargon — " Mesopotamian words like ' the dominant of D major ' " . He was fiercely partisan in his columns , promoting the music of Wagner and decrying that of Brahms and those British composers such as Stanford and Parry whom he saw as Brahmsian . He campaigned against the prevailing fashion for performances of Handel oratorios with huge amateur choirs and inflated orchestration , calling for " a chorus of twenty capable artists " . He railed against opera productions unrealistically staged or sung in languages the audience did not speak . 
 = = = = Drama = = = = 
 In Shaw 's view the London theatres of the 1890s presented too many revivals of old plays and not enough new work . He campaigned against " melodrama , sentimentality , stereotypes and worn @-@ out conventions " . As a music critic he had frequently been able to concentrate on analysing new works , but in the theatre he was often obliged to fall back on discussing how various performers tackled well @-@ known plays . In a study of Shaw 's work as a theatre critic , E. J. West writes that Shaw " ceaselessly compared and contrasted artists in interpretation and in technique " . Shaw contributed more than 150 articles as theatre critic for The Saturday Review , in which he assessed more than 212 productions . He championed Ibsen 's plays when many theatregoers regarded them as outrageous , and his 1891 book Quintessence of Ibsenism remained a classic throughout the 20th century . Of contemporary dramatists writing for the West End stage he rated Oscar Wilde above the rest : " ... our only thorough playwright . He plays with everything : with wit , with philosophy , with drama , with actors and audience , with the whole theatre " . Shaw 's collected criticisms were published as Our Theatres in the Nineties in 1932 . 
 Shaw maintained a provocative and frequently self @-@ contradictory attitude to Shakespeare ( whose name he insisted on spelling " Shakespear " ) . Many found him difficult to take seriously on the subject ; Duff Cooper observed that by attacking Shakespeare , " it is Shaw who appears a ridiculous pigmy shaking his fist at a mountain . " Shaw was , nevertheless , a knowledgeable Shakespearian , and in an article in which he wrote , " With the single exception of Homer , there is no eminent writer , not even Sir Walter Scott , whom I can despise so entirely as I despise Shakespear when I measure my mind against his , " he also said , " But I am bound to add that I pity the man who cannot enjoy Shakespear . He has outlasted thousands of abler thinkers , and will outlast a thousand more " . Shaw had two regular targets for his more extreme comments about Shakespeare : <unk> " <unk> " , and actors and directors who presented insensitively cut texts in over @-@ elaborate productions . He was continually drawn back to Shakespeare , and wrote three plays with Shakespearean themes : The Dark Lady of the Sonnets , Cymbeline Refinished and Shakes versus Shav . In a 2001 analysis of Shaw 's Shakespearian criticisms , Robert Pierce concludes that Shaw , who was no academic , saw Shakespeare 's plays — like all theatre — from an author 's practical point of view : " Shaw helps us to get away from the Romantics ' picture of Shakespeare as a titanic genius , one whose art cannot be analyzed or connected with the mundane considerations of theatrical conditions and profit and loss , or with a specific staging and cast of actors . " 
 = = = Political and social writings = = = 
 Shaw 's political and social commentaries were published variously in Fabian tracts , in essays , in two full @-@ length books , in innumerable newspaper and journal articles and in prefaces to his plays . The majority of Shaw 's Fabian tracts were published anonymously , representing the voice of the society rather than of Shaw , although the society 's secretary Edward Pease later confirmed Shaw 's authorship . According to Holroyd , the business of the early Fabians , mainly under the influence of Shaw , was to " alter history by rewriting it " . Shaw 's talent as a pamphleteer was put to immediate use in the production of the society 's manifesto — after which , says Holroyd , he was never again so succinct . 
 After the turn of the 20th century , Shaw increasingly propagated his ideas through the medium of his plays . An early critic , writing in 1904 , observed that Shaw 's dramas provided " a pleasant means " of proselytising his socialism , adding that " Mr Shaw 's views are to be sought especially in the prefaces to his plays " . After loosening his ties with the Fabian movement in 1911 , Shaw 's writings were more personal and often provocative ; his response to the furore following the issue of Common Sense About the War in 1914 , was to prepare a sequel , More Common Sense About the War . In this , he denounced the pacifist line espoused by Ramsay MacDonald and other socialist leaders , and proclaimed his readiness to shoot all pacifists rather than cede them power and influence . On the advice of Beatrice Webb , this pamphlet remained unpublished . 
 The Intelligent Woman 's Guide , Shaw 's main political treatise of the 1920s , attracted both admiration and criticism . MacDonald considered it the world 's most important book since the Bible ; Harold Laski thought its arguments outdated and lacking in concern for individual freedoms . Shaw 's increasing flirtation with dictatorial methods is evident in many of his subsequent pronouncements . A New York Times report dated 10 December 1933 quoted a recent Fabian Society lecture in which Shaw had praised Hitler , Mussolini and Stalin : " [ T ] hey are trying to get something done , [ and ] are adopting methods by which it is possible to get something done " . As late as the Second World War , in Everybody 's Political What 's What , Shaw blamed the Allies ' " abuse " of their 1918 victory for the rise of Hitler , and hoped that , after defeat , the Führer would escape retribution " to enjoy a comfortable retirement in Ireland or some other neutral country " . These sentiments , according to the Irish philosopher @-@ poet Thomas Duddy , " rendered much of the Shavian outlook passé and contemptible " . 
 " Creative evolution " , Shaw 's version of the new science of eugenics , became an increasing theme in his political writing after 1900 . He introduced his theories in The Revolutionist 's Handbook ( 1903 ) , an appendix to Man and Superman , and developed them further during the 1920s in Back to Methuselah . A 1946 Life magazine article observed that Shaw had " always tended to look at people more as a biologist than as an artist " . By 1933 , in the preface to On the Rocks , he was writing that " if we desire a certain type of civilization and culture we must exterminate the sort of people who do not fit into it " ; critical opinion is divided on whether this was intended as irony . In an article in the American magazine Liberty , in September 1938 , Shaw included the statement : " There are many people in the world who ought to be liquidated " . Many commentators assumed that such comments were intended as a joke , although in the worst possible taste . Otherwise , Life magazine concluded , " this silliness can be classed with his more innocent bad guesses " . 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 Shaw 's fiction @-@ writing was largely confined to the five unsuccessful novels written in the period 1879 – 1885 . Immaturity ( 1879 ) is a semi @-@ autobiographical portrayal of mid @-@ Victorian England , Shaw 's " own David Copperfield " according to Weintraub . The Irrational Knot ( 1880 ) is a critique of conventional marriage , in which Weintraub finds the characterisations lifeless , " hardly more than animated theories " . Shaw was pleased with his third novel , Love Among the Artists ( 1881 ) , feeling that it marked a turning point in his development as a thinker , although he had no more success with it than with its predecessors . Cashel Byron 's Profession ( 1882 ) is , says Weintraub , an indictment of society which anticipates Shaw 's first full @-@ length play , Mrs Warren 's Profession . Shaw later explained that he had intended An Unsocial Socialist as the first section of a monumental depiction of the downfall of capitalism . Gareth Griffith , in a study of Shaw 's political thought , sees the novel as an interesting record of conditions , both in society at large and in the nascent socialist movement of the 1880s . 
 Shaw 's only subsequent fiction of any substance was his 1932 novella The Adventures of the Black Girl In Her Search for God , written during a visit to South Africa in 1932 . The eponymous girl , intelligent , inquisitive , and converted to Christianity by insubstantial missionary teaching , sets out to find God , on a journey that after many adventures and encounters , leads her to a secular conclusion . The story , on publication , offended some Christians and was banned in Ireland by the Board of Censors . 
 = = = Letters and diaries = = = 
 Shaw was a prolific correspondent throughout his life . His letters , edited by Dan H. Laurence , were published between 1965 and 1988 . Shaw once estimated his letters would occupy twenty volumes ; Laurence commented that , unedited , they would fill many more . Shaw wrote more than a quarter of a million letters , of which about ten per cent have survived ; 2 @,@ 653 letters are printed in Laurence 's four volumes . Among Shaw 's many regular correspondents were his childhood friend Edward McNulty ; his theatrical colleagues ( and <unk> amoureuses ) Mrs Patrick Campbell and Ellen Terry ; writers including Lord Alfred Douglas , H. G. Wells and G. K. Chesterton ; the boxer Gene Tunney ; the nun Laurentia McLachlan ; and the art expert Sydney Cockerell . In 2007 a 316 @-@ page volume consisting entirely of Shaw 's letters to The Times was published . 
 Shaw 's diaries for 1885 – 97 , edited by Weintraub , were published in two volumes , with a total of 1 @,@ 241 pages , in 1986 . Reviewing them , the Shaw scholar Fred Crawford wrote : " Although the primary interest for <unk> is the material that supplements what we already know about Shaw 's life and work , the diaries are also valuable as a historical and sociological document of English life at the end of the Victorian age . " After 1897 pressure of other writing led Shaw to give up keeping a diary . 
 = = = Miscellaneous and autobiographical = = = 
 Through his journalism , pamphlets and occasional longer works , Shaw wrote on many subjects . His range of interest and enquiry included vivisection , vegetarianism , religion , language , cinema and photography , on all of which he wrote and spoke copiously . Collections of his writings on these and other subjects were published , mainly after his death , together with volumes of selected aphorisms , " wit and wisdom " and general journalism . 
 Despite the many books written about him ( Holroyd counts 80 by 1939 ) Shaw 's autobiographical output , apart from his diaries , was relatively slight . He gave interviews to newspapers — " GBS <unk> " , to The Daily Mail in 1904 is an example — and provided sketches to would @-@ be biographers whose work was rejected by Shaw and never published . In 1939 Shaw drew on these materials to produce Shaw Gives Himself Away , a miscellany which , a year before his death , he revised and republished as Sixteen Self Sketches ( there were seventeen ) . He made it clear to his publishers that this slim book was in no sense a full autobiography . 
 = = Beliefs and opinions = = 
 In his lifetime Shaw professed many beliefs , often contradictory . This inconsistency was partly an intentional provocation — the Spanish scholar @-@ statesman Salvador de Madariaga describes Shaw as " a pole of negative electricity set in a people of positive electricity " . In one area at least Shaw was constant : in his lifelong refusal to follow normal English forms of spelling and punctuation . He favoured archaic spellings such as " shew " for " show " ; he dropped the " u " in words like " honour " and " favour " ; and wherever possible he rejected the apostrophe in contractions such as " won 't " or " that 's " . In his will Shaw ordered that after some specified legacies his remaining assets were to form a trust to pay for fundamental reform of the English alphabet , into a phonetic version of forty letters . Though Shaw 's intentions were clear , his drafting was flawed , and the courts initially ruled the intended trust void . A later out @-@ of @-@ court agreement provided a sum of £ 8 @,@ 300 for spelling reform ; the bulk of his fortune went to the residuary legatees — the British Museum , the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and the National Gallery of Ireland . Most of the £ 8 @,@ 300 went on a special phonetic edition of Androcles and the Lion , published in 1962 to a largely indifferent reception . 
 Less consistently maintained were Shaw 's views on religion and Christianity . Having in his youth proclaimed himself an atheist , in middle age he explained this as a reaction against the Old Testament image of a vengeful Jehovah . By the early 20th century he termed himself a " mystic " , although Gary Sloan , in an essay on Shaw 's beliefs , disputes his credentials as such . In 1913 Shaw declared that he was not religious " in the sectarian sense " , aligning himself with Jesus as " a person of no religion " . In the preface ( 1915 ) to Androcles and the Lion , Shaw asks " Why not give Christianity a chance " ? contending that Britain 's social order resulted from the continuing choice of Barabbas over Christ . In a broadcast just before the Second World War , Shaw invoked the Sermon on the Mount , " a very moving exhortation , and it gives you one first @-@ rate tip , which is to do good to those who <unk> use you and persecute you " . In his will , Shaw stated that his " religious convictions and scientific views cannot at present be more specifically defined than as those of a believer in creative revolution . " He requested that no one should imply that he accepted the beliefs of any specific religious organisation , and that no memorial to him should " take the form of a cross or any other instrument of torture or symbol of blood sacrifice . " 
 Shaw espoused racial equality , and inter @-@ marriage between people of different races . Despite his expressed wish to be fair to Hitler , he called anti @-@ Semitism " the hatred of the lazy , ignorant fat @-@ headed Gentile for the pertinacious Jew who , schooled by adversity to use his brains to the utmost , outdoes him in business " . In The Jewish Chronicle he wrote in 1932 , " In every country you can find rabid people who have a phobia against Jews , Jesuits , Armenians , Negroes , Freemasons , Irishmen , or simply foreigners as such . Political parties are not above exploiting these fears and jealousies . " 
 In 1903 Shaw joined in a controversy about vaccination against smallpox . He called vaccination " a peculiarly filthy piece of witchcraft " ; in his view immunisation campaigns were a cheap and inadequate substitute for a decent programme of housing for the poor , which would , he declared , be the means of eradicating smallpox and other infectious diseases . Less contentiously , Shaw was keenly interested in transport ; Laurence observed in 1992 a need for a published study of Shaw 's interest in " bicycling , motorbikes , automobiles , and planes , climaxing in his joining the Interplanetary Society in his nineties . " Shaw published articles on travel , took photographs of his journeys , and submitted notes to the Royal Automobile Club . 
 Shaw strove throughout his adult life to be referred to as " Bernard Shaw " rather than " George Bernard Shaw " , but confused matters by continuing to use his full initials — G.B.S. — as a by @-@ line , and often signed himself " G. Bernard Shaw " . He left instructions in his will that his executor ( the Public Trustee ) was to license publication of his works only under the name Bernard Shaw . Shaw scholars including Ervine , Judith Evans , Holroyd , Laurence and Weintraub , and many publishers have respected Shaw 's preference , although the Cambridge University Press was among the exceptions with its 1988 Cambridge Companion to George Bernard Shaw . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 = = = Theatrical = = = 
 Shaw did not found a school of dramatists as such , but Crawford asserts that today " we recognise [ him ] as second only to Shakespeare in the British theatrical tradition ... the proponent of the theater of ideas " who struck a death @-@ blow to 19th @-@ century melodrama . According to Laurence , Shaw pioneered " intelligent " theatre , in which the audience was required to think , thereby paving the way for the new breeds of 20th @-@ century playwrights from Galsworthy to Pinter . 
 Crawford lists numerous playwrights whose work owes something to that of Shaw . Among those active in Shaw 's lifetime he includes Noël Coward , who based his early comedy The Young Idea on You Never Can Tell and continued to draw on the older man 's works in later plays . T. S. Eliot , by no means an admirer of Shaw , admitted that the epilogue of Murder in the Cathedral , in which Becket 's <unk> explain their actions to the audience , might have been influenced by Saint Joan . The critic Eric Bentley comments that Eliot 's later play The Confidential Clerk " had all the earmarks of <unk> ... without the merits of the real Bernard Shaw " . Among more recent British dramatists , Crawford marks Tom Stoppard as " the most Shavian of contemporary playwrights " ; Shaw 's " serious farce " is continued in the works of Stoppard 's contemporaries Alan Ayckbourn , Henry <unk> and Peter Nichols . 
 Shaw 's influence crossed the Atlantic at an early stage . Bernard Dukore notes that he was successful as a dramatist in America ten years before achieving comparable success in Britain . Among many American writers professing a direct debt to Shaw , Eugene O 'Neill became an admirer at the age of seventeen , after reading The Quintessence of Ibsenism . Other Shaw @-@ influenced American playwrights mentioned by Dukore are Elmer Rice , for whom Shaw " opened doors , turned on lights , and expanded horizons " ; William Saroyan , who empathised with Shaw as " the embattled individualist against the philistines " ; and S. N. Behrman , who was inspired to write for the theatre after attending a performance of Caesar and Cleopatra : " I thought it would be agreeable to write plays like that " . 
 Assessing Shaw 's reputation in a 1976 critical study , T. F. Evans described Shaw as unchallenged in his lifetime and since as the leading English @-@ language dramatist of the century , and as a master of prose style . The following year , in a contrary assessment , the playwright John Osborne castigated The Guardian 's theatre critic Michael Billington for referring to Shaw as " the greatest British dramatist since Shakespeare " . Osborne responded that Shaw " is the most fraudulent , inept writer of Victorian melodramas ever to gull a timid critic or fool a dull public " . Despite this hostility , Crawford sees the influence of Shaw in some of Osborne 's plays , and concludes that though the latter 's work is neither imitative nor derivative , these affinities are sufficient to classify Osborne as an inheritor of Shaw . 
 In a 1983 study , R. J. Kaufmann suggests that Shaw was a key forerunner — " godfather , if not actually finicky paterfamilias " — of the Theatre of the Absurd . Two further aspects of Shaw 's theatrical legacy are noted by Crawford : his opposition to stage censorship , which was finally ended in 1968 , and his efforts which extended over many years to establish a National Theatre . Shaw 's short 1910 play The Dark Lady of the Sonnets , in which Shakespeare pleads with Queen Elizabeth I for the endowment of a state theatre , was part of this campaign . 
 Writing in The New Statesman in 2012 Daniel Janes commented that Shaw 's reputation had declined by the time of his 150th anniversary in 2006 but had recovered considerably . In Janes 's view , the many current revivals of Shaw 's major works showed the playwright 's " almost unlimited relevance to our times " . In the same year , Mark Lawson wrote in The Guardian that Shaw 's moral concerns engaged present @-@ day audiences , and made him — like his model , Ibsen — one of the most popular playwrights in contemporary British theatre . 
 = = = General = = = 
 In the 1940s the author Harold Nicolson advised the National Trust not to accept the bequest of Shaw 's Corner , predicting that Shaw would be totally forgotten within fifty years . In the event , Shaw 's broad cultural legacy , embodied in the widely used term " Shavian " , has endured and is nurtured by Shaw Societies in various parts of the world . The original society was founded in London in 1941 and survives ; it organises meetings and events , and publishes a regular bulletin The Shavian . The Shaw Society of America began in June 1950 ; it foundered in the 1970s but its journal , adopted by Penn State University Press , continued to be published as Shaw : The Annual of Bernard Shaw Studies until 2004 . A second American organisation , founded in 1951 as " The Bernard Shaw Society " , remains active as of 2016 . More recent societies have been established in Japan and India . 
 Besides his collected music criticism , Shaw has left a varied musical legacy , not all of it of his choosing . Despite his dislike of having his work adapted for the musical theatre ( " my plays set themselves to a verbal music of their own " ) two of his plays were turned into musical comedies : Arms and the Man was the basis of The Chocolate Soldier in 1908 , with music by Oscar Straus , and Pygmalion was adapted in 1956 as My Fair Lady with book and lyrics by Alan Jay Lerner and music by Frederick Loewe . Although he had a high regard for Elgar , Shaw turned down the composer 's request for an opera libretto , but played a major part in persuading the BBC to commission Elgar 's Third Symphony , and was the dedicatee of The Severn Suite ( 1930 ) . 
 The substance of Shaw 's political legacy is uncertain . In 1921 Shaw 's erstwhile collaborator William Archer , in a letter to the playwright , wrote : " I doubt if there is any case of a man so widely read , heard , seen , and known as yourself , who has produced so little effect on his generation . " Margaret Cole , who considered Shaw the greatest writer of his age , professed never to have understood him . She thought he worked " immensely hard " at politics , but essentially , she surmises , it was for fun — " the fun of a brilliant artist " . After Shaw 's death , Pearson wrote : " No one since the time of Tom Paine has had so definite an influence on the social and political life of his time and country as Bernard Shaw . " 
 In its obituary tribute to Shaw , The Times Literary Supplement concluded : 
 He was no originator of ideas . He was an insatiable adopter and adapter , an incomparable <unk> with the thoughts of the forerunners . Nietzsche , Samuel Butler ( <unk> ) , Marx , Shelley , Blake , Dickens , William Morris , Ruskin , Beethoven and Wagner all had their applications and misapplications . By bending to their service all the faculties of a powerful mind , by inextinguishable wit , and by every artifice of argument , he carried their thoughts as far as they would reach — so far beyond their sources that they came to us with the vitality of the newly created . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Shaw 's writings = = = = 
 = = = = Journals = = = = 
 = = = = Newspapers = = = = 
 = = = = Online = = = = 
 = Mega Man : Dr. Wily 's Revenge = 
 Mega Man : Dr. Wily 's Revenge , known as Rockman World ( <unk> , Rokkuman Wārudo ) in Japan , is a platform video game by Capcom for the Nintendo Game Boy . It is the first game in the handheld series of the Mega Man franchise . It was first released in Japan on July 26 , 1991 , and was localized in North America that December and in Europe the following year . The game continues the adventures of the android hero Mega Man as he once again confronts the evil Dr. Wily , who has recently dispatched his revived " Robot Masters " and a new " Mega Man Killer " named Enker . 
 Dr. Wily 's Revenge is an action and platform game in same vein as the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) Mega Man games . The player is tasked with completing a series of four stages in any order desired . Beating a stage 's boss will earn the player a special weapon that can be selected at will and used throughout the rest of the game . Dr. Wily 's Revenge specifically takes components of the original Mega Man and Mega Man 2 , including their enemies , stage aesthetics , and Robot Masters . 
 According to series artist Keiji Inafune , Dr. Wily 's Revenge was the first Mega Man game to be outsourced to a developer separate from Capcom . Critical reception for the game has been favorable , and most sources have denoted it as a competent , if excessively difficult , portable version of the popular NES series . Dr. Wily 's Revenge was a best @-@ seller and spawned four sequels of its own on the Game Boy , many of which follow its trend of reusing elements from their home console counterparts . In 2011 , Dr. Wily 's Revenge was made available as a Virtual Console launch title on Japan 's Nintendo eShop for the Nintendo 3DS . It also appeared on PAL region and North American <unk> later that year . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Set in the 21st century ( " 200X " ) , Mega Man : Dr. Wily 's Revenge follows the storyline of the original Mega Man series . The titular protagonist Mega Man , a super robot created by the benevolent Dr. Light , has restored peace to the world by halting the plans of the evil Dr. Wily and his powerful " Robot Masters " . In Dr. Wily 's Revenge , the mad scientist returns to send eight of his old robot masters to contend with the hero once again . After vanquishing four of the robot masters , Mega Man heads to Wily 's Fortress and deals with the remaining half of them . The protagonist then battles a new robot designed solely for destroying him , the " Mega Man Killer " Enker . As Mega Man defeats Enker and obtains his mirror buster ability , Wily retreats to a space station . Mega Man gives chase and , using the mirror buster , destroys Wily 's newly built , final weapon . After putting a stop to his nemesis once again , Mega Man travels back home via space shuttle . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mega Man : Dr. Wily 's Revenge is an action @-@ platformer that shares many similarities with its NES counterparts . The player , as Mega Man , is able to choose among four stages to complete in whatever order desired . Each stage contains various enemies to blast through and obstacles to overcome , such as leaping between disappearing blocks over deadly spikes and bottomless pits . Mega Man 's primary weapon is an arm cannon that has unlimited ammunition . Destroyed enemies typically leave items that replenish Mega Man 's health or extra lives . At the end of every stage is a boss battle with a robot master , and defeating it earns the player its special weapon . Each boss is weak to another 's weapon , allowing the player to strategize the order in which they are beaten . 
 Dr. Wily 's Revenge reuses and mixes stage components , enemies , and robot masters from the first two NES games in the Mega Man series . The initial four stages and bosses ( Cut Man , Ice Man , Fire Man , and Elec Man ) come from the original Mega Man . A password system allows the player to return to the game after any or all of these first four stages are cleared or when the player suffers a game over . Once the player completes these stages and travels through Wily 's fortress , four more robot masters must be fought in order to progress . These bosses ( Quick Man , Bubble Man , Flash Man , and Heat Man ) are taken from Mega Man 2 for NES . Although they do not have their own stages , the player earns the special weapons of these bosses . Once all four are defeated , the player faces a new robot master created for the game , Enker . 
 = = Development = = 
 According to series artist and producer Keiji Inafune , Mega Man : Dr. Wily 's Revenge was the first Mega Man game to be outsourced by Capcom for its development . He felt the game turned out well because the project 's leader was a " huge Mega Man fan " who appeared to understand the games better than some of Capcom 's own people . Because he thought much of his artwork from the original Mega Man was not aging well , Inafune redrew many of his old illustrations to be used for the game 's enemy character sprites . Beginning with Mega Man 2 for the NES , Capcom began accepting boss ideas from fans . It was not until Dr. Wily 's Revenge that Inafune was able to design a boss character from scratch . To keep with the musical motif of naming characters , the new character Enker was named after the Japanese genre <unk> . 
 The decision to release a Game Boy incarnation of the Mega Man series came after the release of Mega Man 3 on the NES . Early reports of Dr. Wily 's Revenge were made in February 1991 in both the magazine GamePro and Steven A. Schwartz 's book The Official Guide to Mega Man . The North American version of this game and the first DOS Mega Man game share a similar cover art . Instead of being an all new illustration , the Dr. Wily 's Revenge North American artwork is a simple touch @-@ up of Mega Man 3 's regional cover , with the surrounding landscape and robot masters cropped out of the picture . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 General critical reception for Mega Man : Dr. Wily 's Revenge has been above average , a popular opinion being that the game retains the respectable run @-@ and @-@ gun gameplay of the earliest NES entries in the series . " What makes this game especially attractive to adults , " proclaimed Entertainment Weekly 's Bob Strauss , " is that you can begin your quest on any one of four stages , thus avoiding that linear , start @-@ over @-@ again @-@ from @-@ scratch quality that only 12 @-@ year @-@ olds find hypnotic . " The use of old stages and bosses has not been universally positive . GamePro was disappointed by the game 's lack of originality but preferred its use of recycled content to poorly made new content . In a 2007 retrospective of the Mega Man franchise , 1UP.com writer Jeremy Parish found the use of rehashed details acceptable for its original release , but believed that Dr. Wily 's Revenge " hasn 't really held up " . 
 Reviewers have also commented on the game 's high difficulty level . Craig Skistimas of ScrewAttack stated that certain parts of the game simply require one to have played before in order to succeed . Allgame contributor Colin Williamson noted the game as extremely hard due to its " pixel @-@ perfect jumps " , the " sheer number of attackers and flying bullets " , and a lack of checkpoints within each stage . IGN editor Lucas M. Thomas pointed out that the large size of the player character within the small Game Boy screen makes dodging enemy attacks overly challenging and sometimes impossible . He furthermore observed the difficulty to be compounded by a lack of helpful Energy Tanks introduced in the NES Mega Man sequels . 
 The readers of GamePro voted Dr. Wily 's Revenge the best handheld game of 1991 . Nintendo Power readers voted it the fifth @-@ best Game Boy game of that year . In North America , Dr. Wily 's Revenge was released under Nintendo 's Player 's Choice best @-@ seller label in 1996 . The game was followed by four sequels on the Game Boy , of which the first three similarly recycle content from the NES games . In Japan , the game was made available on the Nintendo Power cartridge service on March 13 , 2001 . Capcom had planned to release a full @-@ color compilation of all five Game Boy games on the Game Boy Advance in 2004 , but the project was cancelled . In 2011 , Dr. Wily 's Revenge was released as a Virtual Console launch title on Japan 's Nintendo eShop for the Nintendo 3DS . The game made its way to PAL region and North American <unk> later that year . 
 The character Enker , who debuted in Dr. Wily 's Revenge , appeared as a boss in the Game Boy game Mega Man V and as a playable character in the Super Nintendo Entertainment System game Mega Man Soccer . A downloadable stage in Mega Man 10 features Enker as its boss and his Mirror Buster weapon as the reward for beating him . 
 = = Other Media = = 
 Mega Man : Dr. Wily 's Revenge ( Rockman World ) is one of the video games featured in the manga titled Rock 'n Game Boy , by Shigeto <unk> and Published by Comic <unk> October 1989 to December 1991 . 
 = Lupe Fiasco = 
 Wasalu Muhammad Jaco ( born February 16 , 1982 ) , better known by his stage name Lupe Fiasco ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ pay ) , is an American rapper , record producer , and entrepreneur . He rose to fame in 2006 following the success of his debut album , Lupe Fiasco 's Food & Liquor . He also performs as the frontman of rock band Japanese Cartoon under his real name . As an entrepreneur , Fiasco is the chief executive officer of 1st & 15th Entertainment . 
 Raised in Chicago , Jaco developed an interest in hip hop after initially disliking the genre for its use of vulgarity and misogyny . After adopting the name Lupe Fiasco and recording songs in his father 's basement , 19 @-@ year @-@ old Fiasco joined a group called Da Pak . The group disbanded shortly after its inception , and Fiasco soon met rapper Jay @-@ Z who helped him sign a record deal with Atlantic Records . In September 2006 , Fiasco released his debut album Lupe Fiasco 's Food & Liquor on the label , which received three Grammy nominations . He released his second album , Lupe Fiasco 's The Cool , in December 2007 . The lead single " Superstar " became his first top 40 hit on the Billboard Hot 100 . After a two @-@ year delay , Lasers was released in March 2011 to mixed reviews ; however , it became his first album to debut at number one on the Billboard 200 . His latest album , Tetsuo & Youth , was released in January 2015 . 
 In addition to music , Fiasco has pursued other business ventures , including fashion . He runs two clothing lines , Righteous Kung @-@ Fu and <unk> & Truly ; he has designed sneakers for Reebok . He has been involved with charitable activities , including the Summit on the Summit expedition , and in 2010 he recorded a benefit single for victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake . Fiasco is also noted for his anti @-@ establishment views , which he has expressed in both interviews and his music . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1982 – 99 : Early life = = = 
 Fiasco was born Wasalu Muhammad Jaco on February 16 , 1982 in Chicago , Illinois . Of West African descent , he was one of nine children of Shirley , a gourmet chef , and Gregory , an engineer . His father , a member of the Black Panther Party , was a prolific African drummer , karate teacher , operating plant engineer , and owner of karate schools and army surplus stores . Fiasco was raised Muslim on the West Side of Chicago on Madison Terrace housing project . At the age of three , Fiasco began taking martial arts classes . His parents divorced when he was five , and he went on to live with his mother , but his father still remained an important part of his life . He described his father 's influence over the family by saying , " After school , my father would come and get us and take us out into the world — one day , we 're listening to N.W.A , the next day we 're listening to Ravi Shankar , the next day , he 's teaching us how to shoot an AK @-@ 47 , the next day , we 're at karate class , the next day , we 're in Chinatown ... " . 
 In sixth grade , he went to live with his father full @-@ time in Harvey , Illinois . His father lived next door to a crack house and taught Fiasco to use guns to defend himself from drug dealers . Despite his unstable upbringing , Fiasco states that he was well @-@ educated as a child , asserting that his parents exposed him to a diverse array of subjects and that reading was highly encouraged in his household . As a teenager , Fiasco participated in Academic Decathlon competitions . His mother described him by saying , " He was a great spirited child . Smart , a bit complex ; he kind of was a loner ; he didn 't hang with a lot of people ... He always had the glasses . Always had a book bag over his shoulder and some type of a writing tablet . " Fiasco initially disliked hip hop music for its use of vulgarity , and preferred to listen to jazz ; he idolized clarinet player Benny Goodman . His struggle to learn to play an instrument led him to create poetry instead , which led to his interest in the lyrical aspects of music . 
 He began rapping his poems in the eighth grade , and upon hearing Nas ' 1996 album , It Was Written , began to pursue hip hop . While attending Thornton Township High School , Fiasco met gang member Bishop G. The two became friends due to their shared interest in music . Fiasco 's father allowed him and Bishop to make mixtapes in his basement , and the two gained notoriety at the school for their music . However , they were kicked off stage during their first performance because their eclectic musical style was not embraced by the hip hop community . Early in his career , he went by stage names Little Lu and Lu tha Underdog . Growing up , Fiasco was given the nickname " Lu " , the last part of his first name , by his mother . " Lupe " is an extension of this nickname , which he borrowed from a friend from high school . " Fiasco " is a reference to The Firm song " Firm Fiasco " ; the rapper " liked the way it looked on paper . " He also said of his name , " You know how rappers always have names like MC Terrorist — like they 're ' terrorizing ' other rappers ? I knew fiasco meant a great disaster or something like that , but I didn 't realize that the person named Fiasco would be the disaster , and that you should be calling other MCs fiascos — not yourself ... it kind of humbled me in a sense . It taught me like , ' Yo , stop rushing , or you 're going to have some fiascos . ' " 
 = = = 2000 – 2005 : Career beginnings = = = 
 When Fiasco was 18 , he began creating music as a solo artist in his father 's basement , even though his parents were not keen on having their son be a rapper . He scoured flea markets and secondhand stores , where he was able to find an old mixing board and a record player , stacks of vinyl records , and mic stands . At age 19 , Fiasco joined a group called Da Pak , which was influenced by other California gangsta rappers such as Spice 1 and Ice Cube . Da Pak signed to Epic Records and released one single before splitting up . Fiasco later described the experience , saying " We had a song out about cocaine , guns , and women , and I would go to a record store and look at it and think , ' What are you doing ? ' I felt like a hypocrite . I was acting like this rapper who would never be judged , and I had to destroy that guy . Because what Lupe Fiasco says on this microphone is going to come back to Wasalu Jaco . When the music cuts off , you have to go home and live with what you say . " 
 After turning away from gangsta rap , he developed a greater appreciation of the lyricism of Jay Z and Nas . His mother also gave him a record of the influential group The Watts Prophets , one of the first bands to use spoken words with music . Although he was without a group for the first time , Fiasco continued to record music . One of these first self @-@ recorded tracks was " Could Have Been " , which described the career options he could have pursued had he not begun rapping . He viewed the song as a turning point in his career that marked a drastic change in the subject matter of his music . " Could Have Been " was released as a demo tape and discovered by MTV despite the fact that no video was created for the song . 
 Fiasco later signed a solo deal with Arista Records , but was dropped when president and CEO L.A. Reid was fired . During his short tenure at Arista , he met Jay @-@ Z , who was the president of Def Jam Recordings at the time . Jay @-@ Z referred to him as a " breath of fresh air " , saying that he reminded him of a younger version of himself . Jay @-@ Z later helped him get a record deal at Atlantic Records . While Fiasco was working on his debut solo album , he released his mixtape series Fahrenheit 1 / 15 over the internet , which gained notoriety by word @-@ of @-@ mouth . 
 He remixed Kanye West 's song , " Diamonds from Sierra Leone " , renaming the new version as " Conflict Diamonds " . With this remix , Fiasco wished to raise awareness of the conflict diamond business . This caught West 's attention , and he asked Fiasco to perform on the song " Touch the Sky " for West 's album Late Registration . The song , which sampled Curtis Mayfield 's " Move On Up " , became a hit in the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at number forty @-@ two . After this success , Fiasco 's first single " Kick , Push " was released earlier than expected . The song was a love story about two people sharing a passion for skateboarding , a topic generally not discussed in hip @-@ hop . Fiasco explained , " [ Skateboarding culture is ] just as deep as hip @-@ hop . I 'm not the greatest skateboarder , but I 'm a damn good rapper , so I made a damn good skateboarding song . " The single , and its accompanying music video , helped Fiasco get attention in the hip @-@ hop community , and was later nominated for two 2007 Grammy Awards . During this time , he recorded guest performances on Tha ' Rayne 's " Kiss Me " and " Didn 't You Know " singles , and also on K Foxx 's 2004 " This Life " . 
 = = = 2006 – 08 : Lupe Fiasco 's Food & Liquor and The Cool = = = 
 Jay Z assisted him in the production of what would become his debut album Lupe Fiasco 's Food & Liquor . The title of the album is a reference to ' Food and Liquor ' stores common in Chicago . He explains , " The store is where everything is at ... Food to me represents growth and progression . You eat food and you get strength . You need it to live . Liquor is not a necessity ; it is a want . It destroys you . It breaks you down . I can see why it 's prohibited in Islam ... I 've always felt like liquor represents the bad , the food represents the good , and everyone is made up of a little of both . " Lupe Fiasco 's Food & Liquor was officially released on September 19 , 2006 . The album featured production from Jay @-@ Z , Kanye West , Mike Shinoda , The Neptunes , <unk> , among others . The record spawned the singles " Kick , Push " , " I Gotcha " and " Daydreamin ' " featuring Jill Scott . The critically lauded album was later nominated for three Grammy Awards including Best Rap Album . Fiasco won " Best Urban / Alternative Performance " for " Daydreamin ' " . In the same year , he was voted by GQ magazine as the " Breakout Man of the Year . " He also received four BET Hip Hop Award nominations , and it made it to number eight on Billboard 200 and number two on Billboard Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . That same year he participated in the first Cypher at the BET Hip @-@ Hop Awards . 
 In 2007 , Fiasco announced his second album , Lupe Fiasco 's The Cool , a concept album that expands on the story of the track of the same name on his first album . While recording this album , Fiasco 's father died of type II diabetes and his business partner , Charles " Chilly " Patton , was convicted of attempting to supply heroin to a drug ring and was eventually sentenced to 44 years in a correctional facility . These events greatly affected Fiasco and the subsequent themes discussed on the record . The disc was released in December 2007 in United States while the first single and video from the album , " Superstar " featuring Matthew Santos was released the first week of November 2007 . Lupe Fiasco 's The Cool , a concept album that expanded upon recurring themes in Food & Liquor , is about " a hustler who dies and comes back to life , only to get robbed by two little kids with the same gun that killed him . " For the record , Fiasco decided not to work with well @-@ known producers as he considered it to be " too expensive " , noting the commercial failure of his Pharrell collaboration , " I Gotcha " . 
 Lupe Fiasco 's The Cool was very well received by critics and was referred to as " one of the year 's best hip @-@ hop albums " by The New York Times . " Superstar " , a semi @-@ autobiographical account of his rise to fame , was released as the first single from the album , and peaked at number 10 on the Billboard Hot 100 . Baseball 's Hanley Ramírez , Troy Tulowitzki , Ryan Zimmerman , Gerald Laird and Ryan Braun have used " Superstar " as their at @-@ bat song . The album 's second single ( released in the UK in April 2008 ) was " Paris , Tokyo " – a song based around Fiasco 's experiences of touring the world between his first and second albums . Moreover , in 2007 it was revealed that Fiasco , Kanye West and Pharrell Williams had formed a group called Child Rebel Soldier . CRS initially released one single , entitled " US <unk> " and featuring a Thom Yorke sample . In an interview with The Village Voice , Fiasco revealed that he was writing a novel about a window washer , aptly titled Reflections of a Window Washer . In 2008 , Fiasco and his band 1500 or Nothin joined Kanye West 's Glow in the Dark Tour which also featured Rihanna and N.E.R.D. The tour stopped in several cities , including his hometown of Chicago . In 2008 , MTV named Fiasco the 7th Hottest MC in the Game and announced that he was remixing The Cool with French electro house act Justice . 
 = = = 2009 – 11 : Lasers = = = 
 At a performance in New Zealand in February 2010 , Fiasco performed new material from the then @-@ titled We Are Lasers for the first time . He claimed that the album was complete and waiting for a release date from his label , Atlantic Records . However , Atlantic feared that the record lacked commercial singles , and presented Fiasco with songs the label wanted him to record . Fiasco declined , as he was told he would not have any ownership of the songs . He explained , " I don 't think the label cares about an album ... People just want their number @-@ one record . " For six months , the cause of the album 's delay remained unclear to the public . In response , Fiasco 's fans created an online petition demanding that Atlantic Records release Lasers . The petition garnered considerable attention on hip hop blog sites as well as over 16 @,@ 000 signatures . Fiasco stated that the petition " brought [ him ] to tears " , and in response to the petition , Fiasco released a song titled " <unk> @-@ Building Minds Faster " to thank his fans . 
 While waiting for Lasers to be released , Fiasco completed another album , titled Food & Liquor II : The Great American Rap Album . He was unsure if the Food and Liquor II would ever be released , though he released the song " Go To Sleep " from the record " out of desperation " to put out new music . He also pursued numerous side projects in the midst of the delay . In April 2010 , Fiasco formed the hip hop collective All City Chess Club along with Pharrell , Asher Roth , B.o.B , The Cool Kids , Charles Hamilton , Blu , Diggy Simmons , Wale , J. Cole , & Dosage . The group has so far made one song , a remix of Fiasco 's " I 'm <unk> " . Additionally , On July 16 , 2010 , Fiasco released his rock side @-@ project Japanese Cartoon 's debut EP In The Jaws of the Lords of Death . Japanese Cartoon was influenced by a variety of musical genres , with Fiasco saying , " I 've always been a fan of all music ... Hip hop is just something I actually know how to do but I always had aspirations to participate in other forms of music . Once I got to create some hip hop , it was like , ' Okay , what am I going to do now ? ' So my artistic side was like , ' Yo , let 's do some rock music . ' " 
 More than two and a half years after the album 's completion , Lasers was released on March 8 , 2011 . The first single from the record was " The Show Goes On " , which samples " Float On " by Modest Mouse . " The Show Goes On " debuted at number 57 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The lead single peaked at number 9 since then . The producers involved on the album include Alex Da Kidd , King David " The Future " and Jerry " Wonda " Duplessis , while featured artists include Skylar Grey , Trey Songz , and John Legend . Upon the album 's release , Lasers debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart , with first @-@ week sales of 204 @,@ 000 copies . Despite the album 's commercial success , Lasers received mixed reviews from most music critics . Writing for AllMusic , editor Andy Kellman gave the record three out of five stars and criticized its " lumbering , overwrought choruses " , writing that " If there is one MC whose rhymes should not be dulled for the sake of chasing pop trends , it 's Lupe Fiasco " . Lasers , however , was nominated Best Rap Album , with " The Show Goes On " nominated for Best Rap Performance , and Best Rap Song at the 2012 Grammy Awards . Lupe Fiasco later involved himself at the Occupy Wall Street movement where he donated tents and released a poem in support of the protesters . He also released his " Friend of the People : I Fight Evil " mixtape on Thanksgiving Day . 
 = = = 2012 – 13 : Food & Liquor II : The Great American Rap Album = = = 
 Fiasco has since released Food & Liquor 2 , as well as put work into a joint album with fellow Child Rebel Soldier & All City Chess Club member Pharrell . Prior to the album 's release , he revealed that there would be no more mixtapes after " Friend Of The People : I Fight Evil " prior to Food & Liquor II : The Great American Rap Album , which was planned to be a double @-@ disc with Part I set to release in fall 2012 . Its lead single , the <unk> and B @-@ Side produced track Around My Way ( Freedom Ain 't Free ) , was released on May 21 , which stirred controversy from an infuriated Pete Rock for using a sample from They <unk> Over You ( <unk> ) . Rock said that he felt " so violated " by the use of the sample , although the original track itself used samples from Tom Scott and James Brown . 
 Fiasco recently collaborated with Australian singer / songwriter Guy Sebastian on the single " Battle Scars " . The single was recorded in Sebastian 's Sydney studio when Fiasco was in Australia for Supafest , and is featured on Sebastian 's album Armageddon . It debuted at number one in Australia in its first week , becoming Fiasco 's first number one single . On 21 August it was announced " Battle Scars " would be included on Fiasco 's fourth album , Food & Liquor II : The Great American Rap Album Pt . 1 , and was released as the fourth single in the United States on 28 August 2012 . It reached number 71 on the US Billboard Hot 100 Chart , number 23 on the Billboard Digital Song Chart and number one on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Digital Song Chart . The song spent 20 nonconsecutive weeks in the Billboard Hot 100 , and reached platinum certification . " Battle Scars " spent six weeks at number one in Australia , and has been certified 9 × platinum by ARIA . It also reached number two and double platinum in New Zealand and number two in Norway . 
 Food & Liquor II : The Great American Rap Album Pt . 1 was released on September 25 , 2012 . The songs " Go to Sleep " and " Bitch Bad " were also released as singles . The album received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 70 , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " , based on 18 reviews . It was also nominated for Best Rap Album at the 55th Grammy Awards . Originally , the album was set to be released as a double @-@ disc album , but Atlantic Records did not allow this arrangement , so the album was divided into two . It was confirmed that a Part 2 will be released in Spring 2013 . Lupe has said the album showcases more of his dexterity and lyrical substance . S1 has confirmed to be producing on the album . On January 17 , 2013 he canceled the plan for the release of the second part of the original double disk . He then said that he would release another studio album in 2013 . 
 = = = 2013 – present : Tetsuo & Youth = = = 
 On February 10 , 2013 , on the red carpet for the Grammy Awards he announced his fifth studio album would be titled Tetsuo & Youth . Since then , he has released songs that are not slated to be on Tetsuo & Youth . These songs are " Light Blue " and " <unk> Forever . " Upon hearing her name in Lupe 's song Form Follows Function , Imogen Heap reached out to Lupe on Twitter to give a thank you which led to Fiasco asking her to appear on his next album making her a possible guest artist on Tetsuo and Youth . On August 4 , 2013 Lupe Fiasco revealed a new song would be released on September 11 , titled " Peace of Paper / Cup of <unk> " . 
 On August 24 , 2013 , Fiasco revealed the first song from Tetsuo & Youth , " Crack " , featuring Chris Brown . Then on October 3 , 2013 , Fiasco announced the Tetsuo & Youth Preview tour to take place between November 2 and December 15 , 2013 . The tour featuring label @-@ mate <unk> as a supporting act , and The Boy Illinois as an opening act . He also revealed the album Tetsuo & Youth would be released in early 2014 , but was later postponed to 2015 . On October 14 , 2013 , Fiasco released the first supposed song from the album , " Old School Love " , featuring singer Ed Sheeran . Then on October 21 , 2013 , Fiasco revealed that Big K.R.I.T. and Rick Ross would also be featured on the album . 
 On May 19 , 2014 , Fiasco released the first promotional single before the announcement of the album 's tracklist . " Mission " is a track to empower those facing cancer , revere cancer survivors , and remember those who have passed due to cancer @-@ related illnesses , " he explains . He has teamed up with Stand Up to Cancer as a celebrity ambassador . Together , they are planning collaborations tied to the track that will be unveiled the same year . On June 24 , 2014 , Fiasco released a second promotional single titled " Next to It " which features Ty Dolla Sign on the hook . 
 Most recently due to the Ferguson riots of last year , Lupe Fiasco has ended up on Twitter feuds with fellow rappers Azealia Banks and Kid Cudi . The feud between Kid Cudi and Lupe Fiasco has not been resolved and has reportedly become worse , with Lupe Fiasco making threats on MTV . 
 On August 29 , 2015 , Lupe surprised fans with a new free mixtape , entitled Pharaoh Height , featuring six new tracks that carry Egyptian @-@ themed titles with cuts like " Valleys , " " Kings , " and " Pyramid . " 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Jaco 's influence include Nas , Jay Z , Common , AZ , De La Soul , N.W.A , Mos Def , Pharrell Williams , A Tribe Called Quest , Q @-@ Tip , and Gang Starr . 
 = = = Lyrical style = = = 
 Fiasco , along with rappers Common , Mos Def and Talib Kweli , has been credited as a pioneer of the conscious hip hop movement , which focuses on social issues . Subjects touched upon on Lupe Fiasco 's Food & Liquor include absent parents , terrorism , Islam and religion , war , and prostitution . Fiasco attributes his interest in social issues to his highly cultured upbringing , as he describes his mother as " very intellectual " and his father as a " Renaissance man " . He rejects the misogyny common in hip hop , which he discusses in the song " Hurt Me Soul " . Despite this , Fiasco is strongly opposed to censorship in music : " If we 're going to [ censor things ] that are offensive , then we are going to have to blind and deafen everyone . Come on , man . Let 's focus on education and literacy and poverty . " 
 Fiasco employs various lyrical techniques in his songwriting . The rapper views hip @-@ hop as a medium conducive to storytelling , a primary element of his lyrics due to his background in theater . He wrote plays as a child , which had a strong effect on his songwriting approaches . Fiasco utilizes both metaphors and literal statements in his work , which he describes as " getting from point A to point B in as few words as possible " . His use of metaphors is exemplified by the song " Gotta Eat " from Lupe Fiasco 's The Cool , which is told from the perspective of a cheeseburger and addresses the poor nutrition in black communities in the United States , while using a continuous metaphor of drug dealing and hustling . 
 = = Philanthropy and business ventures = = 
 In 2001 , Fiasco co @-@ founded 1st & 15th Entertainment with Charles " Chilly " Patton . 1st & 15th is an independent record label separate from Atlantic Records named after the traditional twice @-@ monthly paycheck dates . Although his albums are released by Atlantic since he is under contract with them , most of his works are usually produced by 1st & 15th and its in house producers . Although Fiasco was initially to serve as vice @-@ president , he became CEO after Patton was convicted on drug charges . Fiasco and singer Matthew Santos were two of the most recognizable signed artists . In November 2009 , Fiasco announced he would discontinue the 1st & 15th label : " It was just such a ' this isn 't right for you right now . This isn 't gonna work for you right now . You need to be focused on you . Do you really want that , do you really have the capacity to do it ? ' " In March 2013 Fiasco took to Twitter to announce that he had become the Creative Director at <unk> , a scoring system based in the Chicago area that helps you to discover more about yourself so you can look , live and feel better . 
 In 2005 , he founded Righteous Kung @-@ Fu , a company that designs fashions , sneakers , toys , video games , comic books , and graphics for album covers and skateboard decks . Fiasco also runs a fashion line out of Righteous Kung @-@ Fu called <unk> & Truly . He has sponsored a skateboard team and has endorsements from <unk> Skateboards . In January 2006 , Fiasco signed with major footwear and apparel corporation Reebok , becoming part of the " <unk> " marketing campaign where rap artists such as Lil Wayne and Mike Jones designed their own personal <unk> of the Reebok " <unk> " model . 
 In 2009 , Fiasco performed in The People Speak , a documentary feature film that employs musical performances of the letters , diaries , and speeches of everyday Americans , based on historian Howard Zinn 's A People 's History of the United States . On January 7 , 2010 , Fiasco joined musician Kenna , actress Jessica Biel , and other celebrities and activists for an expedition to the top of Mount Kilimanjaro called Summit on the Summit to raise awareness of the billions of people worldwide who lack access to sanitary drinking water . On January 20 , 2010 , Fiasco released a track called " Resurrection " with Kenna in response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake . The song , part of a compilation released through the charity Music for Relief , aimed to encourage donations for immediate relief and long @-@ term recovery following the disaster . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Lupe Fiasco is an avid video game fan and likes to play the Street Fighter series of fighting games . He announced that he will be playing an exhibition Street Fighter V match against professional player Daigo Umehara . Fiasco defeated Daigo 3 @-@ 2 using Ken . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Lupe Fiasco has stated on MTV 's Rap Fix as well as in various other media that he is a Muslim , and that Islam " plays a part in my life and everything I do , to a certain extent ... I don 't like putting my religion out there , I don 't like wearing it like that , because I don 't want people to look at me as the poster child for Islam . I 'm not . I don 't want them to look at my flaws and be like , ' oh , that 's the flaws of Islam ' . " His mixtape series Fahrenheit 1 / 15 featured a remix of Kanye West 's " Jesus Walks " entitled " Muhammad Walks " , which went on to become very popular in the Muslim community . He can be heard using Islamic recitals in " Hurt Me Soul " , " Little Weapon " , " Hi @-@ Definition " as well as the intro and outro tracks to Lupe Fiasco 's Food & Liquor . Most recently , Lupe Fiasco claimed to believe Islam will one day take over the world . 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 Fiasco is noted for his anti @-@ establishment views . In an interview with Stephen Colbert on the satirical news show The Colbert Report , Fiasco stated his credo on political philosophy : " You should criticize power even if you agree with it . " In another interview in June 2011 on the CBS program What 's Trending , Fiasco discussed the political content of his music , stating , " My fight against terrorism , to me , the biggest terrorist is Obama and the United States of America . I 'm trying to fight the terrorism that 's actually causing the other forms of terrorism . You know , the root cause of terrorism is the stuff the U.S. government allows to happen . The foreign policies that we have in place in different countries that inspire people to become terrorists . " He additionally criticized Obama for his stance on the Israeli – Palestinian conflict . In keeping with his anti @-@ establishment views , Fiasco does not vote in U.S. elections . On January 20 , 2013 , he was removed from the stage by the security for refusing to move onto the next song after performing a 30 @-@ minute version of " Words I Never Said " , which contains anti @-@ Obama lyrics , in Washington D.C. , during Obama 's second presidential inauguration . In June 2015 , Lupe Fiasco wrote an open letter about white supremacy . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Lupe Fiasco 's Food & Liquor ( 2006 ) 
 Lupe Fiasco 's The Cool ( 2007 ) 
 Lasers ( 2011 ) 
 Food & Liquor II : The Great American Rap Album Pt . 1 ( 2012 ) 
 Tetsuo & Youth ( 2015 ) 
 <unk> Light ( 2016 ) 
 <unk> ( 2016 ) 
 <unk> ( 2016 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 In 2006 , Lupe was named one of GQ 's Men of the Year along with being awarded one Grammy in 2008 along with 12 nominations . He has been nominated for numerous other awards and has also been awarded the Character Approved Award for a Musician by USA in 2009 . 
 = Michael Jackson 's This Is It = 
 Michael Jackson 's This Is It is a 2009 American documentary – concert film directed by Kenny Ortega that documents Michael Jackson 's rehearsals and preparation for his concert series of the same name that was originally scheduled to start on July 13 , 2009 , but cancelled due to his death eighteen days prior on June 25 . The film consists of Jackson rehearsing musical numbers , directing his team , and additional behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage including dancer auditions and costume design . The film 's director Kenny Ortega confirmed that none of this footage was originally intended for release , but after Jackson 's death it was agreed that the film be made . The footage was filmed in California at the Staples Center and The Forum , and features a clip from London 's O2 Arena where Jackson publicly announced the concert series . 
 Despite originally being set for October 30 , the film 's release date was rescheduled for October 28 2009 due to a strong demand by Jackson 's fans . The film was given a worldwide release and a limited two @-@ week theatrical run from October 28 to November 12 , 2009 , but theatrical release was later extended . Tickets went on sale a month early ( on September 27 ) to satisfy a high anticipated demand ; to date , the film has broken numerous records via tickets both presale and sales worldwide . 
 Since the film 's confirmation , AEG Live has faced criticism ; mostly consisting of claims that they had only made the film to make a profit . Multiple members of Jackson 's family had confirmed that they did not support the film and some family members went as far as to try to stop the film agreement in August . The film has also been surrounded by allegations regarding the appearance of body doubles in place of Jackson , which Sony denied ; and an outrage from some of Jackson fans , with some going as far as to start a protest against the film . In August 2009 , a judge approved a deal between Jackson 's estate , concert promoter AEG Live , and Sony Pictures ( sister company to Jackson 's record distributors of his album label ) . The agreement allowed Sony to edit the hundreds of hours of rehearsal footage needed to create the film . Sony subsequently paid $ 50 million for the film rights . 
 The film received generally positive reviews from both critics and Jackson fans ; the film 's portrayal of Jackson and his performances were generally praised , while criticism mainly consisted of both critics and fans having felt that the film was made just to profit off Jackson 's death and that Jackson would not have wanted the film released because he was a perfectionist . Despite some fans boycotting the film , and his family not endorsing the film , the ticket sales for This Is It broke international records a month before its release . Among the cities with the strongest sales were Los Angeles , San Francisco , Houston and New York . Records were also set in Japan , where more than $ 1 million in tickets were sold on the first day they were available . In London , fans bought more than 30 @,@ 000 tickets on the first day . Record sales were also reported in the Netherlands , Sweden , Belgium , Brazil , and New Zealand . In the first opening weekend it grossed $ 101 million worldwide . The film sold $ 32 @.@ 5 million over its first five days in the U.S. and Canada , and $ 68 @.@ 5 million in 97 other countries — making the number one film at the box office and making it the fifth highest @-@ grossing Halloween debut . On its theatrical run , the film 's worldwide revenue gross was in total $ 261 million and become the highest @-@ grossing concert film of all time ( Worldwide ) . 
 = = Concept = = 
 The film begins with a short text introduction stating the purpose of the footage and its intent " For the fans ... " After short dialogues from various dancers , Ortega is heard talking through the original concert opening sequence involving a body suit made from screens which display fast clips and images with bright intensity from which Jackson emerges on stage . Immediately after this , Jackson begins " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " first solo , which pauses half @-@ way through and a small snippet of Jackson singing " Speechless " a cappella is shown . Jackson is then joined by dancers and completes the first number . A short clip showing rehearsals of the " toaster " mechanism is shown before rehearsal footage of " Jam " is played . This plays directly into the green screen adaptation of soldiers dancers for " Bad " which are also used for " They Don 't Care About Us " which is shown next . From here , the film shows Michael directing Ortega and his band for his solo rehearsal performance of " Human Nature " which he performs a cappella , then acoustic and finally with full band . Green screen rehearsals for the video vignette for " Smooth Criminal " come next ( with scenes from his film Moonwalker as well as the film Gilda featuring Rita Hayworth as the title character singing " Put the Blame on Mame " ) , with dress rehearsals of the song following , including parts of the vignette intertwined with the dancing . Jackson is seen next directing his musical team for the cues in his song " The Way You Make Me Feel " . Jackson then performs a rehearsal with dancers which he alters and changes as he goes . Jackson then rehearses a medley of The Jackson 5 songs : " I Want You Back " , " The Love You Save " , " I 'll Be There " and " Shake Your Body ( Down to the Ground ) " . After this , Jackson sings with Judith Hill , one of his backup singers , on his duet song " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " in which he sings at full strength , directing his partner as he goes . The filming for the " Thriller " vignette is then shown with Jackson and Ortega watching with 3D glasses . Jackson is then seen rehearsing " Thriller " with the vignette intertwined like that in " Smooth Criminal . " Footage of the show 's aerialists rehearsing to the instrumental of " Who Is It " is shown next . 
 During the dance sequence , puppets are suspended in the audience aisles while Jackson emerges from a robotic spider originally seen in the vignette . Jackson and Ortega rehearsing the cherry @-@ picker is seen next , along with Jackson rehearsing " Beat It " . Footage of Jackson and the band rehearsing " Black or White " is shown next , in which he instructs his band to skip the second verse and later allows guitarist Orianthi <unk> to take center stage to finish with a high guitar riff . The video sequence for " Earth Song " is shown next , featuring a little girl who wanders through a forest , falls asleep , and wakes up to find the forest destroyed by man . Jackson then performs the song , with his voice being heard at the end telling of the dangers of global warming and the lack of reversible time left . He then performs a quick version of his song " Billie Jean " . Michael is then seen talking to all crew members and wishing everyone the best for the London performances . At a sound check , Michael performs " Man in the Mirror " with strong backing vocals . The credits are shown next , with a montage of rehearsal clips and " This Is It " being played in the background . After the show , a live recording of " Heal The World " was played . Then , the audio of " Human Nature " was played , with a clip of Michael rehearsing it in early June ( the 3D screen was not set up yet ) . Then , a clip of what could have been a Dome Project video of " Heal the World " was shown , in which the girl that appeared in the " Earth Song " video was shown holding the world and a signed message , by Michael , saying " I Love You . " 
 = = = Songs performed in the film = = = 
 = = Background = = 
 On March 5 , 2009 at the O2 Arena , Jackson announced that he was to perform 10 concerts as part of a comeback . Jackson suggested possible post @-@ show retirement by stating : " I just wanted to say that these will be my final show performances in London . When I say this is it , it really means this is it , this will be the final curtain call . " On March 11 , two days before pre @-@ sale began , an extra 40 dates were added to meet high demand , bringing the number of shows to 50 — five of these dates were reserved in their entirety for the public sale . Jackson 's 50 dates would make the concerts the longest residency at the arena . In May 2009 , the show was originally set to have begun on July 8 , 2009 , and finished on March 6 , 2010 . 
 On May 20 . 2009 , it was announced that the first concert would be pushed back by eight days to July 16 , and three other July dates would be rescheduled for March 2010 . AEG Live stated that the delay was necessary because more time was needed to prepare , mainly for dress rehearsals . The revised schedule called for 27 shows between July 16 , and September 29 , 2009 , followed by a three @-@ month break , and resuming in 2010 , with 23 more shows between January 7 , and March 6 , 2010 . The This Is It concerts would have been Jackson 's first major performances and series of concerts since the HIStory World Tour that began in 1996 and finished in 1997 . In preparation for the concerts , Jackson had been collaborating with multiple well known and high profile figures , such as Kenny Ortega , who would have served as his choreographer . On June 29 , 2009 , only days after Jackson 's death , AEG Live , the concert 's promoter , offered ticket holders a choice ; to either get refunded all the money spent of their ticket ( s ) or to keep the ticket ( s ) as a souvenir and memento by receiving the printed ticket that Jackson had designed himself . 
 = = Music = = 
 The album , titled This Is It was released on October 26 and debuted at # 1 on the Billboard 200 album chart with the sales of over 373 @,@ 000 in its first week of release . The two @-@ disc album features music ' that inspired the movie ' . Sony said of the albums that : " Disc one will feature the original album masters of some of Michael 's biggest hits arranged in the same sequence as they appear in the film " and stated that " the disc ends with two versions of the ' never @-@ released ' " This Is It " . This song is featured in the film 's closing sequence and includes backing vocals by Michael Jackson 's brothers , The Jacksons . " Sony also stated that the second disc will feature " previously unreleased versions " from Jackson 's ' catalogue of hits ' and that It will also include a spoken word poem entitled " Planet Earth " ( which originally appeared in the liner notes of the Dangerous ( 1991 ) album ) and a 36 @-@ page commemorative booklet with " photos of Michael [ Jackson ] from his last rehearsal " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The film 's director and choreographer Ortega stated that the rehearsal footage and concept of making a film to document the preparation of the concerts had come about as " an accident " . Ortega stated the film was pieced together from " private footage " shot by documentarians Sandrine <unk> and Tim Patterson of Jackson and the concerts crew rehearsing and that before Jackson 's death , was never intended to be released to the public , or even in general . " The recordings were made so we could use them , then the tapes were destined for Michael [ Jackson ] ' s private library . They have a real unguarded honesty to them . " Ortega stated that he had gotten the idea to use the rehearsal footage from Jackson 's fans after his death : " At first I got so many messages from fans around the world asking to see the shows , asking to see the footage and eventually I realized the journey wasn 't over and we had to do this " , and Ortega also stated that the film was made only for the Jackson fans : " [ The film ] is for the fans and the film will show the development and intentions of the show , and the concert as it moved closer to London . " 
 On August 10 , a Superior Court Judge officially approved the deal between Columbia Pictures ( film distributor ) and AEG Live ( the concerts ' promoter ) for Columbia to be able to purchase and distribute rehearsal footage of Jackson and the rehearsal crew for the film . The deal also included a merchandising agreement with Bravado International Group — the company is a division of Universal Music Group that is owned by Vivendi — so that they can distribute and sell " Jackson @-@ themed products " . Columbia had reportedly paid $ 60 million ( £ 35 million ) for rights to the rehearsal footage in court documents that were filed . The papers filed had also reportedly stated that Jackson 's estate will get 90 % of the profits and that AEG will get the remaining 10 % from the film 's revenue . In the agreement , Columbia and AEG Live both agreed in the deal that the final version of the film should be no longer than 150 minutes ( 2 hours and 30 minutes ) , and that the film must attain a PG rating . The contract also stated that the film is not allowed to show footage of Jackson that shows him in a negative way , stating that : " Footage that paints Jackson in a bad light will not be permitted " and " Under the terms of the proposed contract , the film will have to be screened for Jackson 's estate and cannot include any footage that puts the superstar in a bad light . " The court papers stated that in order for the film to be released to the public the final version of the film must be screened to representatives of Jackson 's Estate . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 On September 9 , 2009 , the film 's official theatrical poster was released . On September 10 , 2009 , it was reported that MTV 's Video Music Awards , which at the time had already announced that they would honor Jackson at the show would premiere the film 's first , and only known , trailer . Along with Janet Jackson 's tribute to Michael , the trailer of the film premiered at the 2009 MTV Video Music Award which was watched by a total of 9 million people . On September 13 , 2009 , it was reported that a " secret Michael Jackson [ promotional music ] single is being produced " to promote the film , at which the film would have , at the time , been released the following month . It was reported that Jackson had recorded the song for release with his planned summer tour but after his death it was shelved until producers in Los Angeles remixed the vocals with an orchestral accompaniment . 
 On September 23 , 2009 , it was reported that the film 's new song " This Is It " would be released on October 12 , 2009 , sixteen days before the film 's release . On October 9 , it was confirmed that the song would debut online the following Monday at midnight , receiving its world premiere on <unk> On September 21 , 2009 , Sony released a 45 @-@ second clip of Jackson rehearsing his performance for " Human Nature " and also released stills from the video clip . As part of a print marketing campaign for the film , Entertainment Weekly magazine did a cover story of the film for the magazine 's October 16 , 2009 issue , to coincide with the film 's release for that same month . Also as part of promotion for the film , Entertainment Weekly released 8 " never before seen " movie stills from the film . On October 21 , a clip of Jackson rehearsing " The Way You Make Me Feel " was released . On October 21 , a 2 @-@ minute featurette of the film was released . 
 In September 2009 , Sony launched " This @-@ Is @-@ It @-@ <unk> " , which allowed fans to sign up for an ' alert ' so that they can be able to take part in ' Michael Jackson 's This Is It mosaic ' , in which fans could upload photos to the website , beginning September 21 and running to September 30 , and the completed mosaic would be posted online on October 22 , six days before the film 's release . On September 24 , 2009 , MTV announced , after the success the project proved with New Moon , that they will allow MTV registered users , to " watch and comment on any scene in the film 's already released trailer " . MTV described the project as " essentially [ being ] an in @-@ video graphical overlay that allows users to comment on the video as it plays and review comments from other users . 
 = = = Ticket release = = = 
 On September 25 , 2009 , lines opened at the courtyard outside the Nokia Theatre 's L.A. Live complex in downtown Los Angeles . Hundreds of people were waiting in line to purchase tickets on the day the tickets were out on the box office . The L.A. Live complex ; allowed people waiting in line the opportunity to bring chairs , one per person , and umbrellas due to the long wait ahead of them . It was reported that the " first 500 fans in line have been promised commemorative lenticular tickets designed by Jackson for the London concerts at the O2 Arena " , the only other way to obtain those specialized tickets was to trade in your concert tickets to the now canceled tour . 
 MTV stated that , " Fans in line are also eligible to receive commemorative ' Michael Jackson 's This Is It ' T @-@ shirts and posters [ ... ] They 're also being invited to sign the memorial wall set up outside the theater , which is open for anyone who wants to leave a message or memory " for Jackson A reported total of 3 @,@ 000 movie tickets will be available for the early screening of the film on October 27 , 2009 , at the L.A. Live 's new Regal Cinemas Stadium 14 , marking it the movie theater 's grand opening . It is the only screening location offering the advance shows and commemorative tickets . Jeff Labrecque of En commented , " Three months after Michael Jackson 's death , I 'm still surprised by the passion of his fans . " Bridget Daly of Hollyscoop commented on the waiting time for tickets that , she could " expect nothing less " from Jackson 's fans . 
 = = = = Sales = = = = 
 On September 27 , 2009 , the first day of ticket sales , all 3 @,@ 000 tickets to the advance screenings of the film had " sold out within two hours [ on ] early Sunday [ September 27 , 2009 ] . " Fans had reportedly waited in line for days . CinemaBlend.com reported that over 160 showings had sold out . <unk> , stated that " hundreds of screenings in North America have already sold out , a month before the film 's October 28 opening . " According to MovieTickets.com , sales of tickets to the film have " accounted for more than 82 percent of all the tickets sold at the site today [ Monday , September 28 , 2009 ] . " CinemaBlend.com described the sale of tickets on MovieTickets.com as being " fairly significant " — but remarked that " this is after all , just a concert documentary . " It was reported that over 80 percent of tickets sold on Fandango.com were for this film . 
 It was also reported that the film had " accounted for some 80 % of all online ticketing in the U.S. within its first 24 hours of sales , dominating presales compared with such upcoming titles as Avatar and The Twilight Saga : New Moon . Sony , confirmed that over 30 @,@ 000 tickets were sold in the first 24 hours that tickets went of sale . Sony also stated that the film had moved over 1 million dollars in tickets sales in Japan . Sony announced in a press release that in the " last 24 hours [ since September 27 ] " , that over 80 % of all Fandango.com and Movietickets.com sales for the film , had already sold out in Los Angeles , San Francisco , Houston , Nashville and New York , among others and : " Internationally , exhibitors from London and Sydney to Bangkok and Tokyo have experienced the same epic demand . " Sony stated in a statement of the film 's good ticket sale 's that : " Staggering advance sales were reported in Australia , where tickets for Michael Jackson 's This Is It purchased through Village Cinemas exceeded the lifetime pre @-@ sales of such blockbusters as Transformers and X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine . 
 On Thursday , October 1 , 2009 , Fandango.com stated the film was the ' top ticket seller ' on the site . Both Fandango.com and Movietickets.com are reported that more than 1 @,@ 600 screenings had already been sold out , via online pre @-@ sales , by 15 October . In United Kingdom , Vue Cinemas stated that they 'd sold 64 @,@ 000 tickets in the two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half weeks since ticket purchasing was made available , while Odeon Cinema stated that they 'd had the sales of over 60 @,@ 000 tickets by 15 October . E ! Online said of the film , based on its current record ticket selling , out @-@ selling and making more revenue than Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert that : " Last year , Disney billed Miley Cyrus ' Best of Both Worlds show as a one @-@ week @-@ only event . Then the film scored a $ 31 million opening weekend , and one week turned into 15 . Hannah Montana / Miley Cyrus became the top @-@ grossing concert movie of all time . So far . While it 's still early , This Is It is on track to top Hannah Montana / Miley Cyrus . During its first three days of sales , Fandango said , Jackson 's film outpaced Cyrus ' first three days by a wide three @-@ to @-@ one margin . " Joel Cohen , the executive vice president of MovieTickets.com , said of the ticket sales : " Michael Jackson is such an iconic figure , with a fan base that transcends even some of the most bankable stars in Hollywood [ ... ] We expected there to be a large demand for tickets for an ' event ' film like this one , but MovieTickets.com has never seen such a high volume of sellouts this far in advance for any movie . " 
 = = = = = Record sales = = = = = 
 It was reported that fans had lined up at the box office ticket counters throughout the city of Bangkok , Thailand , and that by the end of the first day " all tickets for the first showings across Bangkok were sold out . " It was also reported that there were " sell @-@ outs at theaters in France " and that " thousands of fans lined up at The Grand Rex in Paris and quickly bought out the film 's first screening there [ ... ] Record @-@ setting sales also were recorded in Germany [ ... ] hundreds of fans lined up outside one theater in Munich at midnight to await the opening of the box office . " A German exhibitor said of crowds of people lining up for tickets to the film , that : " Something like this [ has ] never happened before in Germany . " Among other countries , " record sales " and " sell @-@ outs " were also reported in the Netherlands , Sweden , Belgium and New Zealand . On October 7 2009 , three weeks prior to the film 's release , MovieTickets.com stated that the film had entered their " Top @-@ 25 Advance Ticket Sellers of All @-@ Time " , bumping The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring from the Number 25 slot . By October 27 , <unk> cinemas sold over 24 @,@ 000 pre @-@ sale tickets in South Africa , tripling the previous pre @-@ sale record . 
 = = = IMAX and release = = = 
 Despite the fact that IMAX screenings are usually planned and booked months in advance by the film 's movie distributors , Regal Entertainment Group , America 's largest cinema chain , stated on September 30 , that they would screen IMAX versions of the film at their cinemas . Regal stated that they are planning on making 25 of their IMAX locations available for the screening of the film when it opened to the public on 28 October . Dick Westerling , head of marketing and advertising for Regal , stated that the film was selected due to its strong ticket sales . IMAX Corporation and Sony stated that the film will open in digital IMAX <unk> and that the limited IMAX release will be played domestically during " evening show times " in 96 IMAX digital theaters , and additionally the movie will be played in 27 of the company 's international digital locations . A key part of the IMAX DMR process includes re @-@ mastering the soundtrack to take advantage of IMAX 's 14 @,@ 000 watt digital audio system . 
 On August 11 , it was widely announced , and later confirmed , that the film would be released to theatres in October 2009 , though at the time no specific date was released or confirmed . When confirmed it was reported that the film was set be released worldwide on October 30 2009 . Later in August it was announced that the film 's release date was rescheduled two days early for October 28 . Sony stated that the film 's release date was moved up by two days due to an ' overwhelming demand ' for the film . " On October 6 , it was reported and confirmed by a Sony executive , that the film had been chosen to be one of the last of China 's " 20 annual foreign movie import slots " . China only allows 20 major foreign films to be released in the country every year on a revenue @-@ sharing basis . Chinese censors had reportedly approved the film before the countries weeklong holiday that started on October 1 , clearing it in time for the global release date of October 28 . Li Chow , manager of Sony Pictures Releasing International 's stated that Sony will give the movie as wide a release as possible because of Jackson 's popularity in China . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 In September 2009 , AEG stated , that based on the positive enthusiasm by fans for waiting in lines for days for tickets to the film , that they had hoped it was a sign that the public had not felt that they were exploiting Jackson after his death . AEG president Tim Leiweke stated he hoped that the film would give fans some peace of mind that as a company , Jackson 's ' legacy ' and well being was always a priority and the fact that people had thought otherwise had really " hurt " people at AEG . Leiweke stated , 
 " Some of the things that people have said about us , which are so untrue , this movie 's going to restore his legacy , and prove that we , in fact , gave Michael a second chance here . And an opportunity to make the kind of comeback he was dreaming of . And that we created an environment for him that was probably the best environment that the guy had the last 10 or 15 years of his life . And I 'm very proud of the way we treated Michael , and very proud of the partnership that we had with him . And this movie is an opportunity to celebrate that , and we could get past all of the gossip and all of the innuendo . " 
 Multiple members of Jackson 's family had opposed the film from the start in August 2009 . Jackson 's nephews tried to go to court to try to stop negotiations between AEG Live and Sony . Jackson 's older sister La Toya stated that she felt that Michael would not have wanted the film to have been released because he was not giving his all into his performances . In October 2009 , Jackson 's father , Joe , stated and had strongly insisted that the film " is mostly body doubles " and that " the media is going to tear this movie apart " because of it . TMZ stated that members of the Jackson family had felt that footage of " Jackson " in the film was not him but rather body double ( s ) . However , Sony released a statement denying rumors that the film had rehearsal footage of Jackson body doubles , describing the story as " pure garbage " . 
 At the time of Jackson 's death , and in the aftermath of it , multiple reports surfaced that AEG Live purposely tried to hide Jackson 's health concerns during preparations for his would @-@ have @-@ been concerts . Concerns included Jackson 's frail appearance due to lack of eating that had reportedly caused Jackson to be unable to perform from lack of strength and that AEG had used body doubles in rehearsals to stand in for Jackson . After Jackson 's death , AEG stated that there was no truth to any of the rumors and that Jackson was thin but in good enough condition to perform . On 23 October 2009 , days before the film 's release , fans of Jackson launched a protest campaign against the film entitled " This Is not It " . The campaign 's focus was to convince people that Jackson 's health was neglected by AEG , among others , and that AEG was partly responsible for Jackson 's death and now the company is making a profit off Jackson 's death . The group started a website and created their own ' trailer ' for the movie to showcase their point @-@ of @-@ view on the documentary . The protestors also inaccurately claimed that Jackson was 108 pounds ( 49 kg ) at his death , contradicting Jackson 's autopsy , which had stated that Jackson weighed 136 pounds ( 61 kg ) . Shortly after the protest became news , The Guardian conducted a poll on their website asking users " What do you think of Michael Jackson 's posthumous film This Is It ? " , 51 @.@ 4 % agreed with one of the two options : " I agree with the fans who are boycotting it — it 's shameless profiteering " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film upon its debut grossed more internationally than in North America . As of March 1 , 2011 , the film 's total worldwide gross was $ 261 @,@ 183 @,@ 588 . The Hollywood Reporter said This Is It is going to take first place in the weekend box office chart with $ 23 @,@ 234 @,@ 394 at 3 @,@ 481 theaters — with a per @-@ theater average of $ 6 @,@ 675 over the period of five days . This return had " underperformed " to both Sony and film analysts ' expectations — Sony 's had originally expected the film to make an estimated 50 million , but after the film 's " disappointing " three @-@ day gross , due to some fans , mostly in North America , boycotting the movie and issuing boycott propaganda in social networks and media , Sony lowered their expectations to $ 35 million , while analysts expected an estimated 30 million for the weekend . In the film 's second weekend of wide release , it declined to 43 @.@ 4 % , making $ 13 @,@ 157 @,@ 944 , placing it at second at the box office , behind A Christmas Carol — which had grossed more than twice what This Is It made . The film completed its theatrical run in North America on December 3 , 2009 . 
 This Is It made its international debut in 110 territories on October 28 – 30 2009 . The film 's revenue mainly consisted of international sales — 72 @.@ 4 % . Throughout the film 's international release , it performed strongly at the box office , despite some criticism from other fans in North America . On November 7 , the film surpassed the $ 100 million mark at the foreign box office , reaching block @-@ buster status . This Is It , at the Australian box office grossed $ 8 @,@ 734 @,@ 295 and $ 1 @,@ 878 @,@ 725 ( in Australian currency ) . This Is It debuted at first place at the United Kingdom box office , with the revenue of £ 4 @,@ 877 @,@ 255 . In the film 's second weekend of release , with the gross revenue of the previous week being down 52 % , with £ 1 @,@ 355 @,@ 855 , it placed at second at the United Kingdom — having been outgrossed by A Christmas Carol , which , similar to its second week at the North American box office , had been knocked to second place by the film . The film 's international revenue was significantly contributed to within Japan — with $ 58 @,@ 4 million , followed by the United Kingdom — with $ 16 million . 
 = = = = Box office result = = = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received mostly positive reviews from film critics . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 80 % of 162 critics have given the film a positive review , with a rating average of 7 @.@ 1 out of 10 . The site 's general consensus is that " While it may not be the definitive concert film ( or the insightful backstage look ) some will hope for , Michael Jackson 's This Is It packs more than enough entertainment value to live up to its ambitious title . " Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from film critics , has a rating score of 67 based on 32 reviews . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun Times described the film as being an " extraordinary documentary , " and stated that the film was " nothing at all like what " he was expecting to see . Ebert dismissed reports that Jackson was in poor health and was underperforming , stating that the film did not show a " sick and drugged man forcing himself through grueling rehearsals , but a spirit embodied by music " and referred to Jackson 's rehearsal performance ( s ) as having been " something else . " Kirt Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter praised the film for being " strange yet strangely beguiling " for capturing Jackson in " feverish grips of pure creativity " and stated that while the film presents that audience with a screen filled with everyone ranging from " performers , musicians , choreographers , crew members , craftsmen , " she took notice that the film had primarily focused on Jackson . Honeycutt perceived based on what he had seen from the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes look of rehearsals that he understood what it takes to " attain such dizzying heights in entertainment " and that he understood why Jackson " chose to stay away " from performing " for a decade " and , based on what he saw from footage from rehearsals that it " looks like the world has missed one helluva concert . " Honeycutt cited that the only thing that frustrated him more than knowing the " tragedy " that prevented the concert from happening was " not knowing what you 're looking at " and commented that the film did not feel like a complete concert film because it had a grip on the audience , stating : " Where are Jackson and his conspirators at any given moment in the creative process ? The film tries to be a concert film without having the actual footage . So when everything comes to a halt , audiences get thrown . " Peter Travers , of Rolling Stone described watching Jackson 's " struggle " as being " illuminating , unnerving and unforgettable " and felt that the film was a great " transcendent tribute " to Jackson because it did not have , nor need , a " safety net . " 
 Joshua Rothkopf of Time Out New York referred to being a " must @-@ see <unk> . " Rothkopf described Jackson as " obviously " having been " shooting for the moon right before his death " based on what he could tell from the " stunning bits of concert spectacle " of " phalanxes of computer @-@ generated dancers , tempo changes on a dime , a bombshell of a blond guitarist who plays Eddie Van Halen 's " Beat It " solo flawlessly " . Rothkopf stated that : " But the true value of this raw rehearsal footage is its emphasis , less known , on MJ 's <unk> attention to detail , as he works his band and troupe up to speed . A firm floor manager himself , he 's often exposed — and probably wouldn 't have approved of this film . ( One on one , High School Musical 's Kenny Ortega , meanwhile , treats him with kid gloves : " I agree , Michael . " ) But to see him sweetly lose himself in " Human Nature " ( " I like living this way ... " ) is to feel a creature of the stage finally returned home , and possibly on the cusp of redemption . " Peter Paras , of E ! Online felt that watching Jackson and his performances in a positive aspect is the " genius and the sadness of the entire film . " He did note that Jackson 's performance of " Earth Song , " which consists of using Jackson 's voiceover to emphasize his environmental concerns while a bulldozer threatens to eat him , was well @-@ intentioned — because it brought attention to environmental concerns — but felt it was a little over the top . Paras felt the film showed an " exacting and refreshingly funny side of Jackson to be revealed " and " had Jackson lived , we never would have seen those moments " and felt the film was a proper way to " finally say goodbye " to Jackson . 
 Marjorie Baumgarten of Austin Chronicle referred to the film as being " neither a true concert film nor a strict behind @-@ the @-@ scenes documentary , This Is It is , like Jackson himself , a real hybrid " and felt that while the film 's " made up of lots of grainy footage , which Ortega has edited together seamlessly " it will also " provide a fitting farewell . " Baumgarten noted that " the finished film is a fairly complete concert run @-@ through with each song edited " and that while the film will easily show that it was made for a profit , that , the audience will see a " film to be a fitting elegy . " Joe Morgenstern , of The Wall Street Journal , felt the film was " expertly packaged — brilliantly packaged , " and noted that the film " quite convincingly " had emphasized that Jackson had enough energy to perform , even with his " wraith @-@ thin body " . Ann Powers , of Los Angeles Times said that while the film offers only a few such " insights into Jackson 's artistic process , though enough surface to make this a useful document , as well as a beautiful one " that the film is " a piece with Jackson 's body of work : dazzling and strange , blurring the line between fantasy and reality . " She described Ortega 's editing to make the film feel like a real concert film as being " almost too good to believe . " Powers praised the film for showing " intimate views " of Jackson , like his " vulnerable moments " during performances and felt the film was made " to honor not just the memory of Jackson but the hard work of a big cast and crew that never made it to opening night , " which she felt mostly is a tribute to the " power of Jackson 's body and voice . " Powers stated she had felt the film was such " a tragic teaser for the shows that might have been , ' This Is It ' hurts . If Jackson had been able to perform as he frequently does during these scenes , he would have accomplished the comeback for which he was so hungry . " She noted that Jackson 's " total lack of engagement with the cameras adds to the unreal mood " because he was always performing — " but for the imagined masses , not for the <unk> " and that the film does not " entirely acknowledge that reality , and that 's a little odd . " 
 Lou Lumenick , of the New York Post strongly criticized both the film and Jackson 's performances . Lumenick 's criticism of Jackson 's performances was he felt Jackson moves " stiffly and lethargically " and that it was " clear " that Jackson was lip @-@ synching while performing " Thriller . " He felt Jackson 's performance of " Smooth Criminal " looked " incongruous , to say the least " and that " the hokey environmental visuals accompanying ' Earth Song ' are even worse , " and cited " Beat It " as being the movie 's " only half @-@ decent number . " Lumenick said that he was certain that a " perfectionist " like Jackson would not want to have been remembered by a " shoddy piece of exploitation . " David Edwards , of Daily Mirror , stated that while he felt that the film is a " success " he overall disliked the film , having felt that " as an exercise in wringing every last penny from Jackson 's legacy " the film " most certainly isn 't it " a tribute . Alex Fletcher , of Digital Spy described the film as having been an " essential viewing " and praised the film for showing " the real Michael Jackson " — which consisted of " difficult , odd , kind , obsessive and funny . " He cited Jackson 's best performances as " Thriller " and " Billie Jean " and the " worst material " as " Earth Song . " However , Fletcher did feel that , while based on the rehearsal footage , Jackson " falls short of his groundbreaking Dangerous and Bad world tours , " he noted that Jackson 's age and thinness was mostly likely a factor in his performances and described Jackson as having more " star quality and charisma than a million Simon Cowell factory @-@ line production pop singers . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 This Is It was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in North America on January 26 , 2010 . It sold over 1 @.@ 5 million units in U.S. , alone within its first week of release , setting a new record for the first week sales of a music DVD . By March 2011 , in USA alone DVD and Blu @-@ ray sales stood at 3 @.@ 2 million with gross earnings of $ 62 million . The film was released on the same day in Japan , also breaking records , with $ 18 million in sales on the title 's first day of release — $ 11 @.@ 3 million in DVD and $ 6 @.@ 7 million in Blu @-@ ray — breaking Ponyo 's record of $ 6 @.@ 2 million . In Ireland , the DVD became the joint @-@ third best @-@ selling music " record " in terms of units , going 5x Platinum by the end of 2010 . 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = A3 ( Croatia ) = 
 The A3 motorway ( Croatian : Autocesta A3 ) is a major motorway in Croatia spanning 306 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 190 @.@ 5 mi ) . The motorway connects Zagreb , the nation 's capital , to the Slavonia region and a number of cities along the Sava River . It represents a major east – west transportation corridor in Croatia and a significant part of the Pan @-@ European Corridor X , serving as a transit route between the European Union states and the Balkans . Apart from Zagreb , where the A3 motorway comprises a considerable part of the Zagreb bypass , the motorway runs near a number of significant Croatian cities . The motorway has a positive economic impact on the cities and towns it connects , and is an important route within Croatia . 
 The motorway consists of two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each driving direction , separated by a central reservation . All intersections of the A3 motorway are grade separated , and the motorway comprises several large stack and cloverleaf interchanges at junctions with four other motorways in Croatia : A1 , A2 , A4 and A5 . As of October 2010 , another cloverleaf interchange is under construction on the A3 route , where the A11 motorway is scheduled to branch off . The route comprises a large number of bridges and culverts , but has no tunnels because it runs through plains . The Sava River Bridge is the most significant structure on the A3 . Currently , there are 21 exits and 18 rest areas operating along the route . A large part of the motorway is tolled using a ticket system ; one section uses an open toll collection system . The Zagreb bypass sections are not tolled . The toll is charged according to vehicle classification in Croatia . The A3 motorway is operated by Hrvatske autoceste . 
 Construction of the six @-@ lane motorway began in 1977 , initially as the Zagreb bypass , then continued in the 1980s as an expansion of the existing two @-@ lane road between Zagreb and Belgrade . The construction was suspended in the first part of the 1990s , due to the Croatian War of Independence , and resumed in 1996 . Construction of the entire route was completed in 2006 ; further development entails new exits , new rest areas and the reconstruction of the existing motorway . The construction cost of the A3 motorway is estimated at 7 billion Croatian kuna ( approximately 958 @.@ 9 million euro ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The A3 motorway ( Croatian : Autocesta A3 ) is a major east – west motorway in Croatia connecting the capital of the country , Zagreb , to the Slavonia region , where the motorway follows a route parallel to the Sava River and further on to Serbian and Slovenian motorway networks . As a part of the road network of Croatia , it represents a part of European route E70 Bordeaux – Turin – Ljubljana – Zagreb – Belgrade – Bucharest . The motorway has facilitated accelerated economic development in the regions it connects . The motorway also connects to a number of other motorways in Croatia ( from the west to the east ) : the A2 at the Jankomir interchange , the A1 at Lučko interchange , the A11 at Jakuševec , the A4 at Ivanja Reka and the A5 at the Sredanci interchange . 
 The motorway spans 306 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 190 @.@ 5 mi ) between the Bregana border crossing , located near Samobor , to Slovenia and the <unk> border crossing to Serbia , east of Županja . It represents the shortest and the most comfortable transit traffic route between Slovenia , northern Italy , Austria , Switzerland , and southern Germany to the west ; and Serbia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Bulgaria , Macedonia , Greece , and Turkey to the east . The route serves Sisak via the <unk> ; Banja Luka , Bosnia and Herzegovina via the D5 and Stara Gradiška border crossing ; Osijek via the A5 ; and Vinkovci via the <unk> . The A3 motorway route is complete since no extensions or alterations to the route are planned by applicable legislation . 
 The A3 motorway consists of two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each driving direction along its entire length . As of September 2010 , the motorway has 21 interchanges , providing access to numerous towns and cities and the Croatian state road network . Almost all of the existing interchanges are trumpet interchanges , except for Lučko , which is a stack interchange , and Jankomir , Kosnica , Ivanja Reka and Sredanci , which are cloverleaf interchanges . The motorway follows Pan @-@ European Corridor X , and forms junctions with Pan @-@ European Corridors Vb and Vc within Croatia . 
 An automatic traffic monitoring and guidance system is in place along the motorway . It consists of measuring , control and signaling devices , located in zones where driving conditions may vary — at interchanges , near viaducts , bridges , and in zones where fog is known to occur . The system comprises variable traffic signs used to communicate changing driving conditions , possible restrictions and other information to motorway users . 
 There are numerous rest areas along the motorway , providing various types of services ranging from simple parking spaces and restrooms to filling stations , restaurants and motels . The A3 motorway is operated by Hrvatske autoceste , the state @-@ owned company tasked with the management , construction , and maintenance of Croatian motorways . 
 = = Zagreb suburban interchanges = = 
 The route between Bobovica and Ivanja Reka interchanges ( inclusive ) serves as a part of Zagreb bypass , and it is therefore not tolled . The A3 section of the bypass also comprises junctions to a number of other motorways : the A1 at the Lučko interchange , the A2 at the Jankomir interchange , the A11 motorway at the Jakuševec interchange , and the A4 at the Ivanja Reka interchange . Two interchanges east of Zagreb , Rugvica and Križ , have recently been built to fill in 20 @-@ kilometre ( 12 mi ) gaps between the Ivanja Reka , Ivanić @-@ Grad and Popovača interchanges , respectively . Even though the sections east of Rugvica are not parts of Zagreb bypass proper ( they are tolled ) , the area has recently shown a rise in the population as it comprises several Zagreb suburbs and commuter towns . The consequent increase of commuter traffic volume , overall increase of the motorway transit traffic and plans for construction of a Sava River port in Rugvica warranted construction of the additional interchanges . 
 The A3 section of Zagreb bypass is currently the busiest section of the Croatian motorway network , with annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) volume exceeding 40 @,@ 000 vehicles , leading to congestion of the six @-@ lane bypass at peak hours , especially during the summer , when tourist traffic adds to the congestion . The mainline toll plazas at Bobovica and Ivanja Reka can both become bottlenecks at such times . The alternative to the bypass is going through the city via <unk> , <unk> and Slavonska avenues . Despite being a shorter and a more direct route , those avenues are much more congested than the bypass at rush hours and they contain at @-@ grade intersections and traffic lights at some of their junctions . 
 = = Toll = = 
 The A3 is a partially tolled motorway based on the vehicle classification in Croatia . The westernmost section of the motorway , spanning the Bobovica interchange and the Bregana border crossing , is tolled at Bregana toll plaza using an open toll collection system ; the motorway sections east of Ivanja Reka interchange are tolled using a closed toll collection system , integrated with the A5 motorway as the two connect at the Sredanci interchange , forming a unified toll collection system . As of October 2010 , Bregana toll plaza charges 5 @.@ 00 kuna ( 0 @.@ 68 euro ) to passenger cars and 20 @.@ 00 kuna ( 2 @.@ 74 euro ) to semi @-@ trailer trucks . The toll charged along the A3 route between Ivanja Reka and Lipovac varies depending on the distance travelled and ranges from 3 @.@ 00 kuna ( 0 @.@ 41 euro ) to 105 @.@ 00 kuna ( 14 @.@ 38 euro ) for passenger cars and 10 @.@ 00 kuna ( 1 @.@ 37 euro ) to 350 @.@ 00 kuna ( 47 @.@ 95 euro ) for semi @-@ trailer trucks . The toll is payable in either Croatian kuna or euros and by major credit cards , debit cards and a number of prepaid toll collection systems , including various types of smart cards issued by the motorway operator and ENC — an electronic toll collection ( ETC ) system which is shared at most motorways in Croatia and provides drivers with discounted toll rates for dedicated lanes at toll plazas . 
 The toll collected by Hrvatske autoceste along the A3 motorway from January to August 2009 was reported to comprise the largest proportion of the total toll revenue collected by the company for the period : 889 @.@ 8 million kuna ( approximately 121 @.@ 9 million euro ) . Even though this figure is not further decomposed into the individual sections of motorway , it is clear from the traffic volume data analysis that the largest portion of the toll revenue is collected on the sections between Zagreb and Slavonski Brod , and especially on those sections closest to the Ivanja Reka interchange . 
 Summertime and holiday queues at the Ivanja Reka mainline toll plaza can be considerable , a problem exacerbated during the usual weekend @-@ to @-@ weekend tourist stays at Croatia 's coastal resorts . In such conditions , motorway users are advised to use the Rugvica and Ivanić Grad exits ahead of the Ivanja Reka interchange to avoid the queues . As of October 2010 , the westbound transit traffic approaching the Ivanja Reka interchange must exit the tolled motorway network , since the existing Zagreb bypass is not tolled , and then re @-@ enter another tolled motorway . There are plans for the outer Zagreb bypass to be integrated into the tolled motorway network as the ultimate solution for congestion at the Ivanja Reka toll plaza . That will require reconstruction of the Ivanić Grad interchange east of the Ivanja Reka toll plaza . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Brotherhood and Unity Highway = = = 
 A modern highway connecting Zagreb and Belgrade was originally designed in the late 1940s , and construction began on April 1 , 1948 . A substantial portion of the work was carried out by youth from Yugoslavia and abroad through youth work actions . Nearly 300 @,@ 000 youth , including Yugoslav army soldiers , took part in the construction . The 382 @-@ kilometre ( 237 mi ) road spanning the two cities , called Brotherhood and Unity Highway before the 1990s , was completed and officially opened on July 27 , 1950 . Despite being called a motorway ( Croatian : <unk> ) , it was a single carriageway , two @-@ lane road with all of its intersections at @-@ grade . Due to a shortage of construction material , the wearing course was executed in various materials — mostly concrete slabs , with some asphalt concrete sections and even some cobblestone @-@ covered sections . 
 The road was originally designed to carry approximately 9 @,@ 000 vehicles per day , and the original construction plans provided for subsequent conversion of the road into a four @-@ lane motorway . In 1971 , as the road gradually became congested , the plans to build the motorway on the route were approved by the Parliament of the Socialist Republic of Croatia . Unlike the other two motorway plans approved by the Croatian government , Zagreb – Split and Zagreb – Rijeka , which were cancelled after the suppression of the Croatian Spring , the Zagreb – Belgrade motorway plans remained in place and an expansion of the existing motorway into a dual @-@ carriageway , six @-@ lane motorway with exclusively grade @-@ separated intersections proceeded . The additional carriageway was to be built south of the existing road , which was in turn to be widened to accommodate two traffic lanes and an emergency lane . 
 = = = Prewar construction and wartime use = = = 
 Construction of the A3 motorway in Croatia in its present form started in 1977 , when the first six @-@ lane ( including emergency lanes ) sections were constructed as a part of the Zagreb bypass . In 1979 , the 5 @.@ 85 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 64 mi ) section connecting the Jankomir and Lučko interchanges was the first to be completed . The 22 @.@ 15 @-@ kilometre ( 13 @.@ 76 mi ) section between the Lučko and Ivanja Reka interchanges was opened in 1981 , marking the completion of the A3 section of the Zagreb bypass . Unlike the remainder of the motorway , which was constructed by widening the existing road and adding the additional carriageway , these two sections were built entirely from scratch . 
 The first part of the six @-@ lane motorway to be completed east of Zagreb was the 76 @.@ 52 @-@ kilometre ( 47 @.@ 55 mi ) section between Ivanja Reka and Lipovljani , immediately to the east of the present day Lipovljani rest area ; this was done in 1980 . In order to maintain the flow of traffic on the Zagreb – Belgrade road during construction , the southern carriageway was completed first , and then the two @-@ way traffic was rerouted to the new carriageway while the old , northern carriageway was widened and its pavement structure was replaced with a new one . Similarly , as the new carriageway extended further eastward , the at @-@ grade intersections were replaced by interchanges or flyovers . In 1985 , the motorway was extended by 35 @.@ 82 kilometres ( 22 @.@ 26 mi ) to Okučani , and in 1986 by another 7 @.@ 50 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 66 mi ) to <unk> , near Nova Gradiška . Two further extensions of the motorway happened in 1988 and 1989 — those were a 40 @.@ 56 @-@ kilometre ( 25 @.@ 20 mi ) extension to <unk> Stupnik and another 8 @.@ 80 @-@ kilometre ( 5 @.@ 47 mi ) one to Slavonski Brod and the present @-@ day Slavonski Brod <unk> ( west ) interchange . In 1991 , the motorway reached beyond Slavonski Brod as it was extended once more by 11 @.@ 40 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 08 mi ) , to the Slavonski Brod <unk> ( east ) interchange . 
 Further construction of the motorway was suspended by the onset of the Croatian War of Independence . In October 1991 , a part of the motorway between Novska and Nova Gradiška became inaccessible to the government of the Republic of Croatia due to military occupation of the area by the forces of the so @-@ called SAO Western Slavonia . Consequently , the Novska – Nova Gradiška section was closed to all traffic . On December 21 , 1994 , negotiations led to the reopening of that section for transit traffic . However , the section remained unsafe for use as intermittent violence continued until May 1995 , when the area was overrun by the Croatian army . Inspection of the motorway section carried out at the time revealed damage to a viaduct carrying the motorway over the Zagreb – Sisak – Vinkovci railroad and a local road near Novska . Besides the overall lack of maintenance during the period , the pavement and a number of flyovers were damaged by artillery bombardments , and the flyover approach embankments were damaged where trenches were dug . 
 = = = Postwar reconstruction and completion = = = 
 After the war , construction and reconstruction work resumed on the A3 motorway . The battle damage was the first to be addressed , along with removal of the trenches excavated in the flyover embankments . Similarly , unexploded ordnance and minefields left around the motorway had to be removed by minesweepers . The motorway pavement was seriously deteriorated , as evidenced by extensive ruts and cracks incurred during the four @-@ year wartime period . Unlike repairs made to the viaducts and flyovers , mine clearance and pavement reconstruction took considerably more time to perform . 
 In 1996 , the motorway was extended for the first time after the war . This 10 @.@ 90 @-@ kilometre ( 6 @.@ 77 mi ) extension reached to Oprisavci , west of the present @-@ day Sredanci interchange . In 1999 , another 16 @.@ 90 @-@ kilometre ( 10 @.@ 50 mi ) section was completed , stretching to Velika <unk> . The single westward extension of the motorway came about in 2002 as the A3 motorway was extended 13 @.@ 67 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 49 mi ) from Jankomir westward to the Bregana border crossing into Slovenia . The eastward advance of the A3 motorway continued in 2002 , as it was extended by 25 @.@ 95 kilometres ( 16 @.@ 12 mi ) to Županja , while the easternmost 30 @.@ 42 @-@ kilometre ( 18 @.@ 90 mi ) section between Županja and the <unk> border crossing into Serbia was opened in 2006 , thus completing the six @-@ lane A3 motorway . The D4 state road was thus entirely replaced by the A3 motorway . The total investment value of the A3 motorway construction is estimated at 7 billion Croatian kuna ( approximately 958 @.@ 9 million euro ) , making the A3 the least expensive motorway in Croatia . 
 = = Further construction = = 
 Since the A3 motorway was completed in 2006 , further construction on the A3 only consists of the addition of interchanges and rest areas . 
 The Kosnica interchange , itself completed in May 2007 , lacked access ramps to the south , to the <unk> state road , which were in turn completed in November 2013 . 
 The latest new A3 interchange , the Jakuševec interchange on the Zagreb bypass , is a cloverleaf interchange connecting the A3 to the A11 motorway and in the future the city of Zagreb via Sarajevska road . The interchange itself and the access ramps to the A11 were completed in November 2015 . Further construction towards Sarajevska road is planned . 
 As of 2016 , two additional A3 interchanges are in various stages of construction or planning : Sveta Klara and Ivanić Grad . The Sveta Klara interchange is planned to provide another connection to the city of Zagreb ( via <unk> <unk> Avenue ) . The interchange is designed as a trumpet . When both the Jakuševec and Sveta Klara interchanges are completed , the <unk> interchange is scheduled to be removed . 
 The present Ivanić Grad interchange connects the <unk> state road to the A3 motorway near the city of Ivanić Grad , however , the interchange is scheduled to be reconstructed to accommodate a new motorway planned as an outer , tolled Zagreb bypass . The reconstruction is currently in the planning stages . Two further interchanges are planned : ( 1 ) <unk> , to be located between the existing Nova Gradiška and <unk> interchanges , connecting to Požega ; and ( 2 ) Lipovljani , located between the existing Kutina and Novska interchanges . These are included in applicable spatial planning documents and their designs are in development , however funding is yet to be secured . Finally , the <unk> rest area is planned for the A3 section of the Zagreb bypass between the Jakuševec and Kosnica interchanges . It is planned to be an " A @-@ type " rest area , which normally comprises a filling station , a restaurant and a motel . 
 = = Traffic volume = = 
 Traffic is regularly counted by means of a traffic census at toll stations and reported by Hrvatske autoceste . The reported traffic volume gradually decreases as the motorway chainage increases and as it passes by various major destinations and the interchanges that serve them . Thus the greatest volume of traffic is registered along Zagreb bypass , especially the Jankomir – Lučko section , with 41 @,@ 549 vehicle annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) . The busiest tolled section of the motorway is Ivanja Reka – Rugvica with 27 @,@ 049 AADT and 34 @,@ 543 vehicle average summer daily traffic ( ASDT ) figures . The traffic volume gradually decreases from that section eastward to the eastern terminus of the motorway , where the lowest AADT and ASDT figures are recorded . The traffic volume decrease is somewhat more pronounced at interchanges serving Slavonski Brod and the A5 motorway ( Sredanci ) . The seasonal traffic volume variation ranges from a 28 % increase on the busiest , Ivanja Reka – Rugvica , section to a 75 % volume increase , as measured on the Županja – <unk> section . Average summer season traffic volume increase on the motorway is 55 % . The AADT / ASDT ratio analysis does not include Zagreb bypass , as there are no ASDT data available for the bypass . 
 = = Rest areas = = 
 As of October 2010 , there are 18 rest areas operating along the A3 motorway , and additional rest areas are planned along the existing sections of the route . Legislation provides for four types of rest areas , designated as types A through D. A @-@ type rest areas comprise a full range of amenities , including a filling station , a restaurant and a hotel or a motel ; B @-@ type rest areas have no lodging ; C @-@ type rest areas are very common and include a filling station and a café , but no restaurants or accommodations ; D @-@ type rest areas offer parking spaces only , possibly some picnicking tables , benches and restrooms . Even though the rest areas found along the A3 motorway generally follow this ranking system , there are considerable variations , as some of them offer extra services . The filling stations regularly have small convenience stores and some of them offer LPG fuel . 
 The primary motorway operator , Hrvatske autoceste ( HAC ) , leases the A , B and C type rest areas to various operators through public tenders . As of October 2010 , there are three such rest area operators on the A3 motorway : INA , <unk> <unk> and INA Osijek Petrol . The rest area operators are not permitted to sub @-@ lease the fuel operations . Most of the A3 motorway rest areas are accessible to both directions of traffic . There are however rest areas which are available only to the eastbound traffic ( e.g. <unk> and <unk> Stupnik rest areas ) or to westbound traffic only , like Slaven and Staro Petrovo Selo rest areas . Furthermore , some rest areas offer different types of amenities to each direction of the traffic . The rest areas normally operate 24 hours per day , 7 days per week , except Stari <unk> ( eastbound ) rest area , which is open from 7 am to 6 pm . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 These are the exits on the A3 motorway , including those under construction . 
 = STS @-@ 125 = 
 STS @-@ 125 , or HST @-@ SM4 ( Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission 4 ) , was the fifth and final space shuttle mission to the Hubble Space Telescope ( HST ) . Launch occurred on 11 May 2009 at 2 : 01 pm EDT . Landing occurred on 24 May at 11 : 39 am EDT , with the mission lasting a total of just under 13 days . 
 Space Shuttle Atlantis carried two new instruments to the Hubble Space Telescope , the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph and the Wide Field Camera 3 . The mission also replaced a Fine Guidance Sensor , six gyroscopes , and two battery unit modules to allow the telescope to continue to function at least through 2014 . The crew also installed new thermal blanket insulating panels to provide improved thermal protection , and a soft @-@ capture mechanism that would aid in the safe de @-@ orbiting of the telescope by an unmanned spacecraft at the end of its operational lifespan . The mission also carried an IMAX camera with which the crew documented the progress of the mission for the Hubble IMAX movie . 
 The crew of STS @-@ 125 included three astronauts who had previous experience servicing Hubble . Scott Altman visited Hubble in 2002 as commander of STS @-@ 109 , the fourth Hubble servicing mission . John Grunsfeld , an astronomer , has serviced Hubble twice , performing a total of five spacewalks on STS @-@ 103 in 1999 and STS @-@ 109 . Michael Massimino served with both Altman and Grunsfeld on STS @-@ 109 , and performed two spacewalks to service the telescope . 
 NASA managers and engineers declared the mission a complete success . The completion of all the major objectives , as well as some that were not considered vital , upgraded the Hubble telescope to its most technologically advanced state since its launch nineteen years before and made it more powerful than ever . The upgrades will help Hubble to see deeper into the universe and farther into the past , closer to the time of the Big Bang . 
 STS @-@ 125 was the only visit to the Hubble Space Telescope for Atlantis ; the telescope had been previously serviced twice by Discovery and once each by Columbia and Endeavour . The mission was the 30th flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis and also the first by Atlantis in over 14 years not to visit a space station , the last one being STS @-@ 66 . 
 = = Crew = = 
 = = Mission history = = 
 The fifth servicing mission to Hubble , HST @-@ SM4 , was originally scheduled to launch in late 2005 or early 2006 . On 16 January 2004 , then @-@ NASA Administrator Sean O 'Keefe canceled the mission , as well as any future missions to Hubble , citing safety constraints imposed by the Columbia Accident Investigation Board . During the announcement , O 'Keefe stated that it was his decision alone , and not a recommendation from any other departments . The decision was widely criticized by the media , the science community , and those in NASA . Maryland Senator Barbara Mikulski , a member of the Senate <unk> that oversees NASA 's budget , publicly accused O 'Keefe of making a decision outside the transparency process against the wishes of the science community , and stated she would work to reverse the decision . In March 2004 , Representative Mark Udall introduced a bill to the House of Representatives that requested an independent panel of experts review O 'Keefe 's decision to cancel the servicing mission . Also in March 2004 , Space Telescope Science Institute ( STScI ) Director Stephen Beckwith released the results of the Hubble Ultra @-@ Deep Field survey to the entire science community , which helped show the public how important Hubble was to science . The data showed the deepest images ever taken by a telescope and revealed approximately 10 @,@ 000 galaxies , some of which most likely dated back to when the universe was just five hundred million years old . With Beckwith when he released the data to the scientific community was Mikulski , who said of the results , " I think it 's just amazing ... this is why I will continue to stand up for Hubble . " 
 Joining Mikulski as an advocate for servicing Hubble was NASA 's Chief Scientist , physicist John Grunsfeld , who was present at the meeting when O 'Keefe announced the cancellation of the mission . A veteran astronaut of four shuttle missions , including two Hubble servicing missions , Grunsfeld had devoted years to Hubble , and was very disappointed when O 'Keefe canceled the mission . He briefly considered retiring from NASA , but realized if he stayed , he could continue to advance physics in other ways . Instead , Grunsfeld dedicated himself to finding alternate ways to service the telescope , possibly by sending a robot into orbit to do the job . When O 'Keefe announced his resignation as Administrator in December 2004 , five days after a National Academy of Sciences committee opposed O 'Keefe 's position regarding servicing Hubble , the media and science community saw hope for the telescope 's servicing mission to be reinstated . 
 O 'Keefe 's replacement , Michael D. Griffin , took just two months after his appointment to announce that he disagreed with O 'Keefe 's decision , and would consider sending a shuttle to repair Hubble . As an engineer , Griffin had previously worked on Hubble 's construction , and respected the discoveries the telescope brought to the science community . He agreed with the National Academy of Sciences that a robotic mission was not feasible , and said that in light of the " Return to Flight " changes made following the Columbia accident , a shuttle mission to repair Hubble should be reassessed . After the successes of the Return to Flight STS @-@ 114 and STS @-@ 121 missions , and the lessons learned and improvements made following those missions , managers and engineers worked to formulate a plan that would allow the shuttle to service Hubble , while still adhering to the post @-@ Columbia safety requirements . 
 On 31 October 2006 , Griffin announced that the Hubble servicing mission was reinstated , scheduled for 2008 , and announced the crew that would fly the mission , which included Grunsfeld . Senator Mikulski expressed her delight at the news , stating " The Hubble telescope has been the greatest telescope since Galileo invented the first one . It has gone to look at places in the universe that we didn 't know existed before . " 
 New Yorker and dedicated New York Mets fan , Mike Massimino , brought the home plate from Shea Stadium along on the mission . He was forced to slightly alter the plate to allow it to fit into the locker designated for memorabilia . Massimino presented the plate back to the Mets management upon return and threw out the first pitch there . The plate is now on display at Citi Field . 
 = = Mission payload = = 
 The mission added two new instruments to Hubble . The first instrument , the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph , is now the most sensitive ultraviolet spectrograph installed on the telescope . Its far @-@ UV channel is 30 times more sensitive than previous instruments and the near @-@ UV is twice as sensitive . The second instrument , the Wide Field Camera 3 , is a panchromatic wide @-@ field camera that can record a wide range of wavelengths , including infrared , visible , and ultraviolet light . Atlantis also carried the Soft @-@ Capture Mechanism , which was installed onto the telescope . This will enable a spacecraft to be sent to the telescope to assist in its safe de @-@ orbit at the end of its life . It is a circular mechanism containing structures and targets to aid docking . 
 The infrastructure of the telescope was upgraded by replacing a " Fine Guidance Sensor " that controls the telescope 's directional system , installing a set of six new gyroscopes , replacing batteries , and installing a new outer blanket layer to provide improved insulation . 
 The payload bay elements were the Super Lightweight Interchangeable Carrier ( <unk> ) which held the Wide Field Camera 3 , new batteries , and a radiator ; the ORU Carrier which stored the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph and FGS @-@ 3R instruments ; the Flight Support Structure ( FSS ) which held onto the Hubble during repairs ; , the Multi @-@ Use Lightweight Equipment Carrier ( <unk> ) which held support equipment and the Relative Navigation Sensor ( <unk> ) Experiment . 
 Along with the collectible items that are flown on shuttle missions , such as mission patches , flags , and other personal items for the crew , were an official Harlem Globetrotters basketball and a basketball that Edwin Hubble used in 1909 when he played for the University of Chicago . After being returned to Earth , the Harlem Globetrotters basketball would be placed in the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame , and Hubble 's ball would be returned to the University of Chicago . Michael Massimino flew a 1964 reprint of Galileo 's Sidereus Nuncius from the library of his alma mater , MIT . 
 = = = IMAX movie = = = 
 At the end of September 2007 , Warner Bros. Pictures and IMAX Corporation announced that in cooperation with NASA , an IMAX 3D camera would travel to the Hubble telescope in the payload bay of Atlantis for production of a new film that will chronicle the story of the Hubble telescope . An IMAX camera was also stationed at the LC @-@ 39 Press Site for the launch . IMAX has made a number of movies centered around space , including Destiny in Space , The Dream Is Alive , Mission to Mir , Blue Planet , Magnificent Desolation : Walking on the Moon 3D , and Space Station 3D , made in 2001 on the first trip of IMAX to the ISS . The movie was released in March 2010 , with the name IMAX : Hubble 3D . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Astronaut Michael J. Massimino used Twitter to document the training and preparations for the mission . He mentioned that he would like to try sending Twitter updates from space during his off @-@ duty time . Massimino 's first update read , " From orbit : Launch was awesome ! ! I am feeling great , working hard , & enjoying the magnificent views , the adventure of a lifetime has begun ! " Massimino was the first person to use Twitter in space . 
 = = Mission background = = 
 The mission marked : 
 157th NASA manned space flight 
 126th shuttle mission since STS @-@ 1 
 30th flight of Atlantis 
 53rd shuttle landing at Edwards Air Force Base 
 101st post @-@ Challenger mission 
 13th post @-@ Columbia mission 
 = = Shuttle processing = = 
 STS @-@ 125 was first assigned to Discovery with a launch date no earlier than May 2008 . This originally moved the mission ahead of STS @-@ 119 , ISS Assembly flight 15 . Delays to several shuttle missions resulted in a change in mission ordering , and the orbiter was changed to Atlantis on 8 January 2007 . The crew of Atlantis went to the Kennedy Space Center for the Crew Equipment Interface Test in early July 2008 . This allowed the STS @-@ 125 crew to get familiar with the orbiter and the hardware they would be using during the flight . 
 = = = Launch delays = = = 
 On 22 August 2008 , after a delay following Tropical Storm Fay , Atlantis was rolled from the Orbiter Processing Facility to the Vehicle Assembly Building , where it was mated to the external fuel tank and solid rocket booster stack . Problems were encountered during the mating process , and poor weather due to Hurricane Hanna caused a delay in the rollout of Atlantis to the launch pad , which is normally done seven days after rollover . 
 STS @-@ 125 was further pushed back to October 2008 due to manufacturing delays on external tanks for future space shuttle missions . Lockheed Martin experienced delays during the production changes to make new external tanks with all the enhancements recommended by the Columbia Accident Investigation Board , making it impossible for them to produce two tanks for the STS @-@ 125 mission – one for Atlantis , and one for Endeavour for an emergency rescue mission , if necessary – in time for the original August launch date . 
 The first rollout to Launch Pad 39A occurred on 4 September 2008 . On 27 September , the Science Instrument Command and Data Handling ( SIC & DH ) Unit on the Hubble Space Telescope failed . Because of its importance to the telescope , NASA postponed the launch of STS @-@ 125 on 29 September until 2009 so the failed unit could be replaced as well . Atlantis was rolled back to the Vehicle Assembly Building on 20 October . 
 On 30 October 2008 , NASA announced that Atlantis would be removed from its solid rocket boosters and external tank stack and sent back to the Orbiter Processing Facility to await a targeted launch time at 1 : 11 pm EDT on 12 May 2009 . The stack was turned over to be used on the STS @-@ 119 mission instead . On 23 March , Atlantis was mated to its new stack in the Vehicle Assembly Building , and rolled out to Launch Pad 39A on 31 March . On 24 April 2009 , NASA managers issued a request to move the STS @-@ 125 launch up one day to 11 May at 2 : 01 pm EDT . The change was made official at the flight readiness review on 30 April . The reason cited for the change was to add one more day to the launch window , from two to three days . 
 = = Mission timeline = = 
 = = = 11 May ( Flight day 1 , launch ) = = = 
 Following a smooth countdown , Atlantis launched on time at 2 : 01 pm EDT . Almost immediately after launch and during the ascent , flight systems reported problems with a hydrogen tank transducer and a circuit breaker ; the crew was immediately advised to disregard the resultant alarms and continue to orbit . During the post @-@ launch news conference , NASA managers said the initial early review of the launch video showed no obvious debris events , but a thorough analysis would be performed to ensure the orbiter sustained no significant damage during ascent . After working through their post launch checklists , the crew opened the payload bay doors , deployed the Ku band antenna , and moved into the robotic activities portion of the day , which included a survey of the payload bay and crew cabin survey with the orbiter 's robotic arm . 
 During the post @-@ launch inspection of Launch Pad 39A , a twenty @-@ five foot area on the north side of the flame deflector was found to have damage where some of the heat resistant coating came off . Following the launch of STS @-@ 124 , severe damage was seen at the pad where bricks were blasted from the walls , but NASA officials stated the damage from the STS @-@ 125 launch was not nearly as severe and should not impact the launch of STS @-@ 127 in June . 
 = = = 12 May ( Flight day 2 ) = = = 
 Following the morning wake up call , the crew set right to work on the day 's tasks , which were centered on inspection of the orbiter 's heat shield . Using the shuttle robotic arm and the Orbiter Boom Sensor System ( <unk> ) , the crew went through a detailed inspection of the orbiter 's thermal protection system ( TPS ) tile and Reinforced carbon @-@ carbon ( RCC ) surfaces . During the inspection , engineers on the ground noticed a small area of tile on the forward area of the shuttle 's right wing that appeared to have suffered some damage during ascent . Mission managers called up to the crew to alert them of the find , advising Altman ( " Scooter " ) that one of the orbiter 's wing leading edge sensors recorded a debris event during ascent , around 104 – 106 seconds following liftoff , which may have been the cause of the damage seen in that area . CAPCOM Dan Burbank advised the crew that the damage did not initially appear to be serious , but assured the crew that the image analysis team would be reviewing the imagery further , and engineers on the ground would be analyzing it to determine if a focused inspection would be required . 
 As part of the Flight Day 2 Execute Package , ground engineers also provided further information on the circuit breaker failure seen at launch . The breaker ( Channel 1 <unk> , ASA 1 ) is part of the shuttle 's Flight Control Systems ( FCS ) , a subsystem of the Guidance , Navigation and Control ( GNC ) systems . The failure would have no impact to the mission , due to redundant systems . 
 In addition to the survey of the orbiter 's heat shield , the crew gathered and inspected the EVA tools and spacesuits that would be used for the mission 's spacewalks and prepared the Flight Support System ( FSS ) for berthing with Hubble on flight day three . 
 = = = 13 May ( Flight day 3 ) = = = 
 Following the crew 's post @-@ sleep activities , they went to work performing the rendezvous operations that included burning the orbiter 's engines to refine the approach to the Hubble telescope . Following some delays due to communications issues , Altman and Johnson ( " Ray @-@ J " ) guided the orbiter within fifty feet of the telescope . McArthur successfully grappled Hubble at 17 : 14 UTC , and at 18 : 12 the telescope was safely berthed in the payload bay of Atlantis . Later in the day , Grunsfeld and Feustel ( Drew ) , along with Good ( " Bueno " ) and Massimino ( " Mass " ) worked on preparing for the next day 's spacewalk , gathering tools and checking out the suits and equipment that would be used during the EVA . 
 At the Mission Management Team ( MMT ) briefing , MMT Chairman LeRoy Cain reported that the damage assessment team had cleared all of the orbiter 's TPS tiles and blankets , and were expected to clear the RCC portion of the orbiter by flight day four . He stated that no focused inspection would be required . Cain also noted that a debris event was recorded on the orbiter 's wing leading edge sensors , but it was far below the force that would indicate a problem , and would not impact the mission . The late inspection that is routinely performed prior to re @-@ entry would give any additional information , but Cain stated " We 're not concerned that it 's done any kind of damage that would be any concern to us , certainly not critical damage . " 
 During the Mission Status briefing , Lead Flight Director Tony Ceccacci noted that during the camera survey of the equipment in the payload bay , the team noticed some fine particulate matter around the box containing the Wide Field Camera 3 and asked the crew to take additional images using a higher resolution camera for the ground teams to assess . Cain later confirmed that the dust was not present prior to launch , and was most likely particulate shaken loose from the thick insulation blankets inside the payload bay during launch . The team advised the crew to avoid the particulate as much as possible during the spacewalks , and use caution when working around the container to avoid the debris , but it was not a significant concern . 
 = = = 14 May ( Flight day 4 ) = = = 
 Following the crew 's wake up , they set to work preparing for the mission 's first spacewalk . Grunsfeld and Feustel suited up with the assistance of their EVA counterparts , Massimino and Good , and the spacewalk officially began when the two switched their suits to battery power at 12 : 52 UTC . At the start of the spacewalk , Feustel provided managers on the ground with a visual inspection report on the particulate matter seen earlier around the WFC3 box , reporting to the ground team that " I don 't really see any of those particles ... It 's almost <unk> . I can see some few particles on the front of the W @-@ <unk> , little , whitish , grey looking , real small . It 's low density , too . " After getting their tools and equipment for the EVA set up , Grunsfeld and Feustel removed the old Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 , which was installed in 1993 during the telescope 's first servicing mission , and replaced it with the new Wide Field Camera 3 ( WFC3 ) . Feustel initially had trouble removing the bolts from the old camera , which after over fifteen years in space required more torque to remove than expected . After multiple attempts , managers on the ground decided to have Grunsfeld get a contingency torque limiter from the airlock , which would allow Feustel to apply more force without exceeding a specific point , but the bolt would still not release . The concern was that the bolt would shear , and the camera would be unable to be removed should that happened . Finally , managers approved Feustel to remove the limiter , and apply as much force as he safely thought it would take to release the bolt , which was successful . 
 The new camera will allow Hubble to take large @-@ scale , extremely clear and detailed photos over a wider range of colors than the old camera did . After the installation , controllers at the Space Telescope Operations Control Center at Goddard Space Flight Center sent commands to the camera to perform an aliveness test , which passed , indicating the camera was installed correctly . 
 The next task was to remove and replace the telescope 's Science Instrument Command and Data Handling Unit , or SIC & DH , a computer that sends commands to Hubble 's science instruments , and formats science data for transmission to the ground . This was the item that failed in September 2008 , delaying STS @-@ 125 while engineers prepared a replacement part for the mission , and the crew trained for the new task . While the failure of the SIC & DH did not disable the telescope , replacing the unit restores the redundancies . The final major task was to install the Soft @-@ Capture Mechanism ( SCM ) , which includes the 72 @-@ inch @-@ wide ( 1 @,@ 800 mm ) Low Impact Docking System ( <unk> ) that will allow spacecraft in the future to dock with the telescope , and to safely de @-@ orbit the telescope at the end of its life . Feustel also installed two of four <unk> Over Center Kits , or <unk> , that make opening and closing Hubble 's large access doors easier for the remaining spacewalks . The spacewalk officially ended at 20 : 12 UTC , for a time of seven hours and twenty minutes . It was the nineteenth spacewalk devoted to servicing the telescope , and brought the total time in servicing Hubble to one hundred thirty @-@ six hours , thirty minutes . Due to the length of the spacewalk , and the delay in beginning , the crew was over an hour behind their scheduled timeline for the day , but worked through the post @-@ EVA activities and evening activities without problems , and got to sleep only slightly behind their scheduled time . During the mission status briefing , David Leckrone , Hubble Project Senior Scientist , noted he was very relieved that the camera was replaced successfully , and noted that the problems with the bolt caused some concern , " I don 't normally reveal my age and I 'm not going to here , but I can tell you I 'm five years older now than I was when I came to work this morning , we can sleep pretty well tonight , knowing that 's been accomplished . " 
 = = = 15 May ( Flight day 5 ) = = = 
 Following their wake up , the Atlantis crew set right to work preparing for the second spacewalk of the mission , with Massimino and Good suiting up with assistance from Grunsfeld and Feustel . As they were preparing for the EVA , the team on the ground informed the crew that the WFC3 had passed all the overnight functional tests , indicating it was in good working order . 
 While the spacewalk preparations were underway , Altman and McArthur completed a robotic survey of a small row of heat shield tiles that had not been sufficiently imaged during the day two inspection . Following the analysis of the survey , the managers cleared all of the TPS systems until the pre @-@ landing inspection . 
 The mission 's second spacewalk officially began at 12 : 49 UTC , and the pair set to work removing and replacing the telescope 's three gyroscope rate sensing units ( <unk> ) . Each unit contains two gyroscopes that allow the telescope to point itself . The first unit , RSU 2 , was replaced without problems , but when they attempted to replace the second unit , RSU 3 , the unit would not align onto the guide pins , and they could not seat it into the equipment bay . Managers decided to put the unit originally intended for the RSU 1 bay into the RSU 3 bay , and it was installed without problems . The pair then attempted to install the second unit into the third and final bay , but the unit again would not seat properly , and they were unable to install it . Instead , it was decided that an additional unit carried as a spare would be placed into the final bay . The spare unit was one that was removed during the STS @-@ 103 mission , and had been refurbished on the ground . The installation of all three gyro units was a critical objective of the servicing mission , as three had failed , one was offline due to electrical issues , and the other two had also been experiencing issues with performance . Ground controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center confirmed that all six gyroscopes and the new battery passed preliminary tests . 
 The problems with seating the second RSU set the <unk> back in the timeline by approximately two hours , but after Altman asked Massimino and Good how they felt , they replied they were doing well and felt fine to continue . Flight controllers on the ground evaluated the consumables for the two spacesuits , and decided that if Massimino recharged his suit 's oxygen in the airlock , the pair could safely continue with the battery installation . After moving to the battery unit site , Good and Massimino removed one of the original battery modules from Bay 2 of the telescope , and replaced it with a new unit . The batteries provide power to the telescope when it passes into the Earth 's shadow and its solar arrays are not exposed to the sun . The spacewalk officially ended at 20 : 45 UTC , for a time of seven hours , fifty @-@ six minutes . It was the twentieth spacewalk to service Hubble , bringing the total time in EVA servicing the telescope to one hundred forty @-@ four hours and twenty @-@ six minutes . 
 During the mission status briefing , Tomas Gonzalez @-@ Torres , the Lead EVA Officer , and Hubble Program Manager Preston Burch both explained that the spare RSU would not impact the life of the telescope , as it had been fully refurbished on the ground with two of the three improvements incorporated in newer models . " I would say the difference in the projected longevity of the observatory in the out years is very small . We don 't see this is a significant detriment at all to the observatory . This was a tremendous accomplishment for us . " Burch noted . Lead Flight Director Tony Ceccacci noted that due to the length of the spacewalk , and the resulting slip in the timeline , the crew 's sleep shift would have to be moved an hour later , to allow them to get the proper amount of rest , and the rest of the docked timeline would also be shifted forward an hour . 
 = = = 16 May ( Flight day 6 ) = = = 
 After awakening , the crew set to work preparing for the mission 's third spacewalk , one that was considered the most challenging and uncertain , yet had some of the highest priority items scheduled . The tasks were to remove the obsolete Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement ( COSTAR ) , originally installed during STS @-@ 61 to correct the spherical aberration of Hubble 's mirror , and install the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph ( COS ) , and to repair the Advanced Camera for Surveys ( ACS ) . The ACS failed in June 2006 due to an electrical issue , and after being restored partially , failed again in 2007 due to an electrical short . The ACS was not designed to be serviced or repaired in space , so the task was considered one of the most challenging of the mission . After running into various snags in the first two spacewalks , managers on the ground were prepared to see unexpected issues arise during the complicated repair work . The spacewalk began at 13 : 35 UTC , and Grunsfeld and Feustel had no problems . The pair worked through their timeline so efficiently that they were over an hour ahead at one point . After removing COSTAR and stowing it in the orbiter 's payload bay , they installed COS , and then moved on to the ACS repair . Using specially designed tools , they removed an access panel , replaced the camera 's four circuit boards , and installed a new power supply . 
 The spacewalk was completed in six hours and thirty @-@ six minutes , and the ACS passed the initial aliveness tests . It was the twenty @-@ first Hubble servicing spacewalk , and Grunsfeld 's seventh EVA , moving him up to fourth in the record book of spacewalking time . During the previous day 's mission status briefing , Dave Leckrone , Hubble Space Telescope Senior Project Scientist , made a prediction , joking that since the first two spacewalks , which were considered to be straightforward , had run into issues , the most difficult EVA – to repair the ACS , would be the smoothest one of the mission . " I have a prediction , We 've always said EVA 3 was going to be the most difficult and the most challenging , and I predict it 's going to go more smoothly than any other EVA on this mission . I just think that 's some version of Murphy 's Law that 's going to lead us in that direction . " 
 After the initial aliveness testing , the ACS was put through its functional tests . Managers and engineers had noted that the repairs were designed for only one of the three photo channels , the wide @-@ field channel , and that the issues with the high @-@ resolution channel may not be resolved by the designed fix . During the functional testing , the wide @-@ field channel passed , but issues were seen with the high @-@ resolution channel , indicating that the power issue may be farther upstream in the electronic circuits than the spacewalk repair addressed . Additional testing would be performed , but Hubble Program Manager Preston Burch noted that the fix was designed to " back power " the high @-@ resolution channel through the paths connected to the wide @-@ field channel , and while feasible , it was a possibility that the short circuit damage was in an area not corrected with the planned repair . Even if the high @-@ resolution channel is unable to be restored , it was considered to be less important , since the bulk of the ACS science output is undertaken by the wide @-@ field channel . The third channel , the solar @-@ blind channel , passed overnight functional testing without issues . 
 = = = 17 May ( Flight day 7 ) = = = 
 Beginning the mission 's fourth spacewalk at 13 : 45 UTC , Massimino and Good went to work repairing the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph ( STIS ) . The spectrograph failed in 2004 due to a blown power supply . As with the ACS , the STIS was not designed with the intention of servicing it while in space , and one of the major challenges was to remove a cover plate held tight with over 100 screws using a specially designed tool called a fastener @-@ capture plate , designed to trap the screws and washers and prevent them from floating into space when removed . While preparing the fastener @-@ capture plate , Massimino encountered issues with a handrail that had to be removed to accommodate the fastener @-@ capture plate . The handrail had a stripped bolt on the bottom , preventing it from being released . After trying multiple options without success , managers on the ground advised Massimino to use brute force to remove the handrail , so he could proceed with the removal of the cover plate . The procedure was tested at Goddard Space Flight Center prior to approving it , showing that the stripped bolt could be broken off safely using force . Working inside the orbiter , Feustel walked Massimino through the procedure slowly , advising him to tape the handrail with <unk> tape to prevent any parts from breaking off or flying loose , to be aware of the reaction the force would have , as well as to watch for sharp edges on the handrail after removal . 
 Once the handrail was removed , Massimino went to work attaching the capture plate , but ran into additional problems when the battery in one of his power tools failed . Massimino was instructed to return to the orbiter 's airlock to retrieve a spare tool and to recharge his suit 's oxygen reserves , to allow for completion of the STIS repair . The rest of the STIS repair work was completed without any problems , but the <unk> were nearly two hours behind the scheduled timeline , so managers on the ground decided to postpone the task of installing a New Outer Blanket Layers ( <unk> ) onto the telescope 's outer shell . The spacewalk , originally scheduled to last six hours and thirty minutes , ended at 21 : 02 UTC , for a time of eight hours and two minutes . At the time , it became the sixth longest spacewalk in history . It was the twenty @-@ second spacewalk devoted to servicing the Hubble telescope , and Massimino 's fourth spacewalk , bringing his total EVA time to thirty hours , forty @-@ four minutes . 
 During the mission status briefing , Jennifer Wiseman , Chief of Exoplanet and Stellar Astrophysics for Goddard Space Flight Center , noted that the repair of STIS was a major victory for both the mission and the science community , as that part of the telescope performed unique functions , helping scientists understand the materials planets are composed of , and looking at things like the motion of stars around black holes . 
 After initial aliveness testing that showed no issues , STIS was taken into functional testing , and issues were seen when the telescope put itself into safe mode due to a low thermal limit sensor . Ground controllers at Goddard would restart the testing once the thermal limit sensor was back in normal sensor range , but it is believed the component is in good shape . 
 = = = 18 May ( Flight day 8 ) = = = 
 Completing the fifth of the five planned spacewalks , Grunsfeld and Feustel successfully installed the second battery , removed and replaced the Fine Guidance Sensor number three , and worked so efficiently that they were over an hour ahead of the timeline , giving them time to remove degraded insulation panels from three bays of the telescope , and install three New Outer Blanket Layers ( <unk> ) . Beginning the spacewalk at 12 : 20 UTC , the pair first worked on removing an aging battery module , and replaced it with a new pack , which combined with the battery replacement performed during the second spacewalk , gave the telescope all new nickel @-@ hydrogen batteries . They then moved on to the removal and replacement of the Fine Guidance Sensor unit number three , improving Hubble 's focus and stability when imaging . NASA engineers liken the new FGS to being able to keep a laser beam focused on a U.S. dime coin that is 320 km ( 199 mi ) away . Both the new batteries , and the FGS passed both aliveness and functional testing . The mission 's final EVA concluded at 19 : 22 UTC , after seven hours and two minutes . The total time spent during the mission in extra @-@ vehicular activity was thirty @-@ six hours , fifty @-@ six minutes . The twenty @-@ third and final spacewalk to service Hubble brought the total time spent in EVA working on the telescope to one hundred and sixty @-@ six hours , six minutes . Lead Flight Director Tony Ceccacci noted that the final EVA was also the last planned spacewalk from a shuttle airlock . In what was likely his last EVA , Grunsfeld 's has accumulated fifty @-@ eight hours and thirty minutes spacewalking , just two minutes less than Jerry L. Ross , who is third on the list of spacewalking time . 
 The completion of all the major objectives , as well as some that were not considered vital , upgraded the telescope to its most technologically advanced state since its launch nineteen years ago , and made it more powerful than ever . The upgrades will also help Hubble to see deeper into the universe , and farther into the past , closer to the time of the Big Bang . Hubble 's importance to science is not just seen in the dramatic images it provides , but also in the volume of work it has generated – an average of fourteen scientific articles are published each week based on data gathered from the telescope . Officially , the upgrades should extend Hubble 's life through 2014 , but Hubble Space Telescope Senior Scientist David Leckrone noted prior to the mission that if all of the mission 's objectives were successful , the telescope could easily last longer than that . The next large telescope scheduled to be launched is the James Webb Space Telescope in 2018 , which is infrared @-@ only , so to have Hubble , which has ultraviolet , visible , and near @-@ infrared capabilities , still operational after 2018 would be of great benefit to the scientific community . 
 = = = 19 May ( Flight day 9 ) = = = 
 After awakening at 8 : 31 UTC , the crew set to work preparing to release Hubble from the payload bay of Atlantis . Using the shuttle 's robotic arm , McArthur grappled Hubble at 10 : 45 UTC , and lifted it out of the orbiter 's payload bay to prepare for the release . Good and Massimino were standing by ready to perform a spacewalk in the event that something went wrong during the telescope 's deployment . After working through the checklist to prepare the telescope for release , managers on the ground gave the go to Altman to release Hubble , and at 12 : 57 UTC , McArthur successfully released the telescope as the vehicles flew over Africa . Performing a small separation burn , Johnson backed the orbiter away from the telescope , and Altman called down to managers on the ground confirming the deployment of Hubble . <unk> the crew , Altman said " And Houston , Hubble has been released , it 's safely back on its journey of exploration as we begin steps to conclude ours . Not everything went as we planned , but we planned a way to work around everything and with the whole team pulling together ... we 've been able to do some incredible things . And now Hubble can continue on its own , exploring the cosmos , and bringing it home to us as we head for home in a few days . Thank you . " Hubble 's new equipment and upgraded systems would be tested for several months prior to resuming operation , but if all tests are successful , operation of the telescope would resume in early September . 
 Following the separation burn , the crew set to work performing the standard late inspection of the thermal protection system of the orbiter . Using the robotic arm , McArthur , Altman , and Johnson worked through the procedures to inspect the wing leading @-@ edge panels , reinforced carbon @-@ carbon nose cap , and heat shield tiles . After evaluating the weather reports , managers on the ground slightly refined the schedule for landing , opting to bring the shuttle home one orbit early to try to avoid the possibility of showers that would prevent a landing on Friday . The new landing opportunity would bring the crew home at 10 : 01 am EDT . 
 = = = 20 May ( Flight day 10 ) = = = 
 After a busy week servicing Hubble , the crew of Atlantis had the majority of the day off , giving them time to rest and prepare for landing . They took their traditional on @-@ orbit crew portrait , and spoke with reporters from around the world in a news conference . The crew also had the opportunity to speak with the Expedition 19 crew on board the International Space Station , in a conference call routed through satellites . The station crew congratulated them on a very successful mission , and the crew of Atlantis expressed their gratitude to the station crew for all the work they do during their long duration stays on the station . 
 The Spaceflight Meteorology Group at Johnson Space Center was predicting less than favorable weather for Friday 's landing , so managers asked the crew to power down some non @-@ critical systems to help conserve power , in the event that the orbiter is not able to land until Saturday . 
 After evaluating the imagery sent down from the late inspection , the ground team officially cleared the orbiter 's thermal protection system for re @-@ entry . Initially , NASA had planned on releasing Endeavour from its stand @-@ by status following the late inspection , but managers on the ground decided to wait until Atlantis had performed the de @-@ orbit burn before standing down the STS @-@ 400 rescue mission officially . 
 Before going to sleep , the crew took a phone call from President Barack Obama , who congratulated them on their successful mission , joked with them , asking if they could see his house in Chicago , and expressed his pride in the crew . Obama told the crew , " Like a lot of Americans , I 've been watching with amazement the gorgeous images you 've been sending back , and the incredible repair mission you 've been making in space , " he said . " I think you 're providing a wonderful example of the kind of dedication and commitment to exploration that represents America and the space program generally . These are traits that have always made this country strong , and all of you personify them . " 
 = = = 21 May ( Flight day 11 ) = = = 
 The crew spent the day in preparations for Friday 's landing . After working through their post @-@ sleep activities , Altman , Johnson and McArthur performed a check @-@ out of the flight control surfaces , performed a reaction control system hot @-@ fire , and went through communications checks with managers on the ground . The rest of the crew worked to stow away items that were used during the mission . The crew held a deorbit preparations briefing with the ground teams , and Altman and Johnson worked with the simulator on board to run through a series of landing simulations . 
 In the afternoon , the crew became the first shuttle crew to ever testify live from orbit in a United States Senate hearing . Barbara Mikulski , Chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee , Subcommittee on Commerce , Justice , Science and Related Agencies , and former astronaut Senator Bill Nelson of Florida , spoke with the crew about the importance of spaceflight and the repair of Hubble . The first person to give testimony from space was John L. Phillips , who testified before the House Science Committee , Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics in June 2005 while a member of Expedition 11 on board the International Space Station . The crew of Atlantis later spoke with reporters from the major networks CNN , ABC , NBC , CBS , and FOX before going to sleep . 
 While the weather in Florida continued to look grim for a landing Friday , managers on the ground advised the crew that they would proceed with deorbit preparations as planned , and see if the weather cleared up in the morning . NASA managers stated that for Friday , they would focus on a KSC landing for Friday , not activating any of the backup sites , but if the weather was not favorable for a Friday landing , Edwards Air Force Base could be activated on Saturday . Atlantis has enough consumables to stay in orbit until Monday . 
 Also late on Thursday , managers officially released Endeavour from its stand @-@ by state , as Atlantis was cleared of any damage to its heat shield and was in good shape to return to Earth . 
 = = = 22 May ( Flight day 12 ) = = = 
 As the crew worked through the procedures and checklists for entry on Friday , the managers on the ground closely examined the weather patterns around Florida , which were less than favorable . The crew was advised that there were low clouds and thunderstorms , both conditions that violated landing criteria , so managers waived the first opportunity . A second opportunity was also not taken , as the weather had not improved . Entry Flight Director Norm Knight called up Edwards Air Force Base shortly after the decision to delay to Saturday was made , which would give the crew a total of six Saturday landing opportunities , three at each location . 
 = = = 23 May ( Flight day 13 ) = = = 
 The crew of Atlantis had six possible landing opportunities on Saturday . Managers evaluated the best three opportunities of the day to try bring the orbiter home . Saturday 's first landing opportunity at Kennedy Space Center was waived due to poor weather forecasts , and observed weather violations for the landing criteria . After further evaluating weather patterns around Florida , managers on the ground chose to waive the second opportunity as well , and wait one more day to attempt to get the orbiter into Florida on Sunday . Weather in California had excellent forecasts , so if the attempts on Sunday to land in Florida were not successful , the shuttle would be able to land at Edwards Air Force Base without weather being an issue . 
 = = = 24 May ( Flight day 14 , landing ) = = = 
 The Atlantis crew had two Florida return opportunities for the day , as well as two for a California landing , giving the managers time to evaluate the weather and use California if necessary . After choosing to pass on the first opportunity for KSC and evaluate the second , managers on the ground decided that the weather in Florida was too dynamic to risk bringing the orbiter in , and opted to land at Edwards Air Force Base instead . The de @-@ orbit burn was initiated at 14 : 24 UTC , a burn of the shuttle 's engines that brought it out of orbit to begin the orbiter 's reentry into the Earth 's atmosphere . Atlantis successfully landed at Edwards Air Force Base on Runway 22 at 8 : 39 am PDT after 197 orbits in space and a distance of approximately 5 @.@ 2 million miles . 
 After working through the checklists to safely power down the orbiter , the crew performed the traditional walk @-@ around of the shuttle and met with employees from NASA . Speaking briefly to the press following the walk around , Altman joked , " I didn 't realize it was going to be so hard to get back to the Earth ! We 're all thrilled to have the mission complete . " 
 During the post @-@ landing briefing , Associate Administrator for Space Sciences Ed Weiler declared the mission a total success , and after noting the rocky road that it took to get the mission completed , said he considered the mission to be Hubble 's Great American Comeback story , chapter two . 
 " This mission ... was canceled January 16 , 2004 , if you 'd have told me on that day I 'd be sitting here five years later with a totally successful five @-@ EVA mission , with a brand new Hubble once again that will probably operate well into the third decade of its life , I wouldn 't have bet you a penny . But Hubble is the great American comeback story , chapter two . " – Ed Weiler 
 = = Post landing = = 
 Following standard post @-@ landing processing at Edwards Air Force Base , Atlantis was lifted into the air using the Mate @-@ <unk> device , and attached to the top of a modified Boeing 747 , called a Shuttle Carrier Aircraft ( SCA ) for its return flight to Florida . After departing California on June 1 , the flight made an overnight stop at Biggs Army Airfield in El Paso , Texas , and on June 2 made stops in San Antonio , Texas , and Columbus , Mississippi to refuel . After performing a flyby of the coast , the SCA landed at Kennedy Space Center at 6 : 53 p.m EDT on June 2 , 2009 . One of the heavier return flights , Atlantis was still carrying the cargo from the mission in the payload bay , and weighed approximately one quarter of a million pounds . Combined with the 747 , the total weight of the vehicle was approximately six hundred thousand pounds . Atlantis was removed from the SCA and towed to the Orbiter Processing Facility late June 2 . 
 = = Extra @-@ vehicular activity = = 
 Five back @-@ to @-@ back EVAs were planned for the mission . <unk> one through four were originally scheduled to last six hours , thirty minutes , while the fifth spacewalk was scheduled to last five hours , forty @-@ five minutes . All five EVAs were conducted successfully , for a total time in EVA activity of thirty @-@ six hours , fifty @-@ six minutes . 
 = = Wake @-@ up calls = = 
 NASA began a tradition of playing music to astronauts during the Gemini program , which was first used to wake up a flight crew during Apollo 15 . Each track is specially chosen , often by their families , and usually has a special meaning to an individual member of the crew , or is applicable to their daily activities . 
 = = Contingency mission = = 
 STS @-@ 125 was the only planned shuttle mission after the Columbia accident to be launched into a low @-@ inclination orbit that did not allow rendezvous with the International Space Station . Due to the inclination and other orbit parameters of Hubble , Atlantis would have been unable to use the International Space Station as a safe haven in the event of structural or mechanical failure . To preserve NASA 's post @-@ Columbia requirement of having shuttle Launch On Need ( <unk> ) rescue capability , STS @-@ 400 was the flight designation given to the Contingency Shuttle Crew Support ( <unk> ) mission which would have been flown by Endeavour in the event Atlantis became disabled during STS @-@ 125 . After Atlantis performed the late inspection and was cleared for re @-@ entry , Endeavour was officially released from stand @-@ by status on Thursday , 21 May . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = NASA = = = 
 This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . 
 = = = The Universe in a Mirror = = = 
 Zimmerman , Robert F. ( 2008 ) . The Universe in a Mirror : The Saga of the Hubble Telescope and the <unk> Who Built It . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press. p . 287 . ISBN 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = Larry King ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Larry King " is the twelfth episode of the third season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 48th overall episode of the series . It was written by supervising producer Matt Hubbard and directed by Constantine Makris . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on February 26 , 2009 . Salma Hayek , Ajay Naidu , Brian Stack , and Rip Torn guest star in " Larry King " , and there are cameo appearances by Larry King and Meredith Vieira . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) considers taking the next step in his relationship with his girlfriend Elisa Pedrera ( Salma Hayek ) . Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) appears on Larry King Live and inadvertently triggers mayhem in New York City when responding to questions about the economy . In addition , Tracy 's interview sends the crew members of the fictitious show TGS with Tracy Jordan — Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) , Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) , and J. D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) — on a search of the 30 Rock building for a treasure . At the same time , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) loses her cellphone and must go with NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) to Queens to recover it where it is being held for ransom by a taxi driver ( Naidu ) . 
 " Larry King " has received generally positive reviews from television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by 6 @.@ 4 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) appears on Larry King Live . During his appearance on the program , a breaking story interrupts his interview with show host Larry King — it is being reported that the Asian stocks are falling . Larry King asks Tracy 's opinion on this story , which results in Tracy giving chaos @-@ inducting views , including , " New York as we know it will no longer exist tomorrow " and he calls for panic , sending the people of New York into madness . At the NBC studios , the TGS with Tracy Jordan staff , Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) , Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) , and J. D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) , try looking for money that Tracy has hidden in the building after revealing this on Larry King Live . Pete calls the program asking Tracy where he stores the money . Tracy reveals that the safest place he has it hidden has " a hard top and soft bottom , no matter where it moves , the cash stays in the same place . " This clue is of no help to Pete , Frank , Toofer , and Lutz . 
 Meanwhile , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) escorts Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) to Queens to retrieve the cellphone she left in a cab . The taxi driver , Asif ( Ajay Naidu ) , finds an adult picture of her and threatens to send it to everyone in her address book unless she pays him $ 2 @,@ 000 . While on their way to get the phone , chaos is happening around them , which prompts Kenneth to want to turn back . Trying to change his mind , Liz lies to Kenneth , telling him that her phone has sentimental value , although she later tells Kenneth the real reasons she wants her phone back . Feeling betrayed by Liz , Kenneth abandons her and returns to 30 Rock . Liz arrives at the taxi depot and tells Asif that she does not have the money to pay him because rioting children took her handbag . Then Kenneth shows up and they watch Tracy reveal his secret to the whereabouts of his money , prompting Kenneth to realize that the money is stored in his page blazer . Kenneth pays Asif and Liz 's phone is returned . 
 Finally , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) decides to be committed to his girlfriend , Elisa Pedrera ( Salma Hayek ) , as Elisa wants to take their relationship to the next level . Jack persuades Elisa to cancel her annual trip to Puerto Rico so that the two can spend time together . As a result , Jack devotes a whole week to Elisa at exactly the same time as the economic crisis unfolds , forcing Jack to steer General Electric ( GE ) through the Asian market crash . After a video tape of GE CEO Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) surfaces — taped in the event of a financial meltdown — Geiss says " it is the end , and love is all that matters " , which makes Jack realize his love for Elisa . He proposes marriage to her , which she accepts . The day after , Elisa leaves Jack for Puerto Rico . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Larry King " was written by 30 Rock supervising producer Matt Hubbard , and directed by Constantine Makris . This was Hubbard 's sixth writing credit , and Makris ' first directed episode . " Larry King " originally aired in the United States on February 26 , 2009 on NBC as the twelfth episode of the show 's third season and the 48th overall episode of the series . 
 In November 2008 , it was reported that television talk show host Larry King had " quietly filmed an appearance " as himself on 30 Rock . This episode was actress Salma Hayek 's fifth appearance as Elisa on the show . She first appeared in the episode " Señor Macho Solo " as a nurse for Jack Donaghy 's mother and love interest for Jack . She made appearances in the episodes " Flu Shot " , " Generalissimo " , and " St. Valentine 's Day " . Her last guest spot was in the episode " The Ones " in which Elisa and Jack end their relationship . Actor Rip Torn made his seventh appearance on the series as GE CEO Don Geiss . " Larry King " would become Torn 's final appearance on the show , as it is revealed in the fourth season episode " Future Husband " that his character has died . Comedian actor Brian Stack made his third appearance as Howard Jorgensen , a GE executive and associate of Jack 's . Stack previously appeared in the episodes " Jack Meets Dennis " and " Succession " . Actor Ajay Naidu played Asif , the taxi driver holding Liz 's phone for ransom in " Larry King " . " Larry King " was Today show co @-@ host Meredith Vieira 's second guest appearance as herself , having appeared in the November 8 , 2007 , episode " Greenzo " that aired during the show 's second season . In the episode , the night after the economic crisis unfolded , Tracy appears on The Today Show . There , Vieira tells him that he is to blame for the panic that ensued around the city . She asks Tracy 's opinion on the matter , only for Tracy to advertise TGS , the show he stars in , when and what time it airs . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " I 'm new to this country . Is that a real thing ? " , asks Asif , after Liz tells him that she would pay him on Opposite Day . While on Larry King Live , Tracy recounts the entire plot of the film Teen Wolf ( 1985 ) . Tracy reveals that he was to appear in the movie Rush Hour , but was replaced by Hong Kong actor Jackie Chan . Liz lies to Kenneth that her phone has a recording of her deceased grandmother singing a lullaby , to which later Kenneth makes her sing the song and his realization that she was singing the song " 99 Luftballons " , a protest song from German singer Nena . 
 When Pete calls in on Larry King Live , Tracy believes Pete is Peter Frampton , a British musician . When Jack realizes his true feelings for Elisa , he decides to stop her from going to Puerto Rico , but when he sees her outside the 30 Rock building , he tells her , " I was about to do the whole run to the airport thing , like Ross did on Friends and Liz Lemon did in real life " , a reference to the Friends television character Ross Geller doing this in the series finale episode " The Last One " , and as Liz similarly does in the season two episode " Sandwich Day " , where she heads to the airport to make things right with her ex @-@ boyfriend , Floyd DeBarber ( Jason Sudeikis ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Larry King " was watched by 6 @.@ 4 million households , according to the Nielsen Media Research . This episode earned a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 share in the 18 and 49 demographic , meaning that 2 @.@ 9 percent of all people in that group , and 7 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . This was a decrease from the previous episode , " St. Valentine 's Day " , which was watched by 7 @.@ 6 million American viewers . Nonetheless , 30 Rock ranked number 7 among all primetime programs — during the original broadcasting of this episode — in adults aged between 18 and 34 , averaging a 3 @.@ 4 rating / 10 share in that demographic . 
 Since airing , " Larry King " has received generally positive reviews from television critics . Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad wrote that " Larry King " was the " best of the season so far " , saying that there was a " really nice balance " in the episode 's plots . Sassone said that Hayek was " fine " , but much preferred the Jack character single . Alan Sepinwall , television columnist for The Star @-@ Ledger , complimented the episode , reporting that it was " much better " and perhaps the first episode he enjoyed " unreservedly . " He added that the entire cast was used " well " and that it " gave us a Jack story that balanced comedy with some genuine emotion , got some good mileage out of a rare Liz / Kenneth story ... and employed the guest stars as well as they have all season . " IGN contributor Robert Canning admitted in his recap that he was " thrilled " after reading the synopsis of the episode , regarding to Tracy causing mayhem in New York , but after the airing , " I was a bit disappointed " as it " wasn 't as over @-@ the @-@ top " , but overall , " this was still a fun and funny episode . " Canning gave the episode an 8 out of 10 rating . Time contributor James Poniewozik enjoyed Liz and Kenneth 's story as it " felt more emotionally real " and " allowed Kenneth to get to show a bit more spine than usual , standing up to Liz on their journey to darkest Queens " . Poniewozik noted that it was " nice " to see the Pete character back , as Scott Adsit had not appeared on 30 Rock for quite some time . 
 Not all reviews were positive . Matt Mitovich from TV Guide wrote that " Larry King " was " pretty blah . Something about it just seemed drab and lifeless , as if the writers and cast were in a mad dash to break for Christmas . " The A.V. Club 's Scott Tobias believed that the episode was not up to " 30 Rock 's high standards " and commented that a " big problem " was Jack and Elisa 's storyline . " The concept of rich , superficial , commitment @-@ phobic workaholic Jack falling for his exact opposite isn 't a bad one , but Hayek 's run has been more or less a wash . " Tobias further added that Alec Baldwin and Salma Hayek " are an odd couple " citing that they do not have much chemistry together . 
 = Malcolm III of Scotland = 
 Malcolm ( Gaelic : Máel Coluim ; c . 1031 – 13 November 1093 ) was King of Scots from 1058 to 1093 . He was later nicknamed Canmore ( ceann mòr ) in Scottish Gaelic , " Great Chief " . ( Ceann 
 = leader , " head " [ of state ] . Mòr = 
 pre @-@ eminent , great , " big " . ) Malcolm 's long reign , lasting 35 years , preceded the beginning of the Scoto @-@ Norman age . He is the historical equivalent of the character of the same name in Shakespeare 's Macbeth . 
 Malcolm 's kingdom did not extend over the full territory of modern Scotland : the north and west of Scotland remained in Scandinavian , Norse @-@ Gael and Gaelic control , and the areas under the control of the Kings of Scots did not advance much beyond the limits set by Malcolm II until the 12th century . Malcolm III fought a succession of wars against the Kingdom of England , which may have had as their goal the conquest of the English earldom of Northumbria . These wars did not result in any significant advances southwards . Malcolm 's main achievement is to have continued a line which would rule Scotland for many years , although his role as " founder of a dynasty " has more to do with the propaganda of his youngest son David , and his descendants , than with any historical reality . 
 Malcolm 's second wife , Margaret of Wessex , was eventually canonized and is Scotland 's only royal saint . Malcolm himself gained no reputation for piety ; with the notable exception of Dunfermline Abbey , he is not definitely associated with major religious establishments or ecclesiastical reforms . 
 = = Background = = 
 Malcolm 's father Duncan I became king in late 1034 , on the death of Malcolm II , Duncan 's maternal grandfather and Malcolm 's great @-@ grandfather . According to John of Fordun , whose account is the original source of part at least of William Shakespeare 's Macbeth , Malcolm 's mother was a niece of Siward , Earl of Northumbria , but an earlier king @-@ list gives her the Gaelic name <unk> . Other sources claim that either a daughter or niece would have been too young to fit the timeline , thus the likely relative would have been Siward 's own sister Sybil , which may have translated into Gaelic as <unk> . 
 Duncan 's reign was not successful and he was killed by Macbeth on 15 August 1040 . Although Shakespeare 's Macbeth presents Malcolm as a grown man and his father as an old one , it appears that Duncan was still young in 1040 , and Malcolm and his brother Donalbane were children . Malcolm 's family did attempt to overthrow Macbeth in 1045 , but Malcolm 's grandfather Crínán of Dunkeld was killed in the attempt . 
 Soon after the death of Duncan his two young sons were sent away for greater safety — exactly where is the subject of debate . According to one version , Malcolm ( then aged about nine ) was sent to England , and his younger brother Donalbane was sent to the Isles . Based on Fordun 's account , it was assumed that Malcolm passed most of Macbeth 's seventeen @-@ year reign in the Kingdom of England at the court of Edward the Confessor . 
 According to an alternative version , Malcolm 's mother took both sons into exile at the court of Thorfinn Sigurdsson , Earl of Orkney , an enemy of Macbeth 's family , and perhaps Duncan 's kinsman by marriage . 
 An English invasion in 1054 , with Siward , Earl of Northumbria in command , had as its goal the installation of one " Máel Coluim , son of the King of the Cumbrians " . This Máel Coluim has traditionally been identified with the later Malcolm III . This interpretation derives from the Chronicle attributed to the 14th @-@ century chronicler of Scotland , John of Fordun , as well as from earlier sources such as William of Malmesbury . The latter reported that Macbeth was killed in the battle by Siward , but it is known that Macbeth outlived Siward by two years . A. A. M. Duncan argued in 2002 that , using the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle entry as their source , later writers innocently misidentified " Máel Coluim " with the later Scottish king of the same name . Duncan 's argument has been supported by several subsequent historians specialising in the era , such as Richard Oram , Dauvit Broun and Alex Woolf . It has also been suggested that Máel Coluim may have been a son of Owen the Bald , British king of Strathclyde perhaps by a daughter of Malcolm II , King of Scotland . 
 In 1057 various chroniclers report the death of Macbeth at Malcolm 's hand , on 15 August 1057 at Lumphanan in Aberdeenshire . Macbeth was succeeded by his stepson Lulach , who was crowned at Scone , probably on 8 September 1057 . Lulach was killed by Malcolm , " by treachery " , near Huntly on 23 April 1058 . After this , Malcolm became king , perhaps being inaugurated on 25 April 1058 , although only John of Fordun reports this . 
 = = Malcolm and Ingibiorg = = 
 If Orderic Vitalis is to be relied upon , one of Malcolm 's earliest actions as king may have been to travel south to the court of Edward the Confessor in 1059 to arrange a marriage with Edward 's kinswoman Margaret , who had arrived in England two years before from Hungary . If he did visit the English court , he was the first reigning king of Scots to do so in more than eighty years . If a marriage agreement was made in 1059 , it was not kept , and this may explain the Scots invasion of Northumbria in 1061 when Lindisfarne was plundered . Equally , Malcolm 's raids in Northumbria may have been related to the disputed " Kingdom of the Cumbrians " , reestablished by Earl Siward in 1054 , which was under Malcolm 's control by 1070 . 
 The Orkneyinga saga reports that Malcolm married the widow of Thorfinn Sigurdsson , Ingibiorg , a daughter of Finn <unk> . Although Ingibiorg is generally assumed to have died shortly before 1070 , it is possible that she died much earlier , around 1058 . The Orkneyinga Saga records that Malcolm and Ingibiorg had a son , Duncan II ( Donnchad mac Maíl Coluim ) , who was later king . Some Medieval commentators , following William of Malmesbury , claimed that Duncan was illegitimate , but this claim is propaganda reflecting the need of Malcolm 's descendants by Margaret to undermine the claims of Duncan 's descendants , the Meic Uilleim . Malcolm 's son Domnall , whose death is reported in 1085 , is not mentioned by the author of the Orkneyinga Saga . He is assumed to have been born to Ingibiorg . 
 Malcolm 's marriage to Ingibiorg secured him peace in the north and west . The Heimskringla tells that her father Finn had been an adviser to Harald Hardraade and , after falling out with Harald , was then made an Earl by Sweyn Estridsson , King of Denmark , which may have been another recommendation for the match . Malcolm enjoyed a peaceful relationship with the Earldom of Orkney , ruled jointly by his stepsons , Paul and Erlend Thorfinnsson . The Orkneyinga Saga reports strife with Norway but this is probably misplaced as it associates this with Magnus Barefoot , who became king of Norway only in 1093 , the year of Malcolm 's death . 
 = = Malcolm and Margaret = = 
 Although he had given sanctuary to Tostig Godwinson when the Northumbrians drove him out , Malcolm was not directly involved in the ill @-@ fated invasion of England by Harald Hardraade and Tostig in 1066 , which ended in defeat and death at the battle of Stamford Bridge . In 1068 , he granted asylum to a group of English exiles fleeing from William of Normandy , among them Agatha , widow of Edward the Confessor 's nephew Edward the Exile , and her children : Edgar Ætheling and his sisters Margaret and Cristina . They were accompanied by Gospatric , Earl of Northumbria . The exiles were disappointed , however , if they had expected immediate assistance from the Scots . 
 In 1069 the exiles returned to England , to join a spreading revolt in the north . Even though Gospatric and Siward 's son Waltheof submitted by the end of the year , the arrival of a Danish army under Sweyn Estridsson seemed to ensure that William 's position remained weak . Malcolm decided on war , and took his army south into Cumbria and across the Pennines , wasting Teesdale and Cleveland then marching north , loaded with loot , to Wearmouth . There Malcolm met Edgar and his family , who were invited to return with him , but did not . As Sweyn had by now been bought off with a large Danegeld , Malcolm took his army home . In reprisal , William sent Gospatric to raid Scotland through Cumbria . In return , the Scots fleet raided the Northumbrian coast where Gospatric 's possessions were concentrated . Late in the year , perhaps shipwrecked on their way to a European exile , Edgar and his family again arrived in Scotland , this time to remain . By the end of 1070 , Malcolm had married Edgar 's sister Margaret of Wessex , the future Saint Margaret of Scotland . 
 The naming of their children represented a break with the traditional Scots regal names such as Malcolm , Cináed and Áed . The point of naming Margaret 's sons — Edward after her father Edward the Exile , Edmund for her grandfather Edmund Ironside , Ethelred for her great @-@ grandfather Ethelred the Unready and Edgar for her great @-@ great @-@ grandfather Edgar and her brother , briefly the elected king , Edgar Ætheling — was unlikely to be missed in England , where William of Normandy 's grasp on power was far from secure . Whether the adoption of the classical Alexander for the future Alexander I of Scotland ( either for Pope Alexander II or for Alexander the Great ) and the biblical David for the future David I of Scotland represented a recognition that William of Normandy would not be easily removed , or was due to the repetition of Anglo @-@ Saxon royal name — another Edmund had preceded Edgar — is not known . Margaret also gave Malcolm two daughters , Edith , who married Henry I of England , and Mary , who married Eustace III of Boulogne . 
 In 1072 , with the Harrying of the North completed and his position again secure , William of Normandy came north with an army and a fleet . Malcolm met William at Abernethy and , in the words of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle " became his man " and handed over his eldest son Duncan as a hostage and arranged peace between William and Edgar . Accepting the overlordship of the king of the English was no novelty , as previous kings had done so without result . The same was true of Malcolm ; his agreement with the English king was followed by further raids into Northumbria , which led to further trouble in the earldom and the killing of Bishop William Walcher at Gateshead . In 1080 , William sent his son Robert Curthose north with an army while his brother Odo punished the Northumbrians . Malcolm again made peace , and this time kept it for over a decade . 
 Malcolm faced little recorded internal opposition , with the exception of Lulach 's son Máel Snechtai . In an unusual entry , for the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle contains little on Scotland , it says that in 1078 : 
 <unk> [ Máel Coluim ] seized the mother of <unk> [ Máel Snechtai ] ... and all his treasures , and his cattle ; and he himself escaped with difficulty . 
 Whatever provoked this strife , Máel Snechtai survived until 1085 . 
 = = Malcolm and William Rufus = = 
 When William Rufus became king of England after his father 's death , Malcolm did not intervene in the rebellions by supporters of Robert Curthose which followed . In 1091 , William Rufus confiscated Edgar Ætheling 's lands in England , and Edgar fled north to Scotland . In May , Malcolm marched south , not to raid and take slaves and plunder , but to besiege Newcastle , built by Robert Curthose in 1080 . This appears to have been an attempt to advance the frontier south from the River Tweed to the River Tees . The threat was enough to bring the English king back from Normandy , where he had been fighting Robert Curthose . In September , learning of William Rufus 's approaching army , Malcolm withdrew north and the English followed . Unlike in 1072 , Malcolm was prepared to fight , but a peace was arranged by Edgar Ætheling and Robert Curthose whereby Malcolm again acknowledged the overlordship of the English king . 
 In 1092 , the peace began to break down . Based on the idea that the Scots controlled much of modern Cumbria , it had been supposed that William Rufus 's new castle at Carlisle and his settlement of English peasants in the surrounds was the cause . It is unlikely that Malcolm controlled Cumbria , and the dispute instead concerned the estates granted to Malcolm by William Rufus 's father in 1072 for his maintenance when visiting England . Malcolm sent messengers to discuss the question and William Rufus agreed to a meeting . Malcolm travelled south to Gloucester , stopping at Wilton Abbey to visit his daughter Edith and sister @-@ in @-@ law Cristina . Malcolm arrived there on 24 August 1093 to find that William Rufus refused to negotiate , insisting that the dispute be judged by the English barons . This Malcolm refused to accept , and returned immediately to Scotland . 
 It does not appear that William Rufus intended to provoke a war , but , as the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle reports , war came : 
 For this reason therefore they parted with great dissatisfaction , and the King Malcolm returned to Scotland . And soon after he came home , he gathered his army , and came harrowing into England with more hostility than <unk> him .... 
 Malcolm was accompanied by Edward , his eldest son by Margaret and probable heir @-@ designate ( or <unk> ) , and by Edgar . Even by the standards of the time , the ravaging of Northumbria by the Scots was seen as harsh . 
 = = Death = = 
 While marching north again , Malcolm was ambushed by Robert de Mowbray , Earl of Northumbria , whose lands he had devastated , near Alnwick on 13 November 1093 . There he was killed by <unk> Morel , steward of Bamburgh Castle . The conflict became known as the Battle of Alnwick . Edward was mortally wounded in the same fight . Margaret , it is said , died soon after receiving the news of their deaths from Edgar . The Annals of Ulster say : 
 Mael Coluim son of Donnchad , over @-@ king of Scotland , and Edward his son , were killed by the French [ i.e. Normans ] in <unk> Alda in England . His queen , Margaret , moreover , died of sorrow for him within nine days . 
 Malcolm 's body was taken to Tynemouth Priory for burial . The king 's body was sent north for reburial , in the reign of his son Alexander , at Dunfermline Abbey , or possibly Iona . 
 On 19 June 1250 , following the canonisation of Malcolm 's wife Margaret by Pope Innocent IV , Margaret 's remains were disinterred and placed in a reliquary . Tradition has it that as the reliquary was carried to the high altar of Dunfermline Abbey , past Malcolm 's grave , it became too heavy to move . As a result , Malcolm 's remains were also disinterred , and buried next to Margaret beside the altar . 
 = = Issue = = 
 Malcolm and Ingibiorg had three sons : 
 Duncan II of Scotland , succeeded his father as King of Scotland 
 Donald , died <unk> 
 Malcolm , died <unk> 
 Malcolm and Margaret had eight children , six sons and two daughters : 
 Edward , killed 1093 
 Edmund of Scotland 
 Ethelred , abbot of Dunkeld 
 King Edgar of Scotland 
 King Alexander I of Scotland 
 King David I of Scotland 
 Edith of Scotland , also called Matilda , married King Henry I of England 
 Mary of Scotland , married Eustace III of Boulogne 
 = = Depictions in fiction = = 
 Malcolm appears in William Shakespeare ’ s Macbeth as Malcolm . He is the son of King Duncan and heir to the throne . He first appears in the second scene where he is talking to a sergeant , with Duncan . The sergeant tells them how the battle was won thanks to Macbeth . Then Ross comes and Duncan decides that Macbeth should take the title of Thane of Cawdor . Then he later appears in Act 1 @.@ 4 talking about the execution of the former Thane of Cawdor . Macbeth then enters and they congratulate him on his victory . He later appears in Macbeth ’ s castle as a guest . When his father is killed he is suspected of the murder so he escapes to England . He later makes an appearance in Act 4 @.@ 3 , where he talks to Macduff about Macbeth and what to do . They both decide to start a war against him . In Act 5 @.@ 4 he is seen in Dunsinane getting ready for war . He orders the troops to hide behind branches and slowly advance towards the castle . In Act 5 @.@ 8 he watches the battle against Macbeth and Macduff with Siward and Ross . When eventually Macbeth is killed , Malcolm takes over as king . 
 The married life of Malcolm III and Margaret has been the subject of two historical novels : A <unk> Pearl ( 1905 ) by Mary H. Debenham , and Malcolm Canmore 's Pearl ( 1907 ) by Agnes Grant Hay . Both focus on court life in Dunfermline , and the Margaret helping introduce Anglo @-@ Saxon culture in Scotland . The latter novel covers events to 1093 , ending with Malcolm 's death . 
 Canmore appears in the third and fourth episodes of the four @-@ part series " City of Stone " in Disney 's Gargoyles , as an antagonist of Macbeth . After witnessing his father Duncan 's death , the young Canmore swears revenge on both Macbeth and his gargoyle ally , Demona . After reaching adulthood , he overthrows Macbeth with English allies . Canmore is also the ancestor of the Hunters , a family of vigilantes who hunt Demona through the centuries . Canmore was voiced in the series by J.D. Daniels as a boy and Neil Dickson as an adult . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Taiko = 
 Taiko ( 太鼓 ? ) are a broad range of Japanese percussion instruments . In Japanese , the term refers to any kind of drum , but outside Japan , it is used to refer to any of the various Japanese drums called <unk> ( <unk> , " Japanese drums " ) and to the form of ensemble taiko drumming more specifically called kumi @-@ daiko ( <unk> , " set of drums " ) . The process of constructing taiko varies between manufacturers , and preparation of both the drum body and skin can take several years depending on methodology . 
 Taiko have a mythological origin in Japanese folklore , but historical records suggest that taiko were introduced to Japan through Korean and Chinese cultural influence as early as the 6th century CE . Some taiko are similar to instruments originating from India . Archaeological evidence also supports that taiko were present in Japan during the 6th century in the Kofun period . Their function has varied through history , ranging from communication , military action , theatrical accompaniment , and religious ceremony to both festival and concert performances . In modern times , taiko have also played a central role in social movements for minorities both within and outside Japan . 
 Kumi @-@ daiko performance , characterized by an ensemble playing on different drums , was developed in 1951 through the work of Daihachi Oguchi and has continued with groups such as Kodo . Other performance styles , such as <unk> @-@ daiko , have also emerged from specific communities in Japan . Kumi @-@ daiko performance groups are active not only in Japan , but also in the United States , Australia , Canada , and Brazil . Taiko performance consists of many components in technical rhythm , form , stick grip , clothing , and the particular instrumentation . Ensembles typically use different types of barrel @-@ shaped nagadō @-@ daiko as well as smaller shime @-@ daiko . Many groups accompany the drums with vocals , strings , and woodwind instruments . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The origin of the instruments is unclear , though there have been many suggestions . Historical accounts , of which the earliest date from 588 CE , note that young Japanese men traveled to Korea to study the kakko , a drum that originated in South China . This study and appropriation of Chinese instruments may have influenced the emergence of taiko . Certain court music styles , especially gigaku and gagaku , arrived in Japan through both Korea and China . In both traditions , dancers were accompanied by several instruments that included drums similar to taiko . Certain percussive patterns and terminology in <unk> , an early dance and music style in Japan , in addition to physical features of the kakko , also reflect influence from both China and India on drum use in gagaku performance . 
 Archaeological evidence shows that taiko were used in Japan as early as the 6th century CE , during the latter part of the Kofun period , and were likely used for communication , in festivals , and in other rituals . This evidence was substantiated by the discovery of haniwa statues in the Sawa District of Gunma Prefecture . Two of these figures are depicted playing drums ; one of them , wearing skins , is equipped with a barrel @-@ shaped drum hung from his shoulder and uses a stick to play the drum at hip height . This statue is titled " Man Beating the Taiko " and is considered the oldest evidence of taiko performance in Japan . Similarities between the playing style demonstrated by this haniwa and known music traditions in Korea and China further suggest influences from these regions . 
 The Nihon Shoki , the second oldest book of Japanese classical history , contains a mythological story describing the origin of taiko . The myth tells how Amaterasu , who had sealed herself inside a cave in anger , was beckoned out by an elder goddess Ame @-@ no @-@ Uzume when others had failed . Ame @-@ no @-@ Uzume accomplished this by emptying out a barrel of sake and dancing furiously on top of it . Historians regard her performance as the mythological creation of taiko music . 
 = = = Use in warfare = = = 
 In feudal Japan , taiko were often used to motivate troops , call out orders or announcements , and set a marching pace ; marches were usually set to six paces per beat of the drum . During the 16th @-@ century Warring States period , specific drum calls were used to communicate orders for retreating and advancing . Other rhythms and techniques were detailed in period texts . According to the war chronicle Gunji <unk> , nine sets of five beats would summon an ally to battle , while nine sets of three beats , sped up three or four times , was the call to advance and pursue an enemy . Folklore from the 16th century on the legendary 6th @-@ century Emperor Keitai offers a story that he obtained a large drum from China , which he named <unk> @-@ daiko ( <unk> , " front drum " ) . The Emperor was thought to have used it to both encourage his own army and intimidate his enemies . 
 = = = In traditional settings = = = 
 Taiko have been incorporated in Japanese theatre for rhythmic needs , general atmosphere , and in certain settings decoration . In the kabuki play The Tale of Shiroishi and the <unk> Chronicles , scenes in the pleasure quarters are accompanied by taiko to create dramatic tension . Noh theatre also feature taiko where performance consists of highly specific rhythmic patterns . The Konparu ( 金春流 ) school of drumming , for example , contains 65 basic patterns in addition to 25 special patterns ; these patterns are categorized in several classes . Differences between these patterns include changes in tempo , accent , dynamics , pitch , and function in the theatrical performance . Patterns are also often connected together in progressions . 
 Taiko continue to be used in gagaku , a classical music tradition typically performed at the Tokyo Imperial Palace in addition to local temples and shrines . In gagaku , one component of the art form is traditional dance , which is guided in part by the rhythm set by the taiko . Taiko have played an important role in many local festivals across Japan . They are also used to accompany religious ritual music . In kagura , which generically describes music and dances stemming from Shinto practices , taiko frequently appear alongside other performers during local festivals . In Buddhist traditions , taiko are used for ritual dances that are a part of the Bon Festival . Taiko , along with other instruments , are featured atop towers that are adorned with red @-@ and @-@ white cloth and serve to provide rhythms for the dancers who are encircled around the performers . 
 = = = Kumi @-@ daiko = = = 
 In addition to the instruments , the term taiko also refers to the performance itself , and commonly to one style called kumi @-@ daiko , or ensemble @-@ style playing ( as opposed to festival performances , rituals , or theatrical use of the drums ) . Kumi @-@ daiko was developed by Daihachi Oguchi in 1951 . He is considered a master performer and helped transform taiko performance from its roots in traditional settings in festivals and shrines . Oguchi was trained as a jazz musician in Nagano , and at one point , a relative gave him an old piece of written taiko music . Unable to read the traditional and esoteric notation , Oguchi found help to transcribe the piece , and on his own added rhythms and transformed the work to accommodate multiple taiko players on different @-@ sized instruments . Each instrument served a specific purpose that established present @-@ day conventions in kumi @-@ daiko performance . 
 Oguchi 's ensemble , Osuwa Daiko , incorporated these alterations and other drums into their performances . They also devised novel pieces that were intended for non @-@ religious performances . Several other groups emerged in Japan through the 1950s and 1960s . Oedo Sukeroku Daiko was formed in Tokyo in 1959 under Seidō Kobayashi , and has been referred to as the first taiko group who toured professionally . Globally , kumi @-@ daiko performance became more visible during the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo , when it was featured during the Festival of Arts event . 
 Kumi @-@ daiko was also developed through the leadership of Den Tagayasu ( 田耕 , Den Tagayasu ) , who gathered young men who were willing to devote their entire lifestyle to taiko playing and took them to Sado Island for training where Den and his family had settled in 1968 . Den chose the island based on a desire to reinvigorate the folk arts in Japan , particularly taiko ; he became inspired by a drumming tradition unique to Sado called ondeko ( 鬼太鼓 , " demon drumming " in Sado dialect ) that required considerable strength to play well . Den called the group " Za Ondekoza " or Ondekoza for short , and implemented a rigorous set of exercises for its members including long @-@ distance running . In 1975 , Ondekoza was the first taiko group to tour in the United States . Their first performance occurred just after the group finished running the Boston Marathon while wearing their traditional uniforms . In 1981 , some members of Ondekoza split from Den and formed another group called Kodo under the leadership of Eitetsu Hayashi . Kodo continued to use Sado Island for rigorous training and communal living , and went on to popularize taiko through frequent touring and collaborations with other musical performers . Kodo is one of the most recognized taiko groups both in Japan and worldwide . 
 Estimates of the number of taiko groups in Japan vary up to 5000 active in Japan , but more conservative assessments place the number closer to 800 based on membership in the Nippon Taiko Foundation , the largest national organization of taiko groups . Some pieces that have emerged from early kumi @-@ daiko groups that continue to be performed include Yatai @-@ bayashi from Ondekoza , <unk> @-@ <unk> ( <unk> , " galloping horse " ) from Osuwa Daiko , and Zoku ( <unk> , " tribe " ) from Kodo . 
 = = Categorization = = 
 Taiko have been developed into a broad range of percussion instruments that are used in both Japanese folk and classical musical traditions . An early classification system based on shape and tension was advanced by Francis Taylor Piggott in 1909 . Taiko are generally classified based on the construction process , or the specific context in which the drum is used , but some are not classified , such as the toy den @-@ den daiko . 
 With few exceptions , taiko have a drum shell with heads on both sides of the body , and a sealed resonating cavity . The head may be fastened to the shell using a number of different systems , such as using ropes . Taiko may be either tunable or non @-@ tunable depending on the system used . 
 Taiko are categorized into three types based on construction process . Byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko are constructed with the drumhead nailed to the body . Shime @-@ daiko are classically constructed with the skin placed over iron or steel rings , which are then tightened with ropes . Contemporary shime @-@ daiko are tensioned using bolts or turnbuckles systems attached to the drum body . Tsuzumi are also rope @-@ tensioned drums , but have a distinct hourglass shape and their skins are made using deerskin . 
 Byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko were historically made only using a single piece of wood ; they continue to be made in this manner , but are also constructed from staves of wood . Larger drums can be made using a single piece of wood , but at a much greater cost due to the difficulty in finding appropriate trees . The preferred wood is the Japanese zelkova or keyaki , but a number of other woods , and even wine barrels , have been used to create taiko . Byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko cannot be tuned . 
 The typical byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko is the nagadō @-@ daiko , an elongated drum that is roughly shaped like a wine barrel . <unk> @-@ daiko are available in a variety of sizes , and their head diameter is traditionally measured in shaku ( units of roughly 30 cm ) . Head diameters range from 1 to 6 shaku ( 30 to 182 cm ; 12 to 72 in ) . Ko @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) are the smallest of these drums and are usually about 1 shaku ( 30 cm ; 12 in ) in diameter . The chū @-@ daiko is a medium @-@ sized nagadō @-@ daiko ranging from 1 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 8 shaku ( 48 to 85 cm ; 19 to 33 in ) , and weighing about 27 kilograms ( 60 lb ) . Ō @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) vary in size , and are often as large as 6 shaku ( 180 cm ; 72 in ) in diameter . Some ō @-@ daiko are difficult to move due to their size , and therefore permanently remain inside the performance space , such as temple or shrine . Ō @-@ daiko means " large drum " and for a given ensemble , the term refers to their largest drum . The other type of byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko is called a hira @-@ daiko ( <unk> , " flat drum " ) and describes any drum constructed such that the head diameter is greater than the length of the body . 
 Shime @-@ daiko are a set of smaller , roughly @-@ snare drum sized instrument that are tunable . The tensioning system usually consists of hemp cords or rope , but bolt or turnbuckle systems have been used as well . Nagauta shime @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) , sometimes referred to as " taiko " in the context of theater , have thinner heads than other kinds of shime @-@ daiko . The head includes a patch of deerskin is placed in the center , and in performance , drum strokes are generally restricted to this area . The <unk> @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) is a heavier type of shime @-@ daiko . They are available in sizes 1 – 5 , and are named according to their number : namitsuke ( 1 ) , <unk> @-@ gakke ( 2 ) , <unk> @-@ gakke ( 3 ) , <unk> @-@ gakke ( 4 ) , and gochō @-@ gakke ( 5 ) . The namitsuke has the thinnest skins and the shortest body in terms of height ; thickness and tension of skins , as well as body height , increase toward the gochō @-@ gakke . The head diameters of all shime @-@ daiko sizes are around 27 cm ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) . 
 Okedō @-@ daiko or simply <unk> , are a type of shime @-@ daiko that are stave @-@ constructed using narrower strips of wood , have a tube @-@ shaped frame . Like other shime @-@ daiko , drum heads are attached by metal hoops and fastened by rope or cords . Okedō can be played using the same drumsticks ( called bachi ) as shime @-@ daiko , but can also be hand @-@ played . Okedō come in short- and long @-@ bodied types . 
 Tsuzumi are a class of hourglass @-@ shaped drums . The drum body is shaped on a spool and the inner body carved by hand . Their skins can be made from cowhide , horsehide , or deerskin . While the ō @-@ tsuzumi skins are made from cowhide , ko @-@ tsuzumi are made from horsehide . While some classify tsuzumi as a type of taiko , others have described them as a drum entirely separate from taiko . 
 Taiko can also be categorized by the context in which they are used . The <unk> @-@ daiko , for instance , is constructed in the same manner as other byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko , but is distinguished by an ornamental stand and is used for ceremonial purposes at Buddhist temples . The <unk> @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) ( a ko @-@ daiko ) and <unk> @-@ nagadō ( <unk> ) ( a nagadō @-@ daiko with a cigar @-@ shaped body ) are used in sumo and festivals respectively . 
 Several drums , categorized as <unk> , are used in the Japanese theatrical form , gagaku . The lead instrument of the ensemble is the kakko , which is a smaller shime @-@ daiko with heads made of deerskin , and is placed horizontally on a stand during performance . A tsuzumi , called the san @-@ no @-@ tsuzumi is another small drum in gagaku that is placed horizontally and struck with a thin stick . Dadaiko ( <unk> ) are the largest drums of the ensemble , and have heads that are about 127 cm ( 50 in ) in diameter . During performance , the drum is placed on a tall pedestals and surrounded by a rim decoratively painted with flames and adorned with mystical figures such as wyverns . Dadaiko are played while standing , and are usually only played on the downbeat of the music . The <unk> @-@ daiko ( <unk> , " suspended drum " ) is a smaller drum that produces a lower sound , its head measuring about 55 cm ( 22 in ) in diameter . It is used in ensembles that accompany <unk> , a traditional dance performed at the Tokyo Imperial Palace and in religious contexts . Tsuri @-@ daiko are suspended on a small stand , and are played sitting down . Tsuri @-@ daiko performers typically use shorter mallets covered in leather knobs instead of bachi . They can be played simultaneously by two performers ; while one performer plays on the head , another performer uses bachi on the body of the drum . 
 The larger ō @-@ tsuzumi and smaller ko @-@ tsuzumi are used in the opening and dances of Noh theater . Both drums are struck using the fingers ; players can also adjust pitch by manually applying pressure to the ropes on the drum . The color of the cords of these drums also indicates the skill of the musician : Orange and red for amateur players , light blue for performers with expertise , and lilac for masters of the instrument . Nagauta @-@ shime daiko or uta daiko are also featured in Noh performance . 
 Many taiko in Noh are also featured in kabuki performance and are used in a similar manner . In addition to the ō @-@ tsuzumi , ko @-@ tsuzumi , and nagauta @-@ shime daiko , Kabuki performances make use of the larger ō @-@ daiko offstage to help set the atmosphere for different scenes . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = = Process = = = 
 Taiko construction has several stages , including making and shaping of the drum body ( or shell ) , preparing the drum skin , and tuning the skin to the drumhead . Variations in the construction process often occur in the latter two parts of this process . Historically , byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko were crafted from trunks of the Japanese zelkova tree that were dried out over years , using techniques to prevent splitting . A master carpenter then carved out the rough shape of the drum body with a chisel ; the texture of the wood after carving softened the tone of the drum . In contemporary times , taiko are carved out on a large lathe using wood staves or logs that can be shaped to fit drum bodies of various sizes . Drumheads can be left to air @-@ dry over a period of years , but some companies use large , smoke @-@ filled warehouses to hasten the drying process . After drying is complete , the inside of the drum is worked with a deep @-@ grooved chisel and sanded . Lastly , handles are placed onto the drum . These are used to carry smaller drums and they serve an ornamental purpose for larger drums . 
 The skins or heads of taiko are generally made from cowhide from Holstein cows aged about three or four years . Skins also come from horses , and bull skin is preferred for larger drums . Thinner skins are preferred for smaller taiko , and thicker skins are used for larger ones . On some drumheads , a patch of deer skin placed in the center serves as the target for many strokes during performance . Before fitting it to the drum body the hair is removed from the hide by soaking it in a river or stream for about a month ; winter months are preferred as colder temperatures better facilitate hair removal . To stretch the skin over the drum properly , one process requires the body to be held on a platform with several hydraulic jacks underneath it . The edges of the cowhide are secured to an apparatus below the jacks , and the jacks stretch the skin incrementally to precisely apply tension across the drumhead . Other forms of stretching use rope or cords with wooden dowels or an iron wheel to create appropriate tension . Small tension adjustments can be made during this process using small pieces of bamboo that twist around the ropes . Particularly large drumheads are sometimes stretched by having several workers , clad in stockings , hop rhythmically atop it , forming a circle along the edge . After the skin has dried , tacks , called byō , are added to the appropriate drums to secure it ; chū @-@ daiko require about 300 of them for each side . After the body and skin have been finished , excess hide is cut off and the drum can be stained as needed . 
 = = = Drum makers = = = 
 Several companies specialize in the production of taiko . One such company that created drums exclusively for the Emperor of Japan , Miyamoto <unk> Shoten in Tokyo , has been making taiko since 1861 . The Asano Taiko Corporation is another major taiko @-@ producing organization , and has been producing taiko for over 400 years . The family @-@ owned business started in <unk> , Ishikawa , and , aside from military equipment , made taiko for Noh theater and later expanded to creating instruments for festivals during the Meiji period . Asano currently maintains an entire complex of large buildings referred to as Asano Taiko Village , and the company reports producing up to 8000 drums each year . As of 2012 , there is approximately one major taiko production company in each prefecture of Japan , with some regions having several companies . Of the manufacturers in Naniwa , <unk> <unk> is one of the most successful and is thought to have brought considerable recognition to the community and attracted many drum makers there . Umetsu Daiko , a company that operates in Hakata , has been producing taiko since 1821 . 
 = = Performance = = 
 Taiko performance styles vary widely across groups in terms of the number of performers , repertoire , instrument choices , and stage techniques . Nevertheless , a number of early groups have had broad influence on the tradition . For instance , many pieces developed by Ondekoza and Kodo are considered standard in many taiko groups . 
 = = = Form = = = 
 Kata is a term used to describe the posture and movement associated with taiko performance . The term is used in martial arts in a similar way : for example , both traditions include the idea that the hara is the center of being . Author Sean Bender argues that kata is the primary feature that distinguishes different taiko groups from one another , and is a key factor in judging the quality of performance . For this reason , many practice rooms intended for taiko contain mirrors to provide visual feedback to players . An important part of kata in taiko is keeping the body stabilized while performing , and can be accomplished by keeping a wide , low stance with the legs , with the left knee bent over the toes and keeping the right leg straight . It is important that the hips face the drum and the shoulders are relaxed . Some teachers note a tendency to rely on the upper body while playing , and emphasize the importance of the holistic use of the body during performance . 
 Some groups in Japan , particularly those active in Tokyo , also emphasize the importance of the lively and spirited iki aesthetic . In taiko , it refers to very specific kinds of movement while performing that evoke the sophistication stemming from the mercantile and artisan classes active during the Edo period ( 1603 – 1868 ) . 
 The sticks for playing taiko are called bachi , and are made in various sizes and from different kinds of wood such as white oak , bamboo , and Japanese magnolia . Bachi are also held in a number of different styles . In kumi @-@ daiko , it is common for a player to hold their sticks in a relaxed manner between the V @-@ shape of the index finger and thumb , which points to the player . There are other grips that allow performers to play much more technically difficult rhythms , such as the shime grip , which is similar to a matched grip : the bachi are gripped at the back end , and the fulcrum rests between the performer 's index finger and thumb , while the other fingers remain relaxed and slightly curled around the stick . 
 Performance in some groups is also guided by principles based on Zen Buddhism . For instance , among other concepts , the San Francisco Taiko Dojo is guided by rei ( <unk> ) emphasizing communication , respect , and harmony . The way the bachi are held can also be significant ; for some groups , bachi represent a spiritual link between the body and the sky . Some physical parts of taiko , like the drum body , its skin , and the tacks also hold symbolic significance in Buddhism . 
 = = = Instrumentation = = = 
 Kumi @-@ daiko groups consist primarily of percussive instruments where each of the drums plays a specific role . Of the different kinds of taiko , the most common in groups is the nagadō @-@ daiko . <unk> @-@ daiko are common in taiko groups and represent the main rhythm of the group , whereas shime @-@ daiko set and change tempo . Ō @-@ daiko provide a steady , underlying pulse and serve as a counter @-@ rhythm to the other parts . It is common for performances to begin with a single stroke roll called an <unk> ( <unk> , " wind blowing down from mountains " ) . The player starts slowly , leaving considerable space between strikes , gradually shortening the interval between hits , until the drummer is playing a rapid roll of hits . <unk> are also played as a part of theatrical performance , such as in Noh theater . 
 Drums are not the only instruments played in the ensemble ; other Japanese instruments are also used . Other kinds of percussion instruments include the <unk> ( <unk> ) , a hand @-@ sized gong played with a small mallet . In kabuki , the shamisen , a plucked string instrument , often accompanies taiko during the theatrical performance . Kumi @-@ daiko performances can also feature woodwinds such as the shakuhachi and the shinobue . 
 Voiced calls or shouts called <unk> and kiai are also common in taiko performance . They are used as encouragement to other players or cues for transition or change in dynamics such as an increase in tempo . In contrast , the philosophical concept of ma , which superficially describes the space between drum strikes , is also important in shaping rhythmic phrases and creating appropriate contrast . 
 = = = Clothing = = = 
 There is a wide variety of traditional clothing that players wear during taiko performance . Common in many kumi @-@ daiko groups is the use of the <unk> , a decorative , thin @-@ fabric coat , and traditional headbands called hachimaki . Tabi , <unk> ( <unk> , " loose @-@ fitting pants " ) , and <unk> ( <unk> , " working aprons " ) are also typical . During his time with the group Ondekoza , Eitetsu Hayashi suggested that a loincloth called a fundoshi be worn when performing for French fashion designer Pierre Cardin , who saw Ondekoza perform for him in 1975 . The Japanese group Kodo has sometimes worn fundoshi for its performances . 
 = = Education = = 
 Taiko performance is generally taught orally and through demonstration . Historically , general patterns for taiko were written down , such as in the 1512 encyclopedia called the <unk> , but written scores for taiko pieces are generally unavailable . One reason for the adherence to an oral tradition is that , from group to group , the rhythmic patterns in a given piece are often performed differently . Furthermore , ethnomusicologist William P. Malm observed that Japanese players within a group could not usefully predict one another using written notation , and instead did so through listening . In Japan , printed parts are not used during lessons . 
 Orally , patterns of onomatopoeia called <unk> <unk> are taught from teacher to student that convey the rhythm and timbre of drum strikes for a particular piece . For example , don ( どん ) represents a single strike to the center of the drum , where as do @-@ ko ( <unk> ) represents two successive strikes , first by the right and then the left , and lasts the same amount of time as one don strike . Some taiko pieces , such as Yatai @-@ bayashi , include patterns that are difficult to represent in Western musical notation . The exact words used can also differ from region to region . 
 More recently , Japanese publications have emerged in an attempt to standardize taiko performance . The Nippon Taiko Foundation was formed in 1979 ; its primary goals were to foster good relations among taiko groups in Japan and to both publicize and teach how to perform taiko . Daihachi Oguchi , the leader of the Foundation , wrote Japan Taiko with other teachers in 1994 out of concern that correct form in performance would degrade over time . The instructional publication described the different drums used in kumi @-@ daiko performance , methods of gripping , correct form , and suggestions on instrumentation . The book also contains practice exercises and transcribed pieces from Oguchi 's group , Osuwa Daiko . While there were similar textbooks published before 1994 , this publication had much more visibility due to the Foundation 's scope . 
 The system of fundamentals Japan Taiko put forward was not widely adopted because taiko performance varied substantially across Japan . An updated 2001 publication from the Foundation , called the Nihon Taiko <unk> ( <unk> , " Japan Taiko Textbook " ) , describes regional variations that depart from the main techniques taught in the textbook . The creators of the text maintained that mastering a set of prescribed basics should be compatible with learning local traditions . 
 = = Regional styles = = 
 Aside from kumi @-@ daiko performance , a number of folk traditions that use taiko have been recognized in different regions in Japan . Some of these include ondeko ( 鬼太鼓 , " demon drumming " ) from Sado Island , <unk> @-@ daiko from the town of Kokura , and <unk> @-@ odori from Iwate Prefecture . 
 = = = Eisa = = = 
 A variety of folk dances originating from Okinawa , known collectively as <unk> , often make use of the taiko . Some performers use drums while dancing , and generally speaking , perform in one of two styles : groups on the <unk> Peninsula and on <unk> Island use small , single @-@ sided drums called pāranku ( <unk> ) whereas groups near the city of Okinawa generally use shime @-@ daiko . Use of shime @-@ daiko over pāranku has spread throughout the island , and is considered the dominant style . Small nagadō @-@ daiko , referred to as ō @-@ daiko within the tradition , are also used and are worn in front of the performer . These drum dances are not limited to Okinawa and have appeared in places containing Okinawan communities such as in São Paulo , Hawaii , and large cities on the Japanese mainland . 
 = = = Hachijō @-@ daiko = = = 
 Hachijō @-@ daiko ( <unk> , trans . " Hachijō @-@ style taiko " ) is a taiko tradition originating on the island of Hachijō @-@ jima . Two styles of Hachijō @-@ daiko emerged and have been popularized among residents : an older tradition based on a historical account , and a newer tradition influenced by mainland groups and practiced by the majority of the islanders . 
 The Hachijō @-@ daiko tradition was documented as early as 1849 based on a journal kept by an exile named <unk> Kizan . He mentioned some of its unique features , such as " a taiko is suspended from a tree while women and children gathered around " , and observed that a player used either side of the drum while performing . Illustrations from Kizan 's journal show features of Hachijō @-@ daiko . These illustrations also featured women performing , which is unusual as taiko performance elsewhere during this period was typically reserved for men . Teachers of the tradition have noted that the majority of its performers were women ; one estimate asserts that female performers outnumbered males by three to one . 
 The first style of Hachijō @-@ daiko is thought to descend directly from the style reported by Kizan . This style is called Kumaoji @-@ daiko , named after its creator Okuyama Kumaoji , a central performer of the style . Kumaoji @-@ daiko has two players on a single drum , one of whom , called the shita @-@ byōshi ( <unk> , " lower beat " ) , provides the underlying beat . The other player , called the <unk> @-@ byōshi ( <unk> , " upper beat " ) , builds on this rhythmical foundation with unique and typically improvised rhythms . While there are specific types of underlying rhythms , the accompanying player is free to express an original musical beat . Kumaoji @-@ daiko also features an unusual positioning for taiko : the drums are sometimes suspended from ropes , and historically , sometimes drums were suspended from trees . 
 The contemporary style of Hachijō @-@ daiko is called shin @-@ daiko ( <unk> , " new taiko " ) , which differs from Kumaoji @-@ daiko in multiple ways . For instance , while the lead and accompanying roles are still present , shin @-@ daiko performances use larger drums exclusively on stands . Shin @-@ daiko emphasizes a more powerful sound , and consequently , performers use larger bachi made out of stronger wood . Looser clothing is worn by shin @-@ daiko performers compared to kimono worn by Kumaoji @-@ daiko performers ; the looser clothing in shin @-@ daiko allow performers to adopt more open stances and larger movements with the legs and arms . Rhythms used for the accompanying shita @-@ byōshi role can also differ . One type of rhythm , called <unk> , consists of the following : 
 This rhythm is found in both styles , but is always played faster in shin @-@ daiko . Another type of rhythm , called <unk> , is unique to shin @-@ daiko and also contains a song which is performed in standard Japanese . 
 = = = Miyake @-@ daiko = = = 
 Miyake @-@ daiko ( <unk> , trans . " Miyake @-@ style taiko " ) is a style that has spread amongst groups through Kodo , and is formally known as Miyake @-@ jima Kamitsuki mikoshi @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) . The word <unk> comes from Miyake @-@ jima , part of the Izu Islands , and the word Kamitsuki refers to the village where the tradition came from . Miyake @-@ style taiko came out of performances for Gozu Tennō Sai ( <unk> , " Gozu Tennō Festival " ) — a traditional festival held annually in July on Miyake Island since 1820 honoring the deity Gozu Tennō . In this festival , players perform on taiko while portable shrines are carried around town . The style itself is characterized in a number of ways . A nagadō @-@ daiko is typically set low to the ground and played by two performers , one on each side ; instead of sitting , performers stand and hold a stance that is also very low to the ground , almost to the point of kneeling . 
 = = Outside Japan = = 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 Taiko groups in Australia began forming in the 1990s . The first group , called Ataru Taru Taiko , was formed in 1995 by <unk> Thomas , Harold Gent , and <unk> Kamei . <unk> was later formed by percussionist Ian Cleworth and Riley Lee , a former Ondekoza member , and has been performing in Australia since 1997 . They are known for their work in generating interest in performing taiko among Australian audiences , such as by developing a complete education program with both formal and informal classes , and have a strong fan base . Cleworth and other members of the group have developed several original pieces . 
 = = = Brazil = = = 
 The introduction of kumi @-@ daiko performance in Brazil can be traced back to the 1970s and 1980s in São Paulo . <unk> Setsuko founded an eponymous taiko dojo and was Brazil 's first taiko group ; Setsuo Kinoshita later formed the group <unk> Sho . Brazilian groups have combined native and African drumming techniques with taiko performance . One such piece developed by Kinoshita is called Taiko de Samba , which emphasizes both Brazilian and Japanese aesthetics in percussion traditions . Taiko was also popularized in Brazil from 2002 through the work of <unk> Oda , a Japanese native who visited Brazil several times through the Japan International Cooperation Agency . 
 The Brazilian Association of Taiko ( ABT ) suggests that there are about 150 taiko groups in Brazil and that about 10 – 15 % of players are non @-@ Japanese ; Izumo Honda , coordinator of a large annual festival in São Paulo , estimated that about 60 % of all taiko performers in Brazil are women . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 Taiko emerged in the United States in the late 1960s . The first group , San Francisco Taiko Dojo , was formed in 1968 by Seiichi Tanaka , a postwar immigrant who studied taiko in Japan and brought the styles and teachings to the US . A year later , a few members of <unk> Buddhist Temple in Los Angeles led by its minister Masao Kodani initiated another group called Kinnara Taiko . San Jose Taiko later formed in 1973 in Japantown , San Jose , under Roy and PJ Hirabayashi . Taiko started to branch out to the eastern US in the late 1970s . This included formation of Denver Taiko in 1976 and Soh Daiko in New York City in 1979 . Many of these early groups lacked the resources to equip each member with a drum and resorted to makeshift percussion materials such as rubber tires or creating taiko out of wine barrels . 
 Japanese @-@ Canadian taiko began in 1979 with Katari Taiko , and was inspired by the San Jose Taiko group . Its early membership was predominantly female . Katari Taiko and future groups were thought to represent an opportunity for younger , third @-@ generation Japanese Canadians to explore their roots , redevelop a sense of ethnic community , and expand taiko into other musical traditions . 
 There are no official counts or estimates of the number of active taiko groups in the United States or Canada , as there is no governing body for taiko groups in either country . Unofficial estimates have been made . In 1989 , there were as many as 30 groups in the US and Canada , seven of which were in California . One estimate suggested that around 120 groups were active in the US and Canada as of 2001 , many of which could be traced to the San Francisco Taiko Dojo ; later estimates in 2005 and 2006 suggested there were about 200 groups in the United States alone . 
 The Cirque du Soleil shows Mystère in Las Vegas and Dralion have featured taiko performance . Taiko performance has also been featured in commercial productions such as the 2005 Mitsubishi Eclipse ad campaign , and in events such as the 2009 Academy Awards and 2011 Grammy Awards . 
 From 2005 to 2006 , the Japanese American National Museum held an exhibition called Big Drum : Taiko in the United States . The exhibition covered several topics related to taiko in the United States , such as the formation of performance groups , their construction using available materials , and social movements . Visitors were able to play smaller drums . 
 = = Related cultural and social movements = = 
 Certain peoples have used taiko to advance social or cultural movements , both within Japan and elsewhere in the world . 
 = = = Gender conventions = = = 
 Taiko performance has frequently been viewed as an art form dominated by men . Historians of taiko argue that its performance comes from masculine traditions . Those who developed ensemble @-@ style taiko in Japan were men , and through the influence of Ondekoza , the ideal taiko player was epitomized in images of the masculine peasant class , particularly through the character <unk> in the 1958 film Rickshaw Man . Masculine roots have also been attributed to perceived capacity for " spectacular bodily performance " where women 's bodies are sometimes judged as unable to meet the physical demands of playing . 
 Before the 1980s , it was uncommon for Japanese women to perform on traditional instruments , including taiko , as their participation had been systematically restricted . In Ondekoza and in the early performances of Kodo , women performed only dance routines either during or between taiko performances . Thereafter , female participation in kumi @-@ daiko started to rise dramatically , and by the 1990s , women equaled and possibly exceeded representation by men . While the proportion of women in taiko has become substantial , some have expressed concern that women still do not perform in the same roles as their male counterparts and that taiko performance continues to be a male @-@ dominated profession . For instance , a member of Kodo was informed by the director of the group 's apprentice program that women were permitted to play , but could only play " as women " . Other women in the apprentice program recognized a gender disparity in performance roles , such as what pieces they were allowed to perform , or in physical terms based on a male standard . 
 Female taiko performance has also served as a response to gendered stereotypes of Japanese women as being quiet , subservient , or a femme fatale . Through performance , some groups believe they are helping to redefine not only the role of women in taiko , but how women are perceived more generally . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Those involved in the construction of taiko are usually considered part of the burakumin , a marginalized minority class in Japanese society , particularly those working with leather or animal skins . Prejudice against this class dates back to the Tokugawa period in terms of legal discrimination and treatment as social outcasts . Although official discrimination ended with the Tokugawa era , the burakumin have continued to face social discrimination , such as scrutiny by employers or in marriage arrangements . Drum makers have used their trade and success as a means to advocate for an end to discriminatory practices against their class . 
 The Taiko Road ( <unk> , " Taiko Road of Human Rights " ) , representing the contributions of burakumin , is found in Naniwa Ward in Osaka , home to a large proportion of burakumin . Among other features , the road contains taiko @-@ shaped benches representing their traditions in taiko manufacturing and leatherworking , and their impact on national culture . The road ends at the Osaka Human Rights Museum , which exhibits the history of systematic discrimination against the burakumin . The road and museum were developed in part due an advocacy campaign led by the Buraku Liberation League and a taiko group of younger performers called Taiko Ikari ( <unk> , " taiko rage " ) . 
 = = = North American sansei = = = 
 Taiko performance was an important part of cultural development by third @-@ generation Japanese residents of in North America , who are called sansei . During World War II , second @-@ generation Japanese residents , called nisei faced internment in the United States and in Canada on the basis of their race . During and after the war , Japanese residents were discouraged from activities such as speaking Japanese or forming ethnic communities . Subsequently , sansei could not engage in Japanese culture and instead were raised to assimilate into more normative activities . There were also prevailing stereotypes of Japanese people , which sansei sought to escape or subvert . During the 1960s in the United States , the Civil Rights Movement influenced sansei to reexamine their heritage by engaging in Japanese culture in their communities ; one such approach was through taiko performance . Groups such as San Jose Taiko were organized to fulfill a need for solidarity and to have a medium to express their experiences as Japanese @-@ Americans . Later generations have adopted taiko in programs or workshops established by sansei ; social scientist Hideyo Konagaya remarks that this attraction to taiko among other Japanese art forms may be due to its accessibility and energetic nature . Konagaya has also argued that the resurgence of taiko in the United States and Japan are differently motivated : in Japan , performance was meant to represent the need to recapture sacred traditions , while in the United States it was meant to be an explicit representation of masculinity and power in Japanese @-@ American men . 
 = = Notable performers and groups = = 
 A number of performers and groups , including several early leaders , have been recognized for their contributions to taiko performance . Daihachi Oguchi was best known for developing kumi @-@ daiko performance . Oguchi founded the first kumi @-@ daiko group called Osuwa Daiko in 1951 , and facilitated the popularization of taiko performance groups in Japan . 
 Seidō Kobayashi is the leader of the Tokyo @-@ based taiko group Oedo Sukeroku Taiko as of December 2014 . Kobayashi founded the group in 1959 and was the first group to tour professionally . Kobayashi is considered a master performer of taiko . He is also known for asserting intellectual control of the group 's performance style , which has had an impact on performance for many groups , particularly in North America . 
 In 1969 , Den Tagayasu ( 田耕 , Den Tagayasu ) founded Ondekoza , a group well known for making taiko performance internationally visible and for its artistic contributions to the tradition . Den was also known for developing a communal living and training facility for Ondekoza on Sado Island in Japan , which had a reputation for its intensity and broad education programs in folklore and music . 
 Performers and groups beyond the early practitioners have also been noted . Eitetsu Hayashi is best known for his solo performance work . Hayashi joined Ondekoza when he was 19 , and after parting from the group helped found Kodo , one of the best known and most influential taiko performance groups in the world . Hayashi soon left the group to begin a solo career and has performed in venues such as Carnegie Hall in 1984 , the first featured taiko performer there . He was awarded the 47th Education Minister 's Art Encouragement Prize , a national award , in 1997 as well as the 8th Award for the Promotion of Traditional Japanese Culture from the Japan Arts Foundation in 2001 . 
 Seiichi Tanaka is the founder of the San Francisco Taiko Dojo and is regarded as the primary developer of taiko performance in the United States . He was a recipient of a 2001 National Heritage Fellowship awarded by the National Endowment for the Arts . 
 Tokyo <unk> has performed worldwide , including at the National Theater of Japan , at the closing ceremonies of the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France , and the 2014 Festival Internacional <unk> in Mexico . The group also appeared in <unk> no Sakura , a film produced by Toei . 
 = = Glossary = = 
 = Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts = 
 The Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts ( AACTA ) is a professional organisation of film and television practitioners in Australia . The Academy 's aim is " to identify , award , promote and celebrate Australia 's greatest achievements in film and television . " 
 It was established in August 2011 with the backing of the Australian Film Institute ( AFI ) to act as its industry engagement arm and to administer the AACTA Awards ( formerly the Australian Film Institute Awards , also known as the AFI Awards ) which rewards achievements in Australian feature film , television , documentary and short films . 
 The Academy is composed of 15 Chapters , each of which represents different screen artists including actors , directors , producers and writers , and it is overseen by the Academy 's president and the Honorary Council . Australian actor Geoffrey Rush is the inaugural President and hosted the inaugural AACTA Awards in January 2012 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts ( AACTA ) , is a not for profit , membership based , organisation whose aim is " to identify , award , promote and celebrate Australia 's greatest achievements in film and television . " The Academy is a subsidiary of the Australian Film Institute ( AFI ) , a non @-@ profit organisation which was established in 1958 to develop an active film culture in Australia and to foster engagement between the general public and the Australian film industry . The AFI was also responsible for administering the Australian Film Institute Awards ( more commonly known as the AFI Awards ) , which until 2011 rewarded Australian practitioners in feature film , television , documentary and short film screen crafts . The Academy receives funding by the AFI , and Australian state and federal governments . 
 In June 2011 , the AFI proposed the establishment of an " Australian Academy " . The objectives for the proposed academy was to raise the profile of Australian film and television in Australia and abroad , and to change the way it rewards talent by mimicking the methods used in foreign film organisations , such as Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences ( AMPAS ) and British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) . The voting system would change through the establishment of an " Honorary Council " , which will govern fifteen chapters composed of professionals from industry guilds and organisations including actors , directors , producers and screenwriters . It was also stated that the Academy would not replace the AFI and past winners of the AFI Awards would " [ ... ] constitute the founding heritage of an ‘ Australian Academy . ’ " When the announcement of the proposal was made , the AFI began the consultation phase where members of the public and screen industry gave their feedback on the proposed changes throughout June , 2011 . Of the announcement Damian Trewhella , CEO of the AFI said , " We thought a better way to engage with the industry would be to try and improve our professional membership structure [ ... ] It 's quite a big improvement on the way the AFI does things . " 
 By 20 July , weeks after the consultation period ended , the AFI announced that it would go ahead with the proposed changes and the Australian Academy . When asked about the timing of the announcement Trewhella stated that , " Based on the overwhelming industry support we have received , we are now confident that we are moving in the right direction , and therefore that we can move briskly to establish the initial phase of the Academy . " On 18 August 2011 , the AFI announced , in a special event at the Sydney Opera House , that the academy would be called the Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts ( AACTA ) and the inaugural awards ceremony would be renamed the AACTA Awards , but serve as a continuum to the annual AFI Awards . During the event it was also made known that the president of the inaugural awards would be Geoffrey Rush . On the night a new gold statuette was revealed , created by Australian sculptor Ron <unk> , which depicts " a human silhouette based on the shape of the Southern Cross constellation . " 
 = = Structure = = 
 The Academy , which has between 1 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 000 members , comprises fifteen Chapters , with each representing a different area of speciality in feature film , television , documentary and short film . It is overseen by the Academy 's president and the Honorary Council . The role of the Honorary Council is to determine policies and strategies for the way the Academy rewards practitioners . The Chapters are as follows : 
 = = Honorary Councillors = = 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = Festival of film = = = 
 The Festival of Film , which is held in conjunction with the Australian Film Institute , showcases the films in competition for the AACTA Awards , with the inaugural festival held in Sydney and Melbourne from October to November in 2011 . The festival marks the beginning of the Australian film awards season , and members of the Academy can commence voting for films in all categories , while members of the Institute vote for the Best Short Animation , Best Short Fiction Film and Members ' Choice Award only . 
