 = = = Awards = = = 
 The AACTA Awards replaced the previous Australian Film Institute Awards , but serve as a continuum to past ceremonies . The awards were first instituted by the Australian Film Institute in 1958 ( as the Australian Film Awards ) as part of the Melbourne International Film Festival , until 1972 . Before 1969 , awards were presented as a prize to non @-@ feature films due to a lack of feature films produced in Australia . By 1976 competitive film awards were established and in 1987 , awards for television was introduced . The awards were usually held at the end of each year in Melbourne but , prior to the announcement of the Academy , the AFI announced that it would move the awards to January 2012 at the Sydney Opera House , in order to align them with the international film awards season . The awards are held over two events : the AACTA Awards Luncheon , a black tie event where accolades are handed out for non @-@ feature and short films , film production , non @-@ drama related television programs and the Raymond Longford Award , and the AACTA Awards Ceremony which hands out the awards in all other categories at a larger venue and is broadcast on television . Additionally , awards for achievements in foreign film were presented once at the AACTA International Awards in Los Angeles in 2012 . 
 = I Want You ( Janet Jackson song ) = 
 " I Want You " is a song recorded by American singer Janet Jackson for her eighth studio album , Damita Jo ( 2004 ) . It was released April 5 , 2004 , by Virgin Records as the second single from the album . It was written by Harold Lilly , Kanye West , and John Legend , while it was produced by West , Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis , and Jackson . The mid @-@ tempo ballad consists of a retro sound and arrangement , paying homage to the classic pop sound of the Motown era . Its composition is based on Jackson 's passion and desire for an estranged lover . " I Want You " is notable for being among the first singles produced with West and co @-@ written by Legend , who were both upcoming artists at the time . 
 The song received positive reviews by music critics , who complimented Jackson 's vocals and its fusion of nostalgic and modern qualities . The song 's performance was largely affected by the blacklisting of Jackson 's singles and music videos worldwide due to U.S. Federal Communications Commission fines regarding her controversial Super Bowl Halftime Show incident , with conglomerates such as Viacom and CBS enforcing the boycott . " I Want You " reached the top twenty in airplay prior to stalling due to the blockage , also becoming Jackson 's thirty @-@ third consecutive top forty hit on the Hot R & B Songs chart . The blacklisting drew controversy amongst critics , who declared the song to likely have been an " across @-@ the @-@ board smash " song had the incident not occurred . 
 " I Want You " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and received a Grammy nomination for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance . The song 's music video was directed by Dave Meyers and portrays Jackson traveling through Los Angeles to meet her boyfriend . It was not aired on MTV or several other music channels owned by Viacom and CBS due to their boycott of Jackson following her Super Bowl performance incident . During promotional campaign for Damita Jo , Jackson performed " I Want You " various occasions , including Good Morning America . 
 = = Background = = 
 " I Want You " was written by Harold Lilly , Kanye West , and John Legend , while production was handled by West , Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis , and Jackson . It was initially titled " Have Your Way with Me " in its early stages , and was the only song from the album which Jackson did not co @-@ write , along with " Thinkin ' ' Bout My Ex " , written by Kenneth " Babyface " Edmonds . Describing the song , Jackson said , " It 's a different kind of song for me , it 's more of like a throwback . More of a <unk> @-@ y [ feel ] , which I 've never done before which is quite exciting , and I enjoyed recording it in the studio . " John Platt , senior Vice President of Virgin Records and EMI Publishing , commented that Damita Jo " is really about positive love and where she 's at in her life right now . The second half of the album was very easy once me and Janet got to know each other , and found the songs that really were true to her and that she can sing with conviction . That 's why there 's so much passion in this " I Want You " record , that 's where she 's at in her life right now . " 
 West first collaborated with Jackson several months prior to the release of his debut album , The College Dropout ( 2004 ) . West stated , " I don 't want to talk about it before it comes out , but it 'll be unbelievable . " John Legend , who co @-@ wrote the track , also plays the piano on the track . Legend was an upcoming artist and relatively unknown at the time , having not yet released his debut album Get Lifted or any singles . The song was among Legend 's first major credits along with Jay @-@ Z 's " Encore " , West 's remix of Britney Spears ' " Me Against the Music " , and The Black Eyed Peas ' " The Boogie that Be . " Legend commented , " I 'm not going to focus on her breast like the rest of y 'all . I 'm about the music . Since everyone 's paying attention to her , it should bode well for her next single " Have Your Way With Me " which is gonna drop next week . We 're just wrapping up the production now . It 's produced by Kanye West and co @-@ written by Kanye , Harold Lilly and yours truly . I played some piano on there too . It 's a sweet , soulful song . I think it 'll be a smash . " The song also features contributions from Israeli violinist Miri Ben @-@ Ari . Simon <unk> of CNN commented Ari 's contribution " gently caresses " the song , providing " a dramatic edge you won 't find anywhere else . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Due to an early leak , " I Want You " was released for digital download through Virgin Records 's website and All Access Music Group on February 22 , 2004 , though it was not officially sent to radio until April 2004 . " Love Me " , a newly recorded remix of " Just a Little While " produced by Just Blaze , was initially to be sent to urban radio formats . However , its release was canceled when the original version was removed from airplay due to blacklisting from several conglomerates regarding Jackson 's Super Bowl performance incident , prompting the release of " I Want You " . The album version concludes with a brief interlude of Jackson speaking of her passion for music , which the radio edit omits . A promotional single including the song 's E @-@ Smoove remix , music video , and exclusive interview was released for purchase at Regal Cinemas for a limited time . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " I Want You " is a pop ballad based on music of the Motown era . It incorporates doo @-@ wop , R & B and hip @-@ hop into its production , providing an " equally keen senses of <unk> and hip @-@ hop currency . " Its instrumentation consists of guitar , piano , violins , and synthesized drums . It has a slow tempo of 72 beats per minute , with Jackson 's vocals ranging from G3 to C5 . It contains a brief sample from B. T. Express ' 1976 version of The Carpenters ' 1970 song " ( They Long to Be ) Close to You " , written by Burt Bacharach and Hal David . Jackson described the song as having a " throwback " feel , considered a departure from her other works . Michael <unk> of Billboard described its " opening drum downbeat " accompanied by " swirling string crescendos , " considered " the perfect backdrop for Jackson 's breathy vocals . " It was analyzed to have a " chimes @-@ studded texture " and strings backed by drums , also having " a triangle thrown in there for good measure . " Its lyrics focus on longing for an estranged lover and feeling emotionally distraught when apart . Jackson pleads for their affection during its chorus , telling them to " Have your way with me . " Tareck <unk> of Contactmusic.com stated " The lyrics are simple . She just wants her man and she ’ s telling it straight , " while Plugged In observed it to convey Jackson 's " insatiable " desire for intimacy in a " vulnerable and lovesick " manner . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " I Want You " received favorable reviews from music critics . Michael Paoletta of Billboard stated , " the retro @-@ <unk> song calls to mind the sparkly yet wistful soul of ' 60s @-@ era girl groups " while maintaining " a contemporary reference " . Paoletta considered its aura and " girl @-@ desires @-@ boy theme " to make the track a " crossover gem " . West 's production was also praised , adding " the opening drum downbeat immediately sets the tone . That beat smoothly propels the song , accompanied by swirling string crescendos that are the perfect backdrop for Jackson 's breathy vocals " , concluding it to potentially have " multiformat popularity . " Ernest Hardy of LA Weekly called it " a retro affair " with a classic " girl @-@ group arrangement " , while a critique from <unk> noted the song " shimmers with some of Janet 's former iridescent glow . " Alexis Petridis of The Guardian praised its " impossibly lithe <unk> " , calling it an electronic reconstruction of a 1970s soul ballad , also determined to be " not only inventive , but brilliantly constructed . " 
 Hot Press called it an " obligatory ballad " which portrays <unk> 's musicality , showcasing her " versatility and mastery of a bewildering array of styles . " Spence D. of IGN praised the single , calling it " ' 70s retro mode " and a perfect homage to the era of mainstream excess . The review added , " It 's squeaky and clean sounding in a sugary , fluff kind of way , almost as if it were a song recorded by Janet years ago and recently rediscovered . And you know what ? It 's cool because of that . " Aaron Foley of <unk> considered it Jackson 's fourth most underrated single , calling it among " the fruits from that era that don 't get the respect they deserve " . Foley added , that after Jackson 's Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy , " I Want You " " got lost in the wash . The starry @-@ eyed , Motown @-@ inspired ballad had Janet vulnerable and lovesick , boo <unk> for her lover 's attention . " 
 Jim <unk> of Orlando Sentinel classified " the sweetly melodic old @-@ school " song among Jackson 's " occasional bursts of inspiration , " declaring it " a beautifully big arrangement that 's Motown @-@ esque . " Additionally , its " depth and sweetness " was considered unexpected by Dan LeRoy from The Scene , commenting " West 's swaying ' 50s pastiche " I Want You " is delightful " . Richard Cromelin of the Los Angeles Times exclaimed the track " has a swooning charm , with a chimes @-@ studded texture that suggests the sweeping light @-@ points of a disco ball . " Mikael Wood of Baltimore City Paper gave a similar critique , saying the " luscious slow jam " ultimately " shimmers with the sweet lovesickness Karen Carpenter had to fight through a scrim of suburban sang @-@ froid to express . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic declared the song " on the slower side " , containing " a verse that 's memorable . " Plugged In observed subtle sexuality within its lyrics , commenting that Jackson is insatiable . The song 's production from West also received acclaim . Music critic Kevin Nottingham ranked it as West 's second best production , classifying it as a " gorgeous piece of work . " He exclaimed . " The drums hit at the beginning and the listener should already fall in love . Janet 's voice should intrigue you , but frankly , those strings and those drums grab my attention all the time . " Nottingham added that West 's beat takes the listener on a joyful ride , while the beat evokes happiness . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song was released exclusively in North America and Europe to urban radio formats . Due to the blacklist , " I Want You " quickly rose to number eighteen in airplay before stalling on the chart . The song generated an audience impression of nearly twenty @-@ two million on formats able to play the song during its first week . The song debuted at number 74 on the Billboard Hot 100 on April 3 , 2004 , before peaking at number 57 weeks later . It also peaked at number 18 on Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , becoming her thirty @-@ third consecutive top forty hit on the chart . It had also reached number sixteen on Radio and Records 's weekly airplay report . Additionally , it also peaked at number four on Billboard 's Urban Adult Contemporary airplay chart . Due to strong sales , the song was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 " All Nite ( Don 't Stop ) " was released as the album 's second single in most international markets as a double A @-@ Side with " I Want You " , making the song ineligible to chart . However , " I Want You " reached number 19 in the United Kingdom . It also reached number ten on the United Kingdom 's BBC Radio 2 airplay chart , while lead single " Just a Little While " spent multiple weeks atop the chart . It received a Grammy nomination for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance at the 47th Annual Grammy Awards . 
 = = = Blacklist = = = 
 " I Want You " , along with Jackson 's other singles from Damita Jo and her following two albums , was blacklisted by many major radio formats following her controversial Super Bowl Halftime Show incident , regarding several media conglomerates receiving massive U.S. Federal Communications Commission fines in its aftermath , such as Viacom , which owns many radio formats , MTV , and CBS , which broadcast the event and owns Clear Channel Communications . The blacklisting of Jackson drew attention and commentary from music critics ; many deciding the song to likely have achieved much greater success if the blockage had not occurred . Glenn Gamboa of Newsweek stated , " Unfortunately , it 's not clear whether these songs will get heard , " saying after the incident , " Jackson has been put in the pop culture penalty box . The result is that despite some initial backing for " Just a Little While " , radio and TV support for her music has withered , as the conglomerates worry about angering the FCC and Congress " in fear of receiving fines for supporting Jackson . Gamboa added that " I Want You " would have been an " across @-@ the @-@ board smash pre @-@ <unk> . " In retrospect , Rich Juzwiak of Gawker commented the " lush " single would have been successful for Jackson , given another set of circumstances . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 The music video for " I Want You " was directed by Dave Meyers , who previously directed Jackson 's music videos for " All for You " and " Just a Little While " . It debuted on March 16 , 2004 , on BET 's Access Granted . Intended to resemble Brooklyn , New York , the video was shot in Los Angeles . It portrays Jackson traveling through the city at night to meet her boyfriend , interacting with the various people she encounters along the way . Jackson commented that the video was simple , and there was not a major production for wardrobe , hair and makeup . Explaining its concept , she stated " I 'm coming out of my apartment building and walking down the street , and you see all the goings @-@ on in the neighborhood . " Jackson praised Meyers as a director , saying " I think he 's a wonderful director and he 's a good friend , we 've been friends since the " All for You " video . He has a great eye . " Hollywood casting agents sought a wide variety of extras , ranging from teenage delinquents to mothers picking up her babies and children from day care , and other people commuting by bus to and from work . The video was desired to have an intimate " community " feel . Meyers stated : 
 " The song has kind of an old school vibe to it , so we wanted to be really stripped down and really simple with the video . Every time we get the chance to work together I always try to do something a little different , you know . I hadn 't seen her a do a real stripped down , really basic video . I got a taste of it when I did another video with her where she was a guest star , and I got her really stripped down in that but it was still in a Jamaican environment . I just wanted to put her in a really contemporary American environment and bring out the emotions in the song and the <unk> of it . Me and her were just vibing off that , and thought it would be really fun to do something just really simple . No visual effects , no gags . The whole strength of the video is on just the honesty of the piece , and that was sort of what we set out to do . Sometimes it 's an important visual effect , today it 's an important emotion . " 
 A portion of the clip 's premise was inspired by Jackson 's then @-@ relationship with record producer Jermaine Dupri , which was unconfirmed and had generated speculation within the media . Meyers explained , " In the other video we were shooting , she came out of the trailer wearing a So So Def jacket , and that 's when I got the idea , ' it would be great if you do a whole video if you look like you do now when you 're going home ' . It took her a minute , she thought about it , she asked JD if he 'd be okay with doing the video , ' <unk> I was begging and I was like , ' if I could get the two of you in a simple video together , it 's gonna be gold . ' She asked and he said yea , and that 's when my video came to life . " Meyers also had the idea for Dupri 's cameo due to persistent rumors of their relationship circulating in the media , saying " That 's the whole concept here , a real simple video and then the slam dunk is JD 's in the video . He hasn 't been in any of her stuff and all the rumors of ' are they together , are they not together . ' " 
 The video begins with Jackson leaving her apartment before walking through the city 's various settings , including a grocery store before taking the bus , and ends with Jackson entering a Boys & Girls Club recreation center to visit her then @-@ boyfriend , record producer Jermaine Dupri . Along with Dupri , actor Bobb 'e J. Thompson makes a brief cameo . Jackson is shown wearing her trademark midriff @-@ baring outfits and naval piercing in the clip . A scene of Jackson purchasing Trojan condoms was filmed to promote safe sex , but was omitted from the final video . Jackson previously included a similar message at the finale of her video for " Any Time , Any Place " ( 1994 ) . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 The video generally received positive reception , although Dupri 's cameo was ultimately panned . A review considered the portrayal of Jackson " walking down some really shady parts of the neighbourhood in pursuit of Jermaine Dupri " as unrealistic . In an interview with <unk> , Jackson said she was not hesitant to feature Dupri in the video , although revealed it was the director 's idea to do so . 
 = = = Blacklist = = = 
 Following her highly controversial Super Bowl incident , Jackson 's singles and music videos were blacklisted by various entertainment conglomerates involved with the event who received massive FCC fines , including Viacom , which owns MTV , VH1 , and co @-@ produced the event , and CBS , which aired the event and owns Clear Channel Communications . A senior executive for Viacom stated , " [ We are ] absolutely bailing on the record . The pressure is so great , they can 't align with anything related to Janet . The high @-@ ups are still pissed at her , and this is a punitive measure . " As a result , the video for " I Want You " video , in addition to other releases from Damita Jo and Jackson 's following two albums , received minimal or no rotation on major music channels , despite Jackson 's appeal and iconic status in pop culture . In British publication Music Week , Virgin Record 's marketing director Elizabeth <unk> stated MTV 's lack of support due to the Super Bowl incident had been a " major catalyst " in the performance of Jackson 's singles . Jam also responded to an MTV statement claiming the network never received Jackson 's videos , while it was sent to the channel . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 During promotional campaign for Damita Jo , Jackson performed " I Want You " on Good Morning America , On Air with Ryan Seacrest , Much Music , Canada AM , and Spain 's Gala <unk> . Additionally , the performances from On Air with Ryan Seacrest and Much Music are included on Jackson 's From Janet to Damita Jo : The Videos compilation . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 " I Want You " was released as a double A @-@ side with " All Nite ( Don 't Stop ) " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Janet Jackson – vocals , producer 
 Kanye West – songwriter , producer 
 James Harris III - producer , keyboards 
 Terry Lewis - producer 
 John Legend - songwriter 
 Harold Lilly - songwriter 
 Miri Ben @-@ Ari – violin 
 Burt Bacharach – songwriter 
 Hal David - songwriter 
 Bobby Ross Avila - guitarist 
 Keenan Holloway - bassist 
 Ervin Pope - keyboards 
 Ian Cross - engineer 
 Tats Sato - engineer 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Damita Jo album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Old St Paul 's Cathedral = 
 Old St Paul 's Cathedral was the medieval cathedral of the City of London that , until 1666 , stood on the site of the present St Paul 's Cathedral . Built from 1087 to 1314 and dedicated to Saint Paul , the cathedral was the fourth church on the site at Ludgate Hill . 
 Work on the cathedral began during the reign of William the Conqueror after a fire in 1087 that destroyed much of the city . Work took more than 200 years , and construction was delayed by another fire in 1135 . The church was consecrated in 1240 and enlarged again in 1256 and the early 14th century . At its completion in the middle of the 14th century , the cathedral was one of the longest churches in the world and had one of the tallest spires and some of the finest stained glass . 
 The presence of the shrine of Saint Erkenwald made the cathedral a pilgrimage site during the Medieval period . In addition to serving as the seat of the Diocese of London , the building developed a reputation as a hub of the City of London , with the nave aisle , " Paul 's walk " , known as a centre for business and the London grapevine . After the Reformation , the open @-@ air pulpit in the churchyard , St Paul 's Cross , became the stage for radical evangelical preaching and Protestant bookselling . 
 The cathedral was already in severe structural decline by the 17th century . Restoration work by Inigo Jones in the 1620s was halted by the English Civil War . Sir Christopher Wren was attempting another restoration in 1666 when the cathedral was destroyed in the Great Fire of London . After demolition of the old structure , the present , domed cathedral was erected on the site , with an English Baroque design by Wren . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The cathedral could be the fourth church on the site at Ludgate Hill dedicated to St Paul . A devastating fire in 1087 , detailed in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , destroyed much of the city and the cathedral . King William I donated the stone from the destroyed Palatine Tower on the River Fleet towards the construction of a new , Romanesque Norman cathedral , sometimes said to be his last act before his death . 
 Bishop Maurice oversaw early preparations , although it was primarily under his successor , Richard de Beaumis , that construction work fully commenced . Beaumis was assisted by King Henry I , who gave the bishop stone and commanded that all material brought up the River Fleet for the cathedral should be free from toll . To fund the cathedral , Henry gave <unk> rights to all fish caught within the cathedral neighbourhood and tithes on venison taken in the County of Essex . Beaumis also gave a site for the original foundation of St Paul 's School . 
 After Henry I 's death , a civil war known as " The Anarchy " broke out . Henry of Blois , Bishop of Winchester , was appointed to administer the affairs of St Paul 's . Almost immediately , he had to deal with the aftermath of a fire at London Bridge in 1135 . It spread over much of the city , damaging the cathedral and delaying its construction . 
 During this period , the style of the building was changed from heavy Romanesque into Early English Gothic . Although the base Norman columns were left alone , lancet pointed arches were placed over them in the triforium and some heavy columns were substituted with clustered pillars . The steeple was erected in 1221 and the cathedral was rededicated by Bishop Roger Niger in 1240 . 
 = = = New work ( 1255 – 1314 ) = = = 
 After a succession of storms , in 1255 Bishop Fulk Basset appealed for funds to repair the damaged roof . The roof was once more rebuilt in wood , which was ultimately to doom the building . At this time , the east end of the cathedral church was lengthened , enclosing the parish church of St Faith , which was now brought within the cathedral . The eastward addition was always referred to as " The New Work " . 
 After complaints from the dispossessed parishioners of St Faith 's , the east end of the west crypt was allotted to them as their parish church . The congregation were also allowed to keep a detached tower with a peal of bells east of the church which had historically been used to peal the summons to the Cheapside <unk> . The parish later moved to the Jesus chapel during the reign of Edward VI and was merged with St Augustine Watling Street after the 1666 fire . 
 This " New Work " was completed in 1314 , although the additions had been consecrated in 1300 . Excavations in 1878 by Francis Penrose showed it was 586 feet ( 179 m ) long ( excluding the porch later added by Inigo Jones ) and 100 feet ( 30 m ) wide ( 290 feet ( 88 m ) across the transepts and crossing ) . By way of comparison , the current cathedral is 574 feet ( 175 m ) in length including the portico , and 246 feet ( 75 m ) across the transepts , and Winchester Cathedral , the longest remaining medieval church , is 556 feet ( 169 m ) long and 231 feet ( 70 m ) across the transepts . 
 The cathedral had one of Europe 's tallest church spires , the height of which is traditionally given as 489 feet ( 149 m ) , surpassing all but Lincoln Cathedral . The King 's Surveyor , Christopher Wren ( 1632 – 1723 ) , judged that an overestimate and gave 460 feet ( 140 m ) . William Benham noted that the cathedral probably " resembled in general outline that of Salisbury , but it was a hundred feet longer , and the spire was sixty or eighty feet higher . The tower was open internally as far as the base of the spire , and was probably more beautiful both inside and out than that of any other English cathedral . " 
 According to the architectural historian John Harvey , the octagonal chapter house , built about 1332 by William Ramsey , was the earliest example of Perpendicular Gothic . This is confirmed by Alec Clifton @-@ Taylor , who notes that the chapter house and St Stephen 's chapel at Westminster Abbey predate the early Perpendicular work at Gloucester Cathedral by several years . The foundations of the chapter house were recently made visible in the redeveloped south churchyard of the new cathedral . 
 = = Interior = = 
 The finished cathedral of the Middle Ages was renowned for the beauty of its interior . Canon William Benham wrote in 1902 : " It had not a rival in England , perhaps one might say in Europe . " 
 The nave 's immense length was particularly notable , with a Norman triforium and vaulted ceiling . The length earned it the nickname " Paul 's walk " . The cathedral 's stained glass was reputed to be the best in the country , and the east @-@ end Rose window was particularly exquisite . The poet Geoffrey Chaucer uses the windows as a metaphor in " The Miller 's Tale " from The Canterbury Tales , in the knowledge that other Londoners would understand the comparison : 
 His rode was red , his <unk> grey as goose , 
 With Paule 's windows <unk> on his shoes 
 In hosen red he went full <unk> . 
 From the cathedral 's construction until its destruction at the Reformation , the shrine of Erkenwald was a popular site for pilgrimage . Under Bishop Maurice , reports of miracles attributed to the shrine increased , with the shrine attracting thousands of pilgrims to the cathedral . The alliterative Middle English poem St. Erkenwald ( sometimes attributed to the " Pearl Poet " , <unk> ) begins with a description of the construction of the cathedral , referring to the building as the " New Werke " . 
 The shrine was adorned with gold , silver and precious stones . In 1339 , three London goldsmiths were employed for a whole year to rebuild the shrine to a higher standard . William Dugdale records that the shrine was pyramidal in shape with an altar table placed in front for offerings . 
 Monarchs and other dignitaries were often in attendance at the cathedral , and the court occasionally held session there . The building was also the scene of several incidents of mediaeval intrigue . In 1191 , whilst King Richard I was in Palestine , his brother John summoned a council of bishops to St Paul 's to denounce William de Longchamp , Bishop of Ely — to whom Richard had entrusted the affairs of government — for treason . 
 Later that year , William Fitz Osbern gave a fiery speech against the oppression of the poor at Paul 's Cross and incited a riot which saw the cathedral invaded , halted only by an appeal for calm by Hubert Walter , Archbishop of Canterbury . Osbern barricaded himself in nearby St Mary @-@ le @-@ Bow and was later executed , after which Paul 's Cross was silent for many years . 
 Arthur , Prince of Wales , son of Henry VII , married Catharine of Aragon in St Paul 's on November 14 , 1501 . Chroniclers are profuse in their descriptions of the decorations of the cathedral and city on that occasion . Arthur died five months later , at the age of 15 , and the marriage was later to prove contentious during the subsequent reign of his brother , Henry VIII . 
 Several kings of the Middle Ages lay in state in St Paul 's before their funerals at Westminster Abbey , including Richard II , Henry VI and Henry VII . In the case of Richard II , the display of his body in such a public place was to counter rumours that he was not deceased . The walls were lined with the tombs of mediaeval bishops and nobility . In addition to the shrine of Erkenwald , two Anglo @-@ Saxon kings were buried inside : <unk> , King of the East Saxons , and Ethelred the Unready . 
 A number of figures such as John of Gaunt , 1st Duke of Lancaster and John Beauchamp , 3rd Baron Beauchamp de Somerset had particularly large monuments constructed within the cathedral , and the building later contained the tombs of the Crown minister Nicholas Bacon , the poet , courtier and soldier Sir Philip Sidney , and of the poet and clergyman John Donne , who was dean of the cathedral between 1621 until his death in 1631 . Donne 's monument survived the 1666 fire , and is on display in the present building . 
 = = Paul 's Walk = = 
 The first historical reference to the nave , " Paul 's walk " , being used as a marketplace and general meeting area is recorded during the 1381 – 1404 tenure of Bishop Braybrooke . The bishop issued an open letter decrying the use of the building for selling " wares , as if it were a public market " and " others ... by the instigation of the Devil [ using ] stones and arrows to bring down the birds , jackdaws and pigeons which nestle in the walls and <unk> of the building . Others play at ball ... breaking the beautiful and costly painted windows to the amazement of spectators . " His decree goes on to threaten perpetrators with excommunication . 
 By the 15th century , the cathedral had become the centre of the London grapevine . " News mongers " , as they were called , gathered there to pass on the latest news and gossip . Those who visited the cathedral to keep up with the news were known as " Paul 's walkers " . 
 According to Francis Osborne ( 1593 – 1659 ) : 
 It was the fashion of those times ... for the principal gentry , lords , courtiers , and men of all professions not merely mechanic , to meet in Paul 's Church by eleven and walk in the middle aisle till twelve , and after dinner from three to six , during which times some <unk> on business , others of news . Now in regard of the universal there happened little that did not first or last arrive here ... And those news @-@ mongers , as they called them , did not only take the boldness to weigh the public but most intrinsic actions of the state , which some courtier or other did betray to this society . 
 St Paul 's became the place to go to hear the latest news of current affairs , war , religion , parliament and the court . In his play Englishmen for my Money , William Haughton ( d . 1605 ) described Paul 's walk as a kind of " open house " filled with a " great store of company that do nothing but go up and down , and go up and down , and make a grumbling together " . 
 Infested with beggars and thieves , Paul 's walk was also a place to pick up gossip , topical jokes , and even prostitutes . In his <unk> ( 1628 ) , a series of satirical portraits of contemporary England , John Earle ( 1601 – 1665 ) , described Paul 's walk thus : 
 Is the land 's epitome , or you may call it the lesser isle of Great Britain . It is more than this , the whole world 's map , which you may here discern in its <unk> motion , <unk> and turning . It is a heap of stones and men , with a vast confusion of languages ; and were the steeple not sanctified , nothing <unk> Babel . The noise in it is like that of bees , a strange humming or buzz mixed of walking tongues and feet : it is a kind of still roar or loud whisper ... It is the great exchange of all discourse , and no business whatsoever but is here stirring and a @-@ foot ... It is the general mint of all famous lies , which are here like the legends of popery , first coined and stamped in the church . 
 = = Decline ( 16th century ) = = 
 By the 16th century the building was deteriorating . Under Henry VIII and Edward VI , the Dissolution of the Monasteries and Chantries Acts led to the destruction of interior ornamentation and the cloisters , <unk> , crypts , chapels , shrines , chantries and other buildings in the churchyard . 
 Many of these former religious sites in St Paul 's Churchyard , having been seized by the crown , were sold as shops and rental properties , especially to printers and booksellers , such as Thomas Adams , who were often evangelical Protestants . Buildings that were razed often supplied ready @-@ dressed building material for construction projects , such as the Lord Protector 's city palace , Somerset House . 
 Crowds were drawn to the northeast corner of the Churchyard , St Paul 's Cross , where open @-@ air preaching took place . It was there in the Cross Yard in 1549 that radical Protestant preachers incited a mob to destroy many of the cathedral 's interior decorations . In 1554 , in an attempt to end inappropriate practices taking place in the nave , the Lord Mayor decreed that church should return to its original purpose as a religious building , issuing a writ stating that the selling of horses , beer and " other gross wares " was " to the great dishonour and displeasure of Almighty God , and the great grief also and offence of all good and well @-@ disposed persons " . 
 = = = Fire ( 1561 ) = = = 
 On 4 June 1561 the spire caught fire and crashed through the nave roof . According to a <unk> published days after the fire , the cause was a lightning strike . In 1753 , David Henry , a writer for The Gentleman 's Magazine , revived a rumour in his Historical description of St. Paul 's Cathedral , writing that a plumber had " confessed on his death bed " that he had " left a pan of coals and other fuel in the tower when he went to dinner . " However , the number of contemporary eyewitnesses to the storm and a subsequent investigation appears to contradict this . 
 Whatever the cause , the subsequent conflagration was hot enough to melt the cathedral 's bells and the lead covering the wooden spire " poured down like lava upon the roof " , destroying it . This event was taken by both Protestants and Catholics as a sign of God 's displeasure at the other faction 's actions . Queen Elizabeth contributed towards the cost of repairs and the Bishop of London Edmund Grindal gave £ 1200 , although the spire was never rebuilt . The repair work on the nave roof was sub @-@ standard , and only fifty years after the rebuilding was in a dangerous condition . 
 = = = Restoration work ( 1621 – 1666 ) = = = 
 Concerned at the decaying state of the building , King James I appointed England 's first classical architect , Inigo Jones , to restore the building . The poet Henry Farley records the king comparing himself to the building at the commencement of the work in 1621 : " I have had more sweeping , brushing and cleaning than in forty years before . My workmen <unk> like him they call <unk> after sweeping of a chimney . " 
 In addition to cleaning and rebuilding parts of the Gothic structure , Jones added a classical @-@ style portico to the cathedral 's west front in the 1630s , which William Benham notes was " altogether incongruous with the old building ... It was no doubt fortunate that Inigo Jones confined his work at St Paul 's to some very poor additions to the transepts , and to a portico , very magnificent in its way , at the west end . " 
 Work stopped during the English Civil War , and there was much defacement and mistreatment of the building by Parliamentarian forces during which old documents and charters were dispersed and destroyed , and the nave used as a stable for cavalry horses . Much of the detailed information historians have of the cathedral is taken from William Dugdale 's 1658 History of St Pauls Cathedral , written hastily during The Protectorate for fear that " one of the most eminent Structures of that kinde in the Christian World " might be destroyed . 
 Indeed , a persistent rumour of the time suggested that Cromwell had considered giving the building to London 's returning Jewish community to become a synagogue . Dugdale embarked on his project due to discovering hampers full of decaying 14th and 15th century documents from the Cathedral 's early archives . In his book 's dedicatory epistle , he wrote : 
 ... so great was your foresight of what we have since by <unk> experience seen and felt , and specially in the Church , ( through the Presbyterian contagion , which then began violently to <unk> out ) that you often and earnestly incited me to a speedy view of what Monuments I could , especially in the principall Churches of this Realme ; to the end , that by <unk> and paper , the Shadows of them , with their Inscriptions might be preserved for <unk> , forasmuch as the things themselves were so <unk> unto ruine . 
 Dugdale 's book is also the source for many of the surviving engravings of the building , created by Bohemian etcher Wenceslaus Hollar . In July 2010 , an original sketch for Hollar 's engravings was rediscovered when it was submitted to Sotheby 's auction house . 
 = = The Great Fire ( 1666 ) = = 
 After the Restoration of King Charles II , Sir Christopher Wren , the Surveyor to the King 's Works , was appointed to restore the cathedral in a style matching Inigo Jones ' classical additions of 1630 . Wren instead recommended that the building be completely demolished ; according to his first biographer , James Elmes , Wren “ expressed his surprise at the carelessness and want of accuracy in the original builders of the structure ” ; Wren 's son described the new design as " The Gothic rectified to a better manner of architecture " . 
 Both the clergy and citizens of the city opposed such a move . In response , Wren proposed to restore the body of the gothic building , but replace the existing tower with a dome . He wrote in his 1666 Of the Surveyor 's Design for repairing the old ruinous structure of St Paul 's : 
 It must be concluded that the Tower from Top to Bottom and the adjacent parts are such a heap of <unk> that no Judicious Architect will think it <unk> by any Expense that can be laid out upon new dressing it . 
 Wren , whose uncle Matthew Wren was Bishop of Ely , admired the central lantern of Ely Cathedral and proposed that his dome design could be constructed over the top of the existing gothic tower , before the old structure was removed from within . This , he reasoned , would prevent the need for extensive scaffolding and would not upset Londoners ( " Unbelievers " ) by demolishing a familiar landmark without being able to see its " hopeful Successor rise in its stead . " 
 The matter was still under discussion when the restoration work on St Paul 's finally began in the 1660s but soon after being sheathed in wooden scaffolding , the building was completely gutted in the Great Fire of London of 1666 . The fire , aided by the scaffolding , destroyed the roof and much of the stonework along with masses of stocks and personal belongings that had been placed there for safety . Samuel Pepys recalls the building in flames in his diary : 
 Up by five o 'clock , and blessed be God ! find all well , and by water to Paul 's Wharf . Walked thence and saw all the town burned , and a miserable sight of Paul 's Church , with all the roof fallen , and the body of the choir fallen into St. Faith 's ; Paul 's School also , Ludgate , and Fleet Street . 
 John Evelyn 's account paints a similar picture of destruction : 
 September 3rd – I went and saw the whole south part of the City burning from <unk> to the Thames , and ... was now taking hold of St. Paule 's Church , to which the scaffolds contributed exceedingly . 
 September 7th – I went this morning on <unk> from White @-@ hall as far as London Bridge , thro ' the late <unk> @-@ <unk> , Ludgate Hill , by St. Paules ... At my returne I was infinitely concern 'd to find that goodly Church St. Paules now a sad ruine , and that beautiful portico ... now rent in pieces , flakes of vast stone split asunder , and nothing now remaining intire but the inscription in the architrave , shewing by whom it was built , which had not one letter of it <unk> 'd . It was astonishing to see what immense stones the <unk> had in a manner <unk> 'd , so that all the ornaments , columns , freezes , capitals , and <unk> of <unk> Portland @-@ stone flew off , even to the very <unk> , where a sheet of lead covering a great space ( no less than six <unk> by measure ) was totally <unk> ; the <unk> of the vaulted <unk> falling broke into St. Faith 's , which being fill 'd with the magazines of bookes belonging to the Stationers , and carried thither for safety , they were all <unk> 'd , burning for a <unk> following . It is also observable that the lead over the altar at the East end was <unk> 'd , and among the divers monuments , the body of one Bishop remain 'd intire . Thus lay in ashes that most venerable Church , one of the most antient pieces of early piety in the Christian world . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Temporary repairs were made to the building . While it might have been salvageable , albeit with almost complete reconstruction , a decision was taken to build a new cathedral in a modern style instead , a step which had been contemplated even before the fire . Wren declared that it was impossible to restore the old building . 
 The following April , the Dean William Sancroft wrote to him that he had been right in his judgement : " Our work at the west end , " he wrote , " has fallen about our ears . " Two pillars had collapsed , and the rest was so unsafe that men were afraid to go near , even to pull it down . He added , " You are so absolutely necessary to us that we can do nothing , resolve on nothing without you . " 
 Following this declaration by the Dean , demolition of the remains of the old cathedral began in 1668 . Demolition of the Old Cathedral proved unexpectedly difficult as the stonework had been bonded together by molten lead . Wren initially used the then @-@ new technique of using gunpowder to bring down the surviving stone walls . Like many experimental techniques , the use of gunpowder was not easy to control ; several workers were killed and nearby residents complained about noise and damage . Eventually , Wren resorted to using a battering ram instead . Building work on the new cathedral began in June 1675 . 
 Wren 's first proposal , the " Greek cross " design , was considered too radical by members of a committee commissioned to rebuild the church . Members of the clergy decried the design as being too dissimilar from churches that already existed in England at the time to suggest any continuity within the Church of England . Wren 's approved " Warrant design " sought to reconcile the Gothic with his " better manner of architecture " , featuring a portico influenced by Inigo Jones ' addition to the old cathedral . However , Wren received permission from the king to make " ornamental changes " to the submitted design , and over the course of the construction made significant alterations , including the addition of the famous dome . 
 The topping out of the new cathedral took place in October 1708 and the cathedral was declared officially complete by Parliament in 1710 . The consensus on the finished building was mixed ; James Wright ( 1643 – 1713 ) wrote " Without , within , below , above the eye / Is filled with unrestrained delight . " Meanwhile , others were less approving , noting its similarity to St. Peter 's Basilica in Rome : " There was an air of Popery about the gilded capitals , the heavy arches ... They were unfamiliar , un @-@ English . " 
 = Super Meat Boy = 
 Super Meat Boy is an independent video game designed by Edmund McMillen and Tommy Refenes and developed by Team Meat . It is the successor to McMillen and Jonathan McEntee 's 2008 Flash game Meat Boy . Super Meat Boy was released on the Xbox 360 through Xbox Live Arcade in October 2010 , on Microsoft Windows in November 2010 , on OS X a year later in November 2011 , on Linux in December 2011 as a part of the Humble Indie Bundle # 4 , in May 2012 as a part of the Humble Indie Bundle V , on PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita in October 2015 , and on Wii U in May 2016 . In the game the player controls Meat Boy , a red , cube @-@ shaped character , as he attempts to rescue his girlfriend , Bandage Girl , from the game 's antagonist Dr. Fetus . The gameplay is characterized by fine control and split @-@ second timing as the player runs and jumps through over 300 hazardous levels while avoiding obstacles . Additional player @-@ created levels are available for free download . 
 Development of the game began in January 2009 . McMillen worked on level design and artwork , while Refenes coded the game ; it was tested primarily by the pair and their families . Initially intended for release in early 2010 for personal computers and the WiiWare download service , the release date was pushed back as the design was changed to include more levels and exclude multiplayer modes . The WiiWare version was canceled due to the service 's technical limitations . The music for the game was created by Danny Baranowsky , who had also composed the music for Meat Boy . The soundtrack was released as an album , and music from it was released as downloadable content for Rock Band 3 . 
 The game was critically acclaimed . In 2010 , it received awards for Most Challenging Game from IGN , and for Best Downloadable Game from GameSpot and GameTrailers . Critics lauded the game 's precise control , retro artwork , and soundtrack . Reviewers generally praised the game 's challenge , although some warned that not all players would appreciate the level of difficulty . The game was a commercial success , and sold more than one million copies as of January 2012 . A spin @-@ off , Super Meat Boy Forever , is currently in development . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Super Meat Boy is a platform game in which players control a small , dark red , cube @-@ shaped character named Meat Boy , who must save his cube @-@ shaped , heavily bandaged girlfriend Bandage Girl from the evil scientist Dr. Fetus . The game is divided into chapters , which together contain over 300 levels . Players attempt to reach the end of each level , represented by Bandage Girl , while avoiding crumbling blocks , saw blades , and various other fatal obstacles . The player can jump and run on platforms , and can jump off or slide down walls . The core gameplay requires fine control and split @-@ second timing , and was compared to , regarding both gameplay and level of difficulty , traditional platform games such as Super Mario Bros. and Ghosts 'n Goblins . 
 Levels in each chapter can be played in any order , but a certain number of levels need to be completed to access the boss stage , which unlocks the next chapter if cleared . The player has an unlimited number of attempts to complete each level . If Meat Boy is killed , he immediately restarts the level , though the ornamental red meat juice left behind on surfaces that the player has touched remains . A replay function , which may be accessed after a level is completed , simultaneously shows all the player 's attempts to complete the level . Completing a level within a certain time earns an " A + " grade , which unlocks a harder alternate version of the level in the " dark world " , an optional set of especially difficult levels . Hidden stages called warp zones are accessed by finding portals in specific levels . These warp zones feature bonus levels that have either the art style of older video games and a limit of three lives , or are patterned after another indie video game such as Castle Crashers or Braid . The player may control characters other than Meat Boy , many of whom first appeared in other independent video games . Each character has different attributes , such as Commander Video 's ability to momentarily float in midair . These characters can be unlocked by collecting bandage items placed throughout the game 's levels or completing certain warp zones . Some bandages can only be collected by using certain characters . Some levels , such as warp zones and boss levels , can only be played with specific characters . The available characters vary depending on the version of the game played . 
 The Xbox Live Arcade ( XBLA ) version features an unlockable mode called " Teh <unk> " , which is updated with new , free , officially curated levels . The PC version has a " Super Meat World " section , which allows users to play and rate additional levels that players have created with a level editor . This editor was released in May 2011 . Players can also access an unsupported developer mode inside the game to edit their own levels using the " rough " tools that Team Meat used to create the game . 
 = = Development and marketing = = 
 The original Meat Boy is an Adobe Flash game created by Edmund McMillen and programmed by Jonathan McEntee . The game was developed over a three @-@ week period , and was released on Newgrounds on October 5 , 2008 . By April 2009 , it had garnered over 840 @,@ 000 views at Newgrounds , and 8 million overall . A map pack for the Flash version was released on December 8 , 2008 . McMillen began development of Super Meat Boy after Nintendo and Microsoft requested that he make a game for their download services , WiiWare and Xbox Live Arcade , as they were impressed by the success of his Flash games Aether and Meat Boy . At the time , he was working with Tommy Refenes on a Flash game titled Grey Matter . Although McMillen initially pitched the companies a sequel to Gish or Aether , the pair decided to form Team Meat and work on an expanded version of Meat Boy instead . Team Meat also includes soundtrack composer Danny Baranowsky and sound effects designer Jordan Fehr . According to the developers , Super Meat Boy is " a big throwback to a lot of super hardcore NES classics like Ghosts 'n Goblins , Mega Man , and the Japanese version of Super Mario Bros. 2 " , with the plot written as " a mash @-@ up of every videogame story from the early 90s " . The game was explicitly designed by the team to be reminiscent of Super Mario Bros. , and McMillen considered it a tribute to Shigeru Miyamoto , the developer of Super Mario Bros. 
 McMillen worked on level design and artwork , while Refenes coded the game ; it was tested primarily by the pair and their families . McMillen and Refenes lived on opposite sides of the United States , and met only a few times in person while working on the game . They developed the control scheme by iterating through several designs , trying to find one that felt fluid and logical . Rather than use a pre @-@ built game engine , Refenes programmed an original one . The game was initially set to include around 100 levels , and to have co @-@ operative and competitive multiplayer modes . During development , however , the multiplayer option was dropped and the number of levels was greatly increased . The pair designed the game to be deliberately " retro " , imitating the aesthetics of traditional platform games , but with a modern sensibility regarding difficulty . They wanted the game to be rewarding and challenging , rather than frustrating ; to this end they included infinite lives , quick restarts of levels , obvious goals , and short levels . They felt the replay feature transformed death into a form of reward . 
 Development of Super Meat Boy began in January 2009 . Initially announced for WiiWare and PC , the game was set to be released in the first quarter of 2010 . The release date was pushed back to the fourth quarter because the developers wanted more time to create extra levels , such as the dark worlds . A picture released on Team Meat 's Twitter page on February 22 , 2010 , revealed that the game would also be released for XBLA . The next day , they announced that , while all versions would be released in the same month , the game would be released for XBLA first due to " contractual obligations " . In August 2010 , the developers were contacted by Microsoft with the prospect of inclusion in Microsoft 's 2010 Fall <unk> XBLA promotion two months later . As they were almost out of money , they did not believe that they could financially support themselves until the Spring event , but felt they had four months ' worth of work left to complete on the game . For the final two months of development they worked daily , slept five hours a night , and frequently forgot to eat — a process that McMillen said he " would never voluntarily go through " again . According to McMillen , due to Microsoft 's low expectations for the game , Super Meat Boy was lightly promoted . The level of promotion was not increased during the <unk> , though the game greatly outsold the rest of the games in the event . The team described the effort required to finish the game for the promotion as " by far the biggest mistake [ they ] made during SMB 's development " . Their development struggle is depicted in the documentary Indie Game : The Movie . The game was released on XBLA in October 2010 and on PCs via Steam and Direct2Drive a month later . McMillen noted that the PC release was more heavily promoted than the XBLA version . A version for Mac OS X was released in November 2011 , while another version for Linux operating systems was released in December 2011 as part of the Humble Indie Bundle # 4 game pack . 
 Due to Sony 's initial lack of interest in the game , Team Meat entered into contractual obligations that prohibited Super Meat Boy from ever being released on the PlayStation 3 . Despite this a version for the PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita was eventually announced The WiiWare version was canceled because the game 's file size had been expanded beyond the limits imposed by Nintendo . Team Meat looked into releasing it as a retail Wii game , but were told by all third @-@ party publishers they approached that a budget title would not be profitable so late into the Wii 's lifecycle . However , after Team Meat hinted it in October 2015 , Super Meat Boy has been confirmed for the Wii U eShop via a release reel shown on the European Nintendo Direct of March 2016 . The Wii U port is handled by BlitWorks , a separate indie developer , and is expected to be released in 2016 . A limited edition retail version of the PC game was released in April 2011 . It included bonuses such as behind @-@ the @-@ scenes videos , a sample disc of the game 's music , and a Super Meat Boy comic . In 2012 Team Meat began prototyping an iOS and Android version of the game . The game is intended to be a different take on the Super Meat Boy concept that is more adapted to touch @-@ screen controls than a direct port would be . Later Team Meat released two images of the new game one with the new graphics and other with the new chapter named The Green Hills . 
 Team Meat released several pieces of merchandise related to Super Meat Boy . These include Super Meat Boy Handheld , an iOS app released on April 3 , 2010 and styled on a Tiger Electronics handheld . It was released as a joke after Refenes ' game <unk> & <unk> was removed from the iTunes Store following a statement by Refenes that likened the iPhone to a Tiger handheld . McMillen has released a Super Meat Boy microgame for WarioWare D.I.Y. Team Meat sells charms , plush toys , and posters related to the game , as well as T @-@ shirts , stickers , stress balls , and a limited edition Super Meat Boy comic . In 2011 , <unk> released a set of four Super Meat Boy figures of Meat Boy , Bandage Girl , Brownie , and Tofu Boy , later making figures of Commander Video , Jill , <unk> , and Dr. Fetus . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Super Meat Boy 's soundtrack was composed by Danny Baranowsky , who previously composed the soundtracks for the indie video games Canabalt , Cortex Command , and Gravity Hook . He also composed the music for the original Meat Boy . McMillen knew of Baranowsky 's other work , and approached him late in Meat Boy 's development , asking him to supply whatever tracks he had on hand . For the soundtrack of Super Meat Boy , Baranowsky incorporated the music he had provided for Meat Boy into an expanded soundtrack . He tried to ensure that the music would accompany the action on the screen without overpowering the sound effects . Baranowsky was given complete freedom for the game 's music , and retained all of the rights to it ; McMillen believed that being more invested in the game would let Baranowsky express the part of him that was " manic , obsessive , complex , and full of life " . McMillen feels that the soundtrack " gets your heart rate up , complements every aspect of its gameplay , and stays with you for days " . 
 On October 26 , 2010 , the game 's soundtrack was released as a download @-@ only album via the online Bandcamp store titled Super Meat Boy ! Soundtrack . This release features 34 tracks and a 100 @-@ minute runtime , and includes several remixes of tracks from the game . On January 11 , 2011 , Baranowsky and Team Meat released a special edition soundtrack on Bandcamp as both a downloadable and physical album . This edition includes a second disc of songs not included in the original release , as well as additional remixes . The album , titled Nice to Meat You , has a total of 73 tracks , is 2 hours 25 minutes long , and features album artwork by McMillen . Three music tracks from the game were released as downloadable content for Rock Band 3 in June 2011 . 
 <unk> 's music was not used for the PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita versions , as he " no longer [ had ] a working relationship with Team Meat " and they could not agree on licensing terms . Instead , those versions of the game feature a soundtrack composed by <unk> ( Matthias Bossi and Jon Evans ) , David " <unk> " <unk> , and Laura <unk> , who have previously worked on games such as The Binding of Isaac : Rebirth , Hotline Miami , and Plants vs Zombies respectively . A soundtrack album for the new music , titled Songs in the Key of Meat : Music from SMB 5th Anniversary , was released on Bandcamp on October 6 , 2015 . 
 = = = = Track lists = = = = 
 Nice to Meat You track list 
 = = Reception = = 
 Super Meat Boy was critically well received . The Xbox 360 version of the game has aggregate scores of 90 / 100 and 90 @.@ 41 % at websites Metacritic and GameRankings , respectively . The Windows version has similar scores , with a 91 @.@ 25 % at GameRankings and 87 / 100 at Metacritic . After being showcased at the Penny Arcade Expo 2010 , Super Meat Boy was declared Game of the Show by Destructoid and nominated for the same award by Machinima.com. The game received nominations for the Grand Prize and Excellence in Audio awards at the 2010 Independent Games Festival . It won the award for Most Challenging Game in IGN 's Best of 2010 awards , and received nominations for Best Soundtrack and Best Retro Design . It was voted GameSpot 's Best Downloadable Console Game of 2010 , and won the Best Downloadable Game award from GameTrailers . Sales were strong , with nearly 140 @,@ 000 units of the Xbox 360 version sold by the end of 2010 . The Steam and Xbox 360 versions had sold over 600 @,@ 000 copies combined by April 2011 ; 400 @,@ 000 of these sales were through Steam . On January 3 , 2012 , Team Meat announced on Twitter that the game had surpassed 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sales . 
 Critics praised Super Meat Boy 's platforming elements , and often commented on the game 's difficulty . X @-@ Play reviewer Alexandra Hall said the game had " riveting platforming action " , and added that " Super Meat Boy 's designers are masters of their craft . " Henry Gilbert of GamesRadar felt the platforming was " perfect " . He wrote that " while it 's always tough and demanding , it never feels cheap , or like the game is cheating you . " A reviewer from GameTrailers stated that " the difficulty rides the perfect line between driving you utterly bonkers when you fail and making you feel like a platform pro when you succeed " . Joystiq 's Richard Mitchell echoed other reviewers ' comments : " Super Meat Boy is tough , as tough as the toughest nails in the toughest universe . " Gilbert cited the level of difficulty , which he believed made the game inaccessible to some players , as his reason for not awarding the game a perfect score . Tom McShea of GameSpot praised the game 's " precise control " , " excellent level design " , and " smooth difficulty curve " . Reviewer Tom Bramwell of Eurogamer warned that Super Meat Boy is " a hard game . It should make you want to throw the pad across the room " . 
 Critics gave high marks to the game 's retro art direction and presentation . Official Xbox Magazine ( UK ) ' s Mike Channel appreciated the variety found in each set of levels . He stated that " while the graphics may look crude , the presentation is exceptional . Each level has a distinct visual style . " Daemon Hatfield , a reviewer for IGN , noted the uniqueness of the game 's visual presentation . He commented that the warp zone levels pay tribute to classic 8 @-@ bit games , and lauded the game 's soundtrack : " The rocking chiptune soundtrack is the best I 've heard since Scott Pilgrim vs. The World : The Game " . Joe Leonard of 1UP.com noted that the game 's humor and over @-@ the @-@ top gameplay help to calm frustrations regarding the difficulty : " Super Meat Boy 's greatest strength has to be how it never takes itself too seriously — as maddening as some of the levels got , I could never stay angry at the game for too long " , said Leonard . MTV Multiplayer reviewer Russ Frushtick praised the game 's visual design . He appreciated the game 's cutscenes , which he noted are " hand @-@ drawn animated [ shorts ] which [ bear ] more than a passing resemblance to a classic video game intro " . 
 While the game received high praise overall , certain publications voiced complaints . Hatfield noted that the cutscenes had low production values , stating that " they don 't have the polish of the rest of the game " . The reviewer for PC Gamer mentioned " a few minor , yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ patched bugs " . Eduardo Reboucas of Game Revolution said that " a lot of the levels in Super Meat Boy depend a little too much on twitch reflexes and trial @-@ and @-@ error memorization " . He also stated that " there are some bits of toilet humor here and there that are duds " , and that the game 's high level of difficulty " will make most casual players shy away " . Mitchell Dyer of GamePro agreed , saying that certain " absurdly difficult " levels broke the flow of the game , especially in the boss levels and the later chapters . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Meat Boy has made cameo appearances in the video games Bit.Trip Runner , Bit.Trip Fate , and Bit.Trip Presents ... <unk> : Future Legend of Rhythm Alien , as well as in Spelunky , Dust : An Elysian Tail , Ori and the Blind Forest and <unk> . A parody Flash game , Super Tofu Boy , was released by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) on December 1 , 2010 , to protest the game and promote veganism . In response , Team Meat added its own interpretation of Tofu Boy to the PC version of the actual Super Meat Boy on December 2 , 2010 . The game 's success spurred the development of the upcoming 1930s @-@ style animated indie video game <unk> . 
 On August 29 , 2014 , Team Meat announced that a follow @-@ up game , Super Meat Boy : Forever , was in development for smartphones , tablets , and Steam . 
 = Nervous shark = 
 The nervous shark ( Carcharhinus cautus ) is a species of requiem shark , and part of the family Carcharhinidae , so named because of its timid behavior in regard to humans . It is common in shallow , coastal waters off northern Australia , Papua New Guinea , and the Solomon Islands . A small brownish or grayish shark typically measuring 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 3 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 4 @.@ 3 ft ) long , this species has a short , blunt snout , oval eyes , and a relatively large second dorsal fin . The leading margins of most fins are finely edged with black , and the lower caudal fin lobe is black @-@ tipped . 
 Small bony fishes are the main prey of the nervous shark , while crustaceans , molluscs , and snakes may also be eaten . It is viviparous , with the developing embryos nourished through a placental connection . The details of its life history seem to vary depending on latitude — for example , the timing of the breeding season and the length of the gestation period . Females produce litters of one to six young either annually or biennially . The harmless nervous shark is caught incidentally by coastal gillnet fisheries and perhaps also by line and trawl fisheries . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) lacks sufficient data to assess the conservation status of this species except in Australian waters , where its population seems healthy and has been listed under Least Concern . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Australian ichthyologist Gilbert Percy Whitley originally described the nervous shark as a subspecies of Galeolamna <unk> ( a junior synonym of Carcharhinus obscurus , the dusky shark ) , in a 1945 issue of the scientific journal Australian Zoologist . He gave it the name cauta , meaning " cautious " in Latin , because of its skittish demeanor when confronted by people . Later authors have recognized this shark as a distinct species , placed in the genus Carcharhinus . The type specimen consists of the preserved skin and teeth of a 92 cm ( 36 in ) long female caught in Shark Bay , Western Australia . 
 Based on morphology , Jack Garrick suggested in 1982 that the nervous shark is closely related to the blacktip reef shark ( C. melanopterus ) . Leonard Compagno in 1988 tentatively grouped these two species with the blacknose shark ( C. acronotus ) , the copper shark ( C. brachyurus ) , the silky shark ( C. falciformis ) , and the night shark ( C. signatus ) . The close relationship between the nervous and blacktip reef sharks was upheld in a 1992 phylogenetic study by Shane Lavery , based on allozymes , and again in a 2011 study by Ximena Vélez @-@ Zuazoa and Ingi Agnarsson , based on nuclear and mitochondrial genes . 
 = = Description = = 
 The nervous shark has a rather stout , spindle @-@ shaped body and a short , broadly rounded snout . The anterior margin of each nostril is extended into a slender nipple @-@ shaped lobe . The moderately large eyes are horizontally oval in shape and equipped with nictitating membranes . The mouth lacks conspicuous furrows at the corners and contains 25 – 30 upper and 23 – 28 lower tooth rows . The upper teeth are narrow and angled , with coarsely serrated edges . The lower teeth are more slender and upright in shape , and have finer serrations . The five pairs of gill slits are medium in length . 
 The pectoral fins are moderately long , narrow , and pointed . The first dorsal fin originates over the free rear tips of the pectoral fins ; it is large and falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) with a pointed apex . The second dorsal fin is positioned opposite the anal fin and is relatively large and high . There is no ridge between the dorsal fins . A crescent @-@ shaped notch is present on the caudal peduncle just before the upper caudal fin origin . The caudal fin is asymmetrical , with a strong lower lobe and a longer upper lobe with a ventral notch near the tip . The dermal denticles are overlapping and bear three horizontal ridges ( five in larger individuals ) leading to marginal teeth . This species is bronze to gray above and white below , with a white stripe on the flank . A thin black line runs along the leading margins of the dorsal fins , pectoral fins , and the upper caudal fin lobe , as well as the caudal fin trailing margin ; the lower caudal fin lobe and sometimes the pectoral fins are also tipped in black . The nervous shark typically reaches 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 3 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 4 @.@ 3 ft ) in length and may grow up to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) long . Females attain larger sizes than males . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The nervous shark is found over continental and insular shelves off northern Australia from Shark Bay in the west to Moreton Bay in the east , as well as off Papua New Guinea and around the Solomon Islands . It is among the most common sharks in Darwin Harbor , the Gulf of Carpentaria , and Shark Bay . This species generally inhabits shallow inshore waters , to a depth of at least 45 m ( 148 ft ) . It seems to particularly favor mangrove @-@ lined areas with sandy @-@ muddy bottoms and avoids areas with dense seagrass cover . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The diet of the nervous shark consists mainly of small teleost fishes ( including silversides , smelt @-@ whitings , wrasses , and grunters ) . Crustaceans ( including prawns , crabs , and mantis shrimps ) and molluscs ( predominantly cephalopods but also bivalves and gastropods ) constitute secondary food sources . This shark is also known to occasionally prey on the semiaquatic snakes Cerberus <unk> and <unk> <unk> . A known parasite of the nervous shark is the myxosporean Kudoa carcharhini . 
 Like other requiem sharks , the nervous shark is viviparous : once the embryos exhaust their initial supply of yolk , they are provisioned by the mother through a placental connection formed from the depleted yolk sac . Adult females have a single functional ovary , on the right , and two functional uteruses . The male bites at the sides of the female as a prelude to mating . After mating , the female stores the sperm for approximately four weeks prior to fertilization . In Darwin Harbor , mating occurs from January to March and birthing occurs in October and November following a gestation period of eight to nine months . In Shark Bay , mating occurs from late October to early November and birthing occurs around the same time the following year , following a gestation period of 11 months ; this slower development likely reflects the cooler temperatures of Shark Bay . 
 Females produce litters on an annual cycle in Darwin Harbor and on a biennial cycle in Shark Bay . The litter size ranges from one to six and is not correlated with the size of the female . The newborns are relatively large , measuring 35 – 40 cm ( 14 – 16 in ) long , and are birthed in shallow nursery areas such as Herald Bight in Shark Bay . The juvenile growth rate is high for a shark ; males and females mature sexually at around 84 and 91 cm ( 33 and 36 in ) , respectively , in Darwin Harbour , and 91 and 101 cm ( 36 and 40 in ) , respectively , in Shark Bay . The age at maturity is around four years for males and six years for females ; the maximum lifespan is at least 12 years for males and 16 years for females . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Shy and difficult to approach , the nervous shark is harmless to humans . It is occasionally marketed for food . This species is susceptible to being caught incidentally in coastal gillnets , such as the barramundi ( Lates <unk> ) gillnet fishery operating off northern Australia . It may also be caught on line gear and in prawn trawls . The Australian nervous shark population does not appear to be threatened by fishing activities , and there the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed it as Least Concern . No data on the impact of fishing are available elsewhere in its range , and thus the IUCN has listed it overall under Data Deficient . 
 = All Hell Breaks Loose ( Supernatural ) = 
 " All Hell Breaks Loose " is the joint title for the two @-@ part second season finale of the CW television series Supernatural . It consists of the twenty @-@ first and twenty @-@ second episodes of the second season . " Part One " was first broadcast on May 10 , 2007 , and the second part aired the following week on May 17 , 2007 . The narrative follows series protagonist Sam Winchester ( Jared Padalecki ) — a young man who travels the continental United States with his brother Dean ( Jensen Ackles ) hunting supernatural creatures — as he is abducted by series villain Azazel ( Fredric Lehne ) and sent to an abandoned town . Azazel intends to find a leader for his demon army by having Sam and other psychic children like him fight to the death . Sam is eventually killed , but is resurrected after Dean sells his soul . The sole survivor , Jake ( Aldis Hodge ) , is sent by Azazel to a cemetery protected against demons , where he opens a gateway to Hell . At the end of the episode , Azazel is finally killed by Dean with the mystical Colt revolver , but not before hundreds of demons are released into the world . 
 The production process was plagued with problems , and changes had to be made throughout filming . " Part One " ' s setting was altered after production learned of a pre @-@ existing set , which had been used for the western television series Bordertown . The choice of location in turn influenced the type of supernatural monster that was featured . The once @-@ epic script of " Part Two " had to be toned down due to budgetary reasons , with weather conditions forcing the episode 's climax to be filmed on a sound stage rather than on location . The scenes featuring the return of John Winchester ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) had to be filmed weeks in advance using blue screen due to the actor 's limited availability . 
 Despite receiving season @-@ low ratings , the episodes garnered positive reviews from critics , who praised both the writing and the decision to end the main storylines . The performances of Fredric Lehne and Ona Grauer were also applauded , with Jessica Harmon gaining a Leo Award nomination for her role . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part one = = = 
 Sam Winchester ( Padalecki ) is abducted by the yellow @-@ eyed demon Azazel ( Lehne ) and taken to the abandoned town of Cold Oak , supposedly the most haunted place in America . Also placed there are Azazel 's other " psychic children " — young men and women whom the demon visited as babies , doing something that gives them supernatural abilities later in life — including Andy Gallagher ( Gabriel Tigerman ) and Ava Wilson ( Katharine Isabelle ) , as well as new characters Lily ( Jessica Harmon ) and Jake Talley ( Hodge ) . Ava had been abducted months earlier , but claims to have no knowledge of her whereabouts during the time gap . Lily tries to leave the town , but is killed by an Acheri demon , prompting the others to seek refuge in a building , protecting themselves from the demon with barriers of salt . As Dean Winchester ( Ackles ) and fellow hunter Bobby Singer ( Jim Beaver ) head to Harvelle 's Roadhouse — a saloon frequented by hunters — for help and find it burned to the ground with the body of hunter Ash ( Chad Lindberg ) buried in the wreckage , Andy uses his mind @-@ control abilities to send Dean his location telepathically . 
 After falling asleep that night , Sam is visited in a dream by Azazel , who reveals that he has brought them all together so that they can fight to the death , with the sole survivor becoming the leader of his army of demons . Admitting that he killed Sam 's girlfriend Jessica because he believed she was holding him back from returning to his old life of hunting supernatural creatures , the demon then shows him the night of his mother 's death . Azazel had come into Sam 's nursery and fed him his blood , with Mary Winchester ( Samantha Smith ) walking in and recognizing the demon . 
 Later , when Ava and Andy are alone together , she lets the Acheri demon into the building , and uses a new ability to command it to kill him . After revealing to Sam that she has actually been in the town all the months she has been missing , killing off other psychic children that Azazel has sent there , she sets the Acheri demon on him . However , Jake sneaks up behind her and uses his superhuman strength to break her neck , prompting the now free Acheri demon to flee . As Sam and Jake then start to leave the town , Jake attacks him out of distrust , but Sam gains the upper hand and apparently knocks him unconscious . However , as Sam is distracted by an arriving Dean and Bobby , Jake regains consciousness and fatally stabs him . Dean assures his brother that he will take care of him , but Sam dies in his arms . 
 = = = Part two = = = 
 Desperate to save his brother , Dean sells his soul to a Crossroads Demon ( Ona Grauer ) in exchange for Sam 's resurrection , and is given only one year before collection is due . They later conduct research at Bobby 's home , hoping to determine Azazel 's plan . Ellen Harvelle ( Samantha Ferris ) , owner of the now @-@ destroyed Roadhouse , then arrives , and is forced to drink holy water to prove that she is not possessed by a demon . After giving them a map of Wyoming that Ash had left in the Roadhouse 's safe , she points out five X 's that have been marked , representing frontier churches built by Samuel Colt — hunter and creator of the mystical Colt , a gun capable of killing anything . Research also shows that railway lines connect all the churches in the form of a pentagram , creating a giant devil 's trap that demons cannot enter . 
 At the pentagram 's center is an old cowboy cemetery , which Azazel forces Jake to go to by threatening his family . The Winchesters , Bobby , and Ellen are there to meet him , but Jake , having given in to his demonic side , develops mind @-@ control abilities and orders Ellen to put her gun to her head . Everyone is forced to lower their weapons , giving Jake time to use the Colt as a key to open a mausoleum . However , Sam then shoots Jake in the back , and finishes him off with multiple shots as he begs for mercy . As the mausoleum doors begin to open , they realize that it is a Devil 's Gate — a doorway to Hell . A rush of demons then escape and break the iron railway lines of the devil 's trap , allowing Azazel to enter . As Ellen and Bobby try to close the gateway , Sam and Dean take the Colt to confront Azazel . Unfortunately , the demon catches them by surprise and takes the gun . After taunting Dean about his demonic pact and questioning if what came back was " one hundred percent pure Sam " , Azazel prepares to kill them . To his surprise , the escaped spirit of John Winchester ( Morgan ) grabs him , distracting him long enough for Dean to take back the Colt and shoot him in the heart , finally killing him . As Bobby and Ellen manage to close the gates , John 's spirit moves on . Knowing that they now have to face an army of demons , Sam promises to try to free Dean from his deal . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Guest stars = = = 
 The first episode featured the return of many characters . Actress Samantha Smith reprised her role as Mary Winchester in a flashback , with Chad Lindberg making an appearance as the hunter Ash . Actor Gabriel Tigerman of the second season episode " Simon Said " guest starred as the mind @-@ controlling Andy Gallagher , and Katharine Isabelle of " Hunted " returned as the missing Ava Wilson . Other of Azazel 's psychic children introduced in the episode were the heart @-@ stopping Lily , portrayed by Jessica Harmon , and the super @-@ strong Jake Talley , who is played in both episodes by Aldis Hodge . Actor Jim Beaver also guest starred in both parts as recurring character Bobby Singer , as did Fredric Lehne as the yellow @-@ eyed demon Azazel . Lehne first portrayed the character in the second season premiere " In My Time of Dying " , and was originally meant to only play the part temporarily because the demon changes human hosts periodically . However , the show runners liked him so much they kept him in the role . Executive producer and director Kim Manners was happy with this decision , believing that Lehne brought to the character " a real Jack Nicholson flavor " . The second episode brought back actress Samantha Ferris as hunter Ellen Harvelle , as well as Jeffrey Dean Morgan as John Winchester , whose previous appearance was in the season premiere . Morgan 's busy schedule required his scenes for the episode to be filmed weeks in advance . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Multiple storylines spanning the first two seasons were brought to a close in the two @-@ part season finale , including the search for the demon Azazel and the existence of Azazel 's psychic children . As many of the show 's questions are answered in one long conversation by Azazel , series creator Eric Kripke and writer Sera Gamble had to rewrite the demon 's speech multiple times because they felt that " the payoff [ was ] never as good as the anticipation " . Though it would have been easier for them to keep postponing the revelations , the writers believed they would get " crushed under the anticipation " because they would not be able to satisfy fans if they kept building up more expectations . As for the psychic children , the writers originally intended to continue their storyline into the third season , but ultimately killed them off after deciding that the characters were not as interesting as demons and monsters . In the first version of the script , the character of Lily was two roles : a girl named Alex who could kill with a single touch , and a telepath named Lily . Believing they had too many characters , the writers combined Alex and Lily into one . Gamble had envisioned the episode as a " psychic Breakfast Club " , so the new Lily 's motivation was that she was Ally Sheedy . The Acheri demon responsible for two of the psychic children 's deaths was based on the Acheri from Hindu mythology ; writer Sera Gamble felt that it being a " diseased spirit " that comes down from the mountains and " kills everybody in the settlements " fit in with the abandoned mountain @-@ side town that the episode takes place in . Harvelle 's Roadhouse — a saloon frequented by demon hunters — was dropped from the show in these episodes as well , as Kripke disliked the concept of having a fixed home for a road @-@ based series . With the Roadhouse 's destruction came the death of recurring character Ash , whom the writers had been phasing out during the season because they felt his " comical " and " wacky " personality was too unrealistic for the show . 
 With John Winchester making a demonic pact in the second season première , it was decided early on that the season would also end with another demonic pact . This required the writers to kill Sam — they felt it was the only thing that could motivate Dean to sell his soul — with the pact becoming one of the driving forces behind the third season . At the same time , it opened up another new storyline by questioning if what returned was " one hundred percent pure Sam " . Additionally , the " war of demons against humanity " — hinted at throughout the first two seasons — finally started with the release of demons through the Devil 's Gate at the end of the second episode . This plotline continues throughout the rest of the series , with the Winchesters attempting to hunt down the demons in the third season . 
 While the final version of " Part Two " is quite enclosed , the initial script was considered epic , with production designer Jerry Wanek jokingly referring to it as a " six @-@ hour mini @-@ series " . In the original version , the giant devil 's trap keeping demons away from the gateway to Hell was much more complex , with each point in the pentagram being a church housing a holy relic — such as a sliver from the True Cross . With the artifacts powering the devil 's trap , Jake 's role would have been to go to each church and destroy them , the hunters following after him to try to stop him . Jake would then eventually destroy the final relic during a fight with Sam , and Dean would race to the gateway to prevent Azazel from opening it while Jake and Sam are " beating the crap out of each other " . However , when director and executive producer Kim Manners received the script , he realized it was huge , and had the storyboard artist make five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours of storyboards for the episode to prove that it could not be filmed without going hundreds of thousands of dollars over @-@ budget . Production suggested that a large amount of money could be saved by not depicting the churches , which were major set pieces for the intended story . Kripke realized that instead of using churches , he could have the points of the pentagram be connected by railroad tracks . With tracks being made of iron , it fit perfectly with the series mythology because iron is a demon deterrent . Kripke found this aspect to be more Western , matching the tone of show . Rather than destroying the devil 's trap as in the original script , Jake is instead sent by Azazel to open the gateway himself , and the major fight scene between Jake and Sam was then changed into a standoff between Jake and the hunters . Though the storyline had to be toned down , Kripke felt that this improved the overall episode by making it simpler . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming for the first episode lasted for a period of nine days . The diner at the beginning of the episode was built by Wanek , though a pre @-@ existing set — a deserted town built for the Western television series Bordertown that is filmed in the Vancouver area — was used for seven days of filming . Originally , the episode was meant to mainly take place in an abandoned orphanage with many hallways . However , producer Cyrus Yavneh had sent Kripke photos of the Bordertown set during production of Supernatural 's first season , and the " creepy " and " evocative " aspects of the town prompted the writers to change the setting . With the new location , references to the ghost town of <unk> , Connecticut were going to be included in the script , but were eventually edited out . Unfortunately for production , the Bordertown set was surrounded by mountains on one side and farmland on the other , making it difficult for the production team to access . It also rained all seven days , causing problems during filming . However , director Robert Singer felt that the gray skies and mist ended up helping the episode 's appearance . 
 The second episode 's climax was originally to take place in an actual cemetery , but problems at the potential filming locations prohibited this . The scene takes place at night , which , at that time of year , only lasts for nine and a half hours in Vancouver . With only four nights to film the sequence , production came up with the idea of having a " supernatural solar eclipse " so that the scenes could be shot day for night . However , the first filming location did not have trees , which were needed for the filming technique to work . After eventually finding a cemetery that did have trees , a rain storm during inspection forced the production team to realize that weather would interfere with the filming . It was decided at the last minute to film on a sound stage , and a cemetery set was constructed . However , the bark mulch used for the set had to contain manure , making it very rancid . According to actress Samantha Ferris , " It stunk so bad your eyes watered . " 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 As with all other episodes , visual effects were done in @-@ studio . Production wanted to keep the number of shots to a minimum for the opening of the Devil 's Gate at the second episode 's climax , so instead of just digitally creating demon smoke shots , visual effects supervisor Ivan Hayden filmed stand @-@ ins dressed as characters from past episodes — Woman in White , Hook Man , and the Reaper — on a blue screen and inserted them into the scene in post @-@ production during brief flashes of lightning . This filming technique also had to be used for the return of John Winchester . Actor Jeffrey Dean Morgan was busy filming the movie The Accidental Husband during the episode 's scheduled shooting , so he , Jensen Ackles , and Jared Padalecki filmed the scene six weeks earlier in front of a blue screen . The reunion was intended to be " more complex with a lot of fighting " , but the movie 's production crew believed Morgan would be at risk of getting injured and forbid it . Kripke trimmed the scene , removing Morgan 's dialogue and only having him being thrown to the ground by Azazel . The script was not yet complete during the scene 's filming , so Padalecki 's appearance was based on the original storyline in which Sam has a brutal fight with Jake and ends up covered in blood . When the fight scene was removed , Padalecki had to re @-@ film his part of the family reunion using tennis balls and a stand @-@ in as replacements for Ackles and Morgan who were not available . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 As is typical for the series , the synthesized orchestral score of the episodes was written alternately by Jay Gruska and Christopher Lennertz , with the former working on " Part One " and the latter scoring " Part Two " . Because he had worked on the pilot episode of the series — where he introduced a recurring musical theme for scenes related to the villain Azazel — Lennertz was happy to be the one to score the episode featuring the demon 's death , allowing him to " close that chapter " . With the opening of the gateway to Hell at the episode 's end , Lennertz felt that the music " became much larger in scope " than previous episodes , deeming it " an issue of making things larger than life " . As with most episodes of the series , classic rock music is also included . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Part One " was viewed by an estimated 2 @.@ 9 million viewers , with " Part Two " bringing in approximately 2 @.@ 72 million viewers . Compared to the rest of the second season , " Part Two " became the lowest @-@ rated episode behind " Born Under a Bad Sign " , which received only 2 @.@ 84 million viewers . Despite this , the episodes garnered positive reviews from critics . Tina Charles of TV Guide found " so much goodness " in the first episode , and called Dean 's speech to Sam " rip @-@ your @-@ heart @-@ out sad " . She deemed the second episode just plain " wow " , praising both the brotherly relationship depicted and the scenes between Jensen Ackles and Jim Beaver , but was disappointed that the brothers did not converse with the spirit of John Winchester after he escapes from Hell . Of particular interest to critics was the wrapping up the Azazel story arc , described by Charles as a " great way to cap off the season " . Kathie Huddleston of Sci @-@ <unk> noted that the " terrific " finale closed Sam and Dean 's " dad issues and their Yellow @-@ Eyed Demon issues " while opening up new problems for them to face , while TV Squad said it had a " weight and importance that a good finale should have " . TV Squad further stated that in " Part Two " , the show handled Sam 's coming back well , though it was apparent he would from " Part One " . The actors ' performances were also applauded , with Ona Grauer being deemed " delightful " as the Crossroads Demon , coming across as something of a " supernatural used @-@ car salesman " . Frederic Lehne received praise for his portrayal of the demon Azazel , described as " riveting " , " great " , and " appropriately creepy " . 
 However , Tom Burns of Underground Online had previously criticized Supernatural for ruining a surprise ending by giving it away in the show 's recap . For " Part One " , he noted that its ending was given away in the CW 's preview for the episode which showed Sam stabbed in the back and collapsing into Dean 's arms . Burns liked the episode , but did find some fault with it . He felt that " Part One " focusing on Sam and " Part Two " on Dean was a mistake since " Supernatural 's strongest asset has always been the chemistry between the leads " . In addition , Burns felt the season had set up the question of whether Sam was going to " go evil " , and the finale did not follow through , which Burns described as a " tease " . 
 Jessica Harmon gained a Leo Award nomination for " Best Guest Performance by a Female in a Dramatic Series " for her role as Lily in " Part One " . 
 = St Mary Redcliffe = 
 St. Mary Redcliffe is an Anglican parish church located in the Redcliffe district of Bristol , England . The church is a short walk from Bristol Temple Meads . The church building was constructed from the 12th to the 15th centuries , and it has been a place of Christian worship for over 900 years . The church is renowned for the beauty of its Gothic architecture and is classed as a Grade I listed building by Historic England . It was famously described by Queen Elizabeth I as " the fairest , goodliest , and most famous parish church in England . " 
 Little remains of the earliest churches on the site although a little of the fabric has been dated to the <unk> century . Much of the current building dates from the late 13th and 14th centuries when it was built and decorated by wealthy merchants of the city whose tomb and monuments decorate the church . The spire fell after being struck by lightning in 1446 and was not rebuilt until 1872 . Little of the original stained glass remains following damage in the English Civil War with extensive new glass being added during the Victorian era . The tower contains 15 bells designed for full @-@ circle English @-@ Style change ringing . Other music in the church is provided by several choirs and the Harrison & Harrison organ . 
 = = History = = 
 The first church on this site was built in Saxon times , as the Port of Bristol first began . In medieval times , St. Mary Redcliffe , sitting on a red cliff above the River Avon , was a sign to seafarers , who would pray in it at their departure , and give thanks there upon their return . The church was built and beautified by Bristol 's wealthy merchants , who paid to have masses sung for their souls and many of whom are commemorated there . 
 Parts of the church date from the beginning of the 12th century . Although its plan dates from an earlier period , much of the church as it now stands was built between 1292 and 1370 , with the south aisle and transept in the Decorated Gothic of the 13th century and the greater part of the building in the late 14th century Perpendicular . The patrons included Simon de Burton , Mayor of Bristol , and William I Canynges , merchant , five times Mayor of Bristol and three times MP . In the 15th century Canynges ' grandson , the great merchant William II Canynges , also five times Mayor and three times MP , assumed responsibility for bringing the work of the interior to completion and filling the windows with stained glass . In 1446 much of this work was damaged when the spire was struck by lightning , and fell , causing damage to the interior ; however the angle of the falling masonry and the extent of the damage is unclear . Although the spire was to remain damaged for the next 400 years , Canynges continued in his commitment to restore and beautify the church . He took Holy Orders after the death of his wife , and is buried in the church . Other families associated with St Mary Redcliffe include the Penns , the <unk> , the Jays , the <unk> and the Medes . 
 In 1571 , the school that was to become St Mary Redcliffe and Temple School was formed in a chapel in the churchyard . The church and school have remained closely linked in many aspects of their operations . 
 The 17th century saw the loss of many of the church fittings and much of the stained glass during the Reformation and the English Civil War . During the reign of Queen Anne , and partially funded by her , the interior of St. Mary Redcliffe was refitted in the Baroque style . 
 Thomas Chatterton , whose father was sexton of St Mary Redcliffe , was born in the house next to the church in 1752 . He studied the church records in a room above the south porch , and wrote several works which he attempted to pass as genuine medieval documents . He committed suicide in London at the age of seventeen . In 1795 the church saw the marriages of Samuel Taylor Coleridge to Sarah Fricker and Robert Southey to Sarah 's sister Elizabeth . 
 The upper part of the spire , missing since being struck by lightning in 1446 , was reconstructed in 1872 to a height of 292 ft ( 89 m ) . Funds for the spire rebuilding had been raised by the Canynges Society , the Friends of St Mary Redcliffe , which was formed in 1843 . They raised most of the £ 40 @,@ 000 needed . The 1 tonne ( 0 @.@ 98 long tons ; 1 @.@ 1 short tons ) capstone was laid by the Mayor , Mr William Procter Baker , at the top of the scaffolding . Because of the effect of environmental pollution on the Dundry Stone , further repairs to the spire and other stonework was needed in the 1930s . A mobile telecommunication mast is fitted inside the spire . 
 During the Bristol Blitz in the Second World War a bomb exploded in a nearby street , throwing a rail from the tramway over the houses and into the churchyard of St Mary Redcliffe , where it became embedded in the ground . The rail is left there as a monument . 
 = = Archives = = 
 Parish records for St Mary Redcliffe church , Bristol are held at Bristol Record Office ( Ref . <unk> MR ) ( online catalogue ) including baptism , marriage and burial registers . The archive also includes records of the incumbent , churchwardens , overseers of the poor , parochial church council , chantries , charities , estates , restoration of the church , schools , societies and vestry plus deeds , photographs , maps and plans . Records related to St Mary Redcliffe are also held at Berkeley Castle in the <unk> Room and on microfilm at Gloucestershire Archives . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 St Mary Redcliffe is one of the largest parish churches in England , and according to some sources it is the largest of all . The spire is also the third tallest among parish churches , and it is the tallest building in Bristol . 
 St Mary Redcliffe is cruciform in plan , with a chapel extending to the east of the chancel , and a large 13th @-@ century tower placed asymmetrically to the north of the west front . The tower was added to the building in the 13th century . It has broad angle buttresses and Y tracery to the windows . The bell stage has ogee gables and polygonal corner pinnacles . After the collapse of the original spire in 1446 it remained truncated until the 1870s when George Godwin rebuilt it . The nave , chancel and choir are vaulted with richly decorated with bosses in a variety of styles . The Lady Chapel has a star vault . The transepts has large pointed spandrels and a blind arcade with mullions descending from the clerestory windows . Beneath the Lady Chapel is a small crypt , with a larger one beneath the transept of three by two bays . 
 There is a rectangular 13th century porch on either side of the nave . The north porch has an inner component dating from 1200 , with black Purbeck Marble columns , and an outer hexagonal portion built in 1325 which is ogee @-@ cusped with a Moorish appearance . The outer polygonal part of the north porch was built in the 14th century . It has crocketed gables to the buttresses and is richly decorated with pinnacles and a quatrefoil parapet above a lierne vault . 
 Within the church are an oak chest with caryatids dating from 1593 . The choir stalls date from the 15th century . There are two fonts ; one from the 13th century and the other made of marble by William Paty was made in 1755 . The oak pulpit was built in the 19th century by William Bennett . A wrought @-@ iron gilded chancel screen built by William Edney in 1710 still stands under the tower . 
 On 1 June 2016 Purcell announced they had been awarded the contract to extend St Mary Redcliffe to include visitor amenities , step @-@ free access and a community hub . 
 = = = Monuments and memorials = = = 
 The church is adorned with monuments to individuals from the history of the city , including Sir William Penn ( the father of William Penn , founder of Pennsylvania ) . His helm and half @-@ armour are hung on the wall , together with the tattered banners of the Dutch ships that he captured in battle . The church also displays a rib of a whale that John Cabot brought back from one of his voyages . 
 The tombs of William II Canynges and his grandfather William I Canynges both have effigies on them , as does the tomb of Robert de Berkeley . There are also multiple wall monuments and brasses . 
 = = = Stained glass = = = 
 Little of the early stained glass remains . In the west window of St John 's Chapel , for instance , the medieval glass barely survived the destruction ( said to have been caused by Oliver Cromwell 's men ) . Most of the higher portions went untouched , but others were severely damaged . In some cases the windows were impossible to repair , and clear glass was eventually introduced to replace the missing scenes . The Victorian stained @-@ glass windows were created by some of the finest studios of that period . 
 William Wailes produced a design for the seven @-@ light east window following a competition launched in 1846 ; however , delays in raising the money caused delays in its installation . Controversy over the design meant that it was replaced with the current depiction of the Crucifixion by Clayton and Bell in 1904 . The tree design in the window of the south transept was also by Wailes and was installed in 1854 . In the north transept is a memorial window to Samuel Lucas who died in 1853 , designed and installed by the St Helens Crown Glass Company which later became Pilkington . Another Wailes design depicting the Offering of the Wise Men was installed in the Lady Chapel , alongside one designed by Arthur O 'Connor . The windows in the choir aisles are by Clayton and Bell who also designed the memorial to Edward Colston which is in the north wall of the north transept . 
 The west window was obscured by the organ until the 1860s when it was moved to make way for a depiction of the Annunciation which was designed by John Hardman Powell of Hardman & Co. and funded by Sholto Hare . Attempts to achieve some conformity with the installed work and subsequent designs lead to a further commissions for Clayton and Bell and Hardman & Co. generally as memorials to wealthy local dignitaries who had contributed to the restoration of the church . 
 = = = Hogarth 's triptych = = = 
 Sealing the Tomb , a great altarpiece triptych by William Hogarth , was commissioned in 1756 to fill the east end of the chancel . The churchwardens paid him £ 525 for his paintings of the three scenes depicted ; the Ascension featuring Mary Magdalene , on a central canvas which is 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) by 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) . It is flanked by The Sealing of the Sepulchre and the Three Marys at the Tomb , each of which is 13 feet 10 inches ( 4 @.@ 22 m ) by 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) . They are mounted in gilded frames made by Thomas Paty . This was removed from the church by mid @-@ Victorian <unk> , before being displayed at the Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery ; it is now stored in the redundant church of St Nicholas , Bristol . 
 = = The church bells = = 
 The tower contains a total of 15 bells , one bell dating from as early as 1622 cast by Purdue and two cast by Thomas I Bilbie of the Bilbie family from Chew Stoke in 1763 , the remainder were cast by John Taylor & Co at various dates , 1903 ( 9 bells ) , 1951 ( 1 bell ) , 1969 ( 1 bell ) and 2012 ( 1 bell ) . The larger Bilbie ( 10th ) bell along with the 1622 Purdue ( 11th ) bell are included in the 50cwt ring of 12 bells . 
 The bells are hung in a cast iron and steel H @-@ frame by John Taylor & Co dating from the major overhaul of 1903 . A number of small modifications have taken place when each additional bell was added . The 50cwt tenor bell is the largest bell in a parish church to be hung for full @-@ circle English @-@ Style change ringing and the 7th @-@ largest bell in the world , only surpassed by Liverpool Anglican Cathedral 11th ( <unk> ) , Wells Cathedral tenor ( <unk> ) , York Minster tenor ( <unk> ) , St Paul 's Cathedral tenor , London ( <unk> ) , Exeter Cathedral tenor ( <unk> ) and Liverpool Cathedral tenor ( <unk> ) . A new 8th bell was cast by John Taylor & Co in 2012 for the Queen 's Diamond Jubilee replacing the 1768 Bilbie bell a non @-@ swinging bell with an internal hammer fitted for use as a service bell chimed from within the body of the church . 
 The ring of 12 bells is augmented with two additional semitone bells . A sharp treble bell cast by John Taylor & Co in 1969 is the smallest bell in the tower and a " flat 6th " cast by John Taylor & Co in 1951 and allow different diatonic scales to be rung . All the bells have been tuned on a lathe ; the tenor bell was tuned in 1903 and strikes the note of B ( 492 Hz ) . The St Mary Redcliffe Guild of Change Ringers was founded in 1948 . 
 The clock chime can be heard striking the quarter chimes on the 3rd , 4th , 5th and 8th bells of the ring of 12 with the hours being struck on the largest 50cwt ( 12th ) tenor bell . The clock chime strikes the " Cambridge Chimes " , commonly known as the " Westminster Chimes " , every quarter of an hour daily from 7 a.m. to 11pm . The chimes are disabled outside of these hours . If the bells are in the ' up ' position , the chimes are also disabled ( normally during the day on Sundays ) . The clock was fully converted to electric operation during the 1960s . It is now driven by a Smith 's of Derby synchronous motor . The old pendulum , gravity escapement and weights , etc . , were removed when the clock was automated . What remains of the clock movement and electrified chiming barrel is housed in a large enclosure in the ringing room . The clock face is approximately 3 m in diameter and is on the northern elevation . 
 = = Choir = = 
 The choir have released numerous recordings , as well as touring Europe and North America . 
 = = Organ = = 
 The first pipe organ in the church , built by Harris and Byfield in 1726 , was of three manuals and 26 stops . It was rebuilt in 1829 and again in 1867 on either side of the chancel . In 1912 a four @-@ manual , 71 @-@ stop organ having over 4 @,@ 300 pipes was installed by Harrison & Harrison . Towards the end of his life Arthur Harrison said that he regarded the organ at St Mary Redcliffe as his " finest and most characteristic work " . The organ remains essentially as he designed it in 1911 . 
 Kevin Bowyer recorded Kaikhosru Sorabji 's First Organ Symphony on it in 1988 , for which the organ was an " ideal choice " ; the notes to the recording describe the church as " acoustically ideal , with a reverberation period of 3 ½ seconds " , and notes that the organ has " a <unk> of tone " and " a range of volume from practically inaudible to fiendishly loud " . William McVicker , organist at the Royal Festival Hall , has called the organ " the finest high @-@ Romantic organ ever constructed " . 
 November 2010 saw the first performances on the organ after an 18 @-@ month renovation by its original builders Harrison & Harrison , costing around £ 800 @,@ 000 . The organ had been disassembled and some of it taken away to the builders ' workshop in Durham . The pipes were cleaned and the leather of the bellows was replaced . The manuals were also fitted with an electronic panel for storing combinations of stop settings . 
 = = = Organists , choirmasters and directors of music = = = 
 There is no record of the names of some of the early organists ; however there is a record of several payments to Mr <unk> Rogers for playing the organ in the 1730s . Rogers had a long tenure from 1727 when a new organ was installed until 1772 , when John Allen took over . Cornelius Bryan served as the organist from 1818 until 1840 . He was followed by Edwin Hobhouse <unk> until 1855 and then William Haydn Flood until 1862 . For the next hundred years the post of organist was combined with that of choirmaster and was held by : Joseph William Lawson 1862 – 1906 , Ralph Thompson Morgan 1906 – 1949 , Kenneth Roy Long 1949 – 1952 and Ewart Garth Benson 1953 – 1968 , who continued as the organist until 1987 . 
 From 1967 a choirmaster was appointed . The post was held by : Peter Fowler 1968 , Bryan Anderson 1968 – 1980 and John Edward Marsh 1980 – 1987 . From 1987 the title of the post was Director of Music and organist , with the post being held by : John Edward Marsh 1987 – 1994 , Anthony John Pinel 1994 – 2003 and Andrew William Kirk since 2003 . The assistant organists have been : John Edward Marsh 1976 – 1980 , Colin Hunt 1980 – 1990 , Anthony John Pinel 1990 – 1994 , Graham Alsop 1994 – 2003 and Graham and Claire Alsop from 2003 . 
 = Philadelphia transit strike of 1944 = 
 The Philadelphia transit strike of 1944 was a sickout strike by white transit workers in Philadelphia that lasted from August 1 to August 6 , 1944 . The strike was triggered by the decision of the Philadelphia Transportation Company ( PTC ) , made under prolonged pressure from the federal government in view of significant labor shortages , to allow black employees of the PTC to hold non @-@ menial jobs , such as motormen and conductors , that were previously reserved for white workers only . On August 1 , 1944 the eight black employees being trained as streetcar motormen were to make their first trial run ; that fact was used by the white PTC workers to start a massive sickout strike . 
 The strike paralyzed the public transport system in Philadelphia for several days , bringing the city to a standstill and crippling its war production . Although the Transport Workers Union ( TWU ) was in favor of allowing promotions of black workers to any positions they were qualified for , and opposed the strike , the union was unable to persuade the white PTC employees to return to work . On August 3 , 1944 , under the provisions of the Smith – Connally Act , President Franklin D. Roosevelt authorized the Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson to take control of the Philadelphia Transportation Company , and Major @-@ General Philip Hayes was put in charge of its operations . After several days of unsuccessful negotiations with the strike leaders , Hayes issued an order that the striking workers return to work on August 7 , 1944 , and that those refusing to comply be fired , stripped of their military draft deferment , and denied job availability certificates by the War Manpower Commission for the duration of the war . This ultimatum proved effective and on August 7 the strike ended and the strikers returned to work . The black workers , whose pending promotions to non @-@ menial jobs triggered the strike , were allowed to assume those jobs . 
 During the strike , despite considerable tensions , the city of Philadelphia remained mostly calm and there were no major outbreaks of violence . All of the city 's newspapers editorialized against the strike and the public was , by and large , opposed to the strike as well . Several of the strike leaders , including James McMenamin and Frank Carney , were arrested for violating the anti @-@ strike act . The NAACP played an active role both in pressuring the PTC and the federal government to institute fair hiring practices at the PTC for several years before the strike , and in maintaining the calm during the strike itself . 
 The strike received considerable attention in the national media . The Philadelphia transit strike of 1944 is one of the most high profile instances of the federal government invoking the Smith – Connally Act . The Act had been passed in 1943 over President Roosevelt 's veto . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = PTC and the union = = = 
 Since even before the official entry of the United States into World War II in December 1941 , Philadelphia had been one on the major industrial war production centers in the U.S. By 1944 Philadelphia was regarded as the second largest war production center in the country . During that period the black population of the city grew substantially , and tensions with the predominantly white population began to increase . The Philadelphia Transportation Company ( PTC ) ran the city 's huge public transportation system , including subways , buses and trolleys ; by the time of the strike , it carried over one million people per day . By 1944 , the PTC 's eleven thousand strong workforce included 537 black employees . However , the PTC 's black workers had been restricted to holding menial jobs ; none were allowed to serve as conductors or motormen – positions that were reserved for white employees . As early as August 1941 , black employees started pressuring the PTC for fairer employment practices that would allow upgrading of black workers to the more prestigious jobs hitherto reserved for whites . Their efforts were rebuffed by PTC management , who claimed that the current union contract contained a clause prohibiting any significant change in employment practices and customs without the union 's approval ( although the contract said nothing about race ) . The leader of the Philadelphia Rapid Transit Employees Union ( PRTEU ) , Frank Carney , proved to be equally reticent and claimed that he was not authorized by the union members to consider a request to allow promotions of black employees . 
 = = = Federal involvement = = = 
 The black PTC employees enlisted the help of the NAACP and started lobbying the federal authorities , particularly the Fair Employment Practices Commission ( FEPC ) , to intervene . The Fair Employment Practices Commission , created by an executive order of the President in 1941 , was charged with ensuring non @-@ discrimination employment practices by government contractors . Initially it was a fairly weak agency , but its authority was significantly strengthened in 1943 by a new executive order that required all government contracts to have a non @-@ discrimination clause . As the war progressed , the manpower shortages were getting more severe . In January 1943 the PTC requested 100 white motormen from the United States Employment Service ( USES ) , which was a part of the War Manpower Commission ( WMC ) . The WMC , aware that PTC had a pool of black employees seeking upgrading , asked the PTC to allow hiring of black employees for the vacant motormen positions . The PTC refused , again citing the " customs clause " of its union contract . After a complaint from the NAACP , the matter landed at the FEPC , headed at the time by Malcolm Ross . 
 The FEPC made a series of unsuccessful attempts to convince the PTC management and the union leadership to change their stance and to allow promotions of black employees to non @-@ menial jobs . The PTC eventually conceded that it would be willing to go along with the government 's request and " employ Negroes , provided they are acceptable to fellow @-@ workers " , but the PRTEU leadership , particularly Frank Carney , staunchly resisted . On November 17 , 1943 , the FEPC issued a directive requiring that PTC end its discriminatory employment practices and allow blacks to hold non @-@ menial jobs . The directive also required the PTC to review all job applications from June 1941 and redress earlier employment abuses based on racial discrimination . The union immediately protested and requested a public hearing , which took place on December 8 , 1943 . At the hearing the union tried to make the argument that hiring blacks who had applied for the non @-@ menial positions since June 1941 but were denied would adversely affect the seniority rights of the presently employed white workers . Malcolm Ross rejected that argument , pointing out that the seniority rights only begin when an employee is actually hired for a particular job . On December 29 , 1943 , FEPC issued a second directive , reinforcing the first one . 
 In an attempt to deflect the pressure , Carney and PRTEU contacted Virginia congressman Howard W. Smith , who at the time was the Chair of the House Committee to Investigate Executive Agencies . Smith , known for his segregationist views and eager to embarrass and possibly destroy the FEPC , quickly scheduled a hearing . In the meantime , the union informed the PTC that it refused to comply with the FEPC order , and the PTC management told Ross that , given the union 's position , the PTC would not comply with the FEPC directive either . The hearing in front of Smith 's committee took place on January 11 , 1944 . The hearing was inconclusive , with Ross reiterating the FEPC position , and the union representatives falling back on the " customs clause " and their claims about seniority issues . Several white workers testifying at the hearing predicted that there would be trouble and unrest if promotions of black employees at the PTC were allowed : " We are not going to accept them [ the blacks ] as fellow workers . ... We are not going to work with them . If anybody believe it , let them try it " . A petition , signed by 1776 workers , presented at the hearing , read : " Gentlemen : We , the white employees of the Philadelphia Transportation Co . , refuse to work with Negroes as motormen , conductors , operators and station <unk> " . 
 = = = Inter @-@ union struggle = = = 
 After the January 11 congressional hearing , Ross delayed enforcement of the FEPC directive to await the outcome of the upcoming union elections . The PRTEU contract with the PTC was expiring on February 11 , 1944 and a union election was called for March 14 , 1944 . Apart from PRTEU , which was still staunchly opposed to promotions of black employees , there were two other unions competing for the right to represent PTC workers : the Transport Workers Union ( TWU ) , which was a Congress of Industrial Organizations ( CIO ) affiliate , and the Amalgamated Association of Street and Electric Railway and Motor Coach Employees of America , an American Federation of Labor ( AFL ) affiliate . The TWU said that it would allow promotions of black employees while the Amalgamated Association stayed silent on the matter . The PRTEU leadership tried to campaign on the race issue during the union elections , but the topic was overshadowed by other issues , such as the details of a new contract with the PTC . After a bitter campaign , the TWU won the union elections , receiving more votes than both of the other unions combined . At the time of the elections many white workers perceived the contract issue to be more important , where the TWU was promising more attractive terms , and they did not consider promotions of black employees a realistic possibility . Despite the TWU victory , animosities from white workers towards the black employees remained and were largely unabated . The negotiations between the TWU and the PTC on a new contract dragged on , and in the absence of a contract the company continued to resist implementing the FEPC directives . 
 = = = Immediate run up to the strike = = = 
 In view of growing labor shortages , on July 1 , 1944 the War Manpower Commission made an important decision , ruling that from then on all hiring of male employees in the country was to be done through the United States Employment Service ( USES ) . By that time the USES followed strict anti @-@ discrimination employment practices . The PTC management finally gave in and within a week posted notices about available skilled positions that would be open to all applicants , regardless of race . The company accepted eight black applicants ( three from the USES and five from its own ranks ) to train as streetcar coachmen . Their training was to take place in late July , and they were to start taking an empty streetcar on the lines from August 1 . It was that impending trial run of the streetcars by the eight black trainees that finally triggered the strike . 
 As the news spread , resentment among the white PTC workers began to grow . There were postings on PTC bulletin boards urging non @-@ compliance with the new policy , and a petition was circulated calling for a strike to protest job upgrades of black employees . There were also several meetings called by agitators for the strike to discuss the plan of action . Frank Carney played an active role in these meetings . At the last such meeting , on July 31 , Carney announced that the " D @-@ Day " for white workers had arrived . The TWU and the NAACP representatives warned the PTC about impending trouble , but the company management ignored those warnings , maintaining that there was nothing to fear . 
 = = Events of the strike = = 
 = = = Start of the strike = = = 
 At 4 : 00 a.m. on August 1 , 1944 most trolleys , buses and subways in Philadelphia stopped running . Strike agitators blocked access to PTC <unk> with vehicles and advised the arriving workers of a sickout strike . By noon of August 1 the entire PTC transportation system was paralyzed . James McMenamin , a veteran PTC white motorman , organized a 150 @-@ member strike steering committee and became one of the main leaders of the strike . Frank Carney , the ousted union boss , was another key strike leader . At the end of the day the strikers held a large meeting , attended by more than 3 @,@ 500 employees , outside the PTC carbarn on Luzerne Street . The racial rhetoric was escalating . At the meeting , Frank Carney declared that driving a streetcar was a white man 's job and said : " put the Negroes back where they belong , back on the roadway " . McMenamin declared that " the strike was a strictly black and white issue " . 
 The PTC 's response to the strike was anemic and was interpreted by some contemporary observers and later historians as tacitly supporting the strike . Arthur Mitten , chairman of the company 's Industrial Relations Division , stopped by the Luzerne carbarn and asked the workers to return to work . Subsequently he suggested that WMC temporarily suspend the non @-@ discrimination order , and even brought a pile of freshly printed fliers with a suspension announcement to the WMC offices . However , the WMC officials refused to approve suspension of the FEPC order and Mitten 's suspension fliers were not distributed . On the morning of August 1 , PTC officials immediately shut down the high @-@ speed lines , even before the strike had spread , and instructed the company supervisors to stop selling tickets . The PTC left its carbarns open , which allowed the strikers to use the carbarns as rallying points and coordinating centers for their activities . The company also cancelled the regularly scheduled meeting of its executive committee , where the response to the strike could have been discussed , and refused to join the TWU in a radio broadcast urging the strikers to return to work . 
 The TWU officials denounced the strike and pleaded with the PTC employees to resume work , but without success . The city 's mayor , Bernard Samuel , closed all alcohol @-@ selling establishments in an effort to prevent drunken crowds . Governor Edward Martin followed suit and closed the state liquor stores in the area . The city deployed its full police force , with extra police officers posted at major intersections and other vital points . The NAACP , as well as other black civic groups , worked energetically to maintain calm among the black people of Philadelphia . They distributed more than 100 @,@ 000 posters in black sections of the city , which read " Keep Your Heads and Your Tempers ! ... Treat other people as you would be treated " . 
 The strike continued on August 2 . About 250 TWU members initiated a back @-@ to @-@ work movement but were quickly forced to back down by the strike 's leaders and supporters . At the end of the day , William H. Davis , head of the War Labor Board , wrote to President Roosevelt that the WLB had no jurisdiction over the situation and that it was up to the President to intervene . Representatives of the WMC and the FEPC had reached a similar conclusion about the need for the President 's intervention the day before . 
 = = = Military takeover of the PTC = = = 
 The Roosevelt administration felt that it needed to act quickly to stop the strike . War plants in Philadelphia reported debilitating absentee rates in their workforce due to the strike , which was causing significant damage to the city 's war production . The military reported delays in delivery of fighter planes , radar equipment , flamethrowers and numerous other items . Rear Admiral Milo <unk> complained that the strike so significantly slowed the war production in the area that " it could delay the day of victory " . The strike was also negatively affecting America 's image abroad , particularly in Europe , where the U.S. was fighting Nazi Germany under the slogans of freedom and racial justice . Germany , as well as Japan , were apt to use every instance of racial unrest in the U.S. for propaganda purposes . Official reaction by the White House was somewhat delayed by the President Roosevelt 's absence : at the time he was on a warship on his way from Hawaii to the Aleutian islands . At 7 : 45 p.m. on August 3 , in his twenty @-@ fifth seizure order under the Smith – Connally Act , President Roosevelt authorized the Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson to take control of the Philadelphia Transportation Company . Major @-@ General Philip Hayes , head of the Army 's Third Service Command , was put in charge of the PTC 's operations . 
 Hayes acted quickly to take control of the situation . He posted the President 's order on the PTC carbarns and announced that the Army hoped to avoid using the troops and would try to rely on the local and state police to the extent possible . Hayes also announced that he had no intention of canceling or suspending the WMC hiring order . At 10 : 00 p.m. on August 3 , mistakenly believing that the government had agreed to the strikers ' demands , McMenamin declared the end of the strike . The mistake was quickly discovered , and over 1000 strikers voted in the early hours of August 4 to continue the strike . 
 On August 4 limited transportation service resumed but largely dwindled as the day progressed . Hayes and his staff warned the strikers about the severe penalties provided by the Smith – Connally Act for disruption of the war production : the instigators could be subject to a fine of $ 5 @,@ 000 , one year in prison , or both . This prospect was made more real when the United States Attorney General Francis Biddle started an inquiry into possible violations of federal laws by the strike organizers . On August 4 the strike committee again voted to continue the strike , but , in view of the possible Smith – Connally Act penalties , told the workers to make up their own minds and follow the committee if they chose . The maneuver worked and the strike continued . 
 On Saturday , August 5 , with his patience exhausted , Hayes moved 5 @,@ 000 army troops into the city . He announced that they would operate all idle PTC vehicles and ride as guards on active vehicles . He also made a plea to the strikers to support the war effort : " We cannot kill any Germans or Japs with the troops who drive transit vehicles in Philadelphia " . Later on August 5 , Hayes issued an ultimatum to the strikers , which was posted at all carbarns . The PTC workers were given a deadline of 12 : 01 a.m. on August 7 to resume their work . Those who refused would be fired and refused the WMC job availability certificates for the duration of the war ; those between the ages of 18 and 37 would also lose their military draft deferments . The Justice Department obtained federal warrants for McMenamin , Carney and two other strike leaders ; they were quickly arrested , and McMenamin finally told his followers to return to work on Monday , August 7 , as the government demanded . However , he expressed no regret for his actions before and during the strike . 
 The strike was essentially over . On Sunday , August 6 , the PTC workers signed cards pledging to return to work on Monday . On Monday , August 7 , normal PTC operations resumed and the absentee rate was significantly lower than on a typical work day before the strike . As the strike ended , twenty @-@ four strikers were dropped from the PTC rolls and six were immediately drafted into the military . 
 = = = Actions of the local government = = = 
 The enhanced police presence throughout the city during the strike helped to keep the calm , and the restrained approach of the police officers generally won praise from all sides , even though many of the policemen were seen as sympathetic to the striking white workers . The administration of Philadelphia 's Republican mayor Bernard Samuel was also seen as quietly sympathetic to the strikers . Throughout the strike , Mayor Samuel , who was also a member of the PTC board of directors , avoided any attempts of mediation . He refused to call a meeting of the PTC board of directors or to discuss the crisis with the TWU leaders . The mayor denied police protection to the two TWU officials who were willing to travel throughout the city and advocate an end to the strike . Samuel also refused to grant air time to War Production Board representatives who wanted to make a radio plea to end the strike . On August 2 , the mayor declined , without an explanation , the NAACP request for permission to send two sound @-@ trucks into black neighborhoods to broadcast appeals for calm . The city 's black population felt disappointed and disenchanted with the actions of the local administration . 
 = = = Public reaction = = = 
 Except for a few incidents , the city of Philadelphia remained calm during the strike and , despite considerable fears of race riots , there were no major outbreaks of violence . At the start of the strike there were some incidents of vandalism and store window smashing , and the police arrested about 300 people , most of them blacks . In a nastier episode , three white motorists drove a car through a black neighborhood and , without stopping or warning , shot at a 13 @-@ year @-@ old black boy , who received non @-@ critical injuries . The most visible episode of unrest came when a black war factory worker , whose brother was in the Army , threw a paperweight at the Liberty Bell shouting " Liberty Bell , oh Liberty Bell — liberty , that 's a lot of bunk ! " He was arrested and sent by the magistrate for a psychiatric evaluation . However , by and large , calm prevailed and there were no major outbreaks of violence and no deaths or critical injuries among the public . 
 The public opinion and the media in the city were overwhelmingly against the strikers . All the city 's newspapers ran editorials denouncing the strike , which was perceived as unpatriotic and harmful to the war effort ; a number of editorials also decried the racial nature of the strike . Most of the letters to the editor condemned the strike . The radio stations in the city denounced the strike as well , as did the national press . The New York Times wrote : " It would be hard to find in the whole history of American labor a strike in which so much damage has been done for so base a purpose " . The Wall Street Journal editorial condemned the strike but stated that the powers exercised by the government in ending the strike were only justified by the war time conditions . The Los Angeles Times and the Chicago Tribune , while denouncing the strike , tried to put the blame for causing it on the CIO @-@ affiliated Transport Workers Union , and accused the Roosevelt administration of acting too slowly because of its support for the CIO . 
 While critical of the strike , the public did not necessarily support the cause of equal employment opportunities for black workers . A public opinion poll conducted in Philadelphia during the strike showed that only a slim majority of the city 's population felt that blacks should be hired as motormen and conductors , but that a significant majority opposed having a strike over this issue . 
 The strikers directed much of their anger at the federal government , which they accused of overreaching and of refusing to listen to legitimate complaints by white workers . This view resonated with many white Philadelphians and with conservative politicians nationally . On August 8 , Senator Richard Russell from Georgia , one of the leaders of the conservative coalition in Congress , gave a seventy @-@ minute speech on the Senate floor , blaming the FEPC for causing the strike . Russell finished his speech by calling the FEPC " the most dangerous force in existence in the United States today " . Some of the newspapers in the South also blamed the incident on the Roosevelt administration and even on First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt , with Savannah News claiming that the episode was caused by " Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt 's persistent efforts to force social equality on the American people " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Starting with August 7 , the PTC resumed its normal schedule and there were no further disruptions . The troops remained in Philadelphia for another week and a half and rode as guards on PTC vehicles , but encountered no further problems . Seven of the eight black trainees resumed their training ( one withdrew voluntarily because his duties as Jehovah 's Witness minister conflicted with the PTC work schedule ) . On August 9 , the PTC finally agreed to a favorable contact which had been approved by the TWU in June . On August 17 , Hayes returned full control of the public transportation network to the PTC . Subsequent integration of black employees into the PTC workforce proceeded with no further trouble . By December 1944 the PTC had 18 black streetcar operators . An attractive new union contract helped quell the remaining discontent among the white PTC workers . Within a year , the company had over 900 black employees working in a variety of positions , including as drivers and conductors . 
 The NAACP later blamed the PTC management for intentionally dragging its feet on the contract that the TWU approved in late June . The NAACP claimed that the PTC management had hoped to undermine the TWU 's position with the workers and to possibly oust TWU in favor of the more pliable PRTEU . The PTC was aware that the Smith – Connally Act forbade strikes harming war production and that if , with a contract impasse , TWU itself had initiated a contract strike , the union might have been tossed out . This analysis of the situation was shared later by several historians , particularly by James Wolfinger . Another historian , Alan M. Winkler , also had a largely negative view of the company 's role in the conflict and concluded that PTC management , while not overtly conspiring with the strikers , reacted feebly to the strike and tried to opportunistically exploit the situation and the racist attitudes of many white workers for their own purposes . 
 The leaders of the strike , including McMenamin and Carney , were charged in federal court under the Smith – Connally Act ; some thirty strikers were also indicted later . The federal grand jury was convened on August 9 and heard testimony for two months . However , the grand jury returned inconclusive findings ; their report stated that most of the striking workers knew nothing about the strike at the start , and blamed a few instigators for escalating the situation , but did not detail the instigators ' activities . The report was also critical of the PTC 's response to the strike , characterizing it as inadequate and ineffective . The government dropped its charges against the defendants on March 12 , 1945 , with most of them pleading nolo contendere and receiving a fine of $ 100 each . 
 As labor historian James Wolfinger observed , the strike " demonstrated the profound racial cleavages , that divided the working class , not just in the South but across the nation " . 
 Although brief , the Philadelphia transit strike of 1944 had significant negative impact on the war effort , resulting in a loss of four million work hours in war plants alone . The War Manpower Commission estimated that the Philadelphia strike cost the nation 's war production the equivalent of 267 Flying Fortresses or five destroyers . Malcolm Ross later characterized the strike as " the most expensive racial dispute of World War II " . The strike also exposed the limitations of the FEPC 's power . The FEPC did not possess the final authority to enforce its decisions and only the executive intervention of the President made the resolution of the dispute possible . Nevertheless , the strike demonstrated that a combination of black activism , particularly by the NAACP , together with resolute federal policies , were able to break long standing racial barriers in employment . 
 = Kaivalya Upanishad = 
 The Kaivalya Upanishad ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् य उपनिषत ् ) is an ancient Sanskrit text and one of the minor Upanishads of Hinduism . It is classified as a Shaiva Upanishad , and survives into the modern times in two versions , one attached to the Krishna Yajurveda and other attached to the Atharvaveda . It is , as an Upanishad , a part of the corpus of Vedanta literature collection that present the philosophical concepts of Hinduism . 
 The Upanishad extols Shiva , aloneness and renunciation , describes the inner state of man in his personal spiritual journey detached from the world . The text is notable for presenting Shaivism in Vedanta , discussing Atman ( Soul , Self ) and its relation to Brahman , and Self @-@ knowledge as the path to kaivalya ( liberation ) . 
 The text , states Paul Deussen – a German Indologist and professor of Philosophy , is particularly beautiful in the way it describes the self @-@ realized man who " feels himself only as the one divine essence that lives in all " , who feels identity of his and everyone 's consciousness with God ( Shiva , highest Atman ) , who has found this highest Atman within , in the depths of his heart . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Sanskrit word Kaivalya means " aloneness , isolation " , and refers to someone who has renounced and isolated himself from all attachments to worldly desires . It also refers to " the absoluteness " , states Deussen , the inner conviction of man on a spiritual journey to liberation . 
 The term Upanishad means it is knowledge or " hidden doctrine " text that belongs to the corpus of Vedanta literature collection presenting the philosophical concepts of Hinduism and considered the highest purpose of its scripture , the Vedas . 
 = = Chronology and anthology = = 
 The Kaivalya Upanishad , remarks Deussen , is from the group of five Upanishads which extol and assert god Shiva as a symbolism for Atman ( soul ) . These five Upanishads – <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Kaivalya – are ancient , with <unk> likely the oldest and Kaivalya the relatively later era 1st millennium BCE Upanishad , composed closer to Shvetashvatara Upanishad , Mundaka Upanishad , and Mahanarayana Upanishad . 
 The manuscripts of this minor Upanishad is sometimes attached to the Krishna Yajurveda , or alternatively attached to the Atharvaveda . In the Muktika canon , narrated by Rama to Hanuman , this Shaiva Upanishad is listed 12th in the anthology of 108 Upanishads . The text is also titled as the <unk> . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The Kaivalya Upanishad manuscripts vary , depending on which Veda it is attached to . The one attached to Krishna Yajurveda has 26 verses , while the edition attached to the Atharvaveda has 24 verses with an epilogue . Both convey the same message , but the former is structured as a single chapter , and the latter into two chapters ( 19 verses in first , 5 verses in second ) . The text is structured as verses , set to a poetic Vedic meter ( exactly same number of syllables per verse of the song ) . 
 The Upanishad is presented as a discourse between the Vedic sage Ashvalayana and the god Brahma , wherein the Ashvalayana asks Brahma for Brahma @-@ vidya , that is the knowledge of ultimate reality Brahman . 
 The Upanishad 's structure is notable as it embeds key parts of verses from early Principal Upanishads , thus referencing them and yet building its own message . The fragments of earlier major Upanishads it thus integrates within it , include Mundaka Upanishad and Shvetashvatara Upanishad . 
 The text is also notable for presenting Shaivism with Vedanta terminology , discussing the relationship of Atman ( Soul , Self ) and Brahman ( ultimate Reality ) , and Self @-@ knowledge as the means to Kaivalya ( liberation ) . The text describes the self @-@ realized man as one who " feels himself only as the one divine essence that lives in all " , who feels identity of his and everyone 's consciousness with Shiva ( the highest soul ) , who has found this highest soul within , in the depths of his heart . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = The setting : Ashvalayana and Brahma ( verses 1 @-@ 2 ) = = = 
 The Upanishad opens with sage Ashvalayana meeting Brahma , the creator god in Hindu <unk> . Ashvalayana is a revered Vedic sage , mentioned in the Rigveda , student of the ancient grammarian <unk> , and belonging to the Hindu tradition of forest hermits who wander . Ashvalayana , states the text , asks <unk> ( synonym for Brahma ) for Brahmavidya , which <unk> calls " the highest knowledge , always cultivated by the good " , one that enables to reach the person who is greater than the great . This verse references a fragment from section 3 @.@ 2 of the Mundaka Upanishad . 
 Brahma answers , asserts verse 2 of the Upanishad , " Seek knowledge with <unk> @-@ bhakti @-@ dhyana @-@ <unk> ( faith , devotion , meditation in yoga ) , not ritual works , not wealth , not offsprings " . <unk> and renunciation , states the text , is the path to the life of eternity . 
 = = = Brahma 's answer : Grasp Vedanta doctrine ( verses 3 @-@ 5 ) = = = 
 Beyond heaven , in the heart , that which shines within , states Brahma in verse 3 of the Upanishad , is the destination of those who have understood the meaning of Vedanta doctrine . There , states the text , all the <unk> ( <unk> ) who have reached that wisdom reside , in the state of pure being . The Upanishad says , seclusion is their place , enthroned is their joy , calm is their Yoga . 
 These are the ones , asserts the Upanishad , who revere their teachers ( Guru ) , who live a life of virtuous self @-@ restraint , in their Ashrama ( stage ) of life . These are the ones who meditate , states the text , their focus on their heart , wherein resides the pure one , the <unk> , the bliss . 
 The verse 4 references a fragment each from section 3 @.@ 2 of Mundaka Upanishad , and section 2 @.@ 8 of the Shvetashvatara Upanishad . 
 = = = <unk> on Shiva : He , Brahman , Indra , Vishnu are same ( verses 6 @-@ 9 ) = = = 
 The text then iconographically paints god Shiva , as the one who is the companion of Uma , with three eyes , blue neck , the calm wonderful lord imbued with intelligence and bliss , the source of everything . It is this supreme lord , states the text , one must meditate on , asserts verse 7 . 
 This supreme , states Kaivalya Upanishad , is the eternal , the all @-@ pervading , formless , unmanifest , infinite , inconceivable , one without beginning or middle or end , one which is <unk> ( " consciousness @-@ bliss " ) . He is , states the Upanishad , Brahman , Shiva , Indra , Vishnu , Prana ( life force , breath ) , fire and moon ( time , lunar calendar ) . Eternity is him , states the text , all that originated is him , all that originates is him . Know him , find liberation , there is no other way , states verse 9 . 
 = = = <unk> on Om : the three states of consciousness ( verses 10 @-@ 15 ) = = = 
 The Kaivalya Upanishad asserts that one must see " his Atman ( soul ) in all beings , and all beings in his Atman " to attain salvation , there is no other way . 
 In verse 11 , the text makes a reference to a fragment from section 1 @.@ 14 of the Shvetashvatara Upanishad , to metaphorically describe how to gain this knowledge . Making his own soul as the lower fire stick and Om the upper fire stick , states the Kaivalya Upanishad , one must rub these together , light up the fire of knowledge , and burn the ties to ignorance . 
 A Jiva ( being ) immersed in Maya ( changing reality , illusive world ) craves for worldly greed , performs <unk> ( Sanskrit : <unk> , ritual works ) , enjoys bodily pleasures like women , food , drink and pleasures . This , states the text , gives him satisfaction in his wakeful state , in dream as he sleeps his soul fashions a dream world of joys and nightmares , but this is all deception . True bliss , states the text , comes in the third state of consciousness . It is , states the text , the third state , everything comes to rest , in whole , in peace , in bliss . 
 = = = Shiva , Brahman is within you ( verses 16 @-@ 17 ) = = = 
 The next two verses of the Upanishad states , describes Chester Starr – an American professor of History , the crystallization of ancient Hindu thought . Man has an Atman ( spirit ) identical with the great spirit of the world , repeated in its great Upanishadic saying , " That art thou , " or God is within man . 
 Thou art that 
 The verse 17 of the text repeats , that all three states , experienced when one is awake , when one dreams , when one is in deep dreamless sleep , is illuminated therein . " Know yourself to be that Brahman " , translates Deussen , and experience liberation . 
 = = = The state of liberation ( verses 18 @-@ 24 ) = = = 
 The text , in verses 18 to 24 describes the state of liberated renouncer . The Upanishad states he is blissful , content in all three states of consciousness , feels everything was born in him and abides in him and dissolves in him , that he is Brahman that is in everyone , he is Sadashiva , ancient , diverse , spiritual , with the gift to know eternity . 
 The liberated renouncer , feels he is the knower , the perceiver , the one to learn the Vedas , the one to perfect the Vedas , states verse 22 of the text . He feels his essence is beyond good and bad , beyond body and mind , beyond merit and demerits , beyond what perishes , asserts the text . The liberated man , states the Upanishad , has found the highest Atman in his heart . 
 = = = Epilogue = = = 
 In the end , the glories of reciting the Kaivalya Upanishad are told . Recitation of this Upanishad , asserts the epilogue , frees one of various sins , end the cycle of samsara ( birth @-@ death @-@ rebirth ) , gains Supreme Knowledge and kaivalya . 
 The style of the text 's epilogue , that is the concluding verses , is odd and different from the rest of the text . This structural anomaly , as well as the very different message therein , states Deussen , suggests that the passage on the " study of <unk> and all sorts of promises " may be a later insertion or an accident of extraction from the Vedic text this Upanishad was embedded in . 
 = = Commentaries = = 
 Commentaries on the Kaivalya Upanishad are written by <unk> ( c . 1800 CE ) and Osho ( 1931 – 1990 ) . An incomplete commentary , which includes only the first verse , by Aurobindo was written in 1912 and first published in 1971 . Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan translated this text in 1953 . 
 = James Longstreet = 
 James Longstreet ( January 8 , 1821 – January 2 , 1904 ) was one of the foremost Confederate generals of the American Civil War and the principal subordinate to General Robert E. Lee , who called him his " Old War Horse . " He served under Lee as a corps commander for many of the famous battles fought by the Army of Northern Virginia in the Eastern Theater , but also with Gen. Braxton Bragg in the Army of Tennessee in the Western Theater . Biographer and historian Jeffry D. Wert wrote that " Longstreet ... was the finest corps commander in the Army of Northern Virginia ; in fact , he was arguably the best corps commander in the conflict on either side . " 
 Longstreet 's talents as a general made significant contributions to the Confederate victories at Second Bull Run ( Second Manassas ) , Fredericksburg , and Chickamauga , in both offensive and defensive roles . He also performed strongly during the Seven Days Battles , the Battle of Antietam , and until he was seriously wounded , at the Battle of the Wilderness . His performance in semiautonomous command during the Knoxville Campaign resulted in a Confederate defeat . His most controversial service was at the Battle of Gettysburg , where he openly disagreed with General Lee on the tactics to be employed and reluctantly supervised the disastrous infantry assault known as Pickett 's Charge . 
 He enjoyed a successful post @-@ war career working for the U.S. government as a diplomat , civil servant , and administrator . However , his conversion to the Republican Party and his cooperation with his old friend , President Ulysses S. Grant , as well as critical comments he wrote in his memoirs about General Lee 's wartime performance , made him anathema to many of his former Confederate colleagues . His reputation in the South further suffered when he led African @-@ American militia against the anti @-@ Reconstruction White League at the Battle of Liberty Place in 1874 . Authors of the Lost Cause movement focused on Longstreet 's actions at Gettysburg as a primary reason for the Confederacy 's loss of the war . His reputation in the South was damaged for over a century and has only recently begun a slow reassessment . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 James Longstreet was born on January 8 , 1821 in Edgefield District , South Carolina , an area that is now part of North Augusta , Edgefield County . He was the fifth child and third son of James Longstreet ( 1783 @-@ 1833 ) , of Dutch descent , and Mary Ann Dent ( 1793 @-@ 1855 ) of English descent , originally from New Jersey and Maryland respectively , who owned a cotton plantation close to where the village of Gainesville would be founded in northeastern Georgia . James 's ancestor Dirck <unk> <unk> immigrated to the Dutch colony of New Netherland in 1657 , but the name became Anglicized over the generations . James 's father was impressed by his son 's " <unk> " character on the rural plantation , giving him the nickname Peter , and he was known as Pete or Old Pete for the rest of his life . 
 Longstreet 's father decided on a military career for his son , but felt that the local education available to him would not be adequate preparation . At the age of nine , James was sent to live with his aunt and uncle in Augusta , Georgia . His uncle , Augustus Baldwin Longstreet , was a newspaper editor , educator , and a Methodist minister . James spent eight years on his uncle 's plantation , Westover , just outside the city while he attended the Academy of Richmond County . His father died from a cholera epidemic while visiting Augusta in 1833 ; although James 's mother and the rest of the family moved to Somerville , Alabama , following his father 's death , James remained with uncle Augustus . 
 In 1837 , Augustus attempted to obtain an appointment for James to the United States Military Academy , but the vacancy for his congressional district had already been filled so James was appointed in 1838 by a relative , Reuben Chapman , who represented the First District of Alabama ( where Mary Longstreet lived ) . James was a poor student academically and a disciplinary problem at West Point , ranking 54th out of 56 cadets when he graduated in 1842 . He was popular with his classmates , however , and befriended a number of men who would become prominent during the Civil War , including George Henry Thomas , William S. Rosecrans ( his West Point roommate ) , John Pope , D.H. Hill , Lafayette McLaws , George Pickett , and Ulysses S. Grant of the class of 1843 . Longstreet was commissioned a brevet second lieutenant in the 4th U.S. Infantry . Longstreet spent his first two years of service at Jefferson Barracks , Missouri , where he was soon joined by his friend , Lieutenant Ulysses Grant . 
 Soon after , Longstreet met his future first wife Maria Louisa Garland , called Louise by her family . She was the daughter of Longstreet 's regimental commander , Lt. Col. John Garland . They married in March 1848 , after the Mexican @-@ American War . Although their marriage would last for over 40 years and produce 10 children , Longstreet never mentioned Louise in his memoirs and most anecdotes about their relationship came to historians through the writings of his second wife , Helen <unk> Longstreet . 
 At about the same time as Longstreet began courting Garland , Grant became acquainted with and courted Longstreet 's fourth cousin , Julia Dent , and the couple eventually married . Historians agree that Longstreet attended the Grant wedding on August 22 , 1848 in St. Louis , but his role at the ceremony remains unclear . Grant biographer Jean Edward Smith asserted that Longstreet served as Grant 's best man at the wedding . John Y. Simon , editor of Julia Grant 's memoirs , concluded that Longstreet " may have been a <unk> , " and Longstreet biographer Donald Brigman Sanger called the role of best man " uncertain " while noting that neither Grant nor Longstreet mentioned any such role in either of their memoirs . 
 = = Mexican @-@ American War = = 
 Longstreet served with distinction in the Mexican @-@ American War with the 8th U.S. Infantry . Early in the war , he served as a lieutenant in Zachary Taylor 's army at the 1846 Battle of Monterrey . He received brevet promotions to captain for Contreras and Churubusco and to major for Molino del Rey . In the Battle of Chapultepec on September 12 , 1847 , he was wounded in the thigh while charging up the hill with his regimental colors ; falling , he handed the flag to his friend , Lt. George E. Pickett , who was able to reach the summit . 
 Longstreet was a veteran member of the Aztec Club of 1847 . The Aztec Club was a military society for officers who had served in the Mexican War . Many distinguished officers , both Union and Confederate , who served the American Civil War were members of the Aztec Club . 
 After the war and his recovery from the Chapultepec wound , Longstreet and his new wife served on frontier duty in Texas , primarily at Fort Martin Scott near Fredericksburg and Fort Bliss in El Paso . He performed scouting missions and also served as major and paymaster for the 8th Infantry from July 1858 . Author Kevin Phillips claims that during this period Longstreet was involved in a plot to draw the Mexican state of Chihuahua into the Union as a slave state . 
 Longstreet was not enthusiastic about secession from the Union , but he had learned from his uncle Augustus about the doctrine of states ' rights early in his life and had seen his uncle 's passion for it . Although he was born in South Carolina and reared in Georgia , he offered his services to the state of Alabama , which had appointed him to West Point and where his mother still lived . Furthermore , he was the senior West Point graduate from that state , which implied a commensurate rank in the state 's forces would be available . He resigned from the U.S. Army in June 1861 to cast his lot with the Confederacy in the Civil War . 
 = = American Civil War = = 
 = = = First Bull Run and the Peninsula = = = 
 Longstreet arrived in Richmond , Virginia with a commission as a lieutenant colonel in the Confederate States Army . He met with Confederate President Jefferson Davis at the executive mansion on June 22 , 1861 , where he was informed that he had been appointed a brigadier general with date of rank on June 17 , a commission he accepted on June 25 . He was ordered to report to Brig. Gen. P.G.T. Beauregard at Manassas , where he was given command of a brigade of three Virginia regiments — the 1st , 11th , and 17th Virginia Infantry regiments . 
 Longstreet assembled his staff and trained his brigade incessantly . They saw their first action at Blackburn 's Ford on July 18 , resisting a Union Army reconnaissance in force that preceded the First Battle of Bull Run ( First Manassas ) . When the main attack came at the opposite end of the line on July 21 , the brigade played a relatively minor role , although it endured artillery fire for nine hours . Longstreet was infuriated that his commanders would not allow a vigorous pursuit of the defeated Union Army . His trusted staff officer , Moxley Sorrel , recorded that he was " in a fine rage . He dashed his hat furiously to the ground , stamped , and bitter words escaped him . " He quoted Longstreet as saying , " Retreat ! Hell , the Federal army has broken to pieces . " On October 7 , Longstreet was promoted to major general and assumed command of a division in the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia — four infantry brigades and Hampton 's Legion . 
 Tragedy struck the Longstreet family in January 1862 . A scarlet fever epidemic in Richmond claimed the lives of his one @-@ year @-@ old daughter Mary Anne , his four @-@ year @-@ old son James , and eleven @-@ year @-@ old Augustus ( " Gus " ) , all within a week . His 13 @-@ year @-@ old son Garland almost succumbed . The losses were devastating for Longstreet and he became withdrawn , both personally and socially . In 1861 his headquarters were noted for parties , drinking , and poker games . After he returned from the funeral the headquarters social life became more somber , he rarely drank , and he became a devout Episcopalian . 
 Longstreet turned in a mixed performance in the Peninsula Campaign that spring . He executed well as a rear guard commander at Yorktown and Williamsburg , delaying the advance of Union Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan 's army toward Richmond . During the Battle of Seven Pines he marched his men in the wrong direction down the wrong road , causing congestion and confusion with other Confederate units , diluting the effect of the massive Confederate counterattack against McClellan . His report unfairly blamed fellow Maj. Gen. Benjamin Huger for the mishaps . Gen. Joseph E. Johnston was wounded during the battle and he was replaced in command of the Army of Northern Virginia by Gen. Robert E. Lee . 
 During the Seven Days Battles that followed in late June , Longstreet had operational command of nearly half of Lee 's army — 15 brigades — as it drove McClellan back down the Peninsula . Longstreet performed aggressively and well in his new , larger command , particularly at Gaines ' Mill and Glendale . Lee 's army in general suffered from weak performances by Longstreet 's peers , including , uncharacteristically , Maj. Gen. Thomas J. " Stonewall " Jackson , and was unable to destroy the Union Army . Moxley Sorrel wrote of Longstreet 's confidence and calmness in battle : " He was like a rock in steadiness when sometimes in battle the world seemed flying to pieces . " Gen. Lee said , " Longstreet was the staff in my right hand . " He had been established as Lee 's principal lieutenant . 
 = = = Second Bull Run , Maryland , and Fredericksburg = = = 
 The military reputations of Lee 's corps commanders are often characterized as Stonewall Jackson representing the audacious , offensive component of Lee 's army , whereas Longstreet more typically advocated and executed defensive strategies and tactics . Jackson has been described as the army 's hammer , Longstreet its anvil . In the Northern Virginia Campaign of August 1862 , this stereotype did not hold true . Longstreet commanded the Right Wing ( later to become known as the First Corps ) and Jackson commanded the Left Wing . Jackson started the campaign under Lee 's orders with a sweeping flanking maneuver that placed his corps into the rear of Union Maj. Gen. John Pope 's Army of Virginia , but he then took up a defensive position and effectively invited Pope to assault him . On August 28 and August 29 , the start of the Second Battle of Bull Run ( Second Manassas ) , Pope pounded Jackson as Longstreet and the remainder of the army marched north to reach the battlefield . Postwar criticism of Longstreet claimed that he marched his men too slowly , leaving Jackson to bear the brunt of the fighting for two days , but they covered roughly 30 miles ( 50 km ) in a little over 24 hours and Gen. Lee did not attempt to get his army concentrated any faster . 
 When Longstreet 's men arrived around midday on August 29 , Lee planned a flanking attack on the Union Army , which was concentrating its attention on Jackson . Longstreet demurred against three suggestions from Lee , urging him to attack , recommending instead that a reconnaissance in force be conducted to survey the ground in front of him . By 6 : 30 p.m. the division of Brig. Gen. John Bell Hood moved forward against the troops of the Union V Corps , and Longstreet withdrew them at 8 : 30 p.m. , having a better idea of the terrain and enemy soldiers in the area . On the next day , Longstreet 's preparations paid dividends , as his artillery was a major factor in helping Jackson resist the V Corps attack , and he capitalized on Federal confusion by launching an attack of his own , anticipating an order from Lee that had not yet arrived . Despite the smashing victory that followed , Longstreet 's performance at the battle was criticized by postbellum advocates of the Lost Cause , claiming that his slowness , reluctance to attack , and disobedience to Gen. Lee were a harbinger of his controversial performance to come on July 2 , 1863 , at the Battle of Gettysburg . Lee 's biographer , Douglas Southall Freeman , wrote : " The seeds of much of the disaster at Gettysburg were sown in that instant — when Lee yielded to Longstreet and Longstreet discovered that he would . " 
 Despite this criticism , the following day , August 30 , was one of Longstreet 's finest performances of the war . Pope came to believe that Jackson was starting to retreat and Longstreet took advantage of this by launching a massive assault on the Union army 's left flank with over 25 @,@ 000 men . For over four hours they " pounded like a giant hammer " with Longstreet actively directing artillery fire and sending brigades into the fray . Longstreet and Lee were together during the assault and both of them came under Union artillery fire . Although the Union troops put up a furious defense , Pope 's army was forced to retreat in a manner similar to the embarrassing Union defeat at First Bull Run ( First Manassas ) , fought on roughly the same battleground . Longstreet gave all of the credit for the victory to Lee , describing the campaign as " clever and brilliant . " It established a strategic model he believed to be ideal — the use of defensive tactics within a strategic offensive . 
 Longstreet 's actions in the final two major Confederate defensive battles of 1862 would be the proving grounds for his development of dominant defensive tactics . In the Maryland Campaign of September , at the Battle of Antietam , Longstreet held his part of the Confederate defensive line against Union forces twice as numerous . After the delaying action Longstreet 's corps fought at South Mountain , he retired to Sharpsburg to join Stonewall Jackson , and prepared to fight a defensive battle . Using terrain to his advantage , Longstreet validated his idea that the tactical defense was now vastly superior to the exposed offense . While the offense dominated in the time of Napoleon , the technological advancements had overturned this . Lt. Col. Harold M. Knudsen claims that Longstreet was one of the few Civil War officers truly aware of this . At the end of that bloodiest day of the Civil War , Lee greeted his subordinate by saying , " Ah ! Here is Longstreet ; here 's my old war @-@ horse ! " On October 9 , a few weeks after Antietam , Longstreet was promoted to lieutenant general . Lee arranged for Longstreet 's promotion to be dated one day earlier than Jackson 's , making the Old War @-@ Horse the senior lieutenant general in the entire Confederate Army . In an army reorganization in November , Longstreet 's command , now designated the First Corps , consisted of five divisions , approximately 41 @,@ 000 men . 
 In December , Longstreet 's First Corps played the decisive role in the Battle of Fredericksburg . Since Lee moved Longstreet to Fredericksburg early , it allowed Longstreet to take the time to dig in portions of his line , methodically site artillery , and set up a kill zone over the axis of advance he thought the Union attack would come . Remembering the slaughter at Antietam , in which the Confederates did not construct defensive works , Longstreet ordered trenches , abatis , and <unk> to be constructed , which would set a precedent for future defensive battles of the Army of Northern Virginia . Additionally , Longstreet positioned his men behind a stone wall at the foot of Marye 's Heights and held off fourteen assaults by Union forces . The Union army suffered almost 8 @,@ 000 casualties at Marye 's Heights , Longstreet only 1 @,@ 000 . His great defensive success was not based entirely on the advantage of terrain ; this time it was the combination of terrain , defensive works , and a centralized coordination of artillery . 
 = = = Suffolk = = = 
 In the early spring of 1863 , Longstreet suggested to Lee that his corps be detached from the Army of Northern Virginia and sent to reinforce the Army of Tennessee , where Gen. Braxton Bragg was being challenged in Middle Tennessee by Union Maj. Gen. William S. Rosecrans , Longstreet 's roommate at West Point . It is possible that Longstreet believed that an independent command in the West offered better opportunities for advancement than a corps under Lee 's shadow . Lee did detach two divisions from the First Corps , but ordered them to Richmond , not Tennessee . Seaborne movements of the Union IX Corps potentially threatened vital ports on the mid @-@ Atlantic coast . The division of George Pickett started for the capital in mid @-@ February , was followed by John Hood 's , and then Longstreet himself was told to take command of the detached divisions and the Departments of North Carolina and Southern Virginia . 
 In April , Longstreet besieged Union forces in the city of Suffolk , Virginia , a minor operation , but one that was very important to Lee 's army , still stationed in war @-@ devastated central Virginia . It enabled Confederate authorities to collect huge amounts of provisions that had been under Union control . However , this operation caused Longstreet and 15 @,@ 000 men of the First Corps to be absent from the Battle of Chancellorsville in May . Despite Lee 's brilliant victory at Chancellorsville , Longstreet once again came under criticism , claiming that he could have marched his men back from Suffolk in time to join Lee . However , from the Chancellorsville and Suffolk scenario , Longstreet brought forward the beginnings of a new Confederate strategy . These events proved that the Army of Northern Virginia could manage with fewer troops for periods of time , and units could be shifted to create windows of opportunity in other theaters . Longstreet advocated the first strategic movements to utilize rail , interior lines , and create temporary numerical advantages in Mississippi or Tennessee prior to Gettysburg . 
 = = = Gettysburg = = = 
 = = = = Campaign plans = = = = 
 Following Chancellorsville and the death of Stonewall Jackson , Longstreet and Lee met in mid @-@ May to discuss options for the army 's summer campaign . Longstreet advocated , once again , detachment of all or part of his corps to be sent to Tennessee . The justification for this course of action was becoming more urgent as Union Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant was advancing on the critical Confederate stronghold on the Mississippi River , Vicksburg . Longstreet argued that a reinforced army under Bragg could defeat Rosecrans and drive toward the Ohio River , which would compel Grant to break his hold on Vicksburg . Lee was opposed to a division of his army and instead advocated a large @-@ scale offensive or raid into Pennsylvania . In his memoirs , Longstreet described his reaction to Lee 's proposal : 
 His plan or wishes announced , it became useless and improper to offer suggestions leading to a different course . All that I could ask was that the policy of the campaign should be one of defensive tactics ; that we should work so as to force the enemy to attack us , in such good position as we might find in our own country , so well adapted to that purpose — which might assure us of a grand triumph . To this he readily assented as an important and material adjunct to his general plan . 
 This was written years after the campaign and is affected by hindsight , both of the results of the battle and of the postbellum criticism of the Lost Cause authors . In letters of the time Longstreet made no reference to such a bargain with Lee . In April 1868 , Lee said that he " had never made any such promise , and had never thought of doing any such thing . " Yet in his post @-@ battle report , Lee wrote , " It had not been intended to fight a general battle at such a distance from our base , unless attacked by the enemy . " 
 The Army of Northern Virginia was reorganized after Jackson 's death . Two division commanders , Richard S. Ewell and A.P. Hill , were promoted to lieutenant general and assumed command of the Second and the newly created Third Corps respectively . Longstreet 's First Corps gave up the division of Maj. Gen. Richard H. Anderson during the reorganization , leaving him with the divisions of Lafayette McLaws , George Pickett , and John Hood . 
 In the initial movements of the campaign , Longstreet 's corps followed Ewell 's through the Shenandoah Valley . A spy he had hired , Henry Thomas Harrison who went by just " Harrison " , was instrumental in warning the Confederates that the Union Army of the Potomac was advancing north to meet them more quickly than they had anticipated , prompting Lee to order the immediate concentration of his army near Gettysburg , Pennsylvania . 
 = = = = Battle of Gettysburg = = = = 
 Longstreet 's actions at the Battle of Gettysburg would be the centerpiece of the controversy that surrounded him for over a century . Ahead of his troops he arrived on the battlefield late in the afternoon of the first day , July 1 , 1863 . By then , two Union corps had been driven by Ewell and Hill back through the town into defensive positions on Cemetery Hill . Lee had not intended to fight before his army was fully concentrated , but chance and questionable decisions by A.P. Hill brought on the battle , <unk> on the first day- was an impressive Confederate victory . Meeting with Lee , Longstreet was concerned about the strength of the Union defensive position and advocated a strategic movement around the left flank of the enemy , to " secure good ground between him and his capital , " which would presumably compel the Union commander , Maj. Gen. George G. Meade , to attack defensive positions erected by the Confederates . Instead , Lee exclaimed , " If the enemy is there tomorrow , we must attack him . " 
 Lee 's plan for July 2 called for Longstreet to attack the Union 's left flank , which would be followed up by Hill 's attack on Cemetery Ridge near the center , while Ewell demonstrated on the Union right . Longstreet was not ready to attack as early as Lee envisioned . He received permission from Lee to wait for Brig. Gen. Evander M. Law 's brigade ( Hood 's division ) to reach the field before he advanced any of his other brigades ; Law marched his men quickly , but did not arrive until noon . Three of Longstreet 's brigades were still in march column , and some distance from the attack positions they would need to reach . All of Longstreet 's divisions were forced to take a long detour while approaching the enemy position , misled by inadequate reconnaissance that failed to identify a completely concealed route . 
 Postbellum criticism of Longstreet claims that he was ordered by Lee to attack in the early morning and that his delays were a significant contributor to the loss of the battle . However , Lee agreed to the delays for arriving troops and did not issue his formal order for the attack until 11 a.m. Although Longstreet 's motivations have long been clouded by the vitriol of the Lost Cause partisans ( see Legacy ) , many historians agree that Longstreet did not aggressively pursue Lee 's orders to launch an attack as early as possible . Biographer Jeffry D. Wert wrote , " Longstreet deserves censure for his performance on the morning of July 2 . He allowed his disagreement with Lee 's decision to affect his conduct . Once the commanding general determined to assail the enemy , duty required Longstreet to comply with the vigor and thoroughness that had previously characterized his generalship . The concern for detail , the regard for timely information , and the need for preparation were absent . " Military historians Herman Hattaway and Archer Jones wrote , " <unk> about the attack , Longstreet consumed so much time in properly assembling and aligning the corps that the assault did not commence until 4 p.m. During all the time that passed , Meade continued to move in troops to bring about a more and more complete concentration ; by 6 p.m. he had achieved numerical superiority and had his left well covered . " Campaign historian Edwin Coddington presents a lengthy description of the approach march , which he described as " a comedy of errors such as one might expect of inexperienced commanders and raw militia , but not of Lee 's " War Horse " and his veteran troops . " He called the episode " a dark moment in Longstreet 's career as a general . " Gettysburg historian Harry Pfanz concluded that " Longstreet 's angry dissidence had resulted in further wasted time and delay . " David L. Callihan , in a 2002 reassessment of Longstreet 's legacy , wrote , " It is appalling that a field commander of Longstreet 's experience and caliber would so cavalierly and ineptly march and prepare his men for battle . " An alternative view has been expressed by John Lott , " General Longstreet did all that could be expected on the 2nd day and any allegations of failing to exercise his duty by ordering a morning assault can be repudiated . It would have been impossible to have commenced an attack much earlier than it occurred , and it is doubtful that the Confederacy could have placed the attack in any more secure hands than General Longstreet . " But Longstreet 's command of the operation had for the most part , been reasonable , since taking the route he should have would have alerted the whole Union army of his assault . Regardless of the controversy regarding the preparations , however , once the assault began around 4 p.m. , Longstreet pressed the assault by McLaws and Hood ( Pickett 's division had not yet arrived ) competently against fierce Union resistance , but it was largely unsuccessful , with significant casualties . 
 On the night of July 2 , Longstreet did not follow his usual custom of meeting Gen. Lee at his headquarters to discuss the day 's battle , claiming that he was too fatigued to make the ride . Instead , he spent part of the night planning for a movement around Big Round Top that would allow him to attack the enemy 's flank and rear . ( Longstreet , despite his use of scouting parties , was apparently unaware that a considerable body of troops from the Union VI Corps was in position to block this move . ) Shortly after issuing orders for the attack , around sunrise , Longstreet was joined at his headquarters by Lee , who was dismayed at this turn of events . The commanding general had intended for Longstreet to attack the Union left early in the morning in a manner similar to the attack of July 2 , using Pickett 's newly arrived division , in concert with a resumed attack by Ewell on Culp 's Hill . What Lee found was that no one had ordered Pickett 's division forward from its bivouac in the rear and that Longstreet had been planning an independent operation without consulting with him . Lee wrote with some restraint in his after @-@ battle report that Longstreet 's " dispositions were not completed as early as was expected . " 
 Since his plans for an early @-@ morning coordinated attack were now infeasible , Lee instead ordered Longstreet to coordinate a massive assault on the center of the Union line , employing the division of George Pickett and brigades from A.P. Hill 's corps . Longstreet knew this assault had little chance of success . The Union Army was in a position reminiscent of the one Longstreet had taken at Fredericksburg to defeat Burnside 's assault . The Confederates would have to cover almost a mile of open ground and spend time negotiating sturdy fences under fire . The lessons of Fredericksburg and Malvern Hill were lost to Lee on this day . In his memoirs , Longstreet claims to have told Lee that he believed the attack on the Union center would fail : 
 General , I have been a soldier all my life . I have been with soldiers engaged in fights by couples , by squads , companies , regiments , divisions , and armies , and should know , as well as any one , what soldiers can do . It is my opinion that no fifteen thousand men ever arranged for battle can take that position . 
 During the artillery barrage that preceded the infantry assault , Longstreet began to agonize over an assault that was going to cost dearly . He attempted to pass the responsibility for launching Pickett 's division to his artillery chief , Col. Edward Porter Alexander . When the time came to actually order Pickett forward , Longstreet could only nod in assent , unable to verbalize the order . The assault , known as Pickett 's Charge , suffered the heavy casualties that Longstreet anticipated . It was the decisive point in the Confederate loss at Gettysburg and Lee ordered a retreat back to Virginia the following day . 
 Criticism of Longstreet after the war was based not only on his reputed conduct at the Battle of Gettysburg , but also intemperate remarks he made about Robert E. Lee and his strategies , such as : 
 That he [ Lee ] was excited and off his balance was evident on the afternoon of the 1st , and he labored under that oppression until enough blood was shed to appease him . 
 For years after the war Longstreet 's reputation suffered and was blamed for the failed attack even though Lee ordered the advance after Longstreet 's repeated advice to cancel the attack . 
 = = = Tennessee = = = 
 In mid @-@ August 1863 , Longstreet resumed his attempts to be transferred to the Western Theater . He wrote a private letter to Secretary of War James Seddon , requesting that he be transferred to serve under his old friend Gen. Joseph E. Johnston . He followed this up in conversations with his congressional ally , Senator Louis <unk> , who had long considered Longstreet a suitable replacement for Braxton Bragg . Since Bragg 's army was under increasing pressure from Rosecrans outside of Chattanooga , Lee and President Davis agreed to the request on September 5 . In one of the most daunting logistical efforts of the Confederacy , Longstreet , with the divisions of Lafayette McLaws and John Hood , a brigade from George Pickett 's division , and Porter Alexander 's 26 @-@ gun artillery battalion , traveled over 16 railroads on a 775 @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 247 km ) route through the Carolinas to reach Bragg in northern Georgia . Although the entire operation would take over three weeks , Longstreet and lead elements of his corps arrived on September 17 . 
 The First Corps veterans arrived in the early stages of the Battle of Chickamauga . Bragg had already begun an unsuccessful attempt to interpose his army between Rosecrans and Chattanooga before the arrival of Longstreet 's corps . When the two met at Bragg 's headquarters in the evening , Bragg placed Longstreet in command of the Left Wing of his army ; Lt. Gen. Leonidas Polk commanded the Right . On September 20 , 1863 , Longstreet lined up eight brigades in a deep column against a narrow front , an attack very similar to future German tank tactics in World War II . By chance , a mistaken order from General Rosecrans caused a gap to appear in the Union line and Longstreet took additional advantage of it to increase his chances of success . The organization of the attack was well suited to the terrain and would have penetrated the Union line regardless . The Union right collapsed and Rosecrans fled the field , as units began to retreat in panic . Maj. Gen. George H. Thomas managed to rally the retreating units and solidify a defensive position on Snodgrass Hill . He held that position against repeated afternoon attacks by Longstreet , who was not adequately supported by the Confederate right wing . Once night fell , the battle was over , and Thomas was able to extricate the units under his control to Chattanooga . Bragg 's failure to coordinate the right wing and cavalry to further envelop Thomas prevented a total rout of the Union Army . Bragg also neglected to pursue the retreating Federals aggressively , resulting in the futile siege of Chattanooga . Nevertheless , Chickamauga was the greatest Confederate victory in the Western Theater and Longstreet deserved a good portion of the credit . 
 Longstreet soon clashed with Bragg and became leader of the group of senior commanders of the army who conspired to have him removed . Bragg 's subordinates had long been dissatisfied with his leadership and abrasive personality ; the arrival of Longstreet ( the senior lieutenant general in the Army ) and his officers , added credibility to the earlier claims , and was a catalyst toward action . Longstreet wrote to Seddon , " I am convinced that nothing but the hand of God can save us or help us as long as we have our present commander . " The situation became so grave that President Davis was forced to intercede in person . What followed was one of the most bizarre scenes of the war , with Bragg sitting red faced as a procession of his commanders condemned him . Longstreet stated that Bragg " was incompetent to manage an army or put men into a fight " and that he " knew nothing of the business . " Davis sided with Bragg and did nothing to resolve the conflict . 
 Bragg retained his position , relieving or reassigning the generals who had testified against him , and retaliated against Longstreet by reducing his command to only those units that he brought with him from Virginia . Despite the dysfunctional command climate under Bragg , and the lack of support from the War Department and President Davis concerning Bragg 's removal , Longstreet did the best he could to continue to seek options in the Chattanooga Campaign . While Bragg resigned himself and his army to the siege of the Union Army of the Cumberland in Chattanooga , Longstreet devised a strategy to prevent reinforcement and a lifting of the siege by Grant . He knew this Union reaction was underway , and that the nearest railhead was Bridgeport , Alabama , where portions of two Union corps would soon arrive . After sending his artillery commander , Porter Alexander , to reconnoiter the Union @-@ occupied town , he devised a plan to shift most of the Army of Tennessee away from the siege , setting up logistical support in Rome , Georgia , to go after Bridgeport to take the railhead , possibly catching Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker and arriving Union troops from the Eastern Theater in a disadvantageous position . The plan was well received and approved by President Davis , but it was disapproved by Bragg , who objected to the significant logistical challenges it posed . Longstreet accepted Bragg 's arguments and agreed to a plan in which he and his men were dispatched to East Tennessee to deal with an advance by Union Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside . Longstreet was selected for this assignment partially due to enmity on Bragg 's part , but also because the War Department intended for Longstreet 's men to return to Lee 's army and this movement was in that direction . 
 Longstreet was criticized for the slow pace of his advance toward Knoxville in November and some of his troops began using the nickname " Peter the Slow " to describe him . Burnside evaded him at the Battle of Campbell 's Station and settled into entrenchments around the city , which Longstreet besieged unsuccessfully . The Battle of Fort Sanders failed to bring a Confederate breakthrough . When Bragg was defeated by Grant at Chattanooga on November 25 , Longstreet was ordered to join forces with the Army of Tennessee in northern Georgia . He demurred and began to move back to Virginia , soon pursued by Maj. Gen. William T. Sherman in early December . The armies went into winter quarters and the First Corps rejoined the Army of Northern Virginia in the spring . The only real effect of the minor campaign was to deprive Bragg of troops he sorely needed in Chattanooga . Longstreet 's second independent command ( after Suffolk ) was a failure and his self @-@ confidence was damaged . He reacted to the failure of the campaign by blaming others , as he had done at Seven Pines . He relieved Lafayette McLaws from command and requested the court martial of Brig. Gens . Jerome B. Robertson and Evander M. Law . He also submitted a letter of resignation to Adjutant General Samuel Cooper on December 30 , 1863 , but his request to be relieved was denied . 
 His corps suffered through a severe winter in Eastern Tennessee with inadequate shelter and provisions . Writing to Georgia 's Quartermaster General , Ira Roe Foster on January 24 , 1864 , Longstreet noted : " There are five Georgia Brigades in this Army – Wofford 's , G.T. Anderson 's , Bryan 's , Benning 's , and Crews ' cavalry brigade . They are all alike in excessive need of shoes , clothing of all kinds , and blankets . All that you can send will be thankfully received . " Meanwhile , Longstreet again developed strategic plans . He called for an offensive through Tennessee into Kentucky in which his command would be bolstered by P.G.T. Beauregard and 20 @,@ 000 men . Although he had the concurrence of Gen. Lee , Longstreet was unable to convince President Davis or his newly appointed military advisor , Braxton Bragg . 
 = = = Wilderness to Appomattox = = = 
 Finding out that his old friend Ulysses Grant was in command of the Union Army , he told his fellow officers that " he will fight us every day and every hour until the end of the war . " Longstreet helped save the Confederate Army from defeat in his first battle back with Lee 's army , the Battle of the Wilderness in May 1864 , in which he launched a powerful flanking attack along the Orange Plank Road against the Union II Corps and nearly drove it from the field . Once again he developed innovative tactics to deal with difficult terrain , ordering the advance of six brigades by heavy skirmish lines , which allowed his men to deliver a continuous fire into the enemy , while proving to be elusive targets themselves . Wilderness historian Edward Steere attributed much of the success of the Army to " the display of tactical genius by Longstreet which more than redressed his disparity in numerical strength . " After the war , the Union II Corps commander that day , Maj. Gen. Winfield S. Hancock , said to Longstreet of this flanking maneuver : " You rolled me up like a wet blanket . " 
 Longstreet was wounded during the assault — accidentally shot by his own men only about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) away from the place where Jackson suffered the same fate a year earlier . A bullet passed through his shoulder , severing nerves , and tearing a gash in his throat . Micah Jenkins , who was riding with Longstreet , was also shot and died from his wounds . The momentum of the attack subsided . As he was taken from the field , Longstreet urged Lee to press the attack . Instead , Lee delayed further movement until units could be realigned , giving the Union defenders adequate time to reorganize . The subsequent attack was a failure . E.P. Alexander called the removal of Longstreet the critical juncture of the battle : " I have always believed that , but for Longstreet 's fall , the panic which was fairly underway in Hancock 's [ II ] Corps would have been extended & have resulted in Grant 's being forced to retreat back across the Rapidan . " 
 Longstreet missed the rest of the 1864 spring and summer campaign , where Lee sorely missed his skill in handling the army . He was treated in Lynchburg , Virginia , and recuperated in Augusta , Georgia , with his niece , Emma Eve Longstreet Sibley , the daughter of his brother Gilbert . While in Augusta , he participated in the funeral service for Lt. Gen. Leonidas Polk at Saint Paul 's Church , joining the Bishops of Mississippi and Arkansas in casting earth onto the coffin . He rejoined Lee in October 1864 , with his right arm paralyzed and in a sling , initially unable to ride a horse . He had taught himself to write with his left hand ; by periodically pulling on his arm , as advised by doctors , he was able to regain use of his right hand in later years . For the remainder of the Siege of Petersburg he commanded the defenses in front of the capital of Richmond , including all forces north of the James River and Pickett 's Division at Bermuda Hundred . He retreated with Lee in the Appomattox Campaign , commanding both the First and Third Corps , following the death of A.P. Hill on April 2 . As Lee considered surrender , Longstreet advised him of his belief that Grant would treat them fairly , but as Lee rode toward Appomattox Court House on April 9 , 1865 , Longstreet said , " General , if he does not give us good terms , come back and let us fight it out . " 
 = = Post @-@ bellum life = = 
 After the war , Longstreet and his family settled in New Orleans , a location popular with a number of former Confederate generals . He entered into a cotton brokerage partnership there and also became the president of the newly created Great Southern and Western Fire , Marine and Accident Insurance Company . He actively sought the presidency of the Mobile and Ohio Railroad but was unsuccessful , and also failed in an attempt to get investors for a proposed railroad from New Orleans to Monterrey , Mexico . ( In 1870 , he was named president of the newly organized New Orleans and Northeastern Railroad . ) He applied for a pardon from President Andrew Johnson , endorsed by his old friend Ulysses S. Grant . Johnson refused , however , telling Longstreet in a meeting : " There are three persons of the South who can never receive amnesty : Mr. Davis , General Lee , and yourself . You have given the Union cause too much trouble . " Regardless of such opposition the United States Congress restored his rights of citizenship in June 1868 . 
 Longstreet was the only senior Confederate officer to join the Republican Party during Reconstruction . He endorsed Grant for president in 1868 , attended his inauguration ceremonies , and six days later received an appointment as surveyor of customs in New Orleans . For these acts he lost favor with many white Southerners . His old friend Harvey Hill wrote to a newspaper : " Our scalawag is the local leper of the community . " Unlike Northerners who moved South and were sometimes referred to as " Carpetbaggers , " Hill wrote , Longstreet " is a native , which is so much the worse . " The Republican governor of Louisiana appointed Longstreet the adjutant general of the state militia and by 1872 he became a major general in command of all militia and state police forces within New Orleans . During protests of election irregularities in 1874 , referred to as the Battle of Liberty Place , an armed force of 8 @,@ 400 White League members advanced on the State House . Longstreet commanded a force of 3 @,@ 600 Metropolitan Police , city policemen , and African @-@ American militia troops , armed with two Gatling guns and a battery of artillery . He rode to meet the protesters but was pulled from his horse , shot by a spent bullet , and taken prisoner . The White League charged , causing many of Longstreet 's men to flee or surrender . There were casualties of 38 killed and 79 wounded . Federal troops were required to restore order . Longstreet 's use of black troops during the disturbances increased the denunciations by anti @-@ Reconstructionists . 
 In 1875 the Longstreet family left New Orleans with concerns over health and safety , returning to Gainesville , Georgia . By this time Louise had given birth to ten children , five of whom lived to adulthood . He applied for various jobs through the Rutherford B. Hayes administration and was briefly considered for Secretary of the Navy . He served briefly as deputy collector of internal revenue and as postmaster of Gainesville . In 1880 Hayes appointed Longstreet as his ambassador to the Ottoman Empire , and later he served from 1897 to 1904 , under Presidents William McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt , as U.S. Commissioner of Railroads , succeeding Wade Hampton III . 
 On one of his frequent return trips to New Orleans on business , Longstreet converted to Catholicism in 1877 and was a devout believer until his death . He served as a U.S. Marshal from 1881 to 1884 , but the return of a Democratic administration ended his political careers and he went into <unk> on a 65 @-@ acre ( 26 ha ) farm near Gainesville , where he raised turkeys and planted orchards and vineyards on terraced ground that his neighbors referred to jokingly as " Gettysburg . " A devastating fire on April 9 , 1889 ( the 24th anniversary of Lee 's surrender at Appomattox ) destroyed his house and many of his personal possessions , including his personal Civil War documents and memorabilia . That December Louise Longstreet died . He remarried in 1897 , in a ceremony at the governor 's mansion in Atlanta , to Helen <unk> , age 34 . Although Longstreet 's children reacted poorly to the marriage , Helen became a devoted wife and avid supporter of his legacy after his death . She outlived him by 58 years , dying in 1962 . 
 After Louise 's death , and after bearing criticism of his war record from other Confederates for decades , Longstreet refuted most of their arguments in his memoirs entitled From Manassas to Appomattox , a labor of five years that was published in 1896 . His final years were marked by poor health and partial deafness . In 1902 he suffered from severe rheumatism and was unable to stand for more than a few minutes at a time . His weight diminished from 200 to 135 pounds by January 1903 . Cancer developed in his right eye , and in December he had X @-@ ray therapy in Chicago to treat it . He contracted pneumonia and died in Gainesville , six days before his 83rd birthday . Longstreet 's remains are buried in Alta Vista Cemetery . He outlived most of his detractors , and was one of only a few general officers from the Civil War to live into the 20th century . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Criticism from authors in the Lost Cause movement attacked Longstreet 's war career for many years after his death . Knudsen maintains that because Longstreet became a " reconstructed rebel " , embraced equal rights for blacks , unification of the nation , and reconstruction , he became the target of those who wanted to maintain racist policies and otherwise could not accept the verdict of the battlefield . The attacks formally began on January 19 , 1872 , the anniversary of Robert E. Lee 's birth , and less than two years after Lee 's death . Jubal Early , in a speech at Washington College , exonerated Lee of his failure at Gettysburg and falsely accused Longstreet of attacking late on the second day and of being responsible for the debacle on the third . The following year William N. Pendleton , Lee 's artillery chief , claimed in the same venue that Longstreet disobeyed an explicit order to attack at sunrise on July 2 . Both of these allegations were fabrications ; however , Longstreet failed to challenge these lies publicly until 1875 . The delay was damaging to his reputation , as the Lost Cause mythology had taken hold in common opinion by this time . In the 20th century Douglas Southall Freeman kept criticism of Longstreet foremost in Civil War scholarship in his biography of Lee . Clifford <unk> , a Virginia newspaperman and novelist , was noted for his severe criticism of Longstreet in the 1950s and 1960s . 
 After Longstreet 's death , his second wife Helen privately published Lee and Longstreet at High Tide in his defense , in which she stated " the South was seditiously taught to believe that the Federal Victory was wholly the fortuitous outcome of the culpable disobedience of General Longstreet . " 
 The publication of Michael Shaara 's novel The Killer Angels in 1974 , based in part on Longstreet 's memoirs , followed by its 1993 film adaptation , Gettysburg , have been credited with helping to restore Longstreet 's reputation as a general and to dramatically raise his public visibility . The 1982 work by Thomas L. Connolly and Barbara L. Bellows , God and General Longstreet , provided a " further upgrading of Longstreet through an attack on Lee , the Lost Cause , and the Virginia revisionists . " 
 Jeffry D. Wert wrote that " Longstreet ... was the finest corps commander in the Army of Northern Virginia ; in fact , he was arguably the best corps commander in the conflict on either side . " Richard L. <unk> wrote " Even Longstreet 's most virulent critics have conceded that he put together the best staff employed by any commander , and that his de facto chief of staff , Lieutenant Colonel G. Moxley Sorrel , was the best staff officer in the Confederacy . " <unk> cited the effective way in which Longstreet delegated responsibilities for control of battlefield movements to his staff and how they were able to communicate with him more effectively during battles than the staffs of other Confederate generals during the war . 
 = = = In memoriam = = = 
 Longstreet is remembered through numerous places that bear his name in and around Gainesville , Georgia , including Longstreet Bridge , a portion of U.S. Route 129 that crosses the Chattahoochee River ( later dammed to form Lake Sidney Lanier ) , and the local Longstreet Chapter of the United Daughters of the Confederacy . 
 In 1998 , one of the last monuments erected at Gettysburg National Military Park was dedicated as a belated tribute to Longstreet , an equestrian statue by sculptor Gary Casteel . He is shown riding on a depiction of his favorite horse , Hero , at ground level in a grove of trees in Pitzer Woods — unlike most generals , who are elevated on tall bases overlooking the battlefield . 
 The Longstreet Society is an organization and museum in Gainesville , dedicated to the celebration and study of his life and career . The General Longstreet Recognition Project is an educational project of the Agribusiness Council Heritage Preservation Committee aimed at broadening public awareness of Longstreet 's military and public service . 
 Longstreet 's Billet , the house in Russellville , Tennessee , that Longstreet occupied during the winter of 1863 – 64 , has been converted into The Longstreet Museum , open to the public . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Longstreet plays a prominent role in Michael Shaara 's Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning 1974 novel The Killer Angels . He is portrayed in the 1993 film Gettysburg ( based on the The Killer Angels ) by Tom Berenger , and in the prequel , Gods and Generals ( 2003 ) , by Bruce Boxleitner . He was portrayed by Brian Amidei onstage in the world premiere of The Killer Angels at the Lifeline Theatre in Chicago . 
 Longstreet is a character in a number of prominent alternate history novels : Robert <unk> 's Gray Victory ( 1988 ) , Robert Conroy 's 1901 ( 1995 ) , and Harry Turtledove 's Southern Victory Series : Volume 1 : How Few Remain ( 1997 ) . 
 Longstreet appears as a character in Row After Row , a full length one act play by American playwright , Jessica Dickey . The action of the play takes place in the evening after a re @-@ enactment of Gettysburg . One re @-@ enactor , Cal , plays Longstreet in the battle . In parts of the play , the action moves to the moments leading up to Pickett 's Charge . The play ends with tormented Longstreet addressing the future as he wonders if we will ever form a " more perfect union . " 
 = Linois 's expedition to the Indian Ocean = 
 Linois 's expedition to the Indian Ocean was a commerce raiding operation launched by the French Navy during the Napoleonic Wars . Contre @-@ Admiral Charles @-@ Alexandre Durand Linois was ordered to the Indian Ocean in his flagship Marengo in March 1803 accompanied by a squadron of three frigates , shortly before the end of the Peace of Amiens . When war between Britain and France broke out in September 1803 , Marengo was at Pondicherry with the frigates , but escaped a British squadron sent to intercept it and reached Isle de France ( now Mauritius ) . The large distances between naval bases in the Indian Ocean and the limited resources available to the British commanders in the region made it difficult to concentrate sufficient forces to combat a squadron of this size , and Linois was subsequently able to sustain his campaign for three years . From Isle de France , Linois and his frigates began a series of attacks on British commerce across the Eastern Indian Ocean , specifically targeting the large convoys of East Indiamen that were vital to the maintenance of trade within the British Empire and to the British economy . Although he had a number of successes against individual merchant ships and the small British trading post of Bencoolen , the first military test of Linois squadron came at the Battle of Pulo Aura on 15 February 1804 . Linois attacked the undefended British China Fleet , consisting of 16 valuable East Indiamen and 14 other vessels , but failed to press his military superiority and withdrew without capturing a single ship . 
 In September 1804 , Linois attacked a small British convoy at Vizagapatam in the Bay of Bengal and captured one ship , but was again driven off by inferior British forces . The damage Marengo suffered on the return to Isle de France was so severe that she had to be overhauled at Grand Port , and after subsequent cruises in the Red Sea and in the central Indian Ocean , where Linois was again driven away from a large British convoy by inferior British forces , he attempted to return to Europe via the Cape of Good Hope . On the return journey , Linois 's ships sailed into the cruising ground of a British squadron participating in the Atlantic campaign of 1806 and was captured by overwhelming forces at the Action of 13 March 1806 , almost exactly three years after leaving France . Linois 's activities in the Indian Ocean had caused panic and disruption across the region , but the actual damage inflicted on British shipping was negligible and his cruise known more for its failures than its successes . In France , Napoleon was furious and refused to exchange Linois for captured British officers for eight years , leaving him and his crew as prisoners of war until 1814 . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the early nineteenth century the Indian Ocean was a vital conduit of British trade , connecting Britain with its colonies and trading posts in the Far East . Convoys of merchant ships , including the large East Indiamen , sailed from ports in China , South East Asia and the new colony of Botany Bay in Australia , as well as Portuguese colonies in the Pacific Ocean . Entering the Indian Ocean , they joined the large convoys of ships from British India that carried millions of pounds of trade goods to Britain every year . Together these ships crossed the Indian Ocean and rounded the Cape of Good Hope , sailing north until eventually reaching European waters . Docking at one of the principal British ports , the ships unloaded their goods and took on cargo for the return journey . This often consisted of military reinforcements for the Army of the Honourable East India Company ( HEIC ) , whose holdings in India were constantly expanding at the expense of neighbouring states . 
 During the French Revolutionary Wars ( 1793 – 1801 ) , French frigates and privateers operated from the French Indian Ocean colonies of Isle de France and Réunion against British trade routes . Although protected by Royal Navy and the fleet of the HEIC , there were a number of losses among individually sailing ships , particularly the " country ships " : smaller and weaker local vessels less able to defend themselves than the large East Indiamen . Many of these losses were inflicted by privateers , in particular the ships of Robert Surcouf , who captured the East Indiaman Kent in 1800 and retired on the profits . However , these losses formed only a tiny percentage of the British merchant ships crossing the Indian Ocean : the trade convoys continued uninterrupted throughout the conflict . In 1801 the short @-@ lived Peace of Amiens brought an end to the wars , allowing France to reinforce their colonies in the Indian Ocean , including the Indian port @-@ city of Pondicherry on the Bay of Bengal . 
 Another feature of the French Revolutionary Wars was the effect of British blockade on French movements . The Royal Navy maintained an active close blockade of all major French ports during the conflict , which resulted in every French ship that left port facing attack from squadrons and individual ships patrolling the French and allied coasts . The losses the French Navy suffered as a result of this strategy were high , and the blockade was so effective that even movement between ports along the French coasts was restricted . In the Indian Ocean however the huge distances between the French bases on Réunion and Isle de France and the British bases in India meant that close blockade was an ineffective strategy : the scale of the forces required to maintain an effective constant blockade of both islands , as well as the Dutch ports at the Cape of Good Hope and in the Dutch East Indies were too large to be worth their deployment to such a distant part of the world . As a result , the French raiders operating from the Indian Ocean bases were able to travel with more freedom and less risk of interception than those in the Atlantic or Mediterranean . 
 During 1802 , tensions rose again between Britain and France , the latter country now under the rule of First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte . Aware that a return to war was almost inevitable , Napoleon ordered the French Navy to prepare a force for extended service in the Indian Ocean , a force that would be capable of inflicting significant losses on the British trade from the region . The flagship of the squadron was to be the fast ship of the line Marengo , a 74 @-@ gun vessel commanded by Contre @-@ Admiral Charles @-@ Alexandre Léon Durand Linois . Linois was a highly experienced officer who had been engaged with the British on a number of occasions during the French Revolutionary Wars : in May 1794 , he was captured when his frigate Atalante was run down in the mid @-@ Atlantic by HMS Swiftsure . Rapidly exchanged , his next ship Formidable was captured after a fierce defence at the Battle of Groix , and the following year he was captured again in his new frigate Unité and subsequently participated in the disastrous Expédition d 'Irlande in the ship of the line Nestor after a third prisoner exchange . His most important battle was in July 1801 , when he commanded the French squadron during their victory at the First Battle of Algeciras , where HMS Hannibal was captured . He was also in partial command at the defeat in the Second Battle of Algeciras four days later , but the action enhanced his reputation within the French Navy as a successful commander . Marengo was accompanied by the frigates Atalante , Sémillante and Belle Poule and the transports Côte d 'Or and Marie Françoise . Ostensibly this squadron was despatched to the Indian Ocean to take possession of Pondicherry and install a new governor in the French Indian Ocean colonies , General Charles Decaen . The convoy carried 1 @,@ 350 soldiers and a significant quantity of supplies for both the four @-@ month journey to India and the anticipated extended operations that were to follow it . 
 = = Movements in 1803 = = 
 Linois 's squadron departed Brest on 6 March 1803 . The four @-@ month journey to Pondicherry was interrupted by a fierce storm on 28 April , which caused Belle Poule to separate from the squadron and shelter in Madagascar for several days . The transports Côte d 'Or and Marie Françoise were also detached in the high winds , and made their way separately to the destination . The bad weather delayed the arrival of Linois 's main squadron , and thus Belle Poule arrived in India first , on 16 June . Napoleon believed , and had assured Linois , that war with Britain was not likely until September , but relations broke down faster than expected and Britain began mobilising on 16 May , issuing a formal declaration of war two days later . As news could only travel at the same speed as a fast ship , it had not arrived in the Indian Ocean by the time of Belle Poule 's arrival , although it was expected at any moment . Colonel Louis <unk> , who had sailed on the frigate , called on the British officials then operating the factories in Pondicherry to turn them over to the French as stipulated in the Treaty of Amiens , but was refused . The factory owners were under orders from Governor @-@ General Lord Wellesley , in turn under orders from Lord Hawkesbury , to deny the French access to Pondicherry 's commercial assets . The French position was further weakened when a large British squadron , consisting of the ships of the line HMS Tremendous , HMS Trident and HMS Lancaster , the fourth @-@ rate HMS Centurion and the frigates HMS Sheerness , HMS Concorde , HMS Dedaigneuse and HMS Fox anchored at Cuddalore , 20 miles ( 32 km ) to the south of Pondicherry . This squadron had been sent from Bombay under Rear @-@ Admiral Peter Rainier to watch French movements . On 5 July , Rainier had received word from Bombay , via Madras , that war was imminent although not yet declared , and had moved his ships to an anchorage within sight of Pondicherry in anticipation of the outbreak of war . 
 Linois arrived at Pondicherry on 11 July to find Rainier 's ships anchored nearby and most of the city 's financial institutions still in British hands . Trident and the brig HMS Victor were anchored in Pondicherry roads , although on Linois 's arrival they sailed to join Rainier 's squadron . The following day , Linois sent Captain Joseph @-@ Marie Vrignaud and his own nephew on board Rainier 's flagship with an invitation to breakfast the following morning , which was accepted . At 10 : 00 , the transport Marie François arrived in Pondicherry , having been separated in the storm , and she was followed at 18 : 00 by the brig Bélier . Bélier had been sent out from Brest on 16 March carrying , among other papers , copies of a speech made before the British Parliament by King George III that threatened conflict and orders from Napoleon to immediately sail for Isle de France in anticipation of the declaration of war . Linois was instructed to deliver Decaen to the island , and prepare his ships on the Indian Ocean island for a lengthy raiding operation against British commerce in the region . When dawn rose on 13 July , Rainier embarked on the 16 @-@ gun brig HMS Rattlesnake for his breakfast appointment , only to discover that Linois 's ships had slipped away in the night . 
 Linois had escaped so swiftly that his anchors and boats had been left in the bay , where he had abandoned them rather than draw attention to his movements by drawing them in . He had also just missed the transport Côte d 'Or with its 326 soldiers , which arrived on the evening of 13 July and was swiftly surrounded by Centurion and Concorde . <unk> most of his squadron to Madras , Rainier waited off Pondicherry for further French movements and on 15 July spotted Belle Poule just off the coast . Linois had detached the frigate to investigate the anchorage at Madras , but she had been intercepted and followed by the frigate HMS Terpsichore , whose insistent shadowing had forced Captain Alain @-@ Adélaïde @-@ Marie Bruilhac to return to Pondicherry . Belle Poule and Côte d 'Or exchange signals during the morning , and at 11 : 00 the transport suddenly raised sails and departed the anchorage , Terpsichore pursuing closely . Early on 16 July , Terpsichore overtook the transport and fired several shots across her bow , forcing her captain to surrender . Bruilhac had used the distraction to sail Belle Poule to Isle de France without pursuit . Côte d 'Or was returned to Pondicherry and , since there was no news of war from Europe , released on 24 July on condition that she only sail to Isle de France and no other destination . Dedaigneuse was detached to ensure that the transport followed these conditions and Rainier returned to Madras , joined by Dedaigneuse the following day once the transport 's course was ensured . Rainier immediately ordered his ships to take on military supplies in preparation for military operations , although news of the declaration of war , made on 18 May , did not reach him until 13 September . 
 By the time Rainier learned of the outbreak of war , Linois was already at Isle de France , where his ships had arrived without incident on 16 August . Decaen was installed as governor and some of the troops disembarked to reinforce the garrison , although Linois retained the rest on board his squadron . On the journey to India , Linois and Decaen had fallen out , and the effects of their distaste for one another would be a repeated feature of the following campaign . Britain 's declaration of war reached Isle de France at the end of August aboard the corvette Berceau , which Linois added to his squadron . By 8 October his preparations were complete , and the French admiral issued his orders for his squadron to sail . Atalante was detached to raid shipping in the area of Muscat , an important Portuguese trading post . The rest of the squadron , except the troopships , was to sail with Linois to Réunion ( soon to be renamed Île Bonaparte ) , where the garrison was reinforced . It then sailed eastwards to the Dutch East Indies , diverting to raid British shipping lanes , where many merchant ships were still unaware of the outbreak of war . Linois 's first combat cruise was successful , and he captured a number of undefended prizes from the country ships encountered en route to the East Indies . In early December , shortly before he reached Batavia on Java , Linois stopped at the minor British trading town of Bencoolen . The local maritime pilot believed the squadron to be British and brought them into the harbour , anchoring them just outside the range of the port 's defensive battery but within range of the small merchant ships clustered in the bay . These merchant ships recognised the French warships and fled , pursued closely by Berceau and Sémillante . Six were scuttled by their crews at <unk> 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the south and two more burnt by French landing parties after grounding . The French also destroyed three large warehouses containing cargoes of spices , rice and opium and captured three ships , losing two men killed when a cannon shot from the shore struck Sémillante . On 10 December the squadron arrived at Batavia for the winter , disembarking the remaining soldiers to augment the Dutch garrison . 
 = = Pulo Aura = = 
 On 28 December 1803 , carrying provisions for six months cruising , Linois 's squadron left Batavia . Sailing northwards into the South China Sea , Linois sought to intercept the HEIC China Fleet , a large convoy of East Indiamen carrying trade goods worth £ 8 million ( the equivalent of £ 635 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) from Canton to Britain . The annual convoy sailed through the South China Sea and the Straits of Malacca , gathering ships from other destinations en route and usually under the protection of an escort formed from Royal Navy ships of the line . However , the 1804 fleet had no escort : the outbreak of war had delayed the despatch of the vessels from Rainier 's squadron . Thus as the convoy approached the Straits of Malacca it consisted of 16 East Indiamen , 11 country ships and two other vessels guarded by only one small HEIC armed brig , Ganges . On 14 February , close to the island of Pulo Aura , the commodore of the convoy , Nathaniel Dance , was notified that sails were sighted approaching from the south @-@ west . Suspicious , Dance sent a number of the East Indiamen to investigate , and rapidly discovered that the strange ships were the French squadron under Linois . Dance knew that his convoy would be unable to resist the French in combat and instead decided to bluff the French by pretending that a number of his large East Indiamen were disguised ships of the line . 
 Dance formed his ships into a line of battle and ordered three or four of them to raise blue ensigns and the others red , giving the impression of a heavy escort by implying that the ships with blue ensigns were warships . This ruse provoked a cautious response from Linois , who ordered his squadron to shadow the convoy without closing with them . During the night , Dance held position and Linois remained at a distance , unsure of the strength of the British convoy . At 09 : 00 , Dance reformed his force into sailing formation to put distance between the two forces and Linois took the opportunity to attack , threatening to cut off the rearmost British ships . Dance tacked and his lead vessels came to the support of the rear , engaging Marengo at long range . Unnerved by the sudden British manoeuvere , Linois turned and retreated , convinced that the convoy was defended by an overwhelming force . Continuing the illusion that he was supported by warships , Dance ordered his ships to pursue Linois over the next two hours , eventually reforming and reaching the Straits of Malacca safely . There they were met several days later by two ships of the line sent from India . 
 The engagement was an embarrassment for Linois , who insisted that the convoy was defended by up to eight ships of the line and maintained that his actions had saved his squadron from certain destruction . His version of events was widely ridiculed by both his own officers and the authorities in Britain and France , who criticised his timidity and his failure to press the attack when such a valuable prize was within his reach . Dance by contrast was lauded for his defence and rewarded with a knighthood and large financial gifts , including £ 50 @,@ 000 divided among the officers and men of the convoy . The engagement prompted a furious Napoleon to write to the Minister of Marine Denis Decrès : 
 All the enterprises at sea which have been undertaken since I became the head of the Government have missed fire because my admirals see double and have discovered , I know not how or where , that war can be made without running risks . . . Tell Linois that he has shown want of courage of mind , that kind of courage which I consider the highest quality in a leader . 
 = = Operations in the Indian Ocean = = 
 Arriving at Batavia in the aftermath of the engagement , Linois was the subject of criticism from the Dutch governors for his failure to defeat the China convoy . They also refused his requests to make use of the Dutch squadron stationed in port for future operations . Rejoined by Atalante , Linois sold two captured country ships and resupplied his squadron , before sailing for Isle de France , Marengo arriving on 2 April . During the return journey , Linois had detached his frigates and they captured a number of valuable merchant ships sailing independently before joining the admiral at Port Louis , which Decaen had renamed Port Napoleon . On his arrival , Linois was questioned by Decaen about the engagement with the China Fleet and when Decaen found his answers unsatisfactory the governor wrote a scathing letter to Napoleon , which he despatched to France on Berceau . Linois remained at Isle de France for the next two and a half months , eventually departing with Marengo , Atalante and Sémillante in late June , while Belle Poule was detached to cruise independently . 
 = = = Second cruise of Linois = = = 
 Linois initially sailed for Madagascar , seeking to prey on British trade rounding the Cape of Good Hope . Bad weather forced him to shelter in Saint Augustin for much of the next month , taking on fresh provisions before departing to the Ceylon coast . There he captured a number of valuable prizes , including two rice ships which were sent to Isle de France to provide a ready store of food for the squadron . Linois 's force gradually moved northwards into the Bay of Bengal and in late August passed Madras , remaining 60 nautical miles ( 110 km ) off the coast to avoid an unequal encounter with Rainier 's squadron . He investigated the harbours at Masulipatam and <unk> , making a number of small captures and subsequently cruising along Coastal Andhra in search of valuable convoys . Prisoners from one of the ships taken off Masulipatam on 14 September informed him that a valuable British convoy was anchored in the harbour at Vizagapatam , consisting of the frigate HMS Wilhelmina and two East Indiamen . 
 Arriving off Vizagapatam early on 15 September 1804 , Linois discovered that Rainier , concerned by French depredations off the Indian coast , had substituted <unk> for the larger and heavier HMS Centurion , a 50 @-@ gun fourth rate . Also anchored in the harbour roads were the small East Indiamen Barnaby and Princess Charlotte . Centurion 's captain , James Lind , was ashore and command rested with Lieutenant James Robert Phillips , who was suspicious of the new arrivals and fired on them as they came within range . Raising French flags , Linois 's frigates closed on the anchored ships , coming under fire from a gun battery on shore . Marengo remained beyond the sandbanks that marked the harbour entrance but still within long range of Centurion , unwilling to risk grounding his flagship in the shallow waters . Phillips issued urgent orders for the Indiamen to provide assistance , but was ignored : Barnaby drifted ashore and was wrecked when her captain cut her anchor cables while Princess Charlotte refused to participate in the engagement at all , remaining at anchor without making use of her 30 cannon . The French ships temporarily withdrew for repairs at 10 : 45 , but Centurion was even more severely damaged , drifting beyond the support of the shore batteries as the French returned to the attack at 11 : 15 . With the harbour exposed , Princess Charlotte surrendered to Sémillante as Atalante and Marengo continued to engage the British ship . By 13 : 15 , with Centurion badly damaged and the prize secure , Linois decided to withdraw , easily outdistancing the limping British pursuit . Linois subsequently came under criticism for his failure to annihilate the British warship , Napoleon later commenting that " France cared for honour , not for a few pieces of wood . " 
 With Marengo damaged and Rainier actively hunting for his squadron , Linois withdrew from the Bay of Bengal and returned to Isle de France . Rainier knew that his chances of discovering Linois in the open Indian Ocean were insignificant , and instead decided to keep watch for him off his principal base at Port Napoleon . A squadron was detached to the port , but Linois 's scouts discovered the blockade before he arrived and he was able to safely reach Grand Port instead on 31 October . Entering over the reefs that protected the anchorage , Marengo 's deeper keel scraped on the coral . The ship 's hull was badly damaged and her rudder torn off , requiring extensive repairs . Linois was later joined by Captain Bruilhac in Belle Poule , who had captured a valuable merchant ship on his individual cruise in the Bay of Bengal . 
 With his flagship severely damaged , Linois began an extensive series of repairs to Marengo , which was overhauled and beached to have her bottom and rudder replaced . The repairs lasted until May 1805 , and the expense of feeding and accommodating the hundreds of sailors from the squadron placed a significant strain on Decaen 's resources , despite the captured food supplies sent in by Linois during 1804 . To alleviate the pressure , Linois ordered Captain Gaudin @-@ Beauchène in Atalante to cruise independently off the trade routes that passed the Cape of Good Hope and on 6 March detached Sémillante from the squadron entirely , sending Captain Léonard @-@ Bernard Motard on a mission to the Philippines . He was then ordered to sail on across the Pacific to Mexico , to liaise with the Spanish officials there before returning to Europe around Cape Horn . Motard 's mission to the Americas was brought to an end on 2 August 1805 , when he encountered HMS Phaeton and HMS Harrier under Captain John Wood in the San Bernardino Strait , after resupplying for the Pacific voyage at San Jacinto . In a sharp engagement the British ships inflicted severe damage to Sémillante before being driven off by a Spanish fort overlooking the strait . The damage was so severe that Motard abandoned the plans to sail for Mexico , returning to the Indian Ocean and continuing to operate from Isle de France against British trade routes until 1808 . 
 = = = Third cruise of Linois = = = 
 Departing Isle de France for the third and final time on 22 May 1805 , Linois initially sailed northwest to the mouth of the Red Sea . Finding few targets , he turned eastwards and by July was again raiding shipping off the coast of Ceylon , accompanied by Belle Poule . There on 11 July he discovered his richest prize yet , the <unk> ton ( bm ) East Indiaman Brunswick . Linois discovered Brunswick , under the command of Captain James Ludovic Grant , and the 935 @-@ ton ( bm ) country ship Sarah , under Captain M 'Intosh . With the French advancing rapidly on the heavily laden merchant ships , Grant ordered Sarah to separate and attempt to shelter on the Ceylon coast . Linois detached Belle Poule to chase Sarah . M 'Intosh ran Sarah onto the beach to avoid capture , the crew scrambling ashore as Sarah broke up in the heavy surf . Brunswick was slower than Sarah , and although Grant opened fire on Marengo the engagement was brief , Brunswick rapidly surrendering to the larger French vessel . Grant was taken aboard Marengo and observed the French ship at close quarters , developing a negative opinion of Linois and his crew : 
 She sails uncommonly fast : but her ship 's company , though strong in number , there being 800 men now on board , does not possess 100 effective seamen . . . There does not appear to be the least order or discipline amongst their people ; all are equal , and each man seems equally conscious of their own superiority ; and such is the sad state and condition of the Marengo that I may with safety affirm , she floats upon the sea as a hulk of insubordination , filthiness and folly . 
 In early 1805 , Rainier had been replaced in command at Madras by Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Edward Pellew , a more aggressive officer with a reputation of success against the French Navy . Learning of Linois 's reappearance off Ceylon , Pellew immediately despatched a squadron in search of him . Linois discovered the impending arrival of Pellew 's ships from captured prisoners and departed westwards , successfully avoiding an encounter with the British force . After again cruising off the entrance to the Red Sea without success , Linois sailed southwards to intersect the trade routes between the Cape of Good Hope and Madras . During the journey , his squadron were caught in a heavy storm and Belle Poule lost her mizenmast . Linois was able to replace it , but the incident left him without any spare masts should either of his ships lose another . Without a full sailing rig , his ships were vulnerable to capture by faster and more agile British vessels , and Linois decided that protecting his masts was his most important priority . 
 On 6 August 1805 , Linois encountered his first significant prize since Brunswick , when he discovered a convoy of eleven large ships sailing eastwards along the trade route from the Cape to Madras at 19 ° 09 ′ S 81 ° 22 ′ E. Closing to investigate the convoy , which was shrouded in fog , Linois was again cautious , unwilling to engage until he was certain that no Royal Navy ships lay among the East Indiamen . At 4 nautical miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ) distance it became clear that one of the ships was certainly a large warship , flying a pennant indicating the presence of an admiral on board . This ship was HMS Blenheim , a ship of the line built in 1761 as a 90 @-@ gun second rate but recently cut down to 74 @-@ guns . She was commanded by Captain Austen Bissell and flew the flag of Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Thomas Troubridge , a prominent officer who had been sent to the Indian Ocean to assume command of half of Pellew 's responsibilities after a political compromise at the Admiralty . Troubridge 's flagship was the convoy 's only escort , leading ten East Indiamen through the Indian Ocean to Madras . 
 As at Pulo Aura , the Indiamen formed line in preparation for Linois 's attack , and once again Linois refused to engage them directly : Blenheim was a powerful ship capable of inflicting fatal damage on Marengo even if the French managed to defeat her , an uncertain outcome given the presence of the heavily armed merchant ships . Instead , Linois swung in behind the convoy , hoping to cut off a straggler . These manoeuveres were too complex for the poorly manned Brunswick , and she fell out of the French formation and was soon left behind , disappearing over the horizon . At 17 : 30 , Marengo pulled within range of the rearmost East Indiaman and opened a long @-@ range fire , joined by Belle Poule . The rear ship Cumberland , a veteran of the Battle of Pulo Aura , was unintimidated and returned fire as Blenheim held position so that the convoy passed ahead and the French ships rapidly came up with her . Opening a heavy fire with the main deck guns , Troubridge was able to drive the French ships off , even though his lower deck guns were out of service due to the heavy seas that threatened to flood through the lower gunports . Linois , concerned for the safety of his masts , pressed on all sail and by 18 : 00 had gone beyond range of Blenheim 's guns and overtaken the convoy , remaining within sight until nightfall . 
 At midnight , the French ships crossed the bows of the convoy and by morning were 4 nautical miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ) to windward , to the south . Troubridge maintained his line throughout the night and at 07 : 00 on 7 August 1805 he prepared to receive the French again as Linois bore down on the convoy . Retaining their formation , the combined batteries of the Indiamen and Blenheim dissuaded Linois from the pressing the attack and he veered off at 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) distance , holding position for the rest of the day before turning southwards at 21 : 00 and disappearing . Troubridge wanted to pursue in Blenheim , but was dissuaded by the presence of Belle Poule , which could attack the convoy while the ships of the line were engaged . He expressed confidence however that he would have been successful in any engagement and wrote " I trust I shall yet have the good fortune to fall in with him when <unk> 'd with convoy " . Linois 's withdrawal was prudent : his mainmast had been struck during the brief cannonade and was at risk of collapse if the engagement continued . Losses among the crew were light , Marengo suffering eight men wounded and Belle Poule none . British casualties were slightly heavier , a passenger on Blenheim named Mr. Cook was killed by langrage shot and a sailor was killed on the Indiaman Ganges by a roundshot . No British ships suffered anything more than superficial damage in the combat , and the convoy continued its journey uninterrupted , arriving at Madras on 23 August . 
 = = Return to the Atlantic = = 
 Retiring from the encounter with Blenheim , Linois sailed westwards and arrived in Simon 's Bay at the Dutch colony of Cape Town on 13 September . He was hoping there to join up with the Dutch squadron maintained at the Cape , but discovered that the only significant Dutch warship in the port was the ship of the line Bato , which was stripped down and unfit for service at sea . <unk> the damage suffered in the August engagement and replenishing food and naval stores over the next two months , Linois was joined in October by Atalante . On 5 November a gale swept the bay and Atalante dragged her anchors , Captain Gaudin @-@ Beauchène powerless to prevent his frigate driving ashore and rapidly becoming a total wreck . The crew were able to escape to shore in small boats and were then divided among Marengo and Belle Poule , with 160 men left to augment the garrison at Cape Town . Linois 's prize , the Brunswick , too was wrecked near Simon 's Bay . 
 Leaving Simon 's Bay on 10 November , Linois slowly sailed up the West African coast , investigating bays and estuaries for British shipping , but only succeeding in capturing two small merchant vessels . He passed Cape Negro and Cape Lopez and obtained fresh water at Príncipe , before cruising in the region of Saint Helena . There he learned on 29 January 1806 from an American merchant ship that a British squadron had captured Cape Town . With the last safe harbour within reach in enemy hands and in desperate need of repair and resupply , Linois decided to return to Europe and slowly passed north , following the trade routes in search of British merchant shipping . On 17 February , Marengo crossed the equator and on 13 March was in position 26 ° 16 ′ N 29 ° 25 ′ W. 
 = = = Atlantic campaign of 1806 = = = 
 Unknown to Linois , his squadron was sailing directly into the path of a major naval campaign , the Atlantic campaign of 1806 . In the aftermath of the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October 1805 , and the subsequent end of the Trafalgar Campaign at the Battle of Cape Ortegal on 5 November 1805 , the British had relaxed their blockade of the French Atlantic ports . French and Spanish losses had been so severe in the campaign that it was believed by the British First Lord of the Admiralty , Lord Barham , that the French Navy would be unable to respond in the following winter , and consequently withdrew most of the blockade fleet to Britain until the spring . This strategy miscalculated the strength of the French Brest fleet , which had not been engaged in the Trafalgar campaign and therefore was at full strength . Taking advantage of the absence of the British squadrons off his principal Atlantic port , Napoleon ordered two squadrons to put to sea on 15 December 1805 . These forces were ordered to cruise the Atlantic shipping lanes in search of British merchant convoys and avoid confrontations with equivalent British forces . One squadron , under Vice @-@ Admiral Corentin @-@ Urbain Leissegues , was ordered to the Caribbean while the other , under Contre @-@ Admiral Jean @-@ Baptiste Willaumez , was ordered to the South Atlantic . 
 Discovering on 24 December that the French squadrons had broken out of Brest , Barham despatched two squadrons in pursuit , led by Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Richard Strachan and Rear @-@ Admiral Sir John Borlase Warren . A third squadron detached from the blockade of Cadiz without orders , under its commander Rear @-@ Admiral Sir John Thomas Duckworth , all three British forces cruising the mid @-@ Atlantic in search of the French . Following a brief encounter with Willaumez , Duckworth sailed to the Caribbean and there discovered and destroyed Leissegues ' squadron at the Battle of San Domingo in February 1806 . With one of the French squadrons eliminated , Strachan and Warren remained in the mid @-@ Atlantic anticipating Willaumez 's return from his operations to the south . Warren 's squadron was ordered to cruise in the Eastern Atlantic , in the region of the island of Madeira , directly across Linois 's line of advance . 
 = = = Capture of Linois = = = 
 At 03 : 00 on 13 March 1806 , lookouts on Marengo spotted sails in the distance to the southeast . Ignoring arguments from Bruilhac that the sails could be a British battle squadron , Linois insisted that they were a merchant convoy and ordered his ships to advance . The night was dark and visibility was consequently extremely limited ; Linois was therefore unaware of the nature of his quarry until the 98 @-@ gun second rate HMS London loomed out of the night immediately ahead . London 's captain , Sir Harry Burrard Neale , had sighted Linois 's sails at a distance and sailed to investigate , hanging signals with blue lights that notified the rest of Warren 's squadron , which was strung out ahead of the slow sailing London , of his intentions . Neale 's ship was accompanied by the frigate HMS Amazon under Captain William Parker , whose lookouts could not see the enemy but followed London 's wake in anticipation of action . 
 Linois made determined efforts to turn Marengo away from the large British ship , but his flagship was too slow and London opened up a fierce fire . Linois responded in kind and a battle commenced in which both ships suffered serve damage to their masts and rigging . Belle Poule assisted Linois , but on the arrival of Amazon the French admiral gave orders for Bruilhac to escape . Turning to the northeast , Belle Poule pulled away with Amazon gaining rapidly . At 06 : 00 , Linois tried to open some distance between Marengo and from her opponent , but found his flagship too badly damaged to manoeuvre , fire from London continuing unabated . At 08 : 30 , Parker reached Bruilhac 's frigate and opened fire , inflicting serious damage to Belle Poule 's rigging . By 10 : 25 it was clear that the French position was hopeless , with nearly 200 men killed or wounded , the latter including Linois and Vrignaud , both ships badly damaged and <unk> and the ships of the line HMS Foudroyant , HMS Repulse and HMS Ramillies all coming into range with three others close behind : recognising that defeat was inevitable , the most senior remaining officer on Marengo surrendered , Bruilhac following suit soon afterwards . 
 Warren returned to Britain with his prizes , the squadron weathering a serious storm on 23 April which dismasted Marengo and Ramillies . British losses in the engagement had totalled 14 dead and 27 wounded , to French casualties of 69 dead and 106 wounded . Warren was highly praised for his victory and both French ships were taken into British service under their French names . The battle marked the end of Linois 's cruise , three years and seven days after he had left Brest for the Indian Ocean . In contrast to the criticism attracted by his earlier engagements , Linois 's final battle with Warren won praise for his resilience in the face of larger and more powerful opposition : British naval historian William James claimed that if Marengo and London had met independently , Linois might well have been the victor in the battle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Linois 's operations in the Indian Ocean have been compared to those of Captain Karl von Müller in SMS Emden 108 years later : like von Müller , Linois 's raids caused significant concern among British merchant houses and the British authorities in the Indian Ocean , in Linois 's case principally due to the threat he posed to the East Indiaman convoys such as that encountered off Pulo Aura . The practical effects of his raiding were however insignificant : in three years he took just five East Indiamen and a handful of country ships , briefly terrorising the Andhra coast in 1804 but otherwise failing to cause major economic disruption to British trade . The only achievement of his cruise was to force Rainier 's squadron to operate in defence of British convoys and ports , preventing any offensive operations during Linois 's time in the Indian Ocean . The vast distances between friendly ports , the lack of sufficient food supplies or naval stores and the strength of British naval escorts after the initial months of war all played a part in Linois 's failings to fully exploit his opportunity , but the blame for his inadequate achievements has been consistently placed with Linois 's own personal leadership failings , both among his contemporaries and by historians . In battle Linois refused to place his ships in danger if it could be avoided , he spent considerable periods of the cruise refitting at French harbours and even when presented with an undefended target was reluctant to press his advantage . 
 Linois and his men remained prisoners in Britain until the end of the war , Napoleon refusing to exchange them for British prisoners . His anger at Linois 's failure would have precluded any further appointments even if he had returned to France , but in 1814 he was made Governor of Guadeloupe by King Louis XVIII . On the return of Napoleon during the Hundred Days , Linois declared for the Emperor , the only French colonial governor to do so . Within days a small British expeditionary force had ousted him and on 8 July Napoleon himself surrendered . Linois 's career was over , and he died in 1848 without performing any further military service . The Indian Ocean remained an active theatre of warfare for the next four years , the campaign against British merchant shipping in the region conducted by frigate squadrons operating from the Isle de France . These were initially led by Motard in Sémillante , who proved to be a more successful commerce raider than his former commander , until his ship was retired from service in 1808 , too old and battered to remain in commission . Command later passed to Commodore Jacques Hamelin , whose squadron caused more damage in one year than Linois managed in three : capturing seven East Indiamen during 1809 – 1810 . Eventually British forces were marshalled to capture the island in the Mauritius campaign of 1809 – 1811 , culminating in the Invasion of Isle de France in December 1810 and the final defeat of the French in the Indian Ocean . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 = Constitution of Belarus = 
 The Constitution of the Republic of Belarus ( Belarusian : <unk> Рэспублікі Беларусь , Russian : <unk> Республики Беларусь ) is the ultimate law of Belarus . Adopted in 1994 , three years after the country declared its independence from the Soviet Union , this formal document establishes the framework of the Belarusian state and government and enumerates the rights and freedoms of its citizens . The Constitution was drafted by the Supreme Soviet of Belarus , the former legislative body of the country , and was improved upon by citizens and legal experts . The contents of the Constitution include the preamble , nine sections , and 146 articles . 
 The structure and substance of the Constitution were heavily influenced by constitutions of Western powers and by Belarus ' experiences during the Soviet era . While much of the Constitution establishes the government 's functions and powers , an entire section details rights and freedoms granted to citizens and residents . The Constitution has been amended twice since the original adoption , in 1996 and in 2004 . Two referendums that were disputed by independent observers and government opposition leaders increased the power of the presidency over the government and eliminated the term limits for the presidency . 
 = = History = = 
 Belarus adopted its first temporary constitution on October 11 , 1918 . 
 In 1919 , after the occupation of the country by the Russian Bolsheviks , Belarus became a Soviet Republic ( USSR ) , and a new constitution was adopted . Belarus continued to use this constitution until it – along with Russia , Ukraine , and the Transcaucasus – signed a treaty to form the Soviet Union . Now the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic ( Byelorussian SSR ) , the country adopted its first Soviet @-@ era constitution in 1927 , complementing the recently adopted Soviet Constitution . After a re @-@ adoption in 1937 , the Byelorussian SSR adopted its last Soviet @-@ era constitution in 1978 , mainly to reflect changes made in the 1977 Soviet Constitution . 
 When Belarus became independent from the Soviet Union in 1991 , the Supreme Soviet of Belarus passed the Declaration of State Sovereignty of the Belarusian Soviet Socialist Republic , proclaiming Byelorussian SSR acts legal priority over USSR ones ( per article 7 of the Declaration , but this provision was inserted into 1978 Constitution only in August 1991 ) and formally starting a constitutional process in Republic . Soon afterwards , the government established a Constitution Commission to facilitate the adoption of a post @-@ Soviet constitution . In November 1991 , the commission sent the first of three drafts to the Supreme Soviet . Upon approval from the Supreme Soviet , the first draft was published in December 1991 in order for the Belarusian populace to make comments and suggestions . The commission submitted the third and final draft to the Supreme Soviet , where it was signed on March 15 , 1994 by the Speaker of the Supreme Soviet and Head of State , <unk> Hryb . The gazette Zvezda officially published the Constitution fifteen days later . The Supreme Soviet passed a second law along with the Constitution , titled the Enactment Law , rendering the 1978 Byelorussian SSR Constitution and the Declaration of State Sovereignty of the Belarusian Soviet Socialist Republic void , with a few exceptions . The law , passed during the thirteenth session of the Supreme Soviet , also provided transitional phases for office holders and government organs to form within two years . Every year since 1994 , March 15 has been commemorated in Belarus as Constitution Day , a national holiday . 
 The Constitution introduces separation of powers . According to Belarusian law , each office is separate but must work together to serve the people . The Constitution also makes Belarus a presidential democracy , significantly reducing the role of the prime minister . Of the fifteen former Soviet republics , Belarus was the one of latest to create and pass a new constitution subsequent to the dissolution of the USSR . A delay occurred due to debates among Supreme Soviet deputies , who were also trying to stave off the opposition and democratic forces who wanted to close the Supreme Soviet down for good . A power struggle to determine the relationship between the new executive branch and the legislature caused much of the debate in 1992 and 1993 . The former chairman of the Supreme Soviet , <unk> Shushkevich , criticized the early drafts due to the amount of power granted to the president . The opposition Belarusian Popular Front criticized the final drafts due to the lack of balance between the two parties and for allowing <unk> Kebich to run for presidential elections in June of that year despite serving in the same role with the SSR . 
 When drafting the Belarus Constitution , the Supreme Soviet deputies were influenced by the constitutions of various countries , including Austria , Belgium , Denmark , France , Germany , Italy , Sweden , and the United States . Internally , the Constitution was influenced by the period of Soviet domination and a desire to bring back traditions brushed aside by the Soviet Government . The structure of the Constitution is similar to the Russian Federation : for example , the office of the President has powers analogous to those granted to the President of Russia . Overall , the Constitution sought to preserve the statehood of Belarus from pro @-@ Russian unity movements , provide a strong head of state that could cure the ailments Belarus would endure in the post @-@ Soviet era , and lay out a compromise between the political factions in Belarus . 
 = = Preamble = = 
 In the preamble of the Constitution , Belarus assumes the responsibility for its destiny as a member of the international community . To execute this responsibility , the government undertakes to show " adherence to values common to all mankind , founding ourselves on our inalienable right to self @-@ determination , " which is " supported by the centuries @-@ long history of development of Belarusian statehood . " Belarus also pledges to honor the rights and freedoms of its citizens and to maintain a stable government that is run by the people and based on the rule of law . 
 = = Section One : Principles of the Constitutional System = = 
 Section One of the Constitution sets up the governmental framework and specifies that the government is run by the people of Belarus . The government , which has been declared a multi @-@ party representative democracy , forms its own foreign policy and is willing to defend the right to do so when necessary . Section One also establishes that the state protects the rights and freedoms of its citizens , but contains the proviso that a citizen of Belarus " bears a responsibility towards the State to discharge unwaveringly the duties imposed upon him by the Constitution . " 
 The government itself has a system of checks and balances for each branch of the government , but all of the branches are to be independent from influence from the other branches . The government is authorized to pass laws conforming with the provisions of the Constitution , by which it is expected to abide . If the laws do not conform with the Constitution , then they can be declared void . The laws themselves are subject to international law and Belarus is willing to " recognize the supremacy of the universally acknowledged principles of international law and ensure that its laws comply with such principles . " 
 The territory of Belarus is divided into discrete regions , called oblasts . The oblasts are further divided into districts which are in turn subdivided into cities . The Constitution also allows for special regions to be created , which are to be controlled by legislation . Citizens of Belarus are also promised protection and sponsorship , regardless of whether they are inside Belarusian borders or in a foreign country . With some exceptions , those who do not have a nationality and foreigners are , under the Constitution , granted the same status and rights as citizens of Belarus . Belarus also has the power to grant asylum to those who have been subject to persecution due to their ethnic background , political ideology or religious affiliation . 
 The Constitution also establishes Belarusian and Russian as the official languages of the country , pledges neutrality and non @-@ nuclear proliferation , adopts national symbols , and establishes Minsk as the capital ( Minsk was previously the capital of the Belarusian Soviet Socialist Republic ) . 
 = = Section Two : The Individual , Society and the State = = 
 Section Two describes rights the government grants to citizens . According to the document , providing and protecting these basic rights , which include the " right to a dignified standard of living , including appropriate food , clothing , housing and likewise a continuous improvement of necessary living conditions " , is the top priority of the government . These rights are granted to all citizens of Belarus and every Belarusian is to be treated equally under Belarusian law . However , these rights can be removed for national security reasons or if Belarus is under a state of emergency . No one is allowed to " enjoy advantages and privileges that are contrary to the law . " A state of emergency , which can be called by the President of Belarus according to Article 84 , has to be approved by the Council of the Republic within three days of its announcement , according to Article 98 . 
 The Constitution provides that life is a right and that the government will protect the lives of its citizens against other citizens who wish to harm them or their property . The Constitution also allows for the death penalty to be exercised for grave crimes , but only in accordance with national law . If citizens are arrested , they are granted due process of law and do not have to testify against themselves or their family members . Citizens are also given the right to vote , housing , compensation for their share of work , and have the ability to move wherever they wish inside Belarus , and have the right to protest against the government . 
 = = Section Three : Electoral System . Referendum = = 
 Section Three is divided into two chapters dealing with the organization and running of elections . The first chapter deals with the Belarusian electoral system and the second chapter details the organization of national referendums . 
 In Belarus , the right to vote in elections and plebiscites is extended to those who are above the age of eighteen . During elections and plebiscites , a citizen can vote or not vote without any consequences from the government . The Constitution describes two methods of preventing a citizen from voting . First , a court can issue an order stating that the citizen does not have the mental capacity to understand and to cast a ballot . Second , a person being held in detention or confined in a prison during an election cannot cast a ballot . The Constitution says nothing about the voting rights of those who have served their prison terms , nor does it state how those citizens gain the rights back . 
 National referendums , or plebiscites , are elections whereby citizens can determine whether a specific legal text can become official law or not . For this to take place , one of the following conditions must be met : The president wishes to hold one , both houses of the National Assembly request to hold one , or the citizens petition for it . If the National Assembly calls for a plebiscite , a majority is needed in both chambers for it to be official . If the citizens request a plebiscite , they must gather 430 @,@ 000 signatures from eligible voters across the country . Additionally , over 30 @,@ 000 people from each region must sign the petition , including the capital Minsk . Once either condition is met , the president must issue a decree setting the date of the national plebiscite . The plebiscite must take place less than three months after the decree was signed . Local cities can hold their own plebiscites if ten percent of the local population ask for it . 
 = = Section Four : The President , Parliament , Government , the Courts = = 
 Section Four , which is divided into four chapters , outlines the functions of the Belarusian Government , mainly the President of the Republic of Belarus , the Council of Ministers , the Parliament of Belarus and the courts . Although elected by the Belarusian people , the president must not be a member of a political party when he or she assumes office . The Constitution also lists official duties for various posts , such as the president being the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Belarusian Armed Forces . The section also describes procedures for situations where the president cannot continue duties or if the president dies in office . 
 Chapter Four lists the powers and duties of the Parliament of Belarus , which is called the National Assembly . The National Assembly itself is divided into two houses : the lower House of Representatives and the upper Council of the Republic . While each house has its own rules governing how members are elected , members decide on the various bills that could become Belarusian law and approve the nominations of cabinet heads that the president chooses . 
 The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus , headed by the prime minister , is the body of officials that are heads of various ministries of the Belarusian government . The president appoints each member of the council , but the National Assembly must also approve each member . Council members stays on until their term as a minister is over or the president has been replaced . 
 The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Belarus is the highest court in Belarus . While other courts deal with civil or criminal issues , the Constitutional Court deals with matters involving the Constitution and the legality of certain laws passed by the government . The court has the power to declare any law unconstitutional . From April until May 2007 , the Constitutional Court reviewed 101 laws and decrees ; they were deemed to be constitutional . The court that deals with criminal law matters is the Supreme Court of Belarus . 
 = = Section Five : Local Government and Self @-@ Government = = 
 Section Five permits the formation of local governments . Local governments are selected by the local population and they have the power to administer local affairs , such as budgets , social services , and economic development . They also have the authority to collect taxes . The president can appoint and dismiss the heads of the local governments on the approval of the relevant local council of deputies . 
 = = Section Six : The Procurator 's Office . The State Supervisory Committee = = 
 Section Six lists the office and duties of the prosecutor general ( Procurator General in the official translation ) and the State Supervisory Committee . The prosecutor general and his appointed assistant prosecutors are tasked with the balanced implementation of national , regional and local laws on all sectors of government and public society . The prosecutor general is appointed by the president with permission from the Council of the Republic . 
 The State Supervisory Committee is tasked with monitoring the national budget , implementing the president 's economic policy , and regulating the use of government property . As with the prosecutor general , the State Supervisory Committee is appointed by the president . 
 = = Section Seven : Financial and Credit System of the Republic of Belarus = = 
 Section Seven specifies the fiscal responsibilities of Belarus . A national budget must be created , along with budgets for the local regions and cities . The money used in the national budget is acquired from national taxes and fines , and payments made to Belarus by foreign governments . At the end of a fiscal year , the National Assembly must review the budget for the next fiscal year within five months . After the review and passing of the national budget , it is published for public viewing . Local budgets follow the same procedures . The National Bank of the Republic of Belarus is the state bank of Belarus and is the office responsible for issuing the national currency , the Belarusian ruble . 
 = = Section Eight : The Application of the Constitution = = 
 Section Eight describes processes for enforcing and amending the Constitution . The Constitution is the supreme law of the land , therefore other laws and edicts cannot conflict with it . If a conflict occurs , the Constitution applies . If the Constitution is not in conflict , but a law and a decree is , the law would be enforced . 
 To amend the Constitution , one of two things must happen before the National Assembly can consider the measure : The president must suggest the change , or 150 @,@ 000 eligible voters must send a petition to the National Assembly . Both chambers of the National Assembly must discuss the proposed amendments for a minimum of three months . Two conditions can prevent a discussion from taking place : Either there is a state of emergency , or there are less than six months in the current term of the House of Representatives . In order for an amendment to take effect , it must be approved by either two @-@ thirds of both chambers of the National Assembly or a simple majority of the voting population of Belarus in a national referendum . The only restriction is that Sections One , Two , Four and Eight can only be changed by national referendum . Rules for conducting a national referendum are enumerated in Chapters 22 through 25 of the Electoral Code of the Republic of Belarus . Since the original adoption of the Constitution in 1994 , it has been amended twice ; once in 1996 and once in 2004 . 
 = = Section Nine : Final and Transitional Clauses = = 
 The ninth and last section of the Constitution was added following passage of the 1996 revision of Constitution and addresses laws passed before 1996 . If the laws that were passed before the adoption of the Constitution are not in conflict with the Constitution , they are still enforced . All changes to the Constitution come into effect when formally issued by the president , unless specified otherwise . With the passage of the 1996 revision of the Constitution , the 1994 law " On the Procedure Governing the Entry into Force of the Constitution of the Republic of Belarus " ceased to be enforced . As a transitional measure , Section Nine states that the present ( as of November 1996 ) leadership of Belarus can continue to serve until their term of service has been completed . When the Constitution is enforced , the national government is allowed to exercise their assigned duties . Unless otherwise stated in Article 143 , Part 3 , the national leadership must form state governmental bodies two months after the Constitution goes into effect . 
 = = Amendments = = 
 After Lukashenko assumed the presidency in 1994 , he stated his intention to amend the recently passed Constitution . The amendments , according to Lukashenko , would expand the power of his office , marking a turning point in post @-@ Soviet era politics in Belarus . A May 1995 national referendum was the first step in the amendment process . Out of the four questions , one asked if the president could disband parliament if the members violate national law . The vote , which several Supreme Soviet deputies protested , resulted in 77 % in favor of the provision regarding the dismissal of the legislature by the president . Other questions on the ballot , such as the national flag and national emblem , didn 't affect the Constitution as a whole , but their status has been decided by the Constitution . Two years later , Lukashenko scheduled the first referendum that would potentially alter the Constitution . The last referendum on the Constitution occurred in 2004 , also scheduled by Lukashenko . 
 = = = 1996 = = = 
 More calls for constitutional reform came in 1996 . President Lukashenko unilaterally established the referendum after the Supreme Soviet refused to support the measures or set up a date for the vote . An earlier attempt by the Supreme Soviet to establish their own referendum in September 1996 was struck down as " inconsistent with the Constitution " by the Constitutional Court . The referendum amended the Constitution mostly to strengthen the power of the presidency . Amongst the changes made were the following : 
 1- The Supreme Soviet , the unicameral parliament of Belarus , was abolished . The Supreme Soviet was replaced by the National Assembly , a bicameral parliament ; 
 2- The term of President Alexander Lukashenko was extended from 1999 until 2001 . 
 During the referendum , 84 % of the approximately 7 @.@ 5 million voters approved the amendments . On November 28 of that year , President Lukashenko signed the changes into law . Other results not directly related to the voting included the expanding role of the Council of Ministers , which allowed it to deal with issues related to development of economic , social and political spheres within Belarus . The 1996 referendum was not , however , the first call to dissolve the Supreme Soviet . In 1991 and 1992 , after the August coup in Moscow by senior CPSU officials , democratic forces in the government wanted to dissolve the Supreme Soviet permanently . The members of the Belarusian Popular Front pressed for a referendum , and despite achieving the number of signatures required by law at the time , the Supreme Soviet quashed the measure . 
 The results of the 1996 referendum led to the exclusion of opposition parties from the new parliament . Due to problems associated with transparency and ballot stuffing , the European Union , United States and several other nations do not recognize the results of the vote . 
 = = = 2004 = = = 
 Along with choosing members for the National Assembly , Belarusian voters were presented with a referendum regarding presidential term limits . Before the vote , President Alexander Lukashenko was only allowed to serve two terms before the Constitution required him to step down . The voter turnout for the referendum was nearly 90 % , with 77 @.@ 3 % of the voters agreeing to eliminating term limits . The changes were implemented on October 17 , 2004 . Like the 1996 referendum , the validity of the vote was brought into question . According to the Organization for Security and Co @-@ operation in Europe ( OSCE ) , many polling places went without independent observers . The OSCE believed that the standards of the vote did not meet OSCE requirements for " free and fair elections " . Data from other non @-@ governmental organizations ( NGO ) point out that 50 % of voters did not participate in the referendum , so they contend that the results reported by the government are flawed . Two years later , Lukashenko ran in the 2006 election and won 83 % of the vote during the first ballot . With no term limits , Lukashenko states that , depending on his health , he will not retire from politics and might run for re @-@ election in 2011 . 
 = = Criticism of constitutional changes = = 
 Both referendums were severely criticized by the political opposition inside Belarus as well as by international observers such as the OSCE . Observers state that both referendums were non @-@ transparent and that the real results were not published . Observers were not allowed to see the process of counting ballots . Specifically , the democratic opposition to President Lukashenko decided to boycott the 1996 referendum on the Constitution . During the same election , international observers found problems with the voting process or found pro @-@ government advertisements or notices at polling places . Opposition parties contend that the vote to dissolve the Supreme Soviet in 1996 removed Belarus ' last democratically elected parliament and installed Lukashenko 's hand picked parliament . Despite the claims of manipulation of the elections and the Constitution itself , there are a few parts of the current constitution approved by key leaders of the Belarusian democratic opposition . In a 2005 interview with Radio Free Europe , presidential candidate Alaksandar <unk> stated that Belarus ' stance as a neutral country , stated in Article 18 , should be preserved with regard to joining NATO and the European Union . Legal interpretation of the Constitution is also brought into question . In a 1998 journal , the New York University School of Law noted that Belarusian legal scholars came up with a new theory to deal with jurisprudence . Laws are constitutional if they follow the will of President Lukashenko and the people ; unconstitutional if the president and the people do not like it . The laws that fall in the latter category are considered " ignored " by the legal scholars . In June 1999 , a Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers from the United Nations visited Belarus and noted inconsistency between national laws , decrees and the Constitution . The UN rapporteur , Dato Param Cumaraswamy , especially noted that temporary decrees issued by the national authorities are still in force , even if they had expired or contradict the Constitution . 
 = Cold ( Kanye West song ) = 
 " Cold " ( originally " Theraflu " and then " Way Too Cold " ) is a song by American hip hop recording artist Kanye West , released as the second single from the album Cruel Summer ( 2012 ) . The song , which features DJ Khaled , was made available for purchase on the iTunes Store on April 17 , 2012 . Songwriting is credited to West , Chauncey Hollis , James Todd Smith and Marlon Williams , while production was handled by Hit @-@ Boy . Lyrically , the song features West boasting about his personal issues and touching on subjects such as his relationship with Kim Kardashian , his breakup with Amber Rose , and his feelings on Wiz Khalifa and Kris Humphries . The song received positive reviews from music critics , who praised West 's lyrical performance and the boldness of his subject matter . The song contains an interpolation of " Lookin ' at Me " ( 1997 ) as performed by Mase and Puff Daddy , and a sample of " Illegal Search " ( 1990 ) also performed by LL Cool J. 
 The song peaked at number 86 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and hit 68 on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . The track received single artwork designed by frequent West collaborator George Condo , designer of the cover of My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy ( 2010 ) . West performed the song at the 2012 Watch the Throne Tour , and at the 2012 BET Awards , along with singles " Mercy " and " New God Flow " . The song drew controversy from Humphries , the brand Theraflu , and PETA who criticized the content of West 's lyrics , claiming the track glorified fur clothing . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 " Way Too Cold " was produced by Hit @-@ Boy , a producer signed to West 's label GOOD Music , known for his production on " Niggas in Paris " . According to Hit @-@ boy , he had “ made the beat a couple months ago , just in a session messing around ” and that Kanye " just did the record maybe a week and a half ago . We actually don ’ t know if it ’ s going to be on Khaled ’ s album or ‘ Ye ’ s album . We just put it out because we felt like it was so urgent , people just needed to hear it . " In an interview Khaled explained : " I was in the studio with ' Ye [ Kanye ] and I was like , ' Let 's do something for your album , and let 's do something for my album , ' and you can just release it for fun . " 
 The song was first released on the New York City radio station Hot 97 by Funkmaster Flex on April 4 , 2012 . The cover artwork was designed by George Condo , who designed the artwork for West 's album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy and singles like " Power " and " Runaway " . The first cover originally featured a bottle of Theraflu atop the woman 's neck , was edited to remove the bottle before being released for digital download . On April 15 , West announced on Twitter that the name of the song had been changed to " Way Too Cold " , and then finally " Cold " . The track was then released as a single onto iTunes on April 17 , 2012 . Following its digital release , the song impacted urban contemporary radio on May 8 , 2012 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was released on August 13 , 2012 at the end of DJ Khaled 's " I Wish You Would " video . The video features an appearance by Kim Kardashian and was directed by Hype Williams . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Cold " is a bass @-@ heavy , bouncy track with West rapping prominently over a " furious beat " . It includes West 's " blunt thoughts on his romance with model Amber Rose " , who was engaged to rapper Wiz Khalifa at the time , with lines like , " only nigga I got respect for is Wiz / And I admit I fell in love with Kim around the same time she fell in love with him " . The second part of the quote alludes to his relationship with Kim Kardashian and her estranged husband , Kris Humphries . West boasts that Kris is " lucky I ain 't had Jay drop him from the team " , a line referencing his frequent collaborator Jay @-@ Z , who was part @-@ owner of the New Jersey Nets , the NBA team that basketball star Kris Humphries played for at the time . The song " is stuffed with boasts about the rapper 's fashion cred , from boasting that he 's had dinner with Vogue editor Anna Wintour to showing off a $ 6000 pair of shoes . The track features vocal assists from DJ Khaled and DJ Pharris , who close out the outro of the song with their boasting . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Tom Breihan of Stereogum described the song as " a seriously strong performance , all hard snarls over a bleepy late- ' 90s @-@ style beat " and that it " finds Kanye getting surprisingly personal , at least for a couple of lines , about his long @-@ rumored relationship with Kim Kardashian . " Rob Markman of MTV stated that " lyrically , Kanye delivers a fiery performance " on the track , and that " it 's all pretty intriguing , considering Kanye has shied away from the media for almost two years now . " Alex Gale of BET mused that the song features a " brash Kanye West going in furiously over a schizophrenic soundscape from Hit @-@ Boy , the production maestro behind The Throne 's ' Niggas in Paris . ' Yeezy 's bars are <unk> to say the least " . DJBooth mused " arrogance is busting through the seams on the record , yet it is balanced enough to sound charismatic in a form that Mr. West has perfected . " Rolling Stone wrote that the song was " surprisingly magnanimous " and that it features West in his " full @-@ on braggart mode " . 
 In Complex 's list of the best 25 lines of the first half of 2012 , West 's line " And I 'll admit , I had fell in love with Kim / Around the same time she had fell in love with him / Well that 's cool , baby girl , do ya thang / Lucky I ain 't had Jay drop him from the team " was listed as the second best . " Cold " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at position 92 , and achieved a peak position of 86 . The song peaked at number 68 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs charts . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 When " Cold " premiered , it was titled " Theraflu " . A representative of Theraflu released a statement to TMZ which read " We in no way endorse or approve of the references or use of the image and likeness of Theraflu in this manner . " Theraflu noted that this was not done at their request . In response to the line " Tell PETA my mink is <unk> ' on the floor , " PETA stated : 
 " What 's <unk> ’ on the floor is Kanye 's reputation as a man with no empathy for animals or human beings . He ’ s a great musician but doesn ’ t seem to have the fashion sense to design anything more than caveman costumes . We keep hoping that one day he ’ ll find his heart and join evolved style <unk> including Russell Simmons , Pink , and Natalie <unk> who have dropped animal skins . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The song was first performed by West at the London stop of his 2012 Watch the Throne Tour , with West performing the song a cappella . At the 2012 BET Awards , the song was performed with rappers Big Sean , Pusha T , 2 Chainz , as filed out one by one to deliver their verses from the song " Mercy " , with West emerging to perform his verses from " Cold " and " New God Flow " afterwards . Though Los Angeles Times 's Randall Roberts noted that it wasn 't " until West moved into his hit " Cold " that things got great " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = I 've Got Nothing = 
 " I 've Got Nothing " is a song released by the participants of the BBC Two documentary series Chartjackers and is credited as such . The track was produced by university student Marc Dowding and its music video was filmed by YouTube user Charlie McDonnell . It was released by the record label Swinging Mantis on 9 November 2009 exclusively through the iTunes Store . The single and its release were the end product of a ten @-@ week campaign documented on Chartjackers , which challenged the global online community to write , record and release a pop song that would make number one on the UK Singles Chart . The song was written entirely through crowdsourcing , with its every aspect , such as the title , lyrics , melody and singers , having been solicited from YouTube users . 
 " I 've Got Nothing " was a charity single released to benefit the UK charity Children in Need . It was sung by vocalists Miranda Chartrand and Adam Nichols , both on the record and at live performances . Its music video featured shots of Chartrand and Nichols singing in a London park with Children in Need mascot Pudsey Bear , as well as video clips submitted by Chartjackers viewers of themselves miming to the track . The song was generally ignored by music critics and received mostly negative reviews — it went on to sell a total of 20 @,@ 000 copies worldwide and earned a chart position of Number 36 in the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 " I 've Got Nothing " was written in ten weeks entirely through crowdsourcing as part of a project that was documented on the BBC Two series Chartjackers . Members of the online community were asked to submit various song ideas on the YouTube channel " ChartJackersProject " , with the aim that a single could be written , recorded and then released on 9 November 2009 . 
 The lyrics for " I 've Got Nothing " were written on the week of 8 September . A video posted to the YouTube channel " ChartJackersProject " invited viewers to submit possible lines as comments . Viewers posted more than 4 @,@ 000 comments , from which the song 's lyrics were selected . The following week , another video was uploaded to " ChartJackersProject " that published the winning lyrics and announced that the song 's title was to be " I 've Got Nothing " — the song 's chorus had been written by YouTube user " <unk> " . The video also invited viewers to compose a melody for the completed lyrics . Viewers submitted 51 melodies as video responses , with the entry from Jonny Dark , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old musician from London , being selected as the winner . 
 A new YouTube video was uploaded to " ChartJackersProject " on 25 September , offering viewers the opportunity to audition to sing " I 've Got Nothing " on the final release . Hundred of viewers auditioned , with ten being selected to go through as finalists . These ten finalists auditioned in person at the Wellfield Working Men 's Club in Rochdale , where Miranda Chartrand , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old au pair from Stroud , Gloucestershire , and Adam Nichols , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old musician from Essex , were chosen to perform " I 've Got Nothing " on the single . 
 = = Recording and release = = 
 " I 've Got Nothing " was produced and co @-@ written by university student Marc Dowding . Dowding learnt about the opportunity through a video posted to the YouTube channel " ChartJackersProject " and was offered the job after e @-@ mailing his CV to a BBC Switch producer . Chartrand and Nichols travelled to Newport , South Wales on 7 October to record the single at the recording studio of the University of Wales , Newport . On producing the single , Dowding remarked : " It was a great help to be able to use the recording studios at the University . " 
 " I 've Got Nothing " was leaked to the internet during October 2009 , before being officially released a month later by record label Swinging Mantis . As Swinging Mantis was a small record label , the budget for " I 've Got Nothing " was limited , so a physical version of the single was never made available . Instead , the track was made sold exclusively as an iTunes digital download . " I 've Got Nothing " was released worldwide through the iTunes Store at midnight on 9 November . Each copy was sold for £ 0 @.@ 79 in the United Kingdom and $ 0 @.@ 99 in the United States . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " I 've Got Nothing " was largely ignored by the mainstream media and did not receive many reviews — the reviews that it did receive from critics were generally negative . British music website Popjustice called the effort " very bad " , and Ellie Halfacre of Tower Review explained that " some commented that the melody was bad , and others said it was the lyrics " . Halfacre also questioned whether the project was about self @-@ promotion or charity . David Balls of Digital Spy gave the single three stars out of five , predicting that it was " unlikely to make much of a top 40 impact " . James Masterton of Yahoo ! Music felt that the song had " fallen a long way short of " the goal of reaching number one because it had not been able to " guarantee mass public support " . Record producer Mike Stock said that the song had " no killer melody " and singer VV Brown suggested that " the lyrics could be better " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Expectations for the release of " I 've Got Nothing " were high . The main goal of Chartjackers had been for the song to reach number one on the UK Singles Chart , with the synopsis of the first episode expecting it to " sell an estimated 25 @,@ 000 singles " . The single sold almost 20 @,@ 000 copies worldwide and raised £ 10 @,@ 000 for the charity Children in Need . Just under 8 @,@ 400 copies were downloaded in the UK , which gave " I 've Got Nothing " a chart placing of Number 36 in the UK Singles Chart . The following week the single fell out of the UK Top 100 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " I 've Got Nothing " was edited by YouTube user Charlie McDonnell . It shows various " ChartJackersProject " viewers miming to the song , interspersed with shots of Chartrand and Nichols singing " I 've Got Nothing " in a park . The video was created through crowdsourcing , in a manner similar to the writing of the song itself . On 8 October 2009 , viewers were invited via " ChartJackersProject " to film and submit video clips of themselves either singing or clapping along with the track . Shots of Chartrand and Nichols with an actor dressed as Children in Need mascot Pudsey Bear were filmed in a park . This footage was compiled with some of the clips submitted by viewers and used to construct the final music video , which was shown nationwide on British music channels such as 4Music and Viva . 
 Many viewers submitted clips that were literal interpretations of the lyrics . For example , some viewers held up medals and trophies for the lyric " won the greatest prize " , others zoomed @-@ in on their own eye during the line " look into my eyes " and others turned off lights for the lyric " the lights are going out " . Most of the shots of Chartrand and Nichols are of them singing " I 've Got Nothing " in a park with an actor dressed as Pudsey Bear , but the video also features shots of them eating ice cream , swinging around a lamp post and dancing in front of a tree . The video begins with shots of the duo throwing a football back and forth to each other . At 2 : 03 , the video splits into 35 equally sized smaller rectangles , each containing a clip of a " ChartJackersProject " viewer clapping in time with " I 've Got Nothing " . Over the next 18 seconds of the song , 11 different sets of 35 viewers ( i.e. approximately 385 viewers in total ) are shown clapping along with the song . The video also features a cameo from YouTube user Peter Oakley at 0 : 06 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " I 've Got Nothing " was first performed live by Chartrand and Nichols on 4 November 2009 at 93 Feet East in London . Their performance was shown during the ninth episode of Chartjackers . The gig also featured performances from other YouTube users and was headlined by former pop star Chesney Hawkes . The song was performed live for a second time four days later at Switch Live 2009 , an awards show organised by BBC Switch at the HMV Hammersmith Apollo — the event was opened by a performance of " I 've Got Nothing " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Miranda Chartrand – vocals 
 Adam Nichols – vocals 
 Jonny Dark – writer ( melody ) 
 Marc Dowding – writer , producer , engineer and mixer 
 = 94 Meetings = 
 " 94 Meetings " is the 21st episode of the second season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 27th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 29 , 2010 . In the episode , Ron is forced to handle 94 meetings in a single day due to an error by his assistant , April . Meanwhile , Leslie tries to stop alterations to a historic mansion while dealing with her hidden insecurities about the escalation of Ann and Mark 's romantic relationship . 
 The episode was written by Harris Wittels and directed by Tristram Shapeero . It featured guest appearances by several actors who had appeared in previous episodes , including Susan Yeagley , Alison Becker and Yvans Jourdain . It also introduced April Ludgate 's family . According to Nielsen Media Research , " 94 Meetings " was seen by 4 @.@ 03 million household viewers , and received particularly high ratings among males between ages 18 and 34 . The episode received generally positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Due to a mistake by April ( Aubrey Plaza ) , Ron ( Nick Offerman ) is forced to deal with 93 meetings in a single day . He enlists the aid of April , Andy ( Chris Pratt ) , Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) and Ann ( Rashida Jones ) to help handle them , while telling Jerry ( Jim O 'Heir ) that he is free to go home early . During her first meeting , Leslie learns a historic town monument , the <unk> mansion , is soon to be altered by its new renter , the former Miss Pawnee beauty pageant winner Jessica Wicks ( Susan Yeagley ) . Leslie and Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) leave to meet with her at the mansion , where Jessica is planning a birthday party for her extremely old husband , the wealthy Nick Newport Sr. ( Christopher Murray ) , founder of the Sweetums candy company . Leslie is shocked Jessica has already made several alterations , such as hanging up nude portraits of herself and painting the floor . 
 Leslie is outraged when Jessica reveals her plans to demolish an old gazebo in the backyard of <unk> Mansion , the site of a historic wedding between a Pawnee Native American and white woman , which became a " bloodbath " when knowledge of the wedding became public . Under Leslie 's orders , Tom chains Leslie to the front gate to prevent construction crews from entering . However , she mistakenly assumes the gate opens from the middle , allowing the crews to enter right past Leslie and demolish the gazebo . At the end of the day , Ann and Mark ( Paul Schneider ) arrive to free her , and Leslie finally reveals to Tom the true source of her anxiety — Mark 's intentions to marry Ann . Leslie feels emotional confusion over this fact . On the one hand , she wants her friends to be happy . On the other hand , she used to have romantic feelings for Mark , she feels insecure about being single , and she worries about losing her two friends . In response , Tom assures her not to worry , thus empowering Leslie to crash and ruin Jessica 's party . 
 Meanwhile , Ron and the others deal with their meetings : April acts as uninterested as possible , Andy makes promises to people against Ron 's wishes , and Ann provides several medical consults after revealing she is really a nurse ( not a parks and recreation department employee ) . Although the two had previously been developing a romantic interest , Andy now acts uninterested in April because he feels uncomfortable about the eight @-@ year age difference between them , further upsetting April on a difficult day . Ron , who views the many meetings as an utter nightmare , calls in the others during the middle of the day for a progress report , and angrily berates April for her mistake . After all the meetings , April arranges her own meeting with Ron , where she announces she is quitting . When Andy learns this , he convinces Ron that April is a great assistant . Ron goes to April 's house and convinces her to come back by telling her about Andy 's compliments . April then reveals that she knows Ron is Duke Silver , since her mother is a huge fan , and that she recognized him the first time that they met . On her first day back , April successfully scares off someone wanting to meet with Ron by scheduling absurd meeting dates and times such as June 50th , the " one @-@ <unk> " of " march @-@ <unk> " and 2 : 65 PM . Ron gives her an approving smile and nod while watching from his office . 
 = = Production = = 
 " 94 Meetings " was written by Harris Wittels and directed by Tristram Shapeero . Ron Swanson and his staff handle only 93 meetings in the episode , but the 94th meeting from the episode title refers to April 's hastily arranged meeting with Ron in which she quits the job . " 94 Meetings " was the first episode to introduce April Ludgate 's family , who Ron meets when he goes to April 's house to convince her to return to work . The family includes April 's extremely chipper mother and father Larry and Rita Ludgate ( John Ellison and Terri Hoyos ) , and April 's younger sister Natalie Ludgate ( Minni Jo Mazzola ) , who is cynical and brooding very much like April herself . Susan Yeagley , who previously appeared in " Beauty Pageant " , guest starred in " 94 Meetings " as Jessica Wicks , and Alison Becker reprised her role as reporter Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep , who was first introduced in " The Reporter " . The episode also featured Yvans Jourdain in his recurring role as Pawnee Councilman Howser . 
 " 94 Meetings " included several references to past Parks and Recreation episodes . The Newport family and their powerful " Sweetums " corporation were first featured in the episode " Sweetums " , where they convinced the public to allow their extremely unhealthy nutrition bars to be sold at a local park . In another scene , April refers to Ron as " Duke Silver " , his secret jazz saxophonist alter ego first revealed in the episode " Practice Date " . It also features several running gags from throughout the series , including angrily complaining Pawnee citizens , Ann helping parks employees despite not working there , and extremely gory and racist historical Pawnee murals . 
 Within a week of the episode 's original broadcast , a copy of a desk calendar chronicling all of Ron Swanson 's meetings from the episode was placed on the official Parks and Recreation website . That site also featured three deleted scenes from the episode . In the first , 80 @-@ second clip , Leslie and Jessica get into a fight about the gazebo , and Jessica reveals she has trimmed the mansion 's historic hedges into the shape of elephants . The second clip , which lasted one minute , features several more of Ron Swanson 's meetings , including one where he tries to literally will a man away with his mind . Andy also tells Ron he accidentally agreed to sell the recreation center to the Quiznos fast food restaurant chain . In the third , 90 @-@ second clip , Leslie tries to end Nick Newport Sr. ' s birthday party by pulling the plug on the lights , but accidentally disconnects his breathing machine instead . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " 94 Meetings " was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 03 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . It received a 2 @.@ 0 rating / 6 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , which tied the ratings of the last original episode , " Summer Catalog " , although that episode was seen by around 110 @,@ 000 more viewers . " 94 Meetings " received particularly high ratings among males between ages 18 and 34 , a demographic particularly sought after by the networks . The episode received a 2 @.@ 2 rating in that group , besting the CBS reality series Survivor 's 2 @.@ 0 rating . 
 Alan Sepinwall , television columnist for The Star @-@ Ledger , said the meetings themselves were very entertaining and allowed for good character development between April and Andy , and Ron and April . However , he said the main plot with Leslie and the historic mansion was not tied strongly enough to Leslie 's fear that Mark and Ann would get married . Matt Fowler of IGN praised the episode , especially the callbacks to previous episodes and the interaction of the characters during the meetings . Although the show was only on hiatus for about a month , he said , " Man , it feels so good to have Parks and Recreation back . [ ... ] I don 't think there 's another comedy on TV right now that contains such ' miss @-@ able ' characters . " 
 The A.V. Club writer Leonard Pierce said " 94 Meetings " was a particularly strong episode that focused equally on the show 's premise and developing the relationships between characters . He particularly praised Susan Yeagley , but said Tom Haverford was underused , and felt the scenes between Ann and Mark were lacking . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell said it was a fast @-@ paced and funny episode , calling the jokes about the complaining residents " rapid @-@ fire scenes " . Kandell criticized Mark , who he said has been resorted to boring " straight @-@ man services " , and said he did not mind that Paul Schneider was leaving the series . Kona Gallagher of TV Squad appreciated that the episode reintroduced the fact that Leslie once was in love with Mark , and criticized the show for ignoring that fact all season . Gallagher also criticized the fact that a historic building could so easily be damaged and demolished , which he called unrealistic . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " 94 Meetings " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = SMS Lothringen = 
 SMS Lothringen was the fifth of five pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the Braunschweig class in the German Imperial Navy laid down in 1902 and commissioned 1906 . She was named for the then German province of Lothringen , now Lorraine , a region of France . Her sister ships were Braunschweig , Elsass , Hessen , and Preussen . 
 Lothringen served in the II Battle Squadron of the German High Seas Fleet for the majority of her career . She participated in a fleet advance in December 1914 in support of the Raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby during which the German fleet encountered and briefly clashed with a detachment of the British Grand Fleet . Her poor condition necessitated her withdrawal from fleet service in 1916 , after which she was used as a guard ship in the Baltic Sea , and later as a training ship . After the war , Lothringen was retained by the re @-@ formed Reichsmarine and converted into a depot ship for F @-@ type minesweepers . She was stricken in March 1931 and sold to ship breakers later that year . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Lothringen was laid down in 1902 , at the Schichau @-@ Werke in Danzig under construction number 716 . The fifth and final unit of her class , she was ordered under the contract name " M " as a new unit for the fleet . The ship cost 23 @,@ 801 @,@ 000 marks . Lothringen was launched on 27 May 1904 and commissioned into the fleet on 18 May 1906 . 
 The ship was 127 @.@ 7 m ( 419 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 22 @.@ 2 m ( 73 ft ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 1 m ( 27 ft ) forward . The ship was powered by three 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion engines that drove three screws . Steam was provided by eight naval and six cylindrical boilers , all of which burned coal . Lothringen 's powerplant was rated at 16 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 15 @,@ 781 ihp ; 11 @,@ 768 kW ) , which generated a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Lothringen 's armament consisted of a main battery of four 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 40 guns in twin gun turrets , one fore and one aft of the central superstructure . Her secondary armament consisted of fourteen 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 inch ) SK L / 40 guns and eighteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) SK L / 35 quick @-@ firing guns . The armament suite was rounded out with six 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , all mounted submerged in the hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After commissioning , Lothringen was assigned to the II Battle Squadron of the German fleet . Lothringen participated in the de Ruyter festival in Amsterdam on 24 March 1907 . In 1909 , Lothringen and the older battleship Mecklenburg won the annual Kaiser 's Prize for accurate shooting . By 1911 , Germany 's first two classes of dreadnought battleships — the Nassau and Helgoland classes — were entering service . These ships were assigned to I Battle Squadron ; all of the older Kaiser Friedrich III and Wittelsbach @-@ class vessels , armed with only 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns , were placed in reserve . Germany now had a battleship fleet armed entire with guns 28 cm ( 11 in ) or larger . 
 Lothringen was present during the fleet cruise to Norway in July 1914 , which was cut short by the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and subsequent rise in international tensions . On 25 July the ship 's crew was made aware of Austria @-@ Hungary 's ultimatum to Serbia ; Lothringen left Norway to rendezvous with the rest of the fleet the following day . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 After the outbreak of war in August 1914 , the High Seas Fleet conducted a series of operations designed to lure out a portion of the numerically superior British Grand Fleet and destroy it . By achieving a rough equality of forces , the German navy could then force a decisive battle in the southern portion of the North Sea . The first such operation in which the High Seas Fleet , including Lothringen , participated was the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . The main fleet acted as distant support for Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's battlecruiser squadron while it raided the coastal towns . On the evening of 15 December , the fleet came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced the German fleet commander , Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , that the entire Grand Fleet was deployed before him . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battlefleet back towards Germany . 
 Like her sister Preussen , Lothringen missed the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 , though for different reasons . Preussen had been temporarily transferred to guard duties in the Baltic , while Lothringen was in such poor condition that Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the fleet commander , removed her from the squadron . Jutland proved to Scheer that the pre @-@ dreadnought battleships were too vulnerable to take part in a major fleet action , and so detached the II Squadron from the High Seas Fleet . Lothringen became a guard ship in the Baltic after she left the battle fleet . The following year she was transferred to Wilhelmshaven , where she was used as an exercise ship , as well as to train engineers . She served in this capacity until the end of the war in 1918 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war career = = = 
 The Treaty of Versailles , which ended the war , specified that Germany was permitted to retain six battleships of the " Deutschland or Lothringen types . " Lothringen was among those ships chosen to remain on active service with the newly reformed Reichsmarine . Like her sister Preussen , Lothringen was converted into a parent ship for F @-@ type minesweepers at the Kriegsmarinewerft in Wilhelmshaven in 1919 ; the ship was disarmed and platforms for holding the minesweepers were installed . 
 Lothringen served in this capacity with the newly reformed Reichsmarine from 1922 until 1926 , after which she was placed in reserve . She was stricken from the naval register on 31 March 1931 ; the Reichsmarine then sold her , minus her armor plating , to ship breakers that year for 269 @,@ 650 Reichsmarks . Lothringen was subsequently broken up for scrap by Blohm & Voss in Hamburg . 
 = Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) = 
 Vol . 3 : The Subliminal Verses is the third studio album by American heavy metal band Slipknot . The album was released on May 25 , 2004 , through Roadrunner Records , and a special edition , containing a bonus disc , was released on April 12 , 2005 . It is the band 's only album produced by Rick Rubin , and also the only one not to feature profanity . Following the band 's tour to promote its second album in 2002 , speculation regarding the future began . Some band members had already been involved in side projects including Murderdolls , To My Surprise , and the reformation of Stone Sour . In 2003 , Slipknot moved into The Mansion to work on the album . Initially , the band was unproductive ; lead vocalist Corey Taylor was drinking heavily . Nevertheless , they wrote more than enough material for a new album — the band 's first to incorporate more traditional , melodic song structures , guitar solos and acoustic guitars . 
 The album received generally positive reviews . Slipknot was praised by Allmusic for its " dedication to making it a Slipknot album " , while Q added that the album was " a triumph " . The album peaked within the top ten in album sales across eleven countries , and went Platinum in the United States . The band also received the Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance for the song " Before I Forget " . At the end of 2009 , " Before I Forget " was listed as " AOL 's Top Metal Song of the Decade " . Roadrunner Records have listed the music video for " Duality " as the best video in Roadrunner history . 
 = = Production = = 
 Slipknot recorded Vol . 3 : The Subliminal Verses with producer Rick Rubin at The Mansion in Los Angeles , California in 2003 . Earlier there had been speculation regarding the possibility of a third album and the band 's future , as some members worked on other musical projects . After the album was completed , the band said that these side projects " saved the band " and " helped [ them ] break out of the box [ they ] were in " . Coming back together and working out their differences hindered the writing process initially . During an interview in 2008 , drummer Joey Jordison said " we didn 't talk to each other for three months , we just sat there wasting money in the fucking Houdini mansion . " Speaking retrospectively percussionist Shawn Crahan states ; " eventually we got sick of waiting for shit to happen . We got together , had a few beers and wrote a really artsy , fucked up song called ' Happy Ending ' . " 
 In a 2003 interview , Jordison explained that despite the initial problems more than enough material was written for the album and added that " it 's better to have stuff to pick from than to settle for shit " , in contrast to how Slipknot settled too soon with fewer songs on previous albums . Band members were divided over their experience of working with producer Rubin ; some doubted his commitment to Slipknot as he split his time between many artists at once . Lead vocalist Corey Taylor admitted in an interview that he drank heavily throughout their time in the mansion , saying " I would drink from the moment I got up until the moment I passed out . " He explained that ; " everything I did while I was drinking sounded like shit " , while expressing how unhappy he was with the choice of vocal takes which ended up on the album . During this time , percussionist Crahan worked on Voliminal : Inside the Nine , a video documenting the creation process of the album and the touring which would follow . 
 In a 2008 interview , Corey Taylor said that he only met Rubin four times during the entire recording process of Vol . 3 : The Subliminal Verses and that Rubin barely ever showed up to the studio : " ... we were being charged horrendous amounts of money . And for me , if you 're going to produce something , you 're fucking there . I don 't care who you are . " He also added : " He is overrated , he is overpaid , and I will never work with him again . " Conversely , Slipknot 's guitarist Jim Root had said in that same interview that " A lot of the guys in the band say Rick was unavailable . And yeah , he takes on a lot of projects at one time , but he also does things that are beneficial . He would listen to what we 'd done , then have us <unk> things that needed work . He 's kind of like Big Brother up on the hill . Even though he wasn 't there physically every day , he was . That 's my favorite record we 've done . " 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 The cover of the album features the " maggot mask " designed by Shawn Crahan . The name of the mask is a reference to the name given to fans by the band . The mask was made of stitched leather , with a zipper around the mouth area , and copies can be obtained as part of the band 's merchandise . It is featured in the music video for the album 's second single " Vermilion " , in which the band appears whenever the protagonist wears the mask . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Prior to the release of the album , the band released " Pulse of the Maggots " in its entirety as a free downloadable track on the now defunct SK Radio website , it was available for one day only on March 30 , 2004 . This also marked the beginning of Slipknot 's touring cycle , The Subliminal Verses World Tour , starting with their appearance on the Jägermeister Music Tour . On May 4 , 2004 , " Duality " was released as their first official single . Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) was finally released on May 25 , 2004 , to coincide with the release of the album " Duality " was released on a special edition 7 @-@ inch red vinyl . Alongside the normal edition of the album Roadrunner Records also released a limited edition CD that could connect to the Slipknot web site and obtain new songs and other promotional material , but as of 2009 the link on the CD has stopped working . Other singles from the album included " Vermilion " , " Before I Forget " and " The Blister Exists " . On April 12 , 2005 , a special edition version of the album , containing a bonus disc , was released . 
 = = Musical and lyrical themes = = 
 Before the release of Vol . 3 , band members had promised a more experimental album ; drummer Jordison said that " it 's almost as if Slayer was tapping on Radiohead " . For the first time in Slipknot 's career , songs such as " Circle " and " Vermilion Pt . 2 " were led by an acoustic rather than an electric guitar . According to Todd Burns of Stylus , songs such as " Pulse of the Maggots " and " Before I Forget " incorporate a " pounding metal " style . Allmusic wrote that tracks , such as " The Blister Exists " , " Three Nil " , and " Opium of the People " , combine the two extremes of their recognizable metal edge with melody , and the most apparent shifts being in Taylor 's vocal style , with relatively few songs relying solely on screamed vocals in comparison to their earlier work . Entertainment Weekly wrote that the album " [ bounced ] between over @-@ powering speed @-@ metal and haunting acoustic rock " . 
 Vol . 3 : The Subliminal Verses is Slipknot 's first album that does not warrant a Parental Advisory label , mainly because the lyrics of Vol . 3 , compared to other Slipknot albums , are much less explicit in terms of profanity and obscure dark themes . The special edition still has a Parent Advisory label . In a 2008 interview , guitarist Mick Thomson explained that vocalist Corey Taylor made a point of avoiding the use of profanity in response to claims that he relied on use of it . Only two instances of profanity occur ; the use of the word " bitched " in Duality and " bastards " which appears in the monologue leading into " Pulse of the Maggots " . According to Allmusic , the lyrics of Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) include metaphors and touch on themes that include anger , disaffection , and psychosis . Taylor 's diversity in his vocal delivery was praised ; Burns considered tracks like " Vermilion Pt . 2 " to have " stately vocal harmonies " . Taylor 's performance on the closing track " Danger — Keep Away " was specifically praised ; Stylus called it the most " depressing and emotional " track on the album . Burns concluded that overall " the riffs have lost none of their impact , but it seems like finally the group also wants you to appreciate their vocal and lyrical impact . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical reception to Vol . 3 : The Subliminal Verses was generally positive . It received a score of 70 % on review aggregator Metacritic based on 12 reviews . Johnny Loftus of Allmusic called the album " not just another flashy alt @-@ metal billboard " , praising the band 's " dedication to making it a Slipknot album " . Todd Burns of Stylus wrote that people who accuse the band of having " softened " are " mistaking softness for maturation " . Burns went on to call the album " the best pop inflected metal album since System of a Down 's Toxicity " . Sean Richardson of Entertainment Weekly gave the album an A − and wrote that it is a " deranged hippie update " of Slayer 's " masterpiece " Reign in Blood , which was also produced by Rubin . Q hailed Vol . 3 : The Subliminal Verses as " a triumph " . John Robb of PlayLouder complimented Slipknot 's unexpected rise to become " one of the biggest groups in the world " , dubbing " Before I Forget " a " classic [ Slipknot ] anthem " . Robb added that the album is better than Iowa , citing its " differing textures " . Rolling Stone gave the album a rating of 3 out of 5 , stating the album presented " newer extremes " for the band , " which in Slipknot 's case means tunefulness and traditional song structures " . 
 A review from the BBC praised the album , declaring that there " is no finer metal band on the planet " . It cited the group 's integration of " hyperactive bass drums , complex , compelling riffs and ridiculously fast fretwork " with more melodic styles and described Vermilion as " the key track ... an emotional , melodramatic , utterly convincing rollercoaster ride " . 
 Alternative Press criticized the album , writing that it " plays out like a tepid , second @-@ rate version of Iowa , which pretty much makes it a third @-@ rate anything else . " Yahoo ! ' s Chris Heath also reviewed the album negatively , writing that " The Nameless " combines " the ludicrously vicious and ridiculously placid " and that by doing so makes the track feel " awkward " . Heath added , " the themes are predictably absurd ... yet mildly comical given the inclusion of such disparate styles stationed side by side . " 
 Vol . 3 : The Subliminal Verses peaked at position number two on the US Billboard 200 , online , Australian Recording Industry Association , and Canadian sales charts . The album was certified Platinum in the United States on February 21 , 2005 . In 2006 , the band won their first Grammy for Best Metal Performance with " Before I Forget " . In 2009 , Metal Hammer called it one of the " Albums of the Decade " . It was also rated 31st in UK magazine Kerrang ! ' s " The 50 Best Albums of the 21st Century " reader poll . In 2005 , the album was ranked number 396 in Rock Hard magazine 's book of The 500 Greatest Rock & Metal Albums of All Time . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Shawn Crahan , Jim Root , Chris Fehn , Paul Gray , Joey Jordison , Corey Taylor , Craig Jones , Mick Thomson and Sid Wilson . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Aside from their real names , members of the band are referred to by numbers zero through eight . 
 = Stuckism = 
 Stuckism is an international art movement founded in 1999 by Billy Childish and Charles Thomson to promote figurative painting as opposed to conceptual art . By July 2012 the initial group of 13 British artists had expanded to 233 groups in 52 countries . 
 Childish and Thomson have issued several manifestos . The first one was The Stuckists , consisting of 20 points starting with " Stuckism is a quest for authenticity " . Remodernism , the other well @-@ known manifesto of the movement , is a criticism of postmodernism ; it aims to get back to the true spirit of modernism , to produce art with spiritual value regardless of style , subject matter or medium . In another manifesto they define themselves as anti @-@ anti @-@ art which is against anti @-@ art and for art . 
 After exhibiting in small galleries in Shoreditch , London , the Stuckists ' first show in a major public museum was held in 2004 at the Walker Art Gallery , as part of the Liverpool Biennial . The group has demonstrated annually at Tate Britain against the Turner Prize since 2000 , sometimes dressed in clown costumes . They have also come out in opposition to the Charles Saatchi @-@ patronised Young British Artists . 
 Although painting is the dominant artistic form of Stuckism , artists using other media such as photography , sculpture , film and collage have also joined , and share the Stuckist opposition to <unk> and ego @-@ art . 
 = = Name , founding and origin = = 
 The name " Stuckism " was coined in January 1999 by Charles Thomson in response to a poem read to him several times by Billy Childish . In it , Childish recites that his former girlfriend , Tracey Emin had said he was " stuck ! stuck ! stuck ! " with his art , poetry and music . Later that month , Thomson approached Childish with a view to co @-@ founding an art group called Stuckism , which Childish agreed to , on the basis that Thomson would do the work for the group , as Childish already had a full schedule . 
 There were eleven other founding members : Philip <unk> , Frances Castle , Sheila Clark , Eamon <unk> , Ella Guru , Wolf Howard , Bill Lewis , <unk> Lewis , Joe Machine , Sexton Ming , and Charles Williams . The membership has evolved since its founding through creative collaborations : the group was originally promoted as working in paint , but members have since worked in various other media , including poetry , fiction , performance , photography , film and music . 
 In 1979 , Thomson , Childish , Bill Lewis and Ming were members of The Medway Poets performance group , to which <unk> and <unk> Lewis had earlier contributed . Peter Waite 's Rochester Pottery staged a series of solo painting shows . In 1982 , TVS broadcast a documentary on the poets . That year , Emin , then a fashion student , and Childish started a relationship ; her writing was edited by Bill Lewis , printed by Thomson and published by Childish . Group members published dozens of works . The poetry group dispersed after two years , reconvening in 1987 to record The Medway Poets LP . Clark , Howard and Machine became involved over the following years . Thomson got to know Williams , who was a local art student and whose girlfriend was a friend of Emin ; Thomson also met <unk> . During the foundation of the group , Ming brought in his girlfriend , Guru , who in turn invited Castle . 
 = = Manifestos = = 
 In August 1999 , Childish and Thomson wrote The Stuckists manifesto which stress the value of painting as a medium , its use for communication , and the expression of emotion and experience – as opposed to what Stuckists see as the superficial novelty , nihilism and irony of conceptual art and postmodernism . The most contentious statement in the manifesto is : " Artists who don 't paint aren 't artists " . 
 The second and third manifestos , An Open Letter to Sir Nicholas Serota and Remodernism respectively , were sent to the director of the Tate , Nicholas Serota . He sent a brief reply : " Thank you for your open letter dated 6 March . You will not be surprised to learn that I have no comment to make on your letter , or your manifesto ' Remodernism ' . " 
 In the Remodernism manifesto , the Stuckists declared that they aimed to replace postmodernism with <unk> , a period of renewed spiritual ( as opposed to religious ) values in art , culture and society . Other manifestos have included Handy Hints , Anti @-@ anti @-@ art , The <unk> writer and the Idiocy of Contemporary Writing , The Turner Prize , The <unk> of the Critic and Stuckist critique of Damien Hirst . 
 In Anti @-@ anti @-@ art , the Stuckists outlined their opposition to what is known as " anti @-@ art " . Stuckists claim that conceptual art is justified by the work of Marcel Duchamp , but that Duchamp 's work is " anti @-@ art by intent and effect " . The Stuckists feel that " Duchamp 's work was a protest against the stale , unthinking artistic establishment of his day " , while " the great ( but wholly unintentional ) irony of postmodernism is that it is a direct equivalent of the conformist , unoriginal establishment that Duchamp attacked in the first place " . 
 Manifestos have been written by other Stuckists , including the Students for Stuckism group . An " Underage Stuckists " group was founded in 2006 with a manifesto for teenagers written by two 16 @-@ year @-@ olds , Liv Soul and Rebekah Maybury , on MySpace . 
 = = Growth in UK = = 
 In July 1999 , the Stuckists were first mentioned in the media , in an article in The Evening Standard and soon gained other coverage , helped by press interest in Tracey Emin , who had been nominated for the Turner Prize . 
 The first Stuckist show was Stuck ! Stuck ! Stuck ! in September 1999 in Joe Crompton 's in Shoreditch Gallery 108 ( now defunct ) , followed by The Resignation of Sir Nicholas Serota . In 2000 they staged The Real Turner Prize Show at the same time as the Tate Gallery 's Turner Prize exhibition . 
 A " Students for Stuckism " group was founded in 2000 by students from Camberwell College of Arts , who staged their own exhibition . S.P. Howarth was expelled from the painting degree course at Camberwell college for his paintings , and had the first solo exhibit at the Stuckism International Gallery in 2002 , named I Don 't Want a Painting Degree if it Means Not Painting . 
 Thomson stood as a Stuckist candidate for the 2001 British General Election , in the constituency of Islington South & Finsbury , against Chris Smith , the then Secretary of State for Culture . He picked up 108 votes ( 0 @.@ 4 % ) . Childish left the group at this time because he objected to Thomson 's leadership . 
 From 2002 to 2005 Thomson ran the Stuckism International Centre and Gallery in Shoreditch , London . In 2003 , under the title A Dead Shark Isn 't Art , the gallery exhibited a shark which had first been put on public display in 1989 ( two years before Damien Hirst 's ) by Eddie Saunders in his Shoreditch shop , JD Electrical Supplies . It was suggested that Hirst may have seen this and copied it . 
 In 2003 they reported Charles Saatchi to the UK Office of Fair Trading , complaining that he had an effective monopoly on art . The complaint was not upheld . In 2003 , an allied group , Stuckism Photography , was founded by Larry Dunstan and Andy Bullock . In 2005 the Stuckists offered a donation of 175 paintings from the Walker show to the Tate , but it was rejected by the Tate 's trustees . 
 In August 2005 Thomson alerted the press to the fact that the Tate had purchased a work by Chris <unk> , The Upper Room , for £ 705 @,@ 000 while the artist was a serving Tate trustee . Fraser Kee Scott , owner of A Gallery , demonstrated with the Stuckists outside the Tate Gallery against the gallery 's purchase of The Upper Room . Scott said in The Daily Telegraph that the Tate Gallery 's chairman , Paul <unk> , was hypocritical for refusing to divulge the price paid . <unk> had asked other artists to donate work to the gallery . In July 2006 the Charity Commission censured the gallery for acting outside its legal powers . Sir Nicholas Serota stated that the Stuckists had " acted in the public interest " . 
 In October 2006 , the Stuckists staged their first exhibition , Go West , in a commercial West End gallery , Spectrum London , signalling their entry as " major players " in the art world . 
 An international symposium on Stuckism took place in October 2006 at the Liverpool John Moores University during the Liverpool Biennial . The programme was led by Naive John , founder of the Liverpool Stuckists . There was an accompanying exhibition in the 68 Hope Gallery at Liverpool School of Art and Design ( John Moores University Gallery ) . 
 By 2006 there were 63 Stuckist groups in the UK . Members include Naive John , Mark D , Elsa Dax , Paul Harvey , Jane Kelly , <unk> , Peter McArdle , Peter Murphy , Rachel Jordan , Guy Denning and Abby Jackson . John Bourne opened Stuckism Wales at his home , a permanent exhibition of ( mainly Welsh ) paintings . Mandy McCartin is a regular guest artist . 
 In 2010 , Paul Harvey 's painting of Charles Saatchi was banned from the window display of the <unk> Gallery in Maddox Street , London , on the grounds that it was " too controversial for the area " . It was the centrepiece of the show , Stuckist Clowns Doing Their Dirty Work , the first exhibition of the Stuckists in Mayfair , and depicted Saatchi with a sheep at his feet and a halo made from a cheese wrapper . The Saatchi Gallery said that Saatchi " would not have any problem " with the painting 's display . The gallery announced they were shutting down the show . Harvey said , " I did it to make Saatchi look friendly and human . It 's a ludicrous decision " . The Stuckists considered legal action , and protested with emails to the gallery . Subsequently , the painting was reinstated and the show continued . 
 = = = Demonstrations = = = 
 The Stuckists gained significant media coverage for eight years of protests ( 2000 @-@ 2006 and 2008 ) outside Tate Britain against the Turner Prize , sometimes dressed as clowns . In 2001 they demonstrated in Trafalgar Square at the unveiling of Rachel Whiteread 's Monument . In 2002 , they carried a coffin marked The Death of Conceptual Art to the White Cube Gallery . In 2004 outside the launch of The Triumph of Painting at the Saatchi Gallery they wore tall hats with Charles Saatchi 's face emblazoned and carried placards claiming that Saatchi had copied their ideas . 
 Events outside Britain have included The Clown Trial of President Bush held in New Haven in 2003 to protest against the Iraq War . Michael Dickinson has exhibited political and satirical collages in Turkey for which he was arrested , and charged , but acquitted of any crime — an outcome which was seen to have positive implications for Turkey 's relationship with the European Union . 
 = = = The Stuckists Punk Victorian = = = 
