 The Stuckists Punk Victorian was the first national gallery exhibition of Stuckist art . It was held at the Walker Art Gallery and Lady Lever Art Gallery and was part of the 2004 Liverpool Biennial . It consisted of over 250 paintings by 37 artists , mostly from the UK but also with a representation of international Stuckist artists from the US , Germany and Australia . There was an accompanying exhibition of Stuckist photographers . A book , The Stuckists Punk Victorian , was published to accompany the exhibition . Daily Mail journalist Jane Kelly exhibited a painting of Myra Hindley in the show , which may have been the cause of her dismissal from her job . 
 = = = A Gallery = = = 
 In July 2007 , the Stuckists held an exhibition at A Gallery , I Won 't Have Sex with You as long as We 're Married , titled after words apparently said to Thomson by his ex @-@ wife , Stella Vine on their wedding night . The show coincided with the opening of Vine 's major show at Modern Art Oxford and was prompted by Thomson 's anger that the material promoting her show did not mention her time with the Stuckists . Tate chairman Paul <unk> visited both shows . 
 = = = Sir Nicholas Serota Makes an Acquisitions Decision = = = 
 Charles Thomson 's painting , Sir Nicholas Serota Makes an Acquisitions Decision , as Charlotte Cripps of The Independent wrote is one of the best known paintings to come out of the Stuckist movement , and as Jane Morris wrote in The Guardian it 's a likely " signature piece " for the movement , standing for its opposition to conceptual art . Painted in 2000 , the piece has been exhibited in <unk> shows , and featured on placards in Stuckist demonstrations against the Turner Prize . It depicts Sir Nicholas Serota , Director of the Tate Gallery and the usual chairman of the Turner Prize jury , and satirises Young British Artist Tracey Emin 's installation , My Bed , consisting of her bed and objects , including knickers , which she exhibited in 1999 as a Turner Prize nominee . 
 = = International movement = = 
 In 2000 Regan <unk> started the first Stuckist group outside Britain in Melbourne , Australia , and it was decided that other artists should be free to start their own groups also , named after their locality . Stuckism has since grown into an international art movement of 233 groups in 52 countries , as of July 2012 . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 <unk> Bamba founded The <unk> Stuckists in 2001 in Ivory Coast and Kari Seid founded The Cape Town Stuckists in 2008 in South Africa . 
 = = = America = = = 
 In 2000 , Susan <unk> founded the first US group The Pittsburgh Stuckists in Pittsburgh — the second group to be founded outside the UK . This was announced in the In Pittsburgh Weekly , 1 November 2000 : " The new word in art is Stuckism . A Stuckist paints their life , mind and soul with no pretensions and no excuses . " By 2011 there are 44 US Stuckist groups . There have been Stuckist shows and demonstrations in the US , and American Stuckists have also exhibited in international Stuckist shows abroad . US Stuckists include Jeffrey Scott Holland , Tony Juliano , Frank <unk> and Terry Marks . There are also 4 Stuckist groups in Canada including The White Rock Stuckists in British Columbia founded by David Wilson . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 Asim Butt founded the first Pakistani Stuckist group , The Karachi Stuckists , in 2005 . At the end of 2009 he was thinking of expanding The Karachi Stuckists with new members , but on 15 January 2010 he committed suicide . In 2011 <unk> Husain restarted the group . 
 The Tehran Stuckists is an Iranian Stuckist , <unk> and anti @-@ anti @-@ art group of painters founded in 2007 in Tehran , which is a major protagonist of Asian Stuckism . In April 2010 they curated the first Stuckist exhibition in Iran , Tehran Stuckists : Searching for the Unlimited Potentials of <unk> Painting , at Iran Artists Forum , <unk> Gallery . Their second exhibition , International Stuckists : Painters Out of Order , including paintings by Stuckists from Iran , Britain , USA , Spain , South Africa , Pakistan and Turkey was held at Day Gallery in November 2013 . Although one of the main aspects of Stuckism movement is that " the Stuckist allows him / herself uncensored expression " , but The Tehran Stuckists ' exhibitions in Iran are censored and they are not allowed to exhibit some of their artworks in Iranian galleries . The group has also participated in Stuckist exhibitions in Britain , Lithuania and Spain . 
 Other Asian Stuckists are Shelley Li ( China ) , <unk> <unk> ( India ) , Joko <unk> ( Indonesia ) , Elio Yuri <unk> ( Japan ) and Fady Chamaa ( Lebanon ) . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 The Prague Stuckists were founded in 2005 in the Czech Republic by Robert <unk> , Other Stuckist artists in Europe include Peter Klint ( Germany ) , Michael Dickinson ( Turkey ) , Odysseus <unk> ( Greece ) , Artista Eli ( Spain ) , <unk> Per W ( Belgium ) , Jaroslav <unk> ( Czech Republic ) , Jiri Hauschka ( Czech Republic ) , <unk> <unk> ( Czech Republic ) , Jan <unk> ( Slovakia ) and Pavel <unk> ( Bulgaria ) . 
 = = = Oceania = = = 
 In October 2000 , Regan <unk> founded The Melbourne Stuckists in Melbourne , the fourth Stuckist group to be started and the first one outside the UK . On 27 October 2000 , he staged the Real Turner Prize Show at the Dead End Gallery in his home , concurrent with three shows with the same title in England ( London , Falmouth and Dartington ) and one in Germany in protest against the Tate Gallery 's Turner Prize . Other Australian Stuckists include Godfrey Blow , who exhibited in The Stuckists Punk Victorian . In 2005 Mike Mayhew also founded The Christchurch Stuckists in New Zealand . 
 = = Ex Stuckists = = 
 Co @-@ founder , Billy Childish left the group in 2001 , but has stated that he remains committed to its principles . Sexton Ming left to concentrate on a solo career with the Aquarium Gallery . Wolf Howard left in 2006 , but has exhibited with the group since . Jesse Richards who ran the Stuckism Centre USA in New Haven , left the group in 2006 to focus on <unk> film . 
 In June 2000 , Stella Vine went to a talk given by Childish and Thomson on Stuckism and Remodernism in London . At the end of May 2001 , she exhibited some of her paintings publicly for the first time in the Vote Stuckist show in Brixton , and formed The Westminster Stuckists group . On 4 June , she took part in a Stuckist demonstration in Trafalgar Square . By 10 July , she renamed her group The <unk> . In mid @-@ August , Thomson and Vine were married . A work by her was shown in the Stuckist show in Paris , which ended in mid @-@ November , by which time she had rejected the Stuckists , and the marriage had ended . 
 In February 2004 , Charles Saatchi bought a painting of Diana , Princess of Wales by Vine and was credited with " discovering " her . Thomson said it was the Stuckists and not Saatchi who had discovered her . At the end of March 2004 , Thomson made a formal complaint about Saatchi to the Office of Fair Trading , claiming that Saatchi 's leading position was monopolistic " to the detriment of smaller competitors " , citing Vine as an example of this . On 15 April , the OFT closed the file on the case on the basis that Saatchi was not " in a dominant position in any relevant market . " 
 = = Responses = = 
 In 1999 , two performance artists , Yuan Chai and Jian Jun Xi , jumped on Tracey Emin 's installation My Bed , a work consisting of the artist 's own unmade bed , at the Tate Gallery 's Turner Prize , in an unauthorised art intervention . Chai had written , among other things , the words " Anti Stuckism " on his bare back . <unk> Gibbons of The Guardian wrote ( in 1999 ) that the event " will go down in art history as the defining moment of the new and previously unheard of Anti @-@ Stuckist Movement . " Writing in The Guardian ten years later , Jonathan Jones described the Stuckists as " enemies of art " , and what they say as " cheap slogans " and " hysterical rants " . 
 The artist Max <unk> wrote that the art world needed a new manifesto , as confrontational as that of Futurism or Dadaism , " written with a heart @-@ felt passion capable of inspiring and rallying art world outsiders , dissenters , rebels , the neglected and disaffected " , and suggests that " Well now we 've got it , in the form of Stuckism " . 
 New York art gallery owner Edward Winkleman wrote in 2006 that he had never heard of the Stuckists , so he " looked them up on Wikipedia " , and stated he was " turned off by their anti @-@ conceptual stance , not to mention the inanity of their statement about painting , but I 'm more than a bit interested in the democratization their movement represents . " Thomson responded to Winkleman directly . 
 Also in 2006 , Colin <unk> , writing in The Telegraph , noted that the Stuckist 's first exhibition in central London had brought " multiple sales " for leading artists of the movement , and that this raised the question of how good they were at painting . He observed that " Whatever the critics may say , buyers from the UK , the US and Japan have already taken a punt . Six of Thomson 's paintings have sold for between £ 4 @,@ 000 and £ 5 @,@ 000 each . Joe Machine , a former jailbird who paints for therapeutic reasons , has also sold six paintings for the same price . " 
 The BBC arts correspondent Lawrence Pollard wrote in 2009 that the way was paved for " cultural agitators " like the Stuckists , as well as the <unk> , Surrealists and others , by the Futurist Manifesto of 20 February 1909 . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 Some UK artists . 
 = Typhoon Gay ( 1992 ) = 
 Typhoon Gay , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Seniang , was the strongest and longest @-@ lasting storm of the 1992 Pacific typhoon season . It formed on November 14 near the International Date Line from a monsoon trough , which also spawned two other systems . Typhoon Gay later moved through the Marshall Islands as an intensifying typhoon , and after passing through the country it reached its peak intensity over open waters . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) estimated peak winds of 295 km / h ( 185 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 872 mb ( 25 @.@ 8 inHg ) . However , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) , which is the official warning center in the western Pacific , estimated winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) , with a pressure of 900 mbar ( 27 inHg ) . Gay weakened rapidly after peaking because of interaction with another typhoon , and it struck Guam with winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) on November 23 . The typhoon briefly re @-@ intensified before weakening and becoming extratropical south of Japan on November 30 . 
 The typhoon first affected the Marshall Islands , where 5 @,@ 000 people became homeless and heavy crop damage was reported . The nation 's capital of Majuro experienced power and water outages during the storm . There were no fatalities among Marshall Islands citizens , although the typhoon killed a sailor traveling around the world . When Gay struck Guam , it became the sixth typhoon of the year to affect the island . Most of the weaker structures had been destroyed during Typhoon Omar earlier in the year , resulting in little additional damage from Gay . Because of its substantial weakening , the typhoon had a disrupted inner @-@ core and produced minimal rainfall . However , strong winds scorched the plants on Guam with saltwater , causing extensive defoliation . Further north , high waves from the typhoon destroyed a house on Saipan , and heavy rainfall in Okinawa , Japan , caused flooding and power outages . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Gay were from a tropical disturbance east of the International Date Line along a monsoon trough that extended west to the South China Sea in mid @-@ November 1992 . The same trough had earlier spawned Tropical Storm Forrest and would later create Typhoon Hunt . The tropical disturbance moved westward across the dateline and gradually became better organized with increased convection . On November 14 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert . At 1800 UTC that day , the agency initiated advisories on Tropical Depression 31W , located to the east of the Marshall Islands . The Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) also assessed that the depression had developed by that time . The next day , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Gay . 
 For most of Typhoon Gay 's existence , a strong anticyclone to its north steered the storm to the west or west @-@ northwest . The JTWC upgraded the storm to typhoon status early on November 17 , and the JMA followed suit the next day . Gay first affected <unk> Island and eventually crossed the central portion of the Marshall Islands . Owing to favorable sea surface temperatures and upper @-@ level wind patterns , the storm entered a phase of rapid deepening similar to other November typhoons near that location . On November 19 , the JTWC upgraded Gay to a super typhoon , which is a typhoon with 1 @-@ minute sustained winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) . Gradual intensification ensued , and based on satellite estimates , the JTWC estimated that Typhoon Gay attained peak winds of 295 km / h ( 185 mph ) at 0000 UTC on November 21 . The agency also estimated that the typhoon reached a minimum barometric pressure of 872 mb ( 25 @.@ 8 inHg ) , which would have made Gay the most intense typhoon since Typhoon Tip in 1979 . At the same time , the JMA estimated peak 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) , with a pressure of 900 mbar ( 27 inHg ) . 
 After Gay attained its peak intensity , outflow from Typhoon Hunt to its northwest increased the wind shear over the typhoon . The wind shear deteriorated Gay 's northern eyewall , causing the typhoon to weaken . In the 24 hours after Gay reached its peak intensity , the JTWC estimated that the winds had decreased by 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) to below super typhoon status ; such rapid weakening is uncommon for a storm over open waters . Tropical cyclone forecast models had anticipated Gay to make a turn to the north and northeast , but it maintained a west @-@ northwest track toward Guam . Despite weakening steadily , the typhoon maintained a large size with a wind diameter of 1 @,@ 480 km ( 920 mi ) . Around 0000 UTC on November 23 , Gay made landfall on Guam , becoming the third typhoon in three months to strike the island — the others were Typhoon Omar in August and Typhoon Brian in October . Both the JTWC and the JMA estimated the typhoon to have had winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) at landfall . The influence from Typhoon Hunt diminished after Gay affected Guam , allowing it to begin restrengthening . Late on November 25 , the JTWC estimated that the typhoon attained a secondary peak intensity of 215 km / h ( 135 mph ) . Gay subsequently slowed while moving along the western periphery of the subtropical ridge , and it turned north while gradually weakening . On November 28 , the JMA downgraded Gay to a tropical storm , and the JTWC followed suit the next day . The JMA assessed that Gay became an extratropical cyclone at 0000 UTC on November 30 ; however , the JTWC continued issuing advisories until December 1 , making it the longest @-@ lasting typhoon of the season with 63 advisories . The remnant of Gay accelerated and turned to the northeast , passing to the southeast of Japan and crossing the International Date Line . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Marshall Islands = = = 
 Typhoon Gay first affected the Marshall Islands , striking several atolls in the archipelago with typhoon @-@ force winds . On <unk> Island , the first island to be affected , the typhoon destroyed every wooden structure and left most of the islanders homeless . High winds downed all of the island 's trees and destroyed 75 % of the crops . Nearby , <unk> Atoll experienced similar winds , though house damage was minor despite similar crop losses . The large wind field extended to the south , affecting Maloelap and Aur atolls with winds that damaged 30 % of the houses and crops . Further south , the Marshall Islands capital city of Majuro experienced lightning strikes from the typhoon , which caused an island @-@ wide power outage and cuts to the water supply and radio communication . Debris from the storm closed the Marshall Islands International Airport for two days . On <unk> Atoll , the typhoon destroyed an automated meteorological observing station that had been installed in 1989 . The typhoon left over 5 @,@ 000 people homeless across the country , but there were no native deaths and only one injury in the archipelago owing to well @-@ executed warnings and preparations . However , large waves from the typhoon sank a boat in a small lagoon , killing one of the boat 's two sailors . 
 = = = Guam and Northern Marianas = = = 
 After affecting the Marshall Islands , Gay tracked toward Guam and became the fifth typhoon to come within 110 km ( 68 mi ) of the island in six months . Extensive preparations were made , including the sending of ships to mitigate damage and flying United States Air Force planes to other bases in the region . The schools , government buildings , airport , and port were closed , and about 4 @,@ 300 people evacuated to storm shelters . Further north , 1 @,@ 639 people evacuated to storm shelters on Saipan , which set the record for the most storm evacuees at the time . 
 Despite weakening greatly from its peak intensity , Gay struck Guam with sustained winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) , with gusts to 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) on Nimitz Hill . The winds were strong enough to disrupt power and water utilities , as well as destroy a few houses . As a result of its weakening , Gay had a disrupted inner @-@ core with little precipitation , which prompted the JTWC to label it as a " dry typhoon " ; rainfall totals on the island ranged from only 40 – 90 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) . Despite the extreme winds , little wind @-@ thrown trees or snapped branches were observed . The combination of the winds and light rainfall , however , sprayed saltwater over the island 's vegetation , leading to near island @-@ wide loss of leaves . Majority of the local dicots withered and lost their leaves within two days after the storm , while other plants such as palms , cycads and gymnosperms retained their foliage but turned brown . The defoliation led to significant losses for crop farmers ; in some locations , the crops did not recover for four years . Along the east coast of Guam , Gay produced a storm surge of 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 8 m ( 4 – 6 ft ) . The surge reached 3 @.@ 4 m ( 11 ft ) on Cabras Island in northern Guam , washing sand and water onto coastal roads and breaking a boat from its moorings . The JTWC estimated that damage would have been worse had Typhoon Omar not destroyed the weaker structures three months earlier ; little additional damage occurred to the island 's capital of Hagåtña . The typhoon destroyed four iron roofs on Tinian Island , located north of Guam . On Saipan to its north , the storm surge destroyed one house and threatened the foundation of several others ; twelve families required rescue by emergency workers . The storm caused power outages , and one house sustained fire damage due to candles and kerosene lamps . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 While Gay was becoming extratropical , Okinawa Prefecture experienced heavy rainfall . The highest total was 322 mm ( 12 @.@ 7 in ) , and one station recorded 27 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 in ) in a ten @-@ minute period . The rains flooded four buildings and inundated crop fields . Rough winds with gusts peaking at 82 km / h ( 51 mph ) caused isolated power outages and the cancellation of two airline flights . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Marshall Islands president Amata <unk> declared nine islands as disaster areas . United States president George H. W. Bush also declared the Marshall Islands a disaster area on December 16 . Despite being an independent nation , the Marshall Islands were eligible to the same funding from the Federal Emergency Management Agency as a U.S. state or territory . The United States provided a loan of $ 508 @,@ 245 ( 1994 USD ) for emergency assistance and to train locals to mitigate future events . After the storm , workers near Majuro planted seeds to regrow the damaged crops . 
 The rapid succession of typhoons in 1992 caused a significant drop in tourism in Guam . During typhoons Omar and Gay , there was little communication between residents on the island . As a result , the Guam Communications Network was created to facilitate future relief efforts during storms . 
 A research paper published ten years after the storm suggested that Gay could have been stronger than Typhoon Tip , which attained the lowest barometric pressure ever recorded . While at its peak intensity , Gay registered a rating of 8 @.@ 0 for nine consecutive hours using the Dvorak technique , indicating sustained wind speeds of at least ( 315 km / h ) 195 mph . In addition , the cyclone had a significantly colder band of clouds around the eye . Typhoon Angela in 1995 presented similar features and could have been stronger than Gay . Neither of the two had direct observations into their eyes , however , making it impossible to confirm such intensity . 
 = Constitution of the Republic of Singapore Tribunal = 
 The Constitution of the Republic of Singapore Tribunal was established in 1994 pursuant to Article 100 of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore . Article 100 provides a mechanism for the President of Singapore , acting on the advice of the Singapore Cabinet , to refer to the Tribunal for its opinion any question as to the effect of any provision of the Constitution which has arisen or appears to likely to arise . Questions referred to the Tribunal may concern the validity of enacted laws or of bills that have not yet been passed by Parliament . 
 Constitutional questions may also be referred to the Tribunal when Parliament attempts to circumvent or curtail the discretionary powers conferred on the President by the Constitution . If the attempt is by way of an ordinary bill , the President can exercise personal discretion to withhold assent to it . It is then open to Cabinet to advise the President to refer to the Tribunal the question whether the bill in fact circumvents or curtails his discretionary powers . If the bill is determined by the Tribunal not to have that effect , the President is deemed to have assented to the bill on the day following the day when the Tribunal 's opinion is pronounced in open court . When Article 5A of the Constitution is brought into force , a similar procedure will apply to attempts to circumvent or curtail the President 's discretionary powers through a constitutional amendment . If the Tribunal rules that the proposed amendment does have the effect of restricting the discretionary powers of the President , the Prime Minister is entitled to submit the bill to a national referendum for approval . 
 The Tribunal consists of not less than three judges of the Supreme Court . Its opinions are binding on all other courts . Since the Tribunal was established in 1994 , to date only one constitutional question has been referred to it . The Tribunal determined in 1995 that although Article 5 ( 2A ) was not in force , Article 22H ( 1 ) did not prevent Parliament from restricting the President 's discretionary powers through a constitutional amendment . Since then , there have been several unsuccessful attempts to persuade Cabinet to invoke the Article 100 procedure . 
 = = History = = 
 The Constitution of the Republic of Singapore Tribunal is an ad hoc tribunal established by Article 100 of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore . Article 100 was introduced into the Constitution by the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( Amendment No. 2 ) Act 1994 , which was passed by Parliament on 25 August 1994 and assented to by President Ong Teng Cheong on 14 September 1994 . It came into force on 1 October 1994 . 
 Prior to the enactment of Article 100 , Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong noted during the Second Reading of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( Amendment No. 2 ) Bill that the Singapore Constitution had no provisions for referring questions of constitutional interpretation to the courts for an advisory ruling , especially those relating to new and complex provisions of the Constitution . Article 100 was intended to address this perceived lacuna in the Constitution . 
 One question of constitutional interpretation that was highlighted during the parliamentary debates pertained to the former Article 22H which had been incorrectly inserted into the Constitution by the Constitution ( Amendment ) Act 1991 in January 1991 . Article 22H ( 1 ) provided that the President might , acting in his discretion , withhold his assent to any bill passed by Parliament ( other than a bill to which Article 5 ( 2A ) applied ) if the bill provided for the circumvention or curtailment of the discretionary powers conferred upon him by the Constitution . At that time , Article 5 ( 2A ) , which entrenched certain core constitutional provisions ( of which Article 22H ( 1 ) was one ) by requiring the approval of the electorate at a national referendum for their amendment , had not been brought into force . 
 In August 1994 , Parliament intended to amend Article 22H to restrict the President 's powers thereunder to only non @-@ constitutional bills which provided for the circumvention or curtailment of the President 's discretionary powers conferred upon him by the Constitution . Because Article 5 ( 2A ) was not in force , a question arose as to whether the President had the power under Article 22H ( 1 ) to withhold his assent to any bill seeking to amend any of the provisions referred to in Article 5 ( 2A ) , and specifically to any bill seeking to amend Article 22H . President Ong Teng Cheong stated that in the interest of testing out the system , he wished to have this question referred to the courts for a ruling , and that he would accept as correct whatever interpretation of Article 22H was given by the court . In response to his request , Article 100 was inserted into the Constitution by Parliament for that purpose . 
 = = Reference of constitutional questions = = 
 = = = Grounds for bringing of reference = = = 
 A constitutional question can be referred to the Tribunal on three grounds . First , under Article 100 itself , the President , acting on the advice of Cabinet , may refer to the Tribunal for its opinion any question as to the effect of any provision of the Constitution which has arisen or appears to the President likely to arise . During the parliamentary debates preceding the introduction of Article 100 , Nominated Member of Parliament Associate Professor Walter Woon posed the following question : 
 The President can only refer a constitutional question to the tribunal on the advice of the Cabinet . He has no discretion to refer it himself . If you are going to give the power to the President to clear up constitutional ambiguities , would it not be better to allow him to make the reference himself when he sees there is an ambiguity , rather than to constrain it only to situations where Cabinet sees there is an ambiguity ? 
 The reply by the Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong was threefold : 
 Article 100 was drafted by following the precedent in the Constitution of Malaysia . Since it had worked for Malaysia , the drafters thought it safe for Singapore to follow suit . 
 It was the intention of legislation concerning the elected President that the initiative to refer the question to the Tribunal should lie with the Government , and generally not with the President whose recourse was in vetoing the legislation . The Cabinet would advise the President and the matter would then be referred to the Tribunal . 
 In the event of Cabinet wishing to ride roughshod over the President 's views and refusing to refer a particular matter , there would be considerable public pressure exerted on the Government to so refer . 
 Questions referred to the Tribunal may concern the validity of enacted laws or of bills that have not yet been passed by Parliament . 
 The other two grounds relate to attempts by Parliament to circumvent or curtail the discretionary powers conferred on the President by the Constitution . Article 22H of the Constitution deals with attempts to alter the President 's powers by introducing an ordinary bill . If this occurs , the President may exercise personal discretion to withhold assent to the bill . The Cabinet may , if it wishes , advise the President to refer to the Tribunal the question whether the bill in fact has the effect of circumventing or curtailing his discretionary powers . If the Tribunal determines that the bill does not have that effect , the President is deemed to have assented to the bill on the day following the day when the Tribunal 's opinion is pronounced in open court . 
 When Article 5A is brought into force , the President will also be able to decline to assent to a bill seeking to amend the Constitution that has a direct or indirect effect of circumventing or curtailing his discretionary powers . In this case , the Cabinet may also advise the President to refer to the Tribunal the question of whether the bill indeed has this effect . If the Tribunal rules that the bill does not have this effect , the President is deemed to have assented to the bill on the day immediately following the day when the Tribunal pronounces its opinion in open court . On the other hand , if the Tribunal decides to the contrary , the Prime Minister may opt to submit the bill to the electorate . If the bill is supported at a national referendum by not less than two @-@ thirds of the total number of votes cast , the President is deemed to have assented to the bill on the day immediately following the day when the results of the referendum have been published in the Government Gazette . 
 = = = Procedure = = = 
 A reference must be made under the hand of ( that is , signed by ) the President , and must be served on the Attorney @-@ General . The Attorney @-@ General is required to assist the Tribunal in the hearing of the reference , and the President may be represented by such legal counsel as the Tribunal may appoint , after consulting the President . The parties appearing before the Tribunal are not confined to the President and the Attorney @-@ General . The Tribunal may direct that the hearing of a reference be notified to any interested person or , where there is an interested class of persons , to one or more representatives of the class . If there is any interest that is affected which is not represented by counsel , the Tribunal may request that counsel argue the case for this interest . 
 The reference must state the questions on which the Tribunal 's opinion is required in a form which allows , as far as possible , answers to be given in the affirmative or the negative . There must also be a concise statement of facts , and documents must be included , as are necessary to enable the Tribunal to decide the questions referred . During the hearing of a reference , the procedure in proceedings before the Court of Appeal applies . The President of Singapore is treated as the appellant and all other parties as respondents . However , the Tribunal is not bound by strict rules of evidence . The proceedings of the Tribunal , except for the hearing for directions , are held in open court . No party to any proceedings is ordered to pay any costs , and no court fees are payable in respect of any proceedings . 
 The Tribunal has to consider and answer a question referred to it not more than 60 days after the date of such reference . The Tribunal is mandated to certify to the President for his information its opinion on the question referred to it with reasons for its answer , and any Tribunal judge who differs from the opinion of the majority shall similarly certify his opinion and his reasons . The opinion of the majority of judges is the opinion of the Tribunal , and is required to be pronounced in open court . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The Constitution provides that the Tribunal must consist of not less than three judges of the Supreme Court , as Parliament intended that the Tribunal should have the same structure as the Court of Appeal . In practice , the Tribunal consists of the Chief Justice and not less than two other judges of the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice may determine . If for any reason the Chief Justice is unable to be a Tribunal member , the Tribunal must consist of not less than three Supreme Court judges . The Chief Justice is the President of the Tribunal and , in his absence , the presidency of the Tribunal is determined in accordance with the following order of precedence : 
 the vice @-@ presidents of the Court of Appeal ; 
 the Judges of Appeal ( other than vice @-@ presidents ) ; and 
 the Judges of the High Court . 
 Among themselves , the judges in each category rank according to the priority of their appointments to the Bench . 
 = = Effect of opinions = = 
 Opinions of the Tribunal cannot be questioned by any court . This includes the Tribunal 's view of the validity of any law , the bill of which has been the subject of a reference to a Tribunal . This means that although the Tribunal lies outside the normal hierarchy of the courts since it does not hear appeals from any courts , its opinions are binding on all other courts . It is technically open for the President , on Cabinet 's advice , to refer the same matter to the Tribunal for its re @-@ consideration . 
 = = <unk> of the constitutional reference process = = 
 = = = Constitutional Reference No. 1 of 1995 = = = 
 Since the creation of the Tribunal in 1994 , only one constitutional reference has been made to it . Constitutional Reference No. 1 of 1995 arose from the issue of the application of Article 22H ( 1 ) of the Constitution in relation to Article 5 ( 2A ) , which was and is still not yet in force . The matter was referred by President Ong Teng Cheong to clarify the scope of the application of both Articles . The Government was represented by Chan Sek Keong and Soh Tze Bian of the Attorney @-@ General 's Chambers , and the Presidency by Joseph <unk> and Walter Woon . 
 The Constitutional Tribunal , which consisted of the Chief Justice Yong Pung How and Judges of Appeal M. Karthigesu and L.P. Thean , held that although Article 5 ( 2A ) was in abeyance , it represented the will of Parliament and therefore had to be taken into consideration . The Tribunal concluded that the President had no power under Article 22H ( 1 ) to withhold his assent to any bill seeking to amend any of the provisions referred to in Article 5 ( 2A ) . 
 = = = Attempted invocations = = = 
 = = = = Rescue and assistance package for Indonesia = = = = 
 The first instance of a non @-@ governmental attempt to put an issue before the Constitutional Tribunal came from Non @-@ constituency Member of Parliament Joshua Benjamin Jeyaretnam . He challenged the constitutionality of Singapore 's US $ 5 billion loan offer to Indonesia in November 1997 on the basis of Article 144 ( 1 ) of the Constitution which states : " No guarantee or loan shall be given or raised by the Government , except under the authority of any resolution of Parliament with which the President concurs . " Jeyaretnam interpreted this to mean that the giving of a loan required parliamentary and presidential approval . The Finance Minister Dr. Richard Hu Tsu Tau did not agree with Jeyaretnam 's interpretation of the provision , and stated that the Attorney @-@ General had given advice that the granting of loans and the purchase of securities of this type had the prior approval of two Presidents . 
 Subsequently , the Ministry of Finance stated that Article 144 ( 1 ) applied only to the giving of guarantees or the raising of loans by the Government , and not the giving of loans . The Attorney @-@ General Chan Sek Keong confirmed that this reading of the provision , which he characterized as <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Latin for " referring each to each " ) , was correct . The Attorney @-@ General also suggested that Jeyaretnam bring the matter to the Tribunal , a procedure seemingly inconsistent with a rule which stipulates that a reference to the Tribunal shall be made under the hand of the President of Singapore . This issue was finally abandoned when Jeyaretnam refused to pay for the costs for referring the matter to the Tribunal and the Ministry of Law found it ludicrous that it was asked by Jeyaretnam to bear the costs . 
 = = = = Public Entertainments Act = = = = 
 On 20 January 1999 , Jeyaretnam wrote to President Ong Teng Cheong requesting the reference of another constitutional question to the Tribunal . This was made on behalf of his client , opposition politician Chee Soon Juan , who had been charged for giving a public talk on 20 December 1999 without a licence under the Public Entertainments Act . The question involved the constitutionality of the Act . Jeyaretnam argued that the Act violated Articles 14 ( 1 ) ( a ) and ( b ) of the Constitution , which enshrines freedom of speech and assembly . 
 The President , acting on the advice of the Cabinet , turned down the request . The reply to Jeyaretnam dated 29 January 1999 pronounced the request as " misconceived " . The following reasons were given : 
 The jurisdiction of the Tribunal should only be invoked " when there is no other forum available to a person who claims that his constitutional rights have been infringed to have such claim tested " . The Tribunal was not a court of law , but only advisory in nature . Chee would be able to raise the same constitutional question at trial or on appeal as he had been charged under the Act . 
 If the Tribunal were to come into the picture when the court had yet to resolve the matter , then this would " constitute an improper interference with the judicial power of the courts and the constitutional functions of the Public Prosecutor " . 
 = = = = Misuse of Drugs Act = = = = 
 A plea for a review by the Constitutional Tribunal was sought as a last @-@ ditch attempt to stave off the execution of drug trafficker Shanmugam <unk> . Shanmugam 's lawyer contended that his client 's right to equal protection under Article 12 of the Constitution had been infringed . Referring to cases of six recent offenders similarly convicted under the Misuse of Drugs Act , Shanmugam 's lawyer drew attention to the fact that those offenders had imported more than 700 grammes of cannabis , an offence which attracted the death penalty , but were eventually charged with possessing less than 500 grammes of cannabis which resulted only in a jail sentence . In contrast , Shanmugam , who had imported 1 @,@ 029 @.@ 8 grammes of cannabis , did not have the amount reduced and was sentenced to death . The plea was rejected by the President on 12 May 2005 , one day before the execution date . 
 = = = = Legal status of the right to vote = = = = 
 Speaking in Parliament on 12 February 2009 , Nominated Member of Parliament Thio Li @-@ ann posed the question of whether the right to vote is a constitutional one and suggested that the Law Minister obtain an advisory opinion to clarify the point . This issue was briefly dealt with by the Minister who simply answered it in the affirmative , rendering the need for a resolution by the constitutional tribunal <unk> . Thio subsequently expressed the view that it would be desirable to ask the Constitutional Tribunal to give its authoritative opinion as the courts are the final arbiter on questions of constitutionality in Singapore . 
 = Reaction ( The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man ) = 
 " Reaction " is the eighth episode of the American animated television series The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man , which is based on the comic book character Spider @-@ Man , created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko . The episode originally broadcast in the United States on the Kids WB ! block for The CW on May 3 , 2008 , where it was rated TV @-@ Y7 @-@ FV . 
 The episode details Dr. Otto Octavius as an accidental laboratory incident caused by the Green Goblin where the radiation merges special mechanical tentacles to his skin and seemingly damaged his brain ( although it was later suggested that what was interpreted as brain damage was in fact his mind rewiring itself to accommodate four extra limbs ) , and turns him from a timid and weak scientist into the villain Dr. Octopus . " Reaction " was directed by Jennifer Coyle and was the first episode of the series to be written by Randy Jandt . While writing the teleplay , Jandt was challenged with staying true to the original material of Spider @-@ Man , particularly towards that of Dr. Octopus . 
 " Reaction " received generally positive reviews , with television critics singling out Dr. Octopus ' portrayal . Octopus 's character design was applauded by both the designers and Coyle ; the latter noted that his design allowed her to direct them freely in different manners , and that the arms in particular were particularly well @-@ done . Peter MacNicol voiced the character and used a voice inspired by that of late actor Laird Cregar . It is available on both the third volume DVD set for the series , as well as the complete season box set . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Dr. Otto Octavius tries to complain to his boss Norman Osborn about the dangers of several recent experiments they have been performing to create super villains in his laboratory , but is quickly berated by Osborn for his " whining . " Octavius backs down and goes to work inside an experimentation chamber while Osborn departs . Unbeknown to him , the villain Green Goblin sneaks into the lab , activating the chamber 's generators while locking Octavius inside . While unsuccessfully trying to escape from the chamber , the radiation emitted fuses the mechanical tentacles he is wearing into his skin . 
 Osborn and others arrive on the scene to turn off the generator , while Spider @-@ Man jumps in to help get Octavius out of the wreckage . When the doctor wakes up , he attacks Osborn with his tentacles and pins him to a wall . When Spider @-@ Man tries to intervene , Octavius brushes him aside as well with one of his tentacles , declaring himself " Dr. Octopus . " He steals a power battery to recharge his tentacles and storms out of the building , using his tentacles as extra limbs . The next day , Peter , Gwen , Harry and some of Harry 's new popular friends go to Coney Island , where Harry impresses everyone with his newfound strength . Liz Allan begins to attach herself to Peter and the two have a fun time . However , Peter spots Dr. Octopus and abandons the group to pursue him as Spider @-@ Man . 
 Spider @-@ Man follows Dr. Octopus to <unk> , where he attempts to steal a power pack from a vault . Spider @-@ Man swoops in and gets to the power source before him . He then runs out , with Dr. Octopus pursuing him , hoping to cause the doctor to run out of energy . They reach Coney Island through their ensuing brawl and Octopus , aware of Spider @-@ Man 's desire to save innocent lives , kidnaps Liz . With only an hour of energy left , he climbs to the top of a roller coaster , forcing Spider @-@ Man to choose between the power pack and Liz . Spider @-@ Man throws the pack in the air before rescuing Liz ; he gets close to Dr. Octopus as the latter scrambles for the power pack and is able to take it away from him , successfully defeating the doctor . 
 When Peter returns to the group , he discovers that Liz is breaking up with her boyfriend Flash Thompson after the latter gets jealous that she spent the day so close to Peter . Gwen approaches Peter , and the two agree they need to have a talk with Harry about his belligerent attitude towards them and constant strange behavior . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Reaction " was written by Randy Jandt and directed by Jennifer Coyle . It originally aired on the Kids WB ! block for The CW on May 3 , 2008 , at 10 : 00 a.m. Eastern / Pacific time , with a parental guidance rating of TV @-@ Y7 @-@ FV . The episode 's title , " Reaction , " expands the series theme " The Education of Peter Parker " chosen by developer Greg Weisman . Episodes in the third season one arc all shared a naming scheme based on chemistry . 
 The episode was the first of the series to be penned by Jandt , who said that the opportunity to work on the series was " both thrilling and a bit daunting , primarily because of the elevated expectations of such a high @-@ profile , established franchise . " To meet these expectations , he followed a simplistic strategy — " be mindful of the history , listen to the direction and guidance of Greg Weisman , and then write an episode with a good , entertaining story that is packed with as much action and humor as 22 minutes will allow . " Writing for Dr. Octopus in particular was difficult for the first @-@ time writer as he had " such a range of character . " 
 " Reaction " marked the first appearance of Dr. Otto Octavius as Dr. Octopus . Coyle noted her enthusiasm for the character , particularly towards his design ; she has given noteworthy praise towards his arms , as they " are amazing , and the timing has been really good for this show , so much so that I think you feel the impact of those arms . " Coyle also believes that people can connect with the character on different levels . Similarly , Sean Galloway — a character designer on the series — said that he is " probably one of [ his ] favorites " to have designed . 
 Peter MacNicol was cast to play Dr. Octopus . MacNicol had starred in primetime television series , including Chicago Hope , Numb3rs , and Boston Legal , while also being a veteran to the voice acting profession on animated series such as The Wild <unk> and Buzz Lightyear of Star Command . MacNicol chose to base Dr. Octopus ' voice on that of Laird Cregar , a 1940s actor who , throughout his short @-@ lived career , was challenged with obesity , until he lost too much weight and died at age 30 . MacNicol , though , notes that he is " no mimic and it was Cregar 's quality rather than his voice which gave me my model . " 
 " Reaction " became available on the DVD The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man , Volume 3 , on March 17 , 2009 , alongside the episodes " Catalysts " and " The Uncertainty Principle . " The volume featured episodes that detailed Green Goblin as a prominent or supporting character . " Reaction " also became available on the full season DVD box set entitled The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man : The Complete First Season DVD , which featured every other episode of season one for the series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Reaction " received a generally positive response from critics . Eric Goldman of IGN , giving the episode an 8 @.@ 2 @.@ rating ( " Impressive " ) , wrote favorably , noting that the depiction Dr. Octopus " was very clever – on one hand , he was a pitiful , cowering pushover . But when Norman was berating him we got a brief look at the anger within , as he imagined attacking Norman with his robotic tentacles . " Goldman applauded both Dr. Octopus ' line , " I 've been good " and when Spider @-@ Man crashes into several stuffed animals , only to be pulled out by Dr. Octopus in a manner similar to a carnival game ; he concluded that , " This show continues to leave several prime time live @-@ action shows to shame when it comes to building serialized stories and has been one of the most pleasant surprises of the TV season . " 
 Luke Bonanno of Ultimate Disney listed " Reaction " as one of his top five favorite episodes of the first season , while commenting that " the uniform excellence of the lot [ makes ] this a challenging task . " Writing for DVD Talk , reviewer Justin Felix opined that the episode was " particularly action @-@ packed . " Rob M. Worley of Mania described Dr. Octopus ' introduction as " explosive , " while praising MacNicol for balancing such a heavy workload between both the episode and other series . 
 = Western Mexico shaft tomb tradition = 
 The Western Mexico shaft tomb tradition or shaft tomb culture refers to a set of interlocked cultural traits found in the western Mexican states of Jalisco , Nayarit , and , to a lesser extent , Colima to its south , roughly dating to the period between 300 BCE and 400 CE , although there is not wide agreement on this end @-@ date . Nearly all of the artifacts associated with this shaft tomb tradition have been discovered by looters and are without provenance , making dating problematic . The first major undisturbed shaft tomb associated with the tradition was not discovered until 1993 , at Huitzilapa , Jalisco . 
 Originally regarded as of Purépecha origin , contemporary with the Aztecs , it became apparent in the middle of the 20th century , as a result of further research , that the artifacts and tombs were instead over 1000 years older . Until recently , the looted artifacts were all that was known of the people and culture or cultures that created the shaft tombs . So little was known , in fact , that a major 1998 exhibition highlighting these artifacts was subtitled : " Art and Archaeology of the Unknown Past " . 
 It is now thought that , although shaft tombs are widely diffused across the area , the region was not a unified cultural area . Archaeologists , however , still struggle with identifying and naming the ancient western Mexico cultures of this period . 
 = = Description = = 
 The shaft tomb tradition is thought to have developed around 300 BCE . Some shaft tombs predate the tradition by more than 1000 years – for example , the shaft tomb at El <unk> in Michoacán has been dated to 1500 BCE but is linked to Central , rather than Western , Mexico . Like much else concerning the tradition , its origins are not well understood , although the valleys around Tequila , Jalisco , which include the archaeological sites of Huitzilapa and <unk> , constitute its " undisputed core " . The tradition lasted until at least 300 CE although there is not wide agreement on the end date . 
 The Western Mexico shaft tombs are characterized by a vertical or nearly vertical shaft , dug 3 to 20 metres down into what is often underlying volcanic tuff . The base of the shaft opens into one or two ( occasionally more ) horizontal chambers , perhaps 4 by 4 metres ( varying considerably ) , with a low ceiling . The shaft tombs were often associated with an overlying building . 
 Multiple burials are found in each chamber and evidence indicates that the tombs were used for families or lineages over time . The labor involved in the creation of the shaft tombs along with the number and quality of the grave goods indicate that the tombs were used exclusively by the society 's elites , and demonstrate that the shaft tomb cultures were highly stratified at this early date . 
 The sites of El <unk> and La Campana in Colima feature some shaft tombs , and are often associated with the <unk> culture . 
 = = Ceramic figurines and tableaus = = 
 Grave goods within these tombs include hollow ceramic figures , obsidian and shell jewelry , semi @-@ precious stones , pottery ( which often contained food ) , and other household implements such as spindle whorls and metates ( see this Flickr photo for a reconstruction ) . More unusual items include conch shell trumpets covered with stucco and other <unk> . Unlike those of other Mesoamerican cultures such as the Olmec and the Maya , shaft tomb artifacts carry little to no iconography and so are seemingly bereft of symbolic or religious meaning . 
 The plentiful ceramic figurines have attracted the most attention , and are among the most dramatic and interesting produced in Mesoamerica . In fact , these ceramics were apparently the primary outlet for artistic expression for the shaft tomb cultures and there is little to no record of associated monumental architecture , stelae , or other public art . 
 Since the vast majority of these ceramics are without provenance , analysis has largely focused on the ceramics ' styles and subjects . 
 = = = Styles = = = 
 The major stylistic groups include : 
 <unk> del Rio . These abstract figurines have flat , squarish bodies with highly stylized faces complete with nose rings and multiple earrings . Seated figurines have thin rope @-@ like limbs while the standing figurines have short stocky limbs . One of the first styles to be described , noted ethnographer , and caricaturist Miguel Covarrubias stated that it " reaches the limits of absurd , brutal caricature , a peculiar aesthetic concept that relishes the creation of haunting subhuman monstrosities " . Art historian George Kubler finds that " the square bodies , grimacing mouths , and staring eyes convey a disturbing expression which is only in part resolved by the animation and plastic energy of the turgid forms " . 
 " <unk> " or " Chinesco " figurines were named by art dealers after their supposed Chinese @-@ like appearance . An early type , Chinesco is identified with Nayarit and up to five major subgroups have been identified , although there is considerable overlap . Type A figurines , the so @-@ called " classic Chinesco " , are realistically rendered . One prominent curator , Michael Kan , finds that " their calm , subtle exterior suggests rather than demonstrates emotion " . These Type A figures are so similar to one another that it has been suggested that they were the production of a single " school " . Types B through E are more abstract , characterized by puffy , slit @-@ like eyes blended into the face , and broad rectangular or triangular heads . These figures are often shown seated or reclining , with shortened bulbous legs quickly tapering to a point . 
 The Ameca style , associated with Jalisco , is characterized by an elongated face and a high forehead which is often capped by braids or turban @-@ like headgear . The aquiline nose is also elongated and the large eyes are wide and staring , with pronounced rims created by adding separate strips of clay ( " fillets " ) around the eyes . The wide mouth is closed or slightly opened and the large hands have carefully delineated nails . Kubler detects both an early " sheep @-@ faced " style that seem " eroded or melted in the continuous passages of modelling that unite rather than divide the parts of the body " and a later style which are " more animated and more incisively articulated " . 
 Colima ceramics can be identified by their smooth , round forms and their warm brown @-@ red slip . Colima is particularly known for its wide range of animal , especially dog , figurines . Human subjects within the Colima style are more " mannered and less exuberant " than other shaft tomb figurines . 
 Other styles include El Arenal , San Sebastián , and Zacatecas . Although there is general agreement on style names and characteristics , it is not unanimous . Moreover , these styles often overlap to one degree or another , and many figurines defy categorization . 
 = = = Subject matter = = = 
 Common subjects of shaft tomb tradition ceramics are : 
 Ceramic tableaus showing several or even several dozen people engaged in various seemingly typical activities . Concentrated in highland Nayarit and adjoining Jalisco , these tableaus present rich ethnographic insight into funerary practices , the Mesoamerican ballgame , architecture ( most importantly perishable architecture ) , and perhaps even religious thought during the late Formative period . 
 Some tableaus are almost photographic in their detail and have even been associated with architecture ruins in the field . 
 Ceramic dogs are widely known from looted tombs in Colima . Dogs were generally believed in Mesoamerican cultures to represent soul guides of the dead and several dog ceramics wear human masks . Nonetheless , it should also be noted that dogs were often the major source of animal protein in ancient Mesoamerica . 
 Ancestor ( or marriage ) pairs of female and male figurines are common among shaft tomb tradition grave goods . These figurines , perhaps representing ancestors , may be joined or separate and often are executed in the Ixtlán del Río style . 
 Many shaft tomb figurines , spanning various Western Mexico styles and locations , wear a horn set high on the forehead . Several theories have been advanced for these horns : that they show that the figure is a shaman , that they are abstract conch shells ( a not uncommon shaft tomb relic ) and as such , are an emblem of rulership , or are a phallic symbol . These theories are not mutually exclusive . 
 = = = Uses = = = 
 While these ceramics were obviously recovered as grave goods , there is a question of whether they were specifically created for a mortuary rite , or whether they were used prior to burial , perhaps by the deceased . While some ceramics do show signs of wear , it is as yet unclear whether this was the exception or the rule . 
 = = Context = = 
 = = = Western Mexico cultures = = = 
 Considerable effort has been made connecting the shaft tomb tradition to the Teuchitlán tradition , a complex society that occupies much the same geography as the shaft tomb tradition . 
 Unlike the typical Mesoamerican pyramids and rectangular central plazas , the Teuchitlán tradition is marked by central circular plazas and unique conical pyramids . This circular architectural style is seemingly mirrored in the many circular shaft tomb tableau scenes . Known primarily from this architecture , the Teuchitlán tradition rises at roughly the same time as the shaft tomb tradition , 300 BCE , but lasts until 900 CE , many centuries after the end of the shaft tomb tradition . The Teuchitlán tradition appears to be an outgrowth and elaboration of the shaft tomb tradition . 
 = = = Mesoamerican cultures = = = 
 Because western Mexico is on the very periphery of Mesoamerica , it has long been considered outside the Mesoamerican mainstream and the cultures at this time appear to be particularly insulated from many mainstream Mesoamerican influences . For example , no Olmec @-@ influenced artifacts have been recovered from shaft tombs , nor are any Mesoamerican calendars or writing systems in evidence , although some Mesoamerican cultural markers , particularly the Mesoamerican ballgame , are present . 
 Despite this , the inhabitants of this area lived much like their Mesoamerican counterparts elsewhere . The usual trio of beans , squash , and maize was supplemented with <unk> , manioc and other tubers , various grains , and with animal protein from domestic dogs , turkeys , and ducks , and from hunting . They lived in thatched roof wattle @-@ and @-@ daub houses , grew cotton and tobacco , and conducted some long @-@ distance trade in obsidian and other goods . 
 Shaft tombs themselves are not encountered elsewhere in Mesoamerica and their nearest counterparts come from northwestern South America . 
 = = = South American shaft tombs = = = 
 Shaft tombs also appear in northwestern South America in a somewhat later timeframe than western Mexico ( e.g. 200 @-@ 300 CE in northern Peru , later in other areas ) . To Dorothy <unk> , Professor of Archaeology and Ancient Technology at MIT , " The physical similarities between the northern South American and West Mexican tomb types are unmistakable . " while art historian George Kubler finds that the western Mexican chambers " resemble the shafted tombs of the upper Cauca river in Colombia " . However , others disagree that the similarity of form demonstrates cultural linkages — Karen Olsen <unk> states that " this sort of contact . . . seems mainly in the ( muddled ) eye of the synthesizer " . 
 However , other linkages between Western Mexico and northwestern South America have been proposed , in particular the development of metallurgy . See Metallurgy in pre @-@ Columbian Mesoamerica . 
 = = History of scholarly research = = 
 The first major work to discuss artifacts associated with the shaft tomb tradition was Carl <unk> 's 1902 work , Unknown Mexico . Along with illustrations of several of the grave goods , the Norwegian explorer described a looted shaft tomb he had visited in 1896 . He also visited and described the ruins of <unk> , the seat of Purépecha Empire some 150 miles ( 250 km ) to the east , and was one of the first to incorrectly use the term " <unk> " ( Purépecha ) to describe the shaft tomb artifacts . 
 During the 1930s , artist Diego Rivera began accumulating many Western Mexico artifacts for his private collection , a personal interest that sparked a wider public interest in West Mexican grave goods . It was in the late 1930s that one of the most prominent of Western Mexico archaeologists , Isabel Truesdell Kelly , began her investigations . In the period from 1944 until 1985 , Kelly would eventually publish over a dozen scholarly papers on her work in this region . In 1948 , she was the first to hypothesize the existence of the " shaft tomb arc " , the geographic distribution of shaft tomb sites over western Mexico ( see map above ) . 
 In 1946 , Salvador Toscano challenged the attribution of shaft tomb artifacts to the <unk> , a challenge that was echoed in 1957 by Miguel Covarrubias who firmly declared that Purépecha culture appeared only " after the 10th century " . Toscano 's and Covarrubias 's views were later upheld by radiocarbon dating of plundered shaft tombs ' charcoal and other organic remains salvaged in the 1960s by Diego Delgado and Peter Furst . As the result of these excavations and his ethnological investigations of the modern @-@ day indigenous Huichol and Cora peoples of Nayarit , Furst proposed that the artifacts were not only mere representations of ancient peoples , but also contained deeper significance . The model houses , for example , showed the living dwelling in context with the dead – a miniature <unk> – and the horned warriors ( as discussed above ) were shaman battling mystical forces . 
 In 1974 , Hasso von Winning published an exhaustive classification of Western Mexico shaft tomb artifacts ( including , for example , the Chinesco A through D types mentioned above ) , a classification still largely in use today . 
 The 1993 discovery of an <unk> shaft tomb at Huitzilapa is the latest major milestone , providing " the most detailed information to date on the funerary customs " associated with shaft tomb tradition . 
 = 3 ( Britney Spears song ) = 
 " 3 " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her second greatest hits album , The Singles Collection ( 2009 ) . It was written and produced by Max Martin and Shellback , with additional writing from Tiffany Amber . The song was released on October 2 , 2009 by Jive Records , as the only single from The Singles Collection . " 3 " is an uptempo electropop song that features a heavy bassline and synthesizers , and lyrics that talk about <unk> , while referencing American folk @-@ singing trio Peter , Paul and Mary during the chorus as sexual slang . 
 " 3 " received positive appreciation from contemporary music critics , with some reviewers calling it a classic Spears song . The song achieved commercial success by topping the charts in the United States and Canada , as well as reaching the top ten in many countries around the world , including Australia , Finland , Norway , Sweden and the United Kingdom . In the United States , the song debuted at number one in the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming the first to debut at the top position in over three years and the first non @-@ American Idol artist in eleven years to do so . " 3 " was also the fifteenth song in the history of Billboard to debut at number one . 
 An accompanying music video for " 3 " , directed by Diane Martel , features Spears and her dancers in front of different black and white backgrounds . Martel described it as sexy and playful , while contemporary critics gave it positive reviews , complimenting its simplicity . A director 's cut was leaked on December 15 , 2009 . Spears has performed " 3 " during the Femme Fatale Tour ( 2011 ) and her Las Vegas residency Britney : Piece Of Me ( 2013 @-@ 2015 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 On July 12 , 2009 , Spears confirmed through her Twitter account that she had begun recording new material , stating she was going into the studio with Swedish songwriter and producer Max Martin , while she was in Stockholm during the European leg of The Circus Starring Britney Spears . They had previously collaborated on earlier hits including " ... Baby One More Time " , " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " , " Stronger " and " If U Seek Amy " . " 3 " was written and produced by Martin and Shellback , while additional writing was done by Tiffany Amber . Spears recorded her vocals for the song with the producers at Maratone Studios . John Hanes was responsible for Spears ' vocal editing on " 3 " , which was later mixed by Serban Ghenea at MixStar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia . On September 23 , 2009 , Jive Records officially announced the release of a greatest hits titled The Singles Collection through Spears 's official website , in celebration of Spears 's ten @-@ year anniversary in the music industry , also announcing the release of " 3 " as the lead single from the album . The artwork for the single was unveiled through Spears ' official website on September 28 , 2009 . " 3 " was sent to radio stations on September 29 , 2009 , while being digitally released on October 2 , 2009 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " 3 " is an uptempo electropop song , which opens with synths and vocal effects . The song has a basic sequence of Fm – E ♭ – B ♭ m – Fm as its chord progression . During the middle eight , the song slows down with synthetic strings and bass beats , and the section ends with a beat similar to a four @-@ on @-@ the floor , a rhythm pattern popularized in 1970s disco music . Throughout the song , Spears ' vocals are autotuned that , according to the Daily Mail , gives the song " a futuristic , contemporary feel " . 
 The song 's lyrics are about <unk> . Unlike " If U Seek Amy " , the song has no double entendre and it ’ s more straightforward lyrically . The innuendo in the lyrics such as " <unk> the more , triple fun that way " have been compared to the songs in Prince ’ s 1980s studio album Dirty Mind . The chorus has been compared to a playground chant and closes with an extended moan . During the second part of the chorus , there is a reference to the folk group Peter , Paul & Mary , that in the song is used as sexual slang for a threesome . Todd Martens of the Los Angeles Times called the reference " the cut 's biggest oddity " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " 3 " received positive reviews from contemporary music critics . Monica Herrera of Billboard commented that the song " builds to a climax of wildly pulsing bass that summons fans to the dancefloor " and added that " [ it ] will be another notch in this pop provocateur 's belt " . On its online edition , Rolling Stone 's writer Daniel Kreps praised the song for its up @-@ tempo melody and racy lyrics , while comparing it to Flo Rida 's recent work , saying that " 3 " " is more of a surefire dance @-@ floor stomper than anything Brit loaded onto Blackout or Circus " . On the printed issue , the magazine gave the song four stars and called it an " instant Britney classic " . Clark Collis of Entertainment Weekly called it " a fembot voice , near @-@ seizure @-@ inducing dance @-@ floor frenzy " . While crediting the production for " elevating the song above typical dance products " , the Los Angeles Times said that Spears sounded " sweetly generic " . 
 In his review of The Singles Collection , Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic selected " 3 " as one of the " track picks " and commented , " [ it is ] much better than any of the three new cuts on My Prerogative " . Bill Lamb of About.com said that although the lyrics are controversial , " the bottom line is this is another irresistibly catchy pop confection that beats out most everything else on pop radio today " . He praised the chorus and the middle section and called the track " classic Britney " . The song was also compared to Madonna ’ s " Celebration " , since they " musically present nothing particularly new , but they do manage to encapsulate many of the elements that make the singer a star " . A.J. Mayers of MTV picked it as the eighth best song of 2009 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On October 8 , 2009 , " 3 " entered at number fourteen on the U.S. Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 and at number thirty @-@ eight on the U.S. Billboard Pop Songs , becoming Spears ' twenty @-@ fourth career entry in the latter chart , most among all artists . The following week , the song debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Spears ’ third number @-@ one single in the United States and breaking many of the chart records . It made Spears the first artist in over three years to debut at the top position and the only non @-@ American Idol artist in eleven years to do so . It was the fifteenth song in the chart history to debut at the top position and also the shortest title for a song reaching the top of the Billboard Hot 100 . The song also charted at number one on the Billboard Digital Songs , selling 255 @,@ 000 downloads in its first week and having the highest one week total of any song , since The Black Eyed Peas ' " Boom Boom Pow " back in April 2009 . As of October 2015 , " 3 " has sold 2 @.@ 4 million digital downloads in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan . It is her fourth best @-@ selling digital single in the country . In Canada , the song debuted at number eighty @-@ six on the Canadian Hot 100 on October 17 , 2009 and rose up to number one the following week , making it the biggest jump to number one in the history of the chart . It was certified two times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for sales over 80 @,@ 000 copies . 
 " 3 " debuted at number fifty on the Australian Singles Chart on October 12 , 2009 , with only two days of digital sales . It peaked at number six on the week of October 26 , 2009 . " 3 " has been certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) with sales of over 70 @,@ 000 copies . On October 12 , 2009 , the song debuted at number sixteen in New Zealand , making it her highest chart debut since " Womanizer " . On its fifth week on the chart , " 3 " reached its peak position at number twelve . On the UK Singles Chart , " 3 " debuted at number seven on November 16 , 2009 , becoming Spears ' twentieth top ten hit on the chart . According to The Official Charts Company , the song has sold 145 @,@ 000 copies there . " 3 " achieved similar success throughout Europe reaching the top ten in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Czech Republic , Finland , Norway , Sweden as well as the top twenty in Austria , Belgium ( Flanders ) and Denmark . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was filmed on October 5 and October 6 , 2009 in Los Angeles , California . It was directed by Diane Martel and choreographed by Tone & Rich . Fashion stylist GK Reid worked closely with Spears to design the fashion . On October 15 , 2009 , images of the video were released . A countdown , including images and video previews , was announced on her official website and the release date was revealed to be on October 30 , 2009 . When asked about the video , Diane Martel said , 
 " I think it 's her next sexy video . It 's a very simple video for her – I don 't think you 've seen her this much under a magnifying glass . Everything 's really strong and playful . We collaborated on the wardrobe and had meetings about hair and makeup people , we talked a lot on the phone and met Tone and Rich — two of the best choreographers . [ .. ] [ Spears ] ' so sweet and funny and so normal and down to earth . It 's really fun as a director to see her in front of the camera . She 's so creative with this stuff . The video is very simple , it 's very , very minimal . So it 's her , her , her . And she 's totally engaging every second . She really knows how to work with a camera and move . I was really impressed , and I have worked almost with every female artist in the business " . 
 The video begins with Spears wearing a sparkly black dress at a dressing table , putting mascara and Circus Fantasy on . Then , it cuts to her holding her hair up and singing the first lines in front of a white background . There are also black and white scenes of her wearing a white leotard behind a foggy glass . She then appears wearing the leotard and glasses , while surrounded by four female dancers wearing black outfits , hanging from a raised barre . The word " sin " is censored and changed for the word " this " during the pre @-@ chorus . In the chorus , she dances in front of a white wall with barcode @-@ like light installations with six male dancers . There also scenes of her dancing provocatively with two male dancers . At the bridge , there are intercut close @-@ ups of her that end with a smirk . The video concludes with Spears dancing with the two male dancers and cuts to a close @-@ up of her looking into the camera . 
 Rolling Stone writer Daniel Kreps compared the video with the music video of " Single Ladies " and complimented the choreography saying Spears had not danced with so much conviction since the In the Zone era . Bradley Stern of MuuMuse likened the video 's choreography and dancer 's wardrobe to Janet Jackson 's " Feedback " video . Jocelyn Vena of MTV gave the video a positive review , stating that it 's a " sexy , fast @-@ paced clip " and that " there are a few moments in the video where Britney 's personality shines " adding that " she smiles at the song 's tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek lyrics , particularly when she finishes the song 's bridge . " Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly complimented the video ’ s choice of wardrobe , but said that the video was " sparse " , adding " there ’ s not much to the single besides trite , ridiculous advocation for a ménage à trois anyway , so why would the video go any deeper ? " . The Daily Mail said the video " features Britney writhing around in scantily @-@ clad outfits with male dancers in the best way she knows how " . 
 On December 15 , 2009 , a director 's cut version of the video for " 3 " leaked online . Kreps commented that the new version " offers up a slightly more NSFW edit of Martel ’ s dance @-@ heavy vid that seems to find a better cadence with the music , as opposed to the original version , which was essentially filmed and edited in the matter of days to coincide with The Singles Collection release " . 
 = = Live performances and cover version = = 
 On March 25 , 2011 , Spears performed a special show at Rain Nightclub in Las Vegas . The setlist of the show consisted on three songs from her seventh studio album , Femme Fatale , including " Hold It Against Me " , " Big Fat Bass " and " Till the World Ends " . During the performance of " Big Fat Bass " , Spears wore a latex bodysuit and elements of " 3 " , " Gimme More " and " I 'm a Slave 4 U " were also included . On March 27 , 2011 , " Big Fat Bass " was also performed at the Bill Graham Civic Auditorium that aired on Good Morning America on March 29 , 2011 , and the same day , Spears performed the set at Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . 
 " 3 " was performed at 2011 's Femme Fatale Tour . After " Up ' n Down " , Spears put on a white fedora and trench coat and performed the song with her female dancers , dressed in a similar style . Shirley Halperin of The Hollywood Reporter named it one of the best performances of the show along with " Piece of Me " and " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " , stating that " ironically enough , [ they ] were the ones with fewest frills . " Rick Florino of Artistdirect said " ' 3' gave way to a massive sing @-@ a @-@ long " and added that it " [ spoke ] right to the noir @-@ ish connotations of the Femme Fatale tour . However , she built a one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind space where Kim Basinger 's elegant L.A. Confidential beauty becomes enveloped by edgy modern dance attitude . " 
 Spears is currently performing " 3 " as the third song on her Las Vegas residency , Britney : Piece of Me . After a brief talk with the audience , the singer starts a performance of the song , jumping into a triangular cage and was wheeled around by her dancers across the stage . Then , a parallel bar dropped out of the <unk> , and Spears done a choreography similar to its music video . For Billboard 's Keith Caulfield , the song " served as the sexiest jungle gym in Vegas , as Spears and her dancers undulated their way across and around the bar " . Girls ' Generation member Sunny performed a cover version of the song during the Girls ' Generation Tour that took place in 2011 and 2012 . A studio version was also released online alongside the live version featuring on the tour album . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Britney Spears – lead and background vocals 
 Max Martin – songwriting , production , keyboards 
 Shellback – songwriting , production , keyboards , guitars 
 Serban Ghenea – mixing 
 Tim Roberts – assistant engineer 
 John Hanes – vocal editing 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Kingdom Hearts χ = 
 Kingdom Hearts χ ( キングダム ハーツ <unk> , Kingudamu Hātsu Kī ) , stylized as Kingdom Hearts χ [ chi ] , is a Japanese role @-@ playing browser game developed by Square Enix and Success Corporation , and published by Square Enix for web browsers as the eighth installment in the Kingdom Hearts series . Gameplay involves players navigating a customized avatar through Disney @-@ inspired worlds fighting enemies , along with taking down bosses in multiplayer matches in competition with other teams . 
 Kingdom Hearts χ is a prequel to the Kingdom Hearts series as a whole , set 100 years before the events of Kingdom Hearts . It takes place before the Keyblade War , which established the organization of the Kingdom Hearts universe as of the original game . The player assumes the role of a Keyblade wielder who joins one of five factions led by Keyblade Masters fighting for control of the limited Light existing in the world . The game 's plot is connected to Kingdom Hearts III , the next main entry in the series . The title refers to the legendary χ @-@ blade , a weapon central to the series ' story arc . 
 The game was designed as a playing experience that newcomers to the series could come to . Its presentation was compared to that of a fairy tale , as depicting the usual style of the series would have been difficult on the platform . Both Tetsuya Nomura and Yoko Shimomura , veterans from the main series , returned as director and composer respectively . Since release , the game has received favorable opinions from players . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Kingdom Hearts χ is a role @-@ playing video game set in the universe of Kingdom Hearts which includes original characters and locations as well as ones from Disney and Final Fantasy media properties . Before beginning , players create their own character . Players can customize the gender , hair , and clothing , and choose accessories themed after both Square Enix and Disney universes present in the Kingdom Hearts series . Story missions are unlocked by the player . After a certain amount of the available content has been completed , new story missions become available . Players navigate their surroundings by dragging their cursor across the screen . Players navigate different worlds defeating monsters known as the Heartless . The base game is free to play , with optional microtransactions . Actions use up AP , which can be replenished by either waiting or by using potions , which can be earned or bought . Rare items such as special cards can also be purchased . Alongside the single @-@ player mode , there is a multiplayer mode where teams of players take on Raid Bosses , gigantic Heartless with high HP . 
 Enemies appear on @-@ screen , and can be engaged by clicking on them . During the player 's turn , three cards are randomly drawn from a deck of nine , each resulting in an attack . If the cards ' combined strength and attached skills are insufficient to exhaust the enemy 's HP , the heartless will counterattack . If the player survives this attack , or continues by spending additional AP , a new turn begins . Upon defeating an enemy , the player earns Lux , experience points , and Munny , an in @-@ game currency . The player also earns Fragments , cards based on the characters original to the Kingdom Hearts series and those from Disney and Final Fantasy franchises : the fragments are imbued with different properties depending on the character , such as physical or elemental strikes . Players can level up their cards to improve their attack and defense . Players can strengthen their Keyblade using materials found in each world , and new Keyblades are acquired as the story progresses . Each strengthens different types of cards - for example , Starlight is an all @-@ around Keyblade offering boosts for <unk> , <unk> and Magic @-@ type cards , while the Snow White @-@ inspired Treasure Trove is Power @-@ type focused . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts χ is set before the legendary Keyblade War , when disputes between Keyblade wielders over the Light that created the world sparked a war between Light and Darkness , triggering a calamity that created the world of Kingdom Hearts as seen in the first game in the series . Prior to the war , an unnamed Keyblade Master bestowed a book called the Tome of Prophecy to five of his six apprentices before disappearing . The Tome has the ability to predict and even manifest objects and people from the future . The five apprentices learned of a prophecy foretelling the world falling to Darkness and the Light being destroyed . In order to prevent this , each of the apprentices decided to attempt to prevent the prophecy from coming true . As part of their efforts , they used the Tome to manifest powerful warriors from the future as the Fragments . Each eventually begins hoarding pieces of Light , called Lux , from the monsters known as Heartless , and each creates their own factions themed around their individual animal icon : Ursus , Anguis , <unk> , Leopardus , and <unk> . The player character , a newly awakened Keyblade <unk> , chooses to support one of the factions and works to ensure the chosen faction 's supremacy . The story serves as a prequel to the Keyblade War , which all other Kingdom Hearts games occur after . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts χ opens in pop @-@ up book format , showing Kairi and her grandmother in Radiant Garden while Kairi is told a story about the Light and the Darkness . The narrative switches to the distant past where a newly awakened Keyblade wielder , who is controlled by the player , is given a choice of joining one of five factions or " unions " known as Anguis , <unk> , <unk> , Ursus and <unk> . Once the player chooses , they are brought to Daybreak Town and assaulted by an army of Heartless coming through a portal . Before the player is overwhelmed , however , a powerful Keyblade wielder known as a Foreteller arrives and pursues the Heartless back through their portal . A cat @-@ like creature named Chirithy , which had been accompanying the Foreteller , befriends the player 's character and explains their destiny . The player must use their Keyblade to collect Light and stop the Heartless from conquering every world and spreading Darkness . Chirithy also reveals he has been tasked by the Foreteller to aid the player in his training , and part of that process is the finding of powerful cards called Fragments to augment their power . 
 After exploring the area and defeating several Heartless , the player is approached by the Foreteller , who tells them that defeating weaker Heartless is possible to do alone , but they will need others help to defeat more powerful opponents . The Foreteller also describes how many others are collecting light as well , though some may secretly be doing to to gain power instead of fighting the Darkness , and the player must decide who to trust . Chirithy then encourages the player to explore other worlds and help rid them of the Heartless before it is too late . The player then visits the illusion future visions of Disney worlds , where they interact with the locals and help defeat the hoards of Heartless . The player is brought to each world under Chirithy 's direction , and together the two characters search for the origin of the Darkness . As the player succeeds in defeating the forces of evil , Chirithy begins to reveal the full extent of his knowledge regarding the war between Light and Darkness . Chirithy remembers being born in a place of Light , with his creator smiling upon him in the beginning . The creator would later vanish , but before doing so he renamed six of his followers and gave five of them a prophecy of the future . The five , later known as the Foretellers , were shocked to discover that the future ended with a great battle in which the Light would be defeated and the eternal reign of Darkness would begin . To save the future , the Foretellers began to use the hidden powers within the written copy of the prophesy known as the Book of <unk> ( which creates the future worlds that the players travel to ) . Through this book , the Foretellers traveled to the future to grow more powerful and save the Light from final defeat . The power retrieved from the future is manifested as the Cards the player gathers to grow stronger . 
 As the player moves from world to world driving out the Heartless , they return to Daybreak Town where they meet another Keyblade wielder named Ephemera , who is part of a rival union . He wishes to explore a mysterious tower that lies within the center of the town , and against Chirithy 's wishes , the player agrees to help find a way in . Ephemera , however , abandons the player to explore the tower himself . During the player 's exploration , the tower is discovered to be the base of the Foretellers and while there , the player is confronted by Master Ava , the Foreteller they had met previously . She challenges the player to test their strength , and afterwards tells the player they have sadness in their hearts which links them to the Darkness . Undeterred , the player continues their mission and later meets another Keyblade wielder named Skuld who comes from Ephemera 's union . She expresses an interest in further exploring the mysterious tower of the Foretellers . She and the player encounter warring Foretellers from different unions and new kinds of Heartless that are revealed to be corrupted Keyblade wielders as well as a dark vision of Chirithy . 
 To further understand the mysteries of the Foretellers and the future , the player , Chirithy , and Skuld re @-@ enter the Foretellers tower where they are caught by a Foreteller . They are also told that Ephemera was a traitor to his Union and that he has disappeared . The player then challenges the Foreteller to a duel , assuming Ephemera has been captured , but is easily defeated . The Foreteller reveals that she is in fact Master Ava , and that the player 's quest was a test of their character to see if they are worthy of leaving this world before the Great War between Light and Darkness . Keyblade wielders that can resist the Darkness and fight for what they believe in , like their friends , are worthy of becoming elite Keyblade warriors known as <unk> and going on to the World of Light and avoiding the coming universal war . All who stay will become a part of that war and must face an uncertain future . Skuld accepts the offer , but the player 's character is uncertain if they should join Ephemera , who has gone on to the World of Light , or stay and fight to save the future . The story continues without revealing their choice . Later , they encounter two Keyblade warriors accusing each other of stealing Lux from their Unions and the player is forced to fight Master <unk> and loses . Another Foreteller named Ira arrives to stop the fighting . <unk> claims that he is collecting more Keyblade warriors to prepare for the upcoming war before leaving . Ira informs the player , Skuld , and Chirithy that this war can 't be avoided and there will be no winner . The only Foreteller who may have a solution is Gula so the trio go to look for him . When Gula is found , he reveals that the only one who can change this is the Master , the Foreteller 's mentor , who had disappeared recently along with the sixth apprentice , <unk> . Meanwhile , Ava tracks down <unk> , who had been ordered to watch the place by the Master . He reveals that he wants to move forward to see the end of the upcoming Keyblade war after discovering what happens in the " Lost Page " in the Book of <unk> , also revealing that he is the one turning the unions against one another . 
 = = Development = = 
 Kingdom Hearts χ was co @-@ directed by Tetsuya Nomura , one of the series ' creators , and Tatsuya Kando , who had previous directed Nintendo DS game The World Ends with You . The game 's music was composed by Yoko Shimomura , a regular contributor to the series ' music . The game was co @-@ developed by Square Enix and Japanese studio Success Corporation . Square Enix originally handled the planning and design itself , but due to their developers inexperience with creating browser games , development was transferred to the Success Corporation , who were familiar with the process . Despite multiplayer elements being included , the game was " fundamentally single @-@ player " , as with most other entries in the series . Chirithy , the player characters ' companion , was designed around the concept of a supportive yet unobtrusive guide . Nomura based the characters design on the Scottish Fold domestic cat . 
 Due to difficulties that arose adapting the core Kingdom Hearts experience into a browser game , the presentation was designed in a fairy tale @-@ style instead of the locations encountered previously by series protagonists Sora and Riku . And because the game was to be played with a mouse instead of a game controller , the gameplay focus became simple controls and " flashy " battles . In an interview , Nomura stated that the work on developing Kingdom Hearts χ was paused for a time so developers could work on Kingdom Hearts III . He also stated that at the time they were exploring ways to allow more fans of the series to experience the game . The stories of Kingdom Hearts χ and Kingdom Hearts III were both written at the same time , and thus share a strong connection . Despite this strong link , it was described by Tetsuya Nomura as a title where story was not the focus , and that its content was completely separate from the main series , making it accessible for newcomers . The game 's title refers to the χ @-@ blade ( chi @-@ blade ) , the original Keyblade and a weapon central to the Kingdom Hearts storyline . 
 = = Release = = 
 The game was first announced at the Tokyo Game Show on September 20 , 2012 alongside Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix under the tentative title Kingdom Hearts for PC Browsers . Its official title was announced in February the following year . To promote the game , codes for special items and in @-@ game currency were included with first @-@ print copies of Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix . A closed beta for the title began on March 22 , 2013 , with Beta recruitment beginning on March 13 . The test was available for users who had a Yahoo Japan ID , and included in @-@ game items and currency as a starting gift . An open beta test began on July 9 , 2013 , and the game 's official service began on July 18 of the same year . Since the original release , the game received constant updates to its story missions , providing additional content to players . In April 2016 , Square Enix announced that the browser game would be discontinued in September 2016 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 By September 2013 , 200 @,@ 000 users were announced to have enrolled for the game . During the 2013 <unk> Awards , Kingdom Hearts χ was among the games voted into the " Best Rookie of the Year Good Games " category , with most voters praising the game for being accessible to series newcomers , and fun to play . Richard Eisenbeis of Kotaku was generally positive , saying that despite it being similar to other Japanese browser games and using a micro @-@ transaction system , it was " an enjoyable little time waster . " 
 = = Kingdom Hearts Unchained χ = = 
 A updated version of the game was released for mobile devices under the title Kingdom Hearts Unchained χ . It shares multiple gameplay features with its browser counterpart : the main exception is that this version is tailored for a touch screen . The ability to travel freely between different Disney worlds is also replaced with a stage system . These stages , called quests , are confined to specific areas of specific worlds . Instead of spending AP on individual actions , AP is paid to start a quest , and the player can attack as many enemies , collect as many materials , and open as many chests as he or she can find before defeating a target Heartless . If the player 's HP is fully depleted , a choice is offered between forfeiting all progress in the quest or continuing to fight by spending Jewels , a new general @-@ purpose in @-@ game currency . Lux is considered another name for character @-@ leveling experience points . Clothing , hair , and accessories are obtained through Avatar Boards , which each contain an array of nodes on branching pathways . These nodes are unlocked , in set sequences , with Avatar Coins , and may also yield such benefits as increased limits for AP and HP . Cards from the browser version are here replaced by Medals , which are no longer drawn randomly in battle . Instead , each equipped Medal is presented one at a time , and the player is given the choice of attacking one enemy , attacking all enemies ( dealing less damage ) , or using the special attack granted by the Medal ( provided the Keyblade 's special attack gauges are sufficiently filled ) . Medals can be combined with matching Medals to improve their special attacks . 
 The creation of a mobile version of the game was decided upon while the browser version was still being developed . Nomura initially planned to release both titles simultaneously , with each being updated individually . However , as development went on , the teams efforts became focused on finishing Kingdom Hearts χ , and development on Unchained was halted . The original plan was to make the game a simpler version of its browser counterpart , but with the increasing specs of mobile devices , the workload increased , contributing to the halt to development . As mobile devices employ a different control set @-@ up to web browsers , Unchained could not work simply as a port of Kingdom Hearts χ . Its title " Unchained " signified the gameplay and story of Kingdom Hearts χ being released into a mobile format . One of the changes instituted during the games mobile remake was to make the gameplay more " casual " than Kingdom Hearts χ , with battles being shorter and potentially easier . 
 Disney Interactive was forced to delay a western localization of the game when the game 's publisher <unk> , a social game network owned by Disney , was shut down . Despite this , planning continued for a western release with playtesting taking place to improve upon the game before launch . The western localization was revealed to the public with the title Kingdom Hearts Unchained X at the 2015 Electronic Entertainment Expo . Unchained χ was released in Japan on September 3 , 2015 , in North America on April 7 , 2016 , and in Europe on June 16 , 2016 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts χ Unchained received mixed reviews . It received an aggregated score of 73 @.@ 33 % on GameRankings and 70 / 100 on Metacritic . AV Club praised the game for being a true Kingdom Hearts title despite its free to play format . Touch Arcade gave the game three out of five stars , praising the music and graphics while calling the gameplay shallow with an overcomplicated user interface . Gamezebo called the title " better than expected " , citing the games fun but simple combat and extensive character customization but critiquing the games dialogue for being cheesy and the story for being weaker than the console Kingdom Hearts titles . In the month after it was released , the mobile version was downloaded over two million times . 
 = = HD 2 @.@ 8 Final Chapter Prologue = = 
 In September 2015 , Square Enix announced a new game entitled Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 8 Final Chapter Prologue . The collection features Kingdom Hearts χ Back Cover , which will tell the tale of the Foretellers and reveal new parts of the series ' history in the form of a one hour cinematic video . It will be released worldwide in December 2016 . 
 = Scotland in the Late Middle Ages = 
 Scotland in the Late Middle Ages , between the deaths of Alexander III in 1286 and James IV in 1513 , established its independence from England under figures including William Wallace in the late 13th century and Robert Bruce in the 14th century . In the 15th century under the Stewart Dynasty , despite a turbulent political history , the Crown gained greater political control at the expense of independent lords and regained most of its lost territory to approximately the modern borders of the country . However , the Auld Alliance with France led to the heavy defeat of a Scottish army at the Battle of Flodden in 1513 and the death of the king James IV , which would be followed by a long minority and a period of political instability . 
 The economy of Scotland developed slowly in this period and a population of perhaps a little under a million by the middle of the 14th century began to decline after the arrival of the Black Death , falling to perhaps half a million by the beginning of the 16th century . Different social systems and cultures developed in the lowland and highland regions of the country as Gaelic remained the most common language north of the Tay and Middle Scots dominated in the south , where it became the language of the ruling elite , government and a new national literature . There were significant changes in religion which saw mendicant friars and new devotions expand , particularly in the developing burghs . 
 By the end of the period Scotland had adopted many of the major tenets of the European Renaissance in art , architecture and literature and produced a developed educational system . This period has been seen one in which a clear national identity emerged in Scotland , as well as significant distinctions between different regions of the country which would be particularly significant in the period of the Reformation . 
 = = Political history = = 
 = = = Wars of Independence 1286 – 1371 = = = 
 = = = = John = = = = 
 The death of king Alexander III in 1286 , and the subsequent death of his granddaughter and heir Margaret ( called " the Maid of Norway " ) in 1290 , left 14 rivals for succession . To prevent civil war the Scottish magnates asked Edward I of England to arbitrate . He extracted legal recognition that the realm of Scotland was held as a feudal dependency to the throne of England before choosing John Balliol , the man with the strongest claim , who became king as John I ( 30 November 1292 ) . Robert Bruce of Annandale , the next strongest claimant , accepted this outcome with reluctance . Over the next few years Edward I used the concessions he had gained to systematically undermine both the authority of King John and the independence of Scotland . In 1295 John , on the urgings of his chief councillors , entered into an alliance with France , the beginning of the Auld Alliance . 
 In 1296 Edward invaded Scotland , deposing King John . The following year William Wallace and Andrew Murrey raised forces to resist the occupation and under their joint leadership an English army was defeated at the Battle of Stirling Bridge . Murrey died of wounds after the battle and for a short time Wallace ruled Scotland in the name of John Balliol as Guardian of the realm . Edward came north in person and defeated Wallace at the Battle of Falkirk . Wallace escaped but probably resigned as Guardian of Scotland . In 1305 he fell into the hands of the English , who executed him for treason despite the fact that he owed no allegiance to England . 
 = = = = Robert I = = = = 
 Rivals John Comyn and Robert the Bruce , grandson of the claimant Robert Bruce of Annandale , were appointed as joint guardians in Wallace 's place . On 10 February 1306 , Bruce participated in the murder of Comyn , at Greyfriars Kirk in Dumfries . Less than seven weeks later , on 25 March Bruce was crowned as king Robert I at Scone . However , Edward 's forces overran the country after defeating Bruce 's small army at the Battle of Methven . Despite the excommunication of Bruce and his followers by Pope Clement V , his support grew ; and by 1314 , with the help of leading nobles such as Sir James Douglas and the Earl of Moray , only the castles at Bothwell and Stirling remained under English control . Edward I had died in 1307 and his heir Edward II moved an army north to break the siege of Stirling Castle and reassert control . They were defeated by forces under Robert I at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 , securing de facto independence . 
 In 1320 the Declaration of Arbroath , a remonstrance to the Pope from the nobles of Scotland , helped to convince Pope John XXII to overturn the earlier excommunication and nullify the various acts of submission by Scottish kings to English ones so that Scotland 's sovereignty could be recognised by the major European dynasties . The Declaration has also been seen as one of the most important documents in the development of a Scottish national identity . Robert 's brother Edward Bruce carried out a series of campaigns against English forces in Ireland and was declared High King . The campaigns in Ireland , although ultimately unsuccessful , opened the prospect of what has been characterised as " Pan @-@ Gaelic Greater Scotia " under the Bruce dynasty . Robert 's forces carried out a series of raids of Northern England , defeating an English army in 1327 at the Battle of Stanhope Park . Robert 's victories contributed to the deposition of Edward II and Robert was able to take advantage of the minority of his son Edward III to secure the Treaty of Edinburgh @-@ Northampton , signed in May 1328 , which recognised Scotland as an independent kingdom , and Bruce as its king . 
 = = = = David II = = = = 
 Robert I died in 1329 , leaving his five @-@ year @-@ old son to reign as David II . During his minority , the country was ruled by a series of governors , two of whom died as a result of a renewed invasion by English forces from 1332 . This was on the pretext of restoring Edward Balliol , son of John Balliol , to the Scottish throne , thus starting the Second War of Independence . Despite victories at Dupplin Moor ( 1332 ) and Halidon Hill ( 1333 ) , in the face of tough Scottish resistance led by Sir Andrew Murray , the son of Wallace 's comrade in arms , successive attempts to secure Balliol on the throne failed . Edward III lost interest in the fate of his protege after the outbreak of the Hundred Years ' War with France . In 1341 David was able to return from temporary exile in France . In 1346 under the terms of the Auld Alliance , he invaded England in the interests of France , but was defeated and taken prisoner at the Battle of Neville 's Cross on 17 October 1346 and would remain in England as a prisoner for 11 years . His cousin Robert Stewart ruled as guardian in his absence . Balliol finally resigned his claim to the throne to Edward in 1356 , before retiring to Yorkshire , where he died in 1364 . 
 Without swearing allegiance to Edward III , David was released for a ransom of 100 @,@ 000 marks in 1357 , but he was unable to pay , resulting in secret negotiations with the English and attempts to secure succession to the Scottish throne for an English king . Major issues were his marriages and the failure to produce an heir . His first wife , Joan , the sister of Edward III , left him for England sometime after his return and she died without children in 1362 . His planned second marriage to Margaret , the widow of the knight Sir John Logie , resulted in a factional division that alienated nobles including Robert Steward . Eventually the king backed the queen 's opponents and attempted to divorce her . She fled to the continent and appealed to the Pope for support . Before he could marry again David died , apparently unexpectedly , bringing the Bruce dynasty to an end . 
 = = = The Stewarts 1371 – 1513 = = = 
 = = = = Robert II , Robert III and James I = = = = 
 After the unexpected death of the childless David II , Robert Stewart , the first of the Stewart ( later Stuart ) monarchs , came to the throne in 1371 . Despite his relatively venerable age of 55 , his son , John , Earl of Carrick , grew impatient and assumed the reins of government as Lord Lieutenant . A border incursion into England led to the victory at Otterburn in 1388 , but at the cost of the life of John 's ally James Douglas , 2nd Earl of Douglas . This , along with Carrick having suffered a debilitating horse kick , led to a shift in power to his brother Robert Stewart , Earl of Fife , who now was appointed as Lieutenant in his place . When Robert II died in 1390 John took the regnal name Robert III , to avoid awkward questions over the exact status of the first King John , but power rested with his brother Robert , now Duke of Albany . After the suspicious death of his elder son , David , Duke of Rothesay in 1402 , Robert , fearful for the safety of his younger son , James ( the future James I ) , sent him to France in 1406 . However , the English captured him en route and he spent the next 18 years as a prisoner held for ransom . As a result , after the death of Robert III later that year , regents ruled Scotland : first Albany and after his death in 1420 his son Murdoch , during whose term of office the country suffered considerable unrest . 
 When the Scots finally began the ransom payments in 1424 , James , aged 32 , returned with his English bride , Joan Beaufort , determined to assert this authority . He revoked grants from customs and of lands made during his captivity , undermining the position of those who had gained in his absence , particularly the Albany Stewarts . James had Murdoch and two of his sons tried and then executed with further enforcement of his authority by more arrests and forfeiture of lands . In 1436 he attempted to regain one of the major border fortresses still in English hands at Roxburgh , but the siege ended in a humiliating defeat . He was murdered by discontented council member Robert Graham and his co @-@ conspirators near the Blackfriars church , Perth in 1437 . 
 = = = = James II = = = = 
 The assassination left the king 's seven @-@ year @-@ old son to reign as James II . After the execution of a number of suspected conspirators , leadership fell to Archibald Douglas , 5th Earl of Douglas , as lieutenant @-@ general of the realm . After his death in 1439 , power was shared uneasily between the Douglas family , William , 1st Lord Crichton , Lord Chancellor of Scotland and Sir Alexander Livingston of Callendar . A conspiracy to break the power of the Douglas family led to the " Black Dinner " at Edinburgh Castle in 1440 , which saw the judicial murder of the young William Douglas , 6th Earl of Douglas and his brother by Livingstone and Crichton . The main beneficiary was the victims ' great uncle James Douglas , Earl of Avondale who became the 7th Earl of Douglas and emerged as the main power in the government . 
 In 1449 James II was declared to have reached his majority , but the Douglases consolidated their position and the king began a long struggle for power , leading to the murder of the 8th Earl of Douglas at Stirling Castle on 22 February 1452 . This opened an intermittent civil war as James attempted to seize Douglas lands , punctuated by a series of humiliating reversals . Gradually James managed to win over the allies of the Douglases with offers of lands , titles and offices and the Douglases ' forces were finally defeated at the Battle of <unk> on 12 May 1455 . Once independent , James II proved to be an active and interventionist king . He travelled the country dispensing justice and some of the unpopular policies of the following reign , such as the sale of pardons , may have originated in this period . Ambitious plans to take Orkney , Shetland and the Isle of Man came to nothing . His attempt to take Roxburgh from the English in 1460 succeeded , but at the cost of his life as he was killed by an exploding artillery piece . 
 = = = = James III = = = = 
 James II 's son , aged nine or ten , became king as James III , and his widow Mary of Gueldres acted as regent until her own death three years later . The Boyd family , led by Robert , Lord Boyd , emerged as the leading force in the government , making themselves unpopular through self @-@ aggrandisement , with Lord Robert 's son Thomas being made Earl of Arran and marrying the king 's sister , Mary . While Robert and Thomas were out of the country in 1469 the king asserted his control , executing members of the Boyd family . His foreign policy included a rapprochement with England , with his eldest son , the future James IV , being betrothed to Cecily of York , the daughter of Edward IV of England , a change of policy that was immensely unpopular at home . 
 During the 1470s conflict developed between the king and his brothers , Alexander , Duke of Albany and John , Earl of Mar. Mar died suspiciously in 1480 and his estates were forfeited and possibly given to a royal favourite , Robert Cochrane . Albany fled to France in 1479 , accused of treason . By this point the alliance with England was failing and from 1480 there was intermittent war , followed by a full @-@ scale invasion of Scotland two years later , led by the Duke of Gloucester , the future Richard III , and accompanied by Albany . James was imprisoned by his own subjects in Edinburgh Castle , and Albany was established as lieutenant @-@ general . Having taken Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed the English retreated and Albany 's government began to collapse forcing him to flee . Despite conspiracies and more attempts at invasion , James was able to regain power . However , the king managed to alienate the barons , refusing to travel for the implementation of justice , preferring to be resident in Edinburgh , he debased the coinage , probably creating a financial crisis , he continued to pursue an English alliance and dismissed key supporters , including his Chancellor Colin Campbell , 1st Earl of Argyll , becoming estranged from his wife , Margaret of Denmark , and his son James . Matters came to a head in 1488 when he faced an army raised by the disaffected nobles , and many former councillors , acting in the name of the prince as James IV . He was defeated at the Battle of <unk> and killed . 
 = = = = James IV = = = = 
 James IV was 15 when he came to the throne , but soon proved a capable and independent minded ruler , whose reign is often considered to have seen a flowering of Scottish culture under the influence of the European Renaissance . He took a direct interest in the administration of justice and frequently moved his court in legal circuits of justice <unk> . He defeated a major Northern rebellion , mainly of supporters of the murdered James III . It began in Dunbarton in 1489 , led by the Earl of Lennox and Lord Lyle and spreading through the North . James is credited with finally bringing the Lordship of the Isles under control . He forcing through the forfeiture of the lands of the last lord John MacDonald in 1493 , backing Alexander Gordon , 3rd Earl of Huntly 's power in the region and launching a series of naval campaigns and sieges that resulted in the capture or exile of his rivals by 1507 . 
 For a time he supported Perkin Warbeck , the pretender to the English throne , and carried out a brief invasion of England on his behalf in 1496 . However , he then established good diplomatic relations with England , and in 1502 signed the Treaty of Perpetual Peace , marrying Henry VII 's daughter , Margaret Tudor , thus laying the foundation for the 17th century Union of the Crowns . Animosity with Henry VIII of England helped prompt the renewal of the Auld Alliance in 1512 . When the Pope organised a Holy League , which included England , against the French in 1511 , James was caught between incompatible diplomatic policies . He tried to suggest an unrealistic European Crusade to Constantinople , but after border skirmishing , when the French were attacked by the English he declared war on England and was excommunicated by the Pope . He sent his navy and gunners to support the French and in 1513 led a major army of perhaps 34 @,@ 000 over the border . After using his formidable artillery train to take Norham Castle he marched south , where the invasion was stopped decisively on 9 September 1513 at the Battle of Flodden . The King , many of his nobles , and a large number of ordinary troops were killed , commemorated by the song " The Floo 'ers o ' the Forest " . Once again Scotland 's government lay in the hands of regents in the name of the infant James V. 
 = = Geography = = 
 The defining factor in the geography of Scotland is the distinction between the Highlands and Islands in the north and west and the lowlands in the south and east . The highlands are further divided into the Northwest Highlands and the Grampian Mountains by the fault line of the Great Glen . The lowlands are divided into the fertile belt of the Central Lowlands and the higher terrain of the Southern Uplands , which included the Cheviot hills , over which the border with England came to run by the end of the period . The Central Lowland belt averages about 50 miles in width and , because it contains most of the good quality agricultural land and has easier communications , could support most of the urbanisation and elements of conventional medieval government . However , the Southern Uplands , and particularly the Highlands were economically less productive and much more difficult to govern . This provided Scotland with a form of protection , as minor English incursions had to cross the difficult southern uplands and the two major attempts at conquest by the English , under Edward I and then Edward III , were unable to penetrate the highlands , from which area potential resistance could reconquer the lowlands . However , it also made those areas problematic to govern for Scottish kings and much of the political history of the era after the wars of independence circulated around attempts to resolve problems of entrenched localism in these regions . 
 It was in the later medieval era that the borders of Scotland reached approximately their modern extent . The Isle of Man fell under English control in the 14th century , despite several attempts to restore Scottish authority . The English were able to annexe a large slice of the lowlands under Edward III , but these losses were gradually regained , particularly while England was preoccupied with the Wars of the Roses ( 1455 – 85 ) . In 1468 the last great acquisition of Scottish territory occurred when James III married Margaret of Denmark , receiving the Orkney Islands and the Shetland Islands in payment of her dowry . However , in 1482 Berwick , a border fortress and the largest port in medieval Scotland , fell to the English once again , for what was to be the final change of hands . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Because medieval Scotland lacked the intrusive government and growing bureaucracy that can be found in contemporaneous England , there is very little evidence on which to base reliable estimates of population before the early 18th century . On the basis that it had roughly a sixth of the farmable land of England , it has been suggested that the population would have been of a similar proportion , probably a little less than a million at its height before the Black Death reached the country in 1349 . Although there is no reliable documentation on the impact of the plague , there are many anecdotal references to abandoned land in the following decades . If the pattern followed that in England , then the population may have fallen to as low as half a million by the end of the 15th century . Compared with the situation after the redistribution of population in the later clearances and the industrial revolution , these numbers would have been relatively evenly spread over the kingdom , with roughly half living north of the Tay . Perhaps ten per cent of the population lived in one of fifty burghs that existed at the beginning of the period , mainly in the east and south . It has been suggested that they would have had a mean population of about 2 @,@ 000 , but many would be much smaller than 1 @,@ 000 and the largest , Edinburgh , probably had a population of over 10 @,@ 000 by the end of the era . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = Agriculture = = = 
 Scotland is roughly half the size of England and Wales , but has only between a fifth and a sixth of the amount of the arable or good pastoral land , making marginal pastoral farming and , with its extensive coastline , fishing , the key factors in the medieval economy . With difficult terrain , poor roads and methods of transport there was little trade between different areas of the country and most settlements depended on what was produced locally , often with very little in reserve in bad years . Most farming was based on the lowland <unk> or highland baile , settlements of a handful of families that jointly farmed an area notionally suitable for two or three plough teams , allocated in run rigs to tenant farmers . They usually ran downhill so that they included both wet and dry land , helping to offset some of the problems of extreme weather conditions . This land was divided into the infield , which was in continuous arable cultivation , and the outfield which was rotated between arable and grass . Most ploughing was done with a heavy wooden plough with an iron coulter , pulled by oxen , who were more effective and cheaper to feed than horses . Obligations to the local lord usually included supplying oxen for ploughing the lord 's land on an annual basis and the much resented obligation to grind corn at the lord 's mill . The rural economy appears to have boomed in the 13th century and in the immediate aftermath of the Black Death was still buoyant , but by the 1360s there was a severe falling off of incomes , which can be seen in clerical benefices , of between a third and half compared with the beginning of the era . This was followed by a slow recovery in the 15th century . 
 = = = Burghs = = = 
 Most of the burghs were on the east coast , and among them were the largest and wealthiest , including Aberdeen , Perth and Edinburgh , whose growth was facilitated by trade with the continent . Although in the southwest Glasgow was beginning to develop and Ayr and Kirkcudbright had occasional links with Spain and France , sea trade with Ireland was much less profitable . In addition to the major royal burghs this era saw the proliferation of lesser baronial and ecclesiastical burghs , with 51 being created between 1450 and 1516 . Most of these were much smaller than their royal counterparts ; excluded from international trade , they mainly acted as local markets and centres of craftsmanship . In general burghs probably carried out far more local trading with their hinterlands , relying on them for food and raw materials . The wool trade was a major export at the beginning of the period , but the introduction of sheep @-@ scab was a serious blow to the trade and it began to decline as an export from the early 15th century and despite a levelling off , there was another drop in exports as the markets collapsed in the early @-@ 16th century Low Countries . Unlike in England , this did not prompt the Scots to turn to large scale cloth production and only poor quality rough cloths seem to have been significant . 
 = = = Crafts , industry and trade = = = 
 There were relatively few developed crafts in Scotland in this period , although by the later 15th century there were the beginnings of a native iron casting industry , which led to the production of cannon , and of the silver and goldsmithing for which the country would later be known . As a result , the most important exports were unprocessed raw materials , including wool , hides , salt , fish , animals and coal , while Scotland remained frequently short of wood , iron and , in years of bad harvests , grain . Exports of hides and particularly salmon , where the Scots held a decisive advantage in quality over their rivals , appear to have held up much better than wool , despite the general economic downturn in Europe in the aftermath of the plague . The growing desire among the court , lords , upper clergy and wealthier merchants for luxury goods that largely had to be imported led to a chronic shortage of bullion . This , and perennial problems in royal finance , led to several debasements of the coinage , with the amount of silver in a penny being cut to almost a fifth between the late 14th century and the late 15th century . The heavily debased " black money " introduced in 1480 had to be withdrawn two years later and may have helped fuel a financial and political crisis . 
 = = Society = = 
 = = = Kinship and clans = = = 
 The fundamental social bond in late medieval Scottish society was that of kinship . Descent was agnatic , with members of a group sharing a ( sometimes fictional ) common ancestor , in the south often reflected in a common surname . Unlike in England , where kinship was predominately cognatic ( derived through both males and females ) , women retained their original surname at marriage and marriages were intended to create friendship between kin groups , rather than a new bond of kinship . As a result , a shared surname has been seen as a " test of kinship " , proving large bodies of kin who could call on each other ’ s support and this could help intensify the idea of the feud , which was usually carried out as a form of revenge for a kinsman and for which a large bodies of kin could be counted on to support rival sides , although conflict between members of kin groups also occurred . 
 The combination of agnatic kinship and a feudal system of obligation has been seen as creating the highland clan system , evident in records from the 13th century . Surnames were rare in the highlands until the 17th and 18th centuries and in the Middle Ages all members of a clan did not share a name and most ordinary members were usually not related to its head . The head of a clan in the beginning of the era was often the strongest male in the main sept or branch of the clan , but later , as primogeniture began to dominate , was usually the eldest son of the last chief . The leading families of a clan formed the fine , often seen as equivalent to lowland gentlemen , providing council in peace and leadership in war , and below them were the daoine usisle ( in Gaelic ) or tacksmen ( in Scots ) , who managed the clan lands and collected the rents . In the isles and along the adjacent western seaboard there were also buannachann , who acted as a military elite , defending the clan lands from raids or taking part in attacks on clan enemies . Most of the followers of the clan were tenants , who supplied labour to the clan heads and sometimes act as soldiers . In the early modern era they would take the clan name as their surname , turning the clan into a massive , if often fictive , kin group . 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 In the late medieval era the terminology used to describe the different ranks of Scottish social structure was increasingly dominated by the Scots language and as a result began to parallel the terminology used in England . This consciousness over status was reflected in military and ( from 1430 ) sumptuary legislation , which set out the types of weapons and armour that should be maintained , and clothes that could be worn , by various ranks . Below the king were a small number of dukes ( usually descended from very close relatives of the king ) and earls , who formed the senior nobility . Below them were the barons , and , from the 1440s , fulfilling the same role were the lords of Parliament , the lowest level of the nobility with the rank @-@ given right to attend the Estates . There were perhaps 40 to 60 of these in Scotland throughout the period . Members of these noble ranks , perhaps particularly those that had performed military or administrative service to the Crown , might also be eligible for the status of knighthood . Below these were the lairds , roughly equivalent to the English gentlemen . Most were in some sense in the service of the major nobility , either in terms of land or military obligations , roughly half sharing with them their name and a distant and often uncertain form of kinship . Serfdom died out in Scotland in the 14th century , although through the system of courts baron landlords still exerted considerable control over their tenants . Below the lords and lairds were a variety of groups , often ill @-@ defined . These included yeomen , sometimes called " bonnet lairds " , often owning substantial land , and below them the husbandmen , lesser landholders and free tenants that made up the majority of the working population . Society in the burghs was headed by wealthier merchants , who often held local office as a burgess , alderman , bailies or as a member of the council . A small number of these successful merchants were dubbed knights for their service by the king by the end of the era , although this seems to have been an exceptional form of civic knighthood that did not put them on a par with landed knights . Below them were craftsmen and workers that made up the majority of the urban population . 
 = = = Social conflict = = = 
 Historians have noted considerable political conflict in the burghs between the great merchants and craftsmen throughout the period . Merchants attempted to prevent lower crafts and <unk> from infringing on their trade , monopolies and political power . Craftsmen attempted to emphasise their importance and to break into disputed areas of economic activity , setting prices and standards of workmanship . In the 15th century a series of statutes cemented the political position of the merchants , with limitations on the ability of residents to influence the composition of burgh councils and many of the functions of regulation taken on by the bailies . In rural society historians have noted a lack of evidence of widespread unrest similar to that evidenced the Jacquerie of 1358 in France and the Peasants ' Revolt of 1381 in England , possibly because there was relatively little of the type of change in agriculture , like the enclosure of common land , that could create widespread resentment before the modern era . Instead a major factor was the willingness of tenants to support their betters in any conflict in which they were involved , for which landlords reciprocated with charity and support . Highland and border society acquired a reputation for lawless activity , particularly the feud . However , more recent interpretations have pointed to the feud as a means of preventing and speedily resolving disputes by forcing arbitration , compensation and resolution . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = The Crown = = = 
 The Crown was at the centre of government in late medieval Scotland . The unification of the kingdom , the spread of Anglo @-@ Norman custom , the development of a European trading economy and Robert I 's success in achieving independence from England , all did much to build up the prestige of the institution . However , its authority within the kingdom was not unchallenged , not least from the many semi @-@ independent lordships and it endured a series of crisis , particularly frequent minorities and resulting regencies . All of this , in addition to the relative poverty of the kingdom and the lack of a system of regular taxation , helped to limit the scale of central administration and government . Much more than the English monarchy , the Scottish court remained a largely itinerant institution , with the king moving between royal castles , particularly Perth and Stirling , but also holding judicial sessions throughout the kingdom , with Edinburgh only beginning to emerge as the capital in the reign of James III at the cost of considerable unpopularity . Like most western European monarchies , the Scottish Crown in the 15th century adopted the example of the Burgundian court , through formality and elegance putting itself at the centre of culture and political life , defined with display , ritual and pageantry , reflected in elaborate new palaces and patronage of the arts . 
 = = = Privy Council = = = 
 After the Crown the most important government institution was the Privy Council , composed of the king 's closest advisers , but which , unlike in England , retained legislative and judicial powers . It was relatively small , with normally less than 10 members in a meeting , some of whom were nominated by Parliament , particularly during the many minorities of the era , as a means of limiting the power of a regent . The council was a virtually full @-@ time institution by the late 15th century , and surviving records from the period indicate it was critical in the working of royal justice . Nominally members of the council were some of the great magnates of the realm , but they rarely attended meetings . Most of the active members of the council for most of the period were career administrators and lawyers , almost exclusively university @-@ educated clergy , the most successful of which moved on to occupy the major ecclesiastical positions in the realm as bishops and , towards the end of the period , archbishops . By the end of the 15th century this group was being joined by increasing numbers of literate laymen , often secular lawyers , of which the most successful gained preferment in the judicial system and grants of lands and lordships . From the reign of James III onwards the <unk> @-@ dominated post of Lord Chancellor was increasingly taken by leading laymen . 
 = = = Parliament = = = 
 The next most important body in the process of government was parliament , which had evolved by the late 13th century from the King 's Council of Bishops and Earls into a ' colloquium ' with a political and judicial role . By the early 14th century , the attendance of knights and freeholders had become important , and probably from 1326 burgh commissioners joined them to form the Three Estates , meeting in a variety of major towns throughout the kingdom . It acquired significant powers over particular issues , including consent for taxation , but it also had a strong influence over justice , foreign policy , war , and other legislation , whether political , ecclesiastical , social or economic . From the early 1450s , a great deal of the legislative business of the Scottish Parliament was usually carried out by a parliamentary committee known as the ' Lords of the Articles ' , chosen by the three estates to draft legislation which was then presented to the full assembly to be confirmed . Parliamentary business was also carried out by ' sister ' institutions , before c . 1500 by General Council and thereafter by the Convention of Estates . These could carry out much business also dealt with by Parliament — taxation , legislation and policy @-@ making — but lacked the ultimate authority of a full parliament . In the 15th century parliament was being called on an almost annual basis , more often than its English counterpart , and was willing to offer occasional resistance or criticism to the policies of the Crown , particular in the unpopular reign of James III . However , from about 1494 , after his success against the Stewarts and Douglases and over rebels in 1482 and 1488 , James IV managed to largely dispense with the institution and it might have declined , like many other systems of Estates in continental Europe , had it not been for his death in 1513 and another long minority . 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 At a local level , government combined traditional kinship @-@ based lordships with a relatively small system of royal offices . Until the 15th century the ancient pattern of major lordships survived largely intact , with the addition of two new " scattered earldoms " of Douglas and Crawford , thanks to royal patronage after the Wars of Independence , mainly in the borders and south @-@ west . The dominant kindred were the Stewarts , who came to control many of the earldoms . Their acquisition of the Crown , and a series of internal conflicts and confiscations , meant that by around the 1460s the monarchy had transformed its position within the realm , gaining control of most of the " provincial " earldoms and lordships . Rather than running semi @-@ independent lordships , the major magnates now had scattered estates and occasional regions of major influence . In the lowlands the Crown was now able to administer government through a system of sheriffdoms and other appointed officers , rather than semi @-@ independent lordships . In the highlands James II created two new provincial earldoms for his favourites : Argyll for the Campbells and Huntly for the Gordons , which acted as a bulwark against the vast Lordship of the Isles built up by the Macdonalds . James IV largely resolved the Macdonald problem by annexing the estates and titles of John Macdonald II to the Crown in 1493 after discovering his plans for an alliance with the English . 
 = = Warfare = = 
 = = = Armies = = = 
 Scottish armies of the late medieval era depended on a combination of familial , communal and feudal forms of service . " Scottish service " ( <unk> <unk> ) , also known as " common service " ( communis <unk> ) , a levy of all able @-@ bodied freemen aged between 16 and 60 , provided the bulk of armed forces , with ( according to decrees ) 8 days warning . Feudal obligations , by which knights held castles and estates in exchange for service , provided troops on a 40 @-@ day basis . By the second half of the 14th century money contracts of bonds or bands of manrent , similar to English indentures of the same period , were being used to retain more professional troops , particularly men @-@ at @-@ arms and archers . In practice forms of service tended to blur and overlap and several major Scottish lords brought contingents from their kindred . 
 These systems produced relatively large numbers of poorly armoured infantry , often armed with 12 – 14 foot spears . They often formed the large close order defensive formations of <unk> , able to counter mounted knights as they did at Bannockburn , but vulnerable to arrows ( and later artillery fire ) and relatively immobile , as they proved at Halidon Hill . There were attempts to replace spears with longer pikes of 15 ½ to 18 ½ feet in the later 15th century , in emulation of successes over mounted troops in the Netherlands and Switzerland , but this does not appear to have been successful until the eve of the Flodden campaign in early 16th century . There were smaller numbers of archers and men @-@ at @-@ arms , which were often outnumbered when facing the English on the battlefield . Archers became much sought after as mercenaries in French armies of the 15th century to help counter the English superiority in this arm , becoming a major element of the French royal guards as the Garde Écossaise . Scottish men @-@ at @-@ arms often dismounted to fight beside the infantry , with perhaps a small mounted reserve , and it has been suggested that these tactics were copied and refined by the English , leading to their successes in the Hundred Years ' War . 
 = = = Artillery = = = 
 The Stewarts attempted to follow France and England in building up an artillery train . The abortive siege of <unk> in 1436 under James I was probably the first conflict in which the Scots made serious use of artillery . James II had a royal gunner and received gifts of artillery from the continent , including two giant bombards made for Philip the Good , Duke of Burgundy , one of which , Mons Meg , still survives . Although these were probably already outdated on the continent , they represented impressive military technology when they reached Scotland . James II enthusiasm for artillery cost him his life , and James III also experienced ill @-@ fortune when artillery sent from Sigismund , Archduke of Austria , sank in a storm en route to Scotland in 1481 . James IV brought in experts from France , Germany and the Netherlands and established a foundry in 1511 . Edinburgh Castle had a house of artillery where visitors could see cannon cast for what became a formidable train , allowing him to send cannon to France and Ireland and to quickly subdue Norham Castle in the Flodden campaign . However , 18 heavy artillery pieces had to be drawn by 400 oxen and slowed the advancing army , proving ineffective against the longer range and smaller calibre English guns at the Battle of Flodden . 
 = = = Navy = = = 
 After the establishment of Scottish independence , Robert I turned his attention to building up a Scottish naval capacity . This was largely focused on the west coast , with the Exchequer Rolls of 1326 recording the feudal duties of his vassals in that region to aid him with their vessels and crews . Towards the end of his reign he supervised the building of at least one royal man @-@ of @-@ war near his palace at Cardross on the River Clyde . In the late 14th century naval warfare with England was conducted largely by hired Scots , Flemish and French merchantmen and privateers . James I took a greater interest in naval power . After his return to Scotland in 1424 he established a shipbuilding yard at Leith , a house for marine stores , and a workshop . King 's ships , one of which accompanied him on his expedition to the Islands in 1429 , were built and equipped there to be used for trade as well as war , and the office of Lord High Admiral was probably founded in this period . In his struggles with his nobles in 1488 James III received assistance from his two warships the Flower and the King 's Carvel also known as the Yellow Carvel . 
 James IV put the enterprise on a new footing , founding a new harbour at Newhaven in May 1504 , and two years later ordered the construction of a dockyard at the Pools of Airth . The upper reaches of the Forth were protected by new fortifications on Inchgarvie . The king acquired a total of 38 ships for the Royal Scottish Navy , including the Margaret , and the carrack Michael or Great Michael . The latter , built at great expense at Newhaven and launched in 1511 , was 240 feet ( 73 m ) in length , weighed 1 @,@ 000 tons , had 24 cannon , and was , at that time , the largest ship in Europe . Scottish ships had some success against privateers , accompanied the king in his expeditions in the islands and intervened in conflicts in Scandinavia and the Baltic . In the Flodden campaign the fleet consisted of 16 large and 10 smaller craft . After a raid on Carrickfergus in Ireland , it joined up with the French and had little impact on the war . After the disaster at Flodden the Great Michael , and perhaps other ships , were sold to the French and the king 's ships disappeared from royal records after 1516 . 
 = = Religion = = 
 = = = The Church = = = 
 Since gaining its independence from English ecclesiastical organisation in 1192 , the Catholic Church in Scotland had been a " special daughter of the see of Rome " , enjoying a direct relationship with the Papacy . Lacking archbishoprics , it was in practice run by special councils of made up of all the bishops , with the bishop of St Andrews emerging as the most important player , until in 1472 St Andrews became the first archbishopric , to be followed by Glasgow in 1492 . Late medieval religion had its political aspects , with Robert I carrying the <unk> ( or Monymusk reliquary ) , said to contain the remains of St. Columba , into battle at Bannockburn and James IV using his pilgrimages to Tain and Whithorn to help bring Ross and Galloway under royal authority . There were also further attempts to differentiate Scottish liturgical practice from that in England , with a printing press established under royal patent in 1507 to replace the English Sarum Use for services . As elsewhere in Europe , the collapse of papal authority in the Papal Schism allowed the Scottish Crown to gain effective control of major ecclesiastical appointments within the kingdom , a position recognised by the Papacy in 1487 . This led to the placement of clients and relatives of the king in key positions , including James IV 's illegitimate son Alexander , who was nominated as Archbishop of St. Andrews at the age of 11 , intensifying royal influence and also opening the Church to accusations of venality and nepotism . Despite this , relationships between the Scottish crown and the Papacy were generally good , with James IV receiving tokens of papal favour . 
 = = = Popular practice = = = 
 Traditional Protestant historiography tended to stress the corruption and unpopularity of the late medieval Scottish church , but more recent research has indicated the ways in which it met the spiritual needs of different social groups . Historians have discerned a decline of monasticism in this period , with many religious houses keeping smaller numbers of monks , and those remaining often abandoning communal living for a more individual and secular lifestyle . New monastic endowments from the nobility also declined in the 15th century . In contrast , the burghs saw the flourishing of mendicant orders of friars in the later 15th century , who placed an emphasis on preaching and ministering to the population . The order of Observant Friars were organised as a Scottish province from 1467 and the older Franciscans and Dominicans were recognised as separate provinces in the 1480s . In most burghs , in contrast to English towns where churches tended to proliferate , there was usually only one parish church , but as the doctrine of Purgatory gained in importance in the period , the number of chapelries , priests and masses for the dead within them grew rapidly . The number of altars to saints also grew dramatically , with St. Mary 's in Dundee having perhaps 48 and St Giles ' in Edinburgh over 50 , as did the number of saints celebrated in Scotland , with about 90 being added to the missal used in St Nicholas church in Aberdeen . New cults of devotion connected with Jesus and the Virgin Mary also began to reach Scotland in the 15th century , including The Five Wounds , The Holy Blood and The Holy Name of Jesus and new feasts including The Presentation , The Visitation and Mary of the Snows . In the early 14th century the Papacy managed to minimise the problem of clerical pluralism , but with relatively poor livings and a shortage of clergy , particularly after the Black Death , in the 15th century the number of clerics holding two or more livings rapidly increased . This meant that parish clergy were largely drawn from the lower and less educated ranks of the profession , leading to frequent complaints about their standards of education or ability , although there is little clear evidence that this was actually declining . Heresy , in the form of <unk> , began to reach Scotland from England and Bohemia in the early 15th century , but despite evidence of a number of burnings of heretics and some apparent support for its anti @-@ sacramental elements , it probably remained a relatively small movement . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Education = = = 
 In medieval Scotland education was dominated by the Church and largely aimed at the training and education of clerics . In the later medieval period there was a general increase in the numbers of educational institutions as well as increasing use by the laity . These included private tuition in the families of lords and wealthy burghers , song schools attached to most major churches and an increasing number of grammar schools , particularly in the expanding burghs . These were almost exclusively aimed at boys , but by the end of the 15th century Edinburgh also had schools for girls . The growing emphasis on education cumulated with the passing of the Education Act 1496 , which decreed that all sons of barons and freeholders of substance should attend grammar schools . All this resulted in an increase in literacy , but which was largely concentrated among a male and wealthy elite , with perhaps 60 per cent of the nobility being literate by the end of the period . 
 Until the 15th century those who wished to attend university had to travel to England or the continent , but this situation was transformed by the founding of the University of St Andrews in 1413 , the University of Glasgow in 1451 and the University of Aberdeen in 1495 . Initially these institutions were designed for the training of clerics , but they would increasingly be used by laymen who would begin to challenge the clerical monopoly of administrative post in the government and law . Scottish scholars continued to visit the continent for their second degrees and this international contact helped bring the new ideas of humanism back into Scottish intellectual life . 
 = = = Art and architecture = = = 
 Scotland is known for its dramatically placed castles , many of which date from the late medieval era . In contrast to England , where the wealthy began to move towards more comfortable grand houses , these continued to be built into the modern period , developing into the style of Scottish Baronial architecture in the 19th century , popular amongst the minor aristocracy and merchant class . This building type , often built with defence in mind in the form of the tower house , was characterised by corbelled turrets and crow @-@ stepped gables marked the first uniquely Scottish mode of building . Ceilings of these houses were decorated with vividly coloured painting on boards and beams , using emblematic motifs from European pattern books or the artist 's interpretation of trailing grotesque patterns . The grandest buildings of this type were the royal palaces in this style at Linlithgow , Holyrood , Falkland and the remodelled Stirling Castle , all of which have elements of continental European architecture , particularly from France and the Low Countries , adapted to Scottish idioms and materials ( particularly stone and harl ) . More modest buildings with continental influences can be seen in the late 15th century western tower of St Mary 's parish church , Dundee , and tollbooths like the one at Dunbar . 
 Parish church architecture in Scotland was often much less elaborate than in England , with many churches remaining simple oblongs , without transepts and aisles , and often without towers . In the highlands they were often even simpler , many built of rubble masonry and sometimes indistinguishable from the outside from houses or farm buildings . However , there were some churches built in a grander continental style . French master @-@ mason John Morrow was employed at the building of Glasgow Cathedral and the rebuilding of Melrose Abbey , both considered fine examples of Gothic architecture . The interiors of churches were often more elaborate before the Reformation , with highly decorated sacrament houses , like the ones surviving at Deskford and Kinkell . The carvings at Rosslyn Chapel , created in the mid @-@ 15th century , elaborately depicting the progression of the seven deadly sins , are considered some of the finest in the Gothic style . Late medieval Scottish churches also often contained elaborate burial monuments , like the Douglas tombs in the town of Douglas . 
 There is relatively little information about native Scottish artists during the late Middle Ages . As in England , the monarchy may have had model portraits used for copies and reproductions , but the versions that survive are generally crude by continental standards . Much more impressive are the works or artists imported from the continent , particularly the Netherlands , generally considered the centre of painting in the Northern Renaissance . The products of these connections included the delicate hanging lamp in St. John 's Kirk in Perth ; the tabernacles and images of St Catherine and St John brought to Dunkeld , and vestments and hangings in Holyrood ; Hugo van Der Goes 's altarpiece for the Trinity College Church in Edinburgh , commissioned by James III , the work after which the Flemish Master of James IV of Scotland is named , and the illustrated Flemish Bening Book of Hours , given by James IV to Margaret Tudor . 
 = = = Language and literature = = = 
 In was in this period that the Scots language became the dominant language of the state and the social elite , while also becoming linked with Scottish national identity and making inroads into the highland zone at the expense of Gaelic . Middle Scots , often called " English " in this period , was derived largely from Old English , with the addition of elements from Gaelic and French . Although resembling the language spoken in northern England , it became a distinct dialect from the late 14th century onwards . It was the dominant language of the lowlands and borders , brought there largely by Anglo @-@ Saxon settlers from the 5th century , but began to be adopted by the ruling elite as they gradually abandoned French in the late medieval era . By the 15th century it was the language of government , with acts of parliament , council records and treasurer 's accounts almost all using it from the reign of James I onwards . As a result , Gaelic , once dominant north of the Tay , began a steady decline . 
 Gaelic was the language of the bardic tradition , which provided a mechanism for the transference of oral culture from generation to generation . Members of bardic schools were trained in the complex rules and forms of Gaelic poetry . In a non @-@ literate society they were the repositories of knowledge , including not just stories and songs , but also genealogies and medicine . They were found in many of the courts of the great lords , down to the chiefdoms of the highlands at the beginning of the period . The bardic tradition was not completely isolated from trends elsewhere , including love poetry influenced by continental developments and medical manuscripts from Padua , Salerno and Montpellier translated from Latin . The Gaelic oral tradition also began to manifest itself in written form , with the great compilation of Gaelic poetry , the Book of the Dean of Lismore produced by James and Duncan MacGregor at the beginning of the 16th century , probably designed for use in the courts of the greater chiefs . However , by the 15th century lowland writers were beginning to treat Gaelic as a second class , rustic and even amusing language , helping to frame attitudes towards the highlands and to create a cultural gulf with the lowlands . 
 It was Scots that emerged as the language of national literature in Scotland . The first surviving major text is John Barbour 's Brus ( 1375 ) , composed under the patronage of Robert II and telling the story in epic poetry of Robert I 's actions before the English invasion until the end of the war of independence . The work was extremely popular among the Scots @-@ speaking aristocracy and Barbour is referred to as the father of Scots poetry , holding a similar place to his contemporary Chaucer in England . In the early 15th century these were followed by Andrew of Wyntoun 's verse <unk> <unk> of Scotland and Blind Harry 's The Wallace , which blended historical romance with the verse chronicle . They were probably influenced by Scots versions of popular French romances that were also produced in the period , including The <unk> of Alexander , Launcelot o the <unk> and The Porteous of <unk> by Gibert Hay . 
 Much Middle Scots literature was produced by makars , poets with links to the royal court . These included James I who wrote The Kingis Quair . Many of the makars had university education and so were also connected with the Kirk . However , Dunbar 's Lament for the Makaris ( c . 1505 ) provides evidence of a wider tradition of secular writing outside of Court and Kirk now largely lost . Before the advent of printing in Scotland , writers such as Robert Henryson , William Dunbar , Walter Kennedy and Gavin Douglas have been seen as leading a golden age in Scottish poetry . 
 In the late 15th century , Scots prose also began to develop as a genre . Although there are earlier fragments of original Scots prose , such as the Auchinleck Chronicle , the first complete surviving works include John Ireland 's The Meroure of Wyssdome ( 1490 ) . There were also prose translations of French books of chivalry that survive from the 1450s , including The Book of the Law of Armys and the Order of Knychthode and the treatise Secreta Secetorum , an Arabic work believed to be Aristotle 's advice to Alexander the Great . The landmark work in the reign of James IV was Gavin Douglas 's version of Virgil 's Aeneid , the Eneados , which was the first complete translation of a major classical text in an Anglian language , finished in 1513 , but overshadowed by the disaster at Flodden . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Bards , who acted as musicians , but also as poets , story tellers , historians , genealogists and lawyers , relying on an oral tradition that stretched back generations , were found in Scotland as well as Wales and Ireland . Often accompanying themselves on the harp , they can also be seen in records of the Scottish courts throughout the medieval period . Scottish church music from the later Middle Ages was increasingly influenced by continental developments , with figures like 13th @-@ century musical theorist Simon <unk> studying in Paris before returning to Scotland , where he introduced several reforms in church music . Scottish collections of music like the 13th @-@ century ' Wolfenbüttel 677 ' , which is associated with St Andrews , contain mostly French compositions , but with some distinctive local styles . The captivity of James I in England from 1406 to 1423 , where he earned a reputation as a poet and composer , may have led him to take English and continental styles and musicians back to the Scottish court on his release . In the late 15th century a series of Scottish musicians trained in the Netherlands before returning home , including John Broune , Thomas Inglis and John Fety , the last of whom became master of the song school in Aberdeen and then Edinburgh , introducing the new five @-@ fingered organ playing technique . In 1501 James IV refounded the Chapel Royal within Stirling Castle , with a new and enlarged choir , and it became the focus of Scottish liturgical music . Burgundian and English influences were probably reinforced when Henry VII 's daughter Margaret Tudor married James IV in 1503 . 
 = = National identity = = 
 The late Middle Ages has often been seen as the era in which Scottish national identity was initially forged , in opposition to English attempts to annexe the country and as a result of social and cultural changes . English invasions and interference in Scotland have been judged to have created a sense of national unity and a hatred towards England which dominated Scottish foreign policy well into the 15th century , making it extremely difficult for Scottish kings like James III and James IV to pursue policies of peace towards their southern neighbour . In particular the Declaration of Arbroath asserted the ancient distinctiveness of Scotland in the face of English aggression , arguing that it was the role of the king to defend the independence of the community of Scotland . This document has been seen as the first " nationalist theory of sovereignty " . 
 The adoption of Middle Scots by the aristocracy has been seen as building a shared sense of national solidarity and culture between rulers and ruled , although the fact that north of the Tay Gaelic still dominated may have helped widen the cultural divide between highlands and lowlands . The national literature of Scotland created in the late medieval period employed legend and history in the service of the Crown and nationalism , helping to foster a sense of national identity at least within its elite audience . The epic poetic history of the Brus and Wallace helped outline a narrative of united struggle against the English enemy . Arthurian literature differed from conventional version of the legend by treating Arthur as a villain and Mordred , the son of the king of the Picts , as a hero . The origin myth of the Scots , systematised by John of Fordun ( c . 1320 @-@ c . 1384 ) , traced their beginnings from the Greek prince <unk> and his Egyptian wife <unk> , allowing them to argue superiority over the English , who claimed their descent from the Trojans , who had been defeated by the Greeks . 
 It was in this period that the national flag emerged as a common symbol . The image of St. Andrew , martyred while bound to an X @-@ shaped cross , first appeared in the Kingdom of Scotland during the reign of William I and was again depicted on seals used during the late 13th century ; including on one particular example used by the Guardians of Scotland , dated 1286 . Use of a simplified symbol associated with Saint Andrew , the saltire , has its origins in the late 14th century ; the Parliament of Scotland decreed in 1385 that Scottish soldiers should wear a white Saint Andrew 's Cross on their person , both in front and behind , for the purpose of identification . Use of a blue background for the Saint Andrew 's Cross is said to date from at least the 15th century . The earliest reference to the Saint Andrew 's Cross as a flag is to be found in the Vienna Book of Hours , circa 1503 . 
 = A. E. J. Collins = 
 Arthur Edward Jeune " James " Collins ( 18 August 1885 – 11 November 1914 ) , typically now known by his initials A. E. J. Collins , was an English cricketer and soldier . He is most famous for achieving what was , for 116 years , the highest @-@ ever recorded score in cricket : as a 13 @-@ year @-@ old schoolboy , he scored 628 not out over four afternoons in June 1899 . Collins 's record @-@ making innings drew a large crowd and increasing media interest ; spectators at the Old Cliftonian match being played nearby were drawn away to watch the junior school house cricket match in which Collins was playing . Despite this achievement , Collins never played first @-@ class cricket . 
 Collins joined the British Army in 1902 and studied at the Royal Military Academy , Woolwich , before becoming an officer in the Royal Engineers . He served in France during the First World War , where he was killed in action in 1914 during the First Battle of Ypres . Collins had been mentioned in despatches and also represented the Royal Military Academy at cricket and rugby union . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Collins was born in Hazaribagh , India , to Arthur Herbert Collins , a judge in the Indian Civil Service , and Mrs Esther Ida Collins . It had been thought that both of his parents had died by the time he began his education at Clifton College , Bristol , where he held a scholarship . However , the 1901 census shows that Arthur 's mother was actually still alive . 
 He joined Clifton College in September 1897 , becoming a member of Clark 's House , although he later moved to North Town House . Clifton had an excellent reputation for sport . W.G. Grace scored 13 first @-@ class centuries on the Close ( Clifton 's first XI ground ) , and he sent his sons to the school . Collins played half @-@ back for the rugby XV , and was also in the cricket XI . He won a bronze medal for boxing at the public schools tournament in Aldershot in 1901 , along with E. A. Hughes and H. P. Hewett . 
 Tim Rice , in a 9 June 1999 article for The Telegraph to celebrate the centenary of the score , entitled " On the seventh day <unk> Collins rested " , described him thus : 
 He was an orphan whose guardians lived in Tavistock , Devon . He was a reserved boy , short and <unk> built , fair @-@ haired and pale . He was remembered by contemporaries as one who led by example , rather than by inspiration , although paradoxically he was regarded as likely to fall short of the highest standards as a cricketer because of his recklessness at the crease . 
 = = The famous match = = 
 In 1899 , as a 13 @-@ year @-@ old schoolboy , Collins scored the highest ever recorded cricket score of 628 not out . This feat took place during a junior school house cricket match between Clarke 's House and North Town House . Such matches were timeless , played to a finish however long they took . The match was played on an outfield off Guthrie Road , Bristol , now named Collins Piece . The ground had both a poor surface and a very unusual shape : it was very short ( only 60 yards ( 55 m ) long ) , with a wall only 70 yards ( 60 m ) away forming the boundary on one side , while the other side was a gentle slope falling away towards the school sanatorium in the distance . The pitch occupied the central 22 yards ( 20 m ) of the narrow field , with the boundary only 17 yards ( 16 m ) behind each set of stumps . Hits to the long boundary , down the slope , had to be all @-@ run , but the three short boundaries only counted for two runs . 
 The match commenced on Thursday , 22 June , to take advantage of two half @-@ day holidays while the college team played their annual match against Old <unk> nearby . Collins , a right @-@ handed batsman , won the toss for Clarke 's House and chose to bat first . Collins hit his first stroke at around 3 @.@ 30 pm By the close of play at 6 pm , he had scored 200 runs , having been dropped on 50 , 100 and 140 . 
 School lessons allowed another two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours ' play on Friday , 23 June , and by then news of an exceptional innings had gone round the school . So brilliant was his play that even the crowd watching an Old Cliftonian match being played nearby lost its interest and a large crowd watched Collins 's phenomenal performance . Collins 's innings almost ended at 400 when an easy catch was dropped by the youngest player on the field , 11 @-@ year @-@ old Victor Fuller @-@ Eberle , but at around 5 @.@ 30 pm , after batting for around five hours , rapturous applause broke out when he passed Andrew Stoddart 's world @-@ record score of 485 . At the end of the second day , he remained unbeaten on 509 and the team on 680 for 8 . His innings was reported as a world record in The Times newspaper on Saturday 24 June ; the paper , however , gave Collins 's score by the close of play on Friday as 501 , his age as 14 and mis @-@ reported his name as " A. E. G. Collins " . 
 The match resumed in the lunch hour on Monday , 26 June , at 12 : 30 pm , with a large crowd . By the end of play , Collins had been dropped again , on 556 , to reach 598 , but another wicket had fallen , and Collins was running out of partners . On Tuesday , 27 June , the school authorities extended the hours available for play in an attempt to finish the match . The crowds grew and media interest escalated , as The Times again reported on the match on Tuesday , and the disruption to school life was considerable . Collins hit out , with his approach being described as " downright reckless " . He was dropped twice more , on 605 and 619 . After just 25 minutes ' play , Collins lost his final partner , Thomas Redfern , caught by Victor Fuller @-@ Eberle at point for 13 , with Collins 's score on 628 . Collins had played less than seven hours ' cricket , carrying his bat through his side 's innings . He had scored 1 six , 4 fives , 31 fours , 33 threes , 146 twos and 87 singles . The Times once again ran a report , giving the final figures for Collins 's innings in its Wednesday 28 June edition — once again , however , they misspelled his third initial . 
 North Town House , demoralised , were bowled out for 87 in 90 minutes on Tuesday . The match resumed on Wednesday 28 June , when North Town 's second innings went even worse , making 61 in just over an hour , so Clarke House won by an innings and 688 runs . Collins showed some ability as an all @-@ rounder , with his right @-@ arm medium pace bowling taking 11 wickets for 63 runs . 
 The <unk> hangs in the pavilion at Clifton to this day . The scorers faced a difficult task in accurately recording the innings . One of them , Edward Peglar , is said to have remarked that Collins 's score was " 628 , plus or minus twenty shall we say " . The other scorer for the match was J.W. Hall , whose father in 1868 had batted with Edward <unk> , who later played Test cricket for England and whose name is on a poem kept with the Ashes urn . <unk> had earlier set a world @-@ record score of 404 not out in 1868 , also at Clifton . Hall later wrote that " The bowling probably deserved all the lordly contempt with which Collins treated it , sending a considerable number of pulls full pitch over the fives courts into the swimming baths to the danger of the occupants . " 
 Collins became public property for a long while after the match , forever associated with his great score . " Today all men speak of him , " wrote one newspaper , " … he has a reputation as great as the most advertised soap : he will be immortalised . " After leaving school , he never wanted to be reminded of his famous innings ; nevertheless , he has been remembered well beyond his own lifetime . 
 Within two years , 31 @-@ year @-@ old Australian Test cricketer Charles Eady came close to breaking the record , when he made 566 for Break @-@ o ' <unk> against Wellington in Hobart in less than eight hours spread over three weeks in March 1902 . This remained , for over a century , the closest challenge to Collins 's record : his score was finally beaten in January 2016 by <unk> <unk> , a 15 @-@ year @-@ old Indian boy who scored 1 @,@ 009 not out from 327 balls for KC Gandhi School against Arya <unk> School in Mumbai . Only five other players , Prithvi Shaw ( 546 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 515 ) , JC Sharp ( 505 not out ) , Malhotra <unk> ( 502 not out ) , and Brian Lara ( 501 not out ) have ever scored more than 500 runs in one innings in any form of cricket . Lara is the only person to have achieved a score of over 500 runs in first @-@ class cricket . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Collins chose to follow an army career , passing his entrance exams to the Royal Military Academy , Woolwich in September 1901 and representing the Royal Military Academy at both football and rugby as well as cricket , scoring a century in a match against the Royal Military College , Sandhurst . He joined the British Army the following year , being commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 21 December 1904 . Despite the limitations on his sport that the military service caused , he played several matches for Old <unk> , his regiment , and the Army , remaining a free @-@ hitting batsman . He played at Lord 's in 1913 for Royal Engineers against Royal Artillery , scoring 58 and 36 runs in the two innings , but he never played first @-@ class cricket . He also joined Clifton Rugby Football Club in February 1905 , but never rose above the 2nd XV . He served with the 2nd Sappers and Miners in India , and was promoted to Lieutenant on 23 June 1907 . 
 Collins married Ethel Slater in the spring of 1914 and was sent to France when the First World War broke out later that year . He was killed in action on 11 November 1914 at the First Battle of Ypres , while serving as a Captain with the 5th Field Company , Royal Engineers , at the age of 29 . He was signalling for more men to protect the flank of his trench when he was wounded ; he was dragged back into the trench by Sapper <unk> ( <unk> ) but he died an hour later . The 5th Field Company carried out the burials of its Company on 12 November . Due to the continual fighting over this area for the next four years what remained of his grave and remains were never found , but his name is recorded at the Menin Gate Memorial in Belgium . Before his death , he had been Mentioned in Despatches . His younger brother Herbert ( a Lieutenant in the 24th Battalion of the Manchester Regiment and also an old Cliftonian ) was killed in action on 11 February 1917 , aged 27 . Collins 's wife , Ethel , lived as a widow for over fifty years , dying on 1 September 1966 in Haslemere . 
 = German submarine U @-@ 40 ( 1938 ) = 
 German submarine U @-@ 40 was a Type IXA U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine that operated during World War II . 
 U @-@ 40 was built in Bremen by DeSchiMAG AG Weser as yard number 945 . She was launched in November 1938 and commissioned in February 1939 . 
 U @-@ 40 conducted two war patrols during her career . Both of which were part of the 6th U @-@ boat Flotilla . During her short time in the war , she sank no ships . 
 U @-@ 40 was sunk on 13 October 1939 by a mine in the English Channel . 
 = = Construction = = 
 U @-@ 40 was ordered by the Kriegsmarine on 29 July 1936 ( as part of Plan Z and in violation of the Treaty of Versailles ) . Her kneel was laid down on 1 July 1937 . U @-@ 40 was launched on 9 November 1938 and commissioned on 11 February 1939 under the command of Kapitänleutnant Werner von Schmidt . 
 = = Design = = 
 As one of the eight original German Type IX submarines , later designated IXA , U @-@ 40 had a displacement of 1 @,@ 032 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 016 long tons ) when at the surface and 1 @,@ 153 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 135 long tons ) while submerged . The U @-@ boat had a total length of 76 @.@ 50 m ( 251 ft ) , a pressure hull length of 58 @.@ 75 m ( 192 ft 9 in ) , a beam of 6 @.@ 51 m ( 21 ft 4 in ) , a height of 9 @.@ 40 m ( 30 ft 10 in ) , and a draught of 4 @.@ 70 m ( 15 ft 5 in ) . The submarine was powered by two MAN M 9 V 40 / 46 supercharged four @-@ stroke , nine @-@ cylinder diesel engines producing a total of 4 @,@ 400 metric horsepower ( 3 @,@ 240 kW ; 4 @,@ 340 shp ) for use while surfaced , two Siemens @-@ Schuckert 2 GU 345 / 34 double @-@ acting electric motors producing a total of 1 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 740 kW ; 990 shp ) for use while submerged . She had two shafts and two 1 @.@ 92 m ( 6 ft ) propellers . The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to 230 metres ( 750 ft ) . 
 The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 18 @.@ 2 knots ( 33 @.@ 7 km / h ; 20 @.@ 9 mph ) and a maximum submerged speed of 7 @.@ 7 knots ( 14 @.@ 3 km / h ; 8 @.@ 9 mph ) . When submerged , the boat could operate for 65 – 78 nautical miles ( 120 – 144 km ; 75 – 90 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) ; when surfaced , she could travel 10 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 400 km ; 12 @,@ 100 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . U @-@ 40 was fitted with six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four fitted at the bow and two at the stern ) , 22 torpedoes , one 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) SK C / 32 naval gun , 180 rounds , and a 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) as well as a 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . The boat had a complement of forty @-@ eight . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After being commissioned and deployed , U @-@ 40 was stationed in the German port city of Wilhelmshaven , which to be her home for the rest of her fairly short career . 
 = = = Patrols = = = 
 U @-@ 40 left Wilhelmshaven on 19 August 1939 , before World War II began , for her first patrol . For nearly four weeks she operated off the coast of Gibraltar , before returning home on 18 September that same year . U @-@ 40 would once again leave Wilhelmshaven , this time under the command of Kapitänleutnant Wolfgang <unk> , on 10 October 1939 . During this patrol , she was to conduct joint operations off the coasts of Portugal and Spain . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 On 13 October 1939 , U @-@ 40 was sunk by a British mine at 50 ° 41 ′ 6 ″ N 00 ° 15 ′ 1 ″ E. She was to operate as part of the first pack of U @-@ boats in World War II ; however , because she left port late , <unk> decided to take a shortcut to the U @-@ boat 's designated meeting point , southwest of Ireland . This shortcut was through the English Channel , which was festooned with many British naval mines . Choosing to make the voyage nearly three and a half hours after high tide , the mines were not at their lowest point . The boat struck one of these devices and sank immediately to the sea floor . Nevertheless , nine crew members were able to exit through the aft escape hatch . Using escape equipment , they were able to reach the surface ; one of the nine died on his journey . Once there , five more died from exposure to the harsh elements of the English Channel . Nearly ten hours after the sinking , the remaining three men were rescued and taken prisoner by HMS Boreas . 
 = The Bold Bank Robbery = 
 The Bold Bank Robbery is a 1904 short crime film produced and distributed by the Lubin Manufacturing Company . The silent film depicts a group of burglars who plan and execute a successful bank heist . Company employee Jack Frawley was the film 's director , also coming up with the story and serving as cinematographer ; the cast 's identities are unknown . The silent film was the first Lubin Manufacturing Company release to feature an original narrative . 
 The film was created after the commercial success of the Edwin S. Porter film The Great Train Robbery , and was intended to be similar to it . Released on July 30 , 1904 , reception was mixed . It is credited with having motivated Porter to direct the film Capture of the " <unk> " Bank <unk> . A print of the seven @-@ minute film , which is now in the public domain , is preserved in the Library of Congress . In 2002 , the film was released on DVD as part of a compilation of silent films . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After learning they are short of money , a group of four robbers decide to execute a bank heist . The four create a plan and hire an unwitting chauffeur to drive them to their location . As soon as they reach an isolated road , the robbers force the chauffeur out of the car , gag him , and throw him into a ditch . The robbers then drive the car to the bank . After entering , they kill a security guard and use explosives to force the bank vault open . The thieves steal as much money as possible and make a quick retreat to their car . Back in the park , a young couple on a walk discover the unconscious body of the chauffeur , and the man calls the police . 
 The band of robbers , now at home , are about to start splitting their stolen goods equally , when the police barge in . While three of the robbers are subdued after a fight , one manages to make his escape via a window and ends up on the roof . The two policeman chase the criminal , who eludes them by jumping from rooftop to rooftop . After the robber jumps down to the street , he runs toward the railroad station and boards a departing train . The police officers arrive but are too late , as the robber has left . The officers tell the train dispatcher to send a telegram to the next station , informing them of the fugitive and asking them to catch him as soon as possible . When the train reaches the next station , the burglar exits the train and unknowingly runs right into the path of policemen . With all four of the robbers caught , they are sentenced to forty years in jail . While doing work in the jail 's quarry , the group review their failure , with each robber pinning the blame on another . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Bold Bank Robbery was directed by Jack Frawley and produced by the Lubin Manufacturing Company . Frawley worked at the company , serving as their general manager . He often devised the stories for their films ; The Bold Bank Robbery was no exception . The film was the company 's first to feature an original narrative . 
 Frawley , who also served as cinematographer for the film , had a relaxed approach to making films ; he did not use screenplays and never numbered the scenes . During the assembling of Frawley 's films , the sole material for editors to rely on was a pad with notes scrawled in it . The identities of the cast of The Bold Bank Robbery are unrecorded . The film , silent and shot in black @-@ and @-@ white , was filmed in Philadelphia . It was shot using a camera that company creator Siegmund Lubin had built back in 1901 . 
 The Bold Bank Robbery was inspired by and created after the success of the 1903 western film The Great Train Robbery ; other inspirations included American and European crime films . Lubin Manufacturing Company had been known to produce films similar to other popular ones ; film historian Kemp R. <unk> observed that " if it seemed like a good idea , and other film producers were making money , ' Pop ' Lubin simply appropriated the title and remade or duped the motion picture . " Siegmund Lubin filed a copyright for the film on July 25 , 1904 . The finished product comprised 600 feet ( 182 m ) of film . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Bold Bank Robbery was released on July 30 , 1904 . Distribution was handled by Lubin Manufacturing Company and the Kleine Optical Company . To promote the film , Siegmund Lubin placed an advertisement in Billboard ; appearing in its October 15 , 1904 issue , it was the first film to be advertised in the magazine . The advertisement offered the film for purchase at the price of 66 dollars , along with a free Victor Talking Machine if one were to purchase two other films . An advertisement for the film in the New York Clipper declared that The Bold Bank Robbery was " the most sensational film ever made . " 
 When the film was shown in theaters , it was played alongside a phonograph , a device used to record and replay audio . However , the audio was often not synchronized with the action , perhaps owing to the fact that the projectionists still had to operate the machines by hand . It received a positive review from a writer for the American newspaper The Victoria Advocate , who branded it as a film that " everyone should see . " Adversely , author Jay Leyda , writing for Film Quarterly , criticized the film for being " obviously derivative . " 
 In 1904 , Edwin S. Porter directed a film entitled Capture of the " <unk> " Bank <unk> , distributed by Edison Studios . Filmed in August and September of that year , the film features a group of robbers who execute a heist . Porter had been motivated to produce it by The Bold Bank Robbery . A man from Belleville , Ontario , who held screenings of The Bold Bank Robbery and paired it with other films in the crime genre , once screened the films at a fair . The man was surprised by the ovation received from the audience , writing that " The applause was something amazing . I really thought the grandstand had collapsed . " 
 The film has survived ; a print of The Bold Bank Robbery is preserved in the Library of Congress film archive . In 2002 , the film was released on DVD by Kino International as part of The Movies Begin , a DVD boxset which collects 133 silent short films released between 1894 and 1913 . The film is now in the public domain . 
 = The X @-@ Files = 
 The X @-@ Files is an American science fiction horror drama television series created by Chris Carter . The program originally aired from September 10 , 1993 , to May 19 , 2002 , on Fox , spanning nine seasons , with 202 episodes and a feature film of the same name , before returning with a second film in 2008 and a six @-@ episode tenth season in 2016 . The series revolves around FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who investigate X @-@ Files : marginalized , unsolved cases involving paranormal phenomena . Mulder believes in the existence of aliens and the paranormal while Scully , a medical doctor and a skeptic , is assigned to make scientific analyses of Mulder 's discoveries to debunk his work and thus return him to mainstream cases . Early in the series , both agents become pawns in a larger conflict and come to trust only each other and a very few select people . They develop a close relationship which begins as a platonic friendship , but becomes a romance by the end of the series . In addition to the series @-@ spanning story arc , " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " episodes form roughly two @-@ thirds of all episodes . 
 The X @-@ Files was inspired by series which featured elements of suspense and speculative fiction , including Alfred Hitchcock Presents , The Twilight Zone , Night Gallery , Tales from the Darkside , and especially Kolchak : The Night Stalker . When creating the main characters , Carter sought to reverse gender stereotypes by making Mulder a believer and Scully a skeptic . The first seven seasons featured Duchovny and Anderson equally . In the last two seasons , Anderson took precedence while Duchovny appeared intermittently . New main characters were introduced : FBI agents John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) and Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) . Mulder and Scully 's boss , Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , also became a main character . The first five seasons of The X @-@ Files were filmed and produced in Vancouver , British Columbia , before eventually moving to Los Angeles to accommodate Duchovny . The series later returned to Vancouver to film The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe as well as the tenth season of the series . 
 The X @-@ Files was a hit for the Fox network and received largely positive reviews , although its long @-@ term story arc was criticized near the conclusion . Initially considered a cult series , it turned into a pop culture touchstone that tapped into public mistrust of governments and large institutions and embraced conspiracy theories and spirituality . Both the series itself and lead actors Duchovny and Anderson received multiple awards and nominations , and by the end it was the longest @-@ running science fiction series in U.S. television history . The series also spawned a franchise which includes The Lone Gunmen spin @-@ off , two theatrical films and accompanying merchandise . After the final theatrical film in 2008 , fans continued to push for a third movie to conclude the series ' plot lines , and in March 2015 , Fox eventually announced that the series would return , with Chris Carter as executive producer and writer , and Duchovny , Anderson , Pileggi , Davis , and Gish all reprising their roles . The revival premiered on January 24 , 2016 . 
 = = Premise = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 The X @-@ Files follows the careers and personal lives of FBI Special Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . Mulder is a talented profiler and strong believer in the supernatural . He is also adamant about the existence of intelligent extraterrestrial life and its presence on Earth . This set of beliefs earns him the nickname " Spooky " and an assignment to a little @-@ known department that deals with unsolved cases , known as the X @-@ Files . His belief in the paranormal springs from the claimed abduction of his sister Samantha Mulder by extraterrestrials when Mulder was 12 . Her abduction drives Mulder throughout most of the series . Because of this , as well as more nebulous desires for vindication and the revelation of truths kept hidden by human authorities , Mulder struggles to maintain objectivity in his investigations . 
 Agent Scully is a foil for Mulder in this regard . As a medical doctor and natural skeptic , Scully approaches cases with complete detachment even when Mulder , despite his considerable training , loses his objectivity . Her initial task is to debunk Mulder 's theories , supplying logical , scientific explanations for the cases ' apparently unexplainable phenomena . Although she is frequently able to offer scientific alternatives to Mulder 's deductions , she is rarely able to refute them completely . Over the course of the series , she becomes increasingly dissatisfied with her own ability to approach the cases scientifically . After Mulder 's abduction at the hands of aliens in the seventh season finale " Requiem " , Scully becomes a " reluctant believer " who manages to explain the paranormal with science . 
 Various episodes also deal with the relationship between Mulder and Scully , originally platonic , but that later develops romantically . Mulder and Scully are joined by John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) and Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) late in the series , after Mulder is abducted . Doggett replaces him as Scully 's partner and helps her search for him , later involving Reyes , of whom Doggett had professional knowledge . The X @-@ Files ends when Mulder is secretly subjected to a military tribunal for breaking into a Top Secret military facility and viewing plans for alien invasion and colonization of Earth . He is found guilty , but he escapes punishment with the help of the other agents and he and Scully become fugitives . 
 = = = Mythology = = = 
 As the show progressed , key episodes , called parts of the " <unk> " , were recognized as the " mythology " of the series canon ; these episodes carried the extraterrestrial / conspiracy storyline that evolved throughout the series . " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " — often abbreviated as " MOTW " or " <unk> " — came to denote the remainder of The X @-@ Files episodes . These episodes , comprising the majority of the series , dealt with paranormal phenomena , including <unk> and mutants ; science fiction technologies ; horror monsters ; and satiric / comedic elements . The main story arc involves the agents ' efforts to uncover a government conspiracy to hide the existence of extraterrestrials on Earth and their sinister collaboration with those governments . Mysterious men comprising a shadow element within the U.S. government , known as " The Syndicate " , are the major villains in the series ; late in the series it is revealed that The Syndicate acts as the only liaison between mankind and a group of extraterrestrials that intends to destroy the human species . They are usually represented by Cigarette Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) , a ruthless killer , masterful politician , negotiator , failed novelist , and the series ' principal antagonist . 
 As the series goes along , Mulder and Scully learn about evidence of the alien invasion piece by piece . It is revealed that the extraterrestrials plan on using a sentient virus , known as the black oil , to infect mankind and turn the population of the world into a slave race . The Syndicate — having made a deal to be spared by the aliens — have been working to develop an alien @-@ human hybrid that will be able to withstand the effects of the black oil . The group has also been secretly working on a vaccine to overcome the black oil ; this vaccine is revealed in the latter parts of season five , as well as the 1998 film . Counter to the alien colonization effort , another faction of aliens , the faceless rebels , are working to stop alien colonization . Eventually , in the season six episodes " Two Fathers " / " One Son " , the rebels manage to destroy the Syndicate . The colonists , now without human liaisons , dispatch the " Super Soldiers " : beings that resemble humans , but are biologically alien . In the latter parts of season eight , and the whole of season nine , the Super Soldiers manage to replace key individuals in the government , forcing Mulder and Scully to go into hiding . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 Fox Mulder ( seasons 1 – 7 , 10 , main ; season 8 – 9 , intermittent lead ) is portrayed by David Duchovny . Mulder is an Oxford @-@ educated FBI special agent who believes in the existence of extraterrestrials and a government conspiracy to hide the truth regarding them . He works in the X @-@ Files office , which is concerned with cases marked as unsolvable ; most involve supernatural / mysterious circumstances . Mulder considers the X @-@ Files so important that he has made their study his life 's main purpose . After his abduction by aliens at the end of season seven , his role in the show diminished and much of his work is taken on by Agent John Doggett . He appeared in an episode of The Lone Gunmen and in both the 1998 film The X @-@ Files and the 2008 film The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe . 
 Dana Scully ( seasons 1 – 10 , main ) is portrayed by Gillian Anderson . Scully is an FBI special agent , a medical doctor , and scientist who is Mulder 's partner . In contrast to his credulity , Scully is a skeptic , basing her beliefs on scientific explanations . However , despite her otherwise rigid skepticism , she is a Catholic , and her faith plays an important role in several episodes . As the series progresses , she becomes more open to the possibility of paranormal happenings . In the latter part of the eighth season , her position in the X @-@ Files office is taken by Agent Monica Reyes , and Scully moves to Quantico to teach new FBI agents . She appeared in both The X @-@ Files feature films . 
 Walter Skinner ( seasons 1 – 8 , recurring ; season 9 – 10 , intermittent lead ) is portrayed by Mitch Pileggi . Skinner is an FBI assistant director who served in the United States Marine Corps in the Vietnam War . During this time he shot and killed a young boy carrying explosives , an incident which scarred him for life . Skinner is originally Mulder and Scully 's direct supervisor . He later serves the same position for Doggett and Reyes . Although he is originally portrayed as somewhat antagonistic , he eventually becomes a close friend of Mulder and Scully . He appeared in an episode of The Lone Gunmen and in both The X @-@ Files feature films . 
 John Doggett ( seasons 8 – 9 , main ) is portrayed by Robert Patrick . Doggett is an FBI special agent who makes his first appearance in the season eight episode " Within " . Doggett served in the United States Marine Corps from the 1970s to the 1980s . Later , he started to work with the New York City Police Department , reaching the rank of detective . After his son 's death , he joined the FBI 's Criminal Investigations Division . In 2000 , Alvin Kersh assigned him to the X @-@ files unit as Scully 's partner after an unsuccessful task force attempt to find Mulder . He did not appear in The X @-@ Files feature films . 
 Monica Reyes ( season 8 , recurring ; season 9 , main ; season 10 , guest ) is portrayed by Annabeth Gish . Reyes is an FBI special agent who was born and raised in Mexico City . She majored in folklore and mythology at Brown University and earned a master 's degree in religious studies . Her first FBI assignment was serving on a special task force investigating satanic rituals . She is a longtime friend of Doggett 's and becomes his partner after Scully 's departure . She did not appear in The X @-@ Files feature films . 
 = = = Recurring characters = = = 
 Cigarette Smoking Man ( seasons 1 – 7 , 9 – 10 ) is portrayed by William B. Davis . The Cigarette Smoking Man is the series ' primary villain . In the ninth season episodes " William " and " The Truth " , it is suggested that he is Mulder 's biological father . In the seventh season episode " Requiem " , he is believed to be killed after being pushed down a flight of stairs by Alex Krycek until the ninth season finale " The Truth " , where Mulder and Scully travel through remote New Mexico and reach a pueblo where a " wise man " reputedly lives and is revealed to be Cigarette Smoking Man . He appears in the 1998 feature film and in the first and sixth episodes of the 2016 season . 
 Alex Krycek ( seasons 2 – 9 ) is portrayed by Nicholas Lea . Krycek is a Russian @-@ American , the son of Cold War immigrants , and first introduced as an FBI Special Agent assigned as a temporary investigation partner to Fox Mulder . Krycek proceeds to work with Mulder and attempts to gain his trust . However , it later becomes evident that Krycek is actually an undercover agent working for Cigarette Smoking Man . Krycek plays an important part in several events that are harmful to Mulder and Scully . 
 Jeffrey Spender ( seasons 5 – 6 , 9 ) is portrayed by Chris Owens . Spender was a skeptic who was assigned to The X @-@ Files after Fox Mulder 's forced leave . Spender is the son of Cigarette Smoking Man and his ex @-@ wife , multiple abductee Cassandra Spender , as well as possibly being the half @-@ brother of Mulder . Initially thought to have been murdered by Cigarette Smoking Man , Spender returned , horribly disfigured , in the ninth season and helped Scully 's son William . 
 Alvin Kersh ( seasons 6 , 8 – 9 ) is portrayed by James Pickens , Jr .. As an assistant director ( and later deputy director ) , he temporarily became supervisor to Agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully when they were assigned away from the X @-@ Files division . During this time , Cigarette Smoking Man would often visit him in his office . Kersh assigned Mulder and Scully mostly to menial tasks , such as terrorist details and Federal background checks . Kersh was largely antagonistic to Mulder and Scully , but in " The Truth " somewhat redeemed himself by helping Mulder escape capital punishment . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 California native Chris Carter was given the opportunity to produce new shows for the Fox network in the early 1990s . Tired of the comedies he had been working on for Walt Disney Pictures , a report that 3 @.@ 7 million Americans may have been abducted by aliens , the Watergate scandal and the 1970s horror series Kolchak : The Night Stalker , triggered the idea for The X @-@ Files . He wrote the pilot episode in 1992 . 
 Carter 's initial pitch for The X @-@ Files was rejected by Fox executives . He fleshed out the concept and returned a few weeks later , when they commissioned the pilot . Carter worked with NYPD Blue producer Daniel Sackheim to further develop the pilot , drawing stylistic inspiration from the 1988 documentary The Thin Blue Line and the British television series Prime Suspect . Inspiration also came from Carter 's memories of The Twilight Zone as well as from The Silence of the Lambs , which provided the impetus for framing the series around agents from the FBI , in order to provide the characters with a more plausible reason for being involved in each case than Carter believed was present in Kolchak . Carter was determined to keep the relationship between the two leads strictly platonic , basing their interactions on the characters of Emma Peel and John Steed in The Avengers series . 
 The early 1990s series Twin Peaks was a major influence on the show 's dark atmosphere and its often surreal blend of drama and irony . Duchovny had appeared as a cross @-@ dressing DEA agent in Twin Peaks and the Mulder character was seen as a parallel to that show 's FBI Agent Dale Cooper . The producers and writers cited All the President 's Men , Three Days of the Condor , Close Encounters of the Third Kind , Raiders of the Lost Ark , Rashomon , The Thing , The Boys from Brazil , The Silence of the Lambs and JFK as other influences . Carter 's use of continuous takes in " Triangle " was modeled on Hitchcock 's Rope . In addition , episodes written by Darin Morgan often referred to or referenced other films . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Duchovny had worked in Los Angeles for three years prior to The X @-@ Files ; at first he wanted to focus on feature films . In 1993 , his manager , Melanie Green , gave him the script for the " pilot episode " of The X @-@ Files . Green and Duchovny were both convinced it was a good script , so he auditioned for the lead . Duchovny 's audition was " terrific " , though he talked rather slowly . While the casting director of the show was very positive toward him , Carter thought that he was not particularly intelligent . He asked Duchovny if he could " please " imagine himself as an FBI agent in " future " episodes . Duchovny , however , turned out to be one of the best @-@ read people that Carter knew . 
 Anderson auditioned for the role of Scully in 1993 . " I couldn ’ t put the script down " , she recalled . The network wanted either a more established or a " taller , <unk> , blonder and <unk> " actress for Scully than the 24 @-@ year @-@ old Anderson , a theater veteran with minor film experience . After auditions , Carter felt she was the only choice . Carter insisted that Anderson had the kind of no @-@ nonsense integrity that the role required . For portraying Scully , Anderson won numerous major awards : the Screen Actors Guild Award in 1996 and 1997 , an Emmy Award in 1997 , and a Golden Globe Award 1997 . 
 The character Walter Skinner was played by actor Mitch Pileggi , who had unsuccessfully auditioned for the roles of two or three other characters on The X @-@ Files before getting the part . At first , the fact that he was asked back to audition for the recurring role slightly puzzled him , until he discovered the reason he had not previously been cast in those roles — Carter had been unable to envision Pileggi as any of those characters , because the actor had been shaving his head . When Pileggi auditioned for Walter Skinner , he had been in a grumpy mood and had allowed his small amount of hair to grow . His attitude fit well with Skinner 's character , causing Carter to assume that the actor was only pretending to be grumpy . Pileggi later realized he had been lucky that he had not been cast in one of the earlier roles , as he believed he would have appeared in only a single episode and would have missed the opportunity to play the recurring role . 
 Before the seventh season aired , Duchovny filed a lawsuit against 20th Century Fox . He was upset because , he claimed , Fox had undersold the rights to its own affiliates , thereby costing him huge sums of money . Eventually , the lawsuit was settled , and Duchovny was awarded a settlement of about $ 20 million . The lawsuit put strain on Duchovny 's professional relationships . Neither Carter nor Duchovny was contracted to work on the series beyond the seventh season ; however , Fox entered into negotiations near the end of that season in order to bring the two on board for an eighth season . After settling his contract dispute , Duchovny quit full @-@ time participation in the show after the seventh season . This contributed to uncertainties over the likelihood of an eighth season . Carter and most fans felt the show was at its natural endpoint with Duchovny 's departure , but it was decided that Mulder would be abducted at the end of the seventh seasons and would return in 12 episodes the following year . The producers then announced that a new character , John Doggett , would fill Mulder 's role . 
 More than 100 actors auditioned for the role of Doggett , but only about ten were seriously considered . Lou Diamond Phillips , Hart Bochner , and Bruce Campbell were among the ten . The producers chose Robert Patrick . Carter believed that the series could continue for another ten years with new leads , and the opening credits were accordingly redesigned in both seasons eight and nine to emphasize the new actors ( along with Pileggi , who was finally listed as a main character ) . Doggett 's presence did not give the series the ratings boost the network executives were hoping for . The eighth season episode " This is Not Happening " marked the first appearance of Monica Reyes , played by Gish , who became a main character in season nine . Her character was developed and introduced due to Anderson 's possible departure at the end of the eighth season . Although Anderson stayed until the end , Gish became a series regular . 
 = = = = Minor recurring characters = = = = 
 Glen Morgan and James Wong 's early influence on The X @-@ Files mythology led to their introduction of popular secondary characters who continued for years in episodes written by others : Scully 's father , William ( Don S. Davis ) ; her mother , Margaret ( Sheila Larken ) ; and her sister , Melissa ( Melinda McGraw ) . The conspiracy @-@ inspired trio The Lone Gunmen were also secondary characters . The trio was introduced in the first season episode " E.B.E. " as a way to make Mulder appear more credible . They were originally meant to appear in only that episode , but due to their popularity , they returned in the second season episode " Blood " and became recurring characters . Cigarette Smoking Man portrayed by William B. Davis , was initially cast as an extra in the pilot episode . His character , however , grew into the main antagonist . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 During the early stages of production , Carter founded Ten Thirteen Productions and began to plan for filming the pilot in Los Angeles . However , unable to find suitable locations for many scenes , he decided to " go where the good forests are " and moved production to Vancouver . It was soon realized by the production crew that since so much of the first season would require filming on location , rather than on sound stages , a second location manager would be needed . The show remained in Vancouver for the first five seasons ; production then shifted to Los Angeles beginning with the sixth season . Duchovny was unhappy over his geographical separation from his wife Téa Leoni , although his discontent was popularly attributed to frustration with climatic conditions in Vancouver . Anderson also wanted to return to the United States and Carter relented following the fifth season . The season ended in May 1998 with " The End " , the final episode shot in Vancouver ( until the 2016 revival ) and the final episode with the involvement of many of the original crew members , including director and producer R.W. Goodwin and his wife Sheila Larken , who played Margaret Scully and would later return briefly . The X @-@ Files crew returned to Vancouver to film The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe . According to Spotnitz , the film script was written specifically for the city and surrounding areas . 
 With the move to Los Angeles , many changes behind the scenes occurred , as much of the original The X @-@ Files crew was gone . New production designer Corey Kaplan , editor Lynne Willingham , writer David Amann and director and producer Michael Watkins joined and stayed for several years . Bill Roe became the show 's new director of photography and episodes generally had a drier , brighter look due to California 's sunshine and climate , as compared with Vancouver 's rain , fog and temperate forests . Early in the sixth season , the producers took advantage of the new location , setting the show in new parts of the country . For example , Vince Gilligan 's " Drive " , about a man subject to an unexplained illness , was a frenetic action episode , unusual for The X @-@ Files largely because it was set in Nevada 's stark desert roads . The " Dreamland " two @-@ part episode was also set in Nevada , this time in Area 51 . The episode was largely filmed at " Club Ed " , a movie ranch located on the outskirts of Lancaster , California . 
 Although the sixth through ninth seasons were filmed in Los Angeles , the series ' second movie , The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe ( 2008 ) , was filmed in Vancouver , as was the 2016 revival . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music was composed by Mark Snow , who got involved with The X @-@ Files through his friendship with executive producer Goodwin . Initially Carter had no candidates . A little over a dozen people were considered , but Goodwin continued to press for Snow , who auditioned around three times with no sign from the production staff as to whether they wanted him . One day , however , Snow 's agent called him , talking about the " pilot episode " and hinting that he had got the job . 
 The theme , " The X @-@ Files " , used more instrumental sections than most dramas . The theme song 's famous whistle effect was inspired by the track " How Soon Is Now ? " from The Smiths ' 1985 album Meat Is Murder . After attempting to craft the theme with different sound effects , Snow used a Proteus 2 rack @-@ mount synth with an effect called " Whistling Joe " . After hearing this effect , Carter was " taken aback " and noted it was " going to be good " . According to the " Behind the Truth " segment on the first season DVD , Snow created the echo effect on the track by accident . He felt that after several revisions , something still was not right . Carter walked out of the room and Snow put his hand and forearm on his keyboard in frustration . By doing so , he accidentally activated an echo effect setting . The resulting riff pleased Carter ; Snow said , " this sound was in the keyboard . And that was it . " The second episode , " Deep Throat " , marked Snow 's debut as solo composer for an entire episode . The production crew was determined to limit the music in the early episodes . Likewise , the theme song itself first appeared in " Deep Throat " . 
 Snow was tasked with composing the score for both The X @-@ Files films . The films marked the first appearance of real instruments ; previous music had been digitally crafted by Snow . Snow 's soundtrack for the first film , The X @-@ Files : Original Motion Picture Score , was released in 1998 . For the second film , Snow recorded with the Hollywood Studio Symphony in May 2008 at the Newman Scoring Stage at 20th Century Fox in Century City . UNKLE recorded a new version of the theme music for the end credits . Some of the unusual sounds were created by a variation of silly putty and dimes tucked into piano strings . Snow commented that the fast percussion featured in some tracks was inspired by the track " Prospectors Quartet " from the There Will Be Blood soundtrack . The soundtrack score , The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe : Original Motion Picture Score , was released in 2008 . 
 = = = Opening sequence = = = 
 The opening sequence was made in 1993 for the first season and remained unchanged until Duchovny left the show . Carter sought to make the title an " impactful opening " with " supernatural images " . These scenes notably include a split @-@ screen image of a seed germinating as well as a " terror @-@ filled , warped face " . The latter was created when Carter found a video operator who was able to create the effect . The sequence was extremely popular and won the show its first Emmy Award , which was for Outstanding Graphic Design and Title Sequences . Rabwin was particularly pleased with the sequence and felt that it was something that had " never [ been ] seen on television before " . 
 The premiere episode of season eight , " Within " , revealed the first major change to the opening credits . Along with Patrick , the sequence used new images and updated photos for Duchovny and Anderson , although Duchovny only appears in the opening credits when he appears in an episode . Carter and the production staff saw Duchovny 's departure as a chance to change things . The replacement shows various pictures of Scully 's pregnancy . According to executive producer Frank Spotnitz , the sequence also features an " abstract " way of showing Mulder 's absence in the eighth season : he falls into an eye . Season nine featured an entirely new sequence . Since Anderson wanted to move on , the sequence featured Reyes and Skinner . Duchovny 's return to the show for the ninth season finale , " The Truth " marked the largest number of cast members to be featured in the opening credits , with five . 
 The sequence ends with the tagline " The Truth Is Out There " , which is used for the majority of the episodes . The tagline changes in specific episodes to slogans that are relevant to that episode . The first of these was " Trust No One " in " The Erlenmeyer Flask " . Other examples include : " Deny Everything " in " Ascension " , " <unk> ' <unk> ' <unk> <unk> " in " Anasazi " , " Everything Dies " in " Herrenvolk " , " Believe to Understand " in " Closure " , " They 're Watching " in " Trust No 1 " , and " This Is the End " in " My Struggle II " . 
 = = Broadcast and release = = 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 = = = Nielsen ratings = = = 
 The pilot premiered on September 10 , 1993 , and reached 12 million viewers . As the season progressed , ratings began to increase and the season finale garnered 14 million viewers . The first season ranked 105th out of 128 shows during the 1993 – 94 television season . The series ' second season increased in ratings — a trend that would continue for the next three seasons — and finished 63rd out of 141 shows . These ratings were not spectacular , but the series had attracted enough fans to receive the label " cult hit " , particularly by Fox standards . Most importantly it made great gains among the 18 @-@ to @-@ 49 age demographic sought by advertisers . During its third year , the series ranked 55th and was viewed by an average of 15 @.@ 40 million viewers , an increase of almost seven percent over the second season , making it Fox 's top @-@ rated program in the 18 – 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . Although the first three episodes of the fourth season aired on Friday night , the fourth episode " Unruhe " aired on Sunday night . The show remained on Sunday until its end . The season hit a high with its twelfth episode , " Leonard Betts " , which was chosen as the lead @-@ out program following Super Bowl XXXI . The episode was viewed by 29 @.@ 1 million viewers , the series ' highest @-@ rated episode . The fifth season debuted with " Redux I " on November 2 , 1997 and was viewed by 27 @.@ 34 million people , making it the highest @-@ rated non @-@ special broadcast episode of the series . The season ranked as the eleventh @-@ most watched series during the 1997 – 98 year , with an average of 19 @.@ 8 million viewers . It was the series ' highest @-@ rated season as well as Fox ' highest @-@ rated program during the 1997 – 98 season . 
 The sixth season premiered with " The Beginning " , watched by 20 @.@ 24 million viewers . The show ended season six with lower numbers than the previous season , beginning a decline that would continue for the show 's final three years . The X @-@ Files was nevertheless Fox 's highest @-@ rated show that year . The seventh season , originally intended as the show 's last , ranked as the 29th most @-@ watched show for the 1999 – 2000 year , with 14 @.@ 20 million viewers . This made it , at the time , the lowest @-@ rated year of the show since the third season . The first episode of season eight , " Within " , was viewed by 15 @.@ 87 million viewers . The episode marked an 11 % decrease from the seventh season opener , " The Sixth Extinction " . The first part of the ninth season opener , " Nothing Important Happened Today " , only attracted 10 @.@ 6 million viewers , the series ' lowest @-@ rated season premiere . 
 The original series finale , " The Truth " , attracted 13 @.@ 25 million viewers , the series ' lowest rated season finale . The ninth season was the 63rd most @-@ watched show for the 2001 – 02 season , tying its season two rank . On May 19 , 2002 , the finale aired and the Fox network confirmed that The X @-@ Files was over . When talking about the beginning of the ninth season , Carter said " We lost our audience on the first episode . It 's like the audience had gone away and I didn 't know how to find them . I didn 't want to work to get them back because I believed what we are doing deserved to have them back . " While news outlets cited declining ratings because of lackluster stories and poor writing , The X @-@ Files production crew blamed September 11 terrorist attacks as the main factor . At the end of 2002 , The X @-@ Files had become the longest @-@ running consecutive science fiction series ever on U.S. broadcast television . This record was later surpassed by Stargate SG @-@ 1 in 2007 and Smallville in 2011 . 
 The debut episode of the 2016 revival , " My Struggle " , first aired on January 24 , 2016 and was watched by 16 @.@ 19 million viewers . In terms of viewers , this made it the highest @-@ rated episode of The X @-@ Files to air since the eighth season episode " This Is Not Happening " in 2001 , which was watched by 16 @.@ 9 million viewers . When DVR and streaming are taken into account , " My Struggle " was seen by 21 @.@ 4 million viewers , scoring a 7 @.@ 1 Nielsen rating . The season ended with " My Struggle II " , which was viewed by 7 @.@ 60 million viewers . In total , the season was viewed by an average of 13 @.@ 6 million viewers ; it ranked as the seventh most @-@ watched television series of the 2015 – 16 year , making it the highest @-@ ranked season of The X @-@ Files to ever air . 
 = = = Foreign broadcast = = = 
 By the time TV Asahi started broadcasts , The X @-@ Files was already a solid performer at video stores in Japan with sales of over 300 @,@ 000 . When The X @-@ Files first hit Japan , it was the No. 1 rated show in its time slot and had an average rating of 14 @.@ 9 % for its first season . It was the first American @-@ produced series to succeed in Japan in almost a decade and the only U.S. program to have a regular primetime spot on a Japanese television network during its initial three @-@ year run . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 After several successful seasons , Carter wanted to tell the story of the series on a wider scale , which ultimately turned into a feature film . He later explained that the main problem was to create a story that would not require the viewer to be familiar with the broadcast series . The movie was filmed in the hiatus between the show 's fourth and fifth seasons and re @-@ shoots were conducted during the filming of the show 's fifth season . Due to the demands on the actors ' schedules , some episodes of the fifth season focused on just one of the two leads . In summer 1998 , the eponymous The X @-@ Files , also known as The X @-@ Files : Fight the Future was released . The crew intended the movie to be a continuation of the season five finale " The End " , but was also meant to stand on its own . The season six premiere , " The Beginning " , began where the film ended . 
 The film was written by Carter and Spotnitz and directed by series regular Rob Bowman . In addition to Mulder , Scully , Skinner and Cigarette Smoking Man , it featured guest appearances by Martin Landau , Armin Mueller @-@ Stahl and Blythe Danner , who appeared only in the film . It also featured the last appearance of John Neville as the Well @-@ Manicured Man . Jeffrey Spender , Diana Fowley , Alex Krycek and Gibson Praise — characters who had been introduced in the fifth season finale — do not appear in the film . Although the film had a strong domestic opening and received mostly positive reviews from critics , attendance dropped sharply after the first weekend . Although it failed to make a profit during its theatrical release — due in part to its large promotional budget — The X @-@ Files film was more successful internationally . Eventually , the worldwide theatrical box office total reached $ 189 million . The film 's production cost and ad budgets were each close to $ 66 million . Unlike the series , Anderson and Duchovny received equal pay for the film . 
 In November 2001 , Carter decided to pursue a second film adaptation . Production was slated to begin after the ninth season , with a projected release in December 2003 . In April 2002 , Carter reiterated his desire and the studio 's desire to do a sequel film . He planned to write the script over the summer and begin production in spring or summer 2003 for a 2004 release . Carter described the film as independent of the series , saying " We 're looking at the movies as stand @-@ alones . They 're not necessarily going to have to deal with the mythology . " Bowman , who had directed various episodes of The X @-@ Files in the past as well as the 1998 film , expressed an interest in the sequel , but Carter took the job . Spotnitz co @-@ authored the script with Carter . The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe became the second film based on the series , after 1998 's The X @-@ Files : Fight the Future . Filming began in December 2007 in Vancouver and finished on March 11 , 2008 . 
 The film was released in the United States on July 25 , 2008 . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Carter said that if I Want to Believe proved successful , he would propose a third movie that would return to the television series ' mythology and focus on the alien invasion foretold within the series , due to occur in December 2012 . The film grossed $ 4 million on its opening day in the United States . It opened fourth on the U.S. weekend box office chart , with a gross of $ 10 @.@ 2 million . By the end of its theatrical run , it had grossed $ 20 @,@ 982 @,@ 478 domestically and an additional $ 47 @,@ 373 @,@ 805 internationally , for a total worldwide gross of $ 68 @,@ 369 @,@ 434 . Among 2008 domestic releases , it finished in 114th place . The film 's stars both claimed that the timing of the movie 's release , a week after the highly popular Batman film The Dark Knight , negatively affected its success . The film received mixed to negative reviews . Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 reviews from mainstream film critics , reported " mixed or average " reviews , with an average score of 47 based on 33 reviews . Rotten Tomatoes reported that 32 % of 160 listed film critics gave the film a positive review , with an average rating of 4 @.@ 9 out of 10 . The website wrote of the critics ' consensus stating ; " The chemistry between leads David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson do live up to The X @-@ Files ' televised legacy , but the roving plot and droning routines make it hard to identify just what we 're meant to believe in . " 
 = = = Revival = = = 
 In several interviews around the release , Carter said that if the X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe movie proved successful at the box office , a third installment would be made going back to the TV series ' mythology , focusing specifically on the alien invasion and colonization of Earth foretold in the ninth season finale , due to occur on December 22 , 2012 . In an October 2009 interview , David Duchovny likewise said he wanted to do a 2012 X @-@ Files movie , but did not know if he would get the chance . Anderson stated in August 2012 that a third X @-@ Files film is " looking pretty good " . As of July 2013 , Fox had not approved the movie , although Carter , Spotnitz , Duchovny and Anderson expressed interest . At the New York Comic Con held October 10 – 13 , 2013 , Duchovny and Anderson reaffirmed that they and Carter are interested in making a third film , with Anderson saying “ If it takes fan encouragement to get Fox interested in that , then I guess that ’ s what it would be . ” 
 On January 17 , 2015 , Fox confirmed that they were looking at the possibility of bringing The X @-@ Files back , not as a movie , but as a limited run television season . Fox chairman Dana Walden told reporters that " conversations so far have only been logistical and are in very early stages " and that the series would only go forward if Carter , Anderson , and Duchovny were all on board , and that it was a matter of ensuring all of their timetables are open . On March 24 , 2015 , it was confirmed the series would return with series creator Chris Carter and lead actors David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson . It premiered on January 24 , 2016 . 
 = = = Home video release = = = 
 On September 24 , 1996 , the first " wave " set of The X @-@ Files VHS tapes were released . Wave sets were released covering the first through fourth seasons . Each " wave " was three VHS tapes , each containing two episodes , for a total of six episodes per wave and two waves per season . For example , the home video release of wave one drew from the first half of the first season : " Pilot " / " Deep Throat " , " Conduit " / " Ice " and " Fallen Angel " / " Eve " . Each wave was also available in a boxed set . Unlike later DVD season releases , the tapes did not include every episode from the seasons . Ultimately twelve episodes — approximately half the total number aired — were selected by Carter to represent each season , including nearly all " mythology arc " episodes and selected standalone episodes . Carter briefly introduced each episode with an explanation of why the episode was chosen and anecdotes from the set . These clips were later included on the full season DVDs . Wave eight , covering the last part of the fourth season , was the last to be released . No Carter interviews appeared on DVDs for later seasons . Many of the waves had collectible cards for each episode . 
 All nine seasons were released on DVD along with the two films . The entire series was re @-@ released on DVD in early 2006 , in a " slimmer " package . The first five slim case versions did not come with some bonus materials that were featured in the original fold @-@ out versions . However , seasons six , seven , eight and nine all contained the bonus materials found in the original versions . Episodic DVDs have also been released in Region 2 , such as " Deadalive " , " Existence " , " Nothing Important Happened Today " , " Providence " and " The Truth " . Various other episodes were released on DVD and VHS . In 2005 , four DVD sets were released containing the main story arc episodes of The X @-@ Files . The four being Volume 1 – Abduction , Volume 2 – Black Oil , Volume 3 – Colonization and Volume 4 – Super Soldiers . A boxed set containing all nine seasons and the first film was made available in 2007 , which contains all of the special features from the initial releases . The set also includes an additional disc of new bonus features and various collectibles , including a poster for the first film , a comic book , a set of collector cards and a guide to all 202 episodes across all nine seasons and the first film . Due to the fact that the set was released in 2007 , the second film , which was released in 2008 , is not included . 
 Release of The X @-@ Files ' seasons on Blu @-@ ray , restored in high @-@ definition , was rumored to begin in late 2013 . The German TV channel ProSieben Maxx began airing first season episodes reformatted in widescreen and in high @-@ definition on January 20 , 2014 . On April 23 , 2015 , Netflix began streaming episodes of The X @-@ Files in high definition , marking the first time that the series has been made available in the high resolution format in North America . In October 2015 , it was confirmed that the complete series would be reissued on Blu @-@ ray , and the full set was released on December 8 , 2015 . 
 = = Spin @-@ offs = = 
 = = = The Lone Gunmen = = = 
 The Lone Gunmen is an American science fiction television series created by Carter and broadcast on Fox , and was crafted as a more humorous spin @-@ off of The X @-@ Files . The series starred the eponymous Lone Gunmen , and was first broadcast in March 2001 , during The X @-@ Files 's month @-@ long hiatus . Although the debut episode garnered 13 @.@ 23 million viewers , its ratings began to steadily drop . The program was cancelled after thirteen episodes . The last episode was broadcast in June 2001 and ended on a cliffhanger which was partially resolved in a ninth season episode of The X @-@ Files titled " Jump the Shark " . 
 = = = Comic books = = = 
 The X @-@ Files was converted into a comic book series published by Topps Comics during the show 's third and fourth seasons . The initial comic books were written solely by Stefan Petrucha . According to Petrucha , there were three types of stories : " those that dealt with the characters , those that dealt with the conspiracy , and the monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week sort of stuff " . Petrucha cited the latter as the easiest to write . Petrucha saw Scully as a " scientist [ … ] with real world faith " , and that the difference between [ Mulder and Scully ] is not that Mulder believes and Scully doesn 't ; it 's more a difference in procedure . " In this manner , Mulder 's viewpoint was often written to be just as valid as Scully 's , and Scully 's science was often portrayed to be just as convincing as Mulder 's more outlandish ideas . Petrucha was eventually fired and various other authors took up the job . Topps published 41 regular issues of The X @-@ Files from 1995 – 1998 . 
 A 30 Days of Night / The X @-@ Files cross @-@ over graphic novel was published by WildStorm in 2010 . It follows Mulder and Scully to Alaska as they investigate a series of grisly murders that may be linked to vampires . 
 In 2013 , it was announced that The X @-@ Files would return to comic book form with " Season 10 " , now published by IDW . The series , which follows Mulder and Scully after the events of The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe , was released in June 2013 . Joe Harris wrote the series , and Michael Walsh and Jordie Bellaire provided the artwork . It was later announced that Carter himself would be the executive producer for the series and would be " providing feedback to the creative team regarding scripts and outlines to keep the new stories in line with existing and on @-@ going canon . " The series restarted the series ' mythology , and the first arc of the story focused on " seek [ ing ] to bring the mythology of the Alien Conspiracy back up to date in a more paranoid , post @-@ terror , post @-@ <unk> society . ” In addition , sequels to popular Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week episodes were made . The X @-@ Files Season 10 concluded in July 2015 after 25 issues . 
 In August 2015 , The X @-@ Files Season 11 comic book began , also published by IDW . The 8 @-@ issue series served as a continuation of the TV show . Chris Carter was the Executive Producer of the comic book series , while the issues were written by Joe Harris and illustrated by Matthew Dow Smith and Jordie Bellaire . 
 = = Influence = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 = = = = Overall = = = = 
 The X @-@ Files received positive reviews from television critics , with many calling it one of the best series that aired on American television in the 1990s . Ian Burrell from the British newspaper The Independent called the show " one of the greatest cult shows in modern television " . Richard Corliss from Time magazine called the show the " cultural touchstone of " the 1990s . Hal Boedeker from the Orlando Sentinel said in 1996 that the series had grown from a cult favorite to a television " classic " . The Evening Herald said the show had " overwhelming influence " on television , in front of such shows as The Simpsons . In 2012 , Entertainment Weekly listed the show at # 4 in the " 25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years " , describing it as " a paean to oddballs , sci @-@ fi fans , conspiracy theorists and Area 51 pilgrims everywhere . Ratings improved every year for the first five seasons , while Mulder and Scully 's believer @-@ versus @-@ skeptic dynamic created a TV template that 's still in heavy use today . " 
 In 2004 and 2007 , The X @-@ Files ranked # 2 on TV Guide 's " Top Cult Shows Ever " . In 2002 , the show ranked as the 37th best television show of all time . In 1997 , the episodes " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " and " Small Potatoes " respectively ranked # 10 and # 72 on " TV Guide 's 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time " . In 2013 , TV Guide included it in its list of the " 60 Greatest Dramas of All Time " and ranked it at # 25 on their list of the " 60 Best Series of All Time " . In 2007 , Time included it on a list of the " 100 Best TV Shows of All Time " . In 2008 , Entertainment Weekly named it the fourth @-@ best piece of science fiction media , the fourth best TV show in the last 25 years and in 2009 , named it the fourth @-@ best piece of science fiction , in their list of the " 20 Greatest Sci @-@ Fi TV Shows " in history . Empire magazine ranked The X @-@ Files ninth best TV show in history , further claiming that the best episode was the third season entry " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " . According to The Guardian , <unk> research discovered that The X @-@ Files was on top of the list of the most innovative TV brands . In 2009 , it was announced that the show 's catchphrase " The Truth Is Out There " was among Britain 's top 60 best @-@ known slogans and quotes . 
 The X @-@ Files was criticized for being unscientific and presenting paranormal and supernatural ideas ( notably in the person of Fox Mulder ) . For instance , in 1998 , Richard Dawkins wrote that " The X @-@ Files systematically purveys an anti @-@ rational view of the world which , by virtue of its recurrent persistence , is insidious . " 
 = = = = First seven seasons = = = = 
 The " pilot episode " was generally well received by fans and critics . Variety criticized the episode for " using reworked concepts " , but praised the production and noted its potential . Of the acting , Variety said " Duchovny 's delineation of a serious scientist with a sense of humor should win him partisans and Anderson 's wavering doubter connects well . They 're a solid team ... ' " Variety praised the writing and direction : " Mandel 's cool direction of Carter 's ingenious script and the artful presentation itself give TV sci @-@ fi a boost . " The magazine concluded , " Carter 's dialogue is fresh without being self @-@ conscious and the characters are involving . Series kicks off with drive and imagination , both innovative in recent TV . " Entertainment Weekly said that Scully " was set up as a scoffing skeptic " in the pilot but progressed toward belief throughout the season . After the airing of four episodes , the magazine called The X @-@ Files " the most paranoid , subversive show on TV " , noting the " marvelous tension between Anderson — who is dubious about these events — and Duchovny , who has the haunted , imploring look of a true believer " . Virgin Media said the most memorable " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " was " Eugene Tooms " from " Squeeze " and " Tooms " . 
 The following four seasons received similar praise . During the show 's second season , Entertainment Weekly named The X @-@ Files the " Program of the Year " for 1994 , stating " no other show on television gives off the vibe that The X @-@ Files does " . The DVD Journal gave the second season four out of four stars , calling it a " memorable season " . The review highlighted " The Host " , " Duane Barry " and " Ascension " , the cliffhanger finale " Anasazi " , the " unforgettable " " Humbug " and meeting Mulder and Scully 's families in " Colony " and " One Breath " . IGN gave the season a rating of 9 out of 10 , with the reviewer noting it was an improvement upon the first as it had " started to explore a little " and the " evolution of the characters makes the product shine even though the plotlines have begun to seem familiar " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club called the third season The X @-@ Files ' " best season and maybe one of the greatest TV seasons of all time " , noting it was consistent and " [ swung ] from strength to strength " between mythology and stand @-@ alone episodes . Michael Sauter of Entertainment Weekly gave the fifth season an " A – " , writing that it " proves the show was — even then — still at its creative peak ( if only for another year or so ) and full of surprises " . He praised the new additions to the series ' mythology and concluded that " many stand @-@ alone episodes now look like classics " . Francis Dass , writing for the New Straits Times , noted that the season was " very interesting " and possessed " some [ ... ] truly inspiring and hilarious " episodes . 
 After the 1998 film , the show began to receive increasingly critical reviews . Some longtime fans became alienated during the show 's sixth season , due to the different tone taken by most stand @-@ alone episodes after the move to Los Angeles . Rather than adhering to the " Monsters @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " style , they were often romantic or humorous or both , such as " Arcadia " or " Terms of Endearment " . Some fans felt there was no coherent plan to the main storyline and that Carter was " making it all up as he goes along " . As for the seventh season , The A.V. Club noted that while the first eight seasons of The X @-@ Files were " good @-@ to @-@ great " , the seventh season of the show was " flagging " and possessed " significant problems " . Despite this , the final two seasons that featured Duchovny included several episodes that were lauded by critics , including the sixth season entries " Triangle " and " The Unnatural " , as well as the seventh season installment " X @-@ Cops " . 
 = = = = Seasons eight and nine = = = = 
 The show 's eighth season received mixed to positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club noted that the eighth season was " revitalized by the new ' search for Mulder ' story @-@ arc " . Amy H. Sturgis commended the eighth season , praising Anderson 's performance as Scully as " excellence " and positively wrote that Doggett was " non @-@ <unk> " . Collin <unk> from DVD Times said that the season included " more hits than misses overall " but offered a negative word about the mythology episodes , claiming that they were the " weakest " episodes in the season . Jesse Hassenger from PopMatters , however , criticized the new season , claiming that Patrick was miscast and calling Duchovny 's appearances as Mulder shallow . 
 Season nine received mixed to negative reviews by critics and garnered negative reaction from many long @-@ time fans and viewers . Sabadino Parker from PopMatters , called the show " a pale reflection of the show it once was " . Elizabeth <unk> from The New York Times concluded , " shoddy writing notwithstanding , it was this halfhearted culmination of what was once a beautifully complicated friendship " , between Mulder and Scully that ended remaining interest in what was a " waning phenomenon " . Another The New York Times review stated , " The most imaginative show on television has finally reached the limits of its imagination . " The A.V. Club listed the ninth season and the 2008 film The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe as the " bad apple " of The X @-@ Files franchise , describing the ninth season as " clumsy mish @-@ mash of stuff that had once worked and new serialized storylines about so @-@ called ' super soldiers ' " . Brian Linder from IGN , on the other hand , was more positive to the ninth season , saying that the series could still have aired if the writers created a new storyline for Patrick and Gish 's characters . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The X @-@ Files received prestigious awards over its nine @-@ year run , totaling 62 Emmy nominations and 16 awards . Capping its successful first season , The X @-@ Files crew members James Castle , Bruce Bryant and Carol Johnsen won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Graphic Design and Title Sequences in 1994 . In 1995 , the show was nominated for seven Emmy Awards with one win . The following year , the show won five Emmys out of eight nominations , including Darin Morgan for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series . In 1997 , The X @-@ Files won three awards out of twelve , including Gillian Anderson for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series . In 1998 , the show won one of fifteen . In 1999 , it won one out of eight , in the category for Outstanding Makeup for a Series . Season seven won three Emmys from six nominations . The following season would not be as successful , catching only two nominations and winning again in the Makeup category for " Deadalive " . The ninth season received one nomination in Outstanding Music Composition for a Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) . 
 The show was nominated for 12 Golden Globe Awards overall , winning five . The first nomination came in 1994 , when the show won Best Series – Drama . The following year , Anderson and Duchovny were nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role and Best Actress in a Leading Role , respectively . In 1996 , the series won three awards ; Anderson and Duchovny for Best Actress and Actor and for Best Series – Drama . In 1997 and 1998 , the show received the same three nominations . In 1997 , however , the series won Best Series – Drama " . In 1998 the series won no award and received no nominations thereafter . 
 The show was nominated for 14 SAG Awards overall , winning twice . In 1996 and 1997 , Anderson won for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series . In 1996 , the show won a Peabody Award for being able " to convey ideas that are both entertaining and thought @-@ provoking " . The show has also been nominated for : two American Cinema Editors awards , three Directors Guild of America Awards , nine Television Critics Association Awards and two Writers Guild of American Awards . The X @-@ Files was also nominated for nine Satellite Awards , managing to win two of them ; and two Young Artist Awards , winning one . 
 = = = Fandom = = = 
 As The X @-@ Files saw its viewership expand from a " small , but devoted " group of fans to a worldwide mass cult audience , digital telecommunications were becoming mainstream . According to The New York Times , " this may have been the first show to find its audience growth tied to the growth of the Internet " . The X @-@ Files incorporated new technologies into storylines beginning in the early seasons : Mulder and Scully communicated on cellular phones , e @-@ mail contact with secret informants provided plot points in episodes such as " Colony " and " Anasazi " , while The Lone Gunmen were portrayed as Internet aficionados as early as 1994 . Many X @-@ Files fans also had online access . Fans of the show became commonly known as " X @-@ Philes " , a term coined from the Greek root " <unk> " meaning love or obsession . In addition to watching the show , X @-@ Philes reviewed episodes themselves on unofficial websites , formed communities with other fans through Usenet newsgroups and <unk> , and wrote their own fan fiction . 
 The X @-@ Files also " caught on with viewers who wouldn 't ordinarily consider themselves sci @-@ fi fans " . While Carter argued that the show was plot @-@ driven , many fans saw it as character @-@ driven . Duchovny and Anderson were characterized as " Internet sex symbols " . As the show grew in popularity , subgroups of fans developed , such as " shippers " hoping for a romantic or sexual partnership between Mulder and Scully , or those who already perceived one between the lines . Other groups arose to pay tribute to the stars or their characters , while others joined the subculture of " slash " fiction . As of summer 1996 , a journalist wrote , " there are entire forums online devoted to the ' M / S ' [ Mulder and Scully ] relationship " . In addition to " MOTW " , Internet fans invented acronyms such as " UST " meaning " unresolved sexual tension " and " <unk> " standing for " conversation on the rock " — referencing a popular scene in the third season episode " Quagmire " — to aid in their discussions of the agents ' relationship , which was itself identified as the " MSR " . 
 The producers did not endorse some fans ' readings , according to a study on the subject : " Not content to allow Shippers to perceive what they wish , Carter has consistently reassured <unk> [ those against the idea of a Mulder / Scully romance ] that theirs is the preferred reading . This allows him the plausible deniability to credit the show 's success to his original plan even though many watched in anticipation of a romance , thanks , in part , to his strategic polysemy . He can deny that these fans had reason to do so , however , since he has repeatedly stated that a romance was not and would never be . " The Scully @-@ obsessed writer in Carter 's 1999 episode " Milagro " was read by some as his alter ego , realizing that by this point " she has fallen for Mulder despite his authorial intent " . The writers sometimes paid tribute to the more visible fans by naming minor characters after them . The best example is Leyla Harrison . Played by Jolie Jenkins and introduced in the eighth season episode " Alone " , Harrison , was created and named in memory of an Internet fan and prolific writer of fan fiction of the same name , who died of cancer on February 10 , 2001 . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 The X @-@ Files spawned an industry of spin @-@ off products . In 2004 , U.S.-based Topps Comics and most recently , DC Comics imprint Wildstorm launched a new series of licensed tie @-@ in comics . During the series ' run , the Fox Broadcasting Company published the official The X @-@ Files Magazine . The X @-@ Files Collectible Card Game was released in 1996 and an expansion set was released in 1997 . The X @-@ Files has inspired three video games . In 1998 , The X @-@ Files Game was released for the PC and Macintosh and a year later for the PlayStation . This game is set within the timeline of the second or third season and follows an Agent Craig Willmore in his search for the missing Mulder and Scully . In 2000 , Fox Interactive released The X @-@ Files : Unrestricted Access , a game @-@ style database for Windows and Mac , which allowed users access to every case file . Then , in 2004 , The X @-@ Files : Resist or Serve was released . The game is a survival @-@ horror game released for the PlayStation 2 and is an original story set in the seventh season . It allows the player control of both Mulder and Scully . Both games feature acting and voice work from members of the series ' cast . A 6 @-@ player pinball game , called The X @-@ Files , was produced by Sega in 1997 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The X @-@ Files directly inspired other TV series , including Strange World , The Burning Zone , Special Unit 2 , Mysterious Ways , Lost , Dark Skies , The Visitor , Fringe , Warehouse 13 , Supernatural , and Gravity Falls , with key aspects carried over to more standard crime dramas , such as Eleventh Hour and Bones . The influence can be seen on other levels : television series such as Lost developed their own complex mythologies . In terms of characterization , the role of Dana Scully was seen as innovative , changing " how women [ on television ] were not just perceived but behaved " and perhaps influencing the portrayal of other " strong women " investigators . Russell T Davies said The X @-@ Files had been an inspiration on his series Torchwood , describing it as " dark , wild and sexy ... The X @-@ Files meets This Life " . Other shows have been influenced by the tone and mood of The X @-@ Files . For example , Buffy the Vampire Slayer drew from the mood and coloring of The X @-@ Files , as well as from its occasional blend of horror and humor ; creator Joss Whedon described his show as a cross between The X @-@ Files and My So @-@ Called Life . It also inspired themes in video games Deus Ex and Perfect Dark . 
 The show 's popularity led it to become a major aspect of popular culture . The show is parodied in The Simpsons season eight episode " The Springfield Files " , which aired on January 12 , 1997 . In it , Mulder and Scully — voiced by Duchovny and Anderson — are sent to Springfield to investigate an alien sighting by Homer Simpson , but end up finding no evidence other than Homer 's word and depart . Cigarette Smoking Man appears in the background when Homer is interviewed and the show 's theme plays during one particular scene . Nathan Ditum from Total Film ranked Duchovny and Anderson 's performances as the fourth @-@ best guest appearances in The Simpsons history . In the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episode " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " , Benjamin Sisko is interviewed by Federation Department of Temporal Investigations agents Dulmer and Lucsly , anagrams of Mulder and Scully , respectively . The pair were later expanded upon in Christopher L. Bennett 's book Watching the Clock . The X @-@ Files has also been parodied or referenced in countless other shows , like : 3rd Rock from the Sun , Archer , American Horror Story , The Big Bang Theory , Bones , Breaking Bad , Californication , Castle , Family Guy , Hey Arnold ! , King of the Hill , South Park , and Two and a Half Men . Welsh music act Catatonia released the 1998 single " Mulder and Scully " , which became a hit in the United Kingdom . American singer and songwriter Bree Sharp wrote a song called " David Duchovny " about the actor in 1999 that heavily references the show and its characters . Although never a mainstream hit , the song became popular underground and gained a cult following . The series has also been referenced in : " The Bad Touch " by the Bloodhound Gang , " A Change " by Sheryl Crow , " Year 2000 " by Xzibit , and " One Week " by Barenaked Ladies . 
 Carter , Duchovny and Anderson celebrated the 20th anniversary of the series at a July 18 , 2013 panel at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con hosted by TV Guide . During the discussion , Anderson discussed Scully 's influence on female fans , relating that a number of women have informed her that they entered into careers in physics because of the character . Anderson also indicated that she was not in favor of an X @-@ Files miniseries , and Duchovny ruled out working with her on an unrelated project , but both expressed willingness to do a third feature film . Carter was more reserved at the idea , stating , " You need a reason to get excited about going on and doing it again . " The series attained a degree of historical importance , as well . On July 16 , 2008 , Carter and Spotnitz donated several props from the series and new film to the Smithsonian 's National Museum of American History . Some of the items included the original pilot script and the " I Want to Believe " poster from Mulder 's office . 
 = V. Gordon Childe = 
 Vere Gordon Childe ( 14 April 1892 – 19 October 1957 ) , better known as V. Gordon Childe , was an Australian archaeologist and philologist who specialized in the study of European prehistory . Working most of his life as an academic in the United Kingdom for the University of Edinburgh and then the Institute of Archaeology , London , he wrote twenty @-@ six books and was an early proponent of culture @-@ historical archaeology and Marxist archaeology . 
 Born in Sydney , New South Wales to a middle @-@ class family of English descent , Childe studied Classics at the University of Sydney before moving to England to study Classical archaeology at the University of Oxford . Here , he embraced the socialist movement and campaigned against the First World War , viewing it as a conflict waged by competing imperialists to the detriment of Europe 's working class . Returning to Australia in 1917 , he was prevented from working in academia because of his socialist activism , instead working for the Australian Labor Party as the private secretary of politician John Storey . Growing critical of Labor , he authored an analysis of their policies and joined the far @-@ left Industrial Workers of the World . Emigrating to London in 1921 , he became librarian of the Royal Anthropological Institute and continued his research into European prehistory through various journeys across the continent , publishing his findings in academic papers and books . In doing so he introduced the continental European concept of an archaeological culture to the British archaeological community . 
 From 1927 through to 1946 he worked as the Abercromby Professor of Archaeology at the University of Edinburgh , and then from 1947 to 1957 as director of the Institute of Archaeology , London . During this period he oversaw excavation of a number of archaeological sites in Scotland and Northern Ireland , focusing in particular on the society of Neolithic Orkney by excavating the settlement of Skara Brae and the chambered tombs of Maeshowe and Quoyness . Throughout , he continued to publish prolifically , producing excavation reports , journal articles , and books . With Stuart Piggott and Grahame Clark he co @-@ founded The Prehistoric Society in 1934 , becoming its first president . Remaining committed to his socialist ideals , he embraced Marxism , and used Marxist ideas as an interpretative framework for archaeological data . He also became a noted sympathiser with the Soviet Union and visited the country on a number of occasions , although grew sceptical of Soviet foreign policy following the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 . His beliefs resulted in him being legally barred from entering the United States , despite being repeatedly invited to lecture there . Upon retirement , he returned to Australia 's Blue Mountains , there committing suicide . 
 Widely regarded as one of the most important archaeologists and prehistorians of his generation , he became known as the " great synthesizer " for his work in synthesizing regional research into a broader picture of Near Eastern and European prehistory . He was also renowned for his emphasis on the role of revolutionary technological and economic developments in human society , such as the Neolithic Revolution and the Urban Revolution , in this manner being influenced by Marxist ideas on societal development . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood : 1892 – 1910 = = = 
 Childe was born on 14 April 1892 in Sydney , New South Wales . He was the only surviving child of the Reverend Stephen Henry ( 1844 – 1923 ) and Harriet Eliza Childe ( 1853 – 1910 ) , a middle @-@ class couple of English descent . Stephen Childe was a second @-@ generation Anglican priest , ordained into the Church of England in 1867 after gaining a BA from the University of Cambridge . Becoming a teacher , in 1871 he married Mary Ellen Latchford , together having five children . They moved to Australia in 1878 . It was here that Mary died , and in 1886 Stephen married Harriet , an Englishwoman from a wealthy background who had moved to Australia as a child . Gordon Childe was raised alongside five half @-@ siblings at his father 's palatial country house , the Chalet Fontenelle , in the township of Wentworth Falls in the Blue Mountains west of Sydney . Reverend Childe worked as the minister for St. Thomas ' Parish , but proved unpopular , arguing with his congregation and taking unscheduled holidays . 
 A sickly child , Gordon Childe was educated at home for a number of years , before gaining a private school education in North Sydney . In 1907 , he began attending Sydney Church of England Grammar School , gaining his Junior Matriculation in 1909 and Senior Matriculation in 1910 . At school he studied ancient history , French , Greek , Latin , geometry , algebra and trigonometry , achieving good marks in all subjects , but was bullied because of his strange appearance and unathletic physique . In July 1910 his mother died ; his father soon took Monica Gardiner as his third wife . Childe 's relationship with his father was strained , particularly following his mother 's death , and they disagreed on the subject of religion and politics , with the Reverend being a devout Christian and conservative while his son was an atheist and socialist . 
 = = = University in Sydney and Oxford : 1911 – 1917 = = = 
 Childe studied for a degree in Classics at the University of Sydney in 1911 ; although focusing on the study of written sources , he first came across classical archaeology through the works of archaeologists Heinrich Schliemann and Arthur Evans . At university , he became an active member of the Debating Society , at one point arguing in favour of the proposition that " socialism is desirable " . Increasingly interested in socialism , he read the works of Marxism 's founders Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels , as well as those of philosopher G. W. F. Hegel , whose ideas on dialectics heavily influenced Marxist theory . Also while there , he became a great friend of fellow undergraduate Herbert Vere Evatt , with whom he remained in contact throughout his life . Ending his studies in 1913 , Childe graduated the following year with various honours and prizes , including Professor Francis Anderson 's prize for Philosophy . 
 Wishing to continue his education , he gained a £ 200 Cooper Graduate Scholarship in Classics , allowing him to afford the tuition fees at Queen 's College , a part of the University of Oxford , England . He set sail for Britain aboard the SS Orsova in August 1914 , shortly after the outbreak of World War I. At Queen 's , Childe was entered for a diploma in classical archaeology followed by a Literae Humaniores degree , although he never completed the former . Whilst there , he studied under John Beazley and Arthur Evans , the latter acting as Childe 's supervisor . In 1915 , he published his first academic paper , " On the Date and Origin of <unk> Ware " , which appeared in the Journal of Hellenic Studies , and the following year produced his <unk> thesis , " The Influence of Indo @-@ Europeans in Prehistoric Greece " , displaying his interest in combining philological and archaeological evidence . 
 At Oxford he became actively involved with the socialist movement , antagonising the conservative university authorities . Becoming a noted member of the left @-@ wing reformist Oxford University Fabian Society , then at the height of its power and membership , he was there in 1915 when it changed its name to the Oxford University Socialist Society , following a split from the Fabian Society . His best friend and flatmate was Rajani Palme Dutt , a British citizen born to an Indian father and Swedish mother , who was a fervent socialist and Marxist . The two often got drunk and tested each other 's knowledge about classical history late at night . With Britain in the midst of World War I , many socialists refused to fight for the British Army despite the government imposed conscription . They believed that the war was being waged in the interests of the ruling classes of the European imperialist nations at the expense of the working classes , and that class war was the only conflict that they should be concerned with . Dutt was imprisoned for refusing to fight , and Childe campaigned for his release and the release of other socialists and pacifist conscientious objectors . Childe was never required to enlist in the army , most likely because of his poor health and eyesight . The authorities were concerned by his anti @-@ war sentiments ; the intelligence agency MI5 opening a file on him , his mail was intercepted , and he was kept under observation . 
 = = = Early career in Australia : 1918 – 1921 = = = 
 Childe returned to Australia in August 1917 , and being a known socialist agitator , he was soon placed under surveillance by the security services , who intercepted all of his mail . In 1918 he took up the post of Senior Resident Tutor at St Andrew 's College , Sydney University , getting involved in Sydney 's socialist and anti @-@ conscription movement . In Easter 1918 he spoke at the Third Inter @-@ State Peace Conference , an event organised by the Australian Union of Democratic Control for the Avoidance of War , a group opposed to the plans by Prime Minister Billy Hughes and the centre @-@ right Nationalist Party of Australia to introduce conscription . The conference had a prominent socialist emphasis , and its report argued that the best hope for the end to international war was the " abolition of the Capitalist System " . News of Childe 's participation reached the Principal of St Andrew 's College . Under pressure from the university authorities , he forced Childe to resign despite much opposition from staff . 
 With his good academic reputation , several staff members provided him with work as a tutor in Ancient History in the Department of Tutorial Classes , but he was prevented from doing so by the Chancellor of the University , Sir William Cullen , who feared that Childe would propagate socialism to students . This infringement of Childe 's civil rights was condemned in the leftist community , and the issue was brought up in the Parliament of Australia by centre @-@ left politicians William McKell and T.J. Smith . Moving to Maryborough , Queensland , in October 1918 Childe took up employment teaching Latin at the Maryborough Grammar School . Here too his political affiliations became known , and he was subject to an opposition campaign from local conservative groups and the Maryborough Chronicle , resulting in abuse from disobedient pupils . He soon resigned . 
 Realising that an academic career would be barred from him by the right wing university authorities , Childe turned to getting a job within the leftist movement . In August 1919 , he became private secretary and speech writer to politician John Storey , a prominent member of the centre @-@ left Australian Labor Party then in opposition to New South Wales ' Nationalist government . Representing the Sydney suburb of Balmain on the New South Wales Legislative Assembly , Storey became state premier in 1920 when Labor achieved an electoral victory there . Working within the Labor Party allowed Childe to gain an " unrivalled grasp of its structure and history " , enabling him to write a book on the subject , How Labour Governs ( 1923 ) . The greater his involvement , the more Childe became critical of Labor , believing that they betrayed their socialist ideals once they gained political power and moved to a centrist , pro @-@ capitalist stance . He joined the Industrial Workers of the World , which in Australia served mostly as a centre of radical labourers within existing unions , and at the time was banned by the government as a political threat . In 1921 Childe was sent to London by Storey , in order to keep the British press updated about developments in New South Wales , but in December Storey died , and a few days later the New South Wales elections restored a Nationalist government under the premiership of George Fuller . Fuller thought Childe 's job unnecessary , and in early 1922 terminated his employment . 
 = = = London and early books : 1922 – 1926 = = = 
 Unable to find an academic job in Australia , Childe remained in Britain , renting a room in Bloomsbury , Central London , and spending much time studying at the British Museum and the Royal Anthropological Institute library . An active member of the London socialist movement , he associated with leftists at the 1917 Club in Gerrard Street , Soho , and befriended members of the Marxist Communist Party of Great Britain ( CPGB ) , contributing to their publication , Labour Monthly ; however he had not yet openly embraced Marxism . Having earned a reputation as an excellent prehistorian , he was invited to other parts of Europe in order to study prehistoric artefacts . In 1922 he travelled to Vienna , Austria to examine unpublished material about the painted Neolithic pottery from <unk> , Bukovina held in the Prehistoric Department of the Natural History Museum ; he published his findings in the 1923 Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute . Childe used this excursion to visit a number of museums in Czechoslovakia and Hungary , bringing them to the attention of British archaeologists in a 1922 article published in Man . Returning to London , in 1922 Childe became a private secretary for three Members of Parliament , including John Hope Simpson and Frank Gray , both members of the centre @-@ left Liberal Party . Supplementing this income , Childe worked as a translator for the publishers Kegan Paul , Trench , Trübner & Co and occasionally lectured in prehistory at the London School of Economics . 
 In 1923 his first book , How Labour Governs , was published by the London Labour Company . Examining the Australian Labor Party and its wider connection with the Australian labour movement , it reflect Childe 's disillusionment with the party , believing that the politicians that it managed to get elected had abandoned their socialist ideals in favour of personal comfort . Childe 's biographer Sally Green noted that How Labour Governs was of particular significance at the time because it was published just as the British Labour Party was emerging as a major player in British politics , threatening the two @-@ party dominance of the Conservatives and Liberals ; in 1924 they were elected to power . Childe had planned a sequel expanding on his ideas , but it was never published . 
 In May 1923 he visited continental Europe , journeying to the museums in Lausanne , Bern and Zürich to study their prehistoric artefact collections ; that year he became a member of the Royal Anthropological Institute . In 1925 , the Institute offered him one of the only archaeological jobs then available in Britain , and he became their librarian , in doing so cementing connections with scholars across Europe . This job meant that he came into contact with many of Britain 's archaeologists , of whom there were relatively few during the 1920s ; he developed a great friendship with O. G. S. Crawford , the Archaeological Officer to the Ordnance Survey , influencing the latter 's move toward socialism and Marxism . 
 In 1925 , Kegan Paul , Trench , Trübner & Co published Childe 's second book , The Dawn of European Civilisation , in which he synthesised the varied data about European prehistory that he had been exploring for many years . An important work , it was released when the few archaeologists across Europe were amateur and focused purely on studying their locality ; The Dawn was a rare example that looked at the larger picture across the continent . Its importance was also due to the fact that it introduced the concept of the archaeological culture into Britain from continental scholarship , thereby aiding in the development of culture @-@ historical archaeology . Childe later stated that the book " aimed at distilling from archaeological remains a preliterate substitute for the conventional politico @-@ military history with cultures , instead of statesmen , as actors , and migrations in place of battles . " In 1926 he published a successor , The Aryans : A Study of Indo @-@ European Origins , exploring the theory that civilisation diffused northward and westward into Europe from the Near East via an Indo @-@ European linguistic group known as the Aryans ; with the ensuing racial use of the term " Aryan " by the German Nazi Party , Childe avoided mention of the book . In these works , Childe accepted a moderate diffusionism , believing that although most cultural traits spread from one society to another , it was possible for the same traits to develop independently in different places , a theory at odds with the hyper @-@ diffusionism of Sir Grafton Elliot Smith . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Abercromby Professor of Archaeology : 1927 – 1946 = = = 
 In 1927 , Childe was offered the newly created post of Abercromby Professor of Archaeology at Scotland 's University of Edinburgh ( at what is now the School of History , Classics and Archaeology ) , established by deed poll in the bequest of prehistorian Lord John Abercromby . Although sad at leaving London , Childe took the prestigious position , moving to Edinburgh in September 1927 . Aged 35 , Childe became the " only academic prehistorian in a teaching post in Scotland " , and was disliked by many Scottish archaeologists , who viewed him as an outsider with no specialism in Scottish prehistory ; this hostility intensified , and he wrote to a friend , remarking that " I live here in an atmosphere of hatred and envy . " He nevertheless made friends in Edinburgh , including Sir W. Lindsay Scott , Alexander Curle , J.G. Callender , Walter Grant and Charles Galton Darwin , becoming godfather to the latter 's youngest son . Initially lodging at Liberton , he moved into the semi @-@ residential Hotel de Vere in <unk> Crescent . 
 At Edinburgh University , Childe focused on research , and although reportedly very kind towards his students , had difficulty speaking to large audiences ; he organised the BSc degree course so that it began studying the Iron Age , progressing chronologically backward to the Palaeolithic , confusing many students . Founding the Edinburgh League of <unk> , he took his more enthusiastic students on excavations and invited guest lecturers to visit . Involving them in experimental archaeology , of which he was an early proponent , in 1937 he performed experiments to understand the vitrification process that had occurred at several Iron Age forts in northern Britain . 
 Regularly travelling to London to visit friends , one notable comrade was Stuart Piggott , another influential British archaeologist who succeeded Childe as Abercromby Professor at Edinburgh . The duo , along with Grahame Clark , were elected onto the committee of the Prehistoric Society of East Anglia , in 1934 using their influence to convert it into a nationwide organisation , the Prehistoric Society , of which Childe was elected president . 
 Often attending conferences across Europe , Childe became fluent in several languages , and in 1935 first visited the Soviet Union , spending 12 days in Leningrad and Moscow ; impressed with the socialist state , he was particularly interested in the role of Soviet archaeology . Returning to Britain , he became a vocal Soviet sympathiser who avidly read the CPGB 's Daily Worker , although he was heavily critical of certain Soviet government policies , in particular the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact with Nazi Germany . His socialist convictions led to an early denunciation of European fascism , and he was outraged by the Nazi co @-@ option of prehistoric archaeology to glorify their own conceptions of an Aryan racial heritage . Supportive of the British government 's decision to fight the fascist powers in the Second World War , he made the decision to commit suicide should the Nazis conquer Britain . Though opposing fascist Germany and Italy , he also criticised the imperialist , capitalist governments of the United Kingdom and United States : he often described the latter as being full of " loathsome fascist hyenas " . Nevertheless , in summer 1939 he visited the U.S. , lecturing at the University of Harvard , University of California , Berkeley , and University of Pennsylvania . 
 = = = = Excavations = = = = 
 Childe 's university position meant that he was obliged to undertake archaeological excavations , something he loathed and believed that he did poorly . Students agreed , but recognised his " genius for interpreting evidence " . Unlike many contemporaries , he was scrupulous with writing up and publishing his findings , producing almost annual reports for the Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland , unusually ensuring that he acknowledged the help of every digger . 
 His best known excavation was undertaken from 1928 to 1930 at Skara Brae in the Orkney Islands . Uncovering a well @-@ preserved Neolithic village , in 1931 he published the excavation results in a book titled Skara Brae . He nevertheless made an error of interpretation , erroneously attributing the site to the Iron Age . Getting on particularly well with the locals , it is reported that to them " he was every inch the professor " because of his eccentric appearance and habits . In 1932 , Childe , collaborating with anthropologist C. Daryll Forde , excavated two Iron Age hillforts at Earn 's Hugh on the Berwickshire coast , while in June 1935 he excavated a promontory fort at <unk> near to <unk> in Northern Ireland . Together with Wallace Thorneycroft , another Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland , Childe excavated two vitrified Iron Age forts in Scotland , at Finavon , Angus ( 1933 – 34 ) and at <unk> , Argyllshire ( 1936 – 37 ) . In 1938 , he and Walter Grant oversaw excavations at the Neolithic settlement of <unk> ; excavation ceased during the Second World War , but resumed in 1946 . 
 = = = = Publications = = = = 
 Childe continued writing and publishing books on archaeology , beginning with a series of works following on from The Dawn of European Civilisation and The Aryans by compiling and synthesising data from across Europe . First was The Most Ancient Near East ( 1928 ) , which assembled information from across Mesopotamia and India , setting a background from which the spread of farming and other technologies into Europe could be understood . This was followed by The Danube in Prehistory ( 1929 ) which examined the archaeology along the Danube river , recognising it as the natural boundary dividing the Near East from Europe ; Childe believed that it was via the Danube that new technologies travelled westward in prehistory . The book introduced the concept of an archaeological culture to Britain from Germany , revolutionising the theoretical approach of British archaeology . 
 Childe 's next work , The Bronze Age ( 1930 ) , dealt with the titular Bronze Age in Europe , and displayed his increasing acceptance of Marxist theory in understanding how society functioned and changed . He believed that metal was the first indispensable article of commerce , and that metal @-@ smiths were therefore full @-@ time professionals who lived off the social surplus . Within a matter of years he had followed this up with a string of further works : The Forest Cultures of Northern Europe : A Study in Evolution and Diffusion ( 1931 ) and The Continental Affinities of British Neolithic Pottery ( 1932 ) . 
 In 1933 , Childe travelled to Asia , visiting Iraq – a place he thought " great fun " – and India , which he felt was " detestable " due to the hot weather and extreme poverty . Touring archaeological sites in the two countries , he opined that much of what he had written in The Most Ancient Near East was outdated , going on to produce New Light on the Most Ancient Near East ( 1935 ) , applying his Marxist @-@ influenced ideas about the economy to his conclusions . 
 After publishing Prehistory of Scotland ( 1935 ) , Childe produced one of the defining books of his career , Man Makes Himself ( 1936 ) . Influenced by Marxist views of history , Childe argued that the usual distinction between ( pre @-@ literate ) prehistory and ( literate ) history was a false dichotomy and that human society has progressed through a series of technological , economic and social revolutions . These included the Neolithic Revolution , when hunter @-@ gatherers began settling in permanent farming communities , through to the Urban Revolution , when society progressed from a series of small towns through to the first cities , and right up to more recent times , when the Industrial Revolution changed the nature of production . 
 With the Second World War 's outbreak , Childe was unable to travel across Europe , instead focusing on writing Prehistoric Communities of the British Isles ( 1940 ) . Childe 's pessimism surrounding the war 's outcome led him to believe that " European Civilization – Capitalist and Stalinist alike – was irrevocably headed for a Dark Age . " In this state of mind he produced a sequel to Man Makes Himself titled What Happened in History ( 1942 ) , a synthesis of human history from the Palaeolithic through to the fall of the Roman Empire . Although Oxford University Press offered to publish the work , he released it through Penguin Books because they could sell it at a cheaper price , something he believed pivotal in providing knowledge for " the masses . " This was followed by two short works , Progress and Archaeology ( 1944 ) and The Story of Tools ( 1944 ) , the latter being explicitly Marxist and written for the Young Communist League . 
 = = = Institute of Archaeology , London : 1946 – 1956 = = = 
 In 1946 , Childe left Edinburgh to take up the position as Director and Professor of European Prehistory at the Institute of Archaeology ( IOA ) in London . Anxious to return to the capital , he had kept silent over his disapproval of government policies so that he would not be prevented from getting the job . He took up residence at Lawn Road Flats near to Hampstead . 
 Located in St John 's Lodge in the Inner Circle of Regent 's Park , the IOA was founded in 1937 , largely by archaeologist Mortimer Wheeler , but until 1946 relied primarily upon volunteer lecturers . Childe 's relationship with the conservative Wheeler was strained , the latter being intolerant of the shortcomings of others , something Childe made an effort never to be . He was popular among students , who saw him as a kindly eccentric ; they commissioned a bust of Childe from Marjorie Maitland Howard . His lecturing was nevertheless considered poor , as he often mumbled and walked into an adjacent room to find something while continuing to talk . He consistently referred to the socialist states of eastern Europe by their full official titles , and called towns by their Slavonic rather than Germanic names , further confusing his students . He was deemed better at giving tutorials and seminars , where he devoted more time to interacting with his students . As Director , Childe was not obliged to excavate , though he did undertake projects at the Orkney Neolithic burial tombs of Quoyness ( 1951 ) and Maes Howe ( 1954 – 55 ) . 
 In 1949 he and <unk> Crawford resigned as Fellows of the Society of Antiquaries in protest at the election of James Mann to the Presidency following the retirement of Cyril Fox . They believed that Mann , Keeper of the Tower 's Armouries at the Tower of London , was a poor choice and that Wheeler , an actual prehistorian , should have won the election . In 1952 a group of British Marxist historians began publishing the periodical Past & Present , with Childe joining the editorial board . He also became a board member for The Modern Quarterly ( later The Marxist Quarterly ) during the early 1950s , working alongside old friend , the Communist leader , Rajani Palme Dutt , chairman of the board . He authored occasional articles for Palme Dutt 's socialist journal , the Labour Monthly , but disagreed with him over the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 ; Palme Dutt defended the Soviet Union 's decision to quash the revolution using military force , but like many western socialists , Childe strongly disagreed . The event made Childe abandon faith in the Soviet leadership , but not in socialism and Marxism . Childe retained a love of the Soviet Union , having visiting on multiple occasions and having been involved with <unk> satellite body the Society for Cultural Relations with the USSR , and serving as President of their National History and Archaeology Section from the early 1950s until his death . 
 In April 1956 , Childe was awarded the Gold Medal of the Society of Antiquaries for his services to archaeology . He was invited to lecture in the U.S. on multiple occasions , by Robert Braidwood , William Duncan Strong , and Leslie White , but was barred from entering the country due to his socialist beliefs . Whilst working at the Institute , Childe continued writing and publishing books dealing with archaeology and prehistory . History ( 1947 ) continued his belief that prehistory and literate history must be viewed together , and adopted a Marxist view of history , whilst Prehistoric Migrations ( 1950 ) displayed his views on moderate diffusionism . In 1946 he had also published a paper in the Southwestern Journal of Anthropology , titled " Archaeology and Anthropology " which argued that the two disciplines must be used in tandem , something that would be widely accepted in the decades following his death . 
 = = = Retirement and death : 1957 = = = 
 In the summer of 1956 , Childe retired as IOA Director a year prematurely . European archaeology had rapidly expanded during the 1950s , leading to increasing specialisation and making the synthesising that Childe was known for increasingly difficult . That year , the Institute was moving to Gordon Square , Bloomsbury , and Childe wanted to give his successor , W.F. Grimes , a fresh start in the new surroundings . To commemorate his achievements , the Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society published a Festschrift edition on the last day of his <unk> containing contributions from friends and colleagues from all over the world , something that touched Childe deeply . Upon his retirement , he told many friends that he planned to return to Australia , visit his relatives , and then commit suicide ; he was terrified of becoming old , senile , and a burden on society , and suspected that he had cancer . Subsequent commentators have suggested that a core reason for his suicidal desires was his loss of faith in Marxism following the Hungarian Revolution and Premier Nikita Khrushchev 's denouncement of Joseph Stalin , although Bruce Trigger noted that while Childe was critical of the Soviet Union 's foreign policy , he never saw the state and Marxism as " synonymous " , thereby dismissing this explanation . 
 Sorting out his affairs , Childe donated most of his library and all of his estate to the Institute . After a holiday visiting archaeological sites in Gibraltar and Spain in February 1957 , he sailed to Australia , reaching Sydney on his 65th birthday . Here , the University of Sydney , which had once barred him from working there , awarded him an honorary degree . Travelling around the country for six months , visiting family members and old friends , he was unimpressed by Australian society , believing it reactionary , increasingly suburban and uneducated . Looking into Australian prehistory , he found it a lucrative field for research , and lectured to archaeological and leftist groups on this and other topics , taking to Australian radio to attack academic racism towards Indigenous Australians . 
 Writing personal letters to many friends , he sent one to Grimes , requesting that it not be opened until 1968 . In it , he described how he feared old age , and stated his intention to take his own life , remarking that " Life ends best when one is happy and strong . " On 19 October 1957 , Childe went to the area of Govett 's Leap in Blackheath in the Blue Mountains where he had grown up . Leaving his hat , spectacles , compass , pipe and Mackintosh atop the cliffs , he fell 1000 feet ( 300 m ) to his death . A coroner ruled his death as accidental , although in the 1980s the Grimes letter saw publication , allowing for recognition of his suicide . His remains were cremated at the Northern Suburbs Crematorium , and his name added to a small family plaque in the Crematorium Gardens . Following his death , an " unprecedented " level of tributes and memorials were issued by the archaeological community , all testifying to his status as Europe 's " greatest prehistorian and a wonderful human being . " 
 = = Archaeological methodology and theory = = 
 Childe has been considered the principal contributor to archaeological methodology in the first part of the 20th century . His theoretical approach blended together Marxism , diffusionism , and functionalism . Childe was critical of the evolutionary archaeology which was dominant during the 19th century . He believed that those archaeologists who adhered to it placed a greater emphasis on artefacts themselves rather than their makers . He recognised flaws in the technological @-@ based three @-@ age system first developed by Danish antiquarian Christian <unk> Thomsen , rejecting its evolutionary chronology that divided prehistory into the Stone Age , Bronze Age , and Iron Age by noting that many of the world 's societies were still effectively Stone Age in their technology . He nevertheless saw it as a useful model for analysing socio @-@ economic development when combined with a Marxist model . He therefore used technological criteria for dividing up prehistory into three ages , but instead used economic criteria for sub @-@ dividing the Stone Age into the Palaeolithic and Neolithic , rejecting the concept of the Mesolithic as useless . 
 = = = Culture @-@ historical archaeology = = = 
 Childe was a proponent of the culture @-@ historical approach to archaeology , coming to be seen as one of its " founders and chief exponents " . Culture @-@ historical archaeology revolved around the concept of " culture " , which it had adopted from anthropology . This has been seen as " a major turning point in the history of the discipline " , allowing archaeologists to look at the past through a spatial dynamic rather than simply a temporal one . Childe adopted the concept of " culture " from German philologist and archaeologist Gustav <unk> , before using it in three of his books – The Dawn of European Civilisation ( 1925 ) , The Aryans ( 1926 ) and The Most Ancient East ( 1928 ) – without defining it . He proceeded to give it a specifically archaeological definition in The Danube in Prehistory ( 1929 ) . There , he defined a " culture " as being a set of " regularly associated traits " in the material culture – i.e. " pots , implements , ornaments , burial rites , house forms " – that are repeatedly found across a certain area . He stated that in this respect a " culture " was the archaeological equivalent of a " people " . Childe 's use of the term was non @-@ racial , and he considered a " people " to be a social grouping , not a biological race . He opposed the equation of archaeological cultures with biological races , as various nationalists were doing in Europe at the time , and was a vociferous critic of Nazi uses of archaeology , arguing that the Jewish people were not a distinct biological race but a socio @-@ cultural grouping . 
 In 1935 , he suggested that culture worked as a " living functioning organism " , emphasising the adaptive potential of material culture ; in this he was influenced by anthropological functionalism . However , by the late 1940s he came to question the utility of " culture " as an archaeological concept , and therefore the validity of the culture @-@ historical approach . McNairn suggested that this was because the term had become popular across the social sciences in reference to all learned modes of behaviour , and not just material culture as Childe had first used it . He accepted that archaeologists defined " cultures " based on a subjective selection of material criteria ; this view later came to be widely adopted by archaeologists like Colin Renfrew . 
 = = = Marxist archaeology = = = 
 Childe has typically been seen as a Marxist archaeologist , being the first archaeologist in the West to use Marxist theory in his work . McNairn noted that Marxism was " a major intellectual force in Childe 's thought " , while Trigger stated that Childe identified with Marx 's theories " both emotionally and intellectually " . Biographer Sally Green noted that Childe 's beliefs were " never dogmatic , always idiosyncratic " and " continually changing throughout his life " but that " Marxist views on a model of the past " were accepted by Childe because they offer " a structural analysis of culture in terms of economy , sociology and ideology , and a principle for cultural change through economy . " She noted that " Childe 's Marxism " often differed from the orthodox Marxism of his contemporaries because he made reference to the original texts of Hegel , Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels rather than later interpretations and because he was selective in his use of their writings . Similarly , McNairn considered Childe 's Marxism to be " an individual interpretation " that differed from " popular or orthodox " conceptions of Marxism . 
 Marxist archaeology had developed in the Soviet Union in 1929 , when young archaeologist Vladislav I. <unk> published a report titled " For a Soviet history of material culture " . Criticising the archaeological discipline as inherently bourgeois and therefore anti @-@ socialist , it called for the adoption of a pro @-@ socialist , explicitly Marxist approach to archaeology that was a part of the academic reforms instituted under the administration of Premier Joseph Stalin . Although influenced by Soviet archaeology , Childe maintained a sceptical approach to much of it , disapproving of Soviet archaeologists ' tendencies to assume their conclusions in advance of analysing the data , something he recognised as being encouraged by the Soviet government . 
 Childe was heavily critical of the Marxist trend in Soviet archaeology , based on the theories of Georgian philologist Nicholas Marr , which rejected diffusionism in favour of <unk> evolutionism ; instead , Childe saw diffusionism as a key part of historical development . Childe did not publicly air these criticisms of his Soviet colleagues , perhaps so as not to offend his communist friends or to provide support for right @-@ wing archaeologists . Instead , he publicly praised the Soviet system of archaeology and heritage management , contrasting it favourably with that in Britain because it encouraged collaboration rather than competition between archaeologists . After first visiting the country in 1935 , he returned in 1945 , 1953 , and 1956 , befriending many Soviet archaeologists , but shortly before his suicide sent a letter to the Soviet archaeological community stating that he was " extremely disappointed " that they had methodologically fallen behind Western Europe and North America . 
 Other Marxists , such as George Derwent Thomson and Neil Faulkner , have argued that Childe 's archaeological work should not correctly be considered Marxist because he failed to take into account the existence of class struggle as an instrument of social change , something which was a core tenet of Marxist thought . While class struggle was not a factor he considered in his archaeological work , Childe did accept that historians and archaeologists typically interpreted the past through their own class interests , and that most of his contemporaries were producing studies with an innate bourgeois agenda . Childe also diverged from orthodox Marxism by not employing dialectics in his methodology . Furthermore , he denied Marxism 's ability to predict the future development of human society , and did not consider humanity 's development into pure communism to be inevitable , instead opining that society could fossilize or become extinct instead . 
 = = = The Neolithic and Urban Revolutions = = = 
 Influenced by Marxism , Childe argued that society experienced widescale changes in relatively short periods of time , citing the Industrial Revolution as a modern example . He first introduced these ideas of " revolutions " in 1935 , as part of his functional @-@ economic interpretation of the three @-@ age system . Here , he argued for a " Neolithic Revolution " which initiated the Neolithic era , and also believed that there were others that marked the start of the Bronze Age and the Iron Age . However the following year , in Man Makes Himself , he combined these Bronze and Iron Age Revolutions into a singular " Urban Revolution , " which corresponded largely to Lewis H. Morgan 's concept of " civilization . " 
 For Childe , the Neolithic Revolution was a radical period in which humans – who had formerly been hunter @-@ gatherers – began cultivating plants and breeding animals for food , allowing for greater control of the food supply and population growth . He believed that the Urban Revolution was largely caused by the development of bronze metallurgy , and in a 1950 paper proposed ten traits that he believed were present in the oldest cities : they were larger than earlier settlements , they contained full @-@ time craft specialists , the surplus was collected together to a god or king , they witnessed monumental architecture , there was an unequal distribution of social surplus , writing was invented , the sciences developed , naturalistic art developed , trade with foreign areas increased , and the state organisation was based on residence rather than kinship . Childe also believed that the Urban Revolution had a negative side , in that it led to increased social stratification into classes and the oppression of the majority by a power elite . Childe 's concept of " revolutions " were not universally adopted in archaeology , with many believing that the term " revolution " was misleading because the processes of agricultural and urban development were gradual transformations . 
 = = = Influence on processual and post @-@ processual archaeology = = = 
 Through his work , Gordon Childe contributed to two of the major theoretical movements in Anglo @-@ American archaeology , <unk> and post @-@ <unk> . Prominent processual archaeologist Colin Renfrew described him as " one of the fathers of processual thought " due to his " development of economic and social themes in prehistory " , an idea echoed by Marxist archaeologist Neil Faulkner . Trigger argued that Childe 's work foreshadowed processual thought in two clear ways ; first by emphasising the role of change in societal development , and second by adhering to a strictly materialist view of the past . Both of these arose from Childe 's Marxist beliefs . However , most American <unk> ignored Childe 's work , seeing him as particularist and irrelevant in their search for generalised laws of societal behaviour . In keeping with Marxist thought , Childe did not agree that such generalised laws existed , believing that behaviour was conditioned by socio @-@ economic factors and was not universal . 
 Peter Ucko , who was one of Childe 's successors as director of the Institute of Archaeology , highlighted that in his writings , Childe accepted the subjectivity of archaeological interpretation , something which was in stark contrast to the <unk> ' insistence that archaeological interpretation could be objective . This acceptance of subjectivity led Trigger to comment that Childe was a " prototypical post @-@ processual archaeologist " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Biographer Sally Green found no evidence that Childe ever had a serious relationship with anyone ; she assumed him to be heterosexual because she found no evidence of same @-@ sex attraction . He had many friends of both sexes , although remained " awkward and uncouth , without any social graces " . He enjoyed interacting and socialising with students , often inviting them to dine with him , despite finding it difficult relating to other humans . He was shy , and often hid his personal feelings . He could speak a number of European languages , having taught himself in early life when he was travelling across much of the continent . 
 Childe believed that the study of the past could offer guidance for how humans should act in the present and future . A socialist from his undergraduate days , Childe was an atheist and critic of religion , viewing it as a false consciousness based in superstition . In History ( 1947 ) he commented that " Magic is a way of making people believe they are going to get what they want , whereas religion is a system for persuading them that they ought to want what they get . " Archaeologist Colin Renfrew noted that Childe was liberal minded on social issues , but thought that although Childe deplored racism , he did not entirely escape the pervasive 19th century view on distinct differences between different races . 
 Childe was fond of driving cars , enjoying the " feeling of power " he got from them . He often told a story about how he had raced at high speed down Piccadilly , London at 3 o 'clock in the morning for the sheer enjoyment of it , only to be pulled over by a policeman for such illegal activity . He loved practical jokes , and allegedly kept a halfpenny in his pocket to trick pickpockets . On another occasion he played a joke on the delegates at a Prehistoric Society conference by lecturing them on a theory that the Neolithic monument of <unk> had been constructed as an imitation of Stonehenge by a nouveau riche chieftain . Several audience members failed to realise that he was being tongue in cheek . 
 Childe 's other hobbies included walking in the British hillsides , attending classical music concerts , and playing the card game contract bridge . Fond of poetry , his favourite poet was John Keats , although his favourite poems were William Wordsworth 's " Ode to Duty " and Robert Browning 's " A Grammarian 's Funeral " . He was not particularly interested in reading novels but his favourite was D. H. Lawrence 's Kangaroo ( 1923 ) , a book echoing many of Childe 's own feelings about Australia . He was a fan of good quality food and drink , and frequented a number of restaurants . Known for his battered , tatty attire , Childe always wore his wide @-@ brimmed black hat , which he had purchased from a hatter in Jermyn Street , central London , as well as a tie , which was usually red , a colour chosen to symbolise his socialist beliefs . He regularly wore a black Mackintosh raincoat , often carrying it over his arm or draped over his shoulders like a cape . In summer he frequently wore shorts with socks , sock suspenders , and large boots . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 On his death , Childe was praised by his colleague Stuart Piggott as " the greatest prehistorian in Britain and probably the world " . The archaeologist Randall H. McGuire later described him as " probably the best known and most cited archaeologist of the twentieth century " , an idea echoed by Bruce Trigger , while Barbara McNairn labelled him " one of the most outstanding and influential figures in the discipline " . By 1956 , he was cited as the most translated Australian author in history , having seen his books published in such languages as Chinese , Czech , Dutch , French , German , Hindi , Hungarian , Italian , Japanese , Polish , Russian , Spanish , Sweden and Turkish . The archaeologists David Lewis @-@ Williams and David Pearce considered Childe to be " probably the most written about " archaeologist in history , commenting that his books were still " required reading " for those in the discipline in 2005 . 
 Childe is primarily respected for developing a synthesis of European and Near Eastern prehistory at a time when most archaeologists were focused on regional sites and sequences , gaining the moniker of " the Great Synthesizer " . Since his death , this framework has been heavily revised following the discovery of radiocarbon dating , while his interpretations have been " largely rejected " . Various archaeologists have debated and disagreed over the importance of various different parts of Childe 's work . Childe himself believed that his primary contribution to archaeology was in his interpretative frameworks , an analysis supported by Alison <unk> and Peter Gathercole . Childe 's theoretical work had been largely ignored in his lifetime , and remained forgotten in the decades after his death , although would see a resurgence in the late 1990s and early 2000s . It remained best known in Latin America , where Marxism remained a core theoretical current in the archaeological community throughout the latter 20th century . 
 Despite his global influence , Childe 's oeuvre was poorly understood in the United States , where his work on European prehistory had never become well known . As a result , in the U.S. he erroneously gained the reputation of being a Near Eastern specialist , where he was regarded by anthropologists as one of the founders of neo @-@ evolutionism , alongside Julian Steward and Leslie White , despite the fact that his approach was " more subtle and nuanced " than theirs . Nevertheless , Bruce Trigger believed that it was an American archaeologist , Robert McCormick Adams , Jr . , who did the most to develop Childe 's " most innovative ideas " after the latter 's death . 
 = = = Academic publications = = = 
 Following his death , various articles were published that examined Childe 's work from a historical perspective . In 1980 , Bruce Trigger published Gordon Childe : Revolutions in Archaeology , which studied the influences that extended over Childe 's archaeological thought . That year , Barbara McNairn published The Method and Theory of V. Gordon Childe , examining his methodological and theoretical approaches to the discipline . The following year , Sally Green 's <unk> : A Biography of V. Gordon Childe , was published , in which she described him as " the most eminent and influential scholar of European prehistory in the twentieth century " . Peter Gathercole thought the work of Trigger , McNairn and Green to have been " extremely important " , while Ruth <unk> considered them part of a " let 's @-@ get @-@ to @-@ know @-@ Childe @-@ better " movement , expressing her opinion that they were all worth reading . 
 In July 1986 , a colloquium devoted to Childe 's work was held in Mexico City , marking the 50th anniversary of Man Makes Himself 's publication . In May 1992 , a conference marking his centenary was held at the UCL Institute of Archaeology in London , co @-@ sponsored by the Institute and the Prehistoric Society , both organisations that he had formerly headed . The proceedings of the conference were subsequently published in a 1994 volume edited by Institute director David R. Harris , The Archaeology of V. Gordon Childe : Contemporary Perspectives . Harris stated that the book was designed to " demonstrate the dynamic qualities of Childe 's thought , the breadth and depth of his scholarship , and the continuing relevance of his work to contemporary issues in archaeology . " In 1995 , another anthology based on a conference was published . Titled Childe and Australia : Archaeology , Politics and Ideas , it was edited by Peter Gathercole , T.H. Irving , and Gregory <unk> . Further papers would appear on the subject of Childe in ensuing years , looking at such subjects as his personal correspondences , and final resting place . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 Childe is referenced in the American blockbuster film Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull ( 2008 ) . Directed by Steven Spielberg and George Lucas , the motion picture was the fourth film in the Indiana Jones series that dealt with the eponymous fictional archaeologist and university professor . In the film , Jones is heard advising one of his students that to understand the concept of diffusion he must read the works of Childe . 
 = Netball in the Cook Islands = 
 The Cook Islands compete as a part of netball 's Oceania region . More than 1 @,@ 000 players have registered to play the sport . Participation in the game grew during the 1970s . Much of this is possible because of the national governing organisation , the Cook Islands Netball Association which is a member of Oceania Netball Federation . Because of the level of organisation and the game 's development , the country has participated at several international events including the Pacific Games , the Commonwealth Games , the World Games , the Oceania Netball Tournament , the World Youth Netball Championship , and the International Challenge Men ’ s and Mixed Netball Tournament . A demonstration of the Cook Islands success can be found by looking at the national team : It is one of the top ranked in the world . 
 Netball has grassroots support and plays an important part in the life of women on the islands . There are over 15 netball clubs . Beyond club competitions , the game is played at schools and at national festivals like the Manea Games . The game 's reach extends beyond traditional gender boundaries and is also being played by some Cook Islander men . Netball has benefited from several high visibility players and administrators , who have helped to develop the game internally and internationally . 
 = = About the Cook Islands = = 
 The Cook Islands are an island nation , with a population of 23 @,@ 400 people as of September 2010 . As of 2006 , there were 15 @,@ 324 total residents of the Cook Islands . Of these , 7 @,@ 822 were male and 7 @,@ 502 were female . The most populated islands and regions were <unk> with 10 @,@ 226 residents of which 5 @,@ 008 were female , <unk> with 1 @,@ 975 total residents of whom 989 were female , Mangaia with 631 total residents of which 324 were female , Atiu with 558 residents of which 275 were female , Pukapuka with 419 total residents of whom 184 were female , Mauke with 372 total residents of which 178 were female , and Manihiki with 344 total residents of which 153 are female . 
 = = Netball history and development = = 
 Because of a favourable climate , sport is played year @-@ round in the Cook Islands . Most sports , including netball , cricket , tennis , boxing , golf , soccer , squash and rugby union , are of European origin . The most developed and popular of them is netball , a sport in which the Cook Islands has participated on a global stage . The two most important international sport competitions that the Cook Islands participate in are the Commonwealth Games and the South Pacific Games . The Cook Islands was a major force behind the creation of the South Pacific Mini Games , participation in which has played an important role in the country 's modern sporting history . Since the 1970s , the popularity of netball on the islands grew and the Cook Islands has made an effort to host these events as a way to improve facilities . During the 1970s , the Cook Islands began bidding to host international sporting events . Meanwhile , the popularity of netball grew . The sport 's popularity is partly due to the influence of New Zealand , where Cook Island players have competed for New Zealand 's national team . One such player was <unk> <unk> , who joined the Silver Ferns in 1979 . Another was Anna <unk> , who was the captain of the New Zealand side in 1992 . New Zealand encouraged the sport in the Cook Islands during the 1980s by hosting coaching and umpiring clinics . There are a number of athletes from the Cook Islands who reside overseas . This is especially true of netball . Some commentators state that living abroad has provided these athletes with access to facilities and levels of higher competition that they cannot get at home . 
 In 1991 , the Government of the Cook Islands identified the lack of funding for sport facilities as a key reason why the nation has not succeeded at international competitions . It believed that investing in sporting infrastructure would enable the nation to be more globally competitive . Netball was not recognised as an Olympic sport until 1995 . While official recognition as an Olympic sport did not mean that it was played at the Olympics , it did mean that the national association and the Cook Islands government could then access Olympic funding to help cover costs for facilities , travel , coaching , umpire training and other grass roots development efforts . The Cook Islands Netball Association is the governing body for the sport in the Cook Islands , and historically , the sport has been administered by women . Most netball courts are owned by the local village or club . With the exception of National Auditorium , all courts are outside . In 1990 , the Cook Islands Netball Association had 15 clubs affiliated with it , all based in the southern islands group , including <unk> / <unk> , <unk> / <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Outer Islands . 
 The South Pacific Mini Games is a sporting event televised by a local Cook Islands television station . Sports contested at the games included netball . These games were televised , with funding to buy the rights being provided by the West German Government and the Government of the Cook Islands . In 2008 , the first live broadcast of a netball game happened on television in the Cook Islands when the Silver Ferns played the Aussie Diamonds on 29 September . 
 The Manea Games are an annual eleven @-@ day sport festival . The fifth version of the festival was held in 2008 at Aitutaki . The 2011 edition of the games were held in Mangaia . Sports represented at the games include netball , athletics , cricket , darts , soccer , rugby sevens , table tennis , tennis , touch rugby , volleyball and traditional games . The games are taken very seriously across all sports . Girls competing at netball compete with the hope of one day competing at the international level . 
 In 1992 , the government detailed its national sport objectives . These objectives included promoting youth activity in order to improve quality of life , encourage young people to participate in national celebrations , develop and organize local sport , and foster a sense of competition and national unity in the sporting community across the village , national and international sphere . While not specifically mentioning netball , it did acknowledge the importance of the sport in terms of international prestige . One of the strategies to help meet those objectives was to strengthen national sporting bodies like the netball association . This worked ; by 2009 , there were more than 1 @,@ 000 players registered with the Cook Islands Netball Association . 
 = = Grass roots netball = = 
 There are at least three netball courts on the island of Atiu , which has a population of around 650 . The netball and tennis rivalries between villagers on the island is fierce , and they built the netball facilities to help them win . The island has nine tennis courts , which used more often for playing netball , volleyball and soccer than tennis . There are a number of netball teams affiliated with schools on Atiu . Each has its own colours : <unk> wears blue on top and white on the bottom ; <unk> and <unk> wears green on top and white on the bottom ; <unk> wears black on top and bottom ; and <unk> wears red on top and white on the bottom . The Girls ' Brigade , Girl Guides and Junior Missionary Volunteers also have their own uniforms and colours . 
 Netball is played on the island of Aitutaki . Other sports played on the island include rugby union , rugby sevens , association football , cricket , volleyball , darts , tennis , badminton , ping pong and athletics . 
 Netball plays an important role on the social life of Cook Island women . For their social activities , rather than go to bars , they play netball and go to church . Netball games are most often played on Saturdays during the winter months from April to August , though games can be played throughout the year . Female players who make the national team are treated like minor celebrities . 
 Traditionally , on village feast days , several sport competitions are held including netball , rugby and dance . 
 The Cook Islands Golden Oldies Netball Association is a local league that is part of a network of leagues in various sports aimed at seniors . Belonging to these teams offers seniors a chance to travel that they might not be able to afford otherwise because of the high cost of transportation from the Cook Islands to other locations . 
 = = Men 's netball = = 
 Unlike some countries , the growth of men 's netball is hampered by cultural bias against it ; when parents see their boys playing it , they actively discourage them from continuing . Despite this , the Cook Islands also has a men 's national team that has competed in the 2006 , 2009 and 2011 International Challenge Men ’ s and Mixed Netball Tournament . The popularity of netball is growing amongst men on the island , as sport is an important way of villages keeping in touch with each other . 
 At the Easter sports day , organised by the Christian Youth Organization , traditional roles are exchanged and boys play netball while girls play rugby . During this sporting event , the boys cross dress and wear the uniforms that are traditionally worn by women . 
 = = People = = 
 Many people have been important in the push to develop the game in the Cook Islands and raise the profile of the national netball team on the global stage . They include Anna <unk> , who was the captain of the 1992 New Zealand side , <unk> <unk> , who was the first Cook Islands player to play for New Zealand 's national team , and Mamia , who was the secretary of the Cook Islands Netball Association for six years . Mamia was an umpire and an umpire examiner for the Oceania region . She attended South Pacific Games in Micronesia , the Commonwealth Games in Malaysia , and the Olympic Games in Sydney . Mamia was a national representative for teams that had competed in the South Pacific Games during the 1980s . Tina <unk> Browne was president of the Cook Islands Netball Association . Elizabeth Tou was coach of the national team from 2005 to 2007 . She represented the country as a player at Pacific Games , Commonwealth Games and the World Championships . 
 = = International = = 
 The Cook Islands Netball Association is a member of the Oceania Netball Federation . The nation 's participation in the international netball community has raised the islands ' visibility globally . The Cook Islands won the netball competition at the first South Pacific Games , now Pacific Games , held in 1981 . The national team had its first win in the tournament in 1983 , when it beat Fiji . In 1986 , the government provided NZ $ 20 @,@ 000 to help the team travel to the 1986 Commonwealth Games in Scotland . The 1987 Netball World Championships were also held in Scotland , and the Cook Islands team came in sixth . At the World Games 1989 in Germany , the team came fourth . In the 1990 Oceania Netball Tournament , the team defeated New Zealand , Tonga and Fiji to come in second behind Australia . In January 2011 , the national team was ranked eleventh in the world . 
 At the 1992 World Youth Cup in Samoa , the Cook Islands U @-@ 21 team defeated several high profile international teams including Wales , Samoa , and England . The Cook Islands ' defeat of Canada , 114 – 13 , in that tournament was a record for the highest score in the tournament . The Cook Islands also has a national team that competes in the international Golden Oldies netball tournament . In 2004 , a team from the Cook Islands competed in the International Schoolgirls Netball Challenge . The country hosted the 2008 World Youth Championship , and the 2009 International Challenge Men ’ s and Mixed Netball Tournament . In 2011 , a New Zealander , Margaret Foster , was appointed as head coach of the development squad . One of her goals was to improve the team 's fitness levels . 
 In the lead up to the 2009 World Youth Championship , there was considerable anxiety over the facilities , and whether they would be up to world standards . The Prime Minister of the Cook Islands reconfirmed that his government would deliver a new venue . Because of this , the International Netball Federation reaffirmed their support for hosting the event in the Cook Islands . The Chinese government offered to step in and loan the country NZ $ 9 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 to help pay the costs for constructing the facility . The loan was controversial as some organisations felt the country had misplaced priorities . During the planning and preparation period in the lead up to the 2009 World Youth Championship , the government sought to increase the size of the loan for the facility to NZ $ 13 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . The opposition leader Norman George was unhappy with how the government handled the whole situation regarding new sporting facilities to be built for the World Youth Netball Championships and the 2009 Pacific Mini Games . 
 = = = Competitive history = = = 
 The table below contains a sample of the Cook Islands results in international competitions . 
 The table below contains sample of Cook Islands results in individual international matches . 
 = Order of Karađorđe 's Star = 
 The Order of Karađorđe 's Star ( Serbian : Orden <unk> <unk> , Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is Serbia 's highest civilian and military decoration . It originated in the Kingdom of Serbia , and was initially awarded exclusively to Serbian citizens in return for services rendered to the Serbian monarchy , the Serb people and the Serbian state , though it is now bestowed upon Serbs and non @-@ Serbs alike . During the Balkan Wars and World War I , the Order was mostly awarded for acts of bravery on the battlefield . The post @-@ war Kingdom of Yugoslavia retained the Order , and it was awarded by the Yugoslav government @-@ in @-@ exile until the end of World War II , in some cases to individuals who collaborated with the Axis powers . Following the war , the monarchy was outlawed and a communist government came to power . Along with other monarchist symbols , the Order was suppressed during the administration of Josip Broz Tito , and replaced with communist decorations such as the Order of the People 's Hero . 
 Following the breakup of Yugoslavia , Serbia ceased using many of the awards and decorations established during the communist period , though it was not until 2010 that the Serbian Government officially reinstated the Order of Karađorđe 's Star as Serbia 's highest decoration . During the Cold War , it had been awarded by the Karađorđević family in exile . The first person to receive it following its reinstatement as a state order was the tennis player Novak Djokovic , in February 2012 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Order of Karađorđe 's Star was instituted by the royal decree of King Peter I on 1 January 1904 , commemorating his recent accession to the Serbian throne , as well as the one @-@ hundredth anniversary of the First Serbian Uprising . It was meant to replace the Order of the Cross of Takovo and the Order of Miloš the Great , two decorations that had been awarded by the rival Obrenović dynasty , which ruled Serbia prior to the May 1903 coup d 'état that reinstated Peter 's Karađorđević dynasty after several decades in exile . The first award was disagreeable to the <unk> and their supporters because it was named after Takovo , the village where Obrenović dynasty founder Miloš Obrenović had launched the Second Serbian Uprising . The Order of Miloš the Great had to be replaced as it was named after Obrenović himself . 
 Initially , the Order of Karađorđe 's Star was categorized as a senior state award , and organized into four classes . The Grand Cross of Karađorđe 's Star , the highest class , consisted of a badge of the Order on a sash and breast star ; a Grand Officer of Karađorđe 's Star was decorated with a badge <unk> and a slightly smaller breast star ; a Commander of Karađorđe 's Star was only awarded a badge <unk> ; and the recipient of the Order 's fourth class , the Officer of Karađorđe 's Star , would receive a small triangular chest ribbon . The Order was usually awarded for services to the Karađorđević dynasty , the Serbian state or the Serb people , while Karađorđević princes received a Grand Cross at baptism . Recipients included both soldiers and civilians , though until 1906 only Serbian citizens were permitted to receive the award . 
 During the Balkan Wars ( 1912 – 13 ) , the Serbian Government introduced the War Merit Order of Karađorđe 's Star to reward acts of " conspicuous gallantry of commissioned officers in the field " , as well as the battlefield victories of the Royal Serbian Army 's senior officers ; non @-@ commissioned officers ( NCOs ) and soldiers in the field were ineligible . In June 1915 , at the height of World War I , Serbia instituted a sub @-@ division of the War Merit Order , called the Military Order , which was awarded to NCOs and men for bravery in combat . The War Merit Order was divided into two classes : the 1st division Gold Cross and the 2nd division Silver Cross . One of the recipients of the Military Order was the highly decorated female soldier <unk> Savić , and another was Flora <unk> , the only British woman to openly serve as a soldier in the war . Several senior Serbian military leaders were recipients of the War Merit Order , including Prince Regent Alexander , and Field marshals Živojin Mišić and Stepa Stepanović . Foreign recipients included American General John J. Pershing , the British Field marshal Douglas Haig , the French generals Joseph Joffre , Maurice Sarrail , Philippe Pétain , and Louis Franchet d 'Espèrey , and the Romanian King Ferdinand I. 
 The Kingdom of Yugoslavia retained the Order after World War I. In 1939 , it was awarded to the city of Belgrade . During World War II , Peter II bestowed the Order upon a number of Chetniks on the recommendation of Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović . Some of the decorated Chetnik commanders included Pavle Đurišić , Dobroslav Jevđević , Momčilo Đujić and Uroš Drenović . These decorations proved controversial both during and after the war , as many of the commanders cooperated with Germany and Italy against the communist Partisans for several years . Such a discrepancy can best be seen in the case of Đujić , who was given the Order for displaying " gallantry in the face of the enemy " , and subsequently celebrated receiving it at an Italian general 's headquarters . In Jevđević 's case , the Order was given in 1943 for his services to the Serb population of Herzegovina during a series of Ustaše massacres , but Mihailović had news of the award suppressed because Jevđević had visited Rome to plan an anti @-@ communist offensive with the Italians and his forces had carried out several massacres of non @-@ Serbs over the previous several years . 
 After the war , Yugoslavia came under the rule of communist dictator Josip Broz Tito , and Karađorđević @-@ era medals and orders were replaced by non @-@ royal decorations , such as the Order of the People 's Hero . In the 1990s , the Republika Srpska instated its own decoration also called the Order of Karađorđe 's Star , though this is not to be confused with the medal historically awarded by Serbia and the Karađorđević dynasty . 
 In 2010 , the Government of Serbia decided to reinstate the Order as an official state award , though the Karađorđević 's had continued giving the award in exile over the previous sixty years . In February 2012 , tennis player Novak Djokovic became the first person to receive the Order after it was reinstated . The most recent recipient of the Order is the Military Medical Academy , in April 2014 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Order comes in either gold or silver depending on class , and the obverse features a white enameled cross pattée with gilt rays protruding from each of the arms . The rays are intersected diagonally by a pair of sabres when the recipient is awarded an Order " with swords " . Orders from the royal period contain a blue medallion at the centre depicting a Serbian cross with a fire @-@ steel at each corner , with the words " For Faith and Freedom , 1804 " etched into the small circle in the middle of the cross . The reverse of these Orders contains a red medallion depicting a white eagle , with the words " Peter I , 1904 " written around it . The bravery medals awarded from June 1915 forward are almost identical to the Orders awarded before that date , save for the crossed swords being present on all of them regardless of class . Such Orders also lacked the phrase etched into the obverse of the older ones and the date 1904 on the reverse , which marked the centenary of the First Serbian Uprising . Instead , they merely had King Peter 's name on the obverse beside the year when the Order was bestowed . The Orders themselves were originally manufactured by foreign makers of decorations and medals , such as France 's Arthus @-@ Bertrand and Switzerland 's <unk> <unk> ; during the interwar period ( 1919 – 39 ) they were produced domestically . 
 = Monadnock Building = 
 The Monadnock Building ( historically the Monadnock Block ; pronounced / <unk> / mə @-@ NAD @-@ <unk> ) is a skyscraper located at 53 West Jackson Boulevard in the south Loop area of Chicago , Illinois . The north half of the building was designed by the firm of Burnham & Root and built starting in 1891 . The tallest load @-@ bearing brick building ever constructed , it employed the first portal system of wind bracing in America . Its decorative staircases represent the first structural use of aluminum in building construction . The south half , constructed in 1893 , was designed by Holabird & Roche and is similar in color and profile to the original , but the design is more traditionally ornate . When completed , it was the largest office building in the world . The success of the building was the catalyst for an important new business center at the southern end of the Loop . 
 The building was remodeled in 1938 in one of the first major skyscraper renovations ever undertaken — a bid , in part , to revolutionize how building maintenance was done and halt the demolition of Chicago 's aging skyscrapers . It was sold in 1979 to owners who restored the building to its original condition , in one of the most comprehensive skyscraper restorations attempted as of 1992 . The project was recognized as one of the top restoration projects in the USA by the National Trust for Historic Preservation in 1987 . The building is divided into offices from 250 square feet ( 23 m2 ) to 6 @,@ 000 square feet ( 560 m2 ) in size , and primarily serves independent professional firms . It was listed for sale in 2007 . 
 The north half is an unornamented vertical mass of purple @-@ brown brick , flaring gently out at the base and top , with vertically continuous bay windows projecting out . The south half is vertically divided by brickwork at the base and rises to a large copper cornice at the roof . Projecting window bays in both halves allow large exposures of glass , giving the building an open appearance despite its mass . The Monadnock is part of the Printing House Row District , which also includes the Fisher Building , the Manhattan Building , and the Old Colony Building . 
 When it was built , many critics called the building too extreme , and lacking in style . Others found in its lack of ornamentation the natural extension of its commercial purpose and an expression of modern business life . Early 20th @-@ century European architects found inspiration in its attention to purpose and functional expression . It was one of the first buildings named a Chicago Architectural Landmark in 1958 . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1970 , and named as part of the National Historic Landmark South Dearborn Street – Printing House Row North Historic District in 1976 . Modern critics have called it a " classic " , a " triumph of unified design " , and " one of the most exciting aesthetic experiences America 's commercial architecture produced " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = North half ( 1881 – 1891 ) = = = 
 The Monadnock was commissioned by Boston real estate developers Peter and Shepherd Brooks in the building boom following the Depression of 1873 – 79 . The Brooks family , which had amassed a fortune in the shipping insurance business and had been investing in Chicago real estate since 1863 , had retained Chicago property manager Owen F. Aldis to manage the construction of the seven @-@ story Grannis Block on Dearborn Street in 1880 . It was Aldis , one of two men Louis Sullivan credited with being " responsible for the modern office building " , who convinced investors such as the Brooks brothers to build new skyscrapers in Chicago . By the end of the century , Aldis would create over 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 square feet ( 93 @,@ 000 m2 ) of new office space and manage nearly one fifth of the office space in the Loop . 
 Daniel Burnham and John Wellborn Root met as young draftsmen in the Chicago firm of Carter , Drake , and Wight in 1872 and left to form Burnham & Root the following year . At Aldis 's urging , the Brooks brothers had retained the then @-@ fledgling firm to design the Grannis Block , which was their first major commission . Burnham and Root would become the architects of choice for the Brooks family , for whom they would complete the first high @-@ rise building in Chicago , the 10 @-@ story Montauk Building , in 1883 , and the 11 @-@ story Rookery Building in 1888 . 
