 The Great Chicago Fire of 1871 had destroyed a 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) by 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) swath of the city between the Chicago River and Lake Michigan , and subsequent commercial development expanded into the area far south of the main business district along the river that would come to be known as " the Loop " . Between 1881 and 1885 , Aldis bought a series of lots in the area on Peter Brooks ' behalf , including a 70 @-@ by @-@ 200 @-@ foot ( 21 by 61 m ) site on the corner of Jackson and Dearborn streets . The location was remote , yet attractive for several reasons . The construction of the Chicago Board of Trade Building in 1885 had made nearby LaSalle Street the city 's prime financial district , driving up property values , and railroad companies were buying up land further south for new terminal buildings , creating further speculation in the southeastern end of the Loop . Brooks commissioned Burnham & Root to design a building for the site in 1884 , and the project was announced in 1885 , with a brief trade journal notice that the building would cost $ 850 @,@ 000 ( $ 22 @.@ 4 million in 2016 dollars ) . The Chicago building community had little faith in Brooks ' choice of location . Architect Edwin Renwick would say : 
 When Owen Aldis put up the Monadnock on Jackson Boulevard there was nothing on the south side of the street between State Street and the river but cheap one @-@ story shacks , mere hovels . Every one thought Mr. Aldis was insane to build way out there on the ragged edge of the city . Later when he carried the building on through Van Buren Street they were sure he was . 
 Early sketches show a 13 @-@ story building with Ancient Egyptian ornament and a slight flaring at the top , divided visually into five sections with a lotus @-@ blossom decorative motif . This design was never approved , as Brooks waited for the real estate market in the south Loop , still mostly warehouses , to improve . Where Root was known for the detailed ornamentation of his designs ( as seen in the Rookery Building ) , Brooks was known for his stinginess and preference for simplicity . For the Monadnock , Brooks insisted that the architects refrain from elaborate ornamentation and produce instead " the effect of solidity and strength , or a design that will produce that effect , rather than ornament for a notable appearance . " In an 1884 letter to Aldis , he wrote : 
 My notion is to have no projecting surfaces or indentations , but to have everything flush .... So tall and narrow a building must have some ornament in so conspicuous a situation ... [ but ] projections mean dirt , nor do they add strength to the building ... one great nuisance [ is ] the lodgment of pigeons and sparrows . 
 While Root was on vacation , Burnham had a draftsman create a " straight up @-@ and @-@ down , uncompromising , unornamented facade . " Objecting at first , Root later threw himself into the design , declaring that the heavy lines of an Egyptian pyramid had captured his imagination and that he would " throw the thing up without a single ornament " . 
 In 1889 , a new plan was announced for the building : a thick @-@ walled brick tower , 16 stories high , devoid of ornamentation and suggestive of an Egyptian pylon . Brooks insisted that the building have no projections , for which reason the plan did not include bay windows , but Aldis argued that more rentable space would be created by projecting oriel windows , which were included in the final design . The Monadnock 's final height was calculated to be the highest economically viable for a load @-@ bearing wall design , requiring walls 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) thick at the bottom and 18 inches ( 46 cm ) thick at the top . Greater height would have required walls of such thickness that they would have reduced the rentable space too greatly . The final height was much <unk> over by the owners , but a decision was forced when the city proposed an ordinance restricting the height of buildings to 150 feet ( 46 m ) . To protect future income potential , Aldis sought a permit for a 16 @-@ story building immediately . The building commissioner , although " staggered by the sixteen story plan " , granted the permit on June 3 , 1889 . 
 With its 17 stories ( 16 rentable plus an attic ) , its 215 feet ( 66 m ) high load @-@ bearing walls were the tallest of any commercial structure in the world . To support the towering structure and reinforce against wind , the masonry walls were braced with an interior frame of cast and wrought iron . Root devised for this frame the first attempt at a portal system of wind bracing in America , in which iron struts were riveted between the columns of the frame for reinforcement . The narrow lot allowed only a single , double @-@ loaded corridor , which was appointed with a 3 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) high wainscot of white Carrara marble , red oak trim , and feather @-@ chipped glass that allowed outside light to filter from the offices on each side into the hallways . Floors were covered with hand @-@ carved marble mosaic tiles . <unk> open staircases were made of bronze @-@ plated cast iron on upper floors . On the ground floor , they were crafted in cast aluminum — an exotic and expensive material at the time — representing the first use of aluminum in building construction . 
 The building was constructed by the firm of George A. Fuller , who trained as an architect but made his mark as the creator of the modern contracting system in building construction . His firm had supervised construction of the Rookery , and later built New York 's Flatiron Building with Burnham in 1902 . The Monadnock Block was built as a single structure but was legally two buildings , the Monadnock and the Kearsarge , named for Mount Monadnock and Mount Kearsarge in New Hampshire . Work was completed in 1891 . The Monadnock , which Root called his " Jumbo " , was his last project ; he died suddenly while it was under construction . 
 = = = South half and early history ( 1891 – 1893 ) = = = 
 Encouraged by the early success of the building , Shepherd Brooks purchased the 68 @-@ by @-@ 200 @-@ foot ( 21 by 61 m ) lot adjoining to the south in 1893 for $ 360 @,@ 000 ( $ 9 @.@ 48 million in 2016 dollars ) . Aldis recommended the firm of Holabird & Roche , who had designed the Pontiac Building for Peter Brooks in 1891 , to extend the Monadnock south to Van Buren . William Holabird and Martin Roche had trained together in the office of William LeBaron Jenney , and in 1881 formed their own firm , which would become one of the most prolific in the city and the acknowledged leader of the Chicago school of architecture . The north half had struggled with cost overruns and Holabird & Roche presented a far more cost @-@ effective design . The design , for two buildings called the Katahdin and Wachusett ( also named for New England mountains ) , connected them to the north half as a single structure at an estimated cost of $ 800 @,@ 000 ( $ 21 @.@ 1 million in 2016 dollars ) . Construction began in 1892 , under the supervision of Corydon T. Purdy who would later earn accolades as the structural engineer for many famous Chicago and New York skyscrapers . 
 The addition , 17 stories high , preserved the color and vertically massed profile of the original , but was more traditionally ornate in its design , with grander entranceways and more neoclassical touches . The building reflected in its design the transition taking place in skyscraper design from load @-@ bearing walls to steel frame construction . The Katahdin , built first , used the same iron framed masonry construction as the original . The Wachusett was entirely steel framed . Where the north half required great thicknesses of brick in the load @-@ bearing walls , the addition employed only a thin facing of brick and terracotta trim , affording larger expanses of glass and faster , less expensive construction . The south half cost 15 percent less , weighed 15 percent less , and had 15 percent more rentable space than the north half . Connected on every floor except the top one and sharing a common basement , each of the four component buildings was equipped with its own heating system , elevators , stairs , and plumbing to facilitate a separate sale if required . The combined final cost in 1893 was $ 2 @.@ 5 million ( $ 65 @.@ 8 million in 2016 dollars ) . 
 When complete , the Monadnock was the largest office building in the world , with 1 @,@ 200 rooms and an occupancy of over 6 @,@ 000 . The Chicago Daily Tribune commented that the population of most Illinois towns in 1896 would fit comfortably in the building . It was a postal district unto itself , with four full @-@ time carriers delivering mail six times a day , six days a week . It was the first building in Chicago wired for electricity , and one of the first to be fire @-@ proofed , with hollow fire clay tiles lining the structure so that the metal frame would be protected even if the facing brick were to be destroyed . 
 The Brooks ' decision to construct a building of such scale and in such an unlikely location was vindicated by the Monadnock 's success — it was the most profitable investment they ever made . The Economist , a Chicago real estate journal , conceded in 1892 that : 
 the rapidity with which the Monadnock and Kearsarge ... have been rented is one of the phenomenal features in the real estate market of this city . The erecting and successful renting of these structures has simply established , in an incredibly short period of time , an important business center at the southwest corner of Jackson and Dearborn streets , a point which was but a short time ago considered too far south for a prosperous business center . 
 Early tenants , according to Rand McNally , included " great corporations , banks , and professional men ... among them the Santa Fe , the Michigan Central , and the Chicago & Alton Railroads , and the American Exchange National and Globe Savings Banks " . 
 In 1897 , the Union Elevated Railroad Company opened the Union Loop line of the Chicago " L " , the last leg of which ran immediately alongside the Van Buren side of the building . Aldis filed suit against the " L " in 1901 for $ 300 @,@ 000 in damages ( $ 8 @.@ 53 million in 2016 dollars ) , complaining that : 
 [ the ] means of access to the said building ... had been cut off and the light , air , and view obstructed , and the enjoyment of the property disturbed by the throwing of smoke , dust , cinders , and filth ... by the creating and causing of loud and ominous noises , and by the causing of the ground to shake and vibrate ... said building and premises are greatly damaged . 
 Aldis lost the case , but won on appeal , when the Supreme Court of Illinois found that owners of property abutting the " L " lines could recover damages if the property had been injured by noise , vibration , or the blocking of light , paving the way for many lawsuits to follow . 
 = = = Modernization ( 1938 – 1979 ) = = = 
 A boom in new construction after 1926 created stiff competition for older buildings like the Monadnock . Occupancy declined from 87 percent in 1929 to 55 percent in 1937 and the building began to lose money . In 1938 , building manager Graham Aldis ( Owen 's nephew ) announced what the Chicago Daily Tribune called " the city 's largest and most novel modernization job " in a move toward halting the destruction of Chicago 's aging skyscrapers . Rejecting the term " modernization " , Aldis called his plan " progressive styling " , which he believed would revolutionize the way building maintenance was done to preserve millions of dollars worth of buildings that would otherwise be destroyed . " There is no reason why " , he said , " any well @-@ designed office building need be torn down because of obsolescence . " Skidmore & Owings , who had pioneered functional design , were retained to lead a $ 125 @,@ 000 program ( $ 2 @.@ 1 million in 2016 dollars ) to restyle the main entrance , remodel the lobby and ground floor shops , modernize all the public spaces , and progressively modernize office suites as demand required . The modernization included covering the mosaic floors with rubber tile and terrazzo , enclosing the elevators and ornamental stairways , and replacing the marble and oak finishes in the corridors and offices with modern materials . By the end of 1938 , 35 new tenants had signed leases and 11 existing tenants had leased additional space in the building . 
 In 1966 , Aldis & Co . , which had managed the building for the Brooks estate for 75 years , was dissolved and the Monadnock was sold for $ 2 million ( $ 14 @.@ 6 million in 2016 dollars ) to Sudler & Co . , owners of the John Hancock Center , the Rookery , and the Old Colony Building . The new owners again modernized the interior , installing carpet , fluorescent lights , and new doors , and undertook a major effort to shore up the north wall which had sunk 1 @.@ 75 inches ( 44 mm ) during construction of the <unk> Federal Building across Jackson Street in 1974 . 
 By 1977 , operating expenses were high , rents were low , and occupancy had fallen to 80 percent . Struggling to make loan payments , the owners were forced to sell the building to avoid foreclosure . It was purchased by a partnership headed by William S. Donnell in 1979 for $ 5 per square foot ( $ 53 @.@ 82 per square meter ) or approximately $ 2 million ( $ 6 @.@ 52 million in 2016 dollars ) . 
 = = = Restoration and later ( 1979 – ) = = = 
 The building Donnell purchased in 1979 had declined badly . The Dearborn entrances had been closed in , the ground floor had been " defaced by garish signs " , and the brick had been painted and was peeling . Inside , the marble wainscoting had been painted over and many of the original oak doors had been replaced with cheaper mahogany . The decorative stair rails had been enclosed , and some stairways and corridors had been closed off completely . Much of the original mosaic tile had been demolished — some floors were carpeted , others tiled in vinyl or terrazzo . Half of the sixteen elevators were still manually operated . " It was as if it had been partly updated every ten years throughout its history " , said Donnell , " it was never done over in its entirety . " 
 Donnell , who had studied architecture at Harvard , planned to gut the building and construct a new , modern office complex inside the historic shell . Failing to obtain financing for the remodeling , he embarked instead on an incremental , " pay as you go " project to restore the Monadnock to its original condition in painstaking detail . The project was , according to historian Donald Miller , the most comprehensive skyscraper restoration ever attempted at the time ; it took thirteen years to complete . Working from original drawings discovered at the Art Institute of Chicago , and two old photographs , Donnell and John Vinci , one of the nation 's leading preservation architects , restored the building to its condition when first constructed , before any modernizations , working piecemeal as offices became vacant . 
 The color of the shellac was matched to closets where the wood had not been darkened by exposure to light . The mosaic floors were recreated by Italian craftsmen at a cost of $ 50 per square foot ( $ 538 @.@ 12 per square meter ) . A local firm was found that could reproduce the complicated process of sandblasting and hide glue application used to create the original feather chipped glass . This reproduced glass was used to restore the partitions and naturally lit corridors of Root 's design . To recreate the doors and wood trim , Donnell purchased the firm that had created the original oak woodwork — and still used the same 19th century machinery . Perfect replicas of the original aluminum light fixtures were fabricated from early photographs and carbon filament light bulbs were obtained to recreate the original lighting effect . A single surviving aluminum staircase was discovered behind a wall , restored , and used as a model to rebuild the lobby stairways and metalwork . The wainscoting on the upper floors was restored with marble salvaged from the recently modernized , nearby 19 LaSalle and Manhattan Buildings . Marble was purchased from the same Italian quarry that supplied Root 's original construction to restore the lobby walls and ceilings . 
 The Dearborn Street entrances were reopened and their massive granite lintels and surrounds cleared of layers of black paint or replaced . A source was found for the molded bricks needed to repair or replace the curved corners . Large plate glass windows at the entrance were removed and replaced with double @-@ hung windows that conformed to the original design . <unk> shades resembling the original linen versions were installed to preserve the appearance of the facade . The average cost of the restoration work was $ 1 million per floor ( $ 1 @.@ 91 million in 2016 dollars ) in 1989 , or $ 47 per square foot ( $ 505 @.@ 92 per square meter ) . 
 Donnell 's goal was that the Monadnock would " not only look as it originally did , it [ would ] also live as it used to " , and he sought tenants for the street @-@ level shops that were similar to their 19th @-@ century occupants . Shop windows were cleared of all signs and obstructions to preserve intended view from the corridor through to the street . Fluorescent lighting was prohibited and only gold leaf lettering on the glass was permitted for signage . Shops , all individually owned , were selected to fit the architectural character of the building . A florist , for example , was chosen that evoked a turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century atmosphere , as well as a barbershop with vintage fixtures and decor . A tobacconist with oak furnishings , a pen shop with glass cases , a shoe @-@ shine stand , and other service establishments represented , in Donnell 's words , " the kind of small @-@ scale entrepreneurs who occupied those spaces at the turn of the century , the kind of people who bring vitality and life to a building because they have a stake in it . " 
 The restoration was a success both critically and commercially . The building was 80 percent occupied when bought in 1979 and rented for $ 5 @.@ 50 per square foot ( $ 59 @.@ 20 per square meter ) . By 1982 , it was 91 percent occupied and commanded rent of $ 9 per square foot ( $ 96 @.@ 89 per square meter ) . The Monadnock was selected as one of top restoration projects in the country by the National Trust for Historic Preservation in 1987 , noting " the outstanding quality of the overall restoration effort " , and the precision , detail and faithfulness of the interior restoration , in particular the lobby , which " serves as a model for preservation nationwide . " 
 The restored Monadnock is divided into offices of from 250 square feet ( 23 m2 ) to 6 @,@ 000 square feet ( 560 m2 ) As of 2008 , it was 98 @.@ 9 percent leased ; the 300 tenants are primarily independent professional firms and entrepreneurs . Rents range from $ 21 to $ 23 per square foot ( $ 226 to $ 247 per square meter ) , plus electricity . 
 The building was offered for sale in 2007 , with an expected price of $ 45 to $ 60 million . A tentative deal was reached at a price of $ 48 million in 2008 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Together , the two parts of the building have a frontage of 420 feet ( 130 m ) on Dearborn Street with a depth of 70 feet ( 21 m ) . The original northern half presents a plain , unbroken vertical mass of purple @-@ brown brick , which is contoured to create a gentle curve at the base of the building and an outward flare to form an austere parapet at the top . The gentle swelling at base and cornice , observed historian Donald Hoffman , " came very close to the bell @-@ shaped column the Egyptians had derived from papyrus " . The corners of the building are gracefully chamfered as they rise to the top and the oriel windows are chamfered at their base . The floor divisions are not marked on the exterior ; the unbroken edifice is interrupted only by a series of cantilevered window bays , separated by rows of single thin <unk> windows set into the vertical face . The entryways are small , single @-@ height portals topped with plain stone lintels . 
 The south half preserves the lines and color of the older building , but is vertically divided by a stringcourse over the second story , emphasizing the building 's base , and a large ornamental copper cornice at the roof line . Massive blocks of red granite , 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) thick , frame the large , two @-@ story entrances . The projecting window bays of the original are repeated , but alternate in a pattern of two four @-@ window bays to one recessed strip of windows to create the undulating appearance of the facade that was an early trademark of Holabird & Roche . Carl Condit , historian of the Chicago school , has commented that : 
 The general appearance of the Monadnock almost belies its masonry construction . The projecting bays of the walls with their large glass areas give the structure a light and open appearance in spite of its great mass .... Stripped of every vestige of ornament , its rigorous geometry softened only by the slight inward curve of the wall at the top of the first story , the outward flare of the parapet , and the progressive rounding of the corners from bottom to top , subtly proportioned and scaled , the Monadnock is a severe yet powerfully expressive composition in horizontal and vertical lines . 
 The Monadnock rests on the floating foundation system invented by Root for the Montauk Building that revolutionized the way tall buildings were built on Chicago 's spongy soil . A 2 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) layer of concrete , reinforced with steel beams , forms a spread footing extending out 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) under the surrounding streets , spreading the weight of the building over a large area of earth . The building was designed to settle 8 inches ( 200 mm ) , but by 1905 had settled that much and " several inches more " , necessitating reconstruction of the first floor . By 1948 , it had settled 20 inches ( 51 cm ) , resulting in a step down from the street to the ground floor . The entire east wall is supported on caissons sunk to the hardpan , installed when the subway Blue Line was dug under Dearborn Street in 1940 . 
 The narrow building allows an external exposure to all of the 300 offices , which pass natural light via double hung outside windows through feather @-@ chipped glass transoms and hallway partitions into the single central corridor . <unk> bring sunlight into the open stairwells . The north half corridors are 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) wide and the south half corridors are 11 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 51 m ) . In the north half , there are two open stairs in the center at the one third points , with perforated risers , white marble treads , and decorative steel railings . There are two banks of four elevators on the west side of the corridor , one for passengers and the other for freight . In the south half , there is a single bank of elevators on the north half of the length . The southern bank was abandoned and <unk> over on each floor . There is a flight of stairs behind each of these shafts with marble treads , closed cast iron risers , and ornamental balusters . The basic office suite is 600 square feet ( 56 m2 ) , consisting of one outer office and two or more inner offices . Heavy internal walls at the quarter and halfway points , the arches of which manifest Root 's innovative wind bracing , mark the boundaries of the four original buildings . 
 = = Surrounding area = = 
 The Monadnock belongs to the Printing House Row District , a National Historic Landmark which includes the Manhattan Building , the Old Colony Building , and the Fisher Building , some of Chicago 's seminal early skyscrapers . The Manhattan Building , built by William LeBaron Jenney in 1890 , was the first building in Chicago with a complete steel skeleton or " Chicago " construction , an innovation Jenney had introduced in the Home Insurance Building in 1884 . The first 16 @-@ story building in America , at the time it was " regarded with awe and fear " . Jenney 's masterpiece , the Manhattan was considered a technical triumph in construction . The 17 @-@ story Old Colony , built by Holabird & Roche in 1894 , was considered one of the structural masterpieces of its time for its revolutionary portal form of bracing . It is the only survivor of a group of Chicago school buildings with rounded corner bays . The Fisher Building , built by Burnham in 1894 , was an engineering miracle — the first tall commercial building to be built almost entirely without bricks . Its steel frame and thin terracotta curtain wall allowed two @-@ thirds of the surface to be covered with glass . 
 The district overlaps geographically with the Printer 's Row neighborhood , originally the center of Chicago 's printing and publishing industry , but now mostly converted to residential housing . The area is also home to the largest public library in the world , the Harold Washington Library , named for Chicago 's first African @-@ American mayor , and the Loop campus of <unk> University , America 's largest Roman Catholic university . 
 Immediately to the west on Jackson Street is the Union League Club of Chicago , founded in 1879 as a civic organization for " upright , law @-@ abiding businessmen " . To the north are the three buildings comprising Ludwig Mies Van der Rohe 's minimalist Federal Plaza : the 1964 Everett McKinley Dirksen United States Courthouse , the only courthouse designed by Mies ; the 1973 United States Post Office Loop Station ; and the 1975 <unk> Federal Building , Mies 's last project , considered to mark the apex of his career . The triangular , 27 @-@ story Metropolitan Correctional Center , a detention center serving the Federal courts in the Dirksen Building and nearby Ralph H. Metcalfe Federal Building , is southwest of the Monadnock at Clark and LaSalle . 
 The south leg of the Chicago Transit Authority elevated rail loop runs next to the building on Van Buren Street ; the CTA 's Brown , Orange , Pink , and Purple Lines are served by the Library @-@ State / Van Buren stop one block to the east . The Jackson street subway station , serving the Blue Line , is on the Dearborn Street side of the building . 
 = = Critical reception and historical significance = = 
 Contemporary Chicago critics considered the building too radical a departure from Burnham & Root 's previous designs and too extreme in its stark simplicity and disregard for prevailing aesthetic norms , calling it an " engineer 's house " and a " thoroughly puritanical " example of commercial style . European critics were even less approving . In the words of French architect Jacques <unk> , " The Monadnock was no longer the result of an artist responding to particular needs with intelligence and drawing from them all of the possible consequences . It is the work of a laborer who , without the slightest study , super @-@ imposes 15 strictly identical stories to make a block then stops when he finds the block high enough . " 
 Other critics saw this lack of style as " natural " and what made the Monadnock truly modern . New York critic Barr <unk> wrote in 1892 that " There are no attempts at facades ... no ornamental appendages , nothing but a succession of windows , frankly stating that the structure is an office building , devoted to business , needing and using every available surface . " Other critics praised the truthfulness of the building to the ideals of business , which , while " not necessarily the highest to which we might aspire to in art ... are the only ideals the business building ought to express " . Montgomery Schuyler , one of the Monadnock 's most enthusiastic defenders , argued that the Monadnock 's lack of ornament was not a lack of art , but rather " radiated the gravity of modern business life " . 
 The Monadnock was widely praised by early twentieth @-@ century German architects , including Mies , who on his arrival in Chicago in 1938 declared that " The Monadnock block is of such vigor and force that I am at once proud and happy to make my home here . " These European architects found the building 's attention to purpose and functional expression inspiring . Bauhaus architect Ludwig <unk> wrote that " The false solution — unfortunately too common — of applying meaningless and misplaced adornment is here instinctively avoided . An innate feeling for proportion gives this great building inner consistency and logical purity . " 
 Modern critics have praised the Monadnock as one of the most important exemplars of the Chicago school , along with Louis Sullivan 's Carson , Pirie , Scott and Company Building . It has been called " a triumph of unified design " comparable to Henry Hobson Richardson 's Marshall Field 's Wholesale Store , and " one of the most exciting aesthetic experiences our commercial architecture has ever produced " . 
 The building was one of the first five selected by the Chicago Commission on Architectural Landmarks in 1958 , " in recognition of its original design and its historical interest as the highest wall @-@ bearing structure in Chicago " . The commission went on to note that the " restrained use of brick , soaring massive walls , omission of ornamental forms , unite in a building simple yet majestic . " In 1973 , the Chicago City Council voted unanimously to designate the Monadnock a Chicago Landmark , stating that " The two halves of this building provide a unique perspective for examining the history and development of modern architecture .... Together , they mark the end of one building tradition and the beginning of another . " Critics of the Monadnock 's landmark status objected that it would prevent the necessary demolition of the building , which was " an excellent example of a building that is ... no longer fulfilling the functions it was designed to fulfill " and " a wasting asset " that underperformed the market and was far less valuable than the land on which it stood would be . 
 The National Register of Historic Places , to which the Monadnock was added in 1970 , noted that " the sheer , unadorned walls of this building forming a powerful mass became , prophetically , a forerunner of the ' slab skyscraper ' — a style not popular until the late 1920s " and that " the two sections ... make , as an ensemble , one of the strongest , yet refined architectural statements in the development of twentieth century architecture . " Its nomination as a National Historic Landmark in 1976 , as part of the South Dearborn Street – Printing House Row Historic District , included the comment that it was " one of the most classical statements ever made in the skyscraper idiom . " 
 = Daniel Lambert = 
 Daniel Lambert ( 13 March 1770 – 21 June 1809 ) was a gaol keeper and animal breeder from Leicester , England , famous for his unusually large size . After serving four years as an apprentice at an engraving and die casting works in Birmingham , he returned to Leicester around 1788 and succeeded his father as keeper of Leicester 's gaol . He was a keen sportsman and extremely strong ; on one occasion he fought a bear in the streets of Leicester . He was an expert in sporting animals , widely respected for his expertise with dogs , horses and fighting cocks . 
 At the time of Lambert 's return to Leicester , his weight began to increase steadily , even though he was athletically active and , by his own account , abstained from drinking alcohol and did not eat unusual amounts of food . In 1805 , Lambert 's gaol closed . By this time , he weighed 50 stone ( 700 lb ; 320 kg ) , and had become the heaviest authenticated person up to that point in recorded history . Unemployable and sensitive about his bulk , Lambert became a recluse . 
 In 1806 , poverty forced Lambert to put himself on exhibition to raise money . In April 1806 , he took up residence in London , charging spectators to enter his apartments to meet him . Visitors were impressed by his intelligence and personality , and visiting him became highly fashionable . After some months on public display , Lambert grew tired of exhibiting himself , and in September 1806 , he returned , wealthy , to Leicester , where he bred sporting dogs and regularly attended sporting events . Between 1806 and 1809 , he made a further series of short fundraising tours . 
 In June 1809 , he died suddenly in Stamford . At the time of his death , he weighed 52 stone 11 pounds ( 739 lb ; 335 kg ) , and his coffin required 112 square feet ( 10 @.@ 4 square metres ) of wood . Despite the coffin being built with wheels to allow easy transport , and a sloping approach being dug to the grave , it took 20 men almost half an hour to drag his casket into the trench , in a newly opened burial ground to the rear of St Martin 's Church . While others have since overtaken Daniel Lambert 's record as the heaviest person in history , he remains a popular character in Leicester , and in 2009 was described by the Leicester Mercury as " one of the city 's most cherished icons " . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Daniel Lambert was born at his parents ' house in Blue Boar Lane , Leicester , on 13 March 1770 . His father , also named Daniel Lambert , had been the huntsman to Harry Grey , 4th Earl of Stamford , and at the time of his son 's birth was the keeper of Leicester 's gaol . The eldest of four children , Daniel Lambert had two sisters , and a brother who died young . 
 At the age of eight he was a keen swimmer , and for much of his life he taught local children to swim . Lambert 's paternal uncle — like his father — also worked with animals , but as a professional gamekeeper ; his maternal grandfather was a breeder of champion fighting cocks . Lambert grew up with a strong interest in field sports , and was particularly fond of otter hunting , fishing , shooting and horse racing . From his early teens , Lambert was a keen sportsman and by his late teens he was considered an expert in the breeding of hunting dogs . 
 In 1784 , he was apprenticed to Messrs Taylor & Co , an engraving and die casting works in Birmingham owned by a Mr Benjamin Patrick . The engraved buckles and buttons in which Patrick 's factory specialised became unfashionable , however , and the business went into decline . In 1788 , Lambert returned to Leicester , to serve as his father 's assistant at the gaol ( some sources date Lambert 's return to Leicester to 1791 , following the destruction of the building housing Messrs Taylor & Co in the Priestley Riots of July 1791 ) . His father retired soon afterwards and Lambert succeeded him as gaol keeper . The younger Daniel Lambert was a much @-@ respected gaoler ; he befriended many of the prisoners , and made every effort to help them when they went to trial . 
 = = = Weight = = = 
 Although by his own account Lambert did not eat unusually large amounts of food , at about the time of his return to Leicester his weight began to increase steadily , and by 1793 , he weighed 32 stone ( 450 lb ; 200 kg ) . Concerned for his fitness , in his spare time he devoted himself to exercise , building his strength to the point where he was able to easily carry five long hundredweight ( 560 lb ; 250 kg ) . On one occasion , while he was watching a dancing bear on display in Blue Boar Lane , his dog slipped loose and bit it . The bear knocked the dog to the ground , and Lambert asked its keeper to restrain it so he could retrieve his wounded animal ; however , the keeper removed the bear 's muzzle so it could attack the dog . Lambert reportedly struck the bear with a pole and with his left hand , punched its head , knocking it to the ground to allow the dog to escape . 
 Despite his increasingly large girth , Lambert remained fit and active , once walking seven miles ( 11 km ) from Woolwich to the City of London " with much less apparent fatigue than several middle @-@ sized men who were of the party " . Although not particularly agile , he was not significantly restricted by his bulk , and was able to stand on one leg and kick the other to a height of 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) . He continued to teach swimming in Leicester , and was able to stay afloat with two grown men sitting on his back . He disliked changing his clothes , and each morning habitually wore the clothes he had worn the day before , regardless of whether they were still wet ; by Lambert 's own account he suffered no colds or other ill effects from this behaviour . 
 By 1801 , Lambert 's weight had increased to about 40 stone ( 560 lb ; 250 kg ) , and , as his bulk meant neither he nor his horse were able to keep up with the hunt , he was forced to give up hunting . He continued to maintain an interest in field sports , keeping a pack of 30 terriers . By this time , although he retained his solid reputation as a gaoler , serious concerns were being raised about his fitness for the post . Traditional gaols were falling out of favour and being replaced with forced labour institutions , and in 1805 , the old Bridewell gaol was closed . Lambert was left without a job , but was granted an annuity of £ 50 ( about £ 3 @,@ 700 as of 2016 ) a year by the Leicester magistrates , in recognition of his excellent service as gaol keeper . 
 = = = Unemployment = = = 
 Lambert 's girth was then enormous ; six men of normal size could fit together inside his waistcoat , and each of his stockings was the size of a sack . His £ 50 annuity did not adequately cover his living costs , and his size prevented him from working . He became a virtual recluse . Stories of his bulk had by then begun to spread , and travellers visiting Leicester would use various pretexts to visit his home . One such visitor asked Lambert 's servant to allow him entry as he wished to ask Lambert 's advice about fighting cocks ; Lambert leaned out of the window and told the servant to " tell the gentleman that I am a shy cock " . On another occasion , he admitted into his house a Nottingham man who sought his advice about a mare 's pedigree ; on realising the man was visiting only to look at him , Lambert told him that the horse in question was " by <unk> out of Curiosity " . 
 Sensitive about his weight , Daniel Lambert refused to allow himself to be weighed , but sometime around 1805 , some friends persuaded him to come with them to a cock fight in Loughborough . Once he had squeezed his way into their carriage , the rest of the party drove the carriage onto a large scale and jumped out . After deducting the weight of the ( previously weighed ) empty carriage , they calculated that Lambert 's weight was now 50 stone ( 700 lb ; 320 kg ) , and that he had thus overtaken Edward Bright , the 616 @-@ pound ( 279 kg ) " Fat Man of Maldon " , as the heaviest authenticated person in recorded history . 
 = = = London = = = 
 Despite his shyness , Lambert badly needed to earn money , and saw no alternative to putting himself on display , and charging his spectators . On 4 April 1806 , he boarded a specially built carriage and travelled from Leicester to his new home at 53 Piccadilly , then near the western edge of London . For five hours each day , he welcomed visitors into his home , charging each a shilling ( about £ 3 @.@ 7 as of 2016 ) . 
 Lambert shared his interests and knowledge of sports , dogs and animal husbandry with London 's middle and upper classes , and it soon became highly fashionable to visit him , or become his friend . Many called repeatedly ; one banker made 20 visits , paying the admission fee on each occasion . During this period of English history no real stigma was attached to obesity , and Lambert was generally considered a wonder to be marvelled at , rather than a freak to be <unk> or sneered at . His business venture was immediately successful , drawing around 400 paying visitors per day . His home was described as having the air of a fashionable resort , rather than that of an exhibition , and he was pleased to find that his customers generally treated him with courtesy , and not simply as a spectacle . He insisted on maintaining amongst his visitors an atmosphere of civility and all men entering his rooms were obliged to remove their hats . One visitor refused to remove his " even if the King were present " but Lambert replied that " Then by G — — , Sir , you must instantly quit this room , as I do not consider it a mark of respect due to myself , but to the ladies and gentlemen who honor me with their company . " 
 Lambert 's popularity inspired an imitator in " Master Wybrants , Mr. Lambert in miniature " , exhibited a short distance away in Sackville Street . A handbill described Wybrants as " Master Wybrants the Modern Hercules , who at the age of 4 Months weighed 39 pounds , measured 2 feet round the Body 15 Inches round the thigh and 8 Inches round the Arm , to be seen at the corner of Sackville Street Piccadilly " . 
 People would travel long distances to see him ( on one occasion , a party of 14 travelled to London from Guernsey ) , and many would spend hours speaking with him on animal breeding . A life @-@ sized waxwork of Lambert was displayed in London , where it became extremely popular . Daniel Lambert soon became a popular subject with cartoonists , who often depicted him as John Bull . He mixed well with the upper classes , and on one occasion met King George III . The King 's and Lambert 's reactions to this meeting are not recorded . 
 = = = Medical examination = = = 
 Lambert soon came to the attention of the medical profession , and shortly after his arrival in London , the Medical and Physical Journal published an article about him . They confirmed that he weighed 50 stone ( 700 lb ; 320 kg ) , and measured his height as 5 feet 11 inches ( 1 @.@ 80 m ) . A thorough medical examination found that his bodily functions worked correctly , and that he breathed freely . Lambert was described as active and mentally alert , well @-@ read , and with an excellent memory . He was fond of singing , and had a normal speaking voice which showed no signs of pressure on the lungs . Doctors found <unk> of his feet , legs and thighs , and accumulation of fat within the abdomen , but other than scaly and thickened skin on his legs caused by previous attacks of erysipelas , he had no health problems . Lambert told the doctors that he ate normal quantities of ordinary food . He claimed that since about 1795 he had drunk nothing but water , and that even while young , and a regular party @-@ goer , he did not join his fellow revellers in drinking . Lambert estimated that he was able to walk about a quarter of a mile ( 400 m ) without difficulty . He slept regularly for no more than eight hours per night , always with his window open , and was never heard to snore ; on waking he was always fully alert within five minutes , and he never napped during the day . 
 = = = = Possible causes = = = = 
 It is impossible to be certain about what caused Daniel Lambert 's extreme weight , but it is considered unlikely to have been caused by an endocrine ( glandular ) or genetic disorder . Other than his weight gain , he showed no symptoms of a thyroid disorder , and none of his many portraits show the moon face of a patient with Cushing 's syndrome . Patients with Bardet – <unk> syndrome and Prader – Willi syndrome , genetic syndromes which can lead to obesity in patients , also suffer from learning disabilities and muscular weakness , but all those who knew Lambert agreed that he was highly intelligent , was extremely strong physically , and , except for erysipelas and venous insufficiency ( varicose veins ) in his legs , did not suffer from any health problems . One contemporary commentator remarked that " Mr. Lambert scarcely knows what it is to be ailing or indisposed " . Lambert 's only recorded psychological problem was an occasional " depression of the spirits " , during his time in London . Although he had an aunt and uncle who were overweight , his parents and surviving siblings remained of normal build throughout their lives . 
 Consequently , it is likely that Lambert 's weight gain was caused not by a physical disorder but by a combination of overeating and a lack of exercise . Although heavily built in his teens , he began to gain weight only when he took up the relatively sedentary job of prison keeper . A biography of Lambert published during his lifetime recounted that " it was within a year of this appointment that his bulk received the greatest and most rapid <unk> " . Although he claimed to eat little , and to abstain from alcohol , it is likely that a man with his lifestyle and position in society would have eaten large amounts of meat , and drunk beer at social events . 
 = = = Józef Boruwłaski = = = 
 After some months in London , Lambert was visited by Józef Boruwłaski , a 3 @-@ foot @-@ 3 @-@ inch ( 99 cm ) dwarf then in his seventies . Born in 1739 to a poor family in rural <unk> , Boruwłaski was generally considered to be the last of Europe 's court dwarfs . He was introduced to the Empress Maria Theresa in 1754 , and after a short time residing with deposed Polish king Stanisław Leszczyński , he exhibited himself around Europe , thus becoming a wealthy man . At age 60 , he retired to Durham , where he became such a popular figure that the City of Durham paid him to live there and he became one of its most prominent citizens . Boruwłaski had a superb memory , and recalled that Lambert , while still employed by Patrick 's die casting works and before he grew fat , had paid to see him in Birmingham . Boruwłaski remarked " I have seen this face twenty years before at Birmingham , but certainly it be another body " . He had been told that Lambert 's bulk was a hoax , and he therefore felt his leg to prove to himself that it was not . The two men compared their respective outfits , and calculated that one of Lambert 's sleeves would provide enough cloth to make an entire coat for Boruwłaski . Lambert enquired after Boruwłaski 's wife , <unk> <unk> , whereupon the latter replied " No , she is dead , and I am not very sorry , for when I affront her , she put me on the mantle @-@ shelf for punishment . " 
 The meeting of Lambert and Boruwłaski , the largest and smallest men in the country , was the subject of enormous public interest ; one newspaper reported that " It was Sir John Falstaff and Tom Thumb , which must have afforded a double treat to the curious " . Boruwłaski lived to see his 98th year , despite the prediction of the money @-@ lender who sold him his annuity that his small stature would make him prone to illness . 
 = = = Disillusionment = = = 
 Although generally respected by London society , the longer Lambert remained there , the more irritable he became . Shy and self @-@ conscious , he was annoyed at repeatedly being asked about the size of his clothes . In answer to one request , to a woman who enquired as to the cost of his coat , he replied " I cannot pretend to charge my memory with the price , but I can put you into a method of obtaining the information you want . If you think proper to make me a present of a new coat , you will then know exactly what it costs " . Another interested spectator claimed that since his entrance fee was paying for Lambert 's clothing , he had the right to know about it ; Lambert replied " Sir , if I knew what part of my next coat your shilling would pay for , I can assure you I would cut out the piece " . Lambert calculated in 1806 that a full suit of clothes cost him £ 20 , about £ 1 @,@ 500 as of 2016 . 
 = = = Return to Leicester = = = 
 Lambert had the acumen to refuse the management offers of various impresarios and agents , and by September 1806 , he had returned to Leicester as a wealthy man . He returned to his favourite pastimes , breeding sporting dogs and fighting cocks . A terrier bitch , for which he was offered 100 guineas ( about £ 7 @,@ 700 as of 2016 ) , was said to be the finest in England . He refused to sell the dog , which became his lifetime companion . He began again to attend sporting events , as a report on the Leicester Races of September 1806 noted that " Among the distinguished characters upon the turf we were glad to see our old friend , Mr. Daniel Lambert , in apparent high health and spirits " . Although too heavy to follow hunts on horseback , he used a portion of the money earned in London to build up a pack of greyhounds , watching from his carriage as they coursed hares in the Leicestershire countryside . 
 In December 1806 , Lambert went on a brief fundraising tour , and exhibited himself in Birmingham and Coventry . Early the next year he returned to London , and stayed in the fashionable Leicester Square . There he fell ill ; his physician Dr Heaviside felt that his illness might have been caused by the polluted London air , and Lambert returned to Leicester . He recovered , and later in 1807 , made a series of tours of England . 
 In summer 1808 , Lambert briefly returned to the capital , where he sold a pair of spaniels for 75 guineas ( about £ 5 @,@ 500 as of 2016 ) at Tattersalls . Later that year , he exhibited himself in York . In June 1809 , he set off on another tour of East Anglia , to conclude in Stamford during the Stamford Races . One account suggests that this tour was intended to be his last , as he was then sufficiently wealthy to retire . While on the tour , Lambert was weighed in Ipswich ; his weight was 52 stone 11 pounds ( 739 lb ; 335 kg ) . No longer able to use stairs , he took lodgings on the ground floor of the Waggon & Horses inn at 47 Stamford High Street on 20 June . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Following his arrival at Stamford , Lambert sent a message to the Stamford Mercury , ordering advertisements and handbills . Stating that " as the Mountain could not wait upon Mahomet , Mahomet would go to the mountain " , he asked the printer to visit him at the Waggon & Horses , to discuss his printing requirements . That evening , Lambert was in bed and admitted to feeling tired , but nonetheless he was able to discuss his requirements with the printer , and was anxious that the handbills be delivered on time . 
 On the morning of 21 June , Lambert woke at his usual time and appeared in good health . As he began to shave , he complained of breathing difficulties . Ten minutes later , he collapsed and died . 
 There was no autopsy , and the cause of Lambert 's death is unknown . While many sources say that he died of a fatty degeneration of the heart or of stress on his heart caused by his bulk , his behaviour in the period leading to his death does not match that of someone suffering from cardiac insufficiency ; witnesses agree that on the morning of his death he appeared well , before he became short of breath and collapsed . Bondeson ( 2006 ) speculates that the most consistent explanation of his death , given his symptoms and medical history , is that he had a sudden pulmonary embolism . 
 = = Burial = = 
 Lambert 's corpse rapidly began to <unk> . There was no question of his body being returned to Leicester , and so on 22 June , it was placed inside an elm coffin , 6 feet 4 inches long , 4 feet 4 inches wide and 2 feet 4 inches deep ( 193 cm × 132 cm × 71 cm ) , built on wheels to allow it to be moved . The coffin was so large that to wheel it out of the inn and to the newly opened burial ground at the rear of St Martin 's Church , the window and wall of his apartment were demolished . A suitably sized grave had been dug , with a sloping approach to avoid the need to lower the coffin from above , but on 23 June , it nonetheless took almost half an hour for twenty men to pull Lambert 's enormous coffin into the grave . 
 Lambert 's friends paid for a large gravestone , inscribed : 
 In Remembrance of that Prodigy in Nature . 
 <unk> <unk> . 
 a Native of Leicester : 
 who was possessed of an exalted and convivial Mind 
 and in personal Greatness had no <unk> measured three Feet one Inch round the <unk> Feet four Inches round the <unk> <unk> two Stone eleven Pounds ! 
 He departed this Life on the 21st of June <unk> 39 <unk> a Testimony of Respect this Stone is erected by his Friends in Leicester 
 = = After death = = 
 In late 1809 , a Mr J. <unk> released The life of that wonderful and extraordinary heavy man , the late Danl . Lambert , from his birth to the moment of his dissolution , with an account of men noted for their <unk> , and other interesting matter , the first full biography of Lambert to be released after his death . Lambert 's position as the heaviest person in recorded history was soon overtaken by the American Mills Darden ( 1799 – 1857 ) , but Lambert had by now become a cult figure , and virtually every item connected with him was preserved for posterity . His clothes and possessions were sold at auction to collectors , and many of them are preserved in museums today . 
 Across England , many public houses and inns were renamed after Daniel Lambert , particularly in Leicester and Stamford . The Daniel Lambert public house at 12 Ludgate Hill , near the entrance to St Paul 's Cathedral in London , was well known , and had a large portrait of Daniel Lambert and Lambert 's walking stick on display in the lobby . James Dixon , owner of the Ram Jam Inn in Stamford , bought the suit of clothes Lambert had been wearing when he died and put it on display , renaming the inn the Daniel Lambert . 
 The term " Daniel Lambert " entered common use in English speech and writing , to refer to any fat man . His name continued in this use long after the details of his life had been largely forgotten ; in 1852 , Charles Dickens remarked that " Lambert 's name is known better than his history " . Dickens 's Nicholas Nickleby compares the obese George IV to Lambert , and William Makepeace Thackeray used the term in Vanity Fair to refer to the obese Joseph Sedley , and in The Luck of Barry Lyndon to refer to the fat servant Tim . As time progressed , " Daniel Lambert " came to mean anything exceptionally large ; Herbert Spencer 's The Study of Sociology used the phrase " a Daniel Lambert of learning " , while Thomas Carlyle referred sarcastically to Oliver Cromwell as " this big swollen Gambler and gluttonous hapless ' spiritual Daniel Lambert ' " . In 1874 , The Times , in reviewing the newly translated French comedy La <unk> by Mario <unk> in which a character is named " Daniel Lambert " , noted that the name is " always associated in the English mind with the notion of obesity " , and in 1907 , almost 100 years after Lambert 's death , the Château de Chambord was referred to as " the Daniel Lambert among <unk> " . Nellie Lambert <unk> , at the time the heaviest woman in Britain , claimed in 1910 to be Daniel Lambert 's great @-@ granddaughter , but her claim is likely to be untrue ; Lambert was unmarried and is unlikely to have had any children . 
 In 1838 , the English Annual published a series of poems , purportedly written by Lambert and found amongst his papers at the Waggon and Horses after his death . No source published during Lambert 's lifetime mentions his having any interest in poetry or in any reading matter other than periodicals on field sports , and it is unclear why his papers should have been with him in Stamford at his death , rather than at his home in Leicester . The discoverer of the poems is credited only as " Omega " . It is likely that the poems are a hoax . 
 = = = P. T. Barnum and General Tom Thumb = = = 
 P. T. Barnum and the 25 @-@ inch ( 64 cm ) tall General Tom Thumb ( Charles Sherwood Stratton ) visited Stamford in 1846 and donated one of Thumb 's costumes to Dixon to be displayed alongside Lambert 's . General Tom Thumb visited Stamford again in 1859 and was tied up inside one of Lambert 's stockings . In 1866 , General Tom Thumb , with his equally short wife Lavinia Warren ( Mercy Lavinia Warren Bump ) , her sister Minnie Warren ( Huldah Pierce Warren Bump ) and Barnum 's other celebrated dwarf Commodore Nutt ( George Washington Morrison Nutt ) visited Stamford . All four were able to pass through the knee of Lambert 's breeches together . In 1866 , Lambert 's and Tom Thumb 's clothes were sold to the Old London Tavern in Stamford ; they were later in the possession of Stamford Museum . ( In June 2010 , it was announced that the Stamford Museum would close in June 2011 , with its collection transferred to Stamford Library . ) 
 The 1806 waxwork of Lambert was exported to the United States and was on show in New Haven , Connecticut , by 1813 . By 1828 , the effigy was displayed in the Boston Vauxhall Gardens dressed in a complete set of Lambert 's clothes . It was later bought by P.T. Barnum and displayed at Barnum 's American Museum in New York , but the museum was destroyed by fire in 1865 and , although workmen endeavoured to save the waxwork , it melted in the heat and was destroyed . 
 = = = In popular memory = = = 
 Lambert is still a popular character in Leicester , described in 2009 by the Leicester Mercury as " one of the city 's most cherished icons " ; several local public houses and businesses are named after him . Sue Townsend 's play The Ghost of Daniel Lambert , in which Lambert 's ghost watches disapprovingly over the 1960s demolition and redevelopment of Leicester 's historic town centre , premiered at Leicester 's Haymarket Theatre in 1981 . Lambert is also a popular figure in Stamford , and local football team Stamford A.F.C. are nicknamed " The Daniels " , after him . 
 A set of Lambert 's clothes , together with his armchair , walking stick , riding crop and prayer book , are on permanent display at the Newarke Houses Museum in Leicester . Stamford Museum exhibited a tailor 's dummy , dressed with Daniel Lambert 's clothes as if they are being made up for him , plus his hat and a portrait . The Daniel Lambert pub in Ludgate Hill no longer exists , and the memorabilia formerly displayed there are now on permanent display at the George Hotel in Stamford . The Daniel Lambert pub in Stamford has also closed . 
 In 2009 , on the 200th anniversary of his death , Leicester celebrated Daniel Lambert Day , and over 800 people attended an event in his name at Newarke Houses Museum . 
 = Lake Ontario Ordnance Works = 
 The former Lake Ontario Ordnance Works ( LOOW ) was a 7 @,@ 500 @-@ acre ( 3 @,@ 000 ha ) military installation located in Niagara County , New York , United States , approximately 12 @.@ 5 mi ( 20 @.@ 1 km ) north of Niagara Falls . 
 The property was purchased by the War Department during World War II as a location for the production of TNT . Most of the LOOW property was sold after the war . 
 The United States Department of Energy currently owns 191 acres ( 77 ha ) of the original LOOW property , on which the Niagara Falls Storage Site ( <unk> ) is located . The <unk> is used for the storage of radioactive materials produced during the development of America 's first atom bombs . 
 Approximately 93 percent of the original LOOW site — currently occupied by homes , a school , a campground , the Basilica of the National Shrine of Our Lady of Fatima , farms , local and federal government operations , and a toxic waste facility — meets the criteria of a Formerly Used Defense Site , and one portion of the property is listed as a Superfund cleanup site . 
 = = History = = 
 The War Department purchased 7 @,@ 500 @-@ acre ( 3 @,@ 000 ha ) of farmland east of Youngstown , New York , in 1941 as a location to manufacture TNT . The location was selected because of its proximity to chemical manufacturing plants , to Fort Niagara , to the New York Central Railroad , and to water and electrical power . 
 The LOOW headquarters were at first located in a vegetable canning factory at the site . 
 The 149 private landowners living there — mostly farmers and orchard growers — were given 30 days to move out , and most of their 125 farmhouses and 538 barns were torn down or burned . Some homes located on the periphery of the LOOW boundary were kept . 
 Construction of the TNT plant began in January 1941 , and employed over 7 @,@ 500 workers . The production and storage areas occupied approximately 2 @,@ 500 acres ( 1 @,@ 000 ha ) near the center of property , and the remaining 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 000 ha ) was undeveloped and used as a " buffer zone " . A hospital , dormitories , fire department , power plant , USO hall , water supply system , and waste treatment facility were located at the LOOW , and TNT was manufactured for about 9 months , until the plant was decommissioned in 1943 . 
 Uranium used to produce the first atom bombs from 1942 to 1948 was processed by Linde Air Products in nearby Tonawanda , and in 1944 , the Manhattan Engineer District began using the LOOW site for the storage and transshipment of radioactive residues and wastes created through the processing of uranium ore at Linde . 
 The War Assets Administration had by 1948 sold or transferred 6 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 400 ha ) of the original property , and the remaining 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 610 ha ) were given to the newly formed Atomic Energy Commission . 
 More than 1 @,@ 300 acres ( 530 ha ) were sold or transferred between 1955 – 75 , although the area on which the Niagara Falls Storage Site is located remained in the possession of the U.S. government . 
 = = Buildings and operations = = 
 = = = Building 401 = = = 
 Beginning in 1943 , Building 401 was used as the powerhouse for the production of TNT , though operations lasted less than a year . Building 401 was renovated , and from 1953 – 59 and 1965 – 71 , it was used as a Boron @-@ 10 isotope separation plant . The interior of Building 401 was gutted in 1971 , and its hardware and instrumentation were disposed of . Building 401 was demolished in 2010 . 
 = = = Concrete silo = = = 
 A 166 ft ( 51 m ) concrete silo was erected within the east boundary of the LOOW , immediately next to Porter Center Road , which was publicly accessible . A fence with signs warning of " radioactive material " ran next to the road . In 1952 , drums containing 3 @,@ 869 short tons ( 3 @,@ 510 @,@ 000 kg ) of highly @-@ radioactive K @-@ 65 residues were loaded into the silo . The concrete silo was dismantled sometime after 1979 . 
 = = = Interim waste containment structure = = = 
 Construction of the interim waste containment structure was completed in 1991 , and is located entirely within the Niagara Falls Storage Site . The 10 @-@ acre ( 4 @.@ 0 ha ) mound is used for the storage of radioactive waste and residues , and the grass @-@ covered " interim cap " is designed to retard both rainwater infiltration and radon emission . 
 All of the contaminated and radioactive materials stored at the former LOOW site — including thorium , uranium , and the world ’ s largest concentration of radium @-@ 226 — were placed into the structure . 
 = = = Rochester Burial Site = = = 
 In 1951 , laboratory waste and animals that had been injected with plutonium during experiments at the University of Rochester were shipped to the LOOW site for burial . 
 = = = US Army operations = = = 
 The United States Army was given an 860 @-@ acre ( 350 ha ) parcel of land from the original LOOW property , located on the northeast boundary . Beginning in 1957 it housed 36 Nike surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles intended to protect the nearby Niagara Hydroelectric Power Project . The property is currently licensed to the New York Army National Guard , and is used as a weekend training site . 
 = = = US Air Force operations = = = 
 A 98 @-@ acre ( 40 ha ) parcel of land from the original LOOW property was given to the United States Air Force , on which they located an experimental rocket fuel plant called the Youngstown Test Annex Site . 
 = = = Private waste treatment facilities = = = 
 Hooker Chemical and Plastics Corporation ( now Occidental Petroleum ) purchased a large portion of the original LOOW property from a private landowner in 1975 to use as a dump site . 
 Waste Management , Inc currently owns and operates a 713 @-@ acre ( 289 ha ) treatment , storage , disposal , and recovery facility near the center of the former LOOW property . It is the only hazardous waste landfill remaining in the Northeastern United States , and was the location where the anthrax @-@ contaminated desk of news @-@ anchor Tom Brokaw was disposed of in 2001 . 
 Modern Disposal Services operates a landfill on the former LOOW property . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 Approximately 380 private residences and a mobile home park are located within the footprint of the former LOOW site . A school , several small farms , a 13 @-@ acre ( 5 @.@ 3 ha ) campground , and the Basilica of the National Shrine of Our Lady of Fatima , which attracts thousands of visitors annually , are also located on the former LOOW site . 
 = = Safety concerns = = 
 In 1981 , the New York State Assembly Task Force on Toxic Substances wrote that the LOOW was " born in the crisis of war " , and that : 
 Federal mismanagement at the site was manifested by sloppy and deficient record @-@ keeping procedures , inadequate mapping of buried wastes , and technological primitivism with regard to waste storage and removal . Moreover , it is clear that the site should never have been chosen for the storage of radioactive materials in the first place . 
 The report added that radioactive waste had been stored " in rusting barrels stacked along the roadside " . 
 Author Ginger Strand wrote about the LOOW in her 2008 book Inventing Niagara : " the Army Corps engineers , currently charged with the cleanup , readily admit they don 't know everything that went on there " . 
 An extensive study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers concluded in 2014 that there was " no evidence of potential source areas or releases of contamination to groundwater , surface water , or soil associated with any of the ground disturbances evaluated " at the former LOOW site . 
 Currently , approximately 7 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 2 @,@ 800 ha ) or 93 percent of the original LOOW site meets the criteria of a Formerly Used Defense Site , making it eligible for environmental restoration funds available from the U.S Army . One portion of the property containing contaminated groundwater is listed as a Superfund cleanup site . 
 = Typhoon Pat ( 1985 ) = 
 Typhoon Pat , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Luming , was a powerful typhoon that struck Japan during the summer of 1985 . Pat is also one of three storms in the Western Pacific which interacted with each other . Originating from a monsoon trough towards the end of August , Pat first formed on August 24 several hundred miles east of the Philippines . It gradually intensified , and two days later , Pat was upgraded into a tropical storm . The cyclone initially moved east @-@ northeast while continuing to deepen . However , Pat leveled off in intensity on August 27 . After turning northwest , Pat attained typhoon intensity on August 28 . Pat accelerated towards the north , and reached its peak intensity of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) on August 30 . The next day , the storm crossed the southern Japanese islands and entered the Sea of Japan . Gradually weakening , Pat transitioned into an extratropical cyclone later on August 31 . Early the next day , the storm moved ashore along northeastern Japan . The system dissipated on September 2 after reentering the Pacific Ocean . A total of 23 perished due to Typhoon Pat and 12 others were rendered as missing . Additionally , 79 people were injured . Furthermore , 38 houses in Japan were demolished , 110 were damaged , and over 2 @,@ 000 were flooded . More than 160 @,@ 000 homes lost power . A total of 165 flights were cancelled . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Typhoon Pat originated from an active monsoon trough located east of the Philippines in the last two weeks of August . Forming around the time as Typhoon Odessa and Tropical Storm Ruby , an area of enhanced convection was first noted towards the end of August . At 0600 UTC on August 24 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) started watching the system . Fifteen hours later , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) followed suit . At this time , the system was located within a favorable environment . The JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) on the afternoon of August 25 . Early the next day , the JMA upgraded the disturbance into Tropical Storm Pat . Later on August 26 , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft reported winds of 70 km / h ( 45 mph ) and a pressure of 999 mbar ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) , but did not locate a surface circulation . That afternoon , the TCFA was re @-@ issued . Following additional Hurricane Hunter reports , which noted evidence of a surface circulation , the JTWC declared the system Tropical Storm Pat . 
 Initially poorly organized , Pat headed east @-@ northeast , south of a subtropical ridge . At 0600 UTC on August 27 , the JMA increased the intensity of the storm to 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . Meanwhile , the JTWC anticipated the storm to move east @-@ northeast and separate from the monsoon trough before turning west @-@ northwest under a weakening ridge . Instead , Pat drifted northeast , but remained situated within the monsoon trough . As such , the JTWC revised their forecast , and now expected the storm to move northwest due to the presence of an eastward moving trough situated over Mongolia . Meanwhile , the JMA increased the intensity of Pat to 105 km / h ( 65 mph ) early on August 28 . Several hours later , both the JTWC and the JMA upgraded Pat to a typhoon . According to the JMA , the storm leveled off intensity for about a day . By midday on August 29 , some tropical cyclone forecast models began to show Pat emerging into the Sea of Japan west of the ridge . However , this theory was not supported by the JTWC as they believed that the ridge was too narrow to be picked up a trough . That same day , the JTWC increased the intensity to 160 km / h ( 99 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 2 cyclone on the United States @-@ based Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale . The next day , the agency finally revised its forecast and predicted the storm to enter the sea . Around this time , the JTWC estimated that Pat attained peak intensity , with winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) . During the evening of August 30 , the JMA reported that Pat reached its peak intensity of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) and a pressure of 955 mbar ( 28 @.@ 2 inHg ) . By this time , the ridge was gone , though a trough was now located near South Korea . 
 Shortly after its peak , Pat moved ashore along the southern tip Kyushu on August 31 . Overland , Pat began to weaken , and early the next day , the JMA downgraded Pat to a severe tropical storm . Meanwhile , Pat began to interact with Odessa , as the systems were approximately 500 km ( 310 mi ) apart . As Odessa moved east @-@ northeast , Pat accelerated towards the north , and then emerged into the Sea of Japan later on August 31 . That evening , the JTWC downgraded Pat into a tropical storm . At 2100 UTC that day , the JTWC noted that Pat had transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . By this time , all the convection activity was restricted to the northeast quadrant of the system . Early on September 1 , Pat made landfall in Hokkaido along northeastern Japan . At that time , the JMA estimated winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . At midday , the JTWC stopped watching the system , although the JMA continued to do so until 1800 UTC on September 2 . 
 = = Preparations , impact and aftermath = = 
 While crossing Japan , a peak rainfall total of 374 mm ( 14 @.@ 7 in ) was recorded in <unk> , including 271 mm ( 10 @.@ 7 in ) in a day . A peak hourly storm total of 107 mm ( 4 @.@ 2 in ) was measured at <unk> on Nagasaki . Pat was responsible for strong winds , including a 69 km / h ( 43 mph ) wind speed in Yakushima . The island of Kyushu sustained the worst affects from the typhoon . Twenty @-@ three people were killed by the typhoon while 12 others were listed as missing . A 61 @-@ year @-@ old man who died when knocked over by a street sign in Izumi . A 35 @-@ year @-@ old woman was crushed to death in Kagoshima when her home was demolished . A total of 179 people were injured due to Pat , including 23 on Honshu and 156 on Kyushu . In Aomori , a tent fell on 400 people attending a sporting event , injuring 18 . In the nearby Yamagata prefecture , a signboard at a school ground fell due to strong winds , injuring four students . Nearby , in the Kumamoto prefecture , one man was struck and killed by a flying tin plate , another was swept out to sea , and a man died when a ladder fell on him . Elsewhere , twelve fisherman perished at sea , seven of whom were not confirmed dead until September 2 . 
 A total of 38 houses in Japan were destroyed , 110 were damaged , and more than 2 @,@ 000 were flooded . Landslides were observed at 56 locations . Power was lost to 160 @,@ 000 families . A total of 165 flights were cancelled , delaying 15 @,@ 000 passengers . A total of 160 trains were cancelled . Two bullet train lines experienced delays in Kyushu ; ferry and air service were also delayed there . Offshore , ten fishing boats sunk , including one Japanese cargo ship . An additional 12 ships were rendered as missing . Ninety @-@ five other boats took refuge in North Korea , though 59 left on September 2 to return to Japan . 
 = Maevia inclemens = 
 Maevia inclemens is a relatively common and colorful jumping spider of North America . In the males there are two forms , a very rare phenomenon in zoology . These use different courting displays , : 3 @-@ 4 and differ in appearance : the " tufted " morph has a black body and pedipalps ( " palps " ) , three black tufts across its " head " , and pale legs ; and the " gray " morph has black and white stripes all over its body and legs , orange palps , and no tufts . However , each form accounts for 50 % of the adult males , and they are equally successful in mating . A female of Maevia inclemens is 6 @.@ 5 to 8 @.@ 0 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 26 to 0 @.@ 31 in ) long , while males are 4 @.@ 75 to 6 @.@ 50 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 187 to 0 @.@ 256 in ) long . : 3 @-@ 4 
 Like all jumping spiders , M. inclemens has excellent vision . The main eyes , in the front @-@ and @-@ center position , are large , and are more acute than those of a cat and about 10 times as acute as a dragonfly 's . The remaining three pairs of eyes are along the sides of the head , and work as motion detectors . The eyes are used for hunting , for avoiding threats and for finding and wooing mates . Almost all jumping spiders are predators , mostly preying on insects , on other spiders , and on other arthropods . 
 M. inclemens is one of the 11 species in genus Maevia . The species was first called Attus inclemens , and other names have been used . The two male forms look and behave so differently that they were originally considered two distinct species . In 1955 Robert Barnes chose M. inclemens , : 1 and this has become the standard name . 
 The species is found in west southern Canada , and in the United States its distribution forms a crescent from the north mid @-@ west through New England and south to Florida . M. inclemens has been able to establish itself in man @-@ made structures such as outbuildings or fences . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Maevia inclemens is the type species for the genus Maevia ( C.L. Koch , 1850 ) , : 2 @-@ 3 which includes another 10 species in May 2011 . The species name is derived from Latin adjective <unk> " cruel , harsh " or " rough " . The species was first called Attus inclemens , and other names including Attus vittatus , Maevia <unk> , and Maevia vittata . : 2 @-@ 3 Also the two male forms look and behave so differently that they were originally considered two distinct species . In 1955 Robert Barnes chose M. inclemens , : 1 and this has become the standard name . 
 = = Description = = 
 Spiders are chelicerates , which differ from other arthropods in that the usual body segments are fused into only two tagmata , the cephalothorax and abdomen . Spiders ' abdomens bear appendages that have been modified into spinnerets that extrude silk from up to six types of silk glands within their abdomen . The cephalothorax and abdomen are joined by a small , cylindrical pedicel , which allows the abdomen to move while spinning silk . : 571 @-@ 574 While most jumping spiders do not build webs to catch prey , they use silk for other purposes , including molting and laying eggs . : 495 
 Jumping spiders have large forelegs and short , powerful back legs . Unlike most arthropods , spiders have no extensor muscles in their limbs and instead extend them by increasing their blood pressure . Jumping spiders can leap several times their own length by powerfully extending the third or fourth pairs of legs , : 578 reaching up to 200 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) with the forelimbs extended to grasp the prey . Spiders maintain balance when walking , so that legs 1 and 3 on one side and 2 and 4 on the other side are moving , while the other four legs are on the surface . To run faster , spiders increase their stride frequency . : 328 
 In spiders and other chelicerates , there is only one pair of appendages before the mouth , and in spiders these are modified into fangs that inject poison into the prey . Behind the mouth is a pair of pedipalps ( " palps " for short ) , and those of male spiders are quite large and are used for displaying and mating . 
 Spiders groom themselves regularly , and more often if wet or dirty . They moisten their fangs , draw the legs one at a time through the fangs , and " comb " the legs with the fangs and palps . The first and fourth pairs of legs are then used to groom other parts of the body , and the only place they appear not to reach is the dorsal surface of the carapace . : 53 
 The body of M. inclemens is only sparsely covered with hairs and scales . : 2 A female of Maevia inclemens is 6 @.@ 5 to 8 @.@ 0 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 26 to 0 @.@ 31 in ) long , : 3 @-@ 4 her carapace is light brown , her legs are pale and unmarked . The top of her abdomen is chalky : 3 @-@ 4 or rusty colored , and along each side is a black band , often thinly covered with orange scales . Sometimes there is series of chevrons ( V @-@ shaped markings ) along the middle of her abdomen . : 3 @-@ 4 She has a prominent white stripe below the foremost eyes . There are spines on the first and second pair of her legs , but her body never has tufts of hair . : 3 @-@ 4 Males are 4 @.@ 75 to 6 @.@ 50 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 187 to 0 @.@ 256 in ) long , and their carapaces are light to dark brown , with a black line around the edge . There usually is a pair of large lighter areas between the last pair of eyes halfway down the back of the carapace . The eyes are surrounded by black . : 3 @-@ 4 Males occur in two forms , a very rare phenomenon in zoology . The " tufted " morph has a totally black body , black pedipalps , white legs and three tufts of bristles on the front part of the cephalothorax . The " gray " male morph has a black and white striped body , a prominent white stripe on the foremost eyes , striped legs and bright orange pedipalps , and no tufts . : 161 @-@ 162 
 Jumping spiders have a distinctive rectangular carapace , : 51 and that of female Maevia inclemens average 2 @.@ 30 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 091 in ) wide , while the carapaces of males average 2 @.@ 10 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 083 in ) . : 1989 The carapace of M. inclemens is fairly high , between 60 % and 70 % of the width . : 1 
 = = Senses = = 
 Jumping spiders have eight eyes , the two large ones in the center @-@ and @-@ front position ( the anterior @-@ median eyes , also referred to as " principal eyes " : 51 ) providing acute vision and housed in tubes in the head . The other six are secondary eyes , positioned along the sides of the carapace and acting mainly as movement detectors . : 16 While other spiders can jump , salticids including M. inclemens are the only spiders with good vision , : 521 and their main eyes are more acute in daylight than a cat 's and 10 times more acute than a dragonfly 's . The main eyes focus accurately on an object at distances from approximately 2 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) to infinity , : 51 and in practise can see up to about 75 centimetres ( 30 in ) . : 53 In M. inclemens , the front row of secondary eyes is only slightly wider than the third , whose width is 75 % of the width of the carapace at that point . : 2 
 Like other arthropods , spiders have sensors , often modified setae ( bristles ) , for smell , taste , touch and vibration , protruding through their cuticle ( " skin " ) . : 532 @-@ 533 Unlike insects , spiders and other chelicerates do not have antennae . 
 = = Feeding = = 
 Almost all jumping spiders are predators , mostly preying on insects , on other spiders , and on other arthropods . The most common procedure is sighting the prey , stalking , fastening a silk safety line to the surface , using the two pairs of back legs to jump on the victim , and finally biting the prey . Most jumping spiders walk throughout the day , so that they maximize their chances of a catch . 
 = = Reproduction and lifecycle = = 
 Each morph accounts for 50 % of the adult males , and they make the same number of attempts to court females , but using a different courting display . Before looking for a mate , a male spider spins a small , flat web on a surface and ejaculates into it . He then loads the semen into syringe @-@ like receptacles in both palps , and then searches for a female . : 581 
 After sighting a female , the tufted morph pushes himself as high as possible with the last three pair of legs , and claps with the foremost pair , while at the same time waving the palps up and down , and swinging the abdomen from side to side , : 95 usually about 9 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) from the female . : 161 @-@ 162 In contrast , the gray morph crouches down and points the foremost two pairs of legs directly forward , crosses the tips of the legs creating a triangle @-@ like configuration , holds his orange @-@ colored palps beneath his forward eyes , and glides back and forth in stationary or receding semi @-@ circles in front of the female , : 95 at 3 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) away . : 161 @-@ 162 The movements of the two morphs are identical later in the sequence . : 95 , 98 
 When receptive , females respond similarly to both male types : approach and settle ; extend the foremost pair of legs or tap with them . : 99 Both male morphs typically end their initial display and start leg @-@ clapping and zig @-@ zag dancing . : 103 , 106 
 When tufted males clap , females look towards them and display a greater number of tap displays to them than to the gray morph . Females also respond to tufted morphs ' clapping more often by settling than for gray males . : 102 However , after the females look towards the males , gray males approach the female more often than the tufted male . : 102 Females often tip their abdomens from side to side . : 102 
 Finally the male mounts and copulates with the female . Afterward , the male generally dismounts and the two pair usually run away from each other . However , the male sometimes chases the female and tries to copulate again . : 103 , 106 
 In an experiment , 12 tufted ( 52 % ) and 14 gray males ( 54 % ) copulated with females after courtship . At the end of copulation , females tried to capture and eat the males , but in the same experiment only one tufted and one gray male were killed . A count of offspring showed no differences in numbers of spiderlings from the two morphs . However , gray males got females ' attention more quickly within 8 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) while tufted males were quicker between 8 and 30 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 and 11 @.@ 8 in ) from the females . The continuation of two male morphs may be an example of a mixed Evolutionarily Stable Strategy , in which both morphs are genetically determined by their fathers ' morphs , and both are equally successful in their different ways . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Maevia inclemens is found throughout the eastern and mid @-@ west United States and south @-@ west Canada , including : Massachusetts , Connecticut , New York state , New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Maryland , West Virginia , Virginia , North Carolina , Florida , Alabama , Louisiana , Texas , Kansas , Kentucky , Indiana , Illinois , Michigan , Wisconsin , : 4 Quebec and Manitoba . 
 A study reported in 1981 on one mature and three recently clear @-@ cut sites in the southern Appalachian Mountains near Highlands , North Carolina . All specimens of spiders that hunt were collected on plants or webs above ground . Clear @-@ cutting caused a marked decrease in the abundance of nine species and a marked increase in four species , while M. inclemens and six others showed no change . : 288 , 291 @-@ 292 
 A few jumping spider species , including M. inclemens , have been able to establish themselves in man @-@ made structures . Most often these spiders are found on outbuildings or structures such as fences , rather than in permanently inhabited houses . 
 = President of Belarus = 
 The office of President of Belarus ( Belarusian : <unk> Рэспублікі Беларусь , Russian : <unk> Республики Беларусь ) is the head of state of Belarus . The office was created in 1994 with the passing of the Constitution of Belarus by the Supreme Soviet . This replaced the office of Chairman of the Supreme Soviet as the head of state . The tasks of the president including executing foreign and domestic policy , defend the rights and general welfare of citizens and residents and to uphold the Constitution . The president is mandated by the Constitution to serve as a leader in the social affairs of the country and to act as its main representative abroad . The duties , responsibilities and other transitional clauses dealing with the presidency are listed in Chapter Three , Articles 79 through 89 , of the Constitution . 
 The term for the president is five years , but due to a 1996 referendum , the election that was supposed to occur in 1999 was pushed back to 2001 . Under the 1994 constitution , the president could only serve for two terms as president , but due to a change in the constitution , term limits were eliminated . During the course of the office , three elections were held in 1994 , 2001 , 2006 and 2010 . The last election was held on 11 October 2015 . Alexander Lukashenko has been the only person who has served as president since the elections in 1994 . 
 The Presidential office is located in the Republic Palace in Minsk , while the presidential residence is located in <unk> ( <unk> ) , Minsk District . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 The Republic of Belarus was formed in 1991 shortly after declaring itself independent of the Soviet Union . Under the government of the Byelorussian SSR , the de facto leader of the Soviet Republic was the first secretaries of the Communist Party of Byelorussia , the only legal party in Soviet Belarus . From independence until passage of the Constitution in 1994 , the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet was the head of state and the Prime Minister as the head of government . When the office of the presidency was created , the role of the prime minister was reduced to assisting the president and resulted in the dissolution of the Supreme Soviet , along with its Chairman , in 1996 . 
 In the first set of elections for the office of president , the Prime Minister of Belarus , <unk> <unk> , was defeated in a runoff vote by Alexander Lukashenko , resulting in Lukashenko becoming the first president . In elections of 2001 and 2006 , which were contested by international observers , Western powers and internal opposition parties due for failing to meet democratic and fair standards , the incumbent Lukashenko defeated the other candidates within the first ballot . As of 2014 , he is the only person to have served as President of Belarus . 
 = = Constitutional status = = 
 Article 79 of the Constitution of Belarus gives the status of head of state to the President of the Republic of Belarus . He is also considered the guardian of the Constitution and the rights and freedoms of those who claim Belarusian citizenship or residency . The President is the personification of unification of the Belarusian state when conducting foreign or internal affairs and shall be the main representative when dealing with other nations or international organizations . The President is also entrusted with the safety , prosperity and stability of the country and acts as an intermediary between the bodies of the national government . 
 = = Selection process = = 
 = = = Eligibility = = = 
 In order to be able to run for office , a candidate must be a Belarusian citizen by birth that is over thirty @-@ five years old . The candidate must also reside within the Republic for ten years and he or she must be able to cast a ballot legally . The provisions are set down in Article 80 of the Constitution . 
 = = = Election = = = 
 Elections for president occur every five years by a national vote . Candidates , as soon as they are deemed eligible under Article 80 of the Constitution , are tasked with collecting signatures from eligible voters . After 100 @,@ 000 signatures are collected and certified , the candidate is declared to be official by the Central Elections Committee . In the voting , the secret ballots are collected directly from eligible voters . During the first round of voting , if a candidate earns fifty percent plus one of the votes , they are declared the President @-@ elect . If no one has achieved that number during the first round , then a run @-@ off election will occur between two candidates who won the most votes . The person who wins the most votes in the run @-@ off is declared the President @-@ elect . 
 In the event the office is vacant , the election to replace the president must occur between thirty and seventy days after the vacancy occurred . During normal election cycles , the elections must occur before the last two months of the current president . In either situation , the government body that calls for elections is the House of Representatives . The next set of presidential elections will occur in 2015 . President Lukashenko , when addressing the press in February 2007 , stated his health will determine if he will run in 2011 or step down at that time . 
 = = Powers and duties = = 
 Articles 84 and 85 states the official political , social and national defense duties that are rested with the president Other than the enumerated powers , Number 30 allows the president to use other powers granted to him either from national law or from other sections of the Constitution . 
 Part of the prerogative of the president is the right to call national referendums , and to call regular and extraordinary elections to the House of Representatives , the Council of the Republic and local representative bodies . He can also dissolve the chambers of the Parliament , as the Constitution permits . It is his duty to appoint the Prime minister of the Republic of Belarus with the consent of the House of Representatives , and to decide the structure of the Government of the Republic of Belarus . The President signs bills , and has the right to return it , fully or in parts , with objections to the House of Representatives . He also appoints – and can dismiss – the deputy Prime ministers , the ministers and the other members of the Government , and he decides in cases of resignation of the Government , or any of its members . With the consent of the Council of the Republic , the President appoints the Chairperson of the Supreme Court , and can dismiss this Chairperson and other judges . The president is supposed to deliver annual messages to the Parliament , and has the right to participate in the sessions of Parliament and its bodies . In instances of strike , the president has the right , in instances specified in the law , to defer or suspend a strike for a period not exceeding three months . In international affairs , it is the President 's duty to conduct negotiations and sign international treaties , and to appoint and recall diplomatic representatives of the Republic . 
 Not only the president is the head of government , he is the social leader of Belarus . The president delivers messages to the citizens several times a year and can issue decrees to establish red letter days and national holidays . The president is the main authority for the granting of Belarusian citizen and can present state decorations to honored individuals . The president also has the ability to determine the status of asylum seekers and grant pardons to convicted citizens . 
 As the Supreme Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Belarusian Armed Forces , the President has the duty to protect the Belarusian territory from internal and external forces . The president can call for a state of emergency in the following cases : natural disasters , a catastrophe , or unrest involving violence or the threat of violence . Regardless if the declaration affects the entire country or sections of it , the Council of the Republic must be notified by the President and must seek their approval within three days of notification . The same rules applies if the President issues a state of martial law in the event of a possible military action against Belarus . The President has to form and head the Security Council of the Republic of Belarus , and can appoint and dismiss the State Secretary of the Security Council and the Supreme Command of the Armed Forces . 
 = = Oath of office = = 
 Before any person can assume the office officially , an oath must be sworn within two months of the election results being finalized . The text of the oath is as follows : 
 During the inauguration ceremony , members of both houses of the National Assembly , government ministers , officials and judges from the Constitutional , Supreme and Economic Court must be present . Upon reading of the oath , any powers held by a previous president will be transferred to the president @-@ elect . The text of the oath can be found in Article 83 of the Constitution . 
 = = Removal = = 
 Articles 87 through 89 of the Constitution deal with how the presidency can change hands in @-@ between election cycles . The President has the ability to resign from office at any time under Article 87 . The letter of resignation is sent to the House of Representatives and is accepted by them . The President has the ability to be removed from office if his physical or mental health is impaired under Article 88 . In order for this to happen , a two @-@ thirds majority must be reached in the House of Representatives and the Council of the Republic on the resolution to remove the President . An ad hoc committee is formed and must make the determination about the state of health before any motion can begin . If the President has committed a grave crime , such as treason , one @-@ third of the House must bring charges against the President formally . The investigation of the charges will be conducted by the Council of the Republic . In order to evict the President from office , a two @-@ thirds majority is needed to vote in favor of conviction . The criminal case is further sent to the Supreme Court for review . The actions of either option must occur one month after the resolution is passed or the action will be considered void by the Constitution . 
 = = Privileges = = 
 Under Article 79 of the Constitution , the president is immune from arrest , with exception to the treason / grave crimes clauses listed in Article 88 in the same document . Also under Article 79 , the honor and dignity of the president will be protected by national law . Information , either printed in the news or reported on television , that is considered defamation against the president is illegal under Article 5 of the Belarusian Law on Press . 
 The president also has an official residence in Minsk surrounded by the streets of Marx , Engels , Kirov and Komsomol . Like the American White House , the streets close to the residence are closed off to vehicular traffic and are patrolled by police forces . 
 = = Symbols = = 
 Officially , the only symbol denoting the presence of the President is the standard of the office ( <unk> <unk> Рэспублікі Беларусь ) . The standard , which has been in use since March 27 , 1997 , was adopted by a decree called " Concerning the Standard of the President of Republic of Belarus . " signed into law by President Lukashenko . 
 The standard 's design is an exact copy of the national flag , with the addition of the Belarusian national emblem in gold . The standard 's ratio of 5 : 6 differs from that of the national flag , making the standard almost square . The standard is bordered by a golden fringe . There are several copies of the standard ; the original is kept in the office of the President while other copies are used on buildings , residences and vehicles to denote his presence . 
 = = List of Presidents of Belarus ( 1994 – present ) = = 
 For leaders before independence , see List of national leaders of Belarus 
 = = Latest election = = 
 = Ice Box Chamberlain = 
 Elton P. " Ice Box " Chamberlain ( November 5 , 1867 – September 22 , 1929 ) was a professional baseball pitcher . He pitched in Major League Baseball for ten seasons between 1886 and 1896 . In several seasons , Chamberlain finished in his league 's top ten in a number of pitching categories , including wins , earned run average , strikeouts , and shutouts . During one of his best seasons , the 1888 St. Louis Browns won the American Association pennant with a 92 – 43 record . Although a righthanded pitcher , Chamberlain pitched the last two innings of an 1888 game with his left hand . 
 Chamberlain finished his major league career with 264 complete games out of his 301 games started . After his playing days , he was hired as a baseball umpire and later announced that he was becoming a boxer , but neither venture seems to have worked out . Not much is known about Chamberlain 's later life . He died in Baltimore in 1929 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Chamberlain was born on November 5 , 1867 in Warsaw , New York . He was one of six children born to veterinary surgeon Irving Chamberlain and his wife Carrie . Moving to Buffalo as a child , Chamberlain began to play organized baseball as a teenager . His early professional career included stints in Hamilton , Ontario and with a Southern League team in Macon , Georgia . As a 17 @-@ year @-@ old pitcher with Hamilton , he earned 18 wins and led the league in strikeouts . 
 Chamberlain made his major league debut with the Louisville Colonels of the American Association on September 13 , 1886 . In early October , Chamberlain was pitching in a game against the Baltimore Orioles when Louisville players began to complain that opposing pitcher Matt Kilroy was leaving the pitcher 's box when he threw the ball . When the umpire did not respond to Louisville 's complaints , Chamberlain 's manager told him to run forward out of the box when he let go of his pitches . The move " scared the Baltimore batters out of their wits " and Kilroy did not deliver any more questionable pitches . 
 In 1887 , Chamberlain won 18 games for Louisville . The right @-@ hander , who stood 5 ft 9 in ( 1 @.@ 75 m ) and weighed 168 lbs . , earned the nickname " Ice Box " . Some sources attribute the nickname to his ability to remain cool when facing tough opposition , but at least one source links the nickname to chronic laziness . On May 9 , 1888 , while pitching against the Kansas City Cowboys , Chamberlain pitched righthanded for the first seven innings and <unk> for the last two innings . Louisville won the game by a score of 18 – 6 . He was the third major league pitcher to throw with both his left and right hands during the same game . The feat was not repeated in the major leagues until Greg Harris switched arms for the ninth inning of a 1995 game . 
 Chamberlain was traded to the St. Louis Browns in August 1888 , having already registered 14 wins for the Colonels that year . He earned 11 more wins in the last six weeks of the season . He struck out 176 batters and registered a 2 @.@ 19 earned run average that season , good for fifth among the league 's pitchers . The Browns finished 1888 with a fourth consecutive league pennant . However , not long after Chamberlain joined the club , pitcher Nat Hudson left the team to get married . In the World Series , the Browns had only Chamberlain and pitcher Silver King to face a trio of New York Giants pitchers that included future Hall of Famer Tim Keefe . 
 After Chamberlain pitched a shutout in the second game of the 1888 World Series , he lost the fourth , sixth and eighth games . Chamberlain gave up 11 runs in the eighth game . Though the Giants clinched the series after that game , they played a full ten games , with Chamberlain winning the last game . The series was Chamberlain 's last major league postseason playing appearance . 
 = = = Middle career = = = 
 The Cincinnati Reds talked to St. Louis about acquiring Chamberlain in 1889 , but Cincinnati balked when St. Louis asked $ 8 @,@ 000 for him . That year , Chamberlain pitched in a career @-@ high 53 games and finished with 32 wins ; his win total was the third highest in the league . Following the 1889 season , a new major league was forming known as the Players ' League . A players association known as the Brotherhood of Professional Ball Players had served as a union and bargaining agent since the mid @-@ 1880s ; now the group 's new league was attempting to compete with established baseball . Browns owner Chris von der Ahe was afraid that Chamberlain would jump to the Chicago team in the new league ; the manager of the Browns from the previous season , Charles Comiskey , had been hired there . Von der Ahe agreed to match the $ 800 pay increase that Chamberlain would have gotten in Chicago . 
 Chamberlain had returned to Buffalo by May 1890 , where he was reported to be hanging out in pool rooms . Rumors held that Chamberlain wanted to join the Brotherhood and that he was " playing for his release . " He was sold to the Columbus Solons ( also of the American Association ) the next month . Chamberlain had appeared in five games for St. Louis and pitched in 25 more for Columbus by the end of the season . He finished the year with a league @-@ leading six shutouts . In February 1891 , Chamberlain pleaded guilty to a charge of aiding and abetting a prize fight . He received a $ 50 fine and the Columbus team declared that they would not retain him for the 1891 season . 
 The Philadelphia Athletics indicated immediate interest in Chamberlain , hoping that he would pitch most of the team 's games . Chamberlain earned a 22 – 23 win @-@ loss record in 1891 . He was the losing pitcher in the last of 485 shutouts recorded in the few seasons of American Association play . In August , he gave up the longest home run that had been hit at Boston 's Congress Street Grounds . Chamberlain pitched for the NL 's Cincinnati Reds in 1892 , compiling a 19 – 23 record . In May of that season , Chamberlain pitched in an unusual game that was suspended due to sunlight ; the scoreless game was in extra innings when umpire Jack Sheridan ruled that the sun was too bright for players to see the ball . The 1892 Reds finished with an overall record of 82 – 68 . League officials split the season into two halves and the Reds finished fourth and eighth in the respective halves . 
 Before the 1893 season , Chamberlain indicated his displeasure with the climate in Cincinnati and said that he hoped to pitch for New York or Philadelphia in the coming year . He also said that he would be happy to pitch in Buffalo if the city received a major league expansion team . Chamberlain stayed in Cincinnati for that season and the next one , earning 16 – 12 and 10 – 9 records . On May 30 , 1894 , Chamberlain was the pitcher when Bobby Lowe became the first major league player to hit four home runs in one game . Two of Lowe 's home runs came in the same inning . Lowe hit only 70 career home runs in an 18 @-@ year career . 
 = = = Later career and life = = = 
 Chamberlain had agreed to play for the Cleveland Spiders in 1895 , but instead he joined a Class D baseball team out of Warren , Ohio in the Iron and Oil League . Future Baseball Hall of Fame member Honus Wagner played on the team . Years later , Wagner recalled Chamberlain as an experienced pitcher who shared his baseball knowledge with his young teammates . He reported to the Spiders in 1896 . The team featured Cy Young and young pitchers such as Cy <unk> and Zeke Wilson . Chamberlain was released after appearing in two games . 
 Chamberlain finished his major league career with a 157 – 120 win @-@ loss record and a 3 @.@ 57 earned run average . Though he only finished among the top ten in complete games in two of his seasons , Chamberlain completed 264 of his 301 games started . His complete game total was ranked 64th on the all @-@ time major league list after the 2013 season . Chamberlain also hit nine home runs , including a grand slam , during his major league career . 
 In early 1898 , The Montreal Gazette reported that NL president Nicholas Young signed Chamberlain as an umpire for the coming season . Chamberlain did not ultimately work for the NL because he was unhappy with the salary that he was offered . He played local semi @-@ amateur baseball in Buffalo and then announced that he was leaving baseball to become a boxer . He challenged Jack Baty , a black fighter , to a boxing match and posted a $ 500 bet on the fight . There is no record of Chamberlain boxing against Baty or anyone else , and little is known about his life after the major leagues . 
 Chamberlain briefly played minor league baseball for the 1899 Buffalo Bisons in the Western League . He did not win any games for Buffalo . In 1904 , Sporting Life reported that the pitcher had a brother , F. Earl Chamberlain , who was named a Pacific Coast League umpire . Elton died of colon cancer at the age of 61 . He was interred in the Holy Cross Cemetery in Baltimore , Maryland . 
 = Army of Me ( Christina Aguilera song ) = 
 " Army of Me " is a song recorded by American singer @-@ songwriter Christina Aguilera for her seventh studio album , Lotus ( 2012 ) . It was co @-@ written by Aguilera with Jamie Hartman , David Glass and Phil Bentley , with production done by Tracklacers and Jamie Hartman . Described by Aguilera as part two to her 2002 single " Fighter " , she decided to record the song so that her newer , younger fans would have an empowering song to listen in case they were unfamiliar with her previous work . The song combines dance @-@ pop and euro @-@ dance genres ; its instrumentation incorporates drum beats and rock guitars . " Army of Me " garnered mixed reviews from music critics . Many praised Aguilera 's strong delivery of the song 's message and branded it a potential single , while others criticized it for being too similar to " Fighter " . Upon the release of Lotus , the song debuted on the South Korea international singles chart at number 103 with digital download sales of 2 @,@ 689 . Aguilera has performed the song at the 40th American Music Awards in the United States . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Following the release of her sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) , Aguilera filed for divorce from her husband Jordan Bratman , starred in her first feature film , Burlesque and recorded the accompanying soundtrack . She then became a coach on NBC 's singing competition show The Voice and appeared as a featured artist on Maroon 5 's single " Moves like Jagger " ( 2011 ) , which spent four weeks atop the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . Following these events , Aguilera announced that had plans to begin production of her seventh album , stating that she wanted high quality and " personal " songs for the record . Regarding the creative direction , she revealed that the album would be a " culmination of everything I 've experienced up until this point ... I 've been through a lot since the release of my last album , being on ( ' The Voice ' ) , having had a divorce ... This is all sort of a free rebirth for me . " She further said " I 'm embracing many different things , but it 's all feel @-@ good , super @-@ expressive [ and ] super @-@ vulnerable . " Aguilera continued to say that the album would be about " self – expression and freedom " because of the personal struggles she had overcome during the last couple of years . Speaking about her new material during an interview on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in 2012 , Aguilera said that the recording process for Lotus was taking a while because " I don 't like to just get songs from producers . I like them to come from a personal place ... I 'm very excited . It 's fun , exciting , introspective , it 's going to be great " . 
 Recorded at Henson Recording Studios , Hollywood , California , and Radley Studios , Los Angeles , California , by Justin Stanley , " Army of Me " was co @-@ written by Aguilera with Jamie Hartman , David Glass and Phil Bentley . It was produced by Tracklacers and it was co @-@ produced by Hartman . Aguilera 's vocals were recorded by Oscar Ramirez at The Red Lips Room in Beverly Hills in California . Programming was carried out by Steve Daly and John Keep , while strings were composed by Hartman . In an interview with Andrew Hampp for Billboard , Aguilera explained how her role on The Voice has allowed her to reach a new generational audience who may not be familiar with her past work , including songs such as her 2002 single , " Fighter " . When asked if some of the songs on Lotus feature themes which are similar to that of her 2002 album , Stripped , Aguilera responded by saying that " Army of Me " is what she describes as " Fighter 2 @.@ 0 " . 
 Absolutely . There 's a song called ' Army of Me , ' which is sort of a ' Fighter 2 @.@ 0 . ' There is a new generation of fans from a younger demographic that might not have been with me all the way but that watch me on the show now . I feel like every generation should be able to enjoy and have their piece of ' Fighter ' within . This time , the way it musically came together it just felt right for this time and this generation . There 's always going to be a fighter in me getting through some obstacle and some hurdle . All these 6 @-@ year @-@ olds who know me from pushing my button and turning around in a big red chair who weren 't around for the actual ' Fighter , ' this is my chance to recharge it , rejuvenate it and do something modernized for them . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Army of Me " is an up @-@ tempo dance @-@ pop and euro @-@ dance song which lasts for a duration of 3 : 26 ( three minutes and 26 seconds ) . Instrumentation consists of a " pounding " drum beat and " rocky " guitars . Aguilera presents herself as a fighter and tells her ex @-@ boyfriend that she is stronger than he is in the lyrics " So how does it feel to know that I beat you ? / That I can defeat you ? " Although Aguilera is heartbroken by the decision to split up with her ex @-@ boyfriend , she is not a broken person . The lyrics " One of me is wiser / One of me is stronger / One of me 's a fighter / And there 's a thousand faces of me / We 're gonna rise up for every time you broke me / You 're gonna face an army of me " are similar to those performed by Aguilera on " Fighter " , although of " Army of Me " does not sample any of the song . Aguilera sings " Now that I 'm wiser / Now that I 'm stronger / Now that I 'm a fighter / There 's a thousand faces on me " over a " thumping " beat , and belts the line " We 're gonna rise up for every time you broke me " on the chorus . The song was covered by recording artist Anastacia for her compilation album Ultimate Collection . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Army of Me " garnered mixed reviews from music critics . Andrew Hampp for Billboard and Chris Younie for 4Music both though that " Army of Me " could have been a potential single , the latter of whom writing " This track must be a future single . " Younie continued to write that the song " captivates and excites right from the very start " , has a " euphoric " energy and is the type of " angry " pop song that Kelly Clarkson " would give her right arm for " . Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe described it as a " Gloria Gaynor @-@ meets @-@ Depeche Mode dance of anger . " Mike Wass for Idolator wrote that although " Army of Me " is a " quality " song , it is an album filler . Writing that it sounds as though it would have been a good song to include on her previous studio album , Bionic , Wass thought that Aguilera was " not exaggerating " when she refers to it as " Fighter 2 @.@ 0 " . He concluded his review by saying that although her vocals are sparse , it is a " quirky " addition to Lotus . The A.V. Club 's Annie Zaleski described Aguilera as a " playful " and " sassy techno diva " on " Army of Me " . 
 Kitty Empire of The Observer also thought that it shares similarities with " Fighter " . She cited the Björk song of the same name as another influence , due to its " emotional territory " Robert Copsey for Digital Spy described the song as " nothing we haven 't heard from her before , but there 's an urgency to it that suggests Christina needed to get it out of her system " , while Matthew Horton of Virgin Media wrote that Aguilera sounds as though she is declaring war . Michael Gallucci for PopCrush was critical of the song , writing that it sounds like a Cher disco song which features Aguilera " overworking " her vocal cords . Melissa Maerz of Entertainment Weekly found the song 's message to be confusing and did not understand who exactly Aguilera is supposed to be rising up against on the song , writing " She hollers ' And we 're gonna rise up ... / For every time you wronged me / Well , you 're gonna face an army , army of me . ' Which begs the question : Rise up against whom ? Is the whole world really out to get her , or is this just an excuse to wear camouflage hot pants ? " 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Aguilera performed " Let There Be Love " for the first time at the 40th American Music Awards on November 18 , 2012 , held at the Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles , California . As one of the first singers to be announced as a performer at the award ceremony on October 19 , 2012 , Aguilera sang " Army of Me " as part of a medley with two other tracks from Lotus : " Lotus Intro " and " Let There Be Love " . During an interview with MTV News , Aguilera revealed what the performance would be like and the creative direction behind it : 
 It 's very exciting . It 's definitely going to be a reflection of what Lotus means to me . If you take that album cover and give it a little performance twist , I 'll bring that album cover to life , so it 's going to be really fun . I can 't give too much away about the songs , but it 's definitely going to represent the album because the album is very multilayered . It doesn 't represent ' Your Body ' as a single tone . It has its ballads ; and everything comes from a very sincere , deep – rooted place whether it 's having fun or being vulnerable . 
 Wearing a " fuller – figure " " cinched in corset " designed by The Blonds , who also design outfits for Lady Gaga , Leah Simpson for the Daily Mail wrote that Aguilera put a " sexy twist on patriotism with a star – spangled bodysuit and managed to get a few pulses racing in the over – the – top ensemble . " The performance featured dance routines and dancers wearing " torture bags labelled the words ' Freak ' and ' Queen ' over their heads . " Bruna Nessif for E ! Online described the performance as " interesting , " and noted that the theme " to celebrate everyone for who they are " was similar to the moral content presented on Gaga 's album Born This Way ( 2011 ) . As Aguilera finished her set , she was joined on stage by Pitbull to perform his song " Feel This Moment " , on which she is a featured artist . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Henson Recording Studios , Hollywood , California ; Radley Studios , Los Angeles , California . 
 String , Bass and Piano recorded at Henson Recording Studios , Hollywood , California . 
 Acoustic Guitars , Synth Piano and Synth Strings recorded at Radley Studios , Los Angeles , California . 
 Vocals recorded at The Red Lips Room , Beverly Hills , California . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Lotus , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Lotus , " Army of Me " debuted on the South Korean singles chart at number 103 during the week of November 11 to 17 , 2012 , due to digital download sales of 2 @,@ 689 . 
 = = Anastacia version = = 
 American recording artist Anastacia covered the song for her second greatest hits album Ultimate Collection ( 2015 ) . The song was released as album 's second single on 23 October 2015 by Sony Music Entertainment . 
 = Ontario Highway 416 = 
 King 's Highway 416 , commonly referred to as Highway 416 and as the Veterans Memorial Highway , is a 400 @-@ series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario that connects the Trans @-@ Canada Highway ( Highway 417 ) in Ottawa with Highway 401 between Brockville and Cornwall . The 76 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 47 @.@ 5 mi ) freeway acts as an important trade corridor from Interstate 81 between New York and Eastern Ontario via Highway 401 , as well as the fastest link between Ottawa and Toronto . Highway 416 passes through a largely rural area , except near its northern terminus where it enters the suburbs of Ottawa . The freeway also serves several communities along its length , notably Spencerville and Kemptville . 
 Highway 416 had two distinct construction phases . Highway 416 " North " was the 21 @-@ kilometre ( 13 mi ) segment starting from an interchange at Highway 417 and bypassing the original route of Highway 16 into Ottawa ( now Prince of Wales Drive ) along a new right @-@ of @-@ way . Highway 416 " South " was the twinning of 57 kilometres ( 35 mi ) of Highway 16 New — a two @-@ lane expressway bypassing the original highway that was constructed throughout the 1970s and finished in 1983 — and the construction of a new interchange with Highway 401 . Sections of both opened throughout the late 1990s . Highway 416 was commemorated as the Veterans Memorial Highway on the 54th anniversary of D @-@ Day in 1998 . The final link was officially opened by a World War I veteran and local officials on September 23 , 1999 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 416 begins at an interchange with Highway 401 , branching to the north near the community of Johnstown in the United Counties of Leeds and Grenville . This interchange only provides access to and from the west of Highway 401 , but immediately north of it , a second interchange with the remaining section of Highway 16 provides access from Johnstown and to a parclo interchange with both directions of Highway 401 , as well as to an international crossing into the United States . Proceeding north , the two carriageways of the freeway are separated by a 68 @-@ metre @-@ wide ( 223 ft ) forested median . The route is surrounded by thick forests for the next 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) . As it passes beneath Leeds and Grenville County Road 44 , the original routing of Highway 16 ( the Prescott Highway ) south of Spencerville , it exits the forest and enters farm fields . The route travels to the east of the community , access to which is provided by an interchange at County Road 21 , and crosses a swamp and the South Nation River . 
 Highway 416 crosses under the Prescott Highway a second time ; to the north , the two remain roughly parallel but separated as they pass through a mix of farmland and forest . South of the community of Kemptville , the Prescott Highway crosses the route a third time , with an interchange connecting the two highways . The freeway curves to the northeast , bypassing Kemptville and featuring an interchange with County Road 43 ( formerly Highway 43 ) . It crosses the line of the old <unk> and Prescott Railway , then curves to the northwest , providing an interchange with River Road . At the southeast corner of the River Road interchange is the Veterans Commemorative Park , dedicated in 2000 by the Royal Canadian Legion . 
 It crosses the Rideau River and enters the City of Ottawa . Aside from the first couple of kilometres north of the Rideau River , the majority of the freeway cuts through swaths of farmland which fill the Ottawa Valley . The median also becomes narrower . The freeway encounters an interchange with Dilworth Road and thereafter with Roger Stevens Drive , the latter providing access to North Gower . 
 Continuing north of <unk> through fields , Highway 416 is crossed by the Prescott Highway for the fourth and final time as that road turns northeast and travels into downtown Ottawa as Prince of Wales Drive . Shortly thereafter is an interchange with Brophy Drive / Bankfield Road ; the latter provides access to the Prescott Highway / Prince of Wales Drive . Approaching urban Ottawa , the route passes alongside a large quarry , then jogs to the west along an S @-@ curve , crossing the Jock River in the process . After this , an interchange with Fallowfield Road provides access to the suburb of <unk> which occupies portions of the land immediately east of the freeway . The route jogs back to the east along a second S @-@ curve and passes through an aesthetically designed bridge while travelling alongside the Stony Swamp . 
 The final section of Highway 416 travels parallel to <unk> Road , which was relocated for the freeway . The Stony Swamp lies west of the route while farmland lies to the east . At the northern end of the swamp is an interchange with West Hunt Club Road . The freeway continues through a section of greenspace before descending gently into a trench . It passes beneath Bruin Road and the Ottawa Central Railway while travelling alongside Lynwood Village in Bells Corners . The highway is crossed by Baseline Road and Richmond Road ; the former provides an onramp to southbound Highway 416 . The freeway ends at a large interchange with the Trans @-@ Canada Highway , Highway 417 ( Exit 131 ) , just south of the Lakeview and Bayshore communities the on the Ottawa River ; downtown Ottawa is to the east and Kanata is to the west . 
 = = = Design features = = = 
 The Stony Swamp overpass at the southern entrance to Ottawa is a pre @-@ tensioned concrete arch ; the design , which allows the structure to cross the entire right of way with a single span , won the 1996 Award of Excellence from the Portland Cement Association . The bridge acts as a gateway to the National Capital Region and is the longest rigid frame bridge in Ontario with a 59 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 194 ft ) span . In the same vicinity , the freeway sinks below ground level in a trench ; groundwater @-@ retaining walls were installed to prevent the lowering of the water table in adjacent wetlands , therefore mitigating damage to them . 
 At the Jock River , southwest of <unk> , deposits of sensitive <unk> clay presented a challenge in designing the crossing for the freeway as well as the Canadian National Railway overpass to the north . It was feared that the weight of these structures could destabilize the clay deposits beneath and lead to landslides . In place of the standard heavier aggregate , lighter blast furnace slag , at half the weight , was substituted . 
 Sloped rock cuts line the side of the freeway in numerous locations . With the intent of reducing the severity of collisions against those cuts , the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) tested out numerous alternatives to strike a cost @-@ to @-@ benefit balance . The standard slope used by the MTO is vertical , offset from the edge of pavement by 10 metres ( 33 ft ) . The study concluded that although an initially higher investment would be required , the 2 : 1 sloped cut with grass overlaid produced the best results . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Highway 16 New = = = 
 In 1966 , the Department of Highways ( DHO ) , predecessor to today 's MTO , published the Eastern Ontario Highway Planning Study , identifying the need for a controlled @-@ access highway between Ottawa and Highway 401 . Highway 16 , which passes over the geologically subdued St. Lawrence Lowlands , was selected over Highway 15 , which crosses the undulating Canadian Shield to the west , as the ideal route for the new link . Highway 16 was one of the first roads taken over by the expanding Department of Public Highways in 1918 . The important corridor between the Trans @-@ provincial Highway ( Highway 2 ) and Ottawa was known as the Prescott Highway . In 1925 , the road was given a numerical designation to supplement the name . This highway served the low traffic volumes of the day , but as the number of vehicles increased over the first half of the 20th century , issues arose with the numerous private driveways along the route . To overcome this issue of abutting properties long @-@ established on the old Highway 16 corridor , the DHO began purchasing a new right @-@ of @-@ way between Highway 401 and Century Road by late 1967 for a two @-@ lane bypass of the original alignment , avoiding all the built @-@ up areas that the original Highway 16 encountered . This route was designed to easily accommodate the eventual upgrade to a freeway when traffic volumes necessitated . 
 Construction of the super two , dubbed Highway 16 New , took place between 1969 and 1983 . The Spencerville Bypass opened by 1971 , connecting with the old highway in the south near Crowder Road and in the north near Ventnor Road . By the end of 1973 , the new highway was completed from immediately north of Highway 401 through Leeds and Grenville United Counties and into Ottawa – Carleton . This included a bypass around Kemptville and a new structure over the Rideau River . The new highway ended at Dilworth Road ( Regional Road 13 ) . 
 For nearly a decade , no new construction took place . Then , during the summer of 1982 , the MTO awarded a contract to construct the route north from Dilworth Road towards <unk> , bypassing North Gower and extending the route as far north as Roger Stevens Drive ( Regional Road 6 ) , including a structure over Stevens Creek . Following completion of this first contract , a second contract was awarded for the remaining distance north to Century Road ( Regional Road 8 ) . The project was completed in 1983 , merging into the original route of Highway 16 northeast of the present Prince of Wales Drive overpass . 
 With the completion of Highway 16 New , the MTO needed only to construct interchanges and the southbound lanes in order to create a full freeway corridor . The upgrade to Highway 416 took place between 1989 and 1999 and was carried out through two separate projects : Highway 416 North was a 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) freeway on a new alignment through Ottawa and an interchange at Highway 417 , and Highway 416 South was the twinning of 57 kilometres ( 35 mi ) of Highway 16 New and an interchange at Highway 401 . 
 = = = Change of plans = = = 
 The original plans for Highway 416 , conceived during the late 1960s , had it enter Ottawa along the Merivale Corridor to merge with the Queensway approximately five kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) east of the present interchange . However , when it came time to construct this section , public attitudes had shifted and environmental concerns had come to the forefront of everyday life ; new roads were now subject to intense public scrutiny . Suburbs grew along Merivale Road , prompting the Region of Ottawa – Carleton to request the MTO decommission the right @-@ of @-@ way along the road in 1977 , which it did . The passing of the Environmental Assessment Act in 1975 , however , meant that new projects were subject to a lengthy investigation of social and environmental concerns . 
 In 1981 , the MTO began an environmental assessment into a new alignment for the northern connection with the Queensway . It was approved in mid @-@ 1987 , with <unk> Drive chosen as the ideal alignment for the new freeway . The MTO set out to design a four @-@ lane route to connect the Queensway with Highway 16 New , including a three @-@ level free @-@ flow interchange . A contract for construction of this interchange was awarded in late 1989 and construction began in 1990 . During the 1991 construction season , contracts were awarded to construct several overpasses along the new route . This contract was completed in 1993 , after which budgetary restraints prevented the awarding of further contracts . As a result , aside from the interchange at Highway 417 and some overpasses , construction activity on Highway 416 came to a standstill for two years . 
 It was during this period that the MTO undertook an engineering review of the entire route in search of cost inefficiencies . Highways 416 and 407 were constructed during a recession in the mid @-@ 1990s . Highway 407 became a tolled highway and for a time it was mentioned in legislative debates that Highway 416 would also be tolled , but ultimately this never happened . Instead , a hiatus in construction allowed engineers to evaluate inefficiencies in bridge and cross @-@ section designs , as well as sensitive clay soils near Ottawa . This initiative led to a cost savings of over C $ 7 million and several of the unique design features located along the length of the freeway . 
 = = = Twinning and completion = = = 
 Work resumed on Highway 416 North following the review . It was opened from Century Road to Hunt Club Road on July 16 , 1996 , and completed on July 31 , 1997 , with the opening of the interchange with Highway 417 . The cost of this section was C $ 196 million . On December 8 , 1995 , in North Gower , the provincial and federal governments announced a financing deal to ensure Highway 416 South was completed by 2000 . This section of the route was constructed through a process known as twinning in which a second carriageway is built parallel to an existing road . In addition , existing intersections were rebuilt as grade @-@ separated interchanges . With the right @-@ of @-@ way along Highway 16 New already purchased , construction was able to proceed without disruption to local properties or traffic . 
 The 57 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 35 mi ) project was constructed through five contracts . The first was awarded to Tarmac Canada on June 10 , 1996 , calling for twinning of 7 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) from Century Road south to Roger Stevens Drive . Another contract was awarded one month later to Bot Construction , on August 19 . This contract involved the section from Roger Stevens Drive south to what was then Highway 43 , a distance of 13 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) . On June 12 , 1997 , the first section opened , connecting with the Ottawa Bypass at Century Road . On July 10 , the third contract was awarded to <unk> Construction to construct the 10 @-@ kilometre ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) section from Highway 43 south to Grenville County Road 20 ( Oxford Station Road ) . Another contract followed on October 21 for the 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) south to Grenville County Road 20 ( <unk> Road ) which was awarded to Bot Construction . The fifth and final contract was awarded to <unk> Construction on April 8 , 1998 , calling for the construction of the southern nine kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) and the two flyover ramps at Highway 401 . The section between Roger Stevens Drive and what had now become Leeds and Grenville County Road 43 , including a second crossing of the Rideau River , opened to traffic on June 26 , 1998 . This was followed two months later by the section between Highway 43 and Oxford Station Road , which opened on August 24 . 
 On the fifty @-@ fourth anniversary of D @-@ Day , June 6 , 1998 , then Transportation Minister Tony Clement unveiled two signs in Ottawa and formally declared the entire length of Highway 416 as the Veterans Memorial Highway , despite earlier reluctance from previous minister Al <unk> . Six additional signs were also installed along the length of the route . At the time , the Veterans Memorial Parkway in London already existed . Since then , two additional veterans highways have been named : on October 20 , 2002 , the Veterans Highway was designated in Halton Region along Regional Road 25 ; on September 23 , 2010 , the Niagara Veterans Memorial Highway was designated in Niagara Falls along Regional Road 420 . A ceremony was held in Johnstown on September 23 , 1999 to open the final section of Highway 416 that would complete the link from Highway 401 to Highway 417 . Premier Mike Harris , Transportation Minister David Turnbull and World War I Veteran James W. Fraser officially opened the highway . 
 On December 14 , 2009 , there was a 60 – 70 vehicle pileup due to fog and icy conditions , forcing the closure of the highway in both directions . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 416 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Operation Doomsday = 
 In Operation Doomsday , the British 1st Airborne Division acted as a police and military force during the Allied occupation of Norway in May 1945 , immediately after the victory in Europe during the Second World War . The division maintained law and order until the arrival of the remainder of Force 134 , the occupation force . During its time in Norway , the division was tasked with supervising the surrender of the German forces in Norway , as well as preventing the sabotage of vital military and civilian facilities . 
 The German Instrument of Surrender was delivered on 8 May to General Franz Böhme , the commander of all German forces stationed in Norway , and the 1st Airborne Division landed near Oslo and Stavanger between 9 May and 11 May . The majority of the transport aircraft carrying the division landed safely , but three planes crashed with a number of fatalities . The division encountered little of the expected German resistance . Operational duties included welcoming back King Haakon VII of Norway , looking after Allied ex @-@ prisoners of war , arresting war criminals and supervising the clearing of minefields . The division was also able to confirm the deaths of the British airborne troops that had taken part in Operation Freshman , an unsuccessful attempt to disrupt the German atomic weapons programme in November 1942 . The division returned to Britain at the end of August and disbanded two months later . 
 = = Background = = 
 Since 1943 the Western Allies had been developing plans for the occupation of Norway , code @-@ named Operation Apostle , after Germany 's surrender . Force 134 , the occupation force , was composed of Norwegian troops who were stationed in Scotland , as well as a British contingent ( initially the 52nd ( Lowland ) Infantry Division ) , a few American troops , and some 12 @,@ 000 Norwegian police troops currently stationed in neutral Sweden . In the event of an emergency , the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force would deploy troops into Norway from Germany . The entire operation came under Headquarters Scottish Command , which had been commanded by General Andrew Thorne since 7 May 1941 . One of the reasons behind Thorne 's appointment to Scottish Command , which he regarded as " being banished to Scotland " , may well have been Thorne 's acquaintance with Adolf Hitler ; they had met several times when Thorne had been British Military Attaché in Berlin in 1934 and 1935 , and Hitler held Thorne and his military abilities in high regard . In the wake of British Commando raids in Norway during 1941 , Hitler had ordered substantial reinforcements for Norway , and British High Command hoped that Thorne as head of Scottish Command would " help to focus the Fuhrer 's attention on the threat posed to Scandinavia " and Norway in particular . 
 Two separate scenarios were considered in planning for Operation Apostle . The first , known as ' Rankin C ( Norway ) ' was based on the assumption that all German forces occupying Norway would surrender as part of a more general unconditional surrender by Germany . The second was known as ' Rankin B ' and assumed that there was no surrender and that only parts of Norway would be abandoned by the Germans in order to reinforce their troops stationed in north @-@ western Europe against Allied advances there ; in this scenario , Force 134 would encounter heavy German resistance . The development of plans for the liberation and administration of Norway were complicated by it being difficult to predict whether the landings would be opposed by German forces and the extent of damage resulting from Allied bombardments and any German " scorched earth " demolitions . As a result , planning for the administration of Norway was detailed and flexible . 
 Either of the two ' Rankin ' scenarios would be difficult for Thorne to accomplish however , as the troops allocated to Force 134 were meagre ; from late 1943 onwards the majority of military resources were dedicated to the campaign in north @-@ west Europe . In September 1944 Thorne was even deprived of 52nd Lowland Division , which was attached to the 1st Allied Airborne Army by the War Office and earmarked for Operation Market Garden . Instead Thorne was later given the 1st Airborne Division , under the command of Major General Roy Urquhart . However , owing to the heavy casualties the division had suffered during Market Garden it would not be combat ready until 1 May 1945 after being heavily reinforced . In order to bolster his forces , Thorne would therefore have to rely on Milorg , the Norwegian Resistance . The Allied civil affairs planners maintained very close contact with the Norwegian Government in exile which was based in London as well as Milorg . As a result , by the end of the war Milorg had been preparing for the arrival of an Allied force for some time ; its 40 @,@ 000 members were well @-@ armed and trained , and led by more than 100 Special Operations Executive agents parachuted into Norway , and it was prepared to prevent any sabotage of key communication centres and other important facilities by German troops if they resisted the Allied forces . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Allied preparations = = = 
 By early May , 1st Airborne Division had been brought up to strength , albeit mainly with inexperienced replacements . 4th Parachute Brigade had been disbanded and its battalions merged with those of 1st Parachute Brigade in the aftermath of the Battle of Arnhem . It was replaced by 1st Independent Polish Parachute Brigade . The Norwegian Parachute Company was also attached to the 1st Airborne Division . However , on 4 May , Urquhart was ordered to despatch 1st Independent Polish Brigade to Dunkirk , and to detach 1st Parachute Brigade from the division ; one of the brigade 's battalions would immediately be transported to Denmark for occupation duties , with the rest of the Brigade remaining in Britain as a reserve formation . At the same time the rest of the division was warned that it would be soon be transported by air to Norway as part of the occupation force , with the Special Air Service Brigade being temporarily attached to the division to replace 1st Parachute Brigade . Urquhart informed Thorne that the division could be ready for deployment in 48 hours , far less time than Thorne and his staff had expected . When it entered Norway , the division would be responsible for maintaining law and order in the areas it occupied , ensuring that German units followed the terms of their surrender , securing and then protecting captured airfields , and finally preventing the sabotage of essential military and civilian structures . To achieve this , the division would be formed of three brigades : 1st Airlanding Brigade , Special Air Service Brigade and an ad hoc Artillery Brigade formed from divisional troops . 
 1st Airlanding Brigade would land near to the Norwegian capital , Oslo , and occupy the city alongside other elements of Force 134 . The brigade 's commander , Brigadier R. H. Bower , would become Commander , Oslo area for the duration of the division 's time in Norway . Oslo was chosen because it was the Norwegian capital , as well as being the centre of Norwegian and German administration . Similarly , the Artillery Brigade would land at Stavanger and its commanding officer Brigadier R.G. Loder @-@ Symonds would become Commander , Stavanger area . Stavanger was the closest airfield to Britain , and would also be useful as a fighter base . Finally , Special Air Service Brigade would also land in Stavanger , from where it would advance to and occupy the area around Kristiansand . This was an important port from which the Royal Navy would sweep the surrounding waters for mines . The division 's operations would be divided into four phases over four consecutive days . On 8 May , fifteen transport aircraft would carry advance parties to airfields at Gardermoen , near Oslo , and Sola airfield by Stavanger ; this was to be completed by the evening . The second phase , on 9 May , would see seventy Handley Page Halifaxes transport 1st Airlanding Brigade and elements of Headquarters 1st Airborne Division to both airfields , and another seventy @-@ six C @-@ 47 Dakotas land the Artillery Brigade at Sola . On 10 May , the third phase would see Special Air Service Brigade land at Sola , and finally stores and vehicles would be landed at both airfields on 11 May . Before the division began to land in Norway , specially selected Allied representatives known as ' Heralds ' would accompany German diplomatic delegates to Norway ; only when they signaled that the airfields were clear to land on would the first transport aircraft take off from Britain . 
 = = = Axis preparations = = = 
 German forces had started gradual withdrawal to northernmost Finland in early September 1944 in Operation Birke . As the value of Petsamo region had decreased , the Germans decided in early October 1944 to abandon Finland and most of northern Norway and had begun Operation Nordlicht ( Northern Light ) , a retreat into prepared positions at Lyngen in northern Norway . Operation Nordlicht had come to an end at the beginning of January 1945 , with only a few miles of Finnish territory remaining in German hands , and several isolated garrisons in Norwegian Finnmark . Soviet forces occupied eastern Finnmark , and the USSR asked that Western Allied forces be landed to support them . Only a single company of Norwegian mountain infantry could be spared for this duty , though the British and Norwegian governments provided food supplies for the civilian population in the area . Due to the failure of the recent offensive in the Ardennes and the fact that several new types of U @-@ Boat were ready to be deployed , the German positions in Norway became of great value to Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Naval High Command as a way to continue submarine warfare against the Allies . They also were to Adolf Hitler , who denied requests from General Heinz Guderian that divisions should be withdrawn from Norway for use in the defence of Germany , and from Böhme in March that northern Norway should be abandoned and that construction of submarine pens should come to a halt due to lack of materials . He feared that any withdrawal might tempt Sweden to enter the war in support of the Allies , and that any withdrawal from northern Norway would endanger U @-@ Boat bases in the southern parts of the country . Until the last days of the war , Dönitz believed that Norway should be kept in order to deploy submarines against Allied vessels , and on 3 May the Kriegsmarine Naval Warfare Command informed U @-@ Boat staff that even if Germany itself were occupied , submarines would still sail from Norway . Only on 4 May were orders issued by the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht that all German troops in Norway were to avoid actions that might provoke Allied forces . 
 In May 1945 , all German troops in Norway came under the command of the Twentieth Mountain Army , which had absorbed the Army Norway on 18 December 1944 . It was commanded by General Franz Böhme , who had succeeded General Lothar Rendulic as Armed Forces Commander , Norway in January 1945 . At the beginning of May , Böhme informed Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Naval High Command and the new German president , with the death of Adolf Hitler , that all forces in Norway consisted of eleven divisions and five brigades . In total , they had a combined strength of between 350 @,@ 000 and 380 @,@ 000 troops . There were also a number of U @-@ boats stationed in naval bases in Norway , including 10 Mark XXI and 17 Mark XXIII models . Yet although Allied forces had entered Germany , and rumours and speculation were rife about a possible invasion of Norway , the Twentieth Mountain Army almost seemed to be at a peace @-@ time status ; Böhme had complained in January that there were some units in the Army that took Sunday off as a holiday , and that he could do little to stop it . 
 = = Occupation = = 
 = = = Arrival = = = 
 In the early hours of 7 May , Dönitz gave the order for all German military forces to unconditionally surrender , and on 8 May the German Instrument of Surrender was delivered to General Böhme . The Germans were to withdraw from all Norwegian towns and the Swedish border and gradually redeploy to areas pre @-@ designated for disarmament ; simultaneously , all senior Nazi party officials and security personnel were to immediately be arrested . Force 134 would be greatly outnumbered during its task ; a total of 30 @,@ 000 Allied troops would have to supervise the disarmament of more than 350 @,@ 000 German troops . There were fears that the German forces might refuse to surrender and instead resist the Allied occupation forces , and there were particular concerns about what the large detachment of Kriegsmarine personnel at the port of Trondheim might do . 
 Although the first phase of the operation had been scheduled for 8 May , no word was received from the ' Heralds ' and so Doomsday was postponed by twenty @-@ four hours . Contact was successfully established on 9 May and the first units of Force 134 arrived in Norway to begin their occupation , including the first elements of 1st Airborne Division and the Norwegian Parachute Company . All but one of the transport aircraft belonging to the first phase took off and landed in Norway without incident . Phase II was accelerated to compensate for the delay , with aircraft scheduled to leave Britain between 02 : 00 and 13 : 30 . Unfortunately , after approximately 07 : 00 poor weather over Oslo caused many transport aircraft heading for the airfield there to return to Britain , although all of those destined for Stavanger landed successfully . Several crash @-@ landed , and one was reported missing . The remaining aircraft took off again on 11 May , with one crashing on takeoff and another going missing ; of the two missing aircraft , one landed at another airfield in Norway , but the other had crashed killing all of its occupants , including Air Vice @-@ Marshal Scarlett @-@ <unk> . The aircraft belonging to the next two phases suffered no more casualties , although a number of them were again delayed by inclement weather over the Norwegian airfields . 1st Airborne Division suffered one officer and thirty @-@ three other ranks killed , and one other rank wounded , and the Royal Air Force six killed and seven injured . All of these losses had occurred after the general surrender had been declared . 
 = = = Occupation duties = = = 
 The original plan for the division called for two of the airborne battalions to march through Oslo on 10 May , but the delay meant that only a few troops had arrived by this date . Instead , two platoons from 2nd Battalion The South Staffordshire Regiment and four Military Policemen on motorcycles accompanied Urquhart , who rode in a commandeered German staff car . The soldiers , although somewhat nervous given the small size of their group , were greeted enthusiastically by the Norwegian population in Oslo . The only resistance came from the captains of several U @-@ boats at Trondheim . Apart from this , 1st Airborne Division encountered no trouble from the German forces in Norway , who co @-@ operated fully with the airborne troops . They were disarmed without problem , allowed themselves to be transferred to collection camps and also assisted in the clearing of numerous minefields they had sown during their occupation , which resulted in several German casualties . 
 Until the arrival of other units from Force 134 , as well as the Headquarters of Allied Forces , Norway , Major General Urquhart and his headquarters staff had complete control over all Norwegian activities . This meant that it was Urquhart who welcomed Crown Prince Olaf of Norway and three ministers representing the Norwegian Government when they arrived on a Royal Navy cruiser , and the division also took part in the celebrations when King Haakon VII of Norway returned to his country from exile . Other duties for the division included rounding up war criminals , ensuring that German troops were confined to their camps and reservations and , with Royal Engineer assistance , clearing buildings of mines and other <unk> . They were also given the responsibility of assisting Allied personnel who had , until the German surrender , been prisoners of war in Norway , a large number of whom were Russian . There were more than 80 @,@ 000 Russian ex @-@ prisoners of war , and many needed medical treatment because of the inhumane conditions of the camps in which they had been imprisoned . When a parade was held in late June to celebrate the Allied liberation , many of the Russians participated , wearing uniforms with Red Star badges they had made themselves . During the division 's time in Norway , some 400 paratroopers under the command of Major Frederick Gough were temporarily transferred to the Netherlands , where they helped take part in Theirs Is the Glory , a documentary about the Battle of Arnhem . 
 The Norwegian resistance co @-@ operated fully with 1st Airborne Division , often providing liaisons and performing guard duties , and the Norwegian population as a whole gave a warm welcome to the airborne troops . British forces were initially only in control of Oslo , Stavanger and Kristiansand with the resistance and , less commonly , local Norwegian authorities taking control of the rest of the country from the Germans . The resistance also helped the division discover the fate of 1st Airborne Division troops assigned to Operation Freshman , a failed attempt in November 1942 to sabotage the Norsk Hydro chemical plant at Vemork , which produced heavy water for Nazi Germany 's atomic weapons programme . Two gliders had been assigned to the operation , and both had crash @-@ landed after being released by the aircraft towing them . The men who survived the crashes were executed shortly after being captured . Although the local Norwegian population could not prevent the prisoners being executed , they later recovered their remains and reinterred them in marked graves . When it arrived , 1st Airborne Division was informed of the fate of the operation and cooperated with the Norwegian government to have a memorial erected and the fallen men buried with full military honours at Stavanger and Oslo . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The remaining units of Force 134 entered Norway throughout the rest of May , gradually reinforcing the airborne troops . On 10 May elements of the 12 @,@ 000 strong Norwegian police force began to enter the country from Sweden , having been raised from young Norwegians who had fled to Sweden after Norway had been occupied in 1940 . General Thorne arrived with the rest of his headquarters on 13 May , and took up his position as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Allied Liberation Forces . In the next two weeks further elements of Force 134 arrived , including a composite American regiment , a Norwegian brigade , and two British infantry brigades composed of re @-@ trained anti @-@ aircraft gunners who replaced the Special Air Service Brigade . Thorne was the de facto Head of Government of Norway until 7 June , when King Haakon returned , and from then until his departure at the end of October was Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of all military forces in Norway . 
 1st Airborne Division was stationed in Norway until the end of the summer . It returned to Britain at the end of August , and its personnel were sent on leave . Initial plans had called for the division to be used as an Imperial Strategic Reserve , as it was believed that 6th Airborne Division would be required in the Far Eastern Theatre ; however , when Japan surrendered in August it negated the need for 6th Airborne Division to be transferred . This created a problem , as two airborne divisions existed , but only one was included in the planned post @-@ war British Regular Army . Although the tradition of seniority might have called for 6th Airborne Division to be disbanded as the junior airborne formation , 1st Airborne Division was still understrength after Operation Market Garden and not fully trained . As such , the division spent the next two months training and transferring troops to 6th Airborne Division , and then disbanded on 15 November 1945 . 
 = World War I memorials = 
 World War I memorials commemorate the events and the casualties of World War I. These war memorials include civic memorials , larger national monuments , war cemeteries , private memorials and a range of utilitarian designs such as halls and parks , dedicated to remembering those involved in the conflict . Huge numbers of memorials were built in the 1920s and 1930s , with around 176 @,@ 000 erected in France alone . This was a new social phenomenon and marked a major cultural shift in how nations commemorated conflicts . Interest in World War I and its memorials faded after World War II , and did not increase again until the 1980s and 1990s , which saw the renovation of many existing memorials and the opening of new sites . Visitor numbers at many memorials increased significantly , while major national and civic memorials continue to be used for annual ceremonies remembering the war . 
 Architecturally , most war memorials were relatively conservative in design , aiming to use established styles to produce a tragic but comforting , noble and enduring commemoration of the war dead . Classical themes were particularly common , taking the prevailing styles of the late 19th century and typically simplifying them to produce cleaner , more abstract memorials . Allegorical and symbolic features , frequently drawing on Christian imagery , were used to communicate themes of self @-@ sacrifice , victory and death . Some memorials adopted a medievalist theme instead , looking backwards to a more secure past , while others used emerging realist and Art Deco architectural styles to communicate the themes of the war . 
 The commissioning of memorials occurred through a wide range of national and local institutions , reflecting local political traditions ; funding was similarly disparate , with most countries relying heavily on local charitable contributions to cover the costs of construction . War cemeteries and memorials to particularly significant battles , however , were typically centrally controlled and funded by the state . The war encouraged the creation of new forms of memorial . Lists of memorial names , reflecting the huge scale of the losses , were a common feature , while Tombs of the Unknown Soldier containing a selected , unidentified body , and empty cenotaph monuments commemorated the numerous unidentifiable corpses and those servicemen whose bodies were never found . Ceremonies were often held at the memorials , including those on Armistice Day , Anzac Day and the Fêtes de la Victoire , while pilgrimages to the sites of the conflict and the memorials there were common in the inter @-@ war years . 
 Much of the symbolism included in memorials was political in tone , and politics played an important part in their construction . Many memorials were embroiled in local ethnic and religious tensions , with memorials either reflecting the contribution of particular groups to the conflict or being rejected entirely by others . In several countries it proved difficult to produce memorials that appealed to and included the religious and political views of all of a community . The Fascist governments that came to power in Italy and Germany during the inter @-@ war period made the construction of memorials a key part of their political programme , resulting in a number of larger memorial projects with strong national overtones being constructed in the 1930s . While few memorials embraced a pacifist perspective , some anti @-@ war campaigners used the memorials for rallies and meetings . Many of the political tensions of the inter @-@ war period had diminished by the end of the 20th century , allowing some countries to commemorate the events of the war through memorials for the first time since the end of the war . In the centennial of World War I , the memory of the war has become a major theme for scholars and museums . 
 = = Background = = 
 On the eve of World War I there were no traditions of nationally commemorating mass casualties in war . France and Germany had been relatively recently involved in the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 to 1871 . Germany had built a number of national war memorials commemorating their victory , usually focusing on celebrating their military leaders . In France , memorials to their losses were relatively common , but far from being a national response , and many towns and villages did not erect memorials at all . A new organisation , the Souvenir Français , was established in the 1880s to protect French war memorials and encourage young French people to engage in military activities ; the organisation grew to have many contacts in local government by 1914 . 
 Britain and Australia had both sent forces to participate in the Second Boer War of 1899 to 1902 , which spurred an increased focus on war memorials . The Boer War had involved 200 @,@ 000 British volunteers alone , and attracted considerable press coverage . Numerous war memorials were erected on their return , either by local community leaders or by the local Lord Lieutenant , acting on behalf of the county regiments ; these were often situated in quiet locations to allow for peaceful reflection by visitors . Australia had honoured its volunteers by placing individual plaques inside buildings , creating outdoor memorial tablets and erecting obelisks in public places . Although the Boer War encouraged a shift away from memorials portraying heroic commanding officers , as had been popular earlier in the 19th century , towards depicting ordinary soldiers , annual ceremonies surrounding the memorials were not common and no official memorial day emerged . Boer War memorials in both countries were widely felt to lack a suitable quality of design and execution , echoing contemporary concerns in the US about the statues erected to commemorate the American Civil War . 
 The new European states that had formed in the second half of the 19th century typically had traditions of war memorials , but nothing on the scale that would later emerge from World War I. Italy built various war memorials after unification in the 1860s , but there was little agreement about who should be responsible for these within the new Italian state . Romania erected a number of heroically styled memorials after the Romanian War of Independence in 1877 and 1878 , usually celebrating famous leaders associated with Romanian independence , but also including the occasional modest local monuments Bulgaria and Serbia constructed many war memorials after the end of the First Balkan War in 1913 . The public played little role in these eastern European memorials , however , which were typically constructed by the central state authorities . 
 = = World War I ( 1914 – 18 ) = = 
 = = = Experience of the conflict = = = 
 The memorials to World War I were shaped by the traumatic nature of the conflict and its impact on individuals and communities . The experience of the different nations influenced varied considerably , but common themes emerged . The war required a mass call to arms , with a significant percentage of the population mobilised to fight , either as volunteers or through conscription . Campaigns were conducted on multiple fronts across Europe and beyond . The fighting was mechanised and conducted on an industrial scale ; existing weapons , such as machine guns and artillery , were combined with the innovative deployment of aircraft , submarines and poison gas . In many theatres of operation , mobile campaigns degenerated into static trench warfare , depending on the slow attrition of the enemy over many years for victory . The battles spread across larger areas than ever before , with key engagements , such as that at Verdun etched on the memories of the nations involved . 
 One result of this style of warfare was a level of casualties unknown in previous conflicts . Approximately 2 million Germans and 1 @.@ 3 million Frenchmen died during the war ; 720 @,@ 000 British soldiers died , along with 61 @,@ 000 Canadian , 60 @,@ 000 Australian and 18 @,@ 000 New Zealand servicemen . On the Eastern front , 300 @,@ 000 Romanians alone died . The war had a global impact , and at least 2 @,@ 000 Chinese died in the European theatre of the conflict alone . Many of the deaths occurred within a short period of time , or affected particular groups : half of France 's casualties occurred during the first 17 months of the war , for example , while the French middle and upper classes suffered disproportionate losses . Many of those who survived were injured in the course of the fighting ; some injuries , such as facial traumas , resulted in the victim being shunned by wider society and banned from public events . These losses also left large numbers of widows and orphans – 1 @.@ 36 m in France alone – and affected most families in some way : in Australia , every second family had lost a relative . Even those left at home had suffered extensively from stress , anxiety and grief . 
 The war had also led to political tensions , revolution and turmoil . In Russia , the conflict resulted in revolution and civil war between 1917 and 1923 , and the rise to power of the Communist Bolshevik government . The German Empire had seen revolution break out at the end of the war , with vicious street fighting in the major cities , including Berlin ; some Germans felt that this experience was too quickly forgotten in the post @-@ war years . Romania almost descended into revolution as well . There was turmoil in Ireland ; 210 @,@ 000 Irish served in the war as part of the British forces , but the Easter Rising in Dublin in 1916 led in turn to the Irish War of Independence and the later civil war . Elsewhere the war exposed simmering ethnic and religious divisions . In Canada , for example , the distinctions between the English , largely Protestant , and French speaking , predominantly Catholic , parts of the country become increasingly apparent , with conscription becoming a major political issue . 
 In the years after the war , veterans , the bereaved and the rest of society focused , to the point of obsession , with the problem of death . There was tremendous interest in creating war memorials that celebrated the themes of glory , heroism and loss . In part , there was a rupture or dislocation with the pre @-@ war norms of how memorials should look and feel ; communities sought to find new , radical ways to mourn the millions of dead , killed in an essentially modern conflict . In other ways , the building of memorials drew on traditional forms and ideas , drawing on existing religious and architectural themes to explore loss and grief . 
 = = = Responses during the war = = = 
 As the war progressed , memorials began to be created in most countries , either in civic centres , personal homes or on the battlefields themselves . Memorials took various names across Europe ; amongst English @-@ speaking countries , such memorials had previously been called fallen soldiers ' monuments , but the term " war memorial " became popularised by the conflict , drawing attention to the role of society as a whole in the events . Germany followed suit , terming the memorials <unk> , war monuments . By contrast France and Italy termed them monuments aux morts and <unk> ai <unk> : monuments to the dead , an explicit reference to the deceased . Many of these memorials were in private homes rather than in public places , as bereaved families often made domestic memorials , using photographs of the deceased and personal objects sent back from the front . 
 In Britain and Australia , early memorials were closely linked to the need to promote military recruitment and the state had an ambivalent attitude towards the informal memorials that emerged during the conflict . In Britain , stone memorials to the war began to be erected in towns and villages from 1915 onwards ; some of these were given out by the state as rewards to communities for meeting military recruitment targets . In Australia , the existing memorials to mark the Boer War were used initially used for commemorative ceremonies intended to increase military recruitment . As casualties increased , rolls of honour listing the dead began to be displayed in Britain and honour tablets with the names of those who had enlisted were put up inside Australian buildings : Australia used these lists to apply moral pressure on those who were not yet joined up . Informal memorials began to multiply as the war progressed . Local Australian groups erected small monuments , such as drinking fountains and stone pillars , to the point where the government became concerned about the expenditure on them and passed a law in 1916 to control their numbers . In Britain , some Anglican church leaders began to create street war shrines to the dead . These cheap , local memorials were mainly constructed in working class districts , often built from wood and paper , and were used for holding short services in honour of the dead and to hold donations of flowers . They were criticised , however , as promoting Catholic <unk> . Official support for the shrines only came after a national newspaper campaign , efforts by the Lord Mayor of London and a well @-@ publicised visit from Queen Mary to a shrine , and standardised stone shrines then began to replace the earlier , temporary versions . 
 Across the German Empire nagelfiguren , war memorials made from iron nails embedded in wood , became popular , particularly in Austria . These took various forms , including knights , shields , eagles and crosses , as well as submarines . This practice had medieval origins , and the memorials were reinforced by the promotion of <unk> during the war , a medieval pact in which disparate German communities would put aside their differences during a conflict . In some cases , relatives of the deceased were encouraged to hammer memorial nails in as part of the ceremonies , while children might be encouraged to read out poems in a medieval style . At some nagelfiguren a charge was made for each nail used , with the revenues donated to charities supporting soldiers , orphans and others affected by the conflict . 
 Some relatively large memorials were constructed during the war . The largest nagelfiguren was a statue of General Hindenburg , famous for his victory over the Russians in Prussia at the battle of Tannenberg ; the 12 m tall statue was put up in Berlin , complete with scaffolding to allow participants to reach the statue and hammer nails in . By the end of the war , architects in Germany already considering how to commemorate the dead . A large , temporary memorial shrine was built in Hyde Park in August 1918 , with over 100 @,@ 000 visitors in its first week : it lasted over a year . The Hyde Park shrine encouraged debate in Britain about permanent war memorials in the major cities and towns . Museums to remember the events of the war also began to be commissioned ; governmentally : the Imperial War Museum in Britain in 1917 , Australia began a War Museum in 1917 ; privately , the repository of wartime records in France , Germany the <unk> . 
 During the conflict itself , monuments were erected near the battlefields and the temporary cemeteries being used to store the dead . It had been hoped in Britain to repatriate the war dead , but this rapidly proved entirely impractical , leading to haphazard , improvised arrangements around the battlefields . By 1916 over 200 war cemeteries had been commissioned in France and Belgium , prompting debate about what longer term memorials might be appropriate at these sites . The government was concerned that unsuitable , even distasteful memorials might be erected by relatives at the cemeteries and the decision was taken that the cemeteries would be controlled by the state , and that a uniform design would be applied to the memorials at the graves . French cemeteries were used for as memorial sites for ceremonies by injured soldiers during the war and many towns began to name streets and squares after Verdun . In Belgium , where the movement of the war and losses of territory had meant that the Flemish elements of the population were increasingly forming a disproportionate percentage of the army , the language on the memorial headstone gradually became an issue , leading to calls for the creation of <unk> , headstones inscribed in Flemish , rather than the usual French . In Imperial Russia , the Moscow City Fraternal Cemetery was constructed for the war dead in 1915 by the Imperial royal family and senior Moscow political leaders , who hoped that its inspiring architecture would ensure patriotism in future generations of Russians . 
 = = Inter @-@ war ( 1919 – 39 ) = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 = = = = Commissioning memorials = = = = 
 Various different mechanisms for commissioning the construction of war memorials emerged during the inter @-@ war period . In most of the nations involved in the conflict , the memorials erected in towns and cities were usually commissioned by local community leaders and other civic groups , with relatively little or no central state involvement . Some national organisations emerged , including the British War Memorials Committee and the Canadian War Memorials Fund , but these focused on narrow , limited projects , rather than trying to coordinate a national response . The local processes and committees could result in multiple memorials being created for the same community or event : the site of Verdun was commemorated by three different memorials , for example , while some British towns saw rival memorials created by competing groups in the community . 
 In contrast , the construction of war cemeteries , graves and their associated memorials were typically placed under the control of a central state authority . The Imperial War Graves Commission ( IWGC ) took on this role for Britain and her empire . The <unk> nazionale per la <unk> ai <unk> di guerra in Italy coordinated the military repatriation of bodies and the construction of cemeteries . The German war graves commission , the <unk> Deutsche <unk> ( VDK ) , was established in 1919 , and took strict control over the creation and style of German war cemeteries . The American Battle Monuments Commission oversaw US military graves in a similar fashion . 
 In Britain and Australia , local community leaders were expected to organise local committees to create war memorials . Britain had a strong tradition of local government and mayors , council chairmen or similar leaders would usually step forward to establish a memorial committee . These committees might then bring in a wider cross @-@ section of local community leaders , including Christian clergy , Jewish leaders , voluntary organisations , rifle clubs and volunteer police , although sometimes committees were more tightly controlled by local government officials . Former servicemen occasionally felt that their opinions were excluded from the formal processes , while in other cases complaints were made that the wealthier members of the community were given a disproportionate role in decision @-@ making . In both Britain and Australia , local memorials were also supplemented by other memorials that reflected wider groups in society , such as military units or particular sports , hobbies or even animals . North America largely followed a similar process . In Canada , the early memorials to the war were typically organised by groups of former soldiers , the Canadian Legion or local authorities . There was considerable discussion in the US during 1919 about the need to construct a suitably grand , national monument to commemorate the war dead , but the discussions failed to produce a consensus and no project was undertaken . 
 In other countries , the state played a stronger role in the process of commissioning memorials . France , for example , mostly relied on local communities to organise and commission most war memorials , but the state played a comparatively larger role than in Britain and similar countries . A law was passed in 1919 establishing an official role for local government officials in the process of commissioning memorials ; many towns then formed committees to take this process forward , typically at the commune level . Members of the Souvenir Français organisation played an important role in many of the resulting local committees . In other cases , governments increased their role in commissioning memorials during the inter @-@ war period . In Romania , most memorials in the early 1920s were initially erected by local communities ; in 1919 the royal family created the Societatea <unk> Eroilor <unk> to oversee commemoration of the war more generally ; the organisation was headed by the Patriarch of the Romanian Orthodox Church . By the 1930s official concern over the diverse range of designs led to increased central control over the process . 
 The rise of Fascism in particular frequently encouraged greater state involvement . In Italy , between the end of the war and 1923 local groups and organisations had established their own local memorials in villages and towns . Not all villages agreed that memorials were appropriate , either for political or religious reasons . With the Fascist revolution , this process became more centralised ; veteran groups were assimilated by the Fascist government in 1926 , and a systematic attempt to construct suitable national and local memorials followed . In Germany , the political and economic chaos of the immediate post @-@ war years discouraged the construction of civic war memorials and comparatively few civic memorials in their larger towns , mainly due to the shortage of funds in the inter @-@ war German economy and political disagreements between local groups as to what to commemorate and how . Those memorials that were constructed were often built instead by local movements , representing particular factional interests . It was only after the rise of the German Nazi party to power in 1933 that substantial funding began to flow into construction programmes , controlled from Berlin . 
 As a result of all these processes , large numbers of memorials , more than for any other conflict , were built across the world during the inter @-@ war period . It is estimated that France built around 176 @,@ 000 war memorials , including around 36 @,@ 000 in the local communes . Most of the local commune memorials were built by 1922 , but those in the towns and cities typically required more protracted negotiations , and their construction stretched into the 1930s . The 1920s were particularly busy for construction of memorials in Britain , although the trend tailed off in 1930s , with the last inter @-@ war memorial unveiled at the town of Mumbles in 1939 . The commissioning of Australian war memorials similarly reduced after the mid @-@ 1920s . Over 3 @,@ 500 Romanian memorials were erected . Many German memorials were built during the 1930s . Russia was unusual in building very few war memorials to the events of World War I , mainly as a result of the devastation of the Civil War and the political views of the subsequent Bolshevik government . 
 = = = = Community and civic memorials = = = = 
 Civic and private memorials in response to the war took many forms , from monuments , sculpture , buildings , gardens , artistic works or special funds to support particular activities . One of the major distinctions between proposed war memorials involved a distinction between utilitarian and non @-@ utilitarian , symbolic designs ; in the US , utilitarian memorials were termed " living memorials " . Utilitarian memorials were intended to commemorate the dead by having a practical function and typically include projects such as libraries , small hospitals , cottages for nursing staff , parks , clock towers or bowling greens , although in Britain and Canada , large @-@ scale urban redevelopment projects were also proposed , including rebuilding the centre of Westminster , to form a huge war memorial complex and building a subway under the Detroit River . In contrast non @-@ utilitarian memorials , such as monuments , remembered the dead purely through their symbolism or design . Locations could be also contentious : in France , some arguments as to whether market places , for example , were suitable locations : was it good to choose a central location , or did this cheapen the symbolism ? In Britain , in a shift from 19th century practices , memorials were typically placed in busy public places . 
 In some countries , such as France and Germany , utilitarian memorials were considered totally unsuitable ; the Germans , for example , thought them unpatriotic and disrespectful to the dead . In other , particularly more Protestant countries , however , a vigorous debate raged as to whether utilitarian or symbolic memorials were more appropriate . In Britain , this debate was spurred on by the formation of various national societies to promote particular perspectives . Some felt that practical memorials failed to remember the war dead properly ; others argued that these memorials helped support the survivors of the war and society as a whole . Although these arguments frequently became embroiled in local politics , there was little correlation between national political views and opinions on the form of memorials . Most memorials in Australia were monumental rather than utilitarian , but practical memorials such as hospitals , schools or new roads were increasingly popular in the post war period , although some concerns were raised that these memorials might be later demolished as Australia 's towns expanded . In America , utilitarian memorials were more popular , and the establishment of the National Committee on Memorial Buildings supported this trend . The American " living memorial " movement was aided by widespread criticism of the war monuments to the American Civil War , which many felt to have been purely executed . 
 For symbolic memorials , numerous designs were possible , from simple monuments through to much more complex pieces of sculpture . Obelisks had been a popular memorial form in the 19th century and remained so in the inter @-@ war years , including in Britain , France , Australia and Romania . One factor in this popularity was that obelisks were relatively cheap to build , while they also fitted well with the existing civic architecture in many towns . Memorial plaques were another popular memorial style around the world . Soldiers , either individually or in groups , were a popular sculptural feature in most countries , portrayed in various stances ; typically these were allegorical , although in France the style of the soldier could also carry political meaning and reflect local political sympathies . Although the trend pre @-@ dated the First World War , very few Western war memorials portrayed heroic commanding officers , as had been popular earlier in the 19th century ; if soldiers were depicted , they were invariably ordinary soldiers , usually infantrymen . After the unveiling of the Cenotaph in London , it became a popular design in many other locations in Britain and Australia too . 
 In other respects , individual countries had different preferences for styles of memorial . French communities usually chose simple monuments , located in public spaces , and deliberately avoided political or religious imagery and rhetoric . In Australia and the US , memorial halls – some of which were large , grand structures – were popular . Australia also created the idea of an Avenue of Honour , involving lines of trees , with memorial plaques , along a road . Canadians often brought back various material from Europe for their memorials , including pieces of local European churches and soil from the relevant battlefields . Individual countries also had typical national symbols that were widely incorporated , from the British Britannia , to the Gallic rooster to the Romanian vulture . Postcards of war memorials were widely produced in Britain and Italy , and ceramic models of the more famous ones , such as the Cenotaph , were sold as souvenirs . 
 = = = = Cemeteries = = = = 
 The World War I war cemeteries represented important memorials sites to the conflict and typically incorporated specific monuments commemorating the dead . Under the Treaty of Versailles , each country was made officially responsible for maintaining the military graves inside their territories , but the relevant countries of the fallen soldiers were typically granted the freedom to design and build the military cemeteries themselves . Some countries ' cemeteries would naturally be on their own soil , but in other cases , such as for Britain and the Dominions , the cemeteries could be relatively distant ; the failure to repatriate British war dead from Europe early in the war had proved domestically controversial , and when the US joined the war in 1917 their government had promised relatives that bodies would be repatriated to the US ; around 70 percent of the US war dead were sent back . Along the Western front , the cemeteries were typically concentrated in specific locations , with the bodies brought in some distances to form larger cemeteries ; elsewhere , the cemeteries tended to be smaller and more scattered . 
 There was much discussion across the British empire about how the IWGC should commemorate the war dead . The construction of war cemeteries was a clear priority , but there was an ambition to produce a ground @-@ breaking series of memorials to the fallen soldiers and the key battles along the Western front , while in the east there was an urgent political requirement to construct memorials to reinforce Britain 's inter @-@ war claims to influence and territories across the region . The Dominions also wanted to have their own national monuments as part of the programme of work . Initially twelve major memorials were planned , each of which would combine a memorial to a key battlefield , a cemetery and a monument to a specific Dominion , but the French government raised concerns over the considerable number and size of these memorials , leading to the plans being halved in scale . 
 IWGC war cemeteries featured grass and flowers within a walled area , intended to resemble an English garden ; almost all were constructed around a War Stone and a Cross of Sacrifice , described in more detail below . The style varied slightly by architect and location , but typically the cemeteries followed classical influences in buildings and monuments , sometimes adapted slightly to appeal to the style of a particular Dominion . The buildings at the cemeteries were important symbolically and formed a key part of these designs . The graves proved controversial : initially they were marked by wooden crosses but , after some argument , it was agreed to replace these with Portland stone markers ; the original wooden memorials were in some cases returned to the soldier 's next of kin . Each marker was identical in shape and individualised only through the inscription of the name , regiment , date of death , a religious symbol and a short text agreed by the next of kin . Public debate ensued about these graves throughout the 1920s . British officials were concerned about families erecting their own memorials on the sites and detracting from the appearance of the cemeteries ; critics complained about the secular nature of the memorials , the limited options for families to <unk> the graves and the excessive role of the IWGC in determining how the soldiers were buried . 
 The construction of the French cemeteries was complicated by even more heated arguments over how the bodies of the war dead should be dealt with . During the conflict the French war dead had ended up being split between special war cemeteries , local civilian cemeteries and some had been returned to their original villages . Catholic traditionalists in the government called for the bodies to be buried together in special cemeteries along the Western front , while others campaigned for them to be returned to local cemeteries . In 1919 , the decision was taken to use special war cemeteries and to ban the repatriation of bodies , but by 1920 this decision had been reversed and 300 @,@ 000 French bodies were repatriated to their original homes . The French war cemeteries were typically much larger than their IWGC equivalents and used concrete Catholic crosses for all the graves , with the exception of the Islamic and Chinese war dead . 
 German war cemeteries are somewhat different from French and British ones , being more austere and simple in design . They were built around lawns , without flowers or other decorations , intended to highlight acceptance of the tragedy and avoid the expensive and pretentious sentimentality that the German VDK felt Allied cemeteries invoked . German war cemeteries also included <unk> , heroes ' groves populated with oak trees and large boulders , dolmen . Both symbolising nature ; this landscaping was considered to be particularly important for German war cemeteries . The cemeteries used slate grave markers , less individualised than British or French equivalents , and felt to better symbolise the importance German nation as a whole . 
 In eastern Europe , Romania built what were termed heroes ' war grave cemeteries , either in existing heroes ' cemeteries , on the sites of the World War I battles , or in new cemeteries symbolically placed on the edges of towns . The situation was somewhat different in Russia , however , where the Moscow City Fraternal Cemetery was used not just for the war dead of World War I , but also for the casualties of the Civil War , and then the victims of the secret police . It was finally closed by the Bolsheviks in 1925 and turned into a park ; subsequently , possibly on the orders of Joseph Stalin , the Eastern Orthodox church and the headstones were systematically destroyed until almost no trace of the cemetery remained . 
 A final wave of war cemetery memorials were completed in the 1930s under the Fascist governments of Germany and Italy . The main Italian war cemeteries were not finished until 1938 , and their positioning in some cases carried special political meaning , emphasising Italy 's right to claim important , but ethnically diverse , border regions . In Germany , the same decade saw the completion of <unk> , fortresses of the dead , used as war cemeteries and memorials . These were in some senses an extension of the cemetery designs of the 1920s , celebrating a natural German landscape , but included extensive modernist , monumental features , intending to highlight German artistic skill . 
 = = = = Battlefields = = = = 
 Most nations considered certain battlefields particularly important because of the national losses that had been incurred there , and took steps to erect special memorials to them , alongside the cemeteries that held their war dead . The French regarded the battles around Verdun as symbolic of the entire war , while for the British the battle of Ypres in Belgium and the battle of the Somme in France — in particular Thiepval hill — had similar resonances . Australian and New Zealand forces placed special significance on the events of Gallipoli . In the same way , Romania regarded the battles of Mărăşeşti and Mărăşti as hugely significant sites , worth of special remembrance . In the inter @-@ war years , these battlefields were frequently described as forming " sacred " ground because of the number deaths that had occurred there . 
 National governmental bodies and charities were rapidly formed to produce memorials for these sites . The British government , for example , set up the Battle Exploits Committee in 1919 to create national battlefield memorials , alongside the work of the IWGC . Initially their intent was to celebrate the more heroic aspects of the fighting , and to avoid the flavour of memorials to the fallen that were being built elsewhere ; by 1921 , however , the committee had entered into a partnership with IWGC and adopted the same focus on the sacrifice of the fallen soldiers . The Canadian Battlefields Memorials Commission ( <unk> ) was similarly established in 1920 to produce war memorials for the major battlefields involving Canadian forces . 
 A range of battlefield memorials emerged . The huge Douaumont ossuary was built to remember Verdun through a private French charity , organised by the Bishop of Verdun . The ossuary was deliberately multi @-@ faith , however , with Catholic , Protestant , Jewish and Islamic facilities . The Romanian authorities built a similar mausoleum at Mărăşeşti , explicitly likened to the use French ossuary at Verdun . Canadian Vimy Monument . Amidst some concerns about denigrating the importance of other battlefields , the <unk> focused on producing a single major memorial at Vimy . In Turkey , the entire battlefield of Gallipoli was ceded to Britain and her imperial allies in 1923 , and the area was turned into an extended memorial to the war dead . There were no settlements to reconstruct , so the graves were largely left scattered in individual graves or small cemeteries , and the slopes were planted with Australian vegetation . Obelisks were particularly popular memorials at Gallipoli along the ridges , including one obelisk 100 ft high . 
 There was uncertainty as to how to treat the wider battlefields surrounding these monuments . At the end of the war , visitors and tourists could easily see the damage caused by the war and the detritus of the fighting , but post @-@ war reconstruction meant that by the 1930s most of this damage along the Western front had been restored . In several cases , veterans felt that the battlefields should be maintained in their immediate post @-@ war condition as memorials ; the reconstruction of the town of Ypres was opposed by some who favoured keeping the ruins as a memorial . It was proposed to leave the fortifications of Douaumont in ruins as a memorial to the dead of Verdun , and the issue of whether or not to replant the region with trees in the 1930s proved controversial with veterans . Some parts of the trench systems were preserved intact as memorials , however , including the Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial and the trench system at the Canadian National Vimy Memorial . In other theatres , such as Iraq and Palestine , reconstruction took much longer and bodies remained unburied at least until 1929 . 
 = = = = Economics = = = = 
 Resources and funds were needed to construct most memorials , particular larger monuments or building projects ; sometimes professional services could be acquired for nothing , but normally designers , workmen and suppliers had to be paid . Different countries approached this problem in various ways , depending on local culture and the role of the state . Despite the special nature of the memorials , contractual arguments and issues over costs , timings and specifications were common , from smaller works in villages through to major works , such as the Vimy Memorial . The sheer volume of work encouraged industrial innovation : carving the inscriptions into the many thousands of British memorial stones had to originally be undertaken by hand , for example , until a Lancashire company invented an automated engraving process . 
 In Britain , voluntary subscription , rather than funding from local or central government , was considered the only correct way to pay for a war memorial , although it was disputed whether active proactive fundraising was appropriate . Raising the sums required could be quite difficult , and many committees tried various means , including moral blackmail , to exhort larger sums out of the more wealthy members of the community . The amount of money successfully raised varied considerably : the city of Glasgow , with a million inhabitants , raised approximately £ 104 @,@ 000 for memorials ; Leeds , with around half a million inhabitants , only £ 6 @,@ 000 . A typical memorial monument in Britain costed between £ 1 @,@ 000 and £ 2 @,@ 000 , but some could be cheaper still ; larger pieces , such as the Royal Artillery Memorial , could cost as much as £ 25 @,@ 000 . Australian communities raised funds in similar ways to their British equivalents , but the process of fund @-@ raising was much more open , and included directly canvassing for donations . Typical Australian projects cost between £ 100 and £ 1 @,@ 000 , with the larger memorials costing up to £ 5 @,@ 000 ; bank @-@ loans were also sometimes used . Memorials along the Western front , being larger , cost rather more than their civic equivalents ; the Villers – Bretonneux Australian National Memorial , for example , cost the IWGC and Australian government around £ 40 @,@ 000 . 
 The French approach to funding memorials also relied mainly on voluntary fundraising , but featured a greater role for the state . A law passed in 1919 provided for a subsidy from central government to local authorities to assist in building memorials ; the money was distributed in proportion to the number of local citizens who had died in the war . Nonetheless the largest French projects , such as the Ossuary of Douaumont , were still paid for mostly through private fund raising across France and the international community : it could take many years to raise the sums required . The Ossuary cost 15 m francs to build ; at the other end of the scale , more modest urban memorials cost around 300 @,@ 000 francs . 
 Much of the inter @-@ war period saw economic recession or stagnant growth , making fund @-@ raising more challenging . Partially as a result , many memorial projects had to be cut back or altered due to lack of money . The final size of Douaumont had to be cut in size by a third when fund @-@ raising slowed . Proposals to turn the planned Imperial War Museum into a grand memorial for the war dead were shelved due to lack of funds . 
 The construction of memorials produced a lot of business in all the countries involved in the war . In Britain and Australia , stone masons provided large quantities of mass @-@ produced design , often advertising through catalogues , while professional architects acquired the bulk of the specialised commissions for war memorials , making use of their professional organisations . Professional sculptors argued that their work was superior and more appropriate than that of architects , but they received far fewer commissions . British stone masons provided cheap products through catalogues . In France , funeral directors played a large part in the business of producing designs , producing catalogues of their designs for local communities to choose from . In the US , there was sufficient interest that a specialist magazine , Monumental News , was created to support the trade in war memorials . 
 = = = Innovation and grieving = = = 
 = = = = Naming the dead = = = = 
 The deaths caused by World War I were difficult for post @-@ war societies to cope with : their unprecedented scale challenged existing methods of grieving . Furthermore , an expectation had arisen during the war that individual soldiers would expect to be commemorated , even if they were low ranking members of the military . One method used to address this was the inclusion of lists of names . In part , this was a response to the practical problem of commemorating such large numbers of dead , but it carried additional symbolic importance ; in some ways , the physical presence of a name acted to compensate for an absent body . The lists could vary in size from the 21 names listed in a small English village like East Ilsley , to the 54 @,@ 896 names inscribed on the Menin Gate and the 73 @,@ 357 on the Thiepval Memorial . 
 Civic memorials in Britain and France typically had names inscribed ; in Britain , these were often combined with other mottos or script , in France , where the significance of the name took even greater importance , just the names were used with a simple introduction . In France the names were usually listed in alphabetical order , resembling a military presentation . The British phrase , adopted by IWGC , " their name liveth for evermore " , was popularised by Rudyard Kipling , who had lost a son during the war . British lists often omitted the soldier 's rank , creating an impression of equality in death . Long lists of names — up to 6 @,@ 000 — incorporated into churches in England and Germany . In Australia , where the forces were solely volunteers , all those who served were typically recorded on memorials , while in New Zealand , where conscription applied , only the fallen were recorded on memorials . 
 Touching the names of the dead on memorials was common gesture of grieving in the inter @-@ war period ; sometimes mourners would also kiss the names . Visitors to the memorials on the Western front would often photograph or trace on paper the relevant names on the memorials , taking these reminders back with them to their homes . By contrast , the naming of the dead played a less significant role in Italy , where formal lists of the war dead were not established until the mid @-@ 1920s ; local communities compiled their own lists , used to produce local memorial plaques , but the national lists remained inaccurate for many years . 
 After the war , a bronze memorial plaque , inscribed with the name of the deceased alongside Britannia and a lion , and a scroll , sent to the next of kin of those had died in the service of the British Empire . Honour rolls in Canada were very popular , particularly immediately after the end of the war , although the decision on which names to include on them proved contentious : should accidental deaths , for example , be included ? Where it was impractical to inscribe names in churches , usually due to the number of casualties and available space , books of names were often recorded instead . 
 = = = = <unk> and Tombs of the Unknown Soldier = = = = 
 A large number of soldiers who died in the war were never found , and similarly bodies were recovered that could not be identified ; once again , this required new forms of memorial . The scale of the issue was once again huge : 73 @,@ 000 Allied dead were never found at the Somme , for example , either because their bodies had been lost , destroyed or were unrecognisable , more than one in ten of the losses in the battle . 
 One of the key developments in memorials to the war , the cenotaph , used an empty tomb to symbolise these aspects of the war . In 1919 , Britain and France planned victory marches through their respective capitals and as part of this France decided to erect a temporary cenotaph , an empty sarcophagus monument , which would be saluted by the marching troops . The British Prime Minister David Lloyd George decided that a similar memorial should be built in London , despite ministerial opposition that a cenotaph was an inappropriate , Catholic form of monument . The victory marches went ahead ; French political leaders had the memorial in Paris removed immediately after the parade , on the basis that it was too Germanic in appearance , but the London cenotaph proved very popular and hundreds of thousands flocked to see it . The popularity of the temporary Cenotaph resulted in it remaining open until the following year , when the decision had to be taken about what to do with the decaying structure : there was concern from the government that a permanent memorial might be vandalised , while the popular press criticised any suggestion of dismantling the existing structure . A new , permanent cenotaph designed by Edwin Lutyens was commissioned and unveiled on Whitehall Street on Armistice Day 1920 , effectively turning this part of London into a memorial to the war ; over a million people visited the site during November that year . The memorial style became very popular and spread to other countries in the subsequent years . 
 In contrast to the empty cenotaph , another new form of memorial , the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier , used the idea of burying one of the unidentified bodies from the war as a symbolic memorial to all of the lost soldiers . This idea had begun to emerge towards the end of the war , and was actively promoted by some British veterans ' groups in 1919 . Initially , however , it failed to gain traction with the government because of the success of the Whitehall Cenotaph , and a second memorial was felt to be unnecessary . Finally , in 1920 , following lobbying by British cleric David Railton , Britain and France both decided to create a Tomb of the Unknown Soldier , choosing an unknown body and creating a special memorial around it ; the tombs were inaugurated on Armistice Day . The choice of location for the French tomb proved controversial , however , and it was not finalised until the following year , when the body was laid to rest under the Arc de Triumph . The concept proved popular , and encouraged similar memorials in other countries . 
 In Italy , the idea of an Unknown Soldier memorial was particularly popular , both because lists of memorial names were less common and because the Italy had suffered particularly heavily from unidentifiable casualties as a result of the campaigns in the Alps — as many of 60 % of the corpses buried at <unk> were unidentifiable . The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Rome was built in 1921 , with other unidentifiable bodies being adopted by local cults of the dead across Italy . The Italian tomb was significant in political terms ; Italy was deeply divided in the post @-@ war years and the Liberal government hoped that the opening would reunify the country . In practice , the tomb became a point of tension between the Liberals and the Italian Fascist movement , and Benito Mussolini claimed to have timed his seizure of power the next year to ensure that the 1922 ceremonies at the tomb would occur under a Fascist government . 
 Other countries considered similar memorials . The US constructed a Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in 1921 ; while the idea was clearly a foreign concept , it proved very popular with the American public and by 1936 was attracting over 1 @.@ 5 m visitors a year and acting as an informal national monument to the war . Edwin <unk> , part of the German government , supported a similar scheme in 1925 , but without success , and Mainz Cathedral and Ulm Minster were later proposed as options for a tomb . In Germany , a tomb was not finally built until 1935 , when it was sponsored by the Nazi government ; the final memorial contained 20 bodies of unknown German soldiers from the Eastern front . Other countries also constructed tombs , including Belgium and Portugal , and as in France and Britain these tombs were placed in capital cities ; there was an abortive attempt to place the Romanian tomb at Mărăşeşti , but this proved impractical for both logistic and ceremonial reasons . Canada , Australia and New Zealand declined to build their own tombs , as they were considered to be represented by the burial in London . 
 = = = = Ceremonies = = = = 
 Ceremonies came to surround many memorials ; many memorials were formally opened or unveiled in public ceremonies , while others were used for recurring ceremonies on commemorative days . Memorials in Britain and France were typically opened in civic ceremonies involving local dignitaries , veterans and the next @-@ of @-@ kin of fallen servicemen . Some memorials acquired daily ceremonies ; in 1928 it became customary to play the Last Post bugle call at the Menin Gate memorial each evening , for example , and this practice spread to many other similar memorials in France . 
 Some ceremonies were formed around the memorials on specific days of the year . During the war , the British had commemorated the 4 August as Remembrance Day , but this was superseded at the end of the conflict by Armistice Day on 11 November each year . It became the norm for ceremonies to be held at memorials across Britain at 11 am on this day , supported by two minutes of silence , instituted by the Government , police and local authorities . The London Cenotaph formed the national hub for these ceremonies from 1919 onwards ; at the first Armistice Day ceremony , it received 500 @,@ 000 visitors in four days . The ceremony at the Cenotaph was equated to a religious event : the Daily Mail , for example , described the emotion and the " mystic meaning " at the ceremony which combined to produce a special " halo " and an " aura " . Ceremonies at the Cenotaph were covered and photographed by the national papers , and national radio broadcasts of the event commenced in 1928 . 
 Armistice Day ceremonies also became important in France . The early ceremonies were organised by veterans ' associations on the 11 November , but in 1921 the French government became concerned that these ceremonies were impacting on industrial productivity and moved the commemoration to the first available Sunday . Following protests , a national French holiday was declared in 1922 . The ceremonies were heavily influenced by the state , with national and local officials playing an important part , and there was an expectation of universal national participation . Attendees would march , often from the local church , past the local cemeteries to a relevant memorial ; tricolour flags , black wreaths and wreaths of flowers would be place on or around the memorials , but unlike Britain there was almost no military symbolism involved in the ceremony . Up to a hundred names of the dead would then be read out , typically by a war orphan , and the crowd would follow each name by saying " Mort pour la France " – " He died for France " – in unison . 
 Other important days were commemorated at memorials around the world . Australia commemorated Armistice Day , but held larger scale commemorations around Anzac Day on 25 April . Anzac Day was founded to remember the Gallipoli campaign , and memorials were erected for the first ceremonies in 1916 ; dawn services at local memorials formed a key part of the national event . In France , the authorities in Verdun organised the Fêtes de la Victoire on 23 June , centring on the city 's memorials and the nearby ossuary . These usually involved senior French military figures and pageantry . Ceremonies to honour the fallen of the battle of the Somme were held by the British at the Somme memorials on the Sunday nearest 1 July throughout the 1920s and 1930s . Romania – inter @-@ war years , the Feast of the Ascension used to commemorate the war dead . Termed Heroes ' Day , civic processions under central guidance from the <unk> took place to the local war memorials . The 6 August was also used to commemorate the battle of Mărăşeşti at the site . Many of these adopted the British use of collective silence during the memorial ceremonies . 
 In some locations , these ceremonies could prove controversial . Canada – ceremonies on Armistice Day in the 1920s not straightforward in Montreal ; predominantly Anglican and English , with French and Catholic elements largely excluded until the end . The opening of the Vimy Memorial drew criticism for its secular nature @-@ no clergy were invited to speak @-@ despite the religious symbolism of much of the building . 
 The emotional character of the ceremonies around the memorials changed as grieving took place and many individuals , inevitably , continued with their lives . Some early ceremonies around memorials were believed to be closely associated with spiritual events . The opening of the Menin Gate memorial , for example , inspired Will Longstaff 's dream that led to the famous Menin Gate at Midnight painting , portraying the fallen dead rising and walking through the gateway , while the Cenotaph ceremonies were photographed in 1922 , and believed by some to show the ghosts of the war dead . Indeed , early ceremonies at the London Cenotaph after the war were felt to be particularly emotional ; commentators felt that by the late 1920s , the events were more formal and less fraught with emotional than previously . Initially foreign diplomats in Britain were expected to lay wreaths on Armistice Day ; this requirement was reviewed in the 1930s . In Australia , there were initially many local ceremonies at memorials on Anzac Day specifically for bereaved mothers ; by the 1930s , these had been discontinued and incorporated into the wider ceremonial occasion . 
 = = = = Pilgrimages = = = = 
 Organised or structured visits to war memorials became popular during the inter @-@ war years . These were often termed pilgrimages , in keeping with the spiritual and religious nature of the journeys . These were frequently combined with other ceremonies at the sites . Tensions existed between those who travelled to the sites as tourists and those who perceived themselves as pilgrims . 
 Along the Western front these began quite early after the war and continued for several decades , dropping in number in the mid @-@ 1920s , when interest in the war temporarily diminished , and again in the Depression years of the early 1930s . Flemish pilgrimages to Belgium graves , particularly the <unk> , and memorials began in 1919 , continuing through the subsequent decades . The Ossuary at Verdun was the centre for many veterans pilgrimages in the 1920s , one of the better known groups being the Fêtes de la Bataille , which travelled to the site to undertake a vigil , processions and lay wreaths . These pilgrimages were typically low @-@ key and avoided military symbolism or paraphernalia . Ypres became a pilgrimage destination for Britons to imagine and share the sufferings of their men and gain a spiritual benefit ; the Ypres League was established by veterans , and sought to transform the horrors of trench warfare into a purifying spiritual quest . The Menin Gate memorial became a focal point for British pilgrims to the Western front after it was opened in 1927 . Pilgrims could come long distances : in the 1920s Canadians began to journey to Vimy and Australians began visiting Gallipoli from 1925 onwards , bringing back military souvenirs relics . 
 Guidebooks for English @-@ speaking visitors became common , including a number of official publications , some extremely detailed . Major Dwight D. Eisenhower spent years working on a guide to American battlefields . A 1920 British guide book , The Holy Ground of British Arms captured the mood of the Ypres League , stating : " there is not a single half @-@ acre in Ypres that is not sacred . There is not a single stone which has not sheltered scores of loyal young hearts , whose one impulse and desire was to fight and , if need be , to die for England . " 
 In central and eastern Europe , the state played a greater role in organising these pilgrimages . The National Orthodox Romanian Women 's Society , supported by the church and the state , played an important part in enabling regular pilgrimages to important Romanian sites up until 1939 . In Germany and Italy , the Fascist governments took a keen interest in organising such journeys . In Italy , these involved large , state @-@ influenced organisations , and the government steadily discouraged private visits or unofficial groups from taking part in alternative ceremonies at these sites . In Nazi Germany , pilgrimages were organised to the new war memorials sponsored by the government in the 1930s . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 The memorials to World War I were frequently politicised , either by the debates over their construction and design , or by the symbolism incorporated into them . Even where attempts were made to ensure political neutrality , as in France where the inscriptions on memorials were usually deliberately neutral , avoiding political controversy , national politics influenced the symbolism and messages incorporated into the memorials . 
 Pacifism slowly began to emerge after the war , but very few war memorials communicated a pacifist message , largely because in the 1920s , most in the victorious countries felt that the war , while costly in human life , had been worth fighting . Anti @-@ war protests in the inter @-@ war years did use war memorials , however , as locations to communicate their messages ; the Communist party in France , for example , held rallies at them . In Britain , political views about the war influenced attitudes towards memorial design and the ceremonies that surrounded them . Those who supported the war were keen to see the ideals of justice and freedom embodied in the designs ; those who opposed the conflict sought memorials that would convince people to avoid future slaughter . The opening of the tomb of the Unknown Soldier was criticised for what anti @-@ war campaigners felt was its pro @-@ war pomp and ceremony , and the burial of the Unknown Soldier in Westminster raised controversy between those who liked the ceremony , and those who thought that the pageantry was designed to distract from the poor living conditions faced by the survivors of the war . 
 Religious differences and tensions could make it difficult to design inclusive war memorials . In US , the separation of church and state meant that crosses were discouraged . Despite being banned from onwards 1905 , many French monuments were explicitly Catholic in character , including a Catholic cross . Australia also minimised the use of crosses , partially for similar reasons , but also because over concerns about excluding their Jewish community . Decisions to incorporate Christian imagery into memorials in Britain could also exclude minority groups , such as Jews , from participating in a memorial . In Britain , the religious differences between Anglicans , Nonconformists and Roman Catholics were frequently played out at a local level in arguments over the location and symbolism to be used in memorials . In Canada , where these differences were overlaid across the English and French speaking national divide , war memorials attempted to reunify the country ; the Cross of Sacrifice memorial in Montreal , for example , was deliberately situated in between the Catholic and Protestant war cemeteries . This was only partially successful – inauguration ceremony and the military parade resulted in shouted arguments between French and English speaking parts of the crowd . 
 World War I memorials were also involved in the civil wars and ethnic disputes of the inter @-@ war period . After independence and the civil war , for example , the Republic of Ireland did not prioritise commemorating the dead of World War I , and indeed the events were largely ignored . Attempts to construct memorials during the 1930s , such as the National War Memorial Gardens in Dublin , were discouraged by the Republican movement and finally blocked altogether in 1939 . By contrast , Unionists in Northern Ireland made the war a key part of their political narrative , emphasising their role in events such as the Battle of the Somme . Monuments were erected in prominent locations in the centres of key Northern Ireland cities . 
 Other multi @-@ ethnic parts of Europe frequently found war memorials equally contentious . In Flanders , the IJzertoren , a controversial Flemish memorial tower , was opened in 1930 , commemorating the sacrifices during the war , but also celebrating Flemish identity and marking the hard treatment of Flemish activists by the Belgian authorities during the conflict . In disputed multi @-@ ethnic territories in the east , such as Transylvania , the war had created bitter memories between Hungarian and Romanian inhabitants . The arguments were played out in differences as to how the dates of the war @-@ in which Hungary and Romania had entered and left at different times @-@ were recorded on tombstones and other memorials . In Serbia , the Kosovo Maiden was extensively used in war memorials , drawing a link between the war and the Battle of Kosovo . 
 The Fascist movements in Italy and Germany in the 1920s and 1930s made extensive use of World War I memorials to communicate a political message . War memorials were a key part of the Italian Fascist government 's programme , with memorials set up in the name of the fallen and the Fascist revolution . Local Fascist organisations made extensive use of the war memorials and associated ceremonies to promote loyalty both to Italy , and to the revolution . The government promoted the " cult of the fallen hero " , stressing that the war dead had played a vital role in transforming Italy 's position in Europe and transforming history . The Fascist leader Mussolini was less enthusiastic , however , about the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier , which he felt was associated with the former regime ; he discouraged its use , although remained sensitive to its symbolic importance to various parts of Italian society . Military fly @-@ pasts were added to the Armistice ceremonies and the Tomb itself was moved in 1935 , to make it easier to use the memorial in military parades . 
 The later German monuments constructed by the Nazi government were substantial , but communicated a limited range of symbolic messages , focusing on German heroism , conservative nationalism sentiments and masculinity . Use of mass graves symbolised the sense of German community . When Paul von Hindenburg died in 1935 , the Tannenberg Memorial was then used as his mausoleum , commemorating elite military leadership during the war . The Nazi government attempted to have the Jewish names removed from the war memorials , but this proved impractical and instead a law was passed forbidding their addition to any future memorials . The government also removed more experimental earlier war memorials which were felt to communicate an inappropriate message about the war , such as the work of Ernst <unk> . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Most World War I war designers attempted to produce memorials that were , as cultural historian Jay Winter describes , noble , uplifting , tragic and <unk> sad . There were various architectural styles used on memorials , but most were essentially conservative in nature , typically embracing well established styles such as classicism and embracing mainstream Christian symbolism . This conservatism in part resulted from the age and background of the committees that were commissioning the memorials , and also from a sense that established architectural styles , rather a potentially more transitory but fashionable style , would be more enduring and appropriate . 
 Professional concern was raised in several countries about the quality of memorials . Australians expressed critical concern from 1919 onwards about the poor quality of the sculptures of soldiers on memorials , the blame being placed on the cheap reproductions by stone masons . Their government responded by establishing advisory boards to discourage this trend . Britain also saw concerns over the " stereotyped designs " being supplied by firms of stone masons , and here again numerous bodies issued guidance on better practices , including the Royal Academy of Art , the Church of England ; the Civic Arts Association was formed specifically to help . The opinion of professional artists and critics remained quite important for committees when choosing designs , however , and there was vigorous discussion between supporters of different styles and architectural traditions . 
 Many designers were involved in the construction of memorials , but some became particularly well known for their work in this area . Many of the sculptors active on the memorials were established , Victorian @-@ era individuals ; the war had disrupted the training of a new generation , and many young sculptors had been killed . Some attempts were made to give preference to designers who had fought in the war , but this was far from universal . In British circles , Edwin Lutyens , Herbert Baker , Reginald Blomfield and Charles Holden formed the core of the established artists ; these were joined by Charles Sargeant Jagger , Gilbert Ledward and Eric Gill from the younger generation . Pietro <unk> was a particularly prolific Australian designer . In Germany , Käthe Kollwitz memorial of a grieving mother at the <unk> cemetery particularly famous , and based on her own loss of a son during the fighting in the war . 
 = = = = Symbolism = = = = 
 World War I memorials made extensive use of symbolism and allegory . Some of these symbols were national in character , carrying a simple message about national victory – a Gallic rooster triumphing over a German , the croix de guerre , or the Romanians ' symbol for their heroes ' cult for example – but others , such as images of infantrymen , could be used in different ways , depending on how they were portrayed . Some sculpture of French infantrymen , for example , aims to capture the spirit of French republicanism , while others are designed with more right @-@ wing , nationalist attributes . 
 Major memorial themes , such as victory and death all had their symbols . Many Canadian and British soldiers are shown raising a hat or a rifle , a sign of victory first introduced into Boer War memorials . The Greek goddess Nike herself frequently appears on civic memorials , particularly in Britain and Canada , personifying victory , often pointing the way to soldiers : the image is far less , common , however , on more sombre memorials in battlefields and graveyards . <unk> of Death rarely feature on these memorials , however , probably because the emphasis is typically on the self @-@ sacrifice of the soldiers involved , rather than their being taken or claimed by Death . Death is more typically presented through images of widows , orphans and elderly parents on memorials , all popular inter @-@ war allegorical forms for death and grieving . Figures of women often represented peace , civilisation or wider humanity . 
 By far the most important source of symbolism on memorials , however , is Christian imagery and icons . Religious imagery permeated many war memorials , even the secular . The most important of these symbols was the Christian cross , a widely used symbol of hope and suffering . The cross could take multiple forms , from Catholic designs in France , to Orthodox crosses in eastern Europe . Celtic crosses were popular in Britain and Ireland , partially because they avoided Catholic connotations , although they were considered vulgar by more classical architects such as Blomfield . In France , les croix des bois , wooden crosses , became popular symbols at memorials after Roland <unk> 's novel of the same name . German memorials made extensive use of the image of the Virgin Mary tending her son Christ , following in the tradition of the pietà . The crucifixion was also a widely used symbol , as seen in Derwent Wood 's Canada 's Golgotha , although Christ himself was relatively rarely typically seen on British memorials . 
 The widespread use of Christian symbolism led to questions about how to produce memorials suitable for non @-@ Christians . Lutyens attempted to solve this problem for the IWGC through the design of the Great Stone of Remembrance , or War Stone . This was a large , simple stone , intended to resemble an altar and evoke the theme of sacrifice . In practice , many commentators felt it resembled a sarcophagus . Lutyens wanted it to avoid conventional Christian symbolism and based it on designs in Chinese Ming tombs . One of Lutyens ' arguments in favour of his design was that explicit Christian symbolism excluded the Indian and Jewish communities and atheists . The IWGC designs for the Indian and Chinese war cemeteries in Europe deliberately did not use Christian imagery – although , as historian Xu <unk> notes , the Chinese role in the Allied armies remains largely <unk> through memorials . 
 = = = = Classicism = = = = 
 Many memorials drew on a classical style of architecture to produce their effect . This had been a popular style for many pre @-@ war memorials , such as those for the dead of the Boer War , and used Greek or Roman structures , styles and symbolism . A key feature of the classical style was the concept of the " beautiful death " — classical memorials might include figures of soldiers , sometimes dying in conflict , but always heroically and , ultimately , peacefully . Soldiers in these memorials were still frequently depicted as Homeric warriors , rather than more realist figures . The classical symbolism was often used to distance the event of death from the observer , appealing to allegories for sacrifice , justice and victory , in an attempt to make mourning easier to bear . 
 Some inter @-@ war architects developed this approach further . Some traditional classical memorials had been criticised in both England and Germany as being fussy and overly ornate . Men such as Lutyens took the classical principles , but simplified them until the design became almost abstract . These memorials used abstract , beautiful designs intended to remove the viewer from the real world , and focus them on an idealised sense of self @-@ sacrifice , a continuation of the principle of a " beautiful death " . In many ways the simplified , but still classical , forms of memorials like the Cenotaph meant that mourners could read their own thoughts and concerns onto the memorial . Where dead soldiers were shown , they were depicted in an image of serenity and peace , often physically distanced from the viewer on a high platform , the entire effect reflected by the silence that traditionally surrounds ceremonies at the Cenotaph . 
 Many classical themes were used in this way . Thiepval Memorial , for example uses the classical themes of a victory arch and an abstract pattern of diminishing arches to produce what historian Jay Winter has termed " an embodiment of nothing " . The various <unk> adopt the principle of <unk> — Greek method with apparently straight lines , that are in fact slightly curved . Many memorials and war cemeteries used precinct walls to mark out the memorial as special and sacred , originally a Roman feature made popular again in the 19th century . Some features were more literally interpreted : the Victoria State Memorial in Australia , for example , was closely based on a Persian step pyramid . 
 Classical themes , like Christian symbolism , emphasised the sacred nature of the memorial sites . Nonetheless , there was some criticism of classicism by those who wanted a clearer separation of pagan and Christian symbolism ; this was played out in arguments in Germany over whether Iron Crosses or traditional Christian crosses should be used on memorials . Similarly , Lutyens ' War Stones were criticised for their blending of Christian and non @-@ Christian design , while the London Cenotaph was critiqued by the Catholic Herald as being " insulting to Christianity " . Some Christian symbols were redesigned in the simplified classical style , however , including the Cross of Sacrifice . This cross , in a classical style and featuring a white cross and an inverted bronze sword , was designed by Sir Reginald Blomfield for the War Graves Commission , widely used in Commonwealth countries . The design was criticised by some who felt that it excluded other faiths from the memorial site , but nonetheless , over a 1 @,@ 000 of these crosses were ultimately built . 
 = = = = Medievalism = = = = 
 In some countries , particularly Germany and England , memorials used a medieval style , reaching back to a more distant past . Some of these medieval styled memorials were set in existing medieval buildings , fusing older and newer themes . Memorial church windows , for example , could combine medieval and modern features , including armoured knights on horseback , modern weapons @-@ including @-@ tanks and aircraft @-@ and modern national flags . Other memorials deliberately chose medieval themes and symbols , such as the Tomb of the Unknown Warrior in Westminster , where the language of the inscriptions was deliberately archaic , and the tomb itself made from a medieval chest , decorated with a crusader 's sword . England 's patron saint , Saint George , was a particular popular symbol in British designs , typically shown mounted and wearing armour . The Arthurian Round Table and the medieval crusades proved popular themes in Canadian memorials . 
 New memorial buildings could also adopt a medieval style . The Scottish National War Memorial , for example , a Scots baronial styled memorial hall complete with stained glass in Edinburgh Castle , attempts to blend in with the surrounding medieval fortress . In Germany , the <unk> usually looked to the past for their style ; Tannenberg , for example , was heavily medieval in appearance , resembling a castle , albeit combined with a huge cross and mass graves . The dolmen boulders used around the outside of many German memorials reinforced the archaic feel of the monuments . In other cases Germans chose to preserve or rebuild real medieval buildings and architecture to form war memorials , such as parts of Dorsten and <unk> . 
 Medievalism was popular with mourners because it reached back to the past , attempting to heal some of the discontinuities and ruptures of the war . In a period of great uncertainty , the style was reaffirming and apparently immutable , lost in a distant past . By placing the recent dead alongside those who had fallen before , the style gave reassurance that the World War I dead would not be forgotten ; in Westminster , the Dean of Westminster , emphasised when he noted that the Unknown Warrior would be resting alongside his " Saxon and Norman , Plantagenet and Tudor " predecessors . The style was actively promoted by a number of extant artistic and architectural institutions and groups , such as the Victoria and Albert Museum , the Arts and Crafts Movement and Gothic revivalists . 
 = = = = Alternative styles = = = = 
 Only a minority of war memorials used some of the newer styles emerging in the inter @-@ war period , such as modernism , realist and Art Nouveau approaches . As noted above , typically existing , traditional themes were preferred for memorials as a way of grounding mourning in a more familiar perspective . Nonetheless , some of the memorials to use the newer styles became particularly famous . There are a handful of memorials conducted in an Art Deco style , including the ANZAC War Memorial in Sydney which uses the delicate aspects of the Art Deco style to invoke sadness in the viewer , and is the only war memorial in the world to depict a naked soldier . The Douaumont Ossuary also draws on Art Deco principles in its structural architecture , avoiding straight lines in favour of gentle , soft , intersecting curves . Modernist principles were taken further in a small number of British memorials designed by Eric Gill , characterised by their highly abstract , simplified forms . 
 Realism and early modernist principles were applied in Britain to produce a critique of the conventional classical approach and the concept of a " beautiful death " , most notably by Charles Jagger . Jagger 's later work during the inter @-@ war period , most notably his Royal Artillery Memorial , uses realism techniques to portray an oversized BL 9 @.@ 2 inch Mk I howitzer in detail , mounted on a huge , architecturally simple plinth with detailed carvings of military events involving ordinary artillerymen . The sheer size of the piece creates a dehumanizing impact , despite the portrayal of a team of artillerymen , including a covered corpse . <unk> by much of the British press when unveiled in 1925 , many veterans however felt that the style connected to them in a way that more classical themes could not . While the Royal Artillery Memorial is unique , elements of the style can be seen in some other memorials , such as the Cameronians Memorial which includes a realist , almost tactile depiction of a machine gun position . 
 Historical accuracy was important to many British designers , resulting in the use of genuine military equipment as models for memorials , and long discussions with committees over the details to be incorporated into designs . In contrast , the British interest in accurately depicting real weaponry from the war was far less common on German monuments , where usually stylised medieval weapons and armour were used . 
 = = Second World War and Post @-@ War = = 
 The Second World War that broke out in 1939 consumed the attention of a new generation . Across most of the theatres of conflict , the participants attempted to respect the memorials to World War I. After the Second World War there was no equivalent mass construction of memorials to the war dead ; instead , often local World War I memorials were adapted for use instead : additional names might be inscribed to the existing lists . In some cases , this resulted in memorials losing their exclusive focus on World War I. The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Washington , for example , was expanded in 1950s to include corpses from the Second World War and Korea War , broadening the memorial 's remit to commemorate most modern wars . In other cases , such as the Australian War Memorial , begun in the inter @-@ war years but only opened in 1941 , an essentially new memorial was formed to honour the multiple conflicts . 
 In Italy and Germany , 1945 saw the collapse of Fascism ; many memorials in Italian towns and cities were used to execute and display the bodies of the overthrown regime , and the inter @-@ war Fascist pilgrimages and ceremonies around the memorials were abandoned and quickly forgotten . The World War I memorial sites continued to be used , but a combination of anti @-@ war feelings and their residual Fascist links limited the attendance at their public ceremonies . Due to the changes in national borders , in the post @-@ war era some sites favoured by the Nazi government , such as the Tannenberg Memorial , found themselves in Poland ; the demolition of Tannenberg began in 1949 and its stonework was reused for Soviet party buildings . 
 Elsewhere , changes in post @-@ war politics impacted considerably on the <unk> in Belgium , the Flemish IJzertoren tower had become associated with Fascism during the Second World War and was blown up in 1946 by anti @-@ Flemish activists , leading to outrage . Proposals were put forward to build a national monument on the site , but ultimately a second Flemish memorial was constructed instead . In Romania , the Communist post @-@ war government moved away from commemorations around Ascension Day , which was seen as carrying too many religious meanings . The Romanian <unk> itself was abolished in 1948 , pilgrimages to the memorials ceased and the focus of the Communist government was almost entirely placed on commemorating the sacrifices of the Soviet army during World War II . Unusually , political changes in Canada led to the construction of new World War I memorials ; some of the inter @-@ war tensions eased , and 35 new memorials were added in Quebec to the existing 68 in the post @-@ war years , often built as combined memorials to later conflicts . 
 As a whole , interest in the war memorials diminished considerably in the 1950s and 1960s , reflected in a reduced level of ceremonies and a simplification of the commemorative events around memorials . In the post @-@ war years , for example , the separate official and veterans ceremonies at the Verdun memorials blended into one ; in 1956 , German and French ceremonies were also united into a single event . Attendance at events like Anzac Day diminished . Many memorials slowly deteriorated : in some cases the original inter @-@ war funding had never included maintenance , in other cases the materials used to construct the memorials were not durable . In some towns and cities , the memorials were moved to less prominent locations as part of urban renewal projects , or hidden by new buildings . World War I memorials were commonplace in many countries and were paid little attention . 
 = = Since 1990 = = 
 In the 1990s , however , there was a resurgence of interest in World War I memorials . This was driven partially by a sequence of academic works on the social and cultural character of the conflict , aided by a sequence of artistic exhibits of some of more famous designers in the 1980s , and partially by generational change in many countries . As the generation who had lived and fought during the war died off , explaining the context of the memorials became more important . In France , veteran groups had begun to build memorial museums alongside the major monuments and battlefields from the late 1930s onwards . 
 Similar efforts made at the end of the 20th century to create additional museums to explain the events of the war and the memorials ; these initiatives have the support of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission – the successor to the IWGC – but caused concerns amongst British government officials , due to concerns that they might cheapen the symbolism of the memorials . As old imperial links declined , in 1993 , Australia decided to repatriate one of its unidentified war dead from the Western front to form its own Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Canberra . 
 Meanwhile , some of the political tensions of earlier generations faded , allowing new memorials to be built . In the Republic of Ireland , new war memorials were built , trips organised to war memorials in Europe , and the National War Memorial Gardens were restored and finally officially opened in 1995 . 
 In Russia , the Memorial Park Complex of the Heroes of the First World War was built on the site of the former Moscow City Fraternity Cemetery after the fall of Communism , opening in 2005 at a cost of 95 million roubles . The park includes 12 monuments , amongst which was the only surviving headstone from the cemetery and a new memorial chapel . In contrast , by the early 21st century , the numbers visiting the IJzertoren tower during the annual pilgrimages declined significantly as memories of the conflict faded . 
 In the late 1990s and start of the 21st century visitor numbers to the Western Front memorials have risen considerably , and Australian visitors to the memorials at Gallipoli have increased hugely in recent years ; the Prime Ministers of Australia and New Zealand opened a new memorial at the site in 2000 . World War I memorials remain in ceremonial use on Remembrance Day — the post @-@ World War II successor to Armistice Day – Anzac Day and other national occasions , while many utilitarian memorials are still in use by local communities in the 21st century . Systematic efforts are being made to catalogue and record the memorials , with a number of individual restoration projects undertaken with public and private funding . In the centennial of World War I , the memory of the war has become a major theme for scholars and museums . Many museums and historical societies have set up special exhibits , websites , and multimedia exhibits . Proposals were put forward to construct a new national U.S. memorial to the conflict in Washington . 
 = Icelandic Phallological Museum = 
 The Icelandic Phallological Museum ( Icelandic : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , located in Reykjavík , Iceland , houses the world 's largest display of penises and penile parts . The collection of 280 specimens from 93 species of animals includes 55 penises taken from whales , 36 from seals and 118 from land mammals , allegedly including <unk> ( Icelandic elves ) and trolls . In July 2011 , the museum obtained its first human penis , one of four promised by would @-@ be donors . Its detachment from the donor 's body did not go according to plan and it was reduced to a greyish @-@ brown shrivelled mass pickled in a jar of formalin . The museum continues to search for " a younger and a bigger and better one . " 
 Founded in 1997 by retired teacher Sigurður <unk> and now run by his son Hjörtur Gísli Sigurðsson , the museum grew out of an interest in penises that began during Sigurður 's childhood when he was given a cattle whip made from a bull 's penis . He obtained the organs of Icelandic animals from sources around the country , with acquisitions ranging from the 170 cm ( 67 in ) front tip of a blue whale penis to the 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 in ) baculum of a hamster , which can only be seen with a magnifying glass . The museum claims that its collection includes the penises of elves and trolls , though , as Icelandic folklore portrays such creatures as being invisible , they cannot be seen . The collection also features phallic art and crafts such as lampshades made from the <unk> of bulls . 
 The museum has become a popular tourist attraction with thousands of visitors a year and has received international media attention , including a Canadian documentary film called The Final Member , which covers the museum 's quest to obtain a human penis . According to its mission statement , the museum aims to enable " individuals to undertake serious study into the field of <unk> in an organized , scientific fashion . " 
 = = History = = 
 The museum 's founder Sigurður <unk> worked as a teacher and principal for 37 years , teaching history and Spanish at Reykjavík 's <unk> College before his retirement . As a child , he owned a bull 's pizzle , which was given to him to use as a cattle whip . He began collecting penises after a friend heard the story of the bull 's penis in 1974 and gave him four new ones , three of which Sigurður gave to friends . Acquaintances at whaling stations began bringing him whale penises as well , and the collection grew from there , expanding through donations and acquisitions from various sources around Iceland . 
 The organs of farm animals came from slaughterhouses , while fishermen supplied those of pinnipeds and the smaller whales . The penises of larger whales came from commercial whaling stations , although this source dried up after the International Whaling Commission implemented a global ban on commercial whaling in 1986 . Sigurður was able to continue to collect whale penises by harvesting them from the 12 – 16 whales that fall victim to stranding on the Icelandic coast each year . He also obtained the penis of a polar bear shot by fishermen who found the animal drifting on drift ice off the <unk> . 
 Sigurður was assisted by his family , though not without some occasional embarrassment . His daughter Þorgerður recalls that she was once sent to a slaughterhouse to collect a specimen but arrived just as the workers were taking a lunch break : " Someone asked , ' What 's in the basket ? ' I had to say , ' I 'm collecting a frozen goat penis . ' After that I said , ' I will never collect for you again . ' " According to Sigurður , " Collecting penises is like collecting anything . You can never stop , you can never catch up , you can always get a new one , a better one . " 
 The collection was at first housed in Sigurður 's office at the college until he retired from his teaching job . He decided , more as a hobby than a job , to put it on public display in Reykjavík and was awarded a grant from the city council of ISK 200 @,@ 000 to support the opening of a museum in August 1997 . By 2003 , it was attracting 5 @,@ 200 visitors a year , of which 4 @,@ 200 were from abroad . He put the museum up for sale in 2003 , but also offered it to the city of Reykjavík as a gift . However , he was unsuccessful in obtaining financial support from the state or city . When he retired in 2004 , he could no longer afford the rent on the museum 's premises . 
 After his retirement , he moved along with his collection to Húsavík , a fishing village with a population of about 2 @,@ 200 people located 298 miles ( 480 km ) northeast of the capital . The museum was housed in a small building , formerly a restaurant , that was marked with a giant wooden penis and a stone phallus standing outside on the street . The village 's inhabitants were at first skeptical of the new arrival , but came to accept it when they were persuaded that there was nothing pornographic about the museum . 
 In 2012 he handed over the collection to his son , Hjörtur Gísli Sigurðsson ( described by Slate as " the world 's only hereditary penis @-@ museum operator " ) . It was relocated from Húsavík to Reykjavík 's main shopping street at <unk> 116 . Its former location in Húsavík is now home to The Exploration Museum . An offer from a wealthy German to buy the museum for ISK 30 million ( US $ 232 @,@ 000 / € 186 @,@ 000 ) and a proposal to move it to the United Kingdom were both turned down , as Hjörtur insists that " the museum has to be in Iceland . " He intends to continue acquiring new penises because you can " always get a better , newer one ... a bigger size or better shape , you know ? " 
 According to University of Iceland anthropologist Sigurjón Baldur <unk> , Icelanders ' tolerance of the museum is an indicator of how Icelandic society has changed since the 1990s , when a newly elected neoliberal government fostered a more open outlook on entertainment , creativity and tourism that has " enabled new ideas to emerge publicly " . He has documented the significance of the museum 's role in Icelandic culture in a book , Phallological museum ( ISBN <unk> ) OCLC <unk> . 
 = = Collection = = 
 According to the museum 's website , the collection comprises 280 specimens from 93 species of animals . They range from some of the largest to some of the smallest penises in the animal world . Its largest exhibit is a portion of a blue whale 's penis measuring 170 cm ( 67 in ) long and weighing 70 kilograms ( 150 lb ) , which Iceland Review has dubbed " a real Moby Dick " . The specimen is just the tip , as the entire organ , when intact , would have been about 5 m ( 16 ft ) long and weighed about 350 – 450 kilograms ( 770 – 990 lb ) . The baculum of a hamster , only 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 in ) long , is the smallest item in the collection and needs a magnifying glass to be viewed . Sigurður has described the collection as the product of " 37 years of collecting penises . Somebody had to do it . " 
 The museum also has a " folklore section " exhibiting mythological penises ; its online catalogue lists specimens taken from elves , trolls , kelpies , and " The Nasty Ghost of <unk> " . Sigurður says that the elf 's penis , which the museum 's catalogue describes as " unusually big and old " , is among his favourites . It cannot be seen , as Icelandic folklore holds that elves and trolls are invisible . The folkloric penises also include those of a merman , a one @-@ legged , one @-@ armed and one @-@ eyed monster called a Beach @-@ <unk> , an <unk> Beach Mouse ( said to draw " money from the sea to enrich her owner " ) , and an Icelandic Christmas Lad found dead at the foot of a mountain in 1985 and whose penis was presented to the museum by a former mayor of Reykjavík . 
 The museum 's website states that it enables " individuals to undertake serious study into the field of <unk> in an organized , scientific fashion " , giving due prominence to a field that until now has only been " a borderline field of study in other academic disciplines such as history , art , psychology , literature and other artistic fields like music and ballet . " The museum aims to collect penis specimens from every mammal in Iceland . It also exhibits phallic artwork and penis @-@ related objects or " <unk> " such as lampshades made from the <unk> of bulls . Other exhibits range " from an 18th @-@ century engraving depicting the circumcision of Christ to a 20th @-@ century plastic penis pacifier . " Most of the collection has been donated , and the only purchase to date has been an elephant 's penis measuring nearly 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long . The penises are either preserved in formaldehyde and displayed in jars or are dried and hung or mounted on the walls of the museum . 
 Sigurður has used a variety of techniques to preserve the penises , including preservation in formaldehyde , pickling , drying , stuffing and salting . One particularly large penis taken from a bull has been converted into a walking stick . Many of the museum 's exhibits are illuminated by lamps made by Sigurður from rams ' testicles . Sigurður has also carved wooden phalluses , which can be found adorning various objects around the museum , and has a bow tie decorated with images of phalluses that he wears on special occasions . 
 Josh <unk> of Salon.com described his impressions of the museum when he visited in 1998 : 
 They were hanging on the walls , stuffed in jars , displayed with curatorial love – dried penises , penises embalmed in formaldehyde , massive penises displayed like hunting trophies . A tanned bull 's penis , a smoked horse 's penis . There were <unk> , shriveled penises of reindeer , foxes , minks and rats . There were seal and walrus penises with stiff penis bones – ensuring a perpetually erect state . There was the Big Penis – a 3 @-@ foot @-@ long blue whale penis ( which could have been an oar for a canoe ) . 
 The museum is open every day and by July 2011 was attracting up to 11 @,@ 000 visitors annually . Sixty percent of the museum 's visitors are reported to be women , though according to the authors of the Rough Guide to Iceland , mentioning the museum " causes the staff at the tourist office to blush with embarrassment . " The museum 's guest book includes comments such as , " I 've never seen so many penises – and I went to boarding school ! " ( from a New Zealand visitor ) , " They 're bigger in the USA , " ( from someone from Wisconsin ) and " Is there a vagina museum ? " On this point , Sigurður has said , " I 'm only collecting the male organ . Somebody else has to do the other job . I 'd be interested in how they would preserve it . I think vaginas are better alive . " ( There is in fact a " Museum of Vaginal Imagination " in Rotterdam in the Netherlands . ) 
 = = = Human penis = = = 
 For many years , the museum sought to obtain a human penis . Sigurður was able to obtain human testicles and a foreskin from two separate donors ; the foreskin was donated by Iceland 's National Hospital after an emergency circumcision operation . The museum also contains sculptures of 15 penises based on the Iceland national handball team . As the team had won the silver medal at the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games , the penises were made from a silvered material . Sigurður claims that although they are not displayed in the same order as the individuals shown in the photograph that accompany them , " their wives would recognise them . " According to Slate , these sculptures were created by Sigurður 's daughter , Þorgerður Sigurðardóttir , and were based on her own experience rather than any knowledge of the team . The team 's goalkeeper denies that the sculptures are casts . 
 The museum has so far received pledges from four men — an Icelander , a German , an American and a Briton — to donate their penises . Canadian film @-@ maker Zach Math comments that the American , Tom Mitchell , " is an ordinary guy but he has this quirk where he thinks of his penis as a separate entity from his body — Elmo . He has this dream that he wants it to be the most famous penis in the world . " According to Sigurður , Mitchell " wanted to have his penis cut off even during his lifetime and then visit the museum . " Mitchell sent a cast of his penis to serve as a substitute in the meantime , along with photographs of it dressed up as Santa Claus and Abraham Lincoln . The donor also tattooed his penis with the Stars and Stripes to make it look more appealing . He says that " I 've always thought it 'd be really cool for my penis to be the first true penis celebrity " and has made it the star of its own comic book , Elmo : Adventures of a Superhero Penis . 
 The Icelandic donor was a 95 @-@ year @-@ old man from nearby Akureyri who was said to have been a womaniser in his youth and wanted to donate his penis to the museum to ensure his " eternal fame " . Sigurður said that , even at the age of 95 , the donor remained active , " both vertically and horizontally " . However , the donor was said to be concerned that " his penis is shrinking as he gets older and he is worried it might not make a proper exhibit . " His penis was given priority over those of the non @-@ Icelandic donors in accordance with the museum 's mission to display the organs of Icelandic mammals . Removing and preserving it was not an easy proposition , as Sigurður explained : " The donor and the doctors are in agreement , it must be taken while the body is warm . Then bleed it and pump it up . If it cools you can 't do anything , so [ the donor ] is eager to have it taken warm and treated to be preserved with dignity . " 
 In January 2011 , the Icelandic donor died and his penis was surgically removed so that it could be added to the museum 's collection . The <unk> was not entirely successful and left the penis " a greyish @-@ brown , shrivelled mass " . According to Sigurður , " I should have stretched it and sewn it at the back to keep it in more or less a normal position " . Instead , it " went directly into the formaldehyde " . Although disappointed with the results , Sigurður expressed confidence that " I will get a younger and a bigger and better one soon . " Visitors ' most common reaction to the preserved human penis is " that it 's very old , you know , a bit shrunken , and the male members [ sic ] say ' oh , I hope mine will not look like this when I get old . ' " Sigurður has considered donating his own penis to the museum when he dies but said that it depends on his wife : " If she dies first , my specimen would go in here . If I die first , well I can 't say . She might say no . " 
 American writer and actor Jonah Falcon , known for his impressively sized penis , was invited by the museum via The Huffington Post to donate his member after his death . It was announced in May 2014 that Falcon had accepted the proposal , suggesting a display alongside a sperm whale to be called " Jonah and the whale " , after the biblical story . 
 = = Film = = 
 The museum is the subject of The Final Member , a film by Canadian documentarians Zach Math and Jonah <unk> . It profiles Sigurður and his quest to obtain a human penis for the museum , telling the story of the American and Icelandic donors and examining the quasi @-@ taboo nature of the museum 's collection . <unk> says : " I wouldn 't say it 's a Rorschach test , but depending on how you react to it really says a lot about what your relationship is with that element of the human anatomy . It 's a really interesting phenomenon and we 're really curious to see how audiences respond . " The film premiered on 1 May 2012 at the Hot Docs Canadian International Documentary Festival . 
 = Mamma Mia ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Mamma Mia " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the third season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 57th overall episode of the series . It was written by co @-@ executive producer Ron Weiner and directed by series producer Don Scardino . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on May 7 , 2009 . Guest stars in this episode include Alan Alda , Steve Buscemi , Stuart Margolin , Keith Olbermann , Clayton Dean Smith , and Michael Benjamin Washington . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) begins to search for his biological father with help from Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) . Meanwhile , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) introduces his supposedly illegitimate son ( Washington ) to the cast and crew of the fictitious show The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) , but some question his intentions . At the same time , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) and Liz fight for attention when Jenna gets public recognition for a comedic sketch Liz wrote . 
 " Mamma Mia " has received generally positive reception from television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by 6 @.@ 2 million households during its original broadcast . Ron Weiner and Alan Alda received Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series and Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series , respectively , both for this episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) decides not to search for his biological father , after it was revealed in the previous episode that the man he believed was his father was not . Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) , however , convinces him to find out who his real father is , so Jack contacts Lenny Wosniak ( Steve Buscemi ) — a private investigator — to search for his biological father . Lenny gives him an envelope containing the names of three individuals who could be his father . Jack tells Liz about the envelope , and she suggests they Mamma Mia ! this and bring the three men to New York under false pretenses , to which Jack agrees . Jack meets the men , George Park , Fred O 'Dwyer ( Stuart Margolin ) , and Professor Milton Greene ( Alan Alda ) . At meeting the three men , Jack comes to the realization that Milton is his father , as George Park is Korean and Fred O 'Dwyer lost his genitals in a grenade explosion during World War II . He tells Milton that he is his son , after Milton admitted to sleeping with his mother , Colleen Donaghy ( Elaine Stritch ) , around the time Jack was conceived . Milton is happy to have him as his son , and reveals to Jack that he is in need of a kidney transplant . 
 Meanwhile , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) introduces his illegitimate son , Donald ( Michael Benjamin Washington ) , to the TGS with Tracy Jordan staff . Liz and Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) suspect that Donald is embezzling from Tracy as they do not believe that Donald is twenty @-@ one years old , which Donald claims to be . Cerie Xerox ( Katrina Bowden ) , Liz 's assistant , obtains Donald 's birth certificate and gives it to Liz and Pete ; the two learn that Donald is forty years of age , thus confirming their suspicions about him . Liz tells Tracy about this , but Tracy knew all about Donald 's scam , explaining he decided to go along with it because Donald was putting all of the money into a dojo and doing good for the community . 
 At the same time , Liz becomes jealous when her friend and TGS star Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) takes credit for " That 's A Deal Breaker , ladies ! " catchphrase , resulting in Liz not getting recognition as she wrote the sketch . As a result of this , Jenna is named the " Funniest Person in New York " by Time Out magazine , and seeing how Liz feels about this , Jenna decides to share the magazine cover with her . At the photo shoot , the photographer ( Clayton Dean Smith ) wants Jenna to use props for the shoot , but Jenna is reluctant to use any of them . Liz , however , decides to pose with the props , resulting in her being on the cover of Time Out , much to Jenna 's displeasure . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Mamma Mia " was written by co @-@ executive producer Ron Weiner , making it his fourth writing credit after " Secrets and Lies " , " Señor Macho Solo " , and " Goodbye , My Friend " . The episode was directed by series producer Don Scardino , his twentieth for the series . " Mamma Mia " originally aired in the United States on May 7 , 2009 , on NBC as the twenty @-@ first episode of the show 's third season and the 57th overall episode of the series . 
 The character Professor Milton Greene , Jack Donaghy 's biological father , was played by guest actor Alan Alda , best known for his role as Hawkeye Pierce from the television series M * A * S * H. Alda and Alec Baldwin have worked together , having appeared in the 2004 biographical drama film The Aviator . Actor Steve Buscemi reprised his role as private investigator Lenny Wosniak for the third time , having appeared in " The Collection " and " The Natural Order " . Buscemi directed the 30 Rock episode " Retreat to Move Forward " that aired on January 22 , 2009 , during the show 's third season . News anchor Keith Olbermann , of Countdown with Keith Olbermann , did a voice over in this episode , in which Pete recalls hearing a sports anchor ( Olbermann ) saying the line " That 's A Deal Breaker , ladies ! " in SportsCenter during a hockey game highlight . 
 One filmed scene from " Mamma Mia " was cut out from the airing . Instead , the scene was featured on 30 Rock 's season three DVD as part of the deleted scenes in the Bonus feature . In the scene , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) gives George Park , Fred O 'Dwyer , and Milton Greene a tour around the backstage area of TGS . Fred tells Kenneth that he resembles a man he served with in the service , which Kenneth says " Well , obviously that 's a coincidence . How could I be in Normandy ? " . Fred responds by saying that he never told Kenneth where he served . Jack shows up where Kenneth and the three men are , and tells Kenneth that he would like to talk to Milton , prompting Kenneth to tell Jack " As head of this tour , I 'm going to deny your request . " Jack and Milton are then seen at Jack 's office . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Throughout the episode , numerous references are made to the jukebox musical Mamma Mia ! , in which Jack tells Liz about his possible three fathers , Jack agreeing to meet with the three men , and Liz saying " And all I 'm promising is a madcap musical romp , dot dot dot , fun , dot dot dot , good . ... That was on the [ Mamma Mia ! ] poster " , and finally Jack revealing his kinship to Milton . Liz tells Jack that he should find out who his real father is , explaining " If I have learned anything from my Sims family : When a child doesn 't see his father enough he starts to jump up and down , then his mood level will drop until he pees himself . " The Sims is a video game in which players create virtual people called " Sims " and places them in houses and helps direct their moods and satisfy their desires . Liz and Pete learn from James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) that Tracy 's favorite television show is NCIS , a CBS police drama series revolving around special agents from the Naval Criminal Investigative Service ( NCIS ) , who conduct criminal investigations involving the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps . Later , Liz and Pete sing the song " It Takes Two " by hip @-@ hop duo Rob Base and DJ E @-@ Z Rock to see if Tracy is familiar with the song as they have doubts about the age Tracy claims to be . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , " Mamma Mia " was watched by 6 @.@ 2 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 8 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was an increase from the previous episode , " The Natural Order " , which was watched by 6 @.@ 0 million American viewers . Ron Weiner received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series , but lost it to fellow 30 Rock writer Matt Hubbard for the episode " Reunion " at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards . At the same awards show , Alan Alda received an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series , but lost it to singer @-@ songwriter Justin Timberlake for hosting Saturday Night Live . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning complimented 30 Rock for Jack 's search of his father plot , writing that they took it and " rolled forward with energy and smarts and delivered one of the funnier episodes from the past several weeks . " Canning said that the other stories were " also very fun " , and having been a critic to Jane Krakowski 's Jenna , Canning said that her appearance in " Mamma Mia " was " effectively funny without overdoing her self @-@ centeredness . " In conclusion , Canning gave it a 9 @.@ 1 out of 10 rating . Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger wrote that this was a " very funny episode , boosted by the ingenious casting of Alan Alda " as Jack 's biological father . The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin praised 30 Rock for delivering " comically " with this episode , and observing there were good elements in it . Rabin opined that the casting of Alda as Jack 's father was " inspired " , and gave " Mamma Mia " an A − grade rating . Entertainment Weekly contributor Aly Semigran was complimentary towards the episode , and appreciated the guest appearances from Alda and Steve Buscemi . Bruce Fretts for TV Guide Magazine said that " Mamma Mia " was " strong " , and cited that it had " quotable inside @-@ TV digs ... an instant chemistry between Alec Baldwin and Alan Alda ... and an infectious rendition of ' It Takes Two ' by Liz and Pete . " Mike Moody of AOL 's TV Squad hoped that " someone on the show figure out " what to do with the Jenna character , and suggested that she have a love interest " that makes her mature or ... makes her move away " because Jenna 's " vacuous , selfish aging diva routine has gotten old already . " Moody , however , said that the best part of Tracy 's story was the karate showdown between Donald and J. D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) . 
 = The Tale of Mac Da Thó 's Pig = 
 The Tale of Mac Da Thó 's Pig ( Old Irish : Scéla <unk> <unk> Da Thó ) is a legendary tale from early Irish literature , written primarily in prose and heroic saga form and placed within the Ulster Cycle . The story 's composition in its present form can probably be attributed to an unknown author of Leinster c . AD 800 , and survives in at least six manuscripts , written between the 12th and 18th centuries . The three most important of these primary sources are held in Trinity College , Dublin and the British Library . 
 The story tells of a dispute between the Connachta , led by <unk> and Medb , and the Ulaid , led by Conchobar mac Nessa , over the acquisition of the hound of Leinster , Ailbe . The dispute is ultimately resolved through the plan of the king of Leinster , Mac Da Thó , to hold a feast at his hostel , at which a fight breaks out over the assignment of the curadmír or champion 's portion . 
 The story deals with the themes of provincial rivalry between Ulster and Connacht , communal feasting and the heroic contest over the curadmír , and includes elements which show parallels with older Gaulish and pan @-@ Celtic traditions . Although apparently the quintessential Ulster Cycle story in many respects , the tale 's composition also displays a sophisticated satiric quality as a parody of the genre . The story was apparently popular in the Middle Ages and later times , and became the subject of a number of independent poems . The central figure of the pig has parallels with the great boars of Welsh @-@ language literature and the Matter of Britain , particularly Twrch Trwyth in the 11th @-@ century Welsh story of Culhwch and Olwen . 
 = = Summary = = 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The story opens with Mac Da Thó , a famous legendary king of Leinster , who possessed a hound called Ailbe . Ailbe defends of the entire province , such that his fame spreads throughout the entire island of Ériu ( Ireland ) . <unk> and Medb , king and queen of Connacht , send messengers to Mac Da Thó demanding the dog ; but at the same time so does Conchobar mac Nessa , king of the Ulaid , the warriors of the province of Ulster . The messengers from Connacht offer an immediate tribute of 160 milch cows , a chariot and two of the finest horses of the Connachta , and the same tribute to be paid to Leinster again the following year . The messengers of Ulster in turn offer Mac Da Thó " jewellery and cattle and everything else from the north " and an alliance through the " great friendship " that would result . 
 These events trouble Mac Da Thó greatly , such that he goes three days without food , drink or sleep . However , his wife devises for him a plan – that he should give the dog to both parties and let them fight for it . Pleased by this scheme , Mac Da Thó takes each delegation aside in private , and intimates to both that he had awarded the hound to them after much deliberation . Unknowingly , both parties agreed separately that their people should come on the same day to a feast in Leinster to claim Ailbe formally . 
 The feast is to take place at Mac Da Thó 's Hostel , one of the five famed legendary " hostels " or feasting halls in Ireland at the time . The hostel itself has seven entrances , seven cauldrons full of beef and salted pork , and seven hearths ; and fifty paces between each pair of doorways . The Ulaid and the Connachta arrive at the door of the hostel at the same time to collect the hound . Mac Da Thó feigns innocence as to the immediately apparent inconsistency , yet invites both provinces inside to the feast nevertheless . Though the hostel is by no means small , it is nonetheless filled with tension , as warriors who had previously done each other injury sit opposite each other . 
 Mac Da Thó has his pig slaughtered for the feast – an animal which had been nourished by 60 milch cows for seven years and which had 40 oxen spread across it for its enormous size . The pig immediately attracts the attention of the Ulaid and Connachta , who must decide over how it is to be divided up , and to whom shall be awarded the curadmír or " hero 's portion " . It is agreed that the warriors shall challenge each other to boast their past exploits in battle . At length the Connacht warrior Cet mac <unk> manages to <unk> his Ulster counterparts : 
 [ Cet ] took knife in hand and sat down to the pig saying " Find among the men of Ériu one to match me in feats – otherwise I will carve the pig . " ... <unk> spoke then : " It is not right that Cet should carve the pig before our very eyes . " Cet answered " One moment Cet , that I may speak with you . You Ulaid have a custom : every one of you who takes arms makes Connacht his object . You came to the border , then , and I met you ; you abandoned your horses and charioteer and escaped with my spear through you . Is that how you propose to take the pig ? " <unk> sat down . 
 A narrative pattern follows , whereby Cet demands a challenge , an Ulster warrior rises , and the Ulaid cry out the name of the challenger ; Cet then proceeds to shame that warrior by recounting one of his deeds against him , as above . Cet shames the challenger Óengus son of Lam <unk> , by recounting how he had cut off Lam <unk> 's hands in battle ; he shames <unk> son of <unk> , the king of <unk> , by recounting how he put out his eye in a cattle @-@ raid ; he reminds <unk> son of <unk> how he had taken his son 's head as a trophy not six days earlier ; Mend son of <unk> , how he had cut off his father 's foot ; <unk> son of <unk> , how he had castrated him with his spear ; and even Conchobar 's son Cúscraid Mend <unk> , how he had pierced his neck with a spear during Cúscraid 's first feat of arms , in ignominious circumstances which led to the abandonment a third of Cúscraid 's retinue in a cowardly retreat . In each case , the challenging warriors are compelled to retake their seats in shame . 
 Just as Cet is exulting in his victory over the full warrior contingent of Ulster present , the Ulster hero Conall Cernach enters the hostel , and leaps into the middle of the hall to roars of welcome from the Ulaid . Cet and Conall acknowledge each other in an exchange of archaic rhetorical verses , and Cet concedes that Conall is a better warrior than he . Cet adds that his brother <unk> would best Conall in a contest : " ' It is our misfortune that he is not in the house . ' ' Oh but he is , ' said Conall , and taking <unk> 's head from his wallet he threw it at Cet 's breast so that a mouthful of blood spattered over the lips . " 
 In shame , Cet leaves the pig to Conall , who rightfully claims the belly as his portion , a burden for nine men , leaving only the fore @-@ trotters to the Connachta . Dissatisfied with their meagre share , the Connachta rise against the Ulaid , and a drinking bout breaks out in the hostel and spills out into the courtyard outside . Fergus rips up a great oak tree from the ground by the roots . Mac Da Thó unleashes Ailbe to see which side it would choose ; Ailbe sides with the Ulaid , and precipitates the rout of the Connachta . The dog itself is decapitated by <unk> 's charioteer Fer Loga at Mag <unk> . 
 As the hosts sweep westward across Mide , Fer Loga hides in the heather and leaps into the chariot of Conchobar as it passes , seizing the king 's head from behind . Conchobar promises him any ransom he wishes ; Fer Loga asks to be taken to the Emain Macha , capital of Ulster , where the women of the Ulaid and their nubile daughters are to sing to him each evening in chorus , " Fer Loga is my darling . " A year later , at the end of the tale , Fer Loga rides westward across Ath <unk> with two of Conchobar 's horses and golden bridles for them both . 
 = = = Dindsenchas = = = 
 The final portion of the plot contains an example of Dindsenchas , or onomastic folklore , " a touch of antiquarianism dear to the ancient Irish " . The episode in which Fer Loga spits the head of Ailbe upon his chariot @-@ pole is used as an explanation for the placename of Mag <unk> , " Ailbe 's Plain " , the valley plain bordering the River Barrow from County Laois and County Carlow to County Kildare . 
 = = Tradition and criticism = = 
 = = = Narrative style = = = 
 In the assessment of <unk> Nora Chadwick , " the tale is told with brilliant narrative power " : its terseness , humour and laconic brevity is reminiscent of the best of the Icelandic sagas . The dialogue is particularly masterly in its " understatement and crisp repartee " , with " the utmost condensation and economy " in its choice of words . " [ I ] n the few remarks made by Mac Da Thó to his visitors , all his previous train of thought , all his cunning and address , are suggested in a few brief words intended by him to hide his true designs from his guests , while suggesting to ourselves his hidden intention . " 
 In spite of the literary finish of the surviving written versions , the tale remains one to be told orally . The story is characterised by " a total absence of reflection " ; " not a word is wasted , no statement is expanded " . The events of the narrative are expressed with swift movement , aiming to arouse and excite the interest and attention of the hearer rather than to stimulate the thought of the reader . " The story @-@ teller makes use of the element of surprise , of quick developments and dramatic moments . He seeks to impress by rapid crescendo to a startling climax , and a shock " ; as when Cet first reluctantly yields to Conall Cernach in the absence of Ánluan , then is unexpectedly and abruptly shamed in full view of the warriors of Ireland , by Conall suddenly hurling the head @-@ trophy of Ánluan " at the breast of his opponent with such violence that a gush of blood burst through Cet 's lips " . 
 Chadwick identifies a story calculated to appeal to men rather than women : a stark contrast with " the refined and delicately handled story of Eochaid and <unk> and their supernatural adventures with the god <unk> " , with " the poetical beauty of the story of Deirdre and the sons of <unk> " , indeed even with the later heroic tales of the Finn Cycle – " stories of life in the open – of hunting , and romance , and of the magic and prowess of a simpler and less organised society than that of Mac Da Thó 's feast . " The gulf separating the tale from this broad range of genres may be used to illustrate the impressive " range of theme which the early Irish story @-@ tellers had at their command " . In Chadwick 's final assessment : 
 One thing we can say with confidence . Our prose saga of Mac Da Thó 's Pig is a work of art of high quality in its own right . Without a touch of romance , without the glamour of magic or of the supernatural , almost without antiquarian elements , it holds us throughout by its swift unflagging narrative , the rapid pitch and toss of its dialogue , the brilliant quality of the dramatic presentation . Never has the tradition of the Irish Heroic Age received a more compelling form ... 
 = = = Theme and antiquity = = = 
 The Tale of Mac Da Thó 's Pig has been referred to as " one of the most brilliantly told of the early Irish sagas " , which " purports to give a picture of the old heroic life in Ireland and its warlike spirit " . The central theme of the narrative is the curadmír , the right of the greatest champion at a feast to receive the " hero 's portion " from a great central cauldron containing the communal supply . Wherever a great body of heroes was gathered together , this right was determined by boasting contests between the contenders : to assert the right to the hero 's portion , a claimant must first produce his credentials by boasting his heroic exploits , and then shame his opponents by quashing their objections and counter @-@ claims . In the event that this unsuccessful and the distinction between the heroes present unclear , the matter would be taken to arbitration , as in the similar Ulster Cycle tale Fled <unk> ; Chadwick suggests that this arbitration may be parodied when Mac Da Thó releases Ailbe to see which province the hound would side with first . 
 Chadwick argues that the antiquity of the tale 's theme – feasting – is probably the most anciently attested of all Celtic stories . The heroic communal feast was apparently central to the Celtic tradition , and classical ethnographers of the <unk> tradition , notably the 2nd @-@ century Athenaeus , give accounts of Gaulish feasts which closely parallel their Insular counterparts . Similarly , in the 1st century BC , the Greek ethnographer Diodorus Siculus describes in detail how the Gauls " honour distinguished men with the best portions of the meat " , and how disputes often lead to challenges in which " they set about glorifying the valour of their forefathers and boasting of their own prowess ; and at the same time they deride and belittle their opponent , and try by their speeches to rob him of the courage he has in his heart " . 
 A secondary theme which drives the contest for the champion 's portion is the rivalry between the royal provinces of Connacht and Ulster , resolved in the contest of the two heroes Cet Mac <unk> and Conall Cernach . The presentation of this rivalry is coloured by the author 's peculiar Leinster viewpoint . He turns both provinces to ridicule by the cunning of Mac Da Thó , King of Leinster ; in particular , the author 's political sympathies favour Connacht and remain hostile to Ulster to the end . To the heroes assembled , Mac Da Thó boasts that all the food provided for the feast is a mere trifle for the Leinstermen . It is tempting to conclude that the inspiration of the story is the claim of Leinster to supersede both Ulster and Connacht . However , it is apparent that by the time of the tale 's composition , even the story @-@ teller does not take the political issues very seriously , using the theme instead as a vehicle for a good story . 
 An unusual element is that the tale draws its characters from essentially the same cast as Táin Bó <unk> , making mention of some thirty heroes from that narrative , yet never once mentions Cú Chulainn . Chadwick suggests this is probably an indication of the antiquity of the tradition of the story 's tradition , predating the development of Cú Chulainn 's story within the Ulster Cycle . Some of the rhetorical verse elements are old and obscure , but certain seemingly parodic elements of the genre at least suggest a later composition of the present form . 
 = = = <unk> elements = = = 
 While The Tale of Mac Da Thó 's Pig appears to be the quintessential Ulster Cycle story in theme and narrative , there are certain unusual elements of the extant forms which suggest it may have a more satiric quality , parodying the heroic genre of the Ulster Cycle . The eponymous pig of Mac Da Thó may be mythic in origin , but its highly exaggerated size may also be satiric . In the Táin Bó <unk> , the Ulaid and Connachta go to war over a mythic best , the finest bull in Ireland , whereas here they come to blows over a dog . 
 In " an <unk> passage of compressed humour " , Mac Da Thó promises the dog to both parties , then feigns ignorance when both arrive on the same day . During the bragging contest , the heroes of the Ulaid are not merely shamed , but are made to look ridiculous . <unk> is used to humorous effect when Conall flings the head of Ánluan at his opponent Cet . Thurneysen notes that in the Harley 5280 manuscript " the mutual slaying of the guests " is referred to as " ' performing a good drinking round ' " ( so @-@ <unk> ) – a " somewhat coarse joke " that was revised or omitted in the other manuscripts because apparently the copyists did not understand it . Gantz notes that Fer Loga 's demand " that the nubile women of Ulaid sing ' Fer Loga is my darling ' to him every night is so comical that its inclusion cannot possibly be inadvertent " . In Chadwick 's assessment , the story is " a glorious travesty of the Ancient World by one who honoured and laughed at its traditions " . 
 The tale 's composition in the early period of the Viking Age in Ireland " may have done something to substitute laconic humour and a spirit of ripe burlesque for the dignity and poetical beauty " of other treasures of the Irish sagas . To call the tale a parody would not be entirely accurate ; instead , it seems " that a literary genius has presented us with a well @-@ preserved heroic tradition , seen through the prismatic lens of a later age . He brings to his theme a ripe sophistication , a concentrated irony , and a gay and lighthearted hyperbole . " 
 = = = Associated traditions = = = 
 The story appears to have been well known in literary circles . A variant of the tale is apparently mentioned in a poem by Flannacán Mac <unk> in the Yellow Book of Lecan . Flannacán is said to have been killed by the Vikings in 896 . Another apparent reference , to an <unk> Mic Da Thó – " The Slaughter of Mac Da Thó " – is included in a 10th @-@ century list of the <unk> , the " primary stories " or " chief stories " which the professional poetic class ( <unk> ) used to relate to kings . Mac Da Thó 's Hostel is also one of a number cited in a poem on the feasting halls or hostels ( <unk> ) of ancient Ireland . Clearly the tradition predates our oldest surviving copy , that of the Book of Leinster . 
 The tale was also apparently popular in later times , and became the subject of a number of independent poems ; none appears to have been directly based on the surviving text , however , suggesting that other versions of the same tale served as their inspiration . The first poem is appended to the old text in the Book of Leinster , Harley 5280 and <unk> Its author used the opportunity to display his knowledge of the names of Irish heroes in general , in which he does not confine himself to characters of the story . The second poem follows the first in Harley 5280 , and appears also in three other manuscripts : the Book of Lecan , Laud 610 in the <unk> Library and lastly in the Stowe manuscript collection . 
 In these two poems , the real hero is not the dog Ailbe but the pig – the latter being " practically a panegyric on the pig " – although the story 's title implies this may have been an original feature . In the unusual choice of a pig as the main protagonist , the story becomes associated with a broader Celtic tradition , including the wild boar motif of Arthurian legend . The wild boar Twrch Trwyth , for example , causes considerable difficulty for the men of Arthur 's court in the 11th @-@ century Welsh story of Culhwch and Olwen ; while the exposition of the geographical details of Ailbe 's route in the rout of the Connachta in the Irish tale has parallels with the route taken by Twrch Trwyth in the Welsh hunt . Indeed , Thurneysen notes that in relation to Mac Da Thó 's pig , the poets use the words torc ( boar ) and <unk> ( pig ) interchangeably . 
 The poetic versions of the story allude to additional matter within the tradition of Mac Da Thó 's pig , including the names of Mac Da Thó 's wife Maine <unk> , of his two sons , and of his grandson Léna . According to these accounts , Léna first found the pig in Slieve Bloom , and was responsible for its nourishment until it had seven inches of fat on its snout . Maine <unk> needed the pig for her husband 's great feast ; Léna refused , but he was killed when the pig grubbed up earth with its snout , burying him alive in his sleep . In this version of the tale , which shows how much may have been omitted from the narrow version of the saga , Mac Da Thó 's swineherd <unk> dutifully delivers the pig to his master 's feast . 
 In the Laud 610 and Stowe manuscripts , the poem in praise of Mac <unk> 's pig forms an appendix to the Dindsenchas of Mag Léna , a plain and heath in County Offaly . The explanation in prose and verse of " the plain of Léna " is as imaginative as could be expected from medieval etymologies : in reality , mag <unk> simply means " plain of meadows " . Similarly , an associated though dubious etymological tradition in another saga , somewhat later than the original Tale of Mac Da Thó 's Pig , equates the name of Mac Da Thó to " Mac Dá <unk> " , " the son of two silent persons " , his parents having been deaf @-@ mutes . Though spurious at best , this explanation has been accepted nevertheless by some poets and <unk> , such as that of Rawlinson B 512 , who write <unk> with a long a and make Thó alliterate with t . 
 = = = Commentaries = = = 
 Chadwick , Nora ( 1959 ) . " Scéla <unk> <unk> Da Thó " . In Dillon , Myles . Irish Sagas . Radio Éireann Thomas Davis Lectures . Irish Stationery Office . 
 Gantz , Jeffrey ( 1981 ) . Early Irish myths and sagas . Penguin Classics . ISBN <unk> . 
 Thurneysen , Rudolf , ed . ( 1935 ) . Scéla <unk> Meic <unk> . Mediaeval and Modern Irish Series VI ( 1975 ed . ) . Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies . 
 = Røst Airport = 
 Røst Airport ( Norwegian : Røst lufthavn ; IATA : RET , ICAO : <unk> ) is a regional airport serving the Røst , <unk> located on the northern edge of the main island of <unk> . It is owned and operated by the state @-@ owned Avinor and handled 9 @,@ 889 passengers in 2014 . Services are provided by Widerøe , operating Dash 8 @-@ 100 aircraft on contract with the Ministry of Transport and Communications to Bodø Airport and Leknes Airport . 
 Røst was first served using seaplanes from the 1960s , and then by helicopters from 1970 . Røst Airport opened on 1 June 1986 , initially with Widerøe operating de Havilland Canada Twin Otters . From 2000 to 2001 the service was operated by Guard Air , and from 2003 to 2008 by Kato Air ; otherwise Widerøe has flown the route . 
 = = History = = 
 Services to Røst started in 1965 , when Widerøe commenced seaplane services to the island using de Havilland Canada Otters and Noorduyn Norseman aircraft . The routes were operated two to three times per week as a charter service , with subsidies from the municipalities of Værøy and Røst . Helikopter Service flew between Bodø Airport to Røst and Værøy — an island community further inland from Røst — with three weekly services from 1973 . The helicopters doubled as serving for search and rescue duty ; in case they were needed for the latter flights to Værøy and Røst were cancelled . The regional airports in Lofoten and Vesterålen opened in 1972 , with the Værøy and Røst service being taken over by Widerøe on 1 September 1973 . As they did not want to operate helicopters , they subcontracted the operations to Helilift . The service operated twice per day on weekdays and once per day in the weekends , using two sixteen @-@ seat Sikorsky S @-@ 58Ts . Subsidies of 1 @.@ 9 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) was granted for the route in 1973 , and the service transported 5 @,@ 359 passengers ( from both Røst and Værøy ) . 
 One of the helicopters was bought by Widerøe in December 1976 and the operations were subcontracted to Offshore Helicopters . The second Sikorsky was bought from Helilift in March 1978 and also operated by Offshore Helicopters . Helikopter Service merged with Offshore Helicopters in 1980 , and the new Helikopter Service took over the route . They introduced an eleven @-@ seat Bell 212 helicopters from 1 January 1982 because of the high maintenance costs of the S @-@ 58Ts . In 1982 the service to both islands handled 7 @,@ 145 passengers and three tonnes of post and cargo , and made 744 landings . It received subsidies for NOK 4 million . 
 Plans for an airport with short take @-@ off and landing flights was launched by the government in December 1983 . The airport was proposed along with five other regional airport : Fagernes Airport , Leirin ; Førde Airport , Bringeland ; Mosjøen Airport , Kjærstad ; Rørvik Airport , Ryum and Værøy Airport . The plans were passed by Parliament on 10 April 1984 and construction started in 1985 . On 22 August 1985 the municipality was granted concession to operate the airport . Værøy and Røst Airports were opened on 1 June 1986 , with Røst Airport having cost about NOK 15 million to build . 
 The Civil Aviation Administration proposed in 1994 closing the airport along with eight other regional airports , because they had high subsidy levels . Røst Airport was nationalized on 1 January 1997 , along with 25 other regional airports , and placed under the control of the Norwegian Civil Airport Administration ( now Avinor ) . 
 = = = Service = = = 
 After the airport opened , services started with Widerøe @-@ operated twenty @-@ seat de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 6 Twin Otters . The airline operated two trips Bodø – Røst – Værøy – Bodø on weekdays and one round trip during the weekend . In addition , there were two weekly trips that connected Værøy to Leknes Airport before returning to Bodø . The service was subsidized by the Ministry of Transport and Communications . Widerøe replaced the Twin Otters with 37 @-@ seat de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 8 @-@ 100 Dash 8s in 1995 . The route from Bodø to Røst was made subject to public service obligation from 1 April 1997 , which was won by the incumbent , after beating <unk> and Helikopter Service in the auction . The following contract , valid from 1 April 2000 , was awarded to Guard Air , but this company folded in 2001 . Helikopter Service operated the route temporarily until Widerøe took it over again the same year . 
 On 1 April 2003 , Kato Air took over the Bodø – Røst route , using Dornier Do 228 aircraft . The new airline had a troubled start with the passenger numbers dropping by 27 percent . On 4 December , a flight from Røst to Bodø was hit by lightning , and received severe damage during the landing at Bodø . The choice of the operator was criticized by the Røst Municipal Council following the incident , stated that the ministry had prioritized price over safety . The council stated that they did not feel that Kato Air provided the same service as Widerøe and that the aircraft were a safety hazard . Among the complaints were lack of accessibility for disabled people , no cabin pressurization , no weather radar , more expensive tickets , no discounted tickets and no possibility for carry @-@ on baggage . In February 2006 , there was a wave of cancellations by Kato Air , due to technical problems with both the airline 's aircraft . In June , the airline 's pilots started selling tickets themselves at the airport . The company stated that this was because they had declined Widerøe to do this because of higher costs . The Civil Aviation Authority of Norway withdrew Kato Air 's concession in 2008 due to lack on maintenance . On an interim basis , the helicopter airline Lufttransport , that operated the route to the nearby island of Værøy , took over the route from 5 September to 29 October , when Widerøe started flying again . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Røst Airport is a regional airport owned and operated by Avinor . It serves the island of <unk> , the most remote island in the Lofoten archipelago . It has a terminal building with a capacity for 40 passengers per hour . The largest aircraft that can operate at the airport are the Dash 8 @-@ 100 . There is free parking at the airport for 20 vehicles . Taxis can be <unk> . The airport resides at an elevation of 3 meters ( 9 @.@ 8 feet ) above mean sea level . It has one runway designated 03 – 21 with an asphalt surface measuring 880 by 30 meters ( 2 @,@ 887 ft × 98 ft ) . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 The airport is served twice daily with a de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 8 @-@ 100 Dash 8 by Widerøe . Flight operate from Bodø Airport via Røst to Leknes Airport before returning to Bodø . The routes are operated as a public service obligation on contract with the Ministry of Transport and Communications . 
 = Tropical Storm Fabian ( 1991 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Fabian was a short @-@ lived tropical storm during the 1991 Atlantic hurricane season . The sixth named storm of the year , it formed in the northwest Caribbean southwest of Cuba . The storm reached a peak intensity of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) , shortly before crossing over Cuba as it moved northeast past Florida . Fabian became extratropical north of the Bahamas the next day , and dissipated on October 17 . Fabian caused only light rainfall along its path and there were no reported fatalities or damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Fabian were from a tropical wave and a cold front that entered the northwestern Caribbean Sea on October 12 . The two systems interacted in the Gulf of Honduras , producing convection and low atmospheric pressures . An anticyclone developed over the system , which aided in the organization of the thunderstorms . At 1300 UTC on October 15 , a Hurricane Hunters flight observed sustained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) to the southwest of the Isle of Youth . Based on the report , the system was classified as Tropical Storm Fabian . Its development was typical for an October storm in the western Caribbean . With a high pressure area to the north , there was already a large pressure gradient that had produced tropical storm force winds over the area . By the time Fabian developed a circulation , it was able to be classified as a tropical storm . However , it is possible it was a tropical depression for about 12 hours before the Hurricane Hunters report . 
 Upon becoming a tropical storm , Fabian was disorganized and had restricted outflow . An eastward moving upper @-@ level trough imparted a northeast motion as well as unfavorable wind shear . Despite the atmospheric conditions , Fabian intensified slightly to peak winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) , although the strongest winds were located primarily east of the center . Late on October 15 , the storm moved over the Isle of Youth before crossing over western Cuba . By early on October 16 , the center was becoming difficult to locate on satellite imagery . The storm moved through the Florida Straits , passing just southeast of the Florida mainland and into the Bahamas . There was initial uncertainty whether Fabian would be absorbed by the approaching trough or maintain its separate identity . By late on October 16 , Fabian transitioned into an extratropical cyclone as it was absorbed into the trough . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 When Fabian first formed , the government of Cuba issued a tropical storm warning from Havana to Ciego de Ávila Province , as well as the Isle of Youth . Before the storm hit the Cuban mainland , it produced wind gusts to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) in Cayo Largo del Sur . Its primary form of impact was from heavy rainfall in a 24 ‑ hour period , peaking at 6 @.@ 2 inches ( 157 @.@ 5 mm ) in <unk> on the south coast of Cuba . In a six @-@ hour period , Punta del Este recorded 5 in ( 130 mm ) . 
 Concurrent with Fabian 's first advisory , a tropical storm watch was issued for all of the Florida Keys as well as for the Bahamas . The watch in the Bahamas was later upgraded to a warning . Prior to the storm 's passage , two state parks were closed in the Florida Keys . In Dade County , Florida , a few storm shelters were opened , in anticipation that Fabian might bring flooding rains . As it passed east of the state , it dropped rainfall near the coast that peaked at 4 @.@ 19 in ( 106 mm ) in Conch Key . In the Florida Keys , the National Weather Service Office in Key West recorded sustained winds of 28 mph ( 44 km / h ) with gusts to 32 mph ( 52 km / h ) . Only isolated flooding happened from the precursor system to Fabian . In South Florida , Homestead Air Force Base reported rainfall of 3 @.@ 68 inches ( 93 @.@ 5 mm ) , but this too was attributed to the precursor frontal system , rather than Fabian itself . 
 = Sabrina Sidney = 
 Sabrina Bicknell ( 1757 – 8 September 1843 ) , better known as Sabrina Sidney , was a British foundling girl taken in when she was 12 by author Thomas Day , who wanted to mould her into his perfect wife . Day had been struggling to find a wife who would share his ideology and had been rejected by a number of women . He decided to educate two girls in the style of Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's book Emile , or On Education , without any frivolities . 
 In 1769 , Day and his barrister friend John Bicknell chose Sabrina and another girl , Lucretia , from orphanages and deceitfully declared they would be indentured to Day 's friend Richard Lovell Edgeworth . Day took the girls to France to begin Rousseau 's methods of education in isolation . After a short time he returned to Lichfield with only Sabrina , having deemed Lucretia inappropriate for his experiment . He used unusual techniques to try to increase her fortitude , such as firing blanks at her clothes , dropping hot wax on her arms and having her wade into a lake fully dressed . 
 When Sabrina reached her teenage years , Day was persuaded by Edgeworth that his ideal wife experiment had failed and he should send her away , as it was inappropriate for Day to live with her <unk> . Sabrina then had a number of moves between boarding school , a dressmaker family , before eventually being employed as Day 's housekeeper . Having seen changes in Sabrina , Day proposed marriage , though he soon called this off when she did not follow his strict instructions and again sent her away , this time to a boarding house where she later found work as a lady 's companion . 
 In 1783 , Bicknell sought her out and proposed marriage , telling her the truth of Day 's experiment . Horrified , she confronted Day in a series of letters ; he admitted the truth but refused to apologise . Sabrina married Bicknell , and the couple had two children before his death in 1787 . Sabrina went on to work with schoolmaster Charles Burney , managing his schools . 
 In 1804 , Anna Seward published a book about Sabrina 's upbringing . Edgeworth followed up with his memoirs , in which he claimed Sabrina loved Day . Sabrina herself , on the other hand , said she was miserable with Day and that he treated her as a slave . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sabrina was born in 1757 in Clerkenwell , London and was left at the Hospital for the Maintenance and Education of Exposed and Deserted Young Children ( more commonly known as the Foundling Hospital ) in London on 24 May 1757 by an anonymous individual . The individual left a note which explained that her baptismal name was <unk> Butler and that she had been baptised in St James 's Church , Clerkenwell . Her name was likely a misspelling of <unk> but there were no baptismal records for any spelling of the name at the parish . 
 One of the requirements of the Foundling Hospital was that babies were to be less than six months old at time of admittance , but the hospital did not keep more accurate records of age . Another requirement was that foundlings were given a new name and a reference number , so Sabrina became Girl Ann Kingston no . <unk> . She was taken in by a wet nurse , Mary Penfold , who brought her to Wotton , Surrey , where she remained until 1759 , when she was two years old . Although it was usual for foundlings to remain with their wet nurse until the age of 5 or 6 , the Foundling Hospital had received an influx of new babies and moved many children who no longer required nursing , including Sabrina , to the Shrewsbury branch of the Foundling Hospital . The Shrewsbury building was not completed until 1765 , so in the meantime Sabrina and another foundling were cared for by a nurse , Ann Casewell , at Casewell 's home . 
 = = Day 's experiment = = 
 Thomas Day was a bachelor who had inherited his fortune from his father when he was an infant . Described as having a pock @-@ marked face through smallpox , a brooding personality and short temper , Day attended Corpus Christi College , Oxford to study philosophy . It was there that he decided to dedicate his life to becoming a virtuous man , shunning luxury and focusing on altruism . Around the same time , he developed a list of requirements for his future wife , that she should be subservient and pure , but also able to discuss philosophy and live without frivolities . These high standards , combined with his generally unlikeable personality , meant that his advances were rejected by multiple women whilst at university . 
 He was introduced to the work of Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau by his friend Richard Lovell Edgeworth and the pair shared a particular affinity for his work on education in the book Emile , or On Education . On leaving Oxford , Edgeworth and Day attempted to teach Edgeworth 's first son , Dick , in the style of Emile , a learning by doing approach . Accompanying Edgeworth to Ireland as Dick 's tutor , Day fell in love and was spurned first by Edgeworth 's sister and then by at least three further women in quick succession . 
 Day came to the conclusion that he would be unable to find a wife that would meet his high standards and largely blamed women 's education for this . Inspired by Rousseau 's character of Sophie in Emile , or On Education , he resolved to " create " his ideal wife by raising her from adolescence , using the techniques laid out in the book . Day was approaching financial independence , where he would have full access to the money left to him , and conspired with his barrister friend , John Bicknell , to find two girls who could be taken into his care to be groomed as a perfect wife . 
 = = = Choosing the girls = = = 
 Just after his 21st birthday in June 1769 , Thomas Day and John Bicknell travelled to the Shrewsbury Orphan Hospital to choose the first girl for his experiment . Sabrina was 12 years old at the time , described as " a clear auburn brunette , with darker eyes more glowing bloom and chestnut tresses " . She was slender , had long eyelashes and a melodious voice . Although Day was struggling to choose a girl for the experiment , Bicknell quickly picked her out . The pair did not tell the orphanage secretary , Samuel Magee , about the planned experiment . Instead they told him that she was to be indentured as a servant at Richard Lovell Edgeworth 's country house in Berkshire , waiving the £ 4 fee they would have received for the apprenticeship . In line with the orphanage 's requirements that responsibility would be held by a married man , Edgeworth would hold legal responsibility for Sabrina , despite him not being present nor even aware of the arrangement . 
 The apprenticeship was approved by the governors of the orphanage on 30 June 1769 , and Sabrina was collected by Day and Bicknell on 17 August . She was brought to lodgings in London , where she met Edgeworth for the first time . Day changed her name to Sabrina Sidney : Sabrina , the Latin name for the River Severn , which her orphanage looked out onto ; and Sidney after Algernon Sidney , one of Day 's heroes . Day became a benefactor , and subsequently governor , of the Foundling Hospital and on 20 September 1769 , he chose another girl for his experiment , whom he renamed Lucretia . 
 Day had Bicknell draw up a contract to define the terms of his indenture of the girls . Within one year , he would choose which girl he intended to marry , the other would be given as an apprentice to a woman in a trade , along with a fee of £ 100 ( equivalent to £ 12 @,@ 514 in 2015 ) . He would give a further £ 400 ( equivalent to £ 50 @,@ 056 in 2015 ) upon the girl 's marriage or if she were to start her own business . He would marry his intended bride or , if he decided not to , would gift her the sum of £ 500 ( equivalent to £ 62 @,@ 570 in 2015 ) . Bicknell would act as guarantor for the contract . 
 = = = Education in France = = = 
 Day wished for the girls to be isolated from external influences while he educated them . As such , at the beginning of November 1769 he decided to move them to France . There is also a possibility that he did this to protect himself from the legal ramifications of his experiment as well as societal gossip . The trio travelled over 600 miles to Avignon , renting a house in le <unk> des <unk> . The girls could speak no French and Day employed no English @-@ speaking servants to be sure that he would be the only person to influence them . 
 Day focussed on their education , in the style of Emile , or On Education . He expanded on their teachings from the Foundling hospital in reading and basic arithmetic , and he also taught them how to write . He believed that the girls should be able to manage the house , so they were charged with cooking and cleaning as well as other house work . Finally , he wanted to be able to debate complex concepts with them , so he taught them rudimentary theories in physics and geography , tasking them with observing the changing of the seasons and recording details of sunrises and sunsets . He also imparted Rousseau 's philosophy 's contempt for luxury on them . 
 Edgeworth received correspondence from Day whilst he was in France . He was told that both girls were passionate about their studies , Sabrina more so . He also wrote of anecdotes , such as a boat trip taken by the trio on the Rhone where the boat overturned and Day singlehanded rescued both girls as they could not swim . Day also wrote of an incident where he had challenged a French Army officer to a duel , even bringing out a set of dueling pistols , for simply conversing with the girls . The officer apologised and explained he did not mean any offence , calming the situation . 
 Accounts by 19th century historians explain that Day eventually became impatient when the girls became bored of their lessons and would squabble ; that he also spent a significant period nursing them through a bout of smallpox . These accounts may have been exaggerated as both girls had been inoculated against smallpox and their strict upbringing would have meant they would not have rebelled excessively . 
 = = = Return to England = = = 
 Whilst in France , Day struggled over which girl to choose to bring forward with the experiment . Both were beautiful ; Lucretia was more cheerful although Sabrina was more reserved and studious . The group returned to England in spring 1770 , by which time Day had finally decided that he would carry on with Sabrina 's training . Edgeworth explained that each of Day 's projects with Sabrina had been successful , however he had come to the conclusion that Lucretia was " <unk> stupid " . Day apprenticed Lucretia to a milliner in Ludgate Hill and took Sabrina to Stowe House in Lichfield , where her training could continue . The household would have had no more than a couple of servants , leaving Sabrina to maintain the four floors of the house . Her tutoring continued at the same time , with one @-@ to @-@ one lessons from Day on a variety of subjects . 
 Day also extended his tutoring to fortify Sabrina against hardship , inspired by Rousseau 's Emile , or On Education . The book explains the concept of ' negative education ' , i.e. protecting a person from vices rather than teaching them virtues . Day interpreted this to mean that submitting Sabrina to tests of endurance would help to create a woman with hardened nerves . One example given by Rousseau was helping Emile become accustomed to explosions such as fireworks by firing pistols with small amounts of powder near him , gradually increasing the amount of powder . Day , on the other hand , fired a pistol loaded only with powder directly at Sabrina 's petticoat , without her knowledge that there was no shot in it . 
 In an attempt to increase her resistance to pain he would drop hot sealing wax on her back and arms or stick pins in her , commanding her not to cry out . He would test her ability to keep secrets by telling her that his life was in danger and she should tell no one . To increase her resistance to the cold , Day instructed Sabrina to wade into Stowe Pool until the water reached her neck , then lie in the nearby meadow until her clothes and hair had dried in the sun . Finally , to test her resistance to luxury , he gave her a big box of handmade silk clothes and had her throw them in the fire . Day had limited success with these techniques . It seems that she could voluntarily have hot wax on her arm without flinching , but she told others of his secrets and screamed whenever he shot his gun at her . 
 During their time at Stowe House , Day introduced Sabrina to the local members of the intellectual circle , including the priest at Lichfield Cathedral , Thomas Seward . Seward and his wife hoped that Day might be a suitor for their daughter , Anna , and Anna 's writings of the time show her interest in Day . Anna was also enchanted by Sabrina , who became the link between Day and the Seward family . Anna also took a keen interest in Sabrina 's story , as her father had taken in Honora Sneyd when Sneyd 's mother had died . 
 = = Moving away from Day = = 
 By 1770 , Sabrina began to question Day 's techniques and complain about the chores she had to perform . In December , the propriety of Day 's arrangement with Sabrina was being questioned by the local community , especially Anna Seward . Edgeworth joined Day for Christmas at Stowe , and convinced Day that his experiment had been unsuccessful . He also persuaded Day that Sabrina was too old to remain living with him without a chaperone . Day appeared to accept Edgeworth 's point of view , as he paid for Sabrina to attend Sutton Coldfield boarding school in Warwickshire early in 1771 . She remained at the boarding school for three years , including weekends and holidays , with infrequent visits from Day . The school normally focused on preparing high society daughters for marriage , with subjects such as needlework and the arts . Day , however , stipulated that she was to be taught academic subjects but should not dance or learn music . 
 In 1774 , Day visited Sabrina to inform her that she would be apprenticed to the Parkinsons , a family of <unk> , as Day believed the profession would not expose her to temptation . She was delivered to the family under the stipulation that she should work hard at chores and be denied luxuries . The Parkinsons , however , treated Sabrina well , to the extent that Day later chastised them for not instilling ' industry and frugality ' in her . Less than a year later the Parkinsons ' business went bankrupt , leaving Sabrina without an apprenticeship and without anywhere to live . Day arranged for her to stay with his friends , the Keir family , and implied that she could take on the role of housekeeper at his own home . Day again considered Sabrina , who was now 18 , as a potential wife , but did not let her know of his intentions , nor that her upbringing was part of his experiment . 
 = = = Broken engagement = = = 
 Over the next few months , Day returned to moulding Sabrina to meet his requirements for the ideal woman , choosing what she would wear and pushing his ideas of frugality upon her . Sabrina took on all the ideas willingly and Day believed he had finally created a woman that would meet all his requirements . Day was so confident that he talked openly of marrying Sabrina , despite the fact that she was unaware of his intentions and eventually one of Day 's friends let her know that he hoped to marry her . Sabrina confronted Day about the rumours and he admitted they were true , neglecting to mention that he had hoped to marry her since the day he met her . 
 Sabrina did not refuse the proposal , so Day planned the wedding whilst she considered it further and eventually agreed . During the preparations Day left Sabrina with friends for a few days , giving her strict instructions on what she should wear . When he returned to find her in an outfit which did not meet his requirements , he flew into a rage and Sabrina fled for a few hours , so Day called off the engagement . Sabrina was sent to a boarding house in Birmingham and given a stipend of £ 50 per annum ( equivalent to £ 5 @,@ 674 in 2015 ) , resolving to never see her again . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 After her engagement to Day ended , Sabrina spent 8 years at boarding houses around Birmingham . Day met and went on to marry an heiress , Esther Milnes in 1778 . Sabrina met an apothecary , Jarvis Wardley , who proposed marriage in an acrostic poem . Sabrina contacted Day for advice , and he told her in absolute terms not to marry Wardley , even writing an acrostic poem for her to use in turning him down . In 1783 , she had become a lady 's companion in Newport , Shropshire It was there that she was approached by Day 's friend , the man who helped choose her at the foundling hospital : John Bicknell . Bicknell was single and had spent the majority of his earnings from his law career in gambling dens . He had not paid much attention to Sabrina since selecting her with Day , but immediately proposed marriage . 
 Sabrina again consulted with Day on the prospective engagement . Day did not approve , claiming the age difference was too great , despite the fact that Bicknell was just two years older than Day . Bicknell , however , decided to tell Sabrina the truth about the experiment , that she was hand @-@ picked to be Day 's wife from childhood , and that all of Day 's actions were designed to further his goal of turning her into the ideal bride . Horrified , Sabrina wrote to Day to confront him on the accusations , Day admitted the truth but refused to apologise . After a series of letters , Day gave his consent to the marriage , telling her that the letter would be his final communication with her . 
 Bicknell and Sabrina married on 16 April 1784 at St Philip 's Cathedral , Birmingham . On the same day , Day paid the £ 500 wedding dowry he had stipulated in the contract he had set up with Bicknell , ending his £ 50 per year stipend . The couple bought a house in Shenfield and had two children , John Laurens Bicknell and Henry Edgeworth Bicknell . Bicknell carried on with his gambling habits , squandering the remaining money over the following three years . On 27 March 1787 , after just three years of marriage , John Bicknell died of a paralytic stroke . 
 Sabrina and her two children were now left without an income . Day sent her a new stipend of £ 30 per year , which was matched by Edgworth . In addition , her husband 's barrister friends raised £ 800 for the widow and her children . Sabrina found a role as housekeeper for Charles Burney , as well as general manager of his schools in Chiswick , Hammersmith and Greenwich . It was at his Greenwich school that Sabrina 's own children were educated . 
 Day 's widow , Esther , carried on paying Sabrina 's allowance after his death in 1789 , and Sabrina carried on her work with Burney until she was 68 . By this time she was living in a four storey house in Gloucester Circus , Greenwich , with her own servants . On 8 September 1843 , Sabrina died at her home of a severe asthma attack . She was buried at Kensal Green cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Sabrina asked her friends to not discuss her past as she believed her humble beginnings and Day 's treatment of her would tarnish her reputation . Anna Seward , however , wrote about Sabrina 's upbringing in her 1804 work , Memoirs on the Life of Dr. Darwin . As Seward publicly identified Sabrina in the book , it was criticised by the press and Sabrina 's son John was very angry to learn of his mother 's past . In his 1820 memoirs , Edgeworth stated his belief that Sabrina and Day made a good match and that she loved him . Sabrina , however , disagreed with these accounts , stating that she never loved Day , that he had made her miserable and she was effectively a slave . 
 Sabrina 's education has been compared to George Bernard Shaw 's story of Pygmalion , and strong parallels are drawn to two books in 1871 , Henry James 's Watch and Ward and Anthony Trollope 's Orley Farm . Wendy Moore 's 2013 book How to Create the Perfect Wife and the 2015 BBC Radio 4 staged drama The Imperfect Education of Sabrina Sidney tell the story of her life . 
 = BMW M1 Procar Championship = 
 For the later German touring car series , see ADAC Procar Series . 
 The BMW M1 Procar Championship , sometimes known simply as Procar , was a one @-@ make auto racing series created by Jochen Neerpasch , head of BMW Motorsport GmbH , the racing division of automobile manufacturer BMW . The series pitted professional drivers from the Formula One World Championship , World Sportscar Championship , European Touring Car Championship , and other international series against one another using identically modified BMW M1 sports cars . 
 Billed as an opportunity to see a mix of drivers from various motorsport disciplines , the championship served as support races for various European rounds of the 1979 Formula One season , with Formula One drivers earning automatic entry into the Procar event based on their performance in their Formula One cars . Austrian Niki Lauda won the inaugural championship . In 1980 , the series held some events outside of Formula One schedule , and was won by Brazilian Nelson Piquet . BMW chose not to continue the championship in 1981 to concentrate on their entrance into Formula One . 
 = = Origin = = 
 Jochen Neerpasch , the head of BMW 's Motorsports division , was the first to propose the idea of a one @-@ make championship . The division had started construction of the first sports car for BMW in 1978 , the M1 , and had planned from the start to enter the new sports car in the World Sportscar Championship in 1979 , as well as offering the cars to customers for other series . BMW Motorsport planned to build M1s to meet regulations known as Group 5 , but a rule change instituted by the Fédération Internationale du Sport Automobile ( FISA ) in 1977 altered the requirements for Group 5 . The new regulations required a minimum of 400 examples of the M1 to be built to meet Group 4 regulations before the car could be further homologated for the Group 5 category . 
 Development of the Group 4 racing car was already under way at the time of the regulation change . Neerpasch believed that rather than delaying their racing program until 400 road cars had been built , racing cars could be built at the same time since they too counted toward the 400 example minimum . A one @-@ make series consisting of the M1 racing cars intended for Group 4 was devised by Neerpasch since the racing cars could not yet legally compete elsewhere , while at the same time allowing BMW to develop the race cars through experience . 
 To attract drivers to the series , Neerpasch entered into discussions with Max Mosley . Mosley was the head of March Engineering , a constructor which BMW was partnered with in their factory efforts in the European Formula Two Championship . Mosley was at the time a member of the Formula One Constructors Association , and was able to use his position to convince other Formula One constructors to support the use of Neerpasch 's one @-@ make series as a support race for European Formula One events . A ruling and organisation body for the series , known as The Procar Association , was set up by BMW and approved by FISA . 
 = = Format = = 
 With the Procar Championship announced in spring 1978 at the official unveiling of the M1 road car , Neerpasch and the newly formed Procar Association laid out regulations for the 1979 season . Races were planned for the middle of the Formula One season , when the championship remained in Europe for several months . Practice and qualifying were held on Friday of the race weekend , while the race itself occurred on Saturday . The winner of each race received US $ 5 @,@ 000 , second place received $ 3 @,@ 000 , and third place $ 1 @,@ 000 . Races varied in length , but each lasted for approximately half an hour . 
 To attract Formula One drivers to the championship , seats were guaranteed in the Procar races by cars which were entered by the factory BMW team . The five fastest Formula One drivers from Friday practice were assigned to the factory team , and were even guaranteed the first five grid positions for the Procar race , regardless of their qualifying times in the cars . This not only guaranteed Formula One driver participation , but also allowed for a variety of drivers to be seen over the course of the season . However , because the series ran Goodyear tyres , several Formula One drivers were not allowed to compete due to contractual obligations with competing tyre manufacturer Michelin . As Scuderia Ferrari and Renault were selling <unk> themselves , they did not allow their Formula One drivers to participate and implicitly endorse BMW . 
 Other teams were allowed to participate , assigning a variety of sportscar and touring car drivers as well as Formula One drivers who had not earned spots in the factory cars . Points were awarded to the top ten finishers , starting with 20 points and decreasing down to 15 , 12 , 10 , 8 , 6 , 4 , 3 , 2 , and finally 1 for the nine remaining drivers . An overall championship was awarded to the driver who had accumulated the most points at the end of the season . A new M1 road car was awarded to the championship winner . 
 = = = Cars = = = 
 All cars used in the Procar Championship were built to identical standards , although their origins varied . BS Fabrications constructed five cars for the BMW factory team , while cars for other competitors were constructed by the British Formula Two team Project Four Racing ( led by Ron Dennis ) and the Italian constructor Osella . The racing cars , designed to meet Group 4 technical regulations , shared only some basics from the M1 road cars . 
 For the M1 's exterior , simple modifications were made to adapt the car aerodynamically . A deep spoiler was added under the nose of the car , while an adjustable wing was added on two mounts at the rear of the engine cover . The arches for the wheels were extended outward to shroud the wider 28 centimetres ( 11 in ) wheels in the front , and 32 cm ( 12 @.@ 6 in ) wheels at the rear . The alloy wheels , designed by Campagnolo , featured a central locking nut and mimicked the <unk> design of the production car 's wheels . Inside , the car featured no finishing or luxuries from the road car , only a <unk> for driver protection . The glass windows were replaced with clear plastic . 
 Mechanically , the Procar M1s were extensively modified to meet the requirements of circuit racing . The standard M1 featured the cast iron block BMW M88 straight @-@ 6 with 3 @,@ 453 cubic centimetres ( 210 @.@ 7 cu in ) displacement . Modified into the M88 / 1 by a team led by Paul <unk> , it was capable of producing 470 horsepower at 9000 rpm , compared to 277 hp from the standard M1 's engine . The 5 @-@ speed ZF gearbox housing from the road car was retained , but with multiple gear ratios allowed , as well as its own oil cooler . 
 The suspension was entirely new , adding adjustable anti @-@ roll bars . The brakes were redesigned to adapt the use of a driver @-@ adjustable brake pressure balance , while the servo @-@ activated braking system was removed . A racing steering rack was used in place of the standard power steering unit . Pneumatic jacks were later added to the cars in the 1980 season to allow for quicker pit stops . Goodyear racing tires were used on all cars . All other non @-@ essential items from the road car were not included , bringing the Procar M1 's weight down to 1 @,@ 020 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 250 lb ) . The performance of the Procar M1s was increased to a top speed of 311 kilometres per hour ( 193 mph ) dependent upon gear ratios , and acceleration from 0 – 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) in 4 @.@ 3 seconds . Each Procar M1 cost approximately US $ 60 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Series history = = 
 = = = 1979 season = = = 
 An announced schedule for the inaugural season of the Procar Championship featured events taking place from May to September , when the Formula One World Championship ran eight consecutive Grands Prix in Europe . A ninth event was scheduled at Donington Park as part of the Gunnar Nilsson Memorial Trophy , a charity event for the Gunnar Nilsson Cancer Fund , although it did not award points towards the overall championship . 
 Different Formula One drivers earned spots on the factory team over the season based on their performance in Formula One practice . These included Mario Andretti , Patrick <unk> , Emerson Fittipaldi , James Hunt , Jean @-@ Pierre Jarier , Alan Jones , Jacques Laffite , Niki Lauda , Nelson Piquet , Didier Pironi , Clay Regazzoni , and John Watson . Teo Fabi , Tiff Needell , Hans @-@ Georg Bürger and Michael <unk> were invited to drive in the factory BMW cars as well although they were not Formula One drivers at the time . 
 As well as the standard five car entry from BMW , several other notable teams participated . Procar constructor Project Four entered a car for Niki Lauda when he was not in the factory entries , while Osella entered cars for a rotating driver line @-@ up . Touring car teams Tom Walkinshaw Racing , Eggenberger Racing , <unk> <unk> , and Schnitzer Motorsport entered cars , as did Team Konrad and GS Tuning from sports cars . 
 = = = = Race results = = = = 
 = = = = Championship standings = = = = 
 The following are the ten highest finishing drivers in the points standings . Niki Lauda won the inaugural championship , initially earning a spot in the factory BMW team in the first round , before running the remaining seven races for Project Four . 
 = = = 1980 season = = = 
 For the second running of the Procar Championship , the schedule was altered and expanded so that the races did not rely exclusively on Formula One events . This allowed the season to start slightly earlier , this time in April . Donington Park was retained from the previous year but now counted towards the championship . Two German events were added , with the Procar Championship designated as that year 's Avusrennen at the AVUS circuit , and the <unk> serving as a support race for the Deutsche <unk> <unk> 's 200 Miles of Norisring . Six Formula One Grands Prix remained on the schedule . 
 Unlike the previous year where the fastest drivers in practice earned seats with the factory BMW team , five drivers were designated as the primary drivers for events which did not share a Grand Prix weekend . These five were Alan Jones , Jacques Laffite , Nelson Piquet , Didier Pironi , and Carlos Reutemann . Other Formula One drivers to participate during Grands Prix were Mario Andretti , Derek Daly , Jean @-@ Pierre Jarier , Riccardo Patrese , and Alain Prost . 
 Several teams from the previous year entered once more , including Project Four , GS Tuning , Eggenberger Racing , Cassani Racing , and Schnitzer Motorsport . Newcomers included personal teams from Arturo <unk> , Dieter <unk> , and Helmut Marko , as well as Swiss sportscar manufacturer Sauber . 
 = = = = Race results = = = = 
 = = = = Championship standings = = = = 
 The following are the ten highest finishing drivers in the points standings . Nelson Piquet won the championship , aided by three consecutive wins to finish the year . 
 = = Afterwards = = 
 At the start of the 1980 season , BMW announced their intention to enter Formula One as an engine supplier for Brabham . The deal came in part due to Bernie Ecclestone , then head of Brabham , as well as the head of BS Fabrications , who had built several of the Procar M1s . BMW planned to enter the series in 1982 , and BMW Motorsport was tasked with concentrating their efforts on the new Formula One engines instead of the Procar series . 
 That same year , BMW officially met FISA 's requirements by having built approximately 400 cars . The M1 was therefore homologated for Group 4 on December 1 , 1980 , allowing BMW to enter the Championship for Makes in 1981 . As BMW shifted towards Formula One , the company ended their plans to enter the Group 5 category after the construction of only two race cars . With BMW no longer needing to quickly build race cars , and with BMW Motorsport shifting to Formula One work , the series was not held in 1981 . The M1s used in the Procar series were sold to various customers for use in the World Championship , as well as smaller series such as the Deutsche <unk> <unk> and Camel GT Championship . 
 In 1988 , Motor Racing Developments , the owners of the Brabham Formula One Team , were sold to Alfa Romeo . Wishing to revive the Procar series , Brabham and Alfa Romeo developed a prototype racing car using a mid @-@ mounted Formula One @-@ based V10 engine , covered in a bodywork silhouette mimicking the Alfa Romeo 164 . Alfa Romeo intended to use identical copies of the car for a resurrected Procar series , but the plans never came to fruition and only the prototype was built . 
 = = = Revival = = = 
 On June 30 , 2008 , BMW announced plans to revive the Procar series in an exhibition event at the 2008 German Grand Prix at the Hockenheimring . The races involved ten original M1 <unk> driven by several drivers who had participated in the original series as well as modern drivers . Each car included a passenger seat for a guest . The line @-@ up included former competitors Christian Danner , Harald <unk> , Niki Lauda , Dieter <unk> , and Marc Surer . Former BMW driver Prince Leopold of Bavaria , BMW Sauber test driver Christian Klien , and a current M1 Procar owner , Marco Wagner , also competed . The BMW M1 Art Car designed by Andy Warhol was involved , driven by series founder Jochen Neerpasch and with fellow Art Car artist Frank Stella as his passenger . 
 Lauda won the first race held on Saturday , July 19 , while Neerpasch was able to win the race held on Sunday , July 20 , the morning of the Grand Prix . 
 = A Little Bit = 
 " A Little Bit " is a song recorded by American recording artist Jessica Simpson . It was written by Kara DioGuardi , Steve Morales and David Siegel , and was produced by Morales along with Ric Wake . The song was released as the second and final single from Simpson 's second studio album Irresistible ( 2001 ) , on October 29 , 2001 through Columbia Records . Musically , the song is a mid @-@ tempo dance @-@ pop song and the lyrics speak about the protagonist wanting changes in a relationship she is in . 
 The song received mostly positive reviews from music critics ; most of them appreciated the song 's production . It failed to chart in the United States , but reached number sixty @-@ two on Australian Singles Chart . An accompanying music video , directed by Hype Williams , shows Simpson dancing on a futuristic dance floor , along with her backup dancers . Simpson performed the song on her DreamChaser Tour ( 2001 ) , the 2001 Jingle Bell Bash and a few televised shows . 
 " A Little Bit " was covered by Welsh singer Rosie Ribbons for her unreleased album Misbehaving . Her version was released as a single through Telstar Records and peaked at number nineteen on the UK Singles Chart . The single was promoted through a promotional music video , which shows Ribbons performing dance routines with her dancers , and live performances on various televised appearances like CD : UK and Top of the Pops and Smile . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " A Little Bit " was written by Kara DioGuardi , Steve Morales and David Siegal , and was produced by Morales and Ric Wake . The song became DioGuardi 's first writing credit for an artist from her native country . Simpson 's vocals were recorded by Dan <unk> at Sony Music Studios , New York City , and the track was mixed by <unk> along with Richie Jones at Cove City Sound Studios , Glen Cove , New York . Keyboard programming was done by Eric <unk> . According to Simpson , " the message behind the song is for guys to listen to the girl " . " A guy needs to give a little bit more of himself , a little bit more of his time . It 's about the love going so much further , the guy would actually be selfless , " she expanded on the song 's theme . In the United States , " A Little Bit " was released as the second single from Irresistible . The song saw an airplay @-@ only release there , while in Australia , a physical single was issued on October 29 , 2001 . " A Little Bit " was used to promote Bally Total Fitness and thus , a limited CD single pressing was made available to people who joined the club . The song was also utilized for the company 's promotional advertisement campaign . 
 " A Little Bit " is a dance @-@ pop song , composed in a " medium pop " tempo . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Music Publishing , it is written in the key of E minor . Its beat is set in common time , and moves at a tempo of 94 beats per minute . It also has the sequence of Em – C – B / D ♯ as its chord progression . Simpson 's voice in the song spans from the note of G3 to the high note of D5 . Following the same beat @-@ oriented pattern as " Irresistible " , " A Little Bit " features piano instrumentation . Simpson sings the lyrics as rapid @-@ fire verses and with start @-@ and @-@ stop hooks . Simpson adopts breathy vocals for the song , and the lyrics talk about what she expects from her partner : " A little more time , a little less wait / A little more heart , a little less break " . She also demands healthy changes in the relationship . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " A Little Bit " garnered mostly positive reviews from music critics . Kirsten Koba of PopMatters gave a positive review , writing " with pop star sass , she belts out [ ... ] proving that she 's a girl with attitude — and fierce rhyming ability . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic wrote that the song and " Irresistible " were " double @-@ punch " on the album . Chuck Taylor of Billboard praised the song 's production , writing that it " locks [ this one ] inside the head long after it 's faded from the speakers . " Larry Printz of The Morning Call also gave a favorable review , writing that the song " benefit [ s ] " from the start @-@ and @-@ stop hooks . <unk> Yahya of The Malay Mail , who was critical of the album as a whole , pointed out that Simpson sounded " decent " on the track . However , Chuck Campbell of Daily News noted Simpson 's singing as " breathless whispers " and deemed the song as being " heavily processed . " The song debuted at number sixty @-@ two on the Australian Singles Chart , on the week dated November 5 , 2001 , which became its peak position . The single fell to number ninety @-@ six the following week , and dropped out of the chart the week after . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
