 The music video was filmed under the direction of Hype Williams to promote the single . The dance sequence was choreographed by George <unk> ( known as GEO ) and the video takes place in a futuristic spaceship @-@ like setting where Simpson performs an intricate dance choreography with four male and four female dancers . She wears a rainbow @-@ colored tank top and a mini skirt in the video . At one part , the dancers perform in pairs with Simpson in front of them . Later , Simpson dances beside a male dancer while wearing sunglasses and a white top with a bedazzled American flag . In the video 's final scene , Simpson , accompanied by the same dancers from the beginning , perform choreography in a red room , and dance with futuristic pole @-@ stands . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Simpson included the song on the set @-@ list of her DreamChaser Tour ( 2001 ) . For the performance on the tour , Simpson was accented by a white top and plaid pants , and also wore a red hat and a red tie . Her performance also made use of poles similar to the one used in music video . She also performed the song on MuchMusic Canada. and the sketch comedy show MADtv . The song was performed along with " Irresistible " , " I Wanna Love You Forever " , and " I Think I 'm in Love with You " , at the Jingle Bell Bash , organized by KBKS @-@ FM , in December 2001 . The same month , she sang the song on the 2001 Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve , along with " Irresistible " , and on the Hot 107 @.@ 9 Mistletoe Meltdown . Mark <unk> of The Post @-@ Standard wrote that Simpson " sure sounded like a diva – especially with the bulked @-@ up tape track that accompanied her singing . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 AUS CD single 
 " A Little Bit " – 3 : 47 
 " A Little Bit " ( Chris ' The Greek ' & Guido Club Mix ) – 7 : 54 
 " A Little Bit " ( Chris ' The Greek ' & Guido Radio Mix ) – 4 : 29 
 " Irresistible " ( Hex Hector Radio Mix ) – 3 : 32 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for " A Little Bit " are adapted from Irresistible liner notes . Credits for the remixes are adapted from " A Little Bit " CD single liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Rosie Ribbons version = = 
 " A Little Bit " was recorded by English singer and Pop Idol runner @-@ up Rosie Ribbons , for her debut studio album Misbehaving . Her version has an " American vibe " and derives from the genres of pop and R & B. A writer for the Western Mail noted that the song contains influences of Samantha Mumba tracks . The song was released on January 13 , 2003 through Telstar Records , as the second single from the album . It reached number nineteen on the UK Singles Chart , and was also accompanied by a music video , which showed Ribbons dancing with her backup dancers . She performed the song on various televised appearances such as CD : UK and Top of the Pops . She also toured with Liberty X and promoted the song . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 Ribbons ' version of " A Little Bit " was released as the second single from her debut album titled Misbehaving , on January 13 , 2003 , through Telstar Records . The album was recorded , but due to Telstar going bankrupt , it was never released . 
 A staff of <unk> gave a favorable review commending Ribbons ' vocal display . The reviewer added " [ so ] often we are bombarded with wannabes with weak vocals and insipid songs , [ Rosie ] shows us that there is life after pop idol and with ' a little bit ' of cred . " Music Week also gave a positive review , noting the song was " catchy " . However , Ian Hyland , writing for the Sunday Mirror was critical of the song , giving it a grade of 6 out of 10 . He remarked that Ribbons " fails " at doing " sexy R 'n'B " . Similarly , Julie MacCaskill of the Daily Record dismissed it as " a lacklustre affair with the wannabe star ditching her Mariah <unk> a @-@ like singing in favour of becoming a Kylie clone " . The single debuted at number nineteen on the UK Singles Chart , the week dated January 25 , 2003 . The position became its peak position . The following week , the song dropped to number thirty @-@ seven and the week after exited the top forty . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 A promotional music video for the song was filmed , which showed Ribbons wearing heavy makeup and donning a stylish costume . The first scene of the music video takes place in an elevator @-@ like set . Ribbons is shown singing in the elevator . Then , as the video progresses she is shown dancing with her backup dancers , in a set with the lyrics of the song inscribed on its walls . Then , Ribbons is shown seducing a man in the elevator . In the last scene Ribbons , along with the backup dancers , dance on a parking lot like set . The music video premiered on CD : UK on December 7 , 2002 . Dean Piper of The Mirror noted the video to be " groovy " . 
 " A Little Bit " was first performed on the Party in the Park event in 2002 . Later , she performed it on various televised appearances such as the British chart show Top of the Pops , Smile and CD : UK . She also appeared on Smash Hits ' chart countdown and promoted the song . In March 2003 , she toured with British pop group Liberty X. 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 = = = Credits and personnel = = = 
 Credits are adapted from " A Little Bit " CD single . 
 Steve Morales – writer 
 Kara DioGuardi – writer 
 David Siegal – writer 
 ICON – producer 
 Rishi Rich – re @-@ mixer 
 M * A * S * H – re @-@ mixer 
 Bini & Martini – re @-@ mixer 
 Joanna Barnes – rap 
 Tanya Scarborough – rap 
 = Calvin Coolidge = 
 John Calvin Coolidge Jr . ( / <unk> / ; July 4 , 1872 – January 5 , 1933 ) was the 30th President of the United States ( 1923 – 29 ) . A Republican lawyer from Vermont , Coolidge worked his way up the ladder of Massachusetts state politics , eventually becoming governor of that state . His response to the Boston Police Strike of 1919 thrust him into the national spotlight and gave him a reputation as a man of decisive action . Soon after , he was elected as the 29th vice president in 1920 and succeeded to the presidency upon the sudden death of Warren G. Harding in 1923 . Elected in his own right in 1924 , he gained a reputation as a small @-@ government conservative , and also as a man who said very little , although having a rather dry sense of humor . 
 Coolidge restored public confidence in the White House after the scandals of his predecessor 's administration , and left office with considerable popularity . As a Coolidge biographer wrote , " He embodied the spirit and hopes of the middle class , could interpret their longings and express their opinions . That he did represent the genius of the average is the most convincing proof of his strength . " Coolidge 's retirement was relatively short , as he died at the age of 60 in January 1933 , less than two months before his direct successor , Herbert Hoover , left office . 
 Though his reputation underwent a renaissance during the Ronald Reagan administration , modern assessments of Coolidge 's presidency are divided . He is adulated among advocates of smaller government and laissez @-@ faire ; supporters of an active central government generally view him less favorably , while both sides praise his stalwart support of racial equality . 
 = = Birth and family history = = 
 John Calvin Coolidge Jr. was born in Plymouth Notch , Windsor County , Vermont , on July 4 , 1872 , the only U.S. president to be born on Independence Day . He was the elder of the two children of John Calvin Coolidge Sr. ( 1845 – 1926 ) and Victoria Josephine Moor ( 1846 – 85 ) . Coolidge Senior engaged in many occupations , but developed a statewide reputation as a prosperous farmer , storekeeper and public servant . He held various local offices , including justice of the peace and tax collector and served in the Vermont House of Representatives as well as the Vermont Senate . Coolidge 's mother was the daughter of a Plymouth Notch farmer . She was chronically ill and died , perhaps from tuberculosis , when Coolidge was twelve years old . His younger sister , Abigail Grace Coolidge ( 1875 – 90 ) , died at the age of fifteen , probably of appendicitis , when Coolidge was eighteen . Coolidge 's father remarried in 1891 , to a schoolteacher , and lived to the age of eighty . 
 Coolidge 's family had deep roots in New England ; his earliest American ancestor , John Coolidge , emigrated from Cottenham , Cambridgeshire , England , around 1630 and settled in Watertown , Massachusetts . Another ancestor , Edmund Rice , arrived at Watertown in 1638 . Coolidge 's great @-@ great @-@ grandfather , also named John Coolidge , was an American military officer in the Revolutionary War and one of the first selectmen of the town of Plymouth Notch . His grandfather , Calvin Galusha Coolidge , served in the Vermont House of Representatives . Many of Coolidge 's ancestors were farmers , and numerous distant cousins were prominent in politics . 
 = = Early career and marriage = = 
 = = = Education and law practice = = = 
 Coolidge attended Black River Academy and then Amherst College , where he distinguished himself in the debating class , as a senior joined the fraternity Phi Gamma Delta and graduated cum laude . While there , Coolidge was profoundly influenced by philosophy professor Charles Edward Garman , a Congregational mystic , with a neo @-@ Hegelian philosophy . Garman ignited in Coolidge a manly self @-@ respect , and inspired him with a belief in God as a cosmic conscious , greater than the human , which represented " the way , the truth and the life . " 
 Coolidge devotedly articulated Garman 's ethics forty years later , 
 " ... there is a standard of righteousness that might does not make right , that the end does not justify the means , and that expediency as a working principle is bound to fail . The only hope of perfecting human relationships is in accordance with the law of service under which men are not so solicitous about what they shall get as they are about what they shall give . Yet people are entitled to the rewards of their industry . What they earn is theirs , no matter how small or how great . But the possession of property carries the obligation to use it in a larger service ... " 
 At his father 's urging after graduation , Coolidge moved to Northampton , Massachusetts to become a lawyer . To avoid the cost of law school , Coolidge followed the common practice of apprenticing with a local law firm , Hammond & Field , and reading law with them . John C. Hammond and Henry P. Field , both Amherst graduates , introduced Coolidge to law practice in the county seat of Hampshire County . In 1897 , Coolidge was admitted to the bar , becoming a country lawyer . With his savings and a small inheritance from his grandfather , Coolidge opened his own law office in Northampton in 1898 . He practiced commercial law , believing that he served his clients best by staying out of court . As his reputation as a hard @-@ working and diligent attorney grew , local banks and other businesses began to retain his services . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 In 1905 , Coolidge met Grace Anna Goodhue , a University of Vermont graduate and teacher at the Clarke School for the Deaf . They were in the same crowd , boating , picnicking , and dancing — the younger ones of the Congregational Church . That year they were engaged in early summer and married in October , after an attempt in vain by Grace 's mother to postpone the vows : she was never enamored with him nor he with her . The newlyweds went on honeymoon to Montreal , originally planned for two weeks but cut short by a week at Coolidge 's request . After 25 years he wrote of Grace , " ... for almost a quarter of a century she has borne with my infirmities and I have rejoiced in her graces " . 
 Being consistently loyal , he was a devoted husband , but also could be self @-@ centered , undemonstrative and reserved , and often grumpy ; and there was the ubiquitous mistress of politics . But Grace knew all of this when she married him , in addition to recognizing in him a man of solid character . She was amiable , tolerant and possessed of an understanding heart . She could mimic her husband 's peculiarities and did so to the amusement of family and friends , but without mocking him maliciously . She knew his great strengths and understood his minor weaknesses . Socially , she was as quick witted as he and of greater maturity ; she supplemented his natural shyness with a graceful candor , and offset his occasional lapses into <unk> with a gay loquacity that could keep a dinner table conversation going . 
 Coolidge was quite frugal when it came to securing a home . They rented . Coolidge did not like to be beholden to bankers or anyone else , for that matter . Independence was his way of protecting his freedom to do what was right . The same impulse caused him to hesitate before joining clubs . Henry Field had a pew in Edwards Church , and Grace was a member , but Coolidge only went along . His decision infuriated his colleagues in politics ; after all , the more clubs one joined , the more friends one had at election time . But Coolidge found another way to connect with fellow citizens : he deposited savings with a variety of institutions . Each additional banker who held some of his money was an additional pair of eyes that would follow him , and likely be an additional vote . 
 The <unk> had two sons : John ( September 7 , 1906 – May 31 , 2000 ) and Calvin , Jr . ( April 13 , 1908 – July 7 , 1924 ) . Calvin 's death at age 16 from blood poisoning brought on by an infected blister " hurt him terribly , " according to son John . John became a railroad executive , helped to start the Coolidge Foundation , and was instrumental in creating the President Calvin Coolidge State Historic Site . 
 = = Local political office = = 
 = = = City offices = = = 
 The Republican Party was dominant in New England in Coolidge 's time , and he followed Hammond 's and Field 's example by becoming active in local politics . In 1896 Coolidge campaigned for Republican presidential candidate William McKinley , and the next year he was selected to be a member of the Republican City Committee . In 1898 , he won election to the City Council of Northampton , placing second in a ward where the top three candidates were elected . The position offered no salary , but provided Coolidge invaluable political experience . In 1899 , he declined renomination , running instead for City Solicitor , a position elected by the City Council . He was elected for a one @-@ year term in 1900 , and reelected in 1901 . This position gave Coolidge more experience as a lawyer and paid a salary of $ 600 . In 1902 , the city council selected a Democrat for city solicitor , and Coolidge returned to private practice . Soon thereafter , however , the clerk of courts for the county died , and Coolidge was chosen to replace him . The position paid well , but it barred him from practicing law , so he remained at the job for only one year . In 1904 , Coolidge suffered his sole defeat at the ballot box , losing an election to the Northampton school board . When told that some of his neighbors voted against him because he had no children in the schools he would govern , Coolidge replied , " Might give me time ! " 
 = = = State legislator and mayor = = = 
 In 1906 , the local Republican committee nominated Coolidge for election to the state House of Representatives . He won a close victory over the incumbent Democrat , and reported to Boston for the 1907 session of the Massachusetts General Court . In his freshman term , Coolidge served on minor committees and , although he usually voted with the party , was known as a Progressive Republican , voting in favor of such measures as women 's suffrage and the direct election of Senators . While in Boston , Coolidge became an ally , and then a <unk> , of then U.S. Senator Winthrop Murray Crane who controlled the western faction of the Massachusetts Republican Party ; Crane 's party rival in the east of the commonwealth was U.S. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge . Another key strategic alliance which Coolidge forged was with Guy Currier , who had served in both state houses and had the social distinction , wealth , personal charm and broad circle of friends which Coolidge lacked , and which would have a lasting impact on his political career . In 1907 , he was elected to a second term , and in the 1908 session , Coolidge was more outspoken , though not in a leadership position . 
 Instead of vying for another term in the State House , Coolidge returned home to his growing family and ran for mayor of Northampton when the incumbent Democrat retired . He was well liked in the town , and defeated his challenger by a vote of 1 @,@ 597 to 1 @,@ 409 . During his first term ( 1910 to 1911 ) , he increased teachers ' salaries and retired some of the city 's debt while still managing to effect a slight tax decrease . He was renominated in 1911 , and defeated the same opponent by a slightly larger margin . 
 In 1911 , the State Senator for the Hampshire County area retired and successfully encouraged Coolidge to run for his seat for the 1912 session ; Coolidge defeated his Democratic opponent by a large margin . At the start of that term , he became chairman of a committee to arbitrate the " Bread and Roses " strike by the workers of the American Woolen Company in Lawrence , Massachusetts . After two tense months , the company agreed to the workers ' demands , in a settlement proposed by the committee . A major issue affecting Massachusetts Republicans that year was the party split between the progressive wing , which favored Theodore Roosevelt , and the conservative wing , which favored William Howard Taft . Although he favored some progressive measures , Coolidge refused to leave the Republican party . When the new Progressive Party declined to run a candidate in his state senate district , Coolidge won reelection against his Democratic opponent by an increased margin . 
 In the 1913 session , Coolidge enjoyed renowned success in arduously navigating to passage the Western Trolley Act which connected Northampton with a dozen similar industrial communities in western Massachusetts . Coolidge intended to retire after his second term as was the custom , but when the President of the State Senate , Levi H. Greenwood , considered running for Lieutenant Governor , Coolidge decided to run again for the Senate in the hopes of being elected as its presiding officer . Although Greenwood later decided to run for reelection to the Senate , he was defeated primarily due to his opposition to women 's suffrage ; Coolidge was in favor of the women 's vote , won his own re @-@ election and with Crane 's help , assumed the presidency of a closely divided Senate . After his election in January 1914 , Coolidge delivered a published and frequently quoted speech entitled Have Faith in Massachusetts , which summarized his philosophy of government . 
 Coolidge 's speech was well received , and he attracted some admirers on its account ; towards the end of the term , many of them were proposing his name for nomination to lieutenant governor . After winning reelection to the Senate by an increased margin in the 1914 elections , Coolidge was reelected unanimously to be President of the Senate . Coolidge 's supporters , led by fellow Amherst alumnus Frank Stearns , encouraged him again to run for lieutenant governor . Stearns , an advertising executive , became another key ally , and began a publicity campaign on <unk> 's behalf before he announced his candidacy at the end of the 1915 legislative session . 
 = = Lieutenant Governor and Governor of Massachusetts = = 
 Coolidge entered the primary election for lieutenant governor and was nominated to run alongside gubernatorial candidate Samuel W. McCall . Coolidge was the leading vote @-@ getter in the Republican primary , and balanced the Republican ticket by adding a western presence to McCall 's eastern base of support . McCall and Coolidge won the 1915 election to their respective one @-@ year terms , with Coolidge defeating his opponent by more than 50 @,@ 000 votes . 
 In Massachusetts , the lieutenant governor does not preside over the state Senate , as is the case in many other states ; nevertheless , as lieutenant governor , Coolidge was a deputy governor functioning as administrative inspector and was a member of the governor 's council . He was also chairman of the finance committee and the pardons committee . As a full @-@ time elected official , Coolidge discontinued his law practice in 1916 , though his family continued to live in Northampton . McCall and Coolidge were both reelected in 1916 and again in 1917 . When McCall decided that he would not stand for a fourth term , Coolidge announced his intention to run for governor . 
 = = = 1918 election = = = 
 Coolidge was unopposed for the Republican nomination for Governor of Massachusetts in 1918 . He and his running mate , Channing Cox , a Boston lawyer and Speaker of the Massachusetts House of Representatives , ran on the previous administration 's record : fiscal conservatism , a vague opposition to Prohibition , support for women 's suffrage , and support for American involvement in World War I. The issue of the war proved divisive , especially among <unk> and German Americans . Coolidge was elected by a margin of 16 @,@ 773 votes over his opponent , Richard H. Long , in the smallest margin of victory of any of his statewide campaigns . 
 = = = Boston Police Strike = = = 
 In 1919 , in reaction to a plan of the policemen of the Boston Police Department to register with a union , Police Commissioner Edwin U. Curtis announced that such an act would not be tolerated . In August of that year , the American Federation of Labor issued a charter to the Boston Police Union . Curtis declared the union 's leaders were guilty of insubordination and would be relieved of duty , but indicated he would cancel their suspension if the union was dissolved by September 4 . The mayor of Boston , Andrew Peters , convinced Curtis to delay his action for a few days , but with no results , and Curtis suspended the union leaders on September 8 . The following day , about three @-@ quarters of the policemen in Boston went on strike . Coolidge , tacitly but fully in support of Curtis ' position , closely monitored the situation but initially deferred to the local authorities . He anticipated that only a resulting measure of lawlessness could sufficiently prompt the public to understand and appreciate the controlling principle – that a policeman does not strike . That night and the next , there was sporadic violence and rioting in the unruly city . Peters , concerned about sympathy strikes by the firemen and others , called up some units of the Massachusetts National Guard stationed in the Boston area pursuant to an old and obscure legal authority , and relieved Curtis of duty . 
 Coolidge , sensing the severity of circumstances were then propitious to his intervention , conferred with Crane 's operative , William Butler , and then acted . He called up more units of the National Guard , restored Curtis to office , and took personal control of the police force . Curtis proclaimed that all of the strikers were fired from their jobs , and Coolidge called for a new police force to be recruited . That night Coolidge received a telegram from AFL leader Samuel Gompers . " Whatever disorder has occurred " , Gompers wrote , " is due to Curtis 's order in which the right of the policemen has been denied … " Coolidge publicly answered Gompers 's telegram , denying any justification whatsoever for the strike – and his response launched him into the national consciousness ( quoted , above left ) . Newspapers across the nation picked up on Coolidge 's statement and he became the newest hero to opponents of the strike . In the midst of the First Red Scare , many Americans were terrified of the spread of communist revolution , like those that had taken place in Russia , Hungary , and Germany . While Coolidge had lost some friends among organized labor , conservatives across the nation had seen a rising star . Although he usually acted with deliberation , the Boston police strike gave him a national reputation as a decisive leader , and as a strict enforcer of law and order . The Boston Police Patrolman Association was finally formed in 1965 ; it would be unionized in 1998 . 
 = = = 1919 election = = = 
 Coolidge and Cox were renominated for their respective offices in 1919 . By this time Coolidge 's supporters ( especially Stearns ) had publicized his actions in the Police Strike around the state and the nation and some of Coolidge 's speeches were published in book form . He faced the same opponent as in 1918 , Richard Long , but this time Coolidge defeated him by 125 @,@ 101 votes , more than seven times his margin of victory from a year earlier . His actions in the police strike , combined with the massive electoral victory , led to suggestions that Coolidge run for president in 1920 . 
 = = = Legislation and vetoes as governor = = = 
 By the time Coolidge was inaugurated on January 2 , 1919 , the First World War had ended , and Coolidge pushed the legislature to give a $ 100 bonus to Massachusetts veterans . He also signed a bill reducing the work week for women and children from fifty @-@ four hours to forty @-@ eight , saying , " We must humanize the industry , or the system will break down . " He signed into law a budget that kept the tax rates the same , while trimming $ 4 million from expenditures , thus allowing the state to retire some of its debt . 
 Coolidge also wielded the veto pen as governor . His most publicized veto prevented an increase in legislators ' pay by 50 % . Although Coolidge was personally opposed to Prohibition , he vetoed a bill in May 1920 that would have allowed the sale of beer or wine of 2 @.@ 75 % alcohol or less , in Massachusetts in violation of the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution . " Opinions and instructions do not outmatch the Constitution , " he said in his veto message . " Against it , they are void . " 
 = = Vice presidency = = 
 = = = 1920 election = = = 
 At the 1920 Republican National Convention , most of the delegates were selected by state party conventions , not primaries . As such , the field was divided among many local favorites . Coolidge was one such candidate , and while he placed as high as sixth in the voting , the powerful party bosses running the convention , primarily the party 's U.S. Senators , never considered him seriously . After ten ballots , the bosses and then the delegates settled on Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio as their nominee for president . When the time came to select a vice presidential nominee , the bosses also made and announced their decision on whom they wanted – Sen. Irvine Lenroot of Wisconsin – and then prematurely departed after his name was put forth , relying on the rank and file to confirm their decision . A delegate from Oregon , Wallace <unk> , having read Have Faith in Massachusetts , proposed Coolidge for vice president instead . The suggestion caught on quickly with the masses starving for an act of independence from the absent bosses , and Coolidge was unexpectedly nominated . 
 The Democrats nominated another Ohioan , James M. Cox , for president and the Assistant Secretary of the Navy , Franklin D. Roosevelt , for vice president . The question of the United States joining the League of Nations was a major issue in the campaign , as was the unfinished legacy of Progressivism . Harding ran a " front @-@ porch " campaign from his home in Marion , Ohio , but Coolidge took to the campaign trail in the Upper South , New York , and New England – his audiences carefully limited to those familiar with Coolidge and those placing a premium upon concise and short speeches . On November 2 , 1920 , Harding and Coolidge were victorious in a landslide , winning more than 60 percent of the popular vote , including every state outside the South . They also won in Tennessee , the first time a Republican ticket had won a Southern state since Reconstruction . 
 = = = " Silent Cal " = = = 
 The U.S. vice presidency did not carry many official duties , but Coolidge was invited by President Harding to attend cabinet meetings , making him the first vice president to do so . He gave a number of unremarkable speeches around the country . 
 As the U.S. vice president , Coolidge and his vivacious wife Grace were invited to quite a few parties , where the legend of " Silent Cal " was born . It is from this time that most of the jokes and anecdotes involving Coolidge originate . Although Coolidge was known to be a skilled and effective public speaker , in private he was a man of few words and was commonly referred to as " Silent Cal " . A possibly apocryphal story has it a matron , seated next to him at a dinner , said to him , " I made a bet today that I could get more than two words out of you . " He replied , " You lose . " Dorothy Parker , upon learning that Coolidge had died , reportedly remarked , " How can they tell ? " Coolidge often seemed uncomfortable among fashionable Washington society ; when asked why he continued to attend so many of their dinner parties , he replied , " Got to eat somewhere . " Alice Roosevelt Longworth , a leading Republican wit , underscored Coolidge 's silence and his dour personality : " When he wished he were elsewhere , he pursed his lips , folded his arms , and said nothing . He looked then precisely as though he had been weaned on a pickle . " 
 As president , Coolidge 's reputation as a quiet man continued . " The words of a President have an enormous weight , " he would later write , " and ought not to be used indiscriminately . " Coolidge was aware of his stiff reputation ; indeed , he cultivated it . " I think the American people want a solemn ass as a President , " he once told Ethel Barrymore , " and I think I will go along with them . " Some historians would later suggest that Coolidge 's image was created deliberately as a campaign tactic , while others believe his withdrawn and quiet behavior to be natural , deepening after the death of his son in 1924 . 
 = = Presidency ( 1923 – 29 ) = = 
 = = = Succession to the presidency = = = 
 On August 2 , 1923 , President Harding died suddenly in San Francisco while on a speaking tour of the western United States . Vice President Coolidge was in Vermont visiting his family home , which had neither electricity nor a telephone , when he received word by messenger of Harding 's death . He dressed , said a prayer , and came downstairs to greet the reporters who had assembled . His father , a notary public , administered the oath of office in the family 's parlor by the light of a kerosene lamp at 2 : 47 a.m. on August 3 , 1923 ; President Coolidge then went back to bed . He returned to Washington the next day , and was sworn in again by Justice Adolph A. <unk> Jr. of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia , to forestall any questions about the authority of a notary public to administer the presidential oath . 
 = = First term , 1923 – 1925 = = 
 The nation initially did not know what to make of Coolidge , who had maintained a low profile in the Harding administration ; many had even expected him to be replaced on the ballot in 1924 . He appointed C. Bascom <unk> , a Virginia Congressman and experienced federal politician , to work jointly with Edward T. Clark , a Massachusetts Republican organizer whom he retained from his vice @-@ presidential staff , as Secretaries to the President ( a position equivalent to the modern White House Chief of Staff ) . 
 Although a few of Harding 's cabinet appointees were scandal @-@ tarred , Coolidge retained all of them , out of an ardent conviction that as successor to a deceased elected president he was obligated to retain Harding 's counselors and policies until the next election . ( He did replace Harding 's speechwriter Judson T. Welliver with Jordan A. <unk> , whom he felt would better reflect his more reserved personality . ) Coolidge strongly felt that those of Harding 's men under suspicion were entitled to every presumption of innocence , taking a characteristically methodical approach to the scandals , principally the Teapot Dome scandal , while others clamored for rapid punishment of those they presumed guilty . Coolidge felt the Senate investigations of the scandals would suffice ; this was affirmed by the resulting resignations of those involved . He did personally intervene in demanding the resignation of Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty after he refused to cooperate with the congressional probe . He then set about to confirm that no loose ends remained in the administration , arranging for a full briefing on the wrongdoing . Harry A. Slattery reviewed the facts with him , Harlan F. Stone analyzed the legal aspects for him and Senator William E. Borah assessed and presented the political factors . 
 Coolidge addressed Congress when it reconvened on December 6 , 1923 , giving a speech that supported many of Harding 's policies , including Harding 's formal budgeting process , the enforcement of immigration restrictions and arbitration of coal strikes ongoing in Pennsylvania . Coolidge 's speech was the first presidential speech to be broadcast over the radio . The Washington Naval Treaty was proclaimed just one month into Coolidge 's term , and was generally well received in the country . In May 1924 , the World War I veterans ' World War Adjusted Compensation Act or " Bonus Bill " was passed over his veto . Coolidge signed the Immigration Act later that year , which was aimed at restricting southern and eastern European immigration , but appended a signing statement expressing his unhappiness with the bill 's specific exclusion of Japanese immigrants . Just before the Republican Convention began , Coolidge signed into law the Revenue Act of 1924 , which reduced the top marginal tax rate from 58 % to 46 % , as well as personal income tax rates across the board , increased the estate tax and bolstered it with a new gift tax . 
 On June 2 , 1924 Coolidge signed the act granting citizenship to all Native Americans born in the United States . By that time , two @-@ thirds of the people were already citizens , having gained it through marriage , military service ( veterans of World War I were granted citizenship in 1919 ) , or the land allotments that had earlier taken place . 
 = = = 1924 election = = = 
 The Republican Convention was held on June 10 – 12 , 1924 , in Cleveland , Ohio ; Coolidge was nominated on the first ballot . The convention nominated Frank Lowden of Illinois for vice president on the second ballot , but he declined ; former Brigadier General Charles G. Dawes was nominated on the third ballot and accepted . 
 The Democrats held their convention the next month in New York City . The convention soon deadlocked , and after 103 ballots , the delegates finally agreed on a compromise candidate , John W. Davis , with Charles W. Bryan nominated for vice president . The Democrats ' hopes were buoyed when Robert M. La Follette Sr. , a Republican Senator from Wisconsin , split from the GOP to form a new Progressive Party . Many believed that the split in the Republican party , like the one in 1912 , would allow a Democrat to win the presidency . 
 After the conventions and the death of his younger son Calvin , Coolidge became withdrawn ; he later said that " when he [ the son ] died , the power and glory of the Presidency went with him . " Even as he mourned , Coolidge ran his standard campaign , not mentioning his opponents by name or <unk> them , and delivering speeches on his theory of government , including several that were broadcast over radio . It was the most subdued campaign since 1896 , partly because of Coolidge 's grief , but also because of his naturally non @-@ confrontational style . The other candidates campaigned in a more modern fashion , but despite the split in the Republican party , the results were similar to those of 1920 . Coolidge and Dawes won every state outside the South except Wisconsin , La Follette 's home state . Coolidge won the popular vote by 2 @.@ 5 million over his opponents ' combined total . 
 = = Second term , 1925 – 1929 = = 
 = = = Industry and trade = = = 
 During Coolidge 's presidency , the United States experienced a period of rapid economic growth known as the " Roaring Twenties . " He left the administration 's industrial policy in the hands of his activist Secretary of Commerce , Herbert Hoover , who energetically used government auspices to promote business efficiency and develop airlines and radio . Coolidge disdained regulation , and demonstrated this by appointing commissioners to the Federal Trade Commission and the Interstate Commerce Commission who did little to restrict the activities of businesses under their jurisdiction . The regulatory state under Coolidge was , as one biographer described it , " thin to the point of invisibility . " 
 Coolidge 's economic policy has often been misquoted as " generally speaking , the business of the American people is business " ( full quotation at right ) . Some have criticized Coolidge as an adherent of the laissez @-@ faire ideology , which they claim led to the Great Depression . On the other hand , historian Robert Sobel offers some context based on Coolidge 's sense of federalism : " As Governor of Massachusetts , Coolidge supported wages and hours legislation , opposed child labor , imposed economic controls during World War I , favored safety measures in factories , and even worker representation on corporate boards . Did he support these measures while president ? No , because in the 1920s , such matters were considered the responsibilities of state and local governments . " 
 = = = Taxation and government spending = = = 
 Coolidge 's taxation policy was that of his Secretary of the Treasury , Andrew Mellon , the ideal that " scientific taxation " — — lower taxes — — actually increase rather than decrease government receipts . Congress agreed , and the taxes were reduced in Coolidge 's term . In addition to these tax cuts , Coolidge proposed reductions in federal expenditures and retiring some of the federal debt . Coolidge 's ideas were shared by the Republicans in Congress , and in 1924 , Congress passed the Revenue Act of 1924 , which reduced income tax rates and eliminated all income taxation for some two million people . They reduced taxes again by passing the Revenue Acts of 1926 and 1928 , all the while continuing to keep spending down so as to reduce the overall federal debt . By 1927 , only the wealthiest 2 % of taxpayers paid any federal income tax . Federal spending remained flat during Coolidge 's administration , allowing one @-@ fourth of the federal debt to be retired in total . State and local governments saw considerable growth , however , surpassing the federal budget in 1927 . 
 = = = Opposition to farm subsidies = = = 
 Perhaps the most contentious issue of Coolidge 's presidency was relief for farmers . Some in Congress proposed a bill designed to fight falling agricultural prices by allowing the federal government to purchase crops to sell abroad at lower prices . Agriculture Secretary Henry C. Wallace and other administration officials favored the bill when it was introduced in 1924 , but rising prices convinced many in Congress that the bill was unnecessary , and it was defeated just before the elections that year . In 1926 , with farm prices falling once more , Senator Charles L. McNary and Representative Gilbert N. Haugen — both Republicans — proposed the McNary – Haugen Farm Relief Bill . The bill proposed a federal farm board that would purchase surplus production in high @-@ yield years and hold it ( when feasible ) for later sale or sell it abroad . Coolidge opposed McNary @-@ Haugen , declaring that agriculture must stand " on an independent business basis , " and said that " government control cannot be divorced from political control . " Instead of manipulating prices , he favored instead Herbert Hoover 's proposal to create profits by modernizing agriculture . Secretary Mellon wrote a letter denouncing the McNary @-@ Haugen measure as unsound and likely to cause inflation , and it was defeated . 
 After McNary @-@ Haugen 's defeat , Coolidge supported a less radical measure , the Curtis @-@ Crisp Act , which would have created a federal board to lend money to farm co @-@ operatives in times of surplus ; the bill did not pass . In February 1927 , Congress took up the McNary @-@ Haugen bill again , this time narrowly passing it , and Coolidge vetoed it . In his veto message , he expressed the belief that the bill would do nothing to help farmers , benefiting only exporters and expanding the federal bureaucracy . Congress did not override the veto , but it passed the bill again in May 1928 by an increased majority ; again , Coolidge vetoed it . " Farmers never have made much money , " said Coolidge , the Vermont farmer 's son . " I do not believe we can do much about it . " 
 = = = Flood control = = = 
 Coolidge has often been criticized for his actions during the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 , the worst natural disaster to hit the Gulf Coast until Hurricane Katrina in 2005 . Although he did eventually name Secretary Hoover to a commission in charge of flood relief , scholars argue that Coolidge overall showed a lack of interest in federal flood control . Coolidge did not believe that personally visiting the region after the floods would accomplish anything , and that it would be seen as mere political grandstanding . He also did not want to incur the federal spending that flood control would require ; he believed property owners should bear much of the cost . On the other hand , Congress wanted a bill that would place the federal government completely in charge of flood mitigation . When Congress passed a compromise measure in 1928 , Coolidge declined to take credit for it and signed the bill in private on May 15 . 
 = = = Civil rights = = = 
 Coolidge spoke in favor of the civil rights of African @-@ Americans , saying in his first State of the Union address that the rights of the former were " just as sacred as those of any other citizen " under the U.S. Constitution and that it was a " public and a private duty to protect those rights . " He appointed no known members of the Ku Klux Klan to office ; indeed , the Klan lost most of its influence during his term . His administration commissioned studies to improve programs for Native Americans . 
 Coolidge repeatedly called for laws to prohibit lynching , saying in his 1923 State of the Union address that it was a " hideous crime " of which African @-@ Americans were " by no means the sole sufferers , " but consisted of the " majority of the victims . " However , most Congressional attempts to pass this legislation were filibustered by Southern Democrats . Coolidge appointed some African @-@ Americans to federal office ; he retained Harding 's choice of Walter L. Cohen of New Orleans , Louisiana , as the comptroller of customs and offered Cohen the post of minister to Liberia , which the businessman declined . 
 On June 2 , 1924 , Coolidge signed the Indian Citizenship Act , which granted U.S. citizenship to all American Indians , while permitting them to retain tribal land and cultural rights . However , the act was unclear on whether the federal government or the tribal leaders retained tribal sovereignty . His administration appointed the Committee of One Hundred , a reform panel to examine federal institutions and programs dealing with Indian nations . This committee recommended that the government conduct an in @-@ depth investigation into reservation life ( health , education , economics , justice , civil rights , etc . ) . This was commissioned through the Department of Interior and conducted by the Brookings Institution , resulting in the groundbreaking Meriam Report of 1928 . 
 A few days later , on June 6 , 1924 , Coolidge delivered a commencement address at Washington , D.C. ' s Howard University , in which he thanked and commended African @-@ Americans for their rapid advances in education and their contributions to U.S. society over the years , as well as their eagerness to render their services as soldiers in World War I , all while being faced with discrimination and prejudices at home : 
 The propaganda of prejudice and hatred which sought to keep the colored men from supporting the national cause completely failed . The black man showed himself the same kind of citizen , moved by the same kind of patriotism , as the white man . They were tempted , but not one betrayed his country . ... They came home with many decorations and their conduct repeatedly won high commendation from both American and European commanders . ... No part of the community responded more willingly , more generously , more unqualifiedly , to the demand for special extraordinary exertion , than did the members of the Negro race . Whether in the military service , or in the vast mobilization of industrial resources which the war required , the Negro did his part precisely as did the white man . He drew no color line when patriotism made its call upon him . He gave precisely as his white fellow citizens gave , to the limit of resources and abilities , to help the general cause . Thus the American Negro established his right to the gratitude and appreciation which the Nation has been glad to accord . 
 In August 1924 , Coolidge responded to a letter from a New York man claiming that the United States was a " white man 's country " and that African @-@ Americans should therefore not be allowed to hold elected office . Echoing his June 1924 speech at Howard University , Coolidge refuted the man 's statement , saying that African @-@ Americans were " just as truly citizens " of the United States " as are any others , " and commended the service of black U.S. soldiers during World War I : 
 I was amazed to receive such a letter . During the war 500 @,@ 000 colored men and boys were called up under the draft , not one of whom sought to evade it . [ As president , I am ] one who feels a responsibility for living up to the traditions and maintaining the principles of the Republican Party . Our Constitution guarantees equal rights to all our citizens , without discrimination on account of race or color . I have taken my oath to support that Constitution . It is the source of your rights and my rights . I propose to regard it , and administer it , as the source of the rights of all the people , whatever their belief or race . A colored man is precisely as much entitled to submit his candidacy in a party primary , as is any other citizen . The decision must be made by the constituents to whom he offers himself , and by nobody else . 
 Speaking before a group of naturalized Americans of European background at the White House in October 1924 , Coolidge stressed tolerance of differences as an American value and thanked immigrants for their contributions to U.S. society , saying that they have " contributed much to making our country what it is . " He stated that although the diversity of peoples was a detrimental source of conflict and tension in Europe , it was peculiar for the United States that it was a " harmonious " benefit for the country . Coolidge further stated the United States should assist and help immigrants who come to the country , and urged immigrants to reject " race hatreds " and " prejudices " : 
 Among these I should place , first , the broadly tolerant attitude that has been a characteristic of this country . I use the word in its most inclusive sense , to cover tolerance of religious opinion , tolerance in politics , tolerance in social relationships ; in general , the liberal attitude of every citizen toward his fellows . ... As a Nation , our first duty must be to those who are already our inhabitants , whether native or immigrants . To them we owe an especial and a weighty obligation . They came to us with stout hearts and high hopes of bettering their estate . They have contributed much to making our country what it is . ... They cannot help other nations by bringing old world race prejudices and race hatreds into action here . In fact , they can best help other countries by scrupulously avoiding any such motives . 
 In December 1924 , Coolidge delivered his second State of the Union address , in which he commended African @-@ Americans for their advances , and stressed that their constitutional rights should be respected and protected : 
 These developments have brought about a very remarkable improvement in the condition of the negro race . Gradually , but surely , with the almost universal sympathy of those among whom they live , the colored people are working out their own destiny . I firmly believe that it is better for all concerned that they should be cheerfully accorded their full constitutional rights , that they should be protected from all of those impositions to which , from their position , they naturally fall a prey , especially from the crime of lynching and that they should receive every encouragement to become full partakers in all the blessings of our common American citizenship . 
 In a May 1926 speech delivered at Arlington to commemorate the U.S. military , Coolidge praised the linguistic , ethnic , and religious diversity of the U.S. population , citing it as an example of American exceptionalism . He spoke out against " race hatred " and " religious intolerance , " saying that engaging in such actions would be an " injury " and not a " benefit " to the country : 
 We are situated differently in this respect from any other country . All the other great powers have a comparatively homogeneous population , close kindred in race and blood and speech , and commonly little divided in religious beliefs . Our great Nation is made up of the strong and virile pioneering stock of nearly all the countries of the world . We have a variety of race and language and religious belief . ... race hatred , religious intolerance , and disregard of equal rights ... are ... a positive injury . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 Although not an isolationist , Coolidge was reluctant to enter into foreign alliances . He considered the 1920 Republican victory as a rejection of the Wilsonian position that the United States should join the League of Nations . While not completely opposed to the idea , Coolidge believed the League , as then constituted , did not serve American interests , and he did not advocate membership . He spoke in favor of the United States joining the Permanent Court of International Justice ( World Court ) , provided that the nation would not be bound by advisory decisions . In 1926 , the Senate eventually approved joining the Court ( with reservations ) . The League of Nations accepted the reservations , but it suggested some modifications of its own . The Senate failed to act ; the United States never joined the World Court . 
 Coolidge 's primary initiative was the Kellogg – Briand Pact of 1928 , named for Coolidge 's Secretary of State , Frank B. Kellogg , and French foreign minister Aristide Briand . The treaty , ratified in 1929 , committed signatories — the United States , the United Kingdom , France , Germany , Italy , and Japan — to " renounce war , as an instrument of national policy in their relations with one another . " The treaty did not achieve its intended result — the outlawry of war — but it did provide the founding principle for international law after World War II . 
 Coolidge continued the previous administration 's policy of withholding recognition of the Soviet Union . He also continued the United States ' support for the elected government of Mexico against the rebels there , lifting the arms embargo on that country . He sent Dwight Morrow to Mexico as the American ambassador . 
 The United States ' occupation of Nicaragua and Haiti continued under his administration , but Coolidge withdrew American troops from the Dominican Republic in 1924 . Coolidge led the U.S. delegation to the Sixth International Conference of American States , January 15 – 17 , 1928 , in Havana , Cuba . This was the only international trip Coolidge made during his presidency . There , he extend an olive branch to Latin American leaders embittered over America 's interventionist policies in Central America and the Caribbean . For 88 years he was the only sitting president to have visited Cuba , until Barack Obama did so in 2016 . 
 = = = 1928 election = = = 
 In the summer of 1927 , Coolidge vacationed in the Black Hills of South Dakota , where he engaged in horseback riding and fly fishing and attended rodeos . He made Custer State Park his " summer White House . " While on vacation , Coolidge surprisingly issued a terse statement that he would not seek a second full term as president : " I do not choose to run for President in 1928 . " After allowing the reporters to take that in , Coolidge elaborated . " If I take another term , I will be in the White House till 1933 … Ten years in Washington is longer than any other man has had it — too long ! " In his memoirs , Coolidge explained his decision not to run : " The Presidential office takes a heavy toll of those who occupy it and those who are dear to them . While we should not refuse to spend and be spent in the service of our country , it is hazardous to attempt what we feel is beyond our strength to accomplish . " After leaving office , he and Grace returned to Northampton , where he wrote his memoirs . The Republicans retained the White House in 1928 in the person of Coolidge 's Secretary of Commerce , Herbert Hoover . Coolidge had been reluctant to endorse Hoover as his successor ; on one occasion he remarked that " for six years that man has given me unsolicited advice — all of it bad . " Even so , Coolidge had no desire to split the party by publicly opposing the nomination of the popular commerce secretary . 
 = = = Cabinet = = = 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 Coolidge appointed one justice to the Supreme Court of the United States , Harlan Fiske Stone in 1925 . Stone was Coolidge 's fellow Amherst alumnus , a Wall Street lawyer and conservative Republican . Stone was serving as dean of Columbia Law School when Coolidge appointed him to be attorney general in 1924 to restore the reputation tarnished by Harding 's Attorney General , Harry M. Daugherty . Stone proved to be a firm believer in judicial restraint and was regarded as one of the court 's three liberal justices who would often vote to uphold New Deal legislation . President Franklin D. Roosevelt later appointed Stone to be chief justice . 
 Coolidge nominated 17 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals , and 61 judges to the United States district courts . He appointed judges to various specialty courts as well , including Genevieve R. Cline , who became the first woman named to the federal judiciary when Coolidge placed her on the United States Customs Court in 1928 . Coolidge also signed the Judiciary Act of 1925 into law , allowing the Supreme Court more discretion over its workload . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 After his presidency , Coolidge retired to the modest rented house on residential Massasoit Street in Northampton before moving to a more spacious home , " The Beeches . " He kept a Hacker runabout boat on the Connecticut River and was often observed on the water by local boating enthusiasts . During this period , he also served as chairman of the non @-@ partisan Railroad Commission , as honorary president of the American Foundation for the Blind , as a director of New York Life Insurance Company , as president of the American Antiquarian Society , and as a trustee of Amherst College . Coolidge received an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Bates College in Lewiston , Maine . 
 Coolidge published his autobiography in 1929 and wrote a syndicated newspaper column , " Calvin Coolidge Says , " from 1930 to 1931 . Faced with looming defeat in the 1932 presidential election , some Republicans spoke of rejecting Herbert Hoover as their party 's nominee , and instead drafting Coolidge to run , but the former president made it clear that he was not interested in running again , and that he would publicly repudiate any effort to draft him , should it come about . Hoover was renominated , and Coolidge made several radio addresses in support of him . Hoover then lost the general election to Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt in a landslide . 
 He died suddenly from coronary thrombosis at " The Beeches , " at 12 : 45 p.m. , January 5 , 1933 . Shortly before his death , Coolidge confided to an old friend : " I feel I no longer fit in with these times . " Coolidge is buried beneath a simple headstone in Plymouth Notch Cemetery , Plymouth Notch , Vermont , where the nearby family home is maintained as one of the original buildings on the Calvin Coolidge Homestead District site . The State of Vermont dedicated a new visitors ' center nearby to mark Coolidge 's 100th birthday on July 4 , 1972 . 
 = = Radio , film , and commemorations = = 
 Despite his reputation as a quiet and even reclusive politician , Coolidge made use of the new medium of radio and made radio history several times while president . He made himself available to reporters , giving 520 press conferences , meeting with reporters more regularly than any president before or since . Coolidge 's second inauguration was the first presidential inauguration broadcast on radio . On December 6 , 1923 , he was the first president whose address to Congress was broadcast on radio . Coolidge signed the Radio Act of 1927 , which assigned regulation of radio to the newly created Federal Radio Commission . On August 11 , 1924 , Theodore W. Case , using the Phonofilm sound @-@ on @-@ film process he developed for Lee DeForest , filmed Coolidge on the White House lawn , making Coolidge the first president to appear in a sound film . The title of the DeForest film was President Coolidge , Taken on the White House Grounds . When Charles Lindbergh arrived in Washington on a U.S. navy ship after his celebrated 1927 trans @-@ Atlantic flight , President Coolidge welcomed him back to the U.S. and a sound @-@ on @-@ film record of the event exists . Coolidge was the only president to have his portrait on a coin during his lifetime , the Sesquicentennial of American Independence Half Dollar , minted in 1926 . After his death he also appeared on a postage stamp , pictured below . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 U.S. President Ronald W. Reagan regarded Coolidge as his favorite 20th @-@ century U.S. president because of Coolidge 's belief in a more limited U.S. federal government . Reagan cited Coolidge 's tough handling of striking Boston police when he fired striking air traffic controllers in 1981 . Coolidge 's reputation remains strong among most political conservatives . 
 The Coolidge effect , whereby males ( and to a lesser extent females ) exhibit renewed sexual interest if introduced to new receptive sexual partners , even after refusing sex from prior but still available sexual partners , is named after the former president . Behavioral endocrinologist Frank A. Beach first mentioned the term " Coolidge effect " in publication in 1955 , crediting one of his students with suggesting the term at a psychology conference . He attributed the neologism to : 
 an old joke about Calvin Coolidge when he was President … The President and Mrs. Coolidge were being shown ( separately ) around an experimental government farm . When [ Mrs. Coolidge ] came to the chicken yard she noticed that a rooster was mating very frequently . She asked the attendant how often that happened and was told , " Dozens of times each day . " Mrs. Coolidge said , " Tell that to the President when he comes by . " Upon being told , the President asked , " Same hen every time ? " The reply was , " Oh , no , Mr. President , a different hen every time . " President : " Tell that to Mrs. Coolidge . " 
 = Edward Riou = 
 Edward Riou FRS ( 20 November 1762 – 2 April 1801 ) was an officer of the Royal Navy who served during the French Revolutionary Wars under several of the most distinguished naval officers of his age and won fame and honour for two incidents in particular . 
 Riou entered the navy at 12 years of age , and after a period spent in British and North American waters , served as a midshipman on Captain James Cook 's third and final voyage of discovery . Rising through the ranks , he saw service on a number of the navy 's stations , but also endured periods of unemployment . He received his first command in 1789 , the former frigate HMS Guardian , which was being used to transport stores and convicts to Australia . He had the misfortune to run his ship onto an iceberg , which nearly caused his ship to sink outright . After several attempts to stop the flooding into the damaged hull , most of the crew abandoned ship . Despite fully anticipating his death , Riou refused to leave his ship , and he and a few others were left to attempt the nearly impossible task of navigating the sinking ship several hundred leagues to land . After nine weeks at sea , and with continued labour and endurance , Riou successfully navigated his half @-@ sunk ship back to port , saving the lives of those who had elected to remain with him . 
 His feat earned him promotions and finally commands , but a period of ill @-@ health forced his temporary retirement from active service . Recovering quickly , he was given command of the new 38 @-@ gun HMS Amazon , and was assigned in 1801 to Sir Hyde Parker 's expedition to the Baltic . Riou worked closely with Vice @-@ Admiral Horatio Nelson during the approach to the Battle of Copenhagen , earning Nelson 's trust and admiration . Nelson appointed Riou to command his frigate squadron during the battle , but when the engagement began badly for the British , Riou used his initiative to attack the Danish forts , despite being heavily outgunned . When Parker sent the signal to withdraw , Nelson ignored it and Riou felt he had no choice but to obey his commanding officer , despite his despair at what Nelson would think of retreat . As the Amazon swung away , she exposed her vulnerable stern to the Danish batteries . Riou was encouraging his men to the end when he was cut down by a round shot . Nelson , on learning of Riou 's death , called the loss ' irreparable ' . A monument was erected to his memory in St Paul 's Cathedral , while a poem commemorated the loss of the ' gallant , good Riou ' . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Riou was born at Mount Ephraim , near Faversham , Kent , on 20 November 1762 , the second son of Captain Stephen Riou of the Grenadier Guards , and his wife Dorothy . He embarked on a naval career at the age of 12 , joining Sir Thomas Pye 's flagship , the 90 @-@ gun HMS Barfleur at Portsmouth . His next ship was the 50 @-@ gun HMS Romney , flagship of Vice @-@ Admiral John Montagu on the Newfoundland station . Riou was rated midshipman by 1776 and joined Captain Charles Clerke 's HMS Discovery for a voyage to the Pacific under Captain James Cook aboard HMS Resolution . The expedition was Cook 's third voyage of discovery , and after his death at Hawaii Clerke took command , transferring to Resolution and bringing Midshipman Riou with him . 
 Riou took and passed his lieutenant 's examination on 19 October 1780 , shortly after the expedition 's return to Britain , and received his promotion on 28 October . His first appointment as lieutenant was to the 14 @-@ gun brig @-@ sloop HMS Scourge , which was sent to serve in the West Indies . Here Riou appears to have become ill , a common experience for naval officers serving in the tropics , but he survived to return to Britain and was discharged from his ship on 3 February 1782 and went into the Royal Naval Hospital at Haslar . He recovered his health and by April 1783 was back on active service , joining the Portsmouth guardship HMS Ganges . Discharging from the Ganges in June 1784 , he went on to half @-@ pay , which lasted for two years until he received another appointment , this time to the 50 @-@ gun HMS Salisbury in March 1786 . The Salisbury was the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral John Elliot , who sailed to Newfoundland take up his post as Commodore @-@ Governor there . During this period in his life , Riou was described by a seaman aboard the Ganges as ' a strict disciplinarian with a fanatical regard for cleanliness ' . He was also noted to be a religious man , and an affectionate son and brother . A further period on half @-@ pay followed his discharge from the Salisbury in November 1788 , but meanwhile he had succeeded in attracting the attention of the Townsend family , and was able to use their patronage to secure an appointment to command HMS Guardian , in April 1789 . 
 = = Command of the Guardian = = 
 The Guardian was a former two @-@ decked 44 @-@ gun frigate , but had been armed en flûte and loaded with stores to be taken to the British colony at Botany Bay . In addition to these stores , consisting of seeds , plants , farm machinery and livestock with a total value of some £ 70 @,@ 000 , the Guardian was also to transport a number of convicts and their overseers . Aboard the Guardian was a young midshipman named Thomas Pitt , the son of politician Thomas Pitt , and nephew of Prime Minister William Pitt . 
 With over 300 people aboard his ship , Riou left Spithead on 8 September 1789 , and had an uneventful voyage to the Cape of Good Hope where he loaded more livestock and plants . While at the Cape , Riou met Lieutenant William Bligh , who had sailed with Riou on Cook 's third voyage during which Bligh had been the sailing master of Resolution . Bligh had arrived at the Cape from Timor , where he had landed after a 3 @,@ 618 mile voyage in an open boat following a mutiny aboard his ship , HMS Bounty . After completing his re @-@ provisioning , Riou sailed from the Cape in mid @-@ December , and picking up the Westerlies , began the second leg of his voyage to New South Wales . On Christmas Eve , twelve days after his departure from the Cape , a large iceberg was spotted , and Riou decided to use the ice to replenish his stocks of fresh water that were quickly being depleted by the need to supply the plants and animals he was transporting . 
 = = = Riou and the iceberg = = = 
 Riou positioned himself near the iceberg , and despatched boats to collect the ice . By the time the last boats had been recovered , night had fallen and a sudden <unk> descended , hiding the iceberg from view . Riou found himself in a dangerous situation . Somewhere to leeward lay a large mass of ice , concealed in the darkness and fog . He posted lookouts in the bows and rigging , and began to edge slowly forward . After sometime the danger seemed to be past , and the iceberg left behind , when at 9 o 'clock a strange pale glow was reported by the lookout in the bows . Riou ordered the helm to turn hard a starboard , turning into the wind as a wall of ice higher than the ship 's masts slid by along the side . It briefly appeared that the danger had been avoided , but as she passed by , the Guardian struck an underwater projection with a crash . Caught in a sudden gust of wind , the ship reared up and swung about , driving the stern into the ice , smashing away the rudder , shattering her stern frame and tearing a large gash in the hull . Despite the seriousness of the situation , Riou remained calm , using the sails to pull clear of the ice , and then taking stock of the damage . 
 Now clear of the immediate danger of the ice , Riou found himself in a desperate situation . There was two feet of water in the hold and more was rushing in , while the sea was rising and a gale had sprung up . The pumps were manned , but could not keep up with the influx of water , and by midnight there was 6 feet of water in the hold . At dawn on Christmas Day , an attempt was made to fother the hull , which involved lowering an oakum @-@ packed studding sail over the side to cover the gash in the hull and slow the flooding . This was temporarily successful and by 11 o 'clock the pumps had been able to reduce the water to a level of 19 inches . The respite was short @-@ lived , as the sail split under the pressure of the water and the water level began to rise again . A number of seaman requested permission to take to the ship 's boats . Riou convinced them to stay , but another attempt to fother the hull with another sail failed when the sail immediately ripped . By nightfall on 25 December , the water in the hold had risen to 7 feet , and the ship was rolling violently , allowing water to pour over the ship 's side . Riou ordered the stores , guns and livestock to be thrown overboard in an attempt to lighten the ship , but was injured when his hand was crushed by a falling cask while trying to clear the bread @-@ room . By morning the next day , the ship was settling by the stern , while the sails had been torn away in the gale . Again the seamen , this time joined by the convicts , requested to be allowed to take to the boats . Riou at last agreed to this , well aware that there were not enough boats for everyone , and announced ' As for me , I have determined to remain in the ship , and shall endeavour to make my presence useful as long as there is any occasion for it.' 
 = = = ' I have determined to remain in the ship ' = = = 
 While the boats were prepared , Riou wrote a letter to the Secretary to the Admiralty ; 
 Sir , 
 If any part of the officers or crew of the Guardian should ever survive to get home , I have only to say their conduct after the fatal stroke against an island of ice was admirable and wonderful in everything that related to their duties considered either as private men or on his Majesty 's Service . 
 As there seems no possibility of my remaining many hours in this world , I beg leave to recommend to the consideration of the Admiralty a sister who if my conduct or service should be found deserving any memory their favour might be shown to her together with a widowed mother . 
 I am Sir remaining with great respect 
 Your ever <unk> & humble <unk> , 
 E. Riou 
 Riou gave the note to Mr Clements , the master of the Guardian , who was given command of the launch . A total of 259 people chose to join the five boats , leaving Riou with sixty @-@ two people ; himself , three midshipmen , including Thomas Pitt , the surgeon 's mate , the boatswain , carpenter , three superintendents of convicts , a daughter of one of the superintendents , thirty seamen and boys and twenty @-@ one convicts . The Guardian was nearly awash by now with 16 feet of water in the hold , but a bumping noise on the deck attracted attention , and on investigation was found to be a number of casks that had broken free and were floating in the hold , trapped under the lower gundeck . Realising that this was providing extra buoyancy , Riou had the gun deck hatches sealed and caulked , while another sail was sent under the hull to control the flooding . Having now created a substitute hull out of his deck , Riou raised what little sail he could and began the long journey back to land , with the pumps being continuously manned . 
 For nine weeks Riou and his small crew navigated the Guardian , by now little more than a raft , across the 400 leagues to the Cape of Good Hope . The Cape of Good Hope was sighted on 21 February 1790 , and whalers were despatched from Table Bay to help the battered ship to safety . Riou ran her aground to prevent her sinking , but a gale struck the coast shortly afterwards , completing the wreck of the Guardian . The voyage was described by J. K. Laughton in the Dictionary of National Biography as ' almost without parallel ' . Those who remained with the Guardian were among the few survivors of the accident . Of the boats sent out on 25 December , only the launch with 15 people survived , having been rescued by a French merchant . The launch had witnessed the sinking of the jolly @-@ boat , before losing contact with the two cutters and the long @-@ boat . Riou arranged for the surviving convicts who had helped to save the ship to be pardoned for their good service . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Riou returned to Britain and was met with popular acclaim for his feat . Acquitted of any blame for the loss of his ship , he was promoted to master and commander on 21 September 1790 , and advanced to post @-@ captain on 4 June 1791 . These promotions were for rank only , and he did not receive a command until after the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars . Appointed to command the sixth rate HMS Rose in June 1793 , he served in the West Indies with Sir John Jervis and was active in the operations against Guadeloupe and Martinique in 1794 . He was moved to the 40 @-@ gun HMS Beaulieu in November 1794 , capturing a number of small French vessels before ill @-@ health forced him to be invalided home . In the meantime , he was appointed to the yacht HMS Princess Augusta , but his health improved and he was able to return to active service in June 1799 with an appointment to command the 38 @-@ gun HMS Amazon . He was active against French privateers , before being assigned to Sir Hyde Parker 's expedition to the Baltic in 1801 to compel the Danes to abandon the League of Armed Neutrality . 
 In May 1796 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society 
 = = Riou in the Baltic = = 
 After the British force had surveyed the Danish positions around Copenhagen , a council of war was held between Parker , his second in command Vice @-@ Admiral Horatio Nelson , and the other British captains . Riou was among those present . Riou had worked closely with Nelson and Captain Thomas Foley in the lead up to the attack , and Nelson duly appointed him commander of the frigates and smaller vessels , with the instruction to deploy his ships to support the main fleet . As the battle began , several of Nelson 's ships ran aground on shoals in the harbour , and a new plan of attack had to be improvised . As Nelson 's ships of the line engaged their Danish counterparts , Riou took his frigates in to harass the Tre Kroner forts and blockships . Despite being heavily outmatched and dangerously exposed , they exchanged fire for several hours . The ships suffered heavy casualties ; Riou was hit on the head by a splinter . 
 = = = ' What will Nelson think of us ? ' = = = 
 At 1 @.@ 15 pm Parker , waiting outside the harbour with the reserve , raised a signal ordering Nelson to withdraw . Nelson acknowledged the signal but ignored it , while Nelson 's second in command , Rear @-@ Admiral Thomas Graves repeated the signal but did not obey it . Riou now found himself in a difficult position . Too junior an officer to risk disobeying a direct order , he reluctantly gave the order for his small squadron to withdraw . In doing so his ships were forced to turn their sterns to the Danish guns , leaving themselves open to heavy fire on their most vulnerable area . The withdrawal of HMS Alcmene and then HMS Blanche reduced the thick cloud of gun smoke that was helping to obscure the British ships , leaving the Amazon exposed to the full force of the Danish guns . Riou remained in action for a further half an hour before reluctantly giving the order to withdraw . Lieutenant @-@ Colonel William Stuart , commanding the soldiers of the 48th Regiment recorded that Riou : 
 ... was sitting on a gun , was encouraging his men , and had been wounded in the head by a splinter . He had expressed himself grieved at being thus obliged to retreat , and nobly observed , ' What will Nelson think of us ? ' His clerk was killed by his side ; and by another shot , several marines , while hauling on the main @-@ brace , shared the same fate . Riou then exclaimed , ' Come , then , by boys , let us all die together ! ' The words were scarcely uttered , when the fatal shot severed him in two . 
 Command of the Amazon devolved to her first lieutenant , Lieutenant John Quilliam , who completed the withdrawal . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 Nelson , who had not known him before this expedition , had conceived a great affection for Riou , and wrote ' In poor dear Riou the country has sustained an irreparable loss . ' The naval historian Sir Jahleel Brenton declared that he had all the qualities of a perfect officer . 
 Parliament commemorated his memory with a joint memorial ( shared with Cpt . James Robert Mosse ) in the crypt of St Paul 's Cathedral . The poet Thomas Campbell wrote The Battle of the Baltic , with the lines 
 Brave hearts ! To Britain 's pride , 
 Once so faithful and so true , 
 On the deck of fame that died 
 With the gallant , good Riou 
 = Modern Vampires of the City = 
 Modern Vampires of the City is the third studio album by American indie rock band Vampire Weekend , released on May 14 , 2013 , by XL Recordings . After releasing their 2010 album Contra , the band toured and wrote new material during sound checks . Following a period in which the quartet pursued different musical projects , they regrouped and began work on their third record in 2011 . Working with no deadline in mind , the band brought in an outside record producer for the first time , Ariel Rechtshaid . 
 Recorded at a number of studios and locations , Modern Vampires of the City was an attempt to distance the band from the sound they became heavily associated with following their 2008 debut and Contra . Broadly experimental , the sound featured on the record is the result of a variety of unconventional recording assets , including pitch shifting . The cover art is a 1966 photograph by Neal Boenzi of the <unk> day in New York City history , on which the air pollution killed at least 169 people . 
 Modern Vampires of the City debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , becoming Vampire Weekend 's second consecutive number @-@ one album in the United States . It received widespread acclaim and was named the best record of 2013 by several publications , while finishing second in the annual Pazz & Jop critics poll . By December 2014 , the album had sold 505 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 The success of Vampire Weekend 's second album , Contra ( 2010 ) , established the group as " one of the past decade 's great indie @-@ rock success stories . " By the time the band wrapped their world tour for Contra , they realized they had not taken a break in nearly five years . During the break , the band members pursued individual projects : Baio performed DJ sets and scored the Bob Byington film Somebody Up There Likes Me , Batmanglij recorded solo material and produced tracks for Das Racist and spent time traveling India with three friends , and Koenig collaborated with Major Lazer . Koenig had broken up with his girlfriend shortly before the release of Contra and subsequently moved out of their shared apartment in New York . Feeling " weird and aimless " , Koenig attempted to stay in Los Angeles but he returned East after four months . 
 By the time the band eventually regrouped in 2011 , the quartet had amassed plenty of material and made sure to take their time making a new record . Koenig and Batmanglij met several times a week to write songs , some of which they 'd later scrap . The pair took a " writing retreat " to Martha 's Vineyard , where they bore down and composed several new tracks . Working with no deadline in mind , the band began work on Modern Vampires of the City . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The songs for Modern Vampires of the City were recorded at several locations , including Downtown Studios in New York City , Echo Park Back House and Vox Studios in Los Angeles , Slow Death Studios in Burbank , and the apartment of Rostam Batmanglij , Vampire Weekend 's multi @-@ instrumentalist and producer . Early drafts of the tracks " Obvious Bicycle " and " Worship You " were produced at OK Go frontman , Damian Kulash 's old house in Chicago , before being taken to an official studio to work on . Batmanglij and Ariel Rechtshaid , the album 's co @-@ producer , used a pair of mirrored solid state MacBooks with <unk> @-@ 2 Satellite <unk> Cards so they could take their recordings anywhere and work on them from separate locations with maximum ease . The band credits Vox Studios with the defining special quality of the recordings , especially the use of their vintage analog tape machines , with Batmanglij remarking , " Much of the overall sound and approach to the album was being able to record the drums to tape on an old Ampex machine . " The band wanted a unique drum sound , and so they recorded in a room with high ceilings and had engineer David Schiffman use a " pretty non @-@ conventional drum miking setup " in which a pair of Neumann U 47s were used as over head mics with RCA <unk> ribbon mics between the <unk> and the drum kit for added texture . Tape recordings of the drums were then heavily treated and manipulated with Ableton Live plug @-@ ins . Lastly , the band layered samples onto select portions of the drum recordings to accent or shape the finished tone . 
 Modern Vampires of the City was an attempt by the band to distance themselves from the sounds featured on their debut record and Contra . " Whenever we came up with something familiar sounding , it was rejected " , said Rechtshaid . Pitch shifting was a major component of recording the album . For tracks such as " Step " , drums were recorded on a <unk> Tape deck set to a lower speed so that they would play back faster and more high pitched . Drummer Chris Tomson would then re @-@ record the drums playing to the sped @-@ up recording to get an uptempo live take . This second recording was then slowed back down to original speed to create an " underwater " effect . The effect is featured prominently on vocals as well . Ezra Koenig 's vocals were run through Eventide <unk> and 910 on tracks such as " Diane Young " , with both the pitch and formant shifted changed to manipulate the sound of recorded vocals . Bass guitar was also recorded straight to tape " with a fairly ambient miking approach where the mic was three feet away from the cabinet " . Vocals were recorded with Soundelux <unk> Microphones , in combination with 1176 Classic limiter plug @-@ in , Fairchild 670 Compressor and Elektro @-@ Mess @-@ Technik 140 Plate Reverb , giving the vocals a quality Batmanglij described as " buttery " . For guitar sounds , Batmanglij chose not to mic his guitar and instead plugged his Les Paul direct @-@ in to ProTools through a <unk> Amp Emulation Pedal , a technique used by Jimmy Page . 
 The band 's main mission was to give each recording warmth , feeling that modern digital recordings lacked the sound quality of older records . In an attempt to make the recordings less harsh , the band and engineers used a spectrum analyzer , <unk> <unk> and heavily automated EQs to edit out harsher , colder frequencies and soften the mix . With the entire band enlisted , the quartet painstakingly listened to the record several separate times using technology from standard commercial iPod earbuds to professional equipment to ensure the record sounded nice regardless of equipment the listener owned . Desiring to " check the relative warmth levels " , the engineers would " go in and perform surgery and automate EQs " in order to make the mixes listenable . The band felt the finished product was something of a third chapter and a continuation of material explored in their previous two efforts . " We thought these three albums should look like they belong together on a bookshelf " , said Batmanglij . " We realized that there are things connecting the songs across three albums , like an invisible hand was guiding us . It does feel like we 've been able to create three distinct worlds for each album , and yet have them be interconnected . " 
 The title was taken from a lyric in Junior Reid 's 1990 song " One Blood " . Koenig , a fan of the song , found the phrase " Modern Vampires of the City " humorous but also " haunting " as a title for their album . The cover art features an image taken by New York Times photographer Neal Boenzi , depicting a fog @-@ shrouded , dystopian @-@ like New York City . Boenzi took the photo atop the Empire State Building in November 1966 , when the city was plagued by a smog problem . Because of the subsequent rise in global air pollution , the band chose the photo believing it may have rendered " some kind of future " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Modern Vampires of the City is a departure from the percussive , African @-@ influenced indie pop of Contra . Batmanglij said that the album has a recurring tension that distinguishes it from the band 's previous albums : " Even if the songs are mostly in a major key , there ’ s something that ’ s hanging out there that ’ s a little bit dark . And I think that ’ s reflective of the world . " According to Heather Phares of Allmusic , the album eschews the eclectic music of Contra for " a less audacious production style and smaller instrumental palette : guitar , organ , harpsichord , and the occasional sample combine into a rarefied sound that suggests a more insular version of their debut " . She pointed to how the album is bookended by the stylistically narrow chamber pop on the songs " Obvious Bicycle " and " Young Lion " . " Step " was inspired by a lyric from Souls of Mischief 's 1993 song " Step to My Girl " , which sampled Grover Washington , Jr . ' s cover of Bread 's " Aubrey " . The vocal melody of the chorus interprets the melody of " Aubrey " so close that the band had to clear it as a sample . The chorus vocals were recorded in Ableton Live using the onboard microphone in Batmanglij 's MacBook Pro . Alexis Petridis viewed that some songs echo lesser known " musical tropes " from the band 's previous albums — a mock Irish folk influence is heard on " Unbelievers " , while " Step " features " Left Banke @-@ inspired baroque pop " . 
 Much of the lyrics were composed by Batmanglij and Koenig in Batmanglij 's apartment ( a former factory building in Brooklyn ) and at a rented cottage on Martha 's Vineyard . The lyrics explore more mature , world @-@ weary themes such as growing old and disillusionment with American foreign policy . The album eschews the theme of privileged youth from their first two albums in favor of characters with adult responsibilities and reflections on the passage of time . Faith and mortality are recurring themes on songs such as " Unbelievers " , " Worship You " , and " Everlasting Arms " . Koenig likened their first three albums to Brideshead Revisited : " The naïve joyous school days in the beginning . Then the expansion of the world , travel , seeing other places , learning a little bit more about how people live . And then the end is a little bit of growing up , starting to think more seriously about your life and your faith . If people could look at our three albums as a bildungsroman , I ’ d be O.K. with that . " According to Brice Ezell from PopMatters , Modern Vampires of the City is " very much an indie rock record " because of Koenig 's voice and diction , which reveals " the youth that he and his bandmates so often strive to shrug off . " Ezell asserts that , on songs such as " Unbelievers " , the " reckless abandon " expressed by the lyrics reveals " the group 's grasp on the genuine rebellion that indie rock ought to strive for . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Modern Vampires of the City received widespread acclaim from critics when it was released on May 14 , 2013 , by XL Recordings . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 84 , based on 51 reviews . In The Independent , Simon Price called it Vampire Weekend 's " most cohesive and convincing effort yet " featuring their most accessible compositions , while Ryan Dombal from Pitchfork Media said the singing suited the music fluidly on songs that sounded more natural and dynamic than the band 's previous work . Alexis Petridis , lead critic for The Guardian , believed Vampire Weekend successfully avoided the gimmicky sounds of their previous albums and wrote more genuine lyrics dealing with mortality rather than " arch depictions of moneyed young Wasp lives " . Rolling Stone magazine 's Nathan Brackett said the album featured a particular spirit and songcraft evocative of urban life , while Robert Christgau appreciated how many twists the coming of age themes revealed . In his review for MSN Music , Christgau found the record similar to the Beatles ' Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band ( 1967 ) because of how each lyric and musical element was " pleasurable in itself and aptly situated in the sturdy songs and tracks , so that the whole signifies without a hint of concept . " 
 In a less enthusiastic review , NME magazine 's John Calvert felt Vampire Weekend sacrificed " the sonic smarts that made them " on an otherwise " gorgeous album " . Greg Kot , writing for the Chicago Tribune , said the band occasionally missteps with attempts at ingenuity on songs such as " Ya Hey " and " Finger Back " . Slant Magazine 's Jesse Cataldo said the songs may be dense and wordy , although he also found them " immediately potent on a purely visceral level , striking a perfect balance that makes for what 's perhaps the best album of the year " . 
 In the first week Modern Vampires of the City was released , it debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and sold 134 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . It was Vampire Weekend 's second consecutive number @-@ one record on the Billboard 200 , as well as the nineteenth independently @-@ distributed album to top the chart in the Nielsen SoundScan era ( 1991 – present ) . The album entered the UK Albums Chart at number three with first @-@ week sales of 27 @,@ 805 copies in the United Kingdom , becoming the band 's third consecutive top @-@ twenty album there . By December 2014 , it had been certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America and sold 505 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Modern Vampires of the City appeared on many critics ' year @-@ end lists of 2013 's best albums . It finished second in voting for the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics published by The Village Voice . At the 2014 Grammy Awards , the record won in the category of Best Alternative Music Album . According to Acclaimed Music , it is the 218th most ranked record on lists of the greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Ezra Koenig , except where noted . All music composed by Rostam Batmanglij and Koenig , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Vampire Weekend = = = 
 Ezra Koenig – lead vocals , piano on " Unbelievers " 
 Rostam Batmanglij – piano , guitars , banjo , vocal harmonies and backing vocals , drum and synth programming , keyboards , shaker , lead vocals on " Young Lion " 
 Chris Baio – bass 
 Chris Tomson – drums 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 Ariel Rechtshaid – additional drum and synth programming on " Obvious Bicycle " , " Unbelievers " , " Diane Young " , and " Hudson " , additional bass on " Everlasting Arms " , production , engineering 
 Jeff Curtin – additional drums on " Diane Young " , engineering 
 Brendan Ryan – accordion on " Unbelievers " 
 Johnny Cuomo – <unk> on " Unbelievers " 
 Danny T. Levin – trumpet on " Unbelievers " and " Hudson " 
 Elizabeth Lea – trombone on " Unbelievers " and " Hudson " 
 Seth Shafer – tuba on " Unbelievers " and " Hudson " 
 Adam Schatz – saxophone on " Diane Young " 
 Angel <unk> – backing vocals on " Obvious Bicycle " , " Worship You " and " Young Lion " , additional vocal arrangement 
 Fanny Franklin – backing vocals on " Finger Back " 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Andean condor = 
 The Andean condor ( Vultur gryphus ) is a South American bird in the New World vulture family Cathartidae and is the only member of the genus Vultur . Found in the Andes mountains and adjacent Pacific coasts of western South America , the Andean condor is the largest flying bird in the world by combined measurement of weight and wingspan . It has a maximum wingspan of 3 @.@ 3 m ( 10 ft 10 in ) exceeded only by the wingspans of four seabirds / water birds — the roughly 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 ft 6 in ) maximum of the wandering albatross , southern royal albatross , great white pelican and Dalmatian pelican . 
 It is a large black vulture with a ruff of white feathers surrounding the base of the neck and , especially in the male , large white patches on the wings . The head and neck are nearly featherless , and are a dull red color , which may flush and therefore change color in response to the bird 's emotional state . In the male , there is a wattle on the neck and a large , dark red comb or caruncle on the crown of the head . Unlike most birds of prey , the male is larger than the female . 
 The condor is primarily a scavenger , feeding on carrion . It prefers large carcasses , such as those of deer or cattle . It reaches sexual maturity at five or six years of age and nests at elevations of up to 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) , generally on inaccessible rock ledges . One or two eggs are usually laid . It is one of the world 's longest @-@ living birds , with a lifespan of over 70 years in some cases . 
 The Andean condor is a national symbol of Argentina , Bolivia , Chile , Colombia , Ecuador , and Peru and plays an important role in the folklore and mythology of the Andean regions . The Andean condor is considered near threatened by the IUCN . It is threatened by habitat loss and by secondary poisoning from carcasses killed by hunters . Captive breeding programs have been instituted in several countries . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 The Andean condor was described by Swedish scientist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the tenth edition of his Systema Naturae and retains its original binomial name of Vultur gryphus . The Andean condor is sometimes called the Argentinean condor , Bolivian condor , Chilean condor , Colombian condor , Ecuadorian condor , or Peruvian condor after one of the nations to which it is native . The generic term Vultur is directly taken from the Latin <unk> or <unk> , which means " vulture " . Its specific epithet is derived from a variant of the Greek word <unk> ( <unk> , " hook @-@ nosed " ) . The word condor itself is derived from the Quechua <unk> . 
 The exact taxonomic placement of the Andean condor and the remaining six species of New World vultures remains unclear . Though both are similar in appearance and have similar ecological roles , the New World and Old World vultures evolved from different ancestors in different parts of the world and are not closely related . Just how different the two families are is currently under debate , with some earlier authorities suggesting that the New World vultures are more closely related to storks . More recent authorities maintain their overall position in the order Falconiformes along with the Old World vultures or place them in their own order , Cathartiformes . The South American Classification Committee has removed the New World vultures from Ciconiiformes and instead described them as incertae sedis , but notes that a move to Falconiformes or Cathartiformes is possible . 
 The Andean condor is the only accepted living species of its genus , Vultur . Unlike the California condor ( Gymnogyps californianus ) , which is known from extensive fossil remains and some additional ones of congeners , the fossil record of the Andean condor recovered to date is scant . Presumed Plio @-@ Pleistocene species of South American condors were later recognized to be not different from the present species , although one known only from a few rather small bones found in a Pliocene deposit of Tarija Department , Bolivia , may have been a smaller <unk> , V. gryphus <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Although it is on average about seven to eight cm shorter from beak to tail than the California condor , the Andean condor is larger in wingspan , which ranges from 270 to 320 cm ( 8 ft 10 in to 10 ft 6 in ) . It is also typically heavier , reaching a weight of 11 to 15 kg ( 24 to 33 lb ) for males and 8 to 11 kg ( 18 to 24 lb ) for females . Overall length can range from 100 to 130 cm ( 3 ft 3 in to 4 ft 3 in ) . Among standard measurements , the wing chord is 75 @.@ 7 – 85 @.@ 2 cm ( 29 @.@ 8 – 33 @.@ 5 in ) , the tail is 33 – 38 cm ( 13 – 15 in ) and the tarsus is 11 @.@ 5 – 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 9 in ) . Measurements are usually taken from specimens reared in captivity . The mean weight is 11 @.@ 3 kg ( 25 lb ) , with the males averaging about a kilogram more at 12 @.@ 5 kg ( 28 lb ) , the females a kilogram less at 10 @.@ 1 kg ( 22 lb ) . According to a recently published manual of avian body masses , the species possesses the heaviest average weight for any living flying bird or animal , ahead of competitors such as trumpeter swans ( Cygnus buccinator ) and Dalmatian pelicans ( Pelecanus crispus ) . However , another resources claims a mean species body mass of 10 @.@ 3 kg ( 23 lb ) for the Andean condor . The Andean condor is the largest living land bird capable of flight if measured in terms of average weight and wingspan , although male <unk> of the largest species ( far more sexually dimorphic in size ) can weigh more at maximum . The mean wingspan is around 283 cm ( 9 ft 3 in ) and the wings have the largest surface area ( measured in square centimeters ) of any extant bird . Among living bird species , only the great albatrosses and the two largest species of pelican exceed the Andean condor in average and maximal wingspan . 
 The adult plumage is a uniform black , with the exception of a frill of white feathers nearly surrounding the base of the neck and , especially in the male , large patches or bands of white on the wings which do not appear until the completion of the bird 's first moulting . The head and neck are red to blackish @-@ red and have few feathers . The head and neck are meticulously kept clean by the bird , and their baldness is an adaptation for hygiene , allowing the skin to be exposed to the sterilizing effects of dehydration and ultraviolet light at high altitudes . The crown of the head is flattened . In the male , the head is crowned with a dark red caruncle or comb , while the skin of his neck lies in folds , forming a wattle . The skin of the head and neck is capable of flushing noticeably in response to emotional state , which serves to communicate between individuals . Juveniles have a grayish @-@ brown general coloration , blackish head and neck skin , and a brown ruff . 
 The middle toe is greatly elongated , and the hind one is only slightly developed , while the talons of all the toes are comparatively straight and blunt . The feet are thus more adapted to walking , and are of little use as weapons or organs of prehension as in birds of prey and Old World vultures . The beak is hooked , and adapted to tear rotting meat . The irises of the male are brown , while those of the female are deep red . The eyelids lack eyelashes . Contrary to the usual rule for sexual dimorphism among birds of prey , the female is smaller than the male . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Andean condor is found in South America in the Andes , including the Santa Marta Mountains . In the north , its range begins in Venezuela and Colombia , where it is extremely rare , then continues south along the Andes in Ecuador , Peru , and Chile , through Bolivia and western Argentina to the Tierra del Fuego . In the early 19th century , the Andean condor bred from western Venezuela to Tierra del Fuego , along the entire chain of the Andes , but its range has been greatly reduced due to human activity . Its habitat is mainly composed of open grasslands and alpine areas up to 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) in elevation . It prefers relatively open , non @-@ forested areas which allow it to spot carrion from the air , such as the páramo or rocky , mountainous areas in general . It occasionally ranges to lowlands in eastern Bolivia and southwestern Brazil , descends to lowland desert areas in Chile and Peru , and is found over southern @-@ beech forests in Patagonia . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The condor soars with its wings held horizontally and its primary feathers bent upwards at the tips . The lack of a large sternum to anchor its correspondingly large flight muscles physiologically identifies it as primarily being a <unk> . It flaps its wings on rising from the ground , but after attaining a moderate elevation it flaps its wings very rarely , relying on thermals to stay aloft . Charles Darwin commented on having watched them for half an hour without once observing a flap of their wings . It prefers to roost on high places from which it can launch without major wing @-@ flapping effort . Andean condors are often seen soaring near rock cliffs , using the heat thermals to aid them in rising in the air . 
 Like other New World vultures , the Andean condor has the unusual habit of urohidrosis : it often empties its cloaca onto its legs and feet . A cooling effect through evaporation has been proposed as a reason for this behaviour , but it makes no sense in the cold Andean habitat of the bird . Because of this habit , their legs are often streaked with a white buildup of uric acid . 
 There is a well @-@ developed social structure within large groups of condors , with competition to determine a ' pecking order ' by body language , competitive play behavior , and vocalizations . Generally , mature males tend to be at the top of the pecking order , with post @-@ dispersal immature males tending to be near the bottom . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The Andean condor is a scavenger , feeding mainly on carrion . Wild condors inhabit large territories , often traveling more than 200 km ( 120 mi ) a day in search of carrion . In inland areas , they prefer large carcasses . Naturally , they feed on the largest carcasses available , which can include llamas ( Lama <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , rheas ( Rhea ssp . ) , <unk> ( Lama <unk> ) , deer and armadillos . However , most inland condors now live largely off of domestic animals , which are now more widespread in South America , such as cattle ( Bos primigenius taurus ) , horses ( Equus ferus caballus ) , donkeys ( Equus africanus asinus ) , mules , sheep ( Ovis aries ) , pigs ( Sus scrofa domesticus ) , goats ( Capra aegagrus hircus ) and dogs ( Canis lupus familiaris ) . They also feed on the carcasses of introduced game species such as wild boars ( Sus scrofa ) , rabbits ( Oryctolagus cuniculus ) , foxes ( Vulpes vulpes ) and red deer ( Cervus elaphus ) . For condors who live around the coast , the diet consists mainly of beached carcasses of marine mammals , largely cetaceans . They will also raid the nests of smaller birds to feed on the eggs . Andean condors have been observed to do some hunting of small , live animals , such as rodents , birds and rabbits , which ( given their lack of powerful , grasping feet or developed hunting technique ) they usually kill by jabbing repeatedly with their bill . Coastal areas provide a constant food supply , and in particularly plentiful areas , some Andean condors limit their foraging area to several kilometers of beach @-@ front land . They locate carrion by spotting it or by following other scavengers , such as corvids or other vultures . It may follow New World vultures of the genus Cathartes — the turkey vulture ( C. aura ) , the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture ( C. burrovianus ) , and the greater yellow @-@ headed vulture ( C. <unk> ) — to carcasses . The Cathartes vultures forage by smell , detecting the scent of ethyl mercaptan , a gas produced by the beginnings of decay in dead animals . These smaller vultures cannot rip through the tougher hides of these larger animals with the efficiency of the larger condor , and their interactions are often an example of mutual dependence between species . Black vultures ( Coragyps atratus ) , king vultures ( Sarcoramphus papa ) and even mammalian scavengers may sometimes track Cathartes vultures for carcasses but the condor is invariably dominant among the scavengers in its range . Andean condors are intermittent eaters in the wild , often going for a few days without eating , then gorging themselves on several pounds at once , sometimes to the point of being unable to lift off the ground . Because its feet and talons are not adapted to grasping , it must feed while on the ground . Like other carrion @-@ feeders , it plays an important role in its ecosystem by disposing of carrion which would otherwise be a breeding ground for disease . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Sexual maturity and breeding behavior do not appear in the Andean condor until the bird is five or six years of age . It may live to be 50 plus , and it mates for life . During courtship displays , the skin of the male 's neck flushes , changing from dull red to bright yellow , and inflates . He approaches the female with neck outstretched , revealing the inflated neck and the chest patch , while hissing , then extends his wings and stands erect while clicking his tongue . Other courtship rituals include hissing and clucking while hopping with wings partially spread , and dancing . The Andean condor prefers to roost and breed at elevations of 3 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 m ( 9 @,@ 800 to 16 @,@ 400 ft ) . Its nest , which consists of a few sticks placed around the eggs , is created on inaccessible ledges of rock . However , in coastal areas of Peru , where there are few cliffs , some nests are simply partially shaded crannies scraped out against boulders on slopes . It deposits one or two bluish @-@ white eggs , weighing about 280 g ( 9 @.@ 9 oz ) and ranging from 75 to 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) in length , during the months of February and March every second year . The egg hatches after 54 to 58 days of incubation by both parents . If the chick or egg is lost or removed , another egg is laid to take its place . Researchers and breeders take advantage of this behavior to double the reproductive rate by taking the first egg away for hand @-@ rearing , causing the parents to lay a second egg , which they are generally allowed to raise . 
 The young are covered with a grayish down until they are almost as large as their parents . They are able to fly after six months , but continue to roost and hunt with their parents until age two , when they are displaced by a new clutch . Healthy adults have no natural predators , but large birds of prey and mammalian predators , like foxes , may take eggs or hatchlings . Predation is relatively uncommon , since the vigilant parents often aggressively displace birds of prey who come near and the rocky , precipitous location of most nests are difficult for mammals to access . 
 = = = Longevity = = = 
 Being a slowly @-@ maturing bird with no known natural predators in adulthood , an Andean condor is quite a long @-@ lived bird . Longevity and mortality rates are not known to have been extensively studied in the wild . Some estimations of lifespans of wild birds has exceeded 50 years . In 1983 , the Guinness Book of World Records considered the longest @-@ lived bird of any species with a confirmed lifespan was an Andean condor that died after surviving 72 years in captivity , having been captured from the wild as a juvenile of undetermined age . Several species of parrot have been reported to live for perhaps over 100 years , but these ( at least in 1983 ) were not considered authenticated . Another early captive @-@ held specimen of condor reportedly lived for 71 years . However , these lifespans have been exceeded by a male , nicknamed " <unk> " , that was kept at Beardsley Zoo in Connecticut . <unk> was born in captivity in 1930 and died on January 26 , 2010 , making him 79 years of age . This would be the greatest verified age ever known for a bird . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 = = = Conservation status = = = 
 The Andean condor is considered near threatened by the IUCN . It was first placed on the United States Endangered Species list in 1970 , a status which is assigned to an animal that is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range . Threats to its population include loss of habitat needed for foraging , secondary poisoning from animals killed by hunters and persecution . It is threatened mainly in the northern area of its range , and is extremely rare in Venezuela and Colombia , where it has undergone considerable declines in recent years . Because it is adapted to very low mortality and has correspondingly low reproductive rates , it is extremely vulnerable to human persecution , most of which stems from the fact that it is perceived as a threat by farmers due to alleged attacks on livestock . Education programs have been implemented by conservationists to dispel this misconception . Reintroduction programs using captive @-@ bred Andean condors , which release birds hatched in North American zoos into the wild to bolster populations , have been introduced in Argentina , Venezuela , and Colombia . The first captive @-@ bred Andean condors were released into the wild in 1989 . When raising condors , human contact is minimal ; chicks are fed with glove puppets which resemble adult Andean condors in order to prevent the chicks from imprinting on humans , which would endanger them upon release as they would not be wary of humans . The condors are kept in aviaries for three months prior to release , where they acclimatize to an environment similar to that which they will be released in . Released condors are tracked by satellite in order to observe their movements and to monitor whether they are still alive . 
 In response to the capture of all the wild individuals of the California condor , in 1988 the US Fish and Wildlife Service began a reintroduction experiment involving the release of captive Andean condors into the wild in California . Only females were released to eliminate the possibility of accidentally introducing a South American species into the United States . The experiment was a success , and all the Andean condors were recaptured and re @-@ released in South America before the reintroduction of the California condors took place . 
 = = = Role in culture = = = 
 The Andean condor is a national symbol of Argentina , Bolivia , Chile , Colombia , Ecuador , Peru and Venezuelan Andes states . It is the national bird of Bolivia , Chile , Colombia , and Ecuador . It plays an important role in the folklore and mythology of the South American Andean regions , and has been represented in Andean art from c . 2500 BCE onward , and they are a part of indigenous Andean religions . In Andean mythology , the Andean condor was associated with the sun deity , and was believed to be the ruler of the upper world . The Andean condor is considered a symbol of power and health by many Andean cultures , and it was believed that the bones and organs of the Andean condor possessed medicinal powers , sometimes leading to the hunting and killing of condors to obtain its bones and organs . In some versions of Peruvian bullfighting , a condor is tied to the back of a bull , where it pecks at the animal as bullfighters fight it . The condor generally survives and is set free . 
 In Peru , they are occasionally shot , but more often revered and used for ceremonial purposes . The <unk> Fiesta is a celebration , the pinnacle of which is the tying of an Andean condor to the back of a bull , allowing the condor to kill the bull with its talons before being released . This ceremony is a symbolic representation of the power of the Andean peoples ( the condor ) over the Spanish ( the bull ) . There is also a ceremony known as the <unk> del condor in which a live Andean condor is suspended from a frame and is punched to death by horsemen as they ride by . 
 The Andean condor is a popular figure on stamps in many countries , appearing on one for Ecuador in 1958 , Argentina in 1960 , Peru in 1973 , Bolivia in 1985 , Colombia in 1992 , Chile in 2001 , and Venezuela in 2004 . It has also appeared on the coins and banknotes of Colombia and Chile . The condor is featured in several coats of arms of Andean countries as a symbol of Andes mountains . 
 The Andean condor is depicted on the logo of Avianca and <unk> Argentinas , which are two of the largest airlines in South America . 
 = New Jersey Route 92 = 
 Route 92 was a 6 @.@ 7 @-@ mile ( 10 @.@ 8 km ) proposed branch of the New Jersey Turnpike that would have run from west to east , beginning at U.S. Route 1 just north of Ridge Road ( old CR 522 ) in South Brunswick Township , east along Route 32 , to Exit 8A in Monroe Township . Route 92 was also assigned in the 1953 renumbering and by the late 1950s it was named the Princeton – Hightstown Bypass , a freeway planned to connect the Somerset Freeway ( an unbuilt section of Interstate 95 ) in Montgomery Township ( near Skillman ) , with Route 33 in East Windsor Township ( east of Hightstown ) . In 1987 , the planned Route 92 was truncated to only run east from U.S. Route 1 near Kingston . New plans were announced in 1994 , this time running to US 1 near Princeton . After public hearings found opposition was still strong , the planned route was truncated to a much shorter bypass of Hightstown only and numbered Route 133 . Construction on the road , the first project awarded under New Jersey 's modified Design @-@ build program , began on September 20 , 1996 and was opened November 30 , 1999 . 
 The first plans for Route 92 's new alignment , running from Exit 8A of the New Jersey Turnpike ( rather than exit 8 ) west to U.S. Route 206 near Rocky Hill , were made in 1988 , using funds from the canceled Somerset Freeway . In 1992 , the plans were formally transferred to the New Jersey Turnpike Authority , which announced the new plans in 1994 , again dropping the segment west of US 1 . All but $ 6 @.@ 5 million of the $ 400 million project was reassigned in November 2005 to widen the Turnpike in southern New Jersey . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Princeton – Hightstown alignment = = = 
 The first proposed alignments for a freeway from the borough of Princeton to the community of Hightstown originates in the designation of State Highway Route 31 @-@ A in 1938 by the New Jersey State Legislature . Construction commenced on the new route , building a new bridge over the Pennsylvania Railroad a year later . This new , 104 @.@ 00 feet ( 31 @.@ 70 m ) long bridge replaced the at @-@ grade crossing on Washington Road , which is now a dead @-@ end . When the state highway renumbering occurred on January 1 , 1953 , the new freeway proposals were designated as Route 92 . ( Route 31 @-@ A was decommissioned at that point , and repealed from state law in 1992 . ) The first assigned alignment of the Route 92 Freeway dates to the late 1950s , when the New Jersey State Highway Department as the Princeton @-@ Hightstown Bypass , a new freeway to connect the Somerset Freeway ( an unbuilt portion of Interstate 95 in the Montgomery Township community of Skillman ) eastward to a junction with Route 33 in the community of East Windsor Township ( east of Hightstown ) . This new freeway was to be constructed by the State Highway Department and maintained by the aforementioned corporation . By 1967 , the New Jersey Department of Transportation announced plans and although monetary issues stalled any forward movements , federal funding soon came in to help resume planning . 
 The highway was proposed and received opposition from the communities of Princeton and Plainsboro , who cited destruction of open space and wetlands , which would reduce the quality of local life . In 1982 , the Somerset Freeway was canceled as a project , and the $ 228 million ( 1982 USD ) that came with it was given around by a partnership , with the New Jersey Department of Transportation suggesting the Route 92 Freeway become one of the six projects to receive funding . Final designs for the freeway were underway in 1986 , amid controversy . As a result , the Department of Transportation dropped the section west of U.S. Route 1 in South Brunswick Township only a year later . After plans for Route 92 were realigned northward in 1988 , the Princeton @-@ Hightstown Bypass was revived in 1994 for construction of a new bypass of Hightstown . This new , 3 @.@ 8 miles ( 6 @.@ 1 km ) long freeway was designed under the Department of Transportation 's first modified design @-@ build program and construction commenced in 1996 . The contractors in hire for the project were the <unk> Construction Group , who set a bid for $ 57 million ( 1996 USD ) . The new freeway , designated as Route 133 instead of Route 92 , was opened in November 1999 , ending the four @-@ decade fight to construction freeway around Hightstown . The delay occurred due to substantial erosion caused by the weakening Hurricane Floyd in 1999 . 
 = = = Turnpike Extension alignment = = = 
 In 1988 , the New Jersey Department of Transportation realigned the proposed Route 92 Freeway off the Princeton @-@ Hightstown Bypass to a route further north . This new alignment was to run from U.S. Route 206 near the community of Rocky Hill in Somerset County to Interchange 8A on the New Jersey Turnpike in Monroe Township in Middlesex County , using the alignment of Route 32 at its eastern terminus . The state cited that this new northerly alignment , funded by the cancellation of the Somerset Freeway , would serve better needs of the people . In 1992 , the proposal for Route 92 was turned over to the New Jersey Turnpike Authority from the Department of Transportation , citing the cost was too elevated . Two years later , the Turnpike Authority released new plans for the Route 92 alignment , this time creating a 6 @.@ 7 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 10 @.@ 8 km ) limited @-@ access highway from U.S. Route 1 in South Brunswick Township to Interchange 8A in Monroe Township . This new highway was to cost the Turnpike Authority $ 300 million ( 1994 USD ) . The opposition to the freeway shifted northward , with South Brunswick residents complaining the divide of their community . The environmentalists also cried foul on the destruction of 33 acres ( 130 @,@ 000 m2 ) of wetlands and the encroachment on local open space . Giving their hands to these factors , the Environmental Protection Agency opposed this project twice during the 1990s , once in January 1997 and once in October 1998 . The state realigned the proposals to reduce the loss of wetlands , and also proposed the addition of 57 new acres ( 230 @,@ 000 m2 ) of wetlands . This proposal gained the support of the state 's Department of Environmental Protection , but not the federal . 
 In February 2000 , the Turnpike Authority gave in to the orders from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to have Route 92 undergo an environmental impact study , which could go up to two years , to help see if they should award the contract for construction . Opponents of the Route 92 project hailed this decision for the thought that the environmental impact statement ( EIS ) would back up their beliefs . Four months later , the Army Corps of Engineers held a meeting to decide what to take into account for the impact statement and held opinions from both the supporters and opponents of the freeway . Around this time , locals sent an editorial to News 12 New Jersey to say that Middlesex County Route 522 , already a four @-@ lane freeway , should become the primary freeway across the portion of Middlesex County . However , the Turnpike Authority replied citing that Route 522 would be inadequate to handle the amount of traffic by 2015 that Route 92 was to handle . In December 2003 , the Army Corps of Engineers approved the statement and although agencies still disagreed on the wetlands issues , held public hearings in 2004 . 
 In 2005 , the Turnpike Authority relocated most of the Route 92 funding to the widening of the New Jersey Turnpike through the southern and central portions of New Jersey . The remaining funds , $ 6 @.@ 5 million ( 2005 USD ) , left the project in limbo , and the Army Corps of Engineers released a final statement , finding no other alternative outside of a new alignment . On December 1 , 2006 , the New Jersey Turnpike Authority terminated its plans to build the spur from Ridge and 1 in South Brunswick to 8A in Monroe . Since most of the 92 funds had already been diverted to the Turnpike Authority 's main concern , it made more sense to cancel the spur due to lack of funding . The Authority 's main focus is widening the Turnpike between Exits 6 in Mansfield Township and 8A in Monroe Township in anticipation of increased traffic coming from the Pennsylvania Turnpike when modifications there are completed . 
 = = Proposed alignments = = 
 = = = Princeton – Hightstown Bypass = = = 
 The first alignment of the Route 92 Freeway , proposed in the 1950s , was to begin at an interchange with Interstate 95 , known as the Somerset Freeway in the community of Skillman ( in Montgomery Township ) . The route was supposed to head eastward , crossing an interchange with U.S. Route 206 in Montgomery Township before crossing over County Route 518 in Rocky Hill and interchanging with New Jersey Route 27 in Kingston . The route would then turn to the south and interchange with U.S. Route 1 and County Route 522 in the community of Monmouth Junction . From there , Route 92 would cross over the Pennsylvania Railroad to the north of New Jersey Route 64 in Plainsboro , turning to the southeast along the Millstone River . After crossing the Millstone , Route 92 was to interchange with County Route 535 in Cranbury before entering East Windsor , where it would interchange with U.S. Route 130 . From there , the route would meet the New Jersey Turnpike at Interchange 8 before reaching its eastern terminus at an interchange with New Jersey Route 33 in the Twin Rivers community in East Windsor . 
 = = = Turnpike Extension alignment ( post @-@ 1994 ) = = = 
 On the turnpike extension alignment proposed in 1994 , Route 92 was to begin at a trumpet interchange with U.S. Route 1 in South Brunswick . The interchange would have also served access to <unk> Crossing Road ( Middlesex CR 683 ) . The highway was to head to the southeast and cross under Perrine Road , which was proposed to have a brand new overpass and a westbound interchange . ( There was also to be an eastbound entrance ramp from Perrine Road . ) After curving to the east , Route 92 was to enter Plainsboro , cross the New Jersey Transit 's Northeast Corridor Line and Devil 's Brook , and then re @-@ enter South Brunswick . The route was to continue eastward , passing to the north of McCormack Lake and begin following Friendship Road until the intersection with Miller Road . Route 92 was to turn to the southeast along with Friendship Road and cross through a toll station . It would have entered a large interchange with U.S. Route 130 and an access route to Friendship Road . Route 92 's interchange with Route 130 was to be a cloverleaf interchange and from there , the highway was to follow current day Route 32 through Monroe Township . There , the highway was to continue southeastward , interchanging with local roads and continuing through an interchange with County Route 535 before merging into Interchange 8A with the New Jersey Turnpike , where Route 92 was to end . 
 = = Proposed interchanges = = 
 = = = Route 92 ( Princeton @-@ Hightstown ) = = = 
 = = = Route 92 ( post @-@ 1994 ) = = = 
 The entire route was in Middlesex County . 
 = 3rd Brigade , 7th Infantry Division ( United States ) = 
 The 3rd Brigade , 7th Infantry Division , originally known as the 14th Infantry Brigade was an infantry brigade of the United States Army , and a part of the 7th Infantry Division . The brigade was based at Fort Ord , California for most of its history . 
 Activated for service in World War I , the unit saw brief service in the conflict , but never fought as an entire unit . After the Korean War , it was reactivated as a brigade , and was returned to the United States where it saw action in Operation Just Cause and Operation Golden Pheasant . The brigade sent units to support 2nd Brigade , 7th Infantry Division during the 1992 Los Angeles Riots . The 3rd Brigade was deactivated in 1993 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The 3rd Brigade , 7th Infantry Division was first constituted and activated in the regular army as the 14th Infantry Brigade on 6 December 1917 at Camp Wheeler , Georgia . One month later it organized and prepared for deployment to Europe to participate in World War I as a part of the American Expeditionary Force , along with the rest of the division . The 14th Infantry Brigade was one of two brigades assigned to the division headquarters , the other being the 13th Infantry Brigade . Serving within the brigade were the 64th Infantry Regiment and the 56th Infantry Regiment , bringing the total strength of the brigade to around 8 @,@ 000 men . Most of the brigade sailed to Europe aboard the SS Leviathan . 
 During its time in France , the brigade did not participate as a whole in any engagements , though its infantry and reconnaissance elements did engage German forces . On 11 October 1918 the 14th Brigade and 7th Division first came under shelling attacks . At Saint @-@ Mihiel the units also came under chemical attack . Elements of the 7th probed up toward Prény near the Moselle River , capturing positions and driving German forces out of the region . It was around this time that the division first received its shoulder sleeve insignia , which the 14th Brigade wore as a part of the division . 
 In early November , the 14th Brigade began readying itself for an attack on the Hindenburg Line with the division , which was part of the Second Army . The division launched a reconnaissance in force on the Voëvre Plain , but before it could begin a full assault , the Allies signed an Armistice ending hostilities . After 33 days on the front lines , the 7th Division suffered 1 @,@ 988 casualties . It was awarded one campaign streamer for Lorraine . The brigade performed occupation duties for the next year as it began preparations to return to the continental United States . 
 The 14th Brigade returned to the United States in late 1919 , and gradually demobilized at Camp George G. Meade , Maryland until 1921 . On 22 September of that year , the Headquarters Company , 7th Division was inactivated , and the 13th and 14th Brigades deactivated with it . 
 = = = Reorganization = = = 
 On 1 July 1940 , the 7th Infantry Division was reactivated at Camp Ord , California Under the command of Major General Joseph W. Stilwell . The Headquarters element , 13th and 14th Brigades did not reactivate , however , and the division was instead centered on three infantry regiments ; the 17th Infantry Regiment , the 32nd Infantry Regiment , and the 53rd Infantry Regiment . The 14th Brigade was not activated for the duration of the war . 
 = = = Post @-@ Korean War = = = 
 In the wake of the Korean War , between 1953 and 1971 , the 7th Infantry Division defended the Korean Demilitarized Zone . Its main garrison was Camp Casey , South Korea . During these occupation duties , the division saw a complete reorganization in compliance with the Reorganization Objective Army Divisions plan . In 1963 , the division 's former headquarters company grew into the 1st Brigade , 7th Infantry Division while the 13th Infantry Brigade became the 2nd Brigade , 7th Infantry Division . The 14th Infantry Brigade was redesignated at the 3rd Brigade , 7th Infantry Division . These renamed formations retained all of the lineage and campaign credits of their previous designations . On 2 April 1971 , the division and its brigades returned to the United States and inactivated at Fort Lewis , Washington . 
 In October 1974 the 7th and two brigades reactivated at their former garrison , Fort Ord ( a National Guard " <unk> " brigade , the 41st , would periodically train with the division as its third brigade ) . The unit did not see any action in Vietnam or during the post war era , but was tasked to keep a close watch on South American developments . It trained at Fort Ord , Camp Roberts , and Fort Hunter Liggett . On 1 October 1985 the division redesignated as the 7th Infantry Division ( Light ) , organized again as a light infantry division . It was the first US division specially designed as such . The various battalions of the 17th , 31st , and 32nd Regiments moved from the division , replaced by battalions from other regiments , including battalions from the 21st Infantry Regiment , the 27th Infantry Regiment , and the 9th Infantry Regiment . The 27th Infantry and the 9th Infantry Regiment participated in Operation Golden Pheasant in Honduras . In 1989 the 3rd Brigade , 7th Infantry Division participated in Operation Just Cause in Panama . 
 In 1991 the Base Realignment and Closure Commission recommended the closing of Fort Ord due to the escalating cost of living on the Central California coastline . By 1994 , the post was closed and the Division was to move to Fort Lewis , Washington . The 3rd Brigade 's 3rd Battalion , 17th Infantry Regiment and other assigned military police companies participated in one final mission in the United States before inactivation ; quelling the 1992 Los Angeles Riots , called Operation Garden Plot , in conjunction with the entire 2nd Brigade , 7th Division . In 1993 the division was slated to move to Fort Lewis , WA and instead inactivated at Fort Ord , CA as part of the post @-@ Cold War draw @-@ down of the US Army , but the 2nd and 3rd Brigades of the 7th inactivated at Ft . Ord in 1993 . The 1st Brigade relocated to Ft . Lewis and was later reflagged as the 2nd Brigade of the 2nd Infantry Division in 1994 , and the division headquarters formally inactivated on 16 June 1994 at Fort Lewis . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = Pressure system = 
 A pressure system is a relative peak or lull in the sea level pressure distribution . The surface pressure at sea level varies minimally , with the lowest value measured 870 @.@ 0 hectopascals ( 25 @.@ 69 inHg ) and the highest recorded 1 @,@ 085 @.@ 7 hectopascals ( 32 @.@ 06 inHg ) . <unk> and low @-@ pressure systems evolve due to interactions of temperature differentials in the atmosphere , temperature differences between the atmosphere and water within oceans and lakes , the influence of upper @-@ level disturbances , as well as the amount of solar heating or radiational cooling an area receives . Pressure systems cause weather experienced locally . Low @-@ pressure systems are associated with clouds and precipitation that minimize temperature changes through the day , whereas high @-@ pressure systems normally associated with dry weather and mostly clear skies with larger diurnal temperature changes due to greater radiation at night and greater sunshine during the day . Pressure systems are analyzed by those in the field of meteorology within surface weather maps . 
 = = Low @-@ pressure system = = 
 A low @-@ pressure area , or " low " , is a region where the atmospheric pressure at sea level is below that of surrounding locations . Low @-@ pressure systems form under areas of wind divergence that occur in upper levels of the troposphere . The formation process of a low @-@ pressure area is known as cyclogenesis . Within the field of atmospheric dynamics , areas of wind divergence aloft occur in two areas : 
 on the east side of upper troughs , which form half of a Rossby wave within the Westerlies ( a trough with large wavelength , which extends through the troposphere ) 
 ahead of embedded shortwave troughs , which have smaller wavelengths 
 Diverging winds aloft ahead of these troughs cause atmospheric lift within the troposphere below , which lowers surface pressures as upward motion partially counteracts the force of gravity . 
 Thermal lows form due to localized heating caused by greater sunshine over deserts and other land masses . Since localized areas of warm air are less dense than their surroundings , this warmer air rises , which lowers atmospheric pressure near that portion of the Earth 's surface . Large @-@ scale thermal lows over continents help create pressure gradients that drive monsoon circulations . Low @-@ pressure areas can also form due to organized thunderstorm activity over warm water . When such an occurrence occurs over the tropics in concert with the Intertropical Convergence Zone , it is known as a monsoon trough . Monsoon troughs reach their northerly extent in August and their southerly extent in February . When a convective low acquires a well @-@ defined circulation in the tropics it is termed a tropical cyclone . Tropical cyclones can form during any month of the year globally , but can occur in either the northern hemisphere or the southern hemisphere during November . 
 Atmospheric lift caused by low @-@ level wind convergence into the surface low brings clouds and potentially precipitation . The low @-@ pressure area 's cloudy skies act to minimize diurnal temperature extremes . Since clouds reflect sunlight , incoming shortwave solar radiation is less , which causes lower temperatures during the day . At night , the absorptive effect of clouds on outgoing longwave radiation , such as heat energy from the surface , allows for warmer diurnal low temperatures in all seasons . The stronger the area of low pressure the stronger the winds experienced in its vicinity . Around the world , low @-@ pressure systems are most frequently located over the Tibetan Plateau and in the lee of the Rocky mountains . In Europe ( in particular , in the United Kingdom ) , recurring low @-@ pressure weather systems are typically known as depressions . The lowest recorded non @-@ tornadic barometric pressure was 870 hectopascals ( 26 inHg ) , occurred in the Western Pacific during Typhoon Tip on 12 October 1979 . 
 = = High @-@ pressure system = = 
 High @-@ pressure systems are frequently associated with light winds at the surface and subsidence through the lower portion of the troposphere . In general , subsidence will dry out an air mass by adiabatic or compressional heating . Thus , high pressure typically brings clear skies . During the day , since no clouds are present to reflect sunlight , there is more incoming shortwave solar radiation and temperatures rise . At night , the absence of clouds means that outgoing longwave radiation ( i.e. heat energy from the surface ) is not absorbed , giving cooler diurnal low temperatures in all seasons . When surface winds become light , the subsidence produced directly under a high @-@ pressure system can lead to a buildup of particulates in urban areas under the ridge , leading to widespread haze . If the low @-@ level relative humidity rises towards 100 percent overnight , fog can form . 
 Strong but vertically shallow high @-@ pressure systems moving from higher latitudes to lower latitudes in the northern hemisphere are associated with continental arctic air masses . The low , sharp temperature inversion can lead to areas of persistent stratocumulus or stratus cloud , known in colloquial terms as anticyclonic gloom . The type of weather brought about by an anticyclone depends on its origin . For example , extensions of the Azores high bubble pressure may bring about anticyclonic gloom during the winter , as they are warmed at the base and will trap moisture as they move over the warmer oceans . High pressures that build to the north and extend southwards will often bring clear weather . This is due to being cooled at the base ( as opposed to warmed ) , which helps prevent clouds from forming . The highest barometric pressure ever recorded on Earth was 1 @,@ 085 @.@ 7 hectopascals ( 32 @.@ 06 inHg ) measured in <unk> , Mongolia on 19 December 2001 . 
 = = Surface weather maps = = 
 A surface weather analysis is a type of weather map that depicts positions for high- and low @-@ pressure areas , as well as various types of synoptic scale systems such as frontal zones . Isotherms can be drawn on these maps , which are lines of equal temperature . Isotherms are drawn normally as solid lines at a preferred temperature interval . They show temperature gradients , which can be useful in finding fronts , which are on the warm side of large temperature gradients . By plotting the freezing line , isotherms can be useful in determination of precipitation type . Mesoscale convective systems such as tropical cyclones , outflow boundaries and squall lines also are analyzed on surface weather analyses . 
 Isobaric analysis is performed on these maps , which involves the construction of lines of equal mean sea level pressure . The innermost closed lines indicate the positions of relative maxima and minima in the pressure field . The minima are called low @-@ pressure areas , and the maxima are called high @-@ pressure areas . A High is often shown as H , and a low is shown as L. Elongated areas of low pressure , or troughs , are sometimes plotted as thick , brown dashed lines down the trough axis . <unk> are commonly used to place surface boundaries from the horse latitudes poleward , while streamline analyses are used in the tropics . A streamline analysis is a series of arrows oriented parallel to wind , showing wind motion within a certain geographic area . Cs depict cyclonic flow or likely areas of low pressure , while As depict anticyclonic flow or likely positions of high @-@ pressure areas . An area of confluent streamlines shows the location of shearlines within the tropics and subtropics . 
 = Diplodocus = 
 Diplodocus ( / <unk> / , / <unk> / , or / <unk> / ) is an extinct genus of diplodocid sauropod dinosaurs whose fossils were first discovered in 1877 by S. W. Williston . The generic name , coined by Othniel Charles Marsh in 1878 , is a neo @-@ Latin term derived from Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) " double " and <unk> ( <unk> ) " beam " , in reference to its double @-@ beamed chevron bones located in the underside of the tail . Chevron bones of this particular form were initially believed to be unique to Diplodocus ; however , since then they have been discovered in other members of the diplodocid family as well as in <unk> sauropods , such as Mamenchisaurus . It is now common scientific opinion that Seismosaurus hallorum is a species of Diplodocus . 
 This genus of dinosaurs lived in what is now western North America at the end of the Jurassic period . Diplodocus is one of the more common dinosaur fossils found in the middle to upper Morrison Formation , between about 154 and 152 million years ago , during the late Kimmeridgian age . The Morrison Formation records an environment and time dominated by gigantic sauropod dinosaurs , such as Apatosaurus , Barosaurus , Brachiosaurus , Brontosaurus , and Camarasaurus . 
 Diplodocus is among the most easily identifiable dinosaurs , with its typical sauropod shape , long neck and tail , and four sturdy legs . For many years , it was the longest dinosaur known . Its great size may have been a deterrent to the predators Allosaurus and Ceratosaurus : their remains have been found in the same strata , which suggests that they coexisted with Diplodocus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Among the best @-@ known sauropods , Diplodocus were very large , long @-@ necked , quadrupedal animals , with long , whip @-@ like tails . Their fore limbs were slightly shorter than their hind limbs , resulting in a largely horizontal posture . The skeletal structure of these long @-@ necked , long @-@ tailed animals supported by four sturdy legs have been compared with suspension bridges . In fact , Diplodocus carnegii is currently one of the longest dinosaurs known from a complete skeleton , with a total length of 25 metres ( 82 ft ) . Modern mass estimates for Diplodocus carnegii have tended to be in the 10 @-@ to @-@ 16 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 11 @-@ to @-@ 18 @-@ short @-@ ton ) range . 
 Diplodocus hallorum , known from partial remains , was even larger , and is estimated to have been the size of four elephants . When first described in 1991 , discoverer David Gillette calculated it may have been up to 52 m ( 171 ft ) long , making it the longest known dinosaur ( excluding those known from exceedingly poor remains , such as Amphicoelias ) . Some weight estimates of this time ranged as high as 113 tonnes ( 111 long tons ; 125 short tons ) . The estimated length was later revised downward to 33 @.@ 5 metres ( 110 ft ) and later on to 32 metres ( 105 ft ) based on findings that show that Gillette had originally misplaced vertebrae 12 – 19 as vertebrae 20 – 27 . The nearly complete Diplodocus carnegii skeleton at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , on which size estimates of D. hallorum are mainly based , also was found to have had its 13th tail vertebra come from another dinosaur , throwing off size estimates for D. hallorum even further . While dinosaurs such as Supersaurus were probably longer , fossil remains of these animals are only fragmentary . 
 Diplodocus had an extremely long tail , composed of about 80 caudal vertebrae , which are almost double the number some of the earlier sauropods had in their tails ( such as Shunosaurus with 43 ) , and far more than contemporaneous macronarians had ( such as Camarasaurus with 53 ) . Some speculation exists as to whether it may have had a defensive or noisemaking ( by cracking it like a coachwhip ) function . The tail may have served as a counterbalance for the neck . The middle part of the tail had ' double beams ' ( oddly shaped chevron bones on the underside , which gave Diplodocus its name ) . They may have provided support for the vertebrae , or perhaps prevented the blood vessels from being crushed if the animal 's heavy tail pressed against the ground . These ' double beams ' are also seen in some related dinosaurs . 
 Like other sauropods , the manus ( front " feet " ) of Diplodocus were highly modified , with the finger and hand bones arranged into a vertical column , horseshoe @-@ shaped in cross section . Diplodocus lacked claws on all but one digit of the front limb , and this claw was unusually large relative to other sauropods , flattened from side to side , and detached from the bones of the hand . The function of this unusually specialized claw is unknown . 
 No skull has ever been found that can be confidently said to belong to Diplodocus , though skulls of other diplodocids closely related to Diplodocus ( such as <unk> ) are well known . The skulls of diplodocids were very small compared with the size of these animals . Diplodocus had small , ' peg ' -like teeth that pointed forward and were only present in the anterior sections of the jaws . Its braincase was small . The neck was composed of at least 15 vertebrae and may have been held parallel to the ground and unable to be elevated much past horizontal . 
 The discovery of partial diplodocid skin impressions in 1990 showed that some species had narrow , pointed keratinous spines , much like those on an iguana and up to 18 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) long , on the " whiplash " portion of their tails , and possibly along the back and neck as well , as in hadrosaurids . The spines have been incorporated into many recent reconstructions of Diplodocus , notably Walking with Dinosaurs . However , the original description of the spines noted that the specimens in the Howe Quarry near Shell , Wyoming were associated with skeletal remains of an undescribed diplodocids " resembling Diplodocus and Barosaurus . " Specimens from this quarry have since been referred to <unk> <unk> and Barosaurus sp . , rather than Diplodocus . 
 = = Discovery and species = = 
 Several species of Diplodocus were described between 1878 and 1924 . The first skeleton was found at Cañon City , Colorado , by Benjamin Mudge and Samuel Wendell Williston in 1877 , and was named Diplodocus longus ( ' long double @-@ beam ' ) , by paleontologist Othniel Charles Marsh in 1878 . Although not the type species , D. carnegii is the most completely known and most famous species due to the large number of casts of its skeleton in museums around the world . Diplodocus remains have since been found in the Morrison Formation of the western U.S. States of Colorado , Utah , Montana , and Wyoming . Fossils of this animal are common , except for the skull , which has never been found with otherwise complete skeletons . D. <unk> , known from a partial skeleton and skull discovered by William H. Utterback in 1902 near Sheridan , Wyoming , was described in 1924 . In 2015 , it was renamed as the separate genus <unk> , and several other Diplodocus specimens were referred to that genus , leaving no definite Diplodocus skulls known . 
 The two Morrison Formation sauropod genera Diplodocus and Barosaurus had very similar limb bones . In the past , many isolated limb bones were automatically attributed to Diplodocus , but may , in fact , have belonged to Barosaurus . Fossil remains of Diplodocus have been recovered from stratigraphic zone 5 of the Morrison Formation . 
 = = = Valid species = = = 
 D. carnegii ( also spelled D. carnegiei ) , named after Andrew Carnegie , is the best known , mainly due to a near @-@ complete skeleton ( specimen CM 84 ) collected by Jacob Wortman , of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania and described and named by John Bell Hatcher in 1901 . This was reconsidered as type @-@ species for Diplodocus . 
 D. hallorum , first described in 1991 by Gillette as Seismosaurus <unk> from a partial skeleton comprising vertebrae , pelvis and ribs , specimen <unk> P @-@ <unk> , was found in 1979 . As the specific name honours two people , Jim and Ruth Hall , George Olshevsky later suggested to emend the name as S. hallorum , using the mandatory genitive plural ; Gillette then emended the name , which usage has been followed by others , including Carpenter ( 2006 ) . In 2004 , a presentation at the annual conference of the Geological Society of America made a case for Seismosaurus being a junior synonym of Diplodocus . This was followed by a much more detailed publication in 2006 , which not only renamed the species Diplodocus hallorum , but also speculated that it could prove to be the same as D. longus . The position that D. hallorum should be regarded as a specimen of D. longus was also taken by the authors of a redescription of Supersaurus , refuting a previous hypothesis that Seismosaurus and Supersaurus were the same . However , a 2015 analysis of diplodocid relationships noted that these opinions are based on the more complete referred specimens of D. longus . The authors of this analysis concluded that those specimens were indeed the same species as D. hallorum , but that D. longus itself was a nomen dubium . 
 = = = Nomina dubia ( doubtful species ) = = = 
 D. longus , the original type species , is known from two complete and several fragmentary caudal vertebrae from the Morrison Formation ( Felch Quarry ) of Colorado . Though several more complete specimens have been attributed to D. longus , detailed analysis has suggested that the original fossil lacks the necessary features to allow comparison with other specimens . For this reason , it has been considered a nomen dubium , which is not an ideal situation for the type species of a well @-@ known genus like Diplodocus . A petition to the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature is currently being considered which proposes to make D. carnegii the new type species . 
 D. <unk> ( " of the lake " ) is a nomen dubium , named by Marsh in 1884 based on specimen YPM 1922 found by Arthur Lakes , consisting of the snout and upper jaw of a smaller animal from Morrison , Colorado . These remains are now believed to have been from an immature animal , rather than from a separate species . In 2015 , it was concluded that the specimen actually belonged to Camarasaurus . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Diplodocus is both the type genus of , and gives its name to , the Diplodocidae , the family to which it belongs . Members of this family , while still massive , are of a markedly more slender build than other sauropods , such as the titanosaurs and <unk> . All are characterised by long necks and tails and a horizontal posture , with fore limbs shorter than hind limbs . <unk> flourished in the Late Jurassic of North America and possibly Africa . 
 A subfamily , the Diplodocinae , was erected to include Diplodocus and its closest relatives , including Barosaurus . More distantly related is the contemporaneous Apatosaurus , which is still considered a diplodocid , although not a diplodocine , as it is a member of the subfamily Apatosaurinae . The Portuguese Dinheirosaurus and the African Tornieria have also been identified as close relatives of Diplodocus by some authors . The Diplodocoidea comprise the diplodocids , as well as dicraeosaurids , <unk> , Suuwassea , Amphicoelias and possibly Haplocanthosaurus , and / or the <unk> . This clade is the sister group to Macronaria ( <unk> , <unk> and titanosaurians ) . 
 Cladogram of the Diplodocidae after Tschopp , Mateus , and Benson ( 2015 ) below : 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 Due to a wealth of skeletal remains , Diplodocus is one of the best @-@ studied dinosaurs . Many aspects of its lifestyle have been subjects of various theories over the years . Comparisons between the scleral rings of diplodocines and modern birds and reptiles suggest that they may have been cathemeral , active throughout the day at short intervals . 
 Marsh and then Hatcher assumed that the animal was aquatic , because of the position of its nasal openings at the apex of the cranium . Similar aquatic behavior was commonly depicted for other large sauropods , such as Brachiosaurus and Apatosaurus . However , a 1951 study by Kenneth A. <unk> indicates that sauropods probably could not have breathed through their nostrils when the rest of the body was submerged , as the water pressure on the chest wall would be too great . Since the 1970s , general consensus has the sauropods as firmly terrestrial animals , browsing on trees , ferns , and bushes . 
 Scientists have debated as to how sauropods were able to breathe with their large body sizes and long necks , which would have increased the amount of dead space . They likely had an avian respiratory system , which is more efficient than a mammalian and reptilian system . Reconstructions of the neck and thorax of Diplodocus show great pneumaticity , which could have played a role in respiration as it does in birds . 
 = = = Posture = = = 
 The depiction of Diplodocus posture has changed considerably over the years . For instance , a classic 1910 reconstruction by Oliver P. Hay depicts two Diplodocus with splayed lizard @-@ like limbs on the banks of a river . Hay argued that Diplodocus had a sprawling , lizard @-@ like gait with widely splayed legs , and was supported by Gustav <unk> . However , this hypothesis was contested by William Jacob Holland , who demonstrated that a sprawling Diplodocus would have needed a trench through which to pull its belly . Finds of sauropod footprints in the 1930s eventually put Hay 's theory to rest . 
 Later , diplodocids were often portrayed with their necks held high up in the air , allowing them to graze from tall trees . Studies using computer models have shown that neutral posture of the neck was horizontal , rather than vertical , and scientists such as Kent Stephens have used this to argue that sauropods including Diplodocus did not raise their heads much above shoulder level . A nuchal ligament may have held the neck in this position . However , a 2009 study found that all tetrapods appear to hold their necks at the maximum possible vertical extension when in a normal , alert posture , and argued that the same would hold true for sauropods barring any unknown , unique characteristics that set the soft tissue anatomy of their necks apart from other animals . One of the sauropod models in this study was Diplodocus , which they found would have held its neck at about a 45 ° angle with the head pointed downwards in a resting posture . 
 As with the related genus Barosaurus , the very long neck of Diplodocus is the source of much controversy among scientists . A 1992 Columbia University study of diplodocid neck structure indicated that the longest necks would have required a 1 @.@ 6 @-@ ton heart — a tenth of the animal 's body weight . The study proposed that animals like these would have had rudimentary auxiliary ' hearts ' in their necks , whose only purpose was to pump blood up to the next ' heart ' . Some argue that the near @-@ horizontal posture of the head and neck would have eliminated the problem of supplying blood to the brain , as it would not be elevated . 
 = = = Diet and feeding = = = 
 <unk> have highly unusual teeth compared to other sauropods . The crowns are long and slender , and elliptical in cross @-@ section , while the apex forms a blunt , triangular point . The most prominent wear facet is on the apex , though unlike all other wear patterns observed within sauropods , diplodocine wear patterns are on the labial ( cheek ) side of both the upper and lower teeth . What this means is that Diplodocus and other diplodocids had a radically different feeding mechanism than other sauropods . Unilateral branch stripping is the most likely feeding behavior of Diplodocus , as it explains the unusual wear patterns of the teeth ( coming from tooth – food contact ) . In unilateral branch stripping , one tooth row would have been used to strip foliage from the stem , while the other would act as a guide and stabilizer . With the elongated preorbital ( in front of the eyes ) region of the skull , longer portions of stems could be stripped in a single action . Also , the <unk> ( backwards ) motion of the lower jaws could have contributed two significant roles to feeding behaviour : 1 ) an increased gape , and 2 ) allowed fine adjustments of the relative positions of the tooth rows , creating a smooth stripping action . 
 Young et al . ( 2012 ) used biomechanical modelling to examine the performance of the diplodocine skull . It was concluded that the proposal that its dentition was used for bark @-@ stripping was not supported by the data , which showed that under that scenario , the skull and teeth would undergo extreme stresses . However , the hypotheses of branch @-@ stripping and / or precision biting were both shown to be <unk> plausible feeding behaviors . <unk> teeth were also continually replaced throughout their lives , usually in less than 35 days , as was discovered by Michael D <unk> et al . Within each tooth socket , as many as five replacement teeth were developing to replace the next one . Studies of the teeth also reveal that it preferred different vegetation from the other sauropods of the Morrison , such as Camarasaurus . This may have better allowed the various species of sauropods to exist without competition . 
 With a laterally and dorsoventrally flexible neck , and the possibility of using its tail and rearing up on its hind limbs ( tripodal ability ) , Diplodocus would have had the ability to browse at many levels ( low , medium , and high ) , up to around 10 m ( 33 ft ) from the ground . The neck 's range of movement would have also allowed the head to graze below the level of the body , leading some scientists to speculate on whether Diplodocus grazed on submerged water plants , from riverbanks . This concept of the feeding posture is supported by the relative lengths of front and hind limbs . Furthermore , its peg @-@ like teeth may have been used for eating soft water plants . However , Matthew Cobley et al . ( 2013 ) dispute this finding that large muscles and cartilage would have limited neck movements . They state that the feeding ranges for sauropods like Diplodocus were smaller than previously believed and the animals may have had to move their whole bodies around to better access areas where they could browse vegetation . As such , they might have spent more time foraging to meet their minimum energy needs . The conclusions of Cobley et al. were disputed in 2013 and 2014 by Mike Taylor , who analysed the amount and positioning of intervertebral cartilage to determine the flexibility of the neck of Diplodocus and Apatosaurus . Taylor found that the neck of Diplodocus was very flexible , and that Cobley et al. were incorrect in that flexibility as implied by bones is less than in reality . 
 In 2010 , Whitlock et al. described a juvenile skull at the time referred to Diplodocus ( CM <unk> ) that differed greatly from adult skulls of the same genus : its snout was not blunt , and the teeth were not confined to the front of the snout . These differences suggest that adults and juveniles were feeding differently . Such an ecological difference between adults and juveniles had not been previously observed in sauropodomorphs . 
 = = = Reproduction and growth = = = 
 While the long neck has traditionally been interpreted as a feeding adaptation , it was also suggested that the oversized neck of Diplodocus and its relatives may have been primarily a sexual display , with any other feeding benefits coming second . However , a 2011 study refuted this idea in detail . 
 While no evidence indicates Diplodocus nesting habits , other sauropods , such as the titanosaurian Saltasaurus , have been associated with nesting sites . The titanosaurian nesting sites indicate that they may have laid their eggs communally over a large area in many shallow pits , each covered with vegetation . Diplodocus may have done the same . The documentary Walking with Dinosaurs portrayed a mother Diplodocus using an ovipositor to lay eggs , but it was pure speculation on the part of the documentary author . For Diplodocus and other sauropods , the size of clutches and individual eggs were surprisingly small for such large animals . This appears to have been an adaptation to predation pressures , as large eggs would require greater incubation time and thus would be at greater risk . 
 Based on a number of bone histology studies , Diplodocus , along with other sauropods , grew at a very fast rate , reaching sexual maturity at just over a decade , and continued to grow throughout their lives . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 The Morrison Formation is a sequence of shallow marine and alluvial sediments which , according to radiometric dating , ranges between 156 @.@ 3 million years old ( Ma ) at its base , and 146 @.@ 8 million years old at the top , which places it in the late Oxfordian , Kimmeridgian , and early Tithonian stages of the Late Jurassic period . This formation is interpreted as a semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons . The Morrison Basin where dinosaurs lived , stretched from New Mexico to Alberta and Saskatchewan , and was formed when the precursors to the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains started pushing up to the west . The deposits from their east @-@ facing drainage basins were carried by streams and rivers and deposited in swampy lowlands , lakes , river channels , and floodplains . This formation is similar in age to the <unk> Formation in Portugal and the Tendaguru Formation in Tanzania . In 1877 , this formation became the center of the Bone Wars , a fossil @-@ collecting rivalry between early paleontologists Othniel Charles Marsh and Edward Drinker Cope . 
 The Morrison Formation records an environment and time dominated by gigantic sauropod dinosaurs . Dinosaurs known from the Morrison include the theropods Ceratosaurus , <unk> , Stokesosaurus , Ornitholestes , Allosaurus and Torvosaurus , the sauropods Apatosaurus , Brachiosaurus , Camarasaurus , and Diplodocus , and the ornithischians Camptosaurus , Dryosaurus , Othnielia , <unk> and Stegosaurus . Apatosaurus is commonly found at the same sites as Allosaurus , Camarasaurus , Diplodocus , and Stegosaurus . Allosaurus , which accounting for 70 to 75 % of theropod specimens and was at the top trophic level of the Morrison food web . Many of the dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation are the same genera as those seen in Portuguese rocks of the <unk> Formation ( mainly Allosaurus , Ceratosaurus , Torvosaurus , and Stegosaurus ) , or have a close counterpart ( Brachiosaurus and Lusotitan , Camptosaurus and Draconyx ) . Other vertebrates that shared this paleoenvironment included ray @-@ finned fishes , frogs , salamanders , turtles like <unk> , sphenodonts , lizards , terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphans such as <unk> , and several species of pterosaur like <unk> and <unk> . Shells of bivalves and aquatic snails are also common . The flora of the period has been revealed by fossils of green algae , fungi , mosses , horsetails , cycads , ginkgoes , and several families of conifers . Vegetation varied from river @-@ lining forests of tree ferns , and ferns ( gallery forests ) , to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the Araucaria @-@ like conifer Brachyphyllum . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Diplodocus has been a famous and much @-@ depicted dinosaur as it has been on display in more places than any other sauropod dinosaur . Much of this has probably been due to its wealth of skeletal remains and former status as the longest dinosaur . However , the donation of many mounted skeletal casts by industrialist Andrew Carnegie to potentates around the world at the beginning of the 20th century did much to familiarize it to people worldwide . Casts of Diplodocus skeletons are still displayed in many museums worldwide , including D. carnegii in a number of institutions . 
 This includes donations by Carnegie or his trust to : 
 The Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh ( original , unveiled in 1907 ) 
 The Natural History Museum in London ( replica , unveiled on 12 May 1905 ) 
 The Museum für Naturkunde in Berlin , Germany ( replica , unveiled in early May , 1908 ) 
 The National Natural History Museum in Paris , France ( replica , unveiled on 15 June 1908 ) 
 The Natural History Museum in Vienna , Austria ( replica , unveiled in 1909 ) 
 The Museum for Paleontology and Geology in Bologna , Italy ( replica , unveiled in 1909 ) : Skulls from this cast ( i.e. , ' second @-@ generation ' ) are on display in museums in Milan and Naples . 
 The Zoological Museum of the Russian Academy of Sciences in St. Petersburg , Russia ( replica , unveiled in 1910 ) 
 The Museo de la Plata in La Plata near Buenos Aires , Argentina ( replica , unveiled in 1912 ) 
 The National Natural History Museum in Madrid , Spain ( replica , unveiled in November 1913 ) 
 The Museo de <unk> in Mexico City ( replica , unveiled in 1930 ) 
 The Paleontological Museum in Munich , Germany ( replica , donated in 1932 and still unmounted ) 
 This project , along with its association with ' big science ' , <unk> , and capitalism , drew much public attention in Europe . The German satirical weekly <unk> devoted a poem to the dinosaur : 
 ... Auch ein viel <unk> Herr noch <unk> 
 Den <unk> <unk> Er ist <unk> Diplodocus ‚ und <unk> zu den <unk> Herr Carnegie <unk> ihn froh In <unk> <unk> Und <unk> als <unk> ihn so 
 An <unk> <unk> ... 
 ( Translation : ... But even a much older gent • Sees itself forced to wander • Goes by the name Diplodocus • And belongs among the fossils • Mr. Carnegie packs him joyfully • In giant arcs • And sends him as gift this way • To multiple monarchs ... ) " Le <unk> " became a generic term for sauropods in French , much as " <unk> " is in English . 
 D. longus is displayed the Senckenberg Museum in Frankfurt ( a skeleton made up of several specimens , donated in 1907 by the American Museum of Natural History ) , Germany . A mounted and more complete skeleton of D. longus is at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History in Washington , DC , while a mounted skeleton of D. hallorum ( formerly Seismosaurus ) , which may be the same as D. longus , can be found at the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science . 
 Dance musician Diplo derived his name from the dinosaur . 
 Diplodocus has been a frequent subject in dinosaur films , both factual and fictional . It was featured in the second episode of the award @-@ winning BBC television series Walking with Dinosaurs . The episode " Time of the Titans " follows the life of a simulated Diplodocus 152 million years ago . In literature , James A. Michener 's book Centennial has a chapter devoted to Diplodocus , narrating the life and death of one individual . 
 = INS Kursura ( <unk> ) = 
 INS Kursura ( <unk> ) was a <unk> @-@ class diesel @-@ electric submarine of the Indian Navy . She was India 's fourth submarine . Kursura was commissioned on 18 December 1969 and was decommissioned on 27 February 2001 after 31 years of service . She participated in the Indo @-@ Pakistani War of 1971 , where she played a key role in patrol missions . She later participated in naval exercises with other nations and made many goodwill visits to other countries . 
 After decommissioning , she was preserved as a museum for public access on Ramakrishna Mission Beach in Visakhapatnam . Kursura has the distinction of being one of the very few submarine museums to retain originality and has been called a " must @-@ visit destination " of Visakhapatnam . Despite being a decommissioned submarine , she still receives the navy 's " Dressing Ship " honour , which is usually awarded only to active ships . 
 = = Description = = 
 Kursura has a length of 91 @.@ 3 m ( 300 ft ) overall , a beam of 7 @.@ 5 m ( 25 ft ) and a draught of 6 m ( 20 ft ) . She displaces 1 @,@ 950 t ( 1 @,@ 919 long tons ) surfaced , 2 @,@ 475 t ( 2 @,@ 436 long tons ) submerged and has a maximum diving depth of 985 ft ( 300 m ) . The complement is about 75 , including 8 officers and 67 sailors . 
 The submarine has three shafts , each with a six @-@ blade propeller . She is powered by three Kolomna <unk> diesel engines , each with 2 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 1 @,@ 500 kW ) . She also has three electric motors , two of them with 1 @,@ 350 hp ( 1 @,@ 010 kW ) and one with 2 @,@ 700 hp ( 2 @,@ 000 kW ) . She can achieve a maximum speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ) when on surface , 15 knots ( 28 km / h ) when submerged and 9 knots ( 17 km / h ) while snorkelling . She has a range of 20 @,@ 000 mi ( 32 @,@ 000 km ) at 8 kn ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) when surfaced and 380 mi ( 610 km ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) when submerged . There are 10 torpedo tubes to carry 22 Type 53 torpedoes . She could lay 44 mines instead of torpedoes . She also had a snoop tray and I @-@ Band radar for surface search . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Kursura was commissioned on 18 December 1969 at Riga , Soviet Union . She was India 's fourth submarine . Kursura 's first commander was Commander A <unk> . She began her maiden voyage to India on 20 February 1970 . During her homecoming voyage , which lasted from February to April 1970 , she visited Göteborg , La Corunna , Takoradi and Mauritius . Kursura , along with sister boat INS Karanj , were made operational under the Indian Navy 's Western Naval Command , and reported to the Flag officer Commanding @-@ in @-@ Chief Western Naval Command ( <unk> ) . They were ordered to patrol approaches to Pakistan 's Karachi harbour and Makran Coast , for which they established waiting stations and submarine havens . 
 In 1970 , Karanj was badly damaged after a collision with the destroyer Ranjit when she surfaced directly below the ship . As no drawings of the damaged portions of the boat were available with the Bombay Dockyard or the Indian Navy , it was decided to use Kursura , which was already docked at Bombay , as the design template for the metal work , and Karanj was repaired within months , in time to join the Indo @-@ Pakistani War of 1971 . 
 = = = Indo @-@ Pakistan War of 1971 = = = 
 During the Indo @-@ Pakistani War of 1971 , Kursura operated in the Arabian Sea . She was given the patrol duties at two designated areas before the war started , but was ordered to operate under two restrictions : she was not to cross demarcated shipping corridors and she could attack a target only after positive identification . The aims of her patrol were to sink any Pakistani naval warships , to sink merchant shipping when specifically ordered , and to conduct general patrol and surveillance . 
 She started from her home port on 13 November 1971 and reached her patrol location by 18 November . She remained there until 25 November when she was shifted to a new patrol location and remained there until 30 November . On 30 November , she rendezvoused with Karanj at sea to transfer instructions and subsequently then left for Bombay and reached there by 4 December 1971 . During her patrols , she encountered fair weather and monitored a number of tankers and commercial aircraft flying on international routes . She was originally intended to lay mines but the plan was later cancelled . 
 = = = Later service = = = 
 Kursura was used for test firing the <unk> 58 torpedo in 1975 . She was laid off for many years to be cannibalised for spare parts for other submarines , but underwent a refit in the Soviet Union between September 1980 and April 1982 , and was made operational again in 1985 . 
 Along with INS <unk> , she participated in the first anti @-@ submarine warfare ( ASW ) training exercise with the RSS Victory of Singapore off the coast of Port Blair between 21 – 24 February 1994 . She participated in the second ASW exercise with Singapore along with INS <unk> , RSS Valour and RSS Vigilance . She visited Singapore and Jakarta , Indonesia , in December 1994 on a good @-@ will visit . 
 After a service of 31 years and traversing 73 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 136 @,@ 100 km ; 84 @,@ 600 mi ) , she was decommissioned on 27 February 2001 . Despite being a decommissioned submarine , she still receives the navy 's " Dressing Ship " honour , which is usually only awarded to active ships . 
 = = Museum ship ( 2002 – present ) = = 
 After decommissioning , the ship was towed to Ramakrishna Mission Beach in Visakhapatnam and was established as a museum ship , which is the first submarine museum in South Asia . The idea of the boat 's conversion to a museum is credited to Admiral V <unk> . Towing the submarine 600 metres to its final location took 18 months and cost ₹ 55 million . It was inaugurated by the chief minister of Andhra Pradesh Chandrababu Naidu on 9 August 2002 , and it was open to the public from 24 August 2002 . Six retired naval personnel serve as guides and another one as the curator . 
 Kursura has the distinction of being one of the very few submarine museums to retain originality . She has become a famous tourist attraction of the city and has been called a " must @-@ visit destination " of Visakhapatnam by The Hindu . Out of the ₹ 10 million revenue generated every year by the museum , ₹ 8 million is used for the submarine 's maintenance . During the first four months of the museum 's operation , it was visited by about 93 @,@ 000 people . Daily visitors usually range between 500 and 600 and shoot up to 1 @,@ 500 during the tourist season . 
 In September 2007 , Vice Admiral Carol M. <unk> of the United States Navy visited the submarine when she wrote in the guestbook " What a fantastic experience . The Indian Navy should be very proud of this awesome display " . She said that the submarine was very well preserved and they did not have anything similar to it in the United States . A major overhaul was done in December 2007 to repair her hull 's corrosion . New steel plates were arranged at a cost of ₹ 1 @.@ 5 million . As of August 2008 , about 1 @.@ 5 million people had visited the museum , and in 2010 , she was visited by 270 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Pigeon photography = 
 Pigeon photography is an aerial photography technique invented in 1907 by the German apothecary Julius Neubronner , who also used pigeons to deliver medications . A homing pigeon was fitted with an aluminium breast harness to which a lightweight time @-@ delayed miniature camera could be attached . Neubronner 's German patent application was initially rejected , but was granted in December 1908 after he produced authenticated photographs taken by his pigeons . He publicized the technique at the 1909 Dresden International Photographic Exhibition , and sold some images as postcards at the Frankfurt International Aviation Exhibition and at the 1910 and 1911 Paris Air Shows . 
 Initially , the military potential of pigeon photography for aerial reconnaissance appeared attractive . Battlefield tests in the First World War provided encouraging results , but the ancillary technology of mobile <unk> for messenger pigeons had the greatest impact . Owing to the rapid perfection of aviation during the war , military interest in pigeon photography faded and Neubronner abandoned his experiments . The idea was briefly resurrected in the 1930s by a Swiss clockmaker , and reportedly also by the German and French militaries . Although war pigeons were deployed extensively during the Second World War , it is unclear to what extent , if any , birds were involved in aerial reconnaissance . The United States Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) later developed a battery @-@ powered camera designed for espionage pigeon photography ; details of its use remain classified . 
 The construction of sufficiently small and light cameras with a timer mechanism , and the training and handling of the birds to carry the necessary loads , presented major challenges , as did the limited control over the pigeons ' position , orientation and speed when the photographs were being taken . In 2004 , the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) used miniature television cameras attached to falcons and goshawks to obtain live footage , and today some researchers , enthusiasts and artists similarly deploy <unk> with various species of animals . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The first aerial photographs were taken in 1858 by the balloonist Nadar ; in 1860 James Wallace Black took the oldest surviving aerial photographs , also from a balloon . As photographic techniques made further progress , at the end of the 19th century some pioneers placed cameras in unmanned flying objects . In the 1880s , Arthur <unk> experimented with kite aerial photography . Many others followed him , and high @-@ quality photographs of Boston taken with this method by William Abner Eddy in 1896 became famous . <unk> <unk> equipped a rocket with a camera and a parachute in 1888 , and Alfred Nobel also used rocket photography in 1897 . 
 Homing pigeons were used extensively in the 19th and early 20th centuries , both for civil pigeon post and as war pigeons . In the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 , the famous pigeon post of Paris carried up to 50 @,@ 000 microfilmed telegrams per pigeon flight from Tours into the besieged capital . Altogether 150 @,@ 000 individual private telegrams and state dispatches were delivered . In an 1889 experiment of the Imperial Russian Technical Society at Saint Petersburg , the chief of the Russian balloon corps took aerial photographs from a balloon and sent the developed collodion film negatives to the ground by pigeon post . 
 = = Julius Neubronner = = 
 In 1903 Julius Neubronner , an apothecary in the German town of Kronberg near Frankfurt , resumed a practice begun by his father half a century earlier and received prescriptions from a sanatorium in nearby Falkenstein via pigeon post . ( The pigeon post was discontinued after three years when the sanatorium was closed . ) He delivered urgent medications up to 75 grams ( 2 @.@ 6 oz ) by the same method , and positioned some of his pigeons with his wholesaler in Frankfurt to profit from faster deliveries himself . When one of his pigeons lost its orientation in fog and mysteriously arrived , well @-@ fed , four weeks late , Neubronner was inspired with the playful idea of equipping his pigeons with automatic cameras to trace their paths . This thought led him to merge his two hobbies into a new " double sport " combining carrier pigeon fancying with amateur photography . ( Neubronner later learned that his pigeon had been in the custody of a restaurant chef in Wiesbaden . ) 
 After successfully testing a <unk> watch camera on a train and whilst riding a sled , Neubronner began the development of a light miniature camera that could be fitted to a pigeon 's breast by means of a harness and an aluminum cuirass . Using wooden camera models which weighed 30 to 75 grams ( 1 @.@ 1 to 2 @.@ 6 oz ) , the pigeons were carefully trained for their load . To take an aerial photograph , Neubronner carried a pigeon to a location up to about 100 kilometres ( 60 mi ) from its home , where it was equipped with a camera and released . The bird , keen to be relieved of its burden , would typically fly home on a direct route , at a height of 50 to 100 metres ( 160 to 330 ft ) . A pneumatic system in the camera controlled the time delay before a photograph was taken . To accommodate the burdened pigeon , the dovecote had a spacious , elastic landing board and a large entry hole . 
 According to Neubronner , there were a dozen different models of his camera . In 1907 he had sufficient success to apply for a patent . Initially his invention " Method of and Means for Taking Photographs of Landscapes from Above " was rejected by the German patent office as impossible , but after presentation of authenticated photographs the patent was granted in December 1908 . ( The rejection was based on a misconception about the carrying capacity of domestic pigeons . ) The technology became widely known through Neubronner 's participation in the 1909 International Photographic Exhibition in Dresden and the 1909 International Aviation Exhibition in Frankfurt . Spectators in Dresden could watch the arrival of the pigeons , and the aerial photographs they brought back were turned into postcards . Neubronner 's photographs won prizes in Dresden as well as at the 1910 and 1911 Paris Air Shows . 
 A photograph of <unk> Kronberg ( then called Schloss Friedrichshof after its owner Kaiserin Friedrich ) became famous due to its accidental inclusion of the photographer 's wing tips . In a breach of copyright it was shown in German cinemas as part of the weekly newsreel in 1929 . 
 In a short book published in 1909 Neubronner described five camera models : 
 The " double camera " described in the patent had two lenses pointing in opposite directions ( forward / backward ) , each with a focal length of 40 mm . Operated by a single focal @-@ plane shutter , the camera could take two simultaneous glass plate exposures at a time determined by the pneumatic system . 
 A stereoscopic camera had similar characteristics , but both lenses pointed in the same direction . 
 One model was capable of transporting film and taking several exposures in a row . 
 One model had its lens fixed to a bag bellows . A scissor mechanism held the bellows in its expanded state until the photo was taken , but condensed it immediately afterwards . This allowed one exposure of size 6 cm × 9 cm on a photographic plate , at a focal length of 85 mm . 
 In a panoramic camera , the focal @-@ plane shutter was replaced by a rotation of 180 ° of the lens itself . This model was the basis for the Doppel @-@ Sport Panoramic Camera , which Neubronner tried to market around 1910 . It captured a panoramic view on 3 cm × 8 cm film . It never went into serial production , though . 
 In a 1920 pamphlet , Neubronner described his last model as weighing slightly more than 40 grams ( 1 @.@ 4 oz ) and being capable of taking 12 exposures . In 2007 , a researcher remarked that only little technical information is available about lenses , shutters and the speed of the photographic media , but reported that Neubronner obtained the film for his panoramic camera from <unk> . For this camera he estimated a film speed of ISO 25 / 15 ° – 40 / 17 ° and a shutter speed of 1 / 60 s – 1 / 100 s . The film was cut to the format 30 mm × 60 mm and bent into a concave shape to prevent unnecessary distortion due to the half @-@ circle movement of the lens . 
 In 1920 Neubronner found that ten years of hard work and considerable expenses had been rewarded only with his inclusion in encyclopedias and the satisfaction that an ancillary technology , the mobile dovecote ( described below ) , had proved its worth in the war . Neubronner 's panoramic camera is displayed at the German Museum of Technology in Berlin and the Deutsches Museum in Munich . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Neubronner 's invention was at least partially motivated by the prospect of military applications . At the time photographic aerial reconnaissance was possible but cumbersome , as it involved balloons , kites or rockets . The Wright brothers ' successful flight in 1903 presented new possibilities , and surveillance aircraft were introduced and perfected during the First World War . But pigeon @-@ based photography , despite its practical difficulties , promised to deliver complementary , detailed photographs taken from a lower height . 
 The Prussian War Ministry was interested , but some initial skepticism could only be overcome through a series of successful demonstrations . The pigeons proved relatively indifferent to explosions , but during battle a dovecote may need to be moved , and pigeons can take some time to orient to their new position . The problem of making carrier pigeons accept a displaced dovecote with only a minimum of retraining had been tackled with some success by the Italian army around 1880 ; the French artillery captain Reynaud solved it by raising the pigeons in an itinerant dovecote . There is no indication that Neubronner was aware of this work , but he knew there must be a solution as he had heard of an itinerant fairground worker who was also a pigeon fancier with a dovecote in his trailer . At the 1909 exhibitions in Dresden and Frankfurt he presented a small carriage that combined a darkroom with a mobile dovecote in flashy colors . In months of laborious work he trained young pigeons to return to the dovecote even after it was displaced . 
 In 1912 Neubronner completed his task ( set in 1909 ) of photographing the waterworks at Tegel using only his mobile dovecote . Almost 10 years of negotiations were scheduled to end in August 1914 with a practical test at a maneuver in Strasbourg , followed by the state 's acquisition of the invention . These plans were thwarted by the outbreak of the war . Neubronner had to provide all his pigeons and equipment to the military , which tested them in the battlefield with satisfactory results , but did not employ the technique more widely . 
 Instead , under the novel conditions of attrition warfare , war pigeons in their traditional role as pigeon post saw a renaissance . Neubronner 's mobile dovecote found its way to the Battle of Verdun , where it proved so advantageous that similar facilities were used on a larger scale in the Battle of the Somme . After the war , the War Ministry responded to Neubronner 's inquiry to the effect that the use of pigeons in aerial photography had no military value and further experiments were not justified . 
 The International Spy Museum in Washington D.C. has a small room dedicated to carrier pigeons and pigeon photography in the First World War . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Despite the War Ministry 's position immediately after the First World War , in 1932 it was reported that the German army was training pigeons for photography , and that the German pigeon cameras were capable of 200 exposures per flight . In the same year , the French claimed that they had developed film cameras for pigeons as well as a method for having the birds released behind enemy lines by trained dogs . 
 Although war pigeons and mobile <unk> were used extensively during the Second World War , it is unclear to what extent , if any , they were employed for aerial photography . According to a report in 1942 , the Soviet army discovered abandoned German trucks with pigeon cameras that could take photos in five @-@ minute intervals , as well as dogs trained to carry pigeons in baskets . On the allied side , as late as 1943 it was reported that the American Signal Corps was aware of the possibility of adopting the technique . 
 It is certain , however , that during the Second World War pigeon photography was introduced into German nurseries in toy form . From around 1935 the toy figures produced under the brand <unk> , some of which show motifs from before 1918 with updated uniforms , began to include a signal corps soldier with a pigeon transport dog . The figurine represents a soldier in the act of releasing a pigeon that carries an oversized pigeon camera . 
 Thanks to research conducted by the Musée suisse de l <unk> <unk> at Vevey , much more is known about the pigeon cameras developed at about the same time by the Swiss clockmaker Christian Adrian Michel ( 1912 – 1980 ) in Walde . He was assigned to the Swiss Army 's carrier pigeons service in 1931 , and in 1933 he began work on adapting Neubronner 's panoramic camera to 16 mm film , and improving it with a mechanism to control the delay before the first exposure and to transport the film between exposures . Michel 's camera , patented in 1937 , weighed only 70 grams ( 2 @.@ 5 oz ) , and may have been one of the first to have a timer operated by clockwork . 
 Michel 's plan to sell his camera to the Swiss Army failed , as he was unable to find a manufacturer to produce it in quantity ; only about 100 of his cameras were constructed . After the outbreak of the Second World War Michel patented a shell and harness for the transport of items such as film rolls by carrier pigeon . Between 2002 and 2007 three of his cameras were auctioned by Christie 's in London . 
 The Musée suisse de l <unk> <unk> at Vevey holds around 1 @,@ 000 photographs taken for test purposes during the development of Michel 's camera . Most of the photos were taken with 16 mm <unk> <unk> film with a speed of ISO 8 / 10 ° . The exposed format was 10 mm × 34 mm . The quality was sufficient for a tenfold magnification . In the catalog of the 2007 exhibition Des pigeons <unk> ? they are classified as test photos on the ground or from a window , human perspectives from the ground or from elevated points , aeroplane @-@ based aerial photographs , aerial photographs of relatively high altitude that were probably taken by pigeons released from a plane , and only a small number of typical pigeon photographs . 
 = = After the Second World War = = 
 The United States Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) developed a battery @-@ powered pigeon camera now on display in the CIA Museum 's virtual tour . According to the website , the details of the camera 's use are still classified . News reports suggest that the camera was used in the 1970s , that the pigeons were released from planes , and that it was a failure . In 1978 the Swiss magazine L <unk> printed an aerial photograph of a street in Basel , taken by a pigeon of <unk> de Vries @-@ Baumann equipped with a camera with a hydraulic mechanism . In 2002 – 03 the performance artist and pigeon fancier Amos <unk> experimented with pigeon photography using Advanced Photo System ( APS ) and digital cameras and turned the results into " <unk> " lecture performances in Portland , Oregon . In a 2008 film adaptation of Sleeping Beauty by the German director Arend <unk> , the prince invents pigeon photography and discovers Sleeping Beauty on a photo taken by a pigeon . 
 In the 1980s a small number of high @-@ quality replica Doppel @-@ Sport cameras were made by Rolf <unk> . One was acquired in 1999 by the Swiss Camera Museum in Vevey . 
 Modern technology allows extension of the principle to video cameras . In the 2004 BBC program Animal Camera , Steve Leonard presented spectacular films taken by miniature television cameras attached to eagles , falcons and goshawks , transmitted to a nearby receiver by microwaves . The cameras have a weight of 28 grams ( 1 oz ) . Miniature digital audio players with built @-@ in video cameras can also be attached to pigeons . In 2009 researchers made news when a peer @-@ reviewed article discussed the insights they gained by attaching cameras to albatrosses . The lipstick @-@ sized cameras took a photo every 30 seconds . Cameras have also been attached to other animals , such as cats and dogs . 
 = The History of the Fairchild Family = 
 The History of the Fairchild Family by Mary Martha Sherwood was a series of bestselling children 's books in nineteenth @-@ century Britain . The three volumes , published in 1818 , 1842 and 1847 , detail the lives of the Fairchild children . Part I , which was in print for over a century , focuses on Emily , Lucy and Henry 's realization of their " human depravity " ( original sin ) and their consequent need for redemption ; Parts II and III emphasize more worldly lessons such as etiquette and virtuous consumerism . 
 During the nineteenth century , The Fairchild Family was renowned for its realistic portrayal of childhood and its humor , but Sherwood 's book fell from favor as Britain became increasingly secularized and new fashions in children 's literature came to dominate the literary scene , represented by works such as Lewis Carroll 's Alice in Wonderland . In the twentieth century the books have most often been viewed as quintessential examples of the didactic style of children 's writing popular before Alice . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Sherwood published the first part of The Fairchild Family in 1818 with the firm of John Hatchard in Piccadilly , thereby assuring it " social distinction " . Hatchard was associated with the Clapham Sect of evangelicals , which included Hannah More , and his customers were wealthy businessmen , gentry , and Members of Parliament . The book was popular , remaining in print until 1913 . Urged by her readers , her printer and her own desire to capitalize on Part I 's success , Sherwood published Parts II and III in 1842 and 1847 , respectively . 
 = = Structure of the text = = 
 The Fairchild Family , Part I tells the story of a family striving towards godliness and consists of a series of lessons taught by the Fairchild parents to their three children ( Emily , Lucy and Henry ) regarding not only the proper orientation of their souls towards Heaven but also proper earthly morality ( envy , greed , lying , disobedience , and fighting , for example , are immoral ) . The text incorporates a series of tract @-@ like stories into an overarching narrative in order to illustrate these moral lessons . The stories of the deaths of two neighborhood children , Charles Trueman and Miss Augusta Noble , for instance , help the Fairchild children to understand how and why they need to prepare their own hearts for salvation . The faithful and " true " Charles has a transcendent deathbed experience ( much like Charles Dickens 's Little Nell in The Old Curiosity Shop ( 1840 – 1 ) ) , suggesting that he was saved ; by contrast , the heedless and disobedient Augusta , who plays with candles , burns up and is presumably damned . 
 Parts II and III have a similar structure ; an overarching narrative of the Fairchild family is interspersed with inset moral tales . Both are noticeably less evangelical than Part I. Part II begins with the recognition by the Fairchild parents that their children have " a new and divine nature , which works against your evil natures , causing you to know when you have done wrong , and making you truly and deeply sorrowful when you have committed a sin . " Emily , Lucy and Henry have finally learned to discipline their own souls . Parts II and III focus to a greater extent on good breeding , virtuous consumption and one 's duty to the poor than does Part I. One of the most important lessons that the children learn , for instance , is respect for their elders . Moreover , the gibbet to which the children had been taken to observe a rotting corpse and instructed regarding the spiritual perils of sibling rivalry in Part I , has disappeared in Part II ; Henry and his father walk by the spot where it used to stand and note its absence . 
 In all three books , thematically @-@ relevant prayers and hymns by the likes of Philip Doddridge , Isaac Watts , Charles Wesley , William Cowper and Ann and Jane Taylor follow each chapter . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Evangelicalism = = = 
 The theme that dominates The Fairchild Family , Part I is the evangelical need to recognize one 's innate " depravity " and prepare oneself for eternity . In this volume , the most important lessons in life are " faith , resignation , and implicit obedience to the will of God . " Sherwood articulates this theology in the very first pages of the book : 
 Mr. and Mrs. Fairchild loved and feared God , and had done so , by the mercy of God , ever since their younger days . They knew that their hearts were very bad , and that they could not be saved by any good thing they could do : on the contrary , that they were by nature fitted only for everlasting punishment : but they believed in the Lord Jesus Christ , and loved him for having died for them ; and they knew he would save them , because he saves all those who trust in him . 
 The book encourages its readers to adopt these beliefs not only through its stories but also through its prayers : 
 Hear , therefore , my prayer , O Lord , and send thy Holy Spirit to shew unto me the wickedness of my own heart ; that I may hate myself , and know , that , had I my deserts , I should now be living with the devil in hell . [ sic ] 
 But unlike previous allegorical literature with these themes , such as John Bunyan 's Pilgrim 's Progress ( 1678 ) , Sherwood domesticated her story — all of the actions in the children 's day @-@ to @-@ day lives are of supreme importance because they relate directly to their salvation . Emily , for example , succumbs to the temptation to eat some forbidden plums : “ no eye was looking at her , but the eye of God , who sees every thing we do , and knows even the secret thoughts of the heart ; but Emily , just at that moment , did not think of God . " 
 As Sherwood scholar M. Nancy Cutt argues , " the great overriding metaphor of all [ Sherwood 's ] work is the representation of divine order by the harmonious family relationship ( inevitably set in its own pastoral Eden ) . . . No writer made it clearer to her readers that the child who is dutiful within his family is blessed in the sight of God ; or stressed more firmly that family bonds are but the earthly and visible end of a spiritual bond running up to the very throne of God . " This is made clear in the Fairchild parents ' description of their own authority : 
 Whilst you are a little child , you must tell your sins to me ; and I will shew [ sic ] you the way by which only you may hope to overcome them : when you are bigger , and I and your papa are removed from you , then you must tell all your sins to God . 
 Children 's literature scholar Patricia Demers has referred to this connection between the family and the divine as the Romantic element in Sherwood 's writing , arguing that her " characters ’ zeal in finding and defining an earthly home prompts their almost automatic longing for a heavenly home . Sherwood 's is a consciously double vision , glimpsing the eternal in the natural , the sublime in the quotidian . " 
 All three parts of The Fairchild Family " taught the lessons of personal endurance , reliance on Providence , and acceptance of one 's earthly status . " Emphasizing individual experience and one 's personal relationship with God , they discouraged readers from attributing their successes or failures to " larger economic and political forces . " This is particularly true for the poor characters in the texts , such as the <unk> in the first volume and the beggar children , Jane and Edward , in the second volume . 
 = = = Victorianism = = = 
 Parts II and III reflect Sherwood 's changing values as well as those of the Victorian period . Significantly , the servants in Part I , " who are almost part of the family , are pushed aside in Part III by their gossiping , flattering counterparts in the fine manor @-@ house . " The second two volumes also outline narrower roles for each sex . In Part I Lucy and Emily learn to sew and keep house while Henry tends the garden and learns Latin , but in Part II , Henry 's scrapes involve letting loose a bull while the girls focus intently on how to make purchases in an economical yet fair fashion . The most extensive thematic change in the series , however , was the disappearance of its strident evangelicalism . Whereas all of the lessons in Part I highlight the children 's " human depravity " and encourage the reader to think in terms of the afterlife , in Parts II and III , other Victorian values such as " respectability " and filial obedience are brought to the fore . Children 's literature scholar Janis Dawson describes the difference in terms of parental indulgence ; in Parts II and III , the Fairchild parents employ softer disciplinary tactics than in Part I. 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The Fairchild Family continued to be a bestseller despite the increasingly popular <unk> image of childhood innocence and the sentimental picture of childhood presented in novels such as Charles Dickens 's Oliver Twist ( 1837 – 39 ) . One scholar has suggested that it " influenced Dickens 's depictions of Pip 's fears of the convict , the gibbet , and ' the horrible young man ' at the close of Chapter 1 " in Great Expectations ( 1860 – 61 ) . Children 's literature scholar Gillian Avery has argued that The Fairchild Family was " as much a part of English childhood as Alice was later to become . " As late as the 1900s , Lord Frederic Hamilton states that he attended a party at which each guest dressed up as a character from the book . Although the book was popular , some scraps of evidence have survived suggesting that readers did not always interpret it as Sherwood would have wanted . Lord Hamilton writes , for instance , that " there was plenty about eating and drinking ; one could always skip the prayers , and there were three or four very brightly written accounts of funerals in it . " 
 When the series was republished later in the century , the books were severely edited ; often Mr. Fairchild 's sermons were removed from Part I and the phrase " human depravity " was replaced with the word " naughtiness . " Many of the changes also served to further emphasize the authority of the parents : " as the religious framework was weakened or removed , the parent became the ultimate authority , and the Victorian cult of the family was reinforced in a way that Mrs. Sherwood had never intended . " 
 Although The Fairchild Family has gained a reputation in the twentieth century as an oppressively didactic book , in the early nineteenth century it was viewed as delightfully realistic . It was often described as humorous and Charlotte Yonge ( 1823 – 1901 ) , a critic who also wrote children 's literature , praised " the gusto with which [ Sherwood ] dwells on new dolls " and " the absolutely sensational naughtiness " of the children . Although twentieth @-@ century critics have tended to view the tale as harsh ( John Rowe Townsend described it as " unspeakably cruel " ) , often pointing to the <unk> ' visit to the gibbet , Cutt and others argue that the positive depiction of the nuclear family in the text , particularly Sherwood 's emphasis on parents ' responsibility to educate their own children , was an important part of the book 's appeal . She argues that Sherwood 's " influence , " via books such as the Fairchild Family , " upon the domestic pattern of Victorian life can hardly be overestimated . " 
 = Celestial spheres = 
 The celestial spheres , or celestial orbs , were the fundamental entities of the cosmological models developed by Plato , Eudoxus , Aristotle , Ptolemy , Copernicus and others . In these celestial models the apparent motions of the fixed stars and the planets are accounted for by treating them as embedded in rotating spheres made of an <unk> , transparent fifth element ( quintessence ) , like jewels set in orbs . Since it was believed that the fixed stars did not change their positions relative to one another , it was argued that they must be on the surface of a single starry sphere . 
 In modern thought , the orbits of the planets are viewed as the paths of those planets through mostly empty space . Ancient and medieval thinkers , however , considered the celestial orbs to be thick spheres of rarefied matter nested one within the other , each one in complete contact with the sphere above it and the sphere below . When scholars applied Ptolemy 's epicycles , they presumed that each planetary sphere was exactly thick enough to accommodate them . By combining this nested sphere model with astronomical observations , scholars calculated what became generally accepted values at the time for the distances to the Sun ( about 4 million miles ) , to the other planets , and to the edge of the universe ( about 73 million miles ) . The nested sphere model 's distances to the Sun and planets differ significantly from modern measurements of the distances , and the size of the universe is now known to be inconceivably large and possibly infinite . 
 Albert Van Helden has suggested that from about 1250 until the 17th century , virtually all educated Europeans were familiar with the Ptolemaic model of " nesting spheres and the cosmic dimensions derived from it " . Even following the adoption of Copernicus 's heliocentric model of the universe , new versions of the celestial sphere model were introduced , with the planetary spheres following this sequence from the central Sun : Mercury , Venus , Earth @-@ Moon , Mars , Jupiter and Saturn . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early ideas of spheres and circles = = = 
 In Greek antiquity the ideas of celestial spheres and rings first appeared in the cosmology of Anaximander in the early 6th century BC . In his cosmology both the Sun and Moon are circular open vents in tubular rings of fire enclosed in tubes of condensed air ; these rings constitute the rims of rotating chariot @-@ like wheels pivoting on the Earth at their centre . The fixed stars are also open vents in such wheel rims , but there are so many such wheels for the stars that their contiguous rims all together form a continuous spherical shell encompassing the Earth . All these wheel rims had originally been formed out of an original sphere of fire wholly encompassing the Earth , which had disintegrated into many individual rings . Hence , in <unk> 's cosmogony , in the beginning was the sphere , out of which celestial rings were formed , from some of which the stellar sphere was in turn composed . As viewed from the Earth , the ring of the Sun was highest , that of the Moon was lower , and the sphere of the stars was lowest . 
 Following Anaximander , his pupil Anaximenes ( c . 585 – 528 / 4 ) held that the stars , Sun , Moon , and planets are all made of fire . But whilst the stars are fastened on a revolving crystal sphere like nails or studs , the Sun , Moon , and planets , and also the Earth , all just ride on air like leaves because of their breadth . And whilst the fixed stars are carried around in a complete circle by the stellar sphere , the Sun , Moon and planets do not revolve under the Earth between setting and rising again like the stars do , but rather on setting they go laterally around the Earth like a cap turning halfway around the head until they rise again . And unlike Anaximander , he relegated the fixed stars to the region most distant from the Earth . The most enduring feature of Anaximenes ' cosmos was its conception of the stars being fixed on a crystal sphere as in a rigid frame , which became a fundamental principle of cosmology down to Copernicus and Kepler . 
 After Anaximenes , Pythagoras , Xenophanes and Parmenides all held that the universe was spherical . And much later in the fourth century BC Plato 's Timaeus proposed that the body of the cosmos was made in the most perfect and uniform shape , that of a sphere containing the fixed stars . But it posited that the planets were spherical bodies set in rotating bands or rings rather than wheel rims as in Anaximander 's cosmology . 
 = = = Emergence of the planetary spheres = = = 
 Instead of bands , Plato 's student Eudoxus developed a planetary model using concentric spheres for all the planets , with three spheres each for his models of the Moon and the Sun and four each for the models of the other five planets , thus making 26 spheres in <unk> modified this system , using five spheres for his models of the Sun , Moon , Mercury , Venus , and Mars and retaining four spheres for the models of Jupiter and Saturn , thus making 33 spheres in all . Each planet is attached to the innermost of its own particular set of spheres . Although the models of Eudoxus and Callippus qualitatively describe the major features of the motion of the planets , they fail to account exactly for these motions and therefore cannot provide quantitative predictions . Although historians of Greek science have traditionally considered these models to be merely geometrical representations , recent studies have proposed that they were also intended to be physically real or have withheld judgment , noting the limited evidence to resolve the question . 
 In his Metaphysics , Aristotle developed a physical cosmology of spheres , based on the mathematical models of Eudoxus . In Aristotle 's fully developed celestial model , the spherical Earth is at the centre of the universe and the planets are moved by either 47 or 55 interconnected spheres that form a unified planetary system , whereas in the models of Eudoxus and Callippus each planet 's individual set of spheres were not connected to those of the next planet . Aristotle says the exact number of spheres , and hence the number of movers , is to be determined by astronomical investigation , but he added additional spheres to those proposed by Eudoxus and Callippus , to counteract the motion of the outer spheres . Aristotle considers that these spheres are made of an unchanging fifth element , the aether . Each of these concentric spheres is moved by its own god — an unchanging divine unmoved mover , and who moves its sphere simply by virtue of being loved by it . 
 In his Almagest , the astronomer Ptolemy ( fl. ca . 150 AD ) developed geometrical predictive models of the motions of the stars and planets and extended them to a unified physical model of the cosmos in his Planetary hypotheses . By using eccentrics and epicycles , his geometrical model achieved greater mathematical detail and predictive accuracy than had been exhibited by earlier concentric spherical models of the cosmos . In Ptolemy 's physical model , each planet is contained in two or more spheres , but in Book 2 of his Planetary Hypotheses Ptolemy depicted thick circular slices rather than spheres as in its Book 1 . One sphere / slice is the deferent , with a centre offset somewhat from the Earth ; the other sphere / slice is an epicycle embedded in the deferent , with the planet embedded in the <unk> sphere / slice . Ptolemy 's model of nesting spheres provided the general dimensions of the cosmos , the greatest distance of Saturn being 19 @,@ 865 times the radius of the Earth and the distance of the fixed stars being at least 20 @,@ 000 Earth radii . 
 The planetary spheres were arranged outwards from the spherical , stationary Earth at the centre of the universe in this order : the spheres of the Moon , Mercury , Venus , Sun , Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn . In more detailed models the seven planetary spheres contained other secondary spheres within them . The planetary spheres were followed by the stellar sphere containing the fixed stars ; other scholars added a ninth sphere to account for the precession of the equinoxes , a tenth to account for the supposed trepidation of the equinoxes , and even an eleventh to account for the changing obliquity of the ecliptic . In antiquity the order of the lower planets was not universally agreed . Plato and his followers ordered them Moon , Sun , Mercury , Venus , and then followed the standard model for the upper spheres . Others disagreed about the relative place of the spheres of Mercury and Venus : Ptolemy placed both of them beneath the Sun with Venus above Mercury , but noted others placed them both above the Sun ; some medieval thinkers , such as al @-@ Bitruji , placed the sphere of Venus above the Sun and that of Mercury below it . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 = = = = Astronomical discussions = = = = 
 A series of astronomers , beginning with the Muslim astronomer al @-@ <unk> , used the Ptolemaic model of nesting spheres to compute distances to the stars and planetary spheres . Al @-@ <unk> 's distance to the stars was 20 @,@ 110 Earth radii which , on the assumption that the radius of the Earth was 3 @,@ 250 miles , came to 65 @,@ 357 @,@ 500 miles . An introduction to Ptolemy 's Almagest , the <unk> al @-@ <unk> , believed to be written by Thābit ibn Qurra , presented minor variations of Ptolemy 's distances to the celestial spheres . In his Zij , Al @-@ <unk> presented independent calculations of the distances to the planets on the model of nesting spheres , which he thought was due to scholars writing after Ptolemy . His calculations yielded a distance of 19 @,@ 000 Earth radii to the stars . 
 Around the turn of the millennium , the Arabic astronomer and polymath Ibn al @-@ Haytham ( <unk> ) presented a development of Ptolemy 's geocentric epicyclic models in terms of nested spheres . Despite the similarity of this concept to that of Ptolemy 's Planetary Hypotheses , al @-@ Haytham 's presentation differs in sufficient detail that it has been argued that it reflects an independent development of the concept . In chapters 15 – 16 of his Book of Optics , Ibn al @-@ Haytham also said that the celestial spheres do not consist of solid matter . 
 Near the end of the twelfth century , the Spanish Muslim astronomer al @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) sought to explain the complex motions of the planets without Ptolemy 's epicycles and eccentrics , using an Aristotelian framework of purely concentric spheres that moved with differing speeds from east to west . This model was much less accurate as a predictive astronomical model , but it was discussed by later European astronomers and philosophers . 
 In the thirteenth century the astronomer , al- ' <unk> , proposed a radical change to Ptolemy 's system of nesting spheres . In his Kitāb al @-@ <unk> , he recalculated the distance of the planets using parameters which he <unk> . Taking the distance of the Sun as 1 @,@ 266 Earth radii , he was forced to place the sphere of Venus above the sphere of the Sun ; as a further refinement , he added the planet 's diameters to the thickness of their spheres . As a consequence , his version of the nesting spheres model had the sphere of the stars at a distance of 140 @,@ 177 Earth radii . 
 About the same time , scholars in European universities began to address the implications of the rediscovered philosophy of Aristotle and astronomy of Ptolemy . Both astronomical scholars and popular writers considered the implications of the nested sphere model for the dimensions of the universe . <unk> of Novara 's introductory astronomical text , the <unk> <unk> , used the model of nesting spheres to compute the distances of the various planets from the Earth , which he gave as 22 @,@ 612 Earth radii or 73 @,@ 387 @,@ 747 100 / 660 miles . In his Opus Majus , Roger Bacon cited Al @-@ <unk> 's distance to the stars of 20 @,@ 110 Earth radii , or 65 @,@ 357 @,@ 700 miles , from which he computed the circumference of the universe to be 410 @,@ 818 @,@ 517 3 / 7 miles . Clear evidence that this model was thought to represent physical reality is the accounts found in Bacon 's Opus Majus of the time needed to walk to the Moon and in the popular Middle English South English Legendary , that it would take 8 @,@ 000 years to reach the highest starry heaven . General understanding of the dimensions of the universe derived from the nested sphere model reached wider audiences through the presentations in Hebrew by Moses Maimonides , in French by <unk> of Metz , and in Italian by Dante Alighieri . 
 = = = = Philosophical and theological discussions = = = = 
 Philosophers were less concerned with such mathematical calculations than with the nature of the celestial spheres , their relation to revealed accounts of created nature , and the causes of their motion . 
 Adi Setia describes the debate among Islamic scholars in the twelfth century , based on the commentary of Fakhr al @-@ Din al @-@ Razi about whether the celestial spheres are real , concrete physical bodies or " merely the abstract circles in the heavens traced out … by the various stars and planets . " Setia points out that most of the learned , and the astronomers , said they were solid spheres " on which the stars turn … and this view is closer to the apparent sense of the Qur 'anic verses regarding the celestial orbits . " However , al @-@ Razi mentions that some , such as the Islamic scholar Dahhak , considered them to be abstract . Al @-@ Razi himself , was undecided , he said : " In truth , there is no way to ascertain the characteristics of the heavens except by authority [ of divine revelation or prophetic traditions ] . " Setia concludes : " Thus it seems that for al @-@ Razi ( and for others before and after him ) , astronomical models , whatever their utility or lack thereof for ordering the heavens , are not founded on sound rational proofs , and so no intellectual commitment can be made to them insofar as description and explanation of celestial realities are concerned . " 
 Christian and Muslim philosophers modified Ptolemy 's system to include an unmoved outermost region , the <unk> heaven , which came to be identified as the dwelling place of God and all the elect . Medieval Christians identified the sphere of stars with the Biblical firmament and sometimes posited an invisible layer of water above the firmament , to accord with Genesis . An outer sphere , inhabited by angels , appeared in some accounts . 
 Edward Grant , a historian of science , has provided evidence that medieval scholastic philosophers generally considered the celestial spheres to be solid in the sense of three @-@ dimensional or continuous , but most did not consider them solid in the sense of hard . The consensus was that the celestial spheres were made of some kind of continuous fluid . 
 Later in the century , the Islamic theologian Adud al @-@ Din al @-@ Iji ( 1281 – 1355 ) , under the influence of the Ash 'ari doctrine of <unk> , which maintained that all physical effects were caused directly by God 's will rather than by natural causes , rejected philosophy and astronomy , and maintained that the celestial spheres were " imaginary things " and " more tenuous than a spider 's web " . Al @-@ Iji 's rejection of astronomy was , in turn , challenged by al @-@ Sharif al @-@ <unk> ( 1339 – 1413 ) , who maintained that " even if they do not have an external reality , yet they are things that are correctly imagined and correspond to what [ exists ] in actuality " . 
 Medieval astronomers and philosophers developed diverse theories about the causes of the celestial spheres ' motions . They attempted to explain the spheres ' motions in terms of the materials of which they were thought to be made , external movers such as celestial intelligences , and internal movers such as motive souls or impressed forces . Most of these models were qualitative , although a few incorporated quantitative analyses that related speed , motive force and resistance . By the end of the Middle Ages , the common opinion in Europe was that celestial bodies were moved by external intelligences , identified with the angels of revelation . The outermost moving sphere , which moved with the daily motion affecting all subordinate spheres , was moved by an unmoved mover , the Prime Mover , who was identified with God . Each of the lower spheres was moved by a subordinate spiritual mover ( a replacement for Aristotle 's multiple divine movers ) , called an intelligence . 
 = = = Renaissance = = = 
 Early in the sixteenth century Nicolaus Copernicus drastically reformed the model of astronomy by displacing the Earth from its central place in favour of the Sun , yet he called his great work De revolutionibus orbium coelestium ( On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres ) . Although Copernicus does not treat the physical nature of the spheres in detail , his few allusions make it clear that , like many of his predecessors , he accepted non @-@ solid celestial spheres . Copernicus rejected the ninth and tenth spheres , placed the orb of the Moon around the Earth and moved the Sun from its orb to the center of the world . The planetary orbs circled the center of the world in the order Mercury , Venus , the great orb containing the Earth and the orb of the Moon , then the orbs of Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn . Finally he retained the eighth starry sphere , which he held to be unmoving . 
 The English almanac maker , Thomas Digges , delineated the spheres of the new cosmological system in his <unk> Description of the <unk> Orbes … ( 1576 ) . Here he arranged the " <unk> " in the new Copernican order , expanding one sphere to carry " the globe of <unk> " , the Earth , the four elements , and the Moon ; and expanding the starry sphere infinitely upward to encompass all the stars , and also to serve as " the court of the Great God , the <unk> of the elect , and of the <unk> <unk> . " 
 In the course of the sixteenth century , a number of philosophers , theologians , and astronomers , among them Francesco <unk> , Andrea <unk> , Peter Ramus , Robert Bellarmine , Giordano Bruno , Jerónimo Muñoz , Michael <unk> , Jean Pena , and Christoph Rothmann , abandoned the concept of celestial spheres . Rothmann argued from the observations of the comet of 1585 that the lack of observed parallax indicated that the Comet was beyond Saturn , while the absence of observed refraction indicated the celestial region was of the same material as air , hence there were no planetary spheres . 
 Tycho Brahe 's investigations of a series of comets from 1577 to 1585 , aided by Rothmann 's discussion of the comet of 1585 and Michael Maestlin 's tabulated distances of the comet of 1577 , which passed through the planetary orbs , led Tycho to conclude that " the structure of the heavens was very fluid and simple . " Tycho opposed his view to that of " very many modern philosophers " who divided the heavens into " various orbs made of hard and impervious matter . " Edward Grant found relatively few believers in hard celestial spheres before Copernicus , and concluded that the idea first became common sometime between the publication of Copernicus 's De revolutionibus in 1542 and Tycho Brahe 's publication of his cometary research in 1588 . 
 In Johannes Kepler 's early Mysterium <unk> , he considered the distances of the planets , and the consequent gaps required between the planetary spheres implied by the Copernican system , which had been noted by his former teacher , Michael Maestlin . Kepler 's Platonic cosmology filled the large gaps with the five Platonic polyhedra , which accounted for the spheres ' measured astronomical distance . In his mature celestial physics , the spheres were regarded as the purely geometrical spatial regions containing each planetary orbit rather than as the rotating physical orbs of the earlier Aristotelian celestial physics . The eccentricity of each planet 's orbit thereby defined the lengths of the radii of the inner and outer limits of its celestial sphere and thus its thickness . In Kepler 's celestial mechanics the cause of planetary motion became the rotating Sun , itself rotated by its own motive soul . However , an immobile stellar sphere was a lasting remnant of physical celestial spheres in Kepler 's cosmology . 
 = = Literary and symbolic expressions = = 
 In Cicero 's Dream of Scipio , the elder Scipio Africanus describes an ascent through the celestial spheres , compared to which the Earth and the Roman Empire dwindle into insignificance . A commentary on the Dream of Scipio by the late Roman writer Macrobius , which included a discussion of the various schools of thought on the order of the spheres , did much to spread the idea of the celestial spheres through the Early Middle Ages . 
 Some late medieval figures noted that the celestial spheres ' physical order was inverse to their order on the spiritual plane , where God was at the center and the Earth at the periphery . Near the beginning of the fourteenth century Dante , in the Paradiso of his Divine Comedy , described God as a light at the center of the cosmos . Here the poet ascends beyond physical existence to the Empyrean Heaven , where he comes face to face with God himself and is granted understanding of both divine and human nature . Later in the century , the illuminator of Nicole Oresme 's Le livre du Ciel et du Monde , a translation of and commentary on Aristotle 's De caelo produced for Oresme 's patron , King Charles V , employed the same motif . He drew the spheres in the conventional order , with the Moon closest to the Earth and the stars highest , but the spheres were concave upwards , centered on God , rather than concave downwards , centered on the Earth . Below this figure Oresme quotes the Psalms that " The heavens declare the Glory of God and the firmament <unk> his handiwork . " 
 The late @-@ 16th @-@ century Portuguese epic The <unk> vividly portrays the celestial spheres as a " great machine of the universe " constructed by God . The explorer Vasco da Gama is shown the celestial spheres in the form of a mechanical model . Contrary to Cicero 's representation , da Gama 's tour of the spheres begins with the Empyrean , then descends inward toward Earth , culminating in a survey of the domains and divisions of earthly kingdoms , thus magnifying the importance of human deeds in the divine plan . 
 = Joseph Priestley House = 
 The Joseph Priestley House was the American home of 18th @-@ century British theologian , Dissenting clergyman , natural philosopher ( and discoverer of oxygen ) , educator , and political theorist Joseph Priestley ( 1733 – 1804 ) from 1798 until his death . Located in Northumberland , Pennsylvania , the house , which was designed by Priestley 's wife Mary , is Georgian with Federalist accents . The Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission ( PHMC ) operated it as a museum dedicated to Joseph Priestley from 1970 to August 2009 , when it closed due to low visitation and budget cuts . The house reopened in October 2009 , still owned by the PHMC but operated by the Friends of Joseph Priestley House ( FJPH ) . 
 Fleeing religious persecution and political turmoil in Britain , the Priestleys emigrated to the United States in 1794 seeking a peaceful life . Hoping to avoid the political troubles that had plagued them in Britain and the problems of urban life they saw in the United States , the Priestleys built a house in rural Pennsylvania . Nevertheless , political disputes and family troubles dogged Priestley during the last ten years of his life . 
 After the Priestleys died , their home remained in private hands until the turn of the 20th century , when George Gilbert Pond , a professor from what is now Pennsylvania State University , bought it and attempted to found the first Priestley museum . He died before he could complete the project and it was not until the 1960s that the house was first carefully restored by the PHMC and designated a National Historic Landmark . A second renovation was undertaken in the 1990s to return the home to the way it looked during Priestley 's time . The home has been a frequent place of celebration for the American Chemical Society ; they commemorated the centennial and bicentennial of the discovery of oxygen gas by Priestley as well as the 250th anniversary of Priestley 's birth . 
 = = Location = = 
 Following the Seven Years ' War ( 1756 – 63 ) and the forced migration of Native American tribes westward , German , Scots @-@ Irish , and other European immigrants settled in the central Susquehanna Valley , including in the area that would become Northumberland , Pennsylvania . Northumberland was laid out around a central village green in 1772 , on land originally purchased from the Iroquois by the Province of Pennsylvania in 1768 , as part of the first Treaty of Fort Stanwix . During the American Revolution , the village was evacuated as part of the Big Runaway in 1778 , and only finally resettled in 1784 . In 1794 , when the Priestleys moved there , it included Quaker and Wesleyan meeting houses , a brewery , two potteries , a potash manufacturer , a clock maker , a printer ( who issued a weekly newspaper ) , several stores , and approximately one hundred houses . 
 The Priestley property , purchased in 1794 at a total cost of £ 500 ( £ 51 @,@ 800 in 2016 ) from Reuben Haines , who had secured the patent to the land for Northumberland , comprised four lots of the original village plan ( numbers 29 – 32 ) . Currently , the house and grounds occupy 1 acre ( 4 @,@ 000 m ² ) at 472 Priestley Avenue . ( The address of the house was originally " North Way " , but the street was later renamed in honor of Joseph Priestley . ) This street forms the northwest boundary of the property ; the other boundaries are Hanover Avenue to the northeast , Wallis Street to the southwest , and the North Shore Railroad to the southeast . Beyond the railroad line is a baseball field , and beyond that lies the Susquehanna River , which was the original southeastern boundary of the property . The confluence of the West Branch Susquehanna River with the main ( or North ) branch of the Susquehanna is a short distance southwest of the property , which is at an elevation of 456 feet ( 139 m ) . 
 The property 's original area was 2 acres ( 8 @,@ 000 m ² ) , but this was reduced by about half around 1830 when the Pennsylvania Canal ( North Branch Division ) was dug through the house 's front yard , between the house and river . On May 31 , 1860 , the Lackawanna and Bloomsburg Railroad opened with a train from Danville . This was the second railroad track in Northumberland , and ran behind the house . The canal closed in 1902 and was later filled in . The modern railroad line approximates the canal 's course through the front yard ; the track behind the house no longer exists . 
 = = Priestleys in America = = 
 = = = Emigration to Northumberland = = = 
 The last three years the Priestleys spent in Britain were a time of political upheaval and the persecution they experienced led to their eventual emigration to the United States . During the Birmingham Riots of 1791 , which began on the second anniversary of the storming of the Bastille in the wake of the conservative British reaction against the French revolution , the Priestleys ' home , Joseph 's church , and the homes of many other religious Dissenters were burned . The Priestleys fled Birmingham and attempted to live in London , but they could not escape the political turmoil . In 1794 , they joined the tide of 10 @,@ 000 emigrants who moved to America — it was the largest emigration from Europe to America until the end of the Napoleonic Wars . The Priestleys left Britain at the beginning of April on the Samson and arrived in New York City on June 4 , 1794 . Two of their three sons , Joseph , Jr . ( eldest ) and Harry ( youngest ) , had already emigrated to the United States in August 1793 , along with Joseph Priestley 's friend , the radical activist Thomas Cooper . Their middle son , William , had moved to America from France , probably early in 1793 , following the September massacres of the previous year . 
 Although Europeans knew Priestley best as a scientist ( he had discovered oxygen gas in 1774 ) , Americans knew him best as a defender of religious freedom and as an advocate for American independence . Immediately upon his arrival , he was fêted by various political factions vying to gain his support . Priestley declined their entreaties , however , hoping to avoid the political discord that had embroiled him in Britain . He wrote to John Adams that he " made it a rule to take no part whatever in the politics of a country in which I am a stranger , and in which I only wish to live undisturbed " . ( Priestley never became a citizen of the United States . ) He also turned down an opportunity to teach chemistry at the University of Pennsylvania at this time . 
 On their way to Northumberland , the Priestleys stopped in Philadelphia , where Joseph gave a series of sermons that helped promote the spread of Unitarianism . According to J. D. Bowers , who studied Priestley 's influence on Unitarianism in America , " [ f ] or a decade Priestley served as the inspiration and leading force in the spread of Unitarianism in America and the formation of numerous societies that followed his teachings on congregational formation , the education of youth , lay preaching , and espousing one 's faith in the presence of opposition from ( and to ) both the Protestant majority and a competing liberal faction . " Through Priestley 's influence , at least twelve congregations were founded in Maine , Massachusetts , New York , Vermont , Pennsylvania , Virginia , and Kentucky , including the First Unitarian Church of Philadelphia and Northumberland 's Unitarian Universalist Congregation of the Susquehanna Valley . When he preached , Unitarians and non @-@ Unitarians flocked to hear him and his sermons were published throughout the country . During his years in America , Priestley became increasingly convinced that the Millennium was approaching . His close study of the Bible , together with the happenings in France , persuaded him that he would see Christ 's return . 
 While Priestley enjoyed preaching in Philadelphia , he could not afford the expense of living there ; he also disliked the city 's opulent Quakers and feared the yellow fever epidemic that had recently decimated the city . He considered settling in Germantown , which had better access to transportation and communication than Northumberland , but Mary preferred the country and wanted to be near her sons . Joseph considered splitting his time between Northumberland and Philadelphia , but this plan became impractical . Determined to ensure the future economic stability of his family , Priestley bought land and settled in Northumberland by July 1794 , which was " five days of rough travel " north of Philadelphia . There they hoped a larger community would eventually blossom . 
 = = = Settling in = = = 
 Priestley seems to have yearned for a more cosmopolitan community than Northumberland provided , writing to his sister that it was " seemingly almost out of the world " and complaining that he had to wait a week for news . He wrote to his friend John Vaughan : " We know but little more than we did when we left you of European affairs . " In the winter of 1794 – 95 , Priestley wrote to friends that his situation was very " distant from my original views " and " my time here is far from passing so agreeably as it did in England " , yet he was " very thankful for such an asylum " and he attempted " to make the best of my situation " . In his letters to friends back in Britain , Priestley consistently referred to himself as an exile and to England as his real home . Mary was happier with the couple 's situation and wrote to William Vaughan : " I am happy and thankful to meet with so sweet a situation and so peaceful a retreat as the place I now write from . Dr. Priestley also likes it and of his own choice intends to settle here , which is more than I hoped for at the time we came up ... This country is very delightful , the prospects of wood and water more beautiful than I have ever seen before and the people plain and decent in their manners . " 
 Priestley ’ s son Joseph Priestley Jr. was a leading member of a consortium that purchased 300 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 200 km2 ) of land along Loyalsock Creek ( between the North and West Branches of the Susquehanna River ) . Shortly thereafter , Thomas Cooper , a friend of Joseph Priestley 's , published a pamphlet in Britain titled Some Information Respecting America , meant to encourage others to settle in Pennsylvania and offering instructions on how to do so . It detailed a clear plan for establishing and financing a settlement . The French translation , <unk> sur l 'Amérique , was , according to one scholar , " carefully phrased in legal terminology " and " lucidly outline [ d ] an ambitious financial venture " . However , it is unclear whether Cooper 's scheme was related to the lands that the younger Priestleys had purchased . 
 Apparently technically unrelated to either of these schemes , but influenced by Cooper 's , poets Samuel Taylor Coleridge and William Wordsworth , full of idealism and angered at Priestley 's treatment in Birmingham , intended to emigrate to America and establish a utopian community which they called " Pantisocracy " ( derived from the Greek for " equal rule of all " ) . They assembled twelve couples who were interested not only in demanding physical labor but also in a life of the mind , but none of them had enough money to embark on the project , which required much capital . Therefore , the poets undertook a lecture tour of England to raise funds ; however , they never generated enough money and never emigrated . The utopia was not built and few immigrants arrived in Northumberland as a result of Cooper 's schemes . 
 After the failure of Cooper 's endeavor , Priestley attempted to convince other friends to move to Northumberland , particularly those he had made in America , but to no avail . Priestley wrote in his Memoirs that " the settlement was given up , but being here , and my wife and myself liking the place , I have determined to take up my residence here , though subject to many disadvantages . Philadelphia was excessively expensive , and this a comparatively cheap place ; and my sons , settling in the neighborhood , will be less exposed to temptation , and more likely to form habits of sobriety and industry . " 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Priestley 's attempts to avoid political controversy in the United States failed . In 1794 , the journalist William Cobbett published Observations on the Emigration of Dr. Joseph Priestley , which falsely accused Priestley of stirring up rebellion in Britain , and attempted to undermine his scientific credibility . His political fortunes took an even worse turn when Cobbett obtained a set of letters sent to Priestley by the radical printer John Hurford Stone and the liberal novelist Helen Maria Williams . Cobbett published the letters in his newspaper , asserting that Priestley and his friends were fomenting a revolution . Priestley was eventually forced to defend himself in print . 
 Family matters also made Priestley 's time in America difficult . His youngest son Harry died on December 11 , 1795 , probably of malaria . Mary Priestley died on September 17 , 1796 ; she was already ill and never fully recovered after the shock of her son 's death . On September 19 of that year Joseph wrote : " This day I bury my wife .... she had taken much thought in planning the new house and now that it is far advanced and promises to be everything she wished , she is removed to another . " After dinner on Monday 14 April 1800 , various members of Priestley 's household fell ill , with symptoms of food poisoning , which prompted the Reading Advertiser to falsely accuse Priestley 's son William , of trying to poison them with arsenic . 
 Priestley continued the educational projects that had been important to him throughout his life , helping to establish a " Northumberland Academy " and donating his library to the fledging institution . He exchanged letters regarding the proper structure of a university with Thomas Jefferson , who used the advice when founding the University of Virginia . Jefferson and Priestley became close and when he had completed his General History of the Christian Church , he dedicated it to President Jefferson , writing that " it is now only that I can say I see nothing to fear from the hand of power , the government under which I live being for the first time truly favourable to me . " Of all of the religious works Priestley published in the United States , and there were many , it was his four @-@ volume General History that was the most important . Stretching from 475 CE to Priestley 's present , he tracked and explained what he saw as the history of Christianity and its " corruptions " , referencing his own An History of the Corruptions of Christianity ( 1772 – 74 ) . However , he ended it by praising American religious toleration . 
 Priestley attempted to continue his scientific investigations in America with the support of the American Philosophical Association . However , he was hampered by lack of news from Europe ; unaware of the latest scientific developments , Priestley was no longer on the forefront of discovery . Although the majority of his publications focused on defending the outmoded phlogiston theory against the " new chemistry " , he also did some original work on spontaneous generation and dreams . As Robert Schofield , Priestley 's major modern biographer , explains : 
 Priestley published more scientific items during his decade in the United States than during all his years in England : some 45 papers , not counting reprintings , and four pamphlets , not counting subsequent editions , but in general his science was now anticlimactic . Few of his papers contributed anything significantly new to the field of chemistry ; most were committed to combatting the new chemistry . 
 Despite Priestley 's reduced scientific importance , he stimulated an interest in chemistry in America . 
 By 1801 , Priestley had become so ill that he could no longer write or experiment effectively . On February 3 , 1804 , Joseph started a last experiment in his lab but was too weak to continue it . He went to a bed in his library , where he died three days later . He was buried in nearby Riverview Cemetery in Northumberland . Priestley 's epitaph reads : 
 Return unto thy rest , O my soul , for the 
 Lord hath dealt <unk> with thee . 
 I will lay me down in peace and sleep till 
 I awake in the morning of the resurrection . 
 = = Architecture and landscaping = = 
 Joseph and Mary lived with their son Joseph , Jr. and his family in a small house while theirs was being built . Mary Priestley was primarily responsible for the design of the couple 's new home and her family inheritance may have helped finance it , but she died before it was completed . By 1797 , Joseph 's laboratory was completed — the first part of the home to be finished . It was the first laboratory that " he had designed , built , and outfitted entirely himself " and was probably the first " scientifically @-@ equipped laboratory " in the United States . Joseph continued his scientific and scholarly work in his new laboratory , identifying carbon monoxide ( which he called " heavy inflammable air " ) . In 1798 Joseph Jr . , his wife , and their children moved into the new house with Joseph Priestley . The house also held Priestley 's library , which contained about 1600 volumes by his death in 1804 and was one of the largest in America at the time . The Priestley family held Unitarian church services in the drawing room and Joseph educated a group of young men until the local Northumberland Academy that he helped found was completed . 
 The house proper was completed in 1798 , with a Mr. Jones of Northumberland employed acting as master carpenter . Built in an 18th @-@ century Georgian style , the " balance and symmetry " of the architecture signaled " subdued elegance " . The house was accented with Federalist highlights , such as " the fanlights over the doors and the balustrades on the rooftop belvedere and main staircase " , marking it as distinctly American . Douglas R. McMinn , in the National Register of Historic Places nomination for the Northumberland Historic District , calls it a " mansion " that is " probably the finest example of the Federal style in the region " . As William N. Richardson , the site administrator for the Joseph Priestley House in the 1990s , notes , Priestley 's American home did not resemble his " high @-@ style Georgian town house " that was destroyed in Birmingham ; rather , it was " plain " and built in the " American vernacular " . 
 The house has a two @-@ and @-@ half story central section , which is 48 feet ( 14 @.@ 6 m ) by 43 feet ( 13 @.@ 1 m ) , and two one @-@ story wings on the north and south sides that are each 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) by 21 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) . The first and second floors have a total area of 5 @,@ 052 square feet ( 469 m ² ) . The north wing was the laboratory and the south wing ( which had an attached woodshed ) was the summer kitchen . The cellar , first , and second floors of the central section are each divided into four rooms , with a central hall on the first and second floors ; the first floor also has an intersecting hall that leads to the laboratory . The attic has three rooms for servants and a larger room for storage . A paint analysis done in 1994 revealed that the house had no wall paper initially and that the walls and woodwork were painted " a brilliant white " . 
 The house is a frame structure , covered with white wooden <unk> , anchored to a stone foundation . The Priestleys built their home out of wood , dried in trenches on the site , because no stone or brick was available in the area . Joseph wrote a detailed description of the drying process , concluding : " A house constructed with such boards I prefer to one of brick and stone " . This may have prompted journalist William Cobbett to caustically label the house a " shed " in one of his political tirades against Joseph . The central section of the house has a slate gable roof with a railing @-@ enclosed deck . The house has " three internal gable end chimneys , one for the main kitchen " , and one each at the north and south ends of the central section . 
 The house faces the Susquehanna River , and both the front and rear doors are " sheltered by a shallow portico " . A circular carriage drive ( originally gravel , now concrete ) leads to the front door , which also has a fanlight . There are five windows on the second floor on both the front and rear sides of the house , with a dentil cornice above both sets of windows . The external details on the house also include a " frieze board with triglyphs " . 
 Originally , delightful panoramic views were visible from the home . It was built facing the Susquehanna River so that visitors arriving by boat could be welcomed by the family and because conventional 18th @-@ century aesthetic theory held that <unk> were more beautiful than townscapes . Priestley built a high wall blocking the view of Northumberland and added a belvedere to the top of his house to more easily survey the landscape . His plantings were " a much scaled @-@ down version of the beautiful gardens " at Bowood , the estate of his former employer Lord Shelburne . 
 The lack of skilled craftspeople in Northumberland made the construction of the house difficult . For example , Richardson speculates that the main staircase was assembled from a kit . It is one step too short for the Northumberland hallway , but no extra step was added to finish off the symmetry of the stairwell , suggesting a dearth of skilled labor . 
 = = Ownership and museum = = 
 After the deaths of Mary and Joseph Priestley , Joseph Priestley , Jr. and his wife , Elizabeth Ryland , continued to live in the house until 1811 , at which time they emigrated to Britain and sold the home . The house passed through various hands during the 19th century . Judge Seth Chapman purchased the house from Joseph Priestley Jr. on May 13 , 1815 for US $ 6 @,@ 250 ( $ 80 @,@ 800 in 2016 ) . Chapman died on December 4 , 1835 , and Rev. James Kay , pastor of the Northumberland Unitarian congregation , and his family lived in the house next . James Kay died on September 22 , 1847 and his widow probably lived in the house until her October 2 , 1850 death . Charles H. Kay , son of James , had purchased the house in 1845 , a few years before his parents ' deaths . In April 1865 Charles Kay 's children sold the house to Henry R. Campbell for $ 2 @,@ 775 ( $ 42 @,@ 900 in 2016 ) . Florence Bingham purchased the house from Campbell for $ 5 @,@ 679 @.@ 53 on January 18 , 1868 ( $ 101 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , and Bingham 's heirs sold it to T. Hugh Johnson for $ 2 @,@ 000 on October 7 , 1882 ( $ 49 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . Kate Scott bought the house for $ 3 @,@ 000 on April 11 , 1888 ( $ 79 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . In 1911 the last private resident moved out of the house , and it was sublet to the Pennsylvania Railroad for its workers ( a large railroad yard was built in Northumberland at this time ) . This led to a general decline in the house and its grounds . 
 Professor George Gilbert Pond was the first person to make a significant effort to establish a permanent Priestley museum at the Priestley House . After raising sufficient funds , he managed to purchase the home at auction for $ 6 @,@ 000 from Scott 's heirs on November 24 , 1919 ( $ 81 @,@ 900 in 2016 ) . Pond believed that construction of a new railroad line would destroy the house , and so intended to move it to Pennsylvania State College ( now Pennsylvania State University ) . However , he died on May 20 , 1920 before this plan could be enacted ; the planned rail line was never built and the house proved too fragile to move . The college established a memorial fund in Pond 's honor and retained the house as a museum , although Pond 's children did not formally transfer the house to the college until April 14 , 1932 . Some restoration of the house was done in the 1920s , and a small , brick building — intended as a fireproof museum for Priestley 's books and scientific apparatus — was built on the grounds and dedicated to Pond 's memory in 1926 . In 1941 the state legislature tried to have the State Historical Commission administer the house as a museum , but Governor Arthur James vetoed the plan for lack of funding . 
 On December 14 , 1955 , the college donated the house to the borough of Northumberland . From 1955 to 1959 the house served as both the borough hall for Northumberland and as a museum . The house proved too costly for the borough to maintain , and was acquired by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in 1961 . Eventually , in 1968 the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission ( PHMC ) began restoring it and in October 1970 the museum was opened to the public . The renovations included a restoration of the laboratory , a removal of ornamentation added in the Victorian era , a return of doorways to their original locations , and a return of the shutters " to their original locations inside the windows " . The PHMC was supported by " The Friends of the Joseph Priestley House " ( FJPH ) , who help with the visitor center , tours , special events , and outreach , as well as with clerical and museum work . 
 Between 1998 and 1999 a renovation that was " one of the most extensive changes in the homestead 's history " set out to " restore the grounds around the house to exactly the way it was when Priestley lived " there . This involved reconstructing exact replicas of the original carriage barn , hog <unk> , horse stalls , gardens , fences , and even the privy . These structures were based on T. Lambourne 's drawings of the house and grounds that had been discovered in 1983 , other records , and excavations . Priestley left no written description of his laboratory , but much is known of his experiments and late @-@ 18th @-@ century laboratories . Extensive research on the laboratory within the house was completed in 1996 , including excavations that revealed two underground ovens , as well as evidence of a primitive fume hood . The 1998 renovations also included work to restore the laboratory to a condition as close to its original state as possible . 
 After Joseph 's death , Thomas Cooper sold a collection of some of his friend 's apparatus and other personal belongings to Dickinson College in Carlisle , which exhibits it each year when presenting the school 's Priestley Award to a scientist who makes " discoveries which contribute to the welfare of mankind " . The house lost its original furnishings when Joseph Jr. and his family moved back to England . Since it is not known what was originally in the home , it is furnished and decorated with artifacts donated by descendants of the Priestleys and with ones similar to those listed in Priestley 's testament of what was lost in the fire at his Birmingham home . A number of items that belonged to Joseph and Mary during their lives both in Britain and America are on display throughout the house , including Joseph 's balance scales and microscope . Portraits , prints , maps , charts , and books have been carefully selected to replicate the Priestleys ' holdings . A bedroom on the second floor is dedicated to an exploration of the life of an 18th @-@ century woman . 
 On January 12 , 1965 , the Joseph Priestley House was designated a National Historic Landmark and it was added to the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) on October 15 , 1966 . On August 1 , 1994 , the American Chemical Society named it the second National Historic Chemical Landmark ; the dedication ceremony was attended by 75 Priestley descendants . In 1988 , the Northumberland Historic District , including the Priestley House ( which it describes as a " gem " and one of the finest Federal style buildings in central Pennsylvania ) , was listed on the NRHP . The district includes one other building already on the NRHP : the Priestley @-@ Forsyth Memorial Library , which was built as an inn around 1820 and was owned by a great @-@ grandson of the Priestleys in the 1880s . Today it serves as Northumberland 's public library . The Joseph Priestley Memorial Chapel , which is a contributing structure in the historic district , was built in 1834 by his grandson , and is home to a Unitarian Universalist congregation that considers Priestley its founder . 
 Under the PHMC , the museum was open ten months a year , closing between early January and early March . In 2007 and 2008 the number of visitors held steady after recent declines . According to the PHMC , in fiscal 2007 – 08 " total visitation ... was 1 @,@ 705 with a paid visitation of 1 @,@ 100 generating $ 4 @,@ 125 in program revenue and 2 @,@ 406 recreational and non @-@ ticketed visitors " . The fiscal 2006 – 07 operations budget for the house and its two full @-@ time staff was $ 142 @,@ 901 , with $ 6 @,@ 900 ( five percent ) coming from FJPH and the rest from the state of Pennsylvania . 
 On March 4 , 2009 the PHMC released a report examining its 22 museums and historic sites and recommended discontinuing operations at six , including the Joseph Priestley House . The proposed closure of the Priestley House was based on " low visitation and limited potential for growth " . Despite public meetings , protest letters , and a general " public outcry " against closure , on August 14 , 2009 the state closed the Priestley House and three other PHMC museums indefinitely due to a lack of funding as part of an ongoing budget crisis . The sole remaining state employee at Priestley House was furloughed . That month the Friends of the Joseph Priestley House submitted a plan to the PHMC to operate the house on weekends from May to October with staffing provided by volunteers . The plan depended both on acquiring insurance for the volunteers , the house , and its contents , and on the state passing a budget . 
 On September 24 , 2009 the PHMC and officers of the FJPH signed an agreement to reopen the museum on Saturday and Sunday afternoons . The house reopened on October 3 , with volunteer staffing from the FJPH . The agreement can be renewed annually and lets FJPH " schedule programs , set fees and be in charge of all the business aspects of running the site " . On November 1 , there was a " grand reopening celebration " at the house with a dozen costumed volunteer guides and chemical demonstrations in Priestley 's laboratory . On November 7 , 2010 the brick Pond building was rededicated after an $ 85 @,@ 000 renovation , as part of the museum 's annual " Fall Heritage Day " . The restoration , which had been planned for years , was paid for by private donors and included " handicapped accessibility , new roofing , heating and air @-@ conditioning and new interior walls , ceilings and lighting " . The FJPH plan to install a timeline of Priestley 's scientific work and times in the Pond building , as well as a video about his laboratory techniques and impact today . 
 = = = American Chemical Society = = = 
 The American Chemical Society ( ACS ) has used the Joseph Priestley House as a place to mark special celebrations . On July 31 and August 1 , 1874 , " seventy @-@ seven chemists made a pilgrimage to the site to celebrate the centennial of chemistry " . The date was chosen to mark the hundredth anniversary of Priestley 's experiment producing oxygen by heating mercuric oxide with a magnifying lens and sunlight . These chemists came from 15 US states and the District of Columbia , Canada , and England , and their meeting at the house and a local school " is now recognized as the first National Chemistry Congress , and many ACS historians believe it led to ACS 's formation two years later on April 6 , 1876 " . On September 5 , 1926 , about 500 ACS members met again at the home to dedicate the small brick museum and to celebrate the meeting 50 years earlier ( two survivors of that first meeting were present ) . 
 Representatives of the ACS were present at the October 1970 dedication of the house as a museum . On April 25 , 1974 around 400 chemists from the ACS Middle Atlantic Regional Meeting in Scranton came to visit the home . The Priestley Medal , the highest and oldest honor awarded by the ACS , was awarded to Paul <unk> at the house that day . ( A replica of the Priestley Medal is on display at the house . ) On August 1 , 1974 — what has been labeled the bicentennial of the discovery of oxygen — over 500 chemists attending the third Biennial Conference on Chemical Education at State College traveled to the house to celebrate " Oxygen Day " . In October 1976 , the ACS celebrated its own centennial with a celebration in Northumberland . A 100 @-@ plus piece replica of Priestley 's laboratory equipment , made by universities , corporations , and the Smithsonian Institution , was presented to the house for display . On April 13 , 1983 , ACS President Fred <unk> spoke at the house to celebrate Priestley 's 250th birthday and as part of a first day of issue ceremony for the United States Postal Service 's Joseph Priestley commemorative stamp . In 2001 the ACS again met at the house to celebrate the 125th anniversary of the society , and reenacted parts of the 1874 and 1926 celebrations , including a march to Priestley 's grave , at which each participant left a red rose . 
 = Charter Oath = 
 The Charter Oath ( <unk> , <unk> no <unk> , more literally , the Oath in Five Articles ) was promulgated at the enthronement of Emperor Meiji of Japan on 7 April 1868 . The Oath outlined the main aims and the course of action to be followed during Emperor Meiji 's reign , setting the legal stage for Japan 's modernization . This also set up a process of urbanization as people of all classes were free to move jobs so people went to the city for better work . It remained influential , if less for governing than inspiring , throughout the Meiji era and into the twentieth century , and can be considered the first constitution of modern Japan . 
 = = Text = = 
 As the name implies , the text of the Oath consists of five clauses : 
 By this oath , we set up as our aim the establishment of the national weal on a broad basis and the framing of a constitution and laws . 
 Deliberative assemblies shall be widely established and all matters decided by open discussion . 
 All classes , high and low , shall be united in vigorously carrying out the administration of affairs of state . 
 The common people , no less than the civil and military officials , shall all be allowed to pursue their own calling so that there may be no discontent . 
 Evil customs of the past shall be broken off and everything based upon the just laws of Nature . 
 Knowledge shall be sought throughout the world so as to strengthen the foundation of imperial rule . 
 = = Origin and subsequent influence = = 
 The first draft of the Oath was written by junior councilor Yuri <unk> in January 1868 , containing progressive language that spoke to the frustrations that the radical but modestly born Meiji leaders had experienced in " service to hereditary incompetents . " Yuri 's language was moderated by his colleague Fukuoka <unk> in February to be " less alarming , " and Kido Takayoshi prepared the final form of the Oath , employing " language broad enough to embrace both readings . " The Oath was read aloud by Sanjō <unk> in the main ceremonial hall of the Kyoto Imperial Palace in the presence of the Emperor and more than 400 officials . After the reading , the nobles and daimyo present signed their names to a document praising the Oath , and swearing to do their utmost to uphold and implement it . Those not able to attend the formal reading afterwards visited the palace to sign their names , bringing the total number of signatures to 767 . 
 The purpose of the oath was both to issue a statement of policy to be followed by the post @-@ Tokugawa shogunate government in the Meiji period , and to offer hope of inclusion in the next regime to pro @-@ Tokugawa domains . This second motivation was especially important in the early stages of the Restoration as a means to keep domains from joining the Tokugawa remnant in the Boshin War . Later , military victory " made it safe to begin to push court nobles and daimyo figureheads out of the way . " 
 The promise of reform in the document initially went unfulfilled : in particular , a parliament with real power was not established until 1890 , and the Meiji oligarchy from Satsuma , Chōshū , Tosa and Hizen retained political and military control well into the 20th century . In general , the Oath was purposely phrased in broad terms to minimize resistance from the daimyo and to provide " a promise of gradualism and equity : " 
 " Deliberative councils " and " public discourse " were , after all , terms that had been applied to cooperation between lords of great domains . That " all classes " were to unite indicated that there would continue to be classes . Even " commoners " were to be treated decently by " civil and military " officers , the privileged ranks of the recent past . No one was likely to be in favor of the retention of " evil customs " ; a rather Confucian " Nature " would indicate the path to be chosen . Only in the promise to " seek knowledge throughout the world " was there a specific indication of change ; but here , too , late Tokugawa activists had deplored the irrationality of Japan 's two @-@ headed government as the only one in the world . Moreover the search would be selective and purposeful , designed to " strengthen the foundations of imperial rule . 
 The Oath was reiterated as the first article of the constitution promulgated in June 1868 , and the subsequent articles of that constitution expand the policies outlined in the Oath . Almost eighty years later , in the wake of the Second World War , Emperor Hirohito paid homage to the Oath and reaffirmed it as the basis of " national polity " in his Humanity Declaration . The ostensible purpose of the rescript was to appease the American occupiers with a renunciation of imperial divinity , but the emperor himself saw it as a statement of the existence of democracy in Meiji era . 
 = Russian cruiser Admiral Makarov = 
 Admiral Makarov was the second of the four Bayan @-@ class armoured cruisers built for the Imperial Russian Navy during the mid @-@ 1900s . While initially assigned to the Baltic Fleet , the ship was detached to the Mediterranean several times before the start of World War I in 1914 . She was modified to lay mines shortly after the war began . Admiral Makarov laid mines herself during the war and provided cover for other ships laying minefields . The ship fought several inconclusive battles with German ships during the war , including the Battle of Åland Islands in mid – 1915 . She also defended Moon Sound during the German invasion of the Estonian islands in late 1917 . Admiral Makarov was decommissioned in 1918 and sold for scrap in 1922 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Admiral Makarov was 449 @.@ 6 feet ( 137 @.@ 0 m ) long overall . She had a maximum beam of 57 @.@ 5 feet ( 17 @.@ 5 m ) , a draught of 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) and displaced 7 @,@ 750 long tons ( 7 @,@ 870 t ) . The ship had a crew of 568 officers and men . Admiral Makarov was named in honour of Admiral Stepan Makarov . 
 The ship had two vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines with a designed total of 16 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 304 kW ) intended to propel the cruiser at 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . However , during sea trials , they developed 19 @,@ 320 indicated horsepower ( 14 @,@ 410 kW ) and drove the ship to a maximum speed of 22 @.@ 55 knots ( 41 @.@ 76 km / h ; 25 @.@ 95 mph ) . Steam for the engines was provided by 26 Belleville boilers . She could carry a maximum of 1 @,@ 100 long tons ( 1 @,@ 118 t ) of coal , although her range is unknown . 
 Admiral Makarov 's main armament consisted of two 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) 45 @-@ calibre guns in single @-@ gun turrets fore and aft . Her eight 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns were mounted in casemates on the sides of the ship 's hull . Anti @-@ torpedo boat defense was provided by twenty 75 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) 50 @-@ calibre guns ; eight of these were mounted in casemates on the side of the hull and in the superstructure . The remaining guns were located above the six @-@ inch gun casemates in pivot mounts with gun shields . Admiral Makarov also mounted four 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns . The ship also had two submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedo tubes , one on each broadside . 
 The ship used Krupp armour throughout . Her waterline belt was 190 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) thick over her machinery spaces . Fore and aft , it reduced to 90 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) . The upper belt and the casemates were 60 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick . The armour deck was 50 millimetres ( 2 in ) thick ; over the central battery it was a single plate , but elsewhere it consisted of a 30 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) plate over two 10 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) plates . The gun turrets were protected by 132 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 2 in ) of armour and the conning tower had sides 136 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) thick . 
 = = Service = = 
 Admiral Makarov was built by Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée in La Seyne @-@ sur @-@ Mer , France . The ship was laid down in April 1905 , and she was launched on 28 May 1906 . Admiral Makarov was completed in April 1908 . The ship sailed for the Baltic on 27 May and reached Tallinn , Estonia on 11 June where she was assigned to the Baltic Fleet . A few months later , she returned to the Mediterranean and provided assistance to the survivor of the Messina earthquake in December . The ship then rejoined the Baltic Fleet , but she was transferred back to Mediterranean in 1910 where she represented the Russian Empire , together with the battleship Tsesarevich , the armored cruiser Rurik , and the protected cruiser Bogatyr , at the coronation of Nicholas I of Montenegro in August 1910 . Admiral Makarov was back in the Baltic during 1911 and she made a port visit to Copenhagen in 1912 . The following year , the ship was one of a group of cruisers that visited Brest , France , the Isle of Portland in Great Britain , and Stavanger , Norway . 
 When World War I began , Admiral Makarov was assigned to the First Cruiser Brigade . On 17 August , the ship , together with the armored cruiser Gromoboi , encountered two German light cruisers and an auxiliary minelayer near the entrance to the Gulf of Finland en route to lay a minefield at the entrance . The Russian commander refused combat because he mistakenly thought that the Germans had two additional armored cruisers with them . Shortly afterward , Admiral Makarov was modified to carry mines . She laid her first mines in early December when she was one of a group of ships that mined the northern and western entrances to the Gulf of Danzig . The following month , she provided cover as other cruisers laid minefields in the western Baltic Sea , near Bornholm and Rügen Islands on the night of 12 January 1915 . On 13 February , the ship was en route to cover another minelaying sortie in the Gulf of Danzig , when Rurik ran aground in fog off Fårö Island . She was pulled off despite taking 2 @,@ 400 long tons ( 2 @,@ 400 t ) of water aboard , and Admiral Makarov escorted the damaged ship back home . Together with her sister Bayan and two protected cruisers , she fought a brief and inconclusive action with the light cruiser SMS München during the night of 6 / 7 May while covering a minelaying sortie off Libau . 
 On 2 July , the ship participated in the Battle of Åland Islands when intercepted and decoded wireless signals informed the Russians that a small German force was at sea to lay a minefield off the Åland Islands . Rear Admiral Mikhail Bakhirev was already at sea with Admiral Makarov , Bayan , Rurik , the protected cruisers Bogatyr and Oleg , and the destroyer Novik en route to bombard Memel . Rurik and Novik got separated from the others in fog , but the rest of the force encountered the light cruiser SMS Augsburg and a number of destroyers escorting the minelayer SMS Albatross . The Russians concentrated on Albatross , which was forced to run aground in Swedish territorial waters , while the faster Augsburg escaped to the south . The Russian cruisers were low on ammunition when they encountered two more German cruisers and broke off the action after exchanging fire . 
 When the German launched Operation Albion , the invasion of the Estonian islands of Saaremaa ( Ösel ) , Hiiumaa ( Dagö ) and Muhu ( Moon ) , on 11 October 1917 , Admiral Makarov was in Finland , although she was assigned to the naval forces defending the Gulf of Riga . The ship arrived in Moon Sound on 14 October and engaged German destroyers attempting to enter the Sound from the west until ordered to withdraw on 19 October . 
 The Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk required the Soviets to evacuate their base at Helsinki in March 1918 or have the ships based there interned by newly independent Finland even though the Gulf of Finland was still frozen over . Admiral Makarov was among the first group of ships that sailed on 25 March and reached Kronstadt five days later in what became known as the ' Ice Voyage ' . She was paid off upon arrival and did not participate in the Russian Civil War . The ship was sold for scrap in 1922 and broken up in Stettin . 
 = Frank Macfarlane Burnet = 
 Sir Frank Macfarlane Burnet , OM AK KBE FRS FAA <unk> ( 3 September 1899 – 31 August 1985 ) , usually known as Macfarlane or Mac Burnet , was an Australian virologist best known for his contributions to immunology . He won the Nobel Prize in 1960 for predicting acquired immune tolerance and was best known for developing the theory of clonal selection . 
 Burnet received his Doctor of Medicine degree from the University of Melbourne in 1924 , and his PhD from the University of London in 1928 . He went on to conduct pioneering research in microbiology and immunology at the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research , Melbourne , and served as director of the Institute from 1944 to 1965 . From 1965 until his retirement in 1978 , Burnet worked at the University of Melbourne . Throughout his career he played an active role in the development of public policy for the medical sciences in Australia and was a founding member of the Australian Academy of Science ( AAS ) , and served as its president from 1965 to 1969 . 
 Burnet 's major achievements in microbiology included discovering the causative agents of Q @-@ fever and psittacosis ; developing assays for the isolation , culture and detection of influenza virus ; describing the recombination of influenza strains ; demonstrating that the myxomatosis virus does not cause disease in humans . Modern methods for producing influenza vaccines are still based on Burnet 's work improving virus growing processes in hen 's eggs . 
 Burnet was the most highly decorated and honoured scientist to have worked in Australia . For his contributions to Australian science , he was made the first Australian of the Year in 1960 , and in 1978 a Knight of the Order of Australia . He was recognised internationally for his achievements : in addition to the Nobel , he received the Lasker Award and the Royal and Copley Medal from the Royal Society , honorary doctorates , and distinguished service honours from the Commonwealth of Nations and Japan . 
 After a series of increasing health problems in his final years , Burnet died of cancer . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Burnet was born in Traralgon , Victoria ; his father , Frank Burnet , a Scottish emigrant to Australia , was the manager of the Traralgon branch of the Colonial Bank . His mother Hadassah Burnet ( née Mackay ) was the daughter of a middle @-@ class Scottish immigrant , and met his father when Frank was working in the town of <unk> . Frank was 36 , and 14 years older than Hadassah when they married in 1893 . The family was socially conservative Anglo @-@ Saxon Protestant . Frank Macfarlane Burnet was the second of seven children and from childhood was known as " Mac " . He had an older sister , two younger sisters and three younger brothers . The eldest daughter Doris had a mental disability that consumed most of Hadassah 's time and the family saw Doris 's condition as an unspoken stigma , discouraging the other children from inviting friends home , lest they come across the eldest daughter . From his early years in Traralgon , Mac enjoyed exploring the environment around him , particularly Traralgon Creek . He first attended a private school run by a single teacher before starting at the government primary school at the age of 7 . Mac was distant from his father — who liked to spend his free time fishing and playing golf — from a young age . He preferred bookish pursuits from a young age and was not enamoured of sport , and by the age of eight was old enough to analyse his father 's character ; Mac disapproved of Frank and saw him as a hypocrite who espoused moral principles and put on a facade of <unk> , while associating with businessmen of dubious ethics . Hadassah was preoccupied with Doris , so Mac developed a rather solitary personality . 
 The <unk> moved to Terang in 1909 , when Frank was posted to be the bank manager there , having declined a post in London . Burnet was interested in the wildlife around the nearby lake ; he joined the Scouts in 1910 and enjoyed all outdoor activities . While living in Terang , he began to collect beetles and study biology . He read biology articles in the Chambers 's Encyclopaedia , which introduced him to the work of Charles Darwin . During his early teens , the family took annual holidays to Port Fairy , where Burnet spent his time observing and recording the behaviour of the wildlife . He was educated at Terang State School and attended Sunday school at the local church , where the priest encouraged him to pursue scholastic studies and awarded him a book on ants as a reward for his academic performance . He advised Frank to invest in Mac 's education and he won a full scholarship to board and study at Geelong College , one of Victoria 's most exclusive private schools . Starting there in 1913 , Burnet was the only boarder with a full scholarship . He did not enjoy his time there among the scions of the ruling upper class ; while most of his peers were brash and sports @-@ oriented , Burnet was bookish and not athletically inclined , and found his fellow students to be arrogant and boorish . During this period he kept his beetle @-@ collecting and disapproval of his peers a secret and mixed with his schoolmates out of necessity . Nevertheless , his academic prowess gained him privileges , and he graduated in 1916 , placing first in his school overall , and in history , English , chemistry and physics . The typical university path for a person of his social background was to pursue studies in theology , law or medicine . By this time , he was becoming disillusioned with religion and chose medicine . Due to World War I , military service was a possibility and he felt that a medical background would increase his chances of being given a non @-@ combat post . 
 = = Academic foundations = = 
 From 1918 , Burnet attended the University of Melbourne , where he lived in Ormond College on a residential scholarship . There , he read more of Darwin 's work and was influenced by the ideas of science and society in the writings of H. G. Wells . He enjoyed his time at university and spent much of his free time reading biology books in the library to feed his passion for scientific knowledge . He also had fleeting sporting success , holding down a position in Ormond 's First VIII rowing squad for a brief period . He continued to pursue his study of beetles in private , although his classmates found out and there was no loss in this as they viewed his hobby positively . Despite an ongoing shyness , Burnet got on well with staff and students at university . Burnet was self @-@ motivated and often skipped lectures to study at his own faster pace and pursue further knowledge in the library , and he came equal first in physics and chemistry in first year . The following year , 1918 , he became increasingly immersed in laboratory work , but he was also dogged by peer pressure to enlist in the military , which he saw as a distasteful prospect . However , this was averted by the end of the war . In 1919 , he was one of 12 high @-@ performing students selected for extra tuition , and he came equal first in third year physiology . He began clinical work in the same year , but found it somewhat unpleasant as he was interested in diagnosing the patient and had little interest in showing empathy towards them . 
 While at university , he became an agnostic ; he was sceptical of religious faith , which he regarded as " an effort to believe what common sense tells you isn 't true . " He was also disgusted by what he regarded as hypocritical conduct by religious adherents . Towards the later years of his undergraduate years , his unhappiness with religion began to dog him to a greater extent . He tried to become involved with communism for brief period but then resolved to devote himself to scientific research . The length of time required to study medicine had been reduced to five years to train doctors faster following the outbreak of World War I , and Burnet graduated with a Bachelor of Medicine and a Bachelor of Surgery in 1922 , ranking second in the final exams despite the death of his father a few weeks earlier . His fellow graduates included Ian Wark , Kate Campbell , Jean Macnamara , Rupert Willis and Roy Cameron , who became distinguished scientists in their own right . 
 He then did a ten @-@ month residency at Melbourne Hospital to gain experience before going into practice . The new graduates spent four months in the medicine ward , another four in surgery , and the remaining two in casualty . In the surgery ward he worked under John Gordon and Alan Newton , both well known surgeons . He enjoyed this period immensely and was disappointed when he had to do his medicine residency . However , he was soon engrossed in his work , having been inspired by the neurologist Richard Stawell , whom Burnet came to idolise . As a result of this he became intent on a career in clinical neurology , and he wrote a theoretical paper about testing sensory losses following peripheral nerve lesions , but his submission to the Clinical Report of the Melbourne Hospital was rejected . Burnet applied to be medical registrar as part of his clinical career path , but the medical superintendent of Melbourne Hospital , who was in charge of such appointments , deemed Burnet 's character and personality more suited to a laboratory research career , and asked Burnet to withdraw his application in return for the post of senior resident pathologist , which would become vacant in the following months . Burnet complied . 
 During the transition period he worked as a pathology registrar at the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research and also prepared for his Doctor of Medicine examinations , late in 1923 . In 1923 he took up the post of senior resident pathologist at the Melbourne Hospital ; the laboratories were a part of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute . He conducted research into the agglutinin reactions in typhoid fever , leading to his first scientific publications . He decided to work full @-@ time on the antibody response in typhoid , even though he was technically supposed to pursuing pathology as part of his obligations to the hospital . Burnet came first in the Doctor of Medicine exams by a long distance , and his score was excluded from the scaling process so that the other students would not fail for being so far behind . 
 At the time , the Hall Institute was in the early stages of rapid expansion . The new director of the Institute , Charles Kellaway , wanted to increase the activities of the organisation to not only support hospital operations but have separate research groups in physiology , microbiology and biochemistry that would also do independent studies . He also hoped to raise the standards to make the Institute comparable to the world @-@ class operations in Europe and America . Kellaway took a liking to Burnet and saw him as the best young talent in the Institute with the ability to help raise it to world leading standards . However , he thought that Burnet would need experience working in a laboratory in England before he could lead his own research group on bacteriology in Australia . Burnet left Australia for England in 1925 and served as ship 's surgeon during his journey in exchange for a free fare . On arrival , he took a paid position assisting the curator of the National Collection of Type Cultures at the Lister Institute in London . Burnet prepared or maintained bacteria cultures for other researchers in the morning and was free to do his own experiments in the afternoon . During the latter half of 1926 , he experimented to see if Salmonella typhimurium was affected by bacteriophage . 
 He was awarded the Beit Memorial Fellowship by the Lister Institute in 1926 ; this gave him enough money for him to resign his curator position and he began full @-@ time research on bacteriophages . He injected mice with bacteriophage and observed their immunological reactions and believed bacteriophages to be viruses . For this work he received a Ph.D. from the University of London in 1928 under the direction of Professor J. D. <unk> and was invited to write a chapter on bacteriophages for the Medical Research Council 's System of Bacteriology . He was also given an invitation to deliver a paper at the Royal Society of Medicine in 1927 on the link between O @-@ <unk> and bacteriophage . Burnet began attending the Fabian Society functions and befriended some communists , although he refrained from joining them in overt left @-@ wing activism . He also spent his free time enjoying theatre , engaging in amateur archaeology and cycling through continental Europe . 
 While in London , Burnet became engaged to fellow Australian Edith Linda Marston Druce . She was a secondary school teacher and daughter of a barrister 's clerk and the pair had met in 1923 and had a few dates but did not keep in touch . Druce sought out Burnet while on a holiday in London and they quickly agreed to marriage although she had to return to Australia . They married in 1928 after he had completed his Ph.D. and returned to Australia , and had a son and two daughters . At the time , there was a vacancy for the Chair of Bacteriology at the University of London , and <unk> was lobbying his colleagues to offer Burnet the post , but Burnet returned to Australia , partly because of Druce . 
 = = Walter and Eliza Hall Institute = = 
 = = = Virology and medicine = = = 
 When Burnet returned to Australia , he went back to the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute , where he was appointed assistant director by Kellaway . His first assignment was to investigate the " Bundaberg disaster " , in which 12 children had died after receiving a contaminated diphtheria vaccine . Kellaway was put in charge of a royal commission to investigate the matter and he put Burnet in charge of the laboratory investigations . He identified Staphylococcus aureus in the toxin @-@ antitoxin mixture that had been administered to the children ; it had been picked up from the skin of one of the children and then transmitted to the others in the injections . However , it turned out to be another toxin that had caused the children 's deaths ; this work on <unk> toxin piqued his interest in immunology . During this time , he continued to study bacteriophages , writing 32 papers on phages between 1924 and 1937 . In 1929 , Burnet and his graduate assistant Margot McKie wrote a paper suggesting that bacteriophages could exist as a stable non @-@ infectious form that multiplies with the bacterial host . Their pioneering description of <unk> was not accepted until much later , and was crucial to the work of Max Delbrück , Alfred Hershey and Salvador Luria on the replication mechanism and genetics of viruses , for which they were awarded the 1969 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine . 
 Between 1932 and 1933 , Burnet took leave of absence to undertake a fellowship at the National Institute for Medical Research in London . The Great Depression had resulted in Burnet 's salary being cut from 1000 to 750 pounds , and the National Institute had been given a large grant from the Rockefeller Foundation that allowed them to hire Burnet at 1000 pounds per annum . The National Institute 's Director Sir Henry Dale gained permission from Kellaway for the two @-@ year move ; Kellaway promised to hold Burnet 's job for him when he returned and felt that the experience would make Burnet — whom he saw as the Hall Institute 's brightest young scientist — better equipped to expand operations when he returned to Melbourne . Dale also paid for Burnet 's sister to travel to England to help look after her brother 's young children . 
 Significant breakthroughs in virology were made while he was there , including the isolation and first demonstration of the transmission of the influenza virus . His own research was on the <unk> virus , which he used in developing a chick embryo assay for the isolation and quantification of animal viruses . Dale offered Burnet a permanent position but he declined and returned to the Hall Institute . Following his productive work in London , the Rockefeller Institute agreed to fund a new virus research laboratory in Melbourne for Burnet . He brought back a set of viruses from the National Institute to begin the basis of research in Melbourne . 
 When Burnet returned to Australia , he continued his work on virology , including the epidemiology of herpes simplex . He was also involved in two projects that were not viral , the characterisation of the causative agents of psittacosis and Q fever . After finding that parrots and cockatoos were infected with psittacosis and were responsible for transmission , he lobbied the government for a ban in order to prevent human infection , but he was rebuffed and later came to agree with the government position that there was not much danger . During the time he worked on Q fever with Australian scientist E.H. Derrick , the causative organism of which was named <unk> <unk> in Burnet 's honour , he became the first person to acquire the disease in the laboratory . His epidemiological studies of herpes and Q fever displayed an appreciation of the ecology of infectious disease that became a characteristic of his scientific method . 
 During World War II , Burnet 's research moved to influenza and scrub typhus . With the outbreak of war , Burnet was handed more responsibility and made acting director and had to oversee the move into a new building as Kellaway was seconded to the military in 1939 . Due to Kellaway , many of the infectious disease problems afflicting the military were referred to the institute . Fearing a repeat of the massive global influenza outbreak that occurred after World War I , Burnet focused the institute in the search for a vaccine . He first tested the vaccine on a group of medical students , and after a promising test on 107 army volunteers in February 1942 following a rise in infections , a large @-@ scale program was introduced two months later to inoculate all new recruits after an influenza A outbreak . In this trial , 20 @,@ 000 personnel were vaccinated , without success , and the scheme was abandoned . In 1942 , the investigations into scrub typhus accelerated after an exodus of researchers in that field from Malaya after the Japanese conquest of the area . However , this ended in tragedy when his collaborator Dora Lush accidentally injected herself and then died of the infection . Nevertheless , his work on immunisation had earned him international recognition by this time . 
 Burnet 's first book , Biological Aspects of Infectious Disease , was published in 1940 . It had wide influence and was translated into several languages . In 1942 he was made a Fellow of the Royal Society , and in 1944 he travelled to Harvard University to deliver the Dunham Lectures . There he was offered a chair , but he refused and returned to Australia . This was attributed to his nationalistic tendencies , as well as his sense of loyalty to the Hall Institute . During his trip he also visited the US military facility at Fort Bragg , where he discussed his work on influenza with the scientists working there . 
 In 1944 , he was appointed director of the Institute when Kellaway was appointed director of the Wellcome Foundation . Although Kellaway had groomed Burnet to become a pivotal figure , he was hesitant as to whether Burnet would be at his most effective with a strategic leadership role . Kellaway thought that Burnet might not be suited to the post , and should have continued to focus purely on research for the time being . Burnet had similar doubts , particularly given his taciturn nature , but applied for the position anyway . Although he was not known for his social skills , his ability as a scientist and to impart ideas for investigation to his subordinates held his leadership and the institute in good stead . Unlike his predecessor , who valued a broad gamut of research activities , Burnet was of the opinion that the institute could not make a significant impact at global level in this way , and he pursued a policy of focusing all effort into one area at a time . Always a strong @-@ willed and rather isolated man , he became more single @-@ minded and less tolerant of criticism of his work and expected a more hierarchical structure and unquestioning obedience . According to biographer Sexton , he " displayed a kind of territorial protectiveness in relation to his own work " . 
 In 1944 , it was decided by the University of Melbourne that Burnet would be appointed a professor as part of a cooperative program so that university students could be experimentally trained at the institute , while the researchers engaged in some teaching . This was not a success , and there was much tension , as Burnet repeatedly expressed his opinion in public that university teaching and research should be kept separate , at one point leading to a series of open letters from university professors decrying his attitude . Burnet was also not interested in the politics of university funding , and his disengagement from administrative matters engendered resentment . On the other hand , Burnet was vigorous in obtaining funding for the Hall Institute from government bodies , resorting to the bluff of feigning interest in moving overseas to secure continued strong backing . However , he was criticised for being thrifty and refusing to invest in cutting edge equipment , despite the Hall Institute 's high standing in research circles . Colleagues believed that he was sceptical of modern technology and thought his outlook to be limiting . 
 In 1946 , he initiated the Clinical Research Unit to allow for closer cooperation with the clinical activities of the Royal Melbourne Hospital . Despite his known derisive views of clinical science as being inferior , he supported the work enthusiastically . 
 Under Burnet 's direction , scientists at the Institute made significant contributions to infectious disease research during a period that has been called the " golden age of virology " . <unk> including Alick Isaacs , Gordon Ada , John Cairns , Stephen Fazekas de St. Groth , and Frank Fenner made significant contributions on Murray Valley encephalitis , myxomatosis , poliomyelitis , poxviruses , herpes and influenza . 
 Burnet made significant contributions to influenza research ; he developed techniques to grow and study the virus , including <unk> assays . He worked on a live vaccine against influenza , but the vaccine was unsuccessful when tested during World War II . His interest in the influenza receptor led him to discover the neuraminidase that is secreted by Vibrio cholerae , which later provided the foundation for Alfred Gottschalk 's significant work on glycoproteins and the neuraminidase substrate , sialic acid . Between 1951 and 1956 , Burnet worked on the genetics of influenza . He examined the genetic control of virulence and demonstrated that the virus recombined at high frequency ; this observation was not fully appreciated until several years later , when the segmented genome of influenza was demonstrated . 
 = = = Immunology = = = 
 In 1957 , Burnet decided that research at the Institute should focus on immunology . Burnet reached the decision unilaterally , leaving many of the research staff disillusioned and feeling the action was arrogant ; for Burnet 's part he was comfortable with the decision as he thought it to be effective . Many virologists left the Institute and settled the Australian National University 's John Curtin School of Medical Research . After 1957 all new staff and students at the Institute worked on immunological problems ; Burnet was involved in work relating to autoimmune diseases and the graft @-@ versus @-@ host reaction , and increasingly in theoretical studies of immunology , immunological surveillance and cancer . 
 At the time , immunology was becoming more sophisticated , with the increasing role of molecular biology and biochemistry . Burnet was suspicious of the direction in which immunology was headed , and the increasing emphasis on technology and more intricate experiments , and colleagues felt that Burnet 's conservative attitude was a factor in his decision to turn the institute 's focus to immunology . 
 Burnet began to switch his focus to immunology in the 1940s . In 1941 he wrote a monograph called " The Production of Antibodies " , which was revised and reissued in 1949 with Frank Fenner as a co @-@ author . This book is seen as a key publication in immunology — it marks the move from the study of immunology as a chemical endeavour to a biological one . Importantly in this work , he introduced the concept of " self " and " non @-@ self " to immunology . The distinction between self and non @-@ self was an integral part of Burnet 's biological outlook , of his interest in the living organism in its totality , its activities , and interactions . Burnet regarded the " self " of the host body as being actively defined during its embryogenesis through complex interactions between immune cells and all the other cells and molecules within an embryo . 
 Using the concept of self , Burnet introduced a hypothesis about the situation where the body failed to make antibodies to its own components ( autoimmunity ) and by extension the idea of immune tolerance . He proposed that 
 if in embryonic life expendable cells from a genetically distinct race are implanted and established , no antibody response should develop against the foreign cell antigen when the animal takes on independent existence . 
 Burnet was , however , unable to prove this experimentally . Peter Medawar , Rupert E. Billingham and Leslie Brent did find support for Burnet 's hypothesis in 1953 when they showed that <unk> could be engrafted by intravenous infusion into mice in utero or just after birth and that when these mice matured , they could accept skin and other tissues from the donor but not from any other mouse strain . Burnet and Medawar were co @-@ recipients of the 1960 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for this work , as it provided the experimental basis for inducing immune tolerance , thereby allowing the transplantation of solid organs . Burnet and Medawar were able to coordinate their work effectively despite the rather different personalities and physical separation ; Burnet was taciturn whereas Medawar was a young and urbane Englishman , but they greatly respected one another . 
 However , later studies showed that cells or tissues transplanted before the immune system development of the recipient , such as in embryonic recipients , could be treated as foreign and trigger rejection , countering Burnet 's explanation for self tolerance . In contrast to the Burnet hypothesis of a special tolerance @-@ inducing period defined by the age of the animal , Joshua Lederberg proposed in 1959 , that it is the age of the lymphocyte that defines whether an antigen that is encountered will induce tolerance , with immature lymphocytes being tolerance @-@ sensitive . Lederberg 's concept is now known as central tolerance , and is widely accepted . It may also explain the success of some transplants given early in life and the failure to induce tolerance in other studies . Burnet noted that his contributions to immune tolerance were strictly theoretical : 
 My part in the discovery of acquired immunological tolerance was a very minor one — it was the formulation of an hypothesis that called for experiment . 
 Burnet was interested in how the body produces antibodies in response to antigens . The dominant idea in the literature through the 1940s was that the antigen acted as a template for antibody production , which was known as the " instructive " hypothesis . Burnet was not satisfied with this explanation , and in the second edition of " The Production of Antibodies " , he and Fenner advanced an indirect template theory which proposed that each antigen could influence the genome , thus effecting the production of antibodies . In 1956 he became interested in Niels Kaj Jerne 's natural selection hypothesis , which described a mechanism for immune response based on an earlier theory of Nobel @-@ winning immunologist Paul Ehrlich . Jerne proposed that the antigen bound to an antibody by chance and , that upon binding , more antibodies to that antigen would be produced . Burnet developed a model which he named clonal selection that expanded on and improved Jerne 's hypothesis . Burnet proposed that each lymphocyte bears on its surface specific immunoglobulins reflecting the specificity of the antibody that will later be synthesised once the cell is activated by an antigen . The antigen serves as a selective stimulus , causing preferential proliferation and differentiation of the clones that have receptors for that antigen . 
 In 1958 Gustav Nossal and Lederberg showed that one B cell always produces only one antibody , which was the first evidence for clonal selection theory . Burnet wrote further about the theory in his 1959 book The <unk> Selection Theory of Acquired Immunity . His theory predicted almost all of the key features of the immune system as we understand it today , including autoimmune disease , immune tolerance and somatic hypermutation as a mechanism in antibody production . The clonal selection theory became one of the central concepts of immunology , and Burnet regarded his contributions to the theoretical understanding of the immune system as his greatest contribution to science , writing that he and Jerne should have received the Nobel for this work . Jerne was recognised for his contributions to the <unk> of the immune system when he was a co @-@ recipient of the Nobel Prize in 1984 . 
 There is some contention over Burnet 's publication of his version of the theory in the Australian Journal of Science in 1957 . Some commentators argue he published in an Australian journal to fast @-@ track his hypothesis and obtain priority for his theory over ideas that were published later that year in a paper written by David Talmage , which Burnet had read prior to its publication . In his paper Burnet cited Talmage 's review , and in a later interview , Talmage said he believed that Burnet " truthfully had developed the idea before he received my paper " . The theory is now sometimes known as Burnet 's clonal selection theory , which overlooks the contributions of Ehrlich , Jerne , Talmage , and the contributions of Lederberg , who conceptualised the genetics of clonal selection . 
 Burnet 's work on graft @-@ versus @-@ host was in collaboration with Lone Simonsen between 1960 and 1962 . Simonsen had shown in 1957 that when a chick embryo was inoculated intravenously with adult @-@ fowl blood , a graft @-@ versus @-@ host reaction occurred ; this was known as the Simonsen phenomenon . Their work in this system would later help to explain passenger leukocytes in transplantation . The last project he worked on at the Institute was a study with assistant Margaret Holmes of autoimmune disease in the New Zealand black mouse model ; this mouse has a high incidence of spontaneous autoimmune hemolytic anemia . They looked at the inheritance of autoimmune disease , and their use of immunosuppressive drug cyclophosphamide to treat the disease influenced the use of immunosuppressive drugs in human autoimmune disease . 
 In 1960 , Burnet scaled back his laboratory work , taking one day off per week to concentrate on writing . In 1963 , Autoimmune Diseases : Pathogenesis , Chemistry and Therapy , which he authored with Ian Mackay , was published . He also oversaw an expansion of the Hall Institute and secured funding from the Nuffield Foundation and the state government to build two further floors in the building and take over some of the space taken up by pathology department at the Royal Melbourne Hospital . Despite this , Burnet believed that a world class research body needed to be small enough that one person could effectively run it , and maintained tight control over its activities throughout his leadership . He determined the policies himself , and personally selected all of the research staff and students , relying on a small staff to enforce his plans . 
 He continued to be active in the laboratory until his retirement in 1965 , although his experimental time began to decrease as the operations became increasingly focused on immunology ; Burnet 's work in this area had been mostly theoretical . Gustav Nossal became the next director of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute . Under Burnet 's leadership the Institute had become " probably the world 's best known research centre devoted to the study of immunology . " However , with the increasing sophistication in medical science and its reliance on more complicated technology , Burnet 's lone @-@ wolf approach became less compatible with the research environment , which required more collaboration . In his final years at the helm , Burnet allowed more technical modernisation during the transition period to Nossal 's leadership . 
 = = Public health and policy = = 
 From 1937 Burnet was involved in a variety of scientific and public policy bodies , starting with a position on a government advisory council on polio . After he became the director of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute in 1944 , he was considered a public figure and overcame shyness to become a good public speaker . He recognised the importance of co @-@ operation with the media if the general public was to understand science and scientists , and his writings and lectures played an important part in the formulation of public attitudes and policy in Australia on a variety of biological topics . However , despite making many appearances on radio and television , he never became at ease with interviews and had to be selective with outreach engagements due to the many invitations he received , and tended to accept those that had the potential to promote the Institute . Over time , he began to increase his activism , as he felt more confident that he would be able to make an impact as his reputation grew , especially after winning the Nobel Prize , and even more so after his retirement from the directorship of the Institute . Although Burnet was not naturally outgoing , he saw it as the social responsibility of a scientific leader and scholar to publicly speak out and impart wisdom and foresight to the wider community . 
 Burnet served as a member or chairman of scientific committees , both in Australia and overseas . Between 1947 and 1953 , he was a member of the National Health and Medical Research Council 's Medical Research Advisory Committee . The committee advised on funding for medical research in Australia . During this same period ( 1947 – 52 ) , he was also a member of the Commonwealth government 's Defence Research and Development Policy Committee . Declassified files from this committee show that Burnet made the recommendation that Australia pursue development of chemical and biological weapons to target neighbouring countries ' food stocks and spread infectious diseases . His report was titled War from a Biological Angle . Between 1955 and 1959 , he was chairman of the Australian Radiation Advisory Committee ; he was concerned that Australians were being exposed to unnecessary medical and industrial radiation . 
 Internationally , Burnet was a chairman of the Papua New Guinea Medical Research Advisory Committee between 1962 and 1969 . At the time , Papua New Guinea was an Australian territory , and Burnet had first travelled there as his son was posted there . His role on the committee allowed him to explore his interest in human biology . He was particularly interested in kuru ( laughing sickness ) , and lobbied the Australian government to establish the Papua New Guinea Institute of Human Biology . Burnet later helped oversee the institute 's contribution to the Anglo @-@ Australian participation in the International Biological Programme in the Field of Human <unk> . 
 Burnet served as first chair for the Commonwealth Foundation ( 1966 – 69 ) , a Commonwealth initiative to foster interaction between the member countries ' elite , and he was also active in the World Health Organization , serving on the Expert Advisory Panels on Virus Diseases and on Immunology between 1952 and 1969 and the World Health Organization Medical Research Advisory Committee between 1969 and 1973 . 
 In 1964 , he was appointed to sit on the University Council of Victoria 's third university Latrobe on an interim basis until the institution was formed in 1966 . He served until 1970 . He advocated a less hierarchical relationship between a professor and student , something seen as a move away from the English tradition prevalent in Australia towards and American model . He also called for the downgrading of the importance placed on the liberal arts . His ideas were too radical for his peers and he stepped down from the role in 1970 after none of his suggestions had made an impact . 
 Burnet was opposed to the use of nuclear power in Australia owing to the issues of nuclear proliferation . He later retracted his objections to uranium mining in Australia , feeling that nuclear power was necessary while other renewable energy sources were being developed . In the late 1960s and 1970s , he was also vocal in the anti @-@ smoking movement ; he was one of the first high @-@ profile figures in Australia to educate the public on the dangers of tobacco , and he appeared in a television advertisement criticising the ethics of tobacco advertising , and broadcasters for displaying such material . He and fellow activists were surprised that the commercial was allowed to run briefly , before being taken off air by the station , which only further generated attention for the anti @-@ smoking campaign . A former smoker , he had rejected the habit in the 1950s after several friends died . Burnet was also a critic of the Vietnam War and called for the creation of an international police force . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following his resignation from the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute , Burnet was offered an office at the University of Melbourne in the School of Microbiology . While at the university , he wrote 13 books on a variety of topics including immunology , ageing and cancer , and human biology . He also wrote an autobiography entitled Changing Patterns : An Atypical Autobiography , which was released in 1968 . In all , he wrote a further 16 books after his retirement from the Hall Institute . He was known for his ability to write quickly , often without a final draft , and his ability to convey a message to readers from a wide spectrum of backgrounds , but he was himself sceptical that his opinions had much influence . In 1969 he published Cellular Immunology , considered his magnum opus on immunity , attempted to show how various phenomena could be predicted by the clonal selection theory . The following year , he wrote Immunological Surveillance , which expounded his established opinion that mammals could <unk> themselves through their ability to detect foreign patterns in the body . He continued to maintain an intense and focused work schedule , often shunning others to keep up a heavy writing load . 
 He became president of the Australian Academy of Science in 1965 , having been a foundational fellow when the Academy was formed in 1954 . He had been offered the presidency in 1958 to replace the inaugural head Sir Mark Oliphant , but declined , although he served on the council and as vice president in 1961 – 63 . As president he was recognised by both government and the public as the leading scientist in Australia . His stature as a scientist gave him the gravitas to end policy disputes , and gave the Academy and its advocacy more credibility in the eyes of government and industry . As such his term was considered to be highly successful . Oliphant said that Burnet 's personal prestige was very important in the increased respect the AAS won and that he " made the biological sciences far more acceptable in Australia " . 
 He helped establish the Academy 's Science and Industry Forum , which was formed in the second year of his leadership in order to improve dialogue between researchers and industrialists . It investigated whether a national science policy should be formulated and led to the eventual creation of the Australian Science and Technology Council . He also laid the foundations of the Australian Biological Resources Study . When his presidency ended in 1969 , the Academy founded the Burnet Lecture and Medal , which is the Academy 's highest award for biological sciences . 
 As in many of his previous pursuits , Burnet set an ambitious agenda for himself but ran into difficulties . He saw the Academy as the peak lobby group of the scientific community and their main liaison with government and industry . He tried to lift its profile and use it to persuade the political and industrial leadership to invest more in science . He also wanted to use the Academy to increase the involvement of the eminent scientists of Australia in training and motivating the next generation , but these initiatives were not successful due to a lack of concrete method . Most controversially , he tried to change the membership criteria of the Academy . He wanted to stop the Royal Society from operating in Australia and accepting new Australian members . He reasoned that the Australian Academy would not be strong if the Royal Society would be able to compete with it , and he felt that if Australian scientists were allowed to possess membership of the both bodies , the more established Royal Society would make the Australian Academy look poor in comparison . Questions were raised over the existing dual members — such as Burnet — being able to maintain their status and the hypocrisy thereby entailed in Burnet 's nationalistic proposal , and it was defeated heavily . 
 In 1966 , Burnet accepted a nomination from Australia Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies to become the inaugural chairman of the Commonwealth Foundation , a body that aimed to increase the professional interchange between the various nations of the British Commonwealth . Burnet served in the role for three years and helped start it on a path of steady growth , although he was unable to use it as a personal platform to espouse the importance of human biology . 
 Burnet 's essays and books published in his later life caused contention within the scientific community and to the chagrin of his peers Burnet often made pessimistic proclamations about the future of science . In 1966 Burnet wrote an opinion article for The Lancet entitled " Men or Molecules ? " in which he questioned the usefulness of molecular biology , arguing that it had not and would not contribute anything of use to medicine and that manipulation of the genome as had been demonstrated in bacteria would do more harm to humans than good . Gustav Nossal subsequently described Burnet as " a biologist with a love @-@ hate affair with biochemistry , which led to a brief but damaging rejection of the worth of molecular biology . " 
 He delivered the inaugural Oscar Mendelsohn lecture in 1971 at Monash University and advocated policies for Australia such as population control , prevention of war , long @-@ term plans for the management of the environment and natural resources , Aboriginal land rights , socialism , recycling , advertising bans on socially harmful products , and more regulation of the environment . He angrily denounced French nuclear testing in the Pacific , and after consistently voting for the ruling Liberal Party coalition as it ruled for the past few decades , signed an open letter backing the opposition Labor Party of Gough Whitlam , which took power in 1972 . However , he soon spoke out against Whitlam 's lack of action against tobacco advertising and French nuclear tests . Burnet often found himself frustrated with the refusal of politicians to base policy on long @-@ term objectives , such as the sustainability of human life . 
 In 1971 – 72 , he wrote four books , most notably , Genes , Dreams and Realities , which caused great controversy due to its strident attacks on molecular biology , cellular biology , and claims that cancer and various other diseases were incurable and that it was pointless to try to do so . He also predicted that scientific progress would end soon . 
 Burnet spoke and wrote widely on the topic of human biology after his retirement , aiming to reach all strata of society . He courted the media as well as the scientific community , often leading to sensationalist or scientifically <unk> report of his outspoken views . This often angered colleagues , who viewed him as abusing his stature to deliberately cause a stir . In 1966 Burnet presented the Boyer Lectures , focusing on human biology . He provided a conceptual framework for sustainable development ; 21 years later the definition provided by the Brundtland Commission was almost identical . In 1970 he revised an earlier book which was published as Dominant Mammal : the Biology of Human Destiny ; it was followed by Endurance of Life , which was published in 1978 . The books discuss aspects of human biology , a topic which Burnet wrote on extensively in his later years . In Dominant Mammal he argued that the roots of all human behaviour can be found in the behaviour of animals ; in Endurance he addressed issues of ageing , life , death and the future of mankind . The books strongly polarised the scientific community , and one reviewer described his ideas of sociobiology as " extreme " and giving " a dismal , unappealing view of humanity " . In Endurance of Life , he also called for society to accept euthanasia of ill older people , repeat violent criminals , and most controversially , abortion of pregnancies likely to result in disabled children , and infanticide of handicapped newborns . Knowing that there would be a strong backlash for such policies , he departed overseas for a two @-@ month lecture series at the time of the book launch . In his absence , he was strongly assailed in newspaper letters and some correspondents compared his stance on infanticide to that of Adolf Hitler . At the same time , he also changed his stance on nuclear power and advocated its use , and the reinvestment of revenue for research into solar power . This about face angered the environmental movement . 
 His first wife , Edith Linda Druce , died from lymphoid leukaemia in 1973 , after a four @-@ year struggle . During her final years , Burnet refused all offers of lectures overseas to spend more time nursing his ailing wife . For a period after this he became very lethargic and reclusive , numbed by his wife 's death . He then moved into Ormond College for company , and resumed beetle collecting , but for a year after her death , Burnet tried to alleviate his grief by writing mock letters to her once a week . Gradually he regained his enthusiasm and began writing again . In 1975 , he travelled to California to deliver a series of lectures . In 1976 he married Hazel G. Jenkins , a widowed former singer from a business family in her 70s who was working in the microbiology department as a librarian , and moved out of Ormond College . 
 In 1978 Burnet decided to officially retire ; in retirement he wrote two books . During this time , he missed his laboratory work , and he was constrained to social events and theorising . In 1982 , Burnet was one of three contributors to Challenge to Australia , writing about genetic issues and their impact on the nation 's impact . As a result of the success of the book , in early 1983 , Burnet was appointed to the 70 @-@ person Australian Advisory Council of Elders to offer counsel to policymakers , but the group folded after several members became too frail or died . 
 Burnet continued to travel and speak , but in the early 1980s , he and his wife became increasingly hampered by illness . Having surmised his illness two years earlier , in November 1984 he underwent surgery for colorectal cancer . He made plans to resume scientific meetings , but was then taken ill again , with significant pain in his thorax and legs . Secondary lesions were found in June 1985 and declared to be inoperable and terminal . A supporter of euthanasia , Burnet was unfazed by his imminent death , and he died on 31 August at his son 's home at Port Fairy after two months of illness . He was given a state funeral by the government of Australia ; many of his distinguished colleagues from the Hall Institute such as Nossal and Fenner were pall @-@ bearers , and he was buried near his paternal grandparents after a private family service at Tower Hill cemetery , near Port Fairy . Following his death he was honoured by the House of Representatives ; Prime Minister Bob Hawke took the highly unusual step of moving a condolence motion , an honour typically reserved for parliamentarians . 
 = = Honours and legacy = = 
 Burnet received extensive honours for his contributions to science and public life during his lifetime . He was knighted in the 1951 New Year Honours , received the Elizabeth II Coronation Medal in 1953 , and was appointed to the Order of Merit ( OM ) in the 1958 Queen 's Birthday Honours . In 1960 he was the first recipient of the honorary Australian of the Year award . He received a Gold and Silver Star from the Japanese Order of the Rising Sun in 1961 . He was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) in the 1969 New Year Honours , and received the Elizabeth II Jubilee Medal in 1977 . In 1978 he was made a Knight of the Order of Australia ( AK ) . He was only the fourth person to receive this honour . 
 He was a fellow or honorary member of 30 international Academies of Sciences . He received 10 honorary D.Sc. degrees from universities including Cambridge , Harvard and Oxford , an honorary M.D. degree from Hahnemann Medical College ( now part of Drexel University ) , an honorary Doctor of Medical Science from the Medical University of South Carolina and a LL.D. degree from the University of Melbourne . Including his Nobel , he received 19 medals or awards including the Royal Medal and the Copley Medal from the Royal Society and the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research ; he also received 33 international lectureships and 17 lectureships within Australia . 
 After his death , Australia 's largest communicable diseases research institute — the Macfarlane Burnet Centre for Medical Research was renamed in his honour . The Burnet Clinical Research Unit of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute was also named in his honour in 1986 . In 1975 his work on immunology was recognised by a 33 @-@ cent stamp released by Australia Post . Seven Australian medical scientists were commemorated in the issue of a set of four Australian stamps released in 1995 ; he appears on the 45 @-@ cent stamp with fellow University of Melbourne graduate Jean Macnamara . He also appears on a Dominican stamp that was issued in 1997 . The centenary of his birth was celebrated in Australia in 1999 ; a statue of him was erected in Franklin Street , Traralgon ; and several events were held in his honour including the release of a new edition of his biography by Oxford University Press . 
 Burnet biographer Christopher Sexton suggests that Burnet 's legacy is fourfold : ( 1 ) the scope and quality of his research ; ( 2 ) his nationalistic attitude which led him to stay in Australia , leading to the development of science in Australia and inspiring future generations of Australian scientists ; ( 3 ) his success establishing the reputation of Australian medical research worldwide ; and ( 4 ) his books , essays and other writings . In spite of his sometimes controversial ideas on science and humanity , Peter C. Doherty has noted that " Burnet 's reputation is secure in his achievements as an experimentalist , a theoretician and a leader of the Australian scientific community . " 
 = Neath and Tennant Canal = 
 The Neath and Tennant Canals are two independent but linked canals in South Wales that are usually regarded as a single canal . The Neath Canal was opened from Glynneath to <unk> , to the south of Neath , in 1795 and extended to Giant 's Grave in 1799 , in order to provide better shipping facilities . With several small later extensions it reached its final destination at Briton Ferry . No traffic figures are available , but it was successful , as dividends of 16 per cent were paid on the shares . The canal was 13 @.@ 5 miles ( 21 @.@ 7 km ) long and included 19 locks . 
 The Tennant Canal was a development of the Glan @-@ y @-@ wern Canal , which was built across Crymlyn Bog to transport coal from a colliery on its northern edge to a creek on the River Neath called Red Jacket Pill . It closed after 20 years , but was enlarged and extended by George Tennant in 1818 , to provide a navigable link from the River Neath to the River Tawe at Swansea docks . In order to increase trade , he built an extension to Aberdulais basin , where it linked to the Neath Canal . The extension was built without an act of Parliament and there was a long delay while Tennant attempted to resolve a dispute with a landowner over the routing of the canal . Once opened , much of the Neath traffic used the Tennant Canal , as Swansea provided better facilities for transferring cargo to ships . 
 Use of the canals for navigation ceased in the 1930s , but they were retained as water channels to supply water to local industries and to Swansea docks . The first attempts at restoration began in 1974 with the formation of the Neath and Tennant Canals Society . The section north of Resolven was restored in the late 1980s , and the canal from Neath to Abergarwed has been restored more recently . This project involved the replacement of Ynysbwllog aqueduct , which carries the canal over the river Neath , with a new 35 @-@ yard ( 32 m ) plate girder structure , believed to be the longest single @-@ span aqueduct in Britain . Some obstacles remain to its complete restoration . In 2003 a feasibility study was published , suggesting that the canal could become part of a small network , if it was linked through Swansea docks to a restored Swansea Canal . 
 = = Neath Canal = = 
 Encouraged by the recent grant of an Act of Parliament to authorise the building of the Glamorganshire Canal , it was resolved at a meeting at the Ship & Castle public house in Neath on 12 July 1790 to build a canal from <unk> to Neath , and another from Neath to Giant 's Grave . Among those attending was Lord Vernon , who had already built a short canal near Giant 's Grave to connect the River Neath to furnaces at <unk> . Thomas Dadford was asked to survey a course , and he was assisted by his father and brother . He proposed a route which required 22 locks , part of which was a conventional canal , while other parts used the River Neath . Dadford costed the project at £ 25 @,@ 716 , but in early 1791 Lord Vernon 's agent , Lewis Thomas , proposed two new cuts , and the idea of using the river was dropped soon afterwards . 
 The canal was authorised by an Act of Parliament passed on 6 June 1791 , which created The Company and Proprietors of the Neath Canal Navigation , who had powers to raise £ 25 @,@ 000 by the issue of shares , and an additional £ 10 @,@ 000 if necessary . As well as building the canal , the Canal Company could build inclined planes , railways or rollers if required , and could optionally use the bed of the River Neath . The canal was to run from Glynneath ( called <unk> at the time ) , which was not as far up the valley as <unk> , to <unk> Pill at Neath , where it would join the river . Thomas Dadford was employed as Engineer , and construction started from Neath , northwards towards Glynneath . The canal had reached the River Neath at Ynysbwllog by 1792 , when Dadford resigned to take up work on the Monmouthshire Canal . He was replaced by Thomas <unk> , who failed to complete the canal by the November 1793 deadline given to him , and was arrested in 1794 for irregularities in the accounts of the Glamorganshire Canal . The canal company completed the building work by 1795 , using direct labour , although the lock into the river was never built . Rebuilding of locks and other improvements continued to be made for several years afterwards . 
 There was no immediate pressure to extend the canal to Giant 's Grave , as access to Neath for coastal vessels of up to 200 long tons ( 200 t ) had been improved in 1791 by the construction of the Neath Navigable Cut . However , a second Neath Canal Act was passed on 26 May 1798 , to authorise an extension of about 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) to Giant 's Grave , where better facilities for transferring goods to seagoing vessels were available . Thomas Dadford again surveyed the route , but Edward Price from <unk> acted as engineer . This part of the canal was financed by Lord Vernon , although he was also paid £ 600 for his <unk> canal , which became part of the main line . The extension was completed on 29 July 1799 , and terminated at a basin close to Giant 's Grave Pill . Flood gates on the canal enabled water to be released into the pill to scour it of silt . The total cost of the project was about £ 40 @,@ 000 , which included 19 locks and a number of access tramways . Between 1815 and 1842 , additional docks and wharfs were built at Giant 's Grave , extending the canal slightly , and the canal was extended to Briton Ferry by the construction in 1832 of the Jersey Canal , which was about 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 1 km ) long , and was built without an Act of Parliament by the Earl of Jersey . Another short extension was made around 1842 . The final length of the canal was 13 @.@ 5 miles ( 21 @.@ 7 km ) . 
 From the northern terminus , a tramway connected the canal to iron works at Aberdare and <unk> . This was built in 1803 , and included an incline just north of Glynneath , which was powered by a high @-@ pressure Trevithick steam engine . The <unk> brothers had bought into the iron industry in 1802 , and built the tramway because of high tolls on the Glamorganshire Canal , but by 1814 they were bankrupt , and had no further connections with the canal . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 Mineral resources near the top end of the canal included ironstone , which was normally extracted by scouring . This caused problems for the canal , as silt was deposited in the feeders and the top pounds . The Fox family , who were based at Neath Abbey , but who were scouring ironstone further up the valley , agreed to construct a new feeder in 1807 to mitigate the problem . Protests made to the <unk> , who were scouring at Pen @-@ <unk> and Cwm <unk> , were less successful . As the pounds were silting up , the company took legal action in 1811 . The court found in their favour , recognising that the canal would soon be useless unless something was done . 
