 Trade steadily grew . Three small private branches were built to serve the industries of the valley . Near the top of the canal , a branch was constructed in 1800 , which ran towards <unk> , and was connected to collieries by nearly 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of tramroad . At <unk> , a branch built in 1817 served the <unk> Bach <unk> on the river bank . Below Neath , a 550 @-@ yard ( 500 m ) branch left the main line at Court Sart to connect to a tramroad serving the collieries at <unk> . Although there are no figures for the tonnage carried , apart from a mention of 90 @,@ 000 tons of coal in 1810 , receipts increased from £ 2 @,@ 117 in 1800 to £ 6 @,@ 677 in 1830 . Subscribers had paid a total of £ 107 @.@ 50 for their shares , and dividends were paid from 1806 , rising from £ 2 in 1806 to £ 18 in 1840 . Based on the receipts , it has been estimated that some 200 @,@ 000 tons of coal were carried when trade was at its peak , supplemented by iron , ironstone and fire clay . 
 Facilities at Giant 's Grave improved , and included jetties to enable ships ' ballast to be landed and dumped , rather than being thrown overboard . This latter approach had caused problems at Newport for the Monmouthshire and Brecon Canal , where ballast had been thrown into the river , and at Cardiff for the Glamorganshire Canal , where it had been thrown into the canal basin . Efforts were also made to improve the facilities at Neath . From 1818 , a Harbour Board was established , and banks of copper slag , marked with buoys , were used to confine the channel . This enabled ships of over 300 tons to reach Neath quays on spring tides , although on neap tides Giant 's Grave still had to be used . From 1824 , when the connection to the Tennant Canal opened , much of the trade crossed the river and passed down the western bank to the port of Swansea . 
 = = Glan @-@ y @-@ wern Canal = = 
 The Glan @-@ y @-@ wern Canal was built to connect Richard Jenkins ' colliery at Glan @-@ y @-@ wern with the River Neath at <unk> 's Hole , an inlet across the mud flats from the main channel of the river Neath , which was later known as Red Jacket Pill . Jenkins obtained a lease to build it from Lord Vernon on 14 August 1788 , but died on the same day . Edward Elton took over management of the colliery , and the canal was constructed by 1790 , although there was no actual connection to the river . At Red Jacket , cargos were transhipped from the small boats used on the canal to larger vessels in the pill , which was tidal . The canal remained in use for about 20 years . Elton became bankrupt and died in 1810 after which Lord Vernon , who had leased the land on which the canal was built to Elton , placed a distraint on the wharves at Red Jacket and on the barges and it became disused . 
 George Tennant incorporated the southern section into his Tennant Canal . The northern branch over the Crymlyn Bog was derelict by 1918 . It branches northwards in Crymlyn Burrows and terminates at the Crymlyn Bog nature reserve , now a Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) . The SSSI covers an area of 692 acres ( 280 ha ) , and has been designated because of the presence of fen and wet woodland habitats . It is also a <unk> site and a Special Area of Conservation . Rare flora and fauna include slender cottongrass , the fen raft spider , and groupings of rare and scarce invertebrates . 
 = = The Tennant Canal = = 
 George Tennant , born in 1765 and the son of a solicitor in Lancashire , moved to the area in 1816 , after he had bought the <unk> estate . The Glan @-@ y @-@ wern Canal was unused at the time , following Lord Vernon 's distraint , but Tennant , who had no previous experience with canals , decided to lease it , enlarge it and extend it . He planned to make it suitable for barges of 30 to 35 long tons ( 30 to 36 t ) , which would gain access to the river Neath through a lock at Red Jacket . Where the canal turned northwards across Crymlyn Bog , he would extend it to the west , to terminate at a lock into the River Tawe , near Swansea harbour . He believed that Swansea docks would provide a better shipping point than Neath or Giant 's Grave , and hoped that the canal would encourage the development of the corridor through which it ran . He attempted to gain support for the scheme from local landowners , but when none was forthcoming , he decided to fund the project himself . Lord Vernon 's estate had been inherited by the Earl of Jersey in 1814 , and so Tennant leased the Glan @-@ y @-@ wern Canal from him . 
 Work started in 1817 , under the direction of the engineer William <unk> , and the canal was completed by autumn 1818 , running from near the east pier on the River Tawe at Swansea to the River Neath at Red Jacket . The canal was built to a grander scale than originally intended , and could be navigated by barges of 50 to 60 long tons ( 51 to 61 t ) . The main line was 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) long , and the 1 @.@ 4 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 3 km ) branch to Glan @-@ y @-@ wern was also reopened , for it supplied regular cargoes of coal . Other goods carried included timber , bark , fire @-@ bricks and sand , but the volume of goods carried was not enough to make a profit . He negotiated with the Neath Canal , who gave him permission to build a lock into the river from their canal , either at Giant 's Grave or Court Sart pill , but working canal boats across a tidal river would not have been ideal , and he did not build the lock . 
 Instead , he decided to build an extension to link up with the Neath Canal basin at Aberdulais . Again he sought support from local landowners , including Lord Jersey , Lord Dynevor and the Duke of Beaufort , but again none was forthcoming . He decided to build it as a private canal , without an Act of Parliament , and work started in 1821 . Engineering problems were experienced near Neath Abbey , where a 500 @-@ yard ( 460 m ) cutting was required through what appeared to be quicksand . Eventually , an inverted masonry arch had to be built to contain the canal and stop the sand collapsing . The lack of an Act to authorise the canal proved to be a problem in April 1821 , when L. W. Dillwyn refused permission for Tennant to cut through his land to pass under the Swansea road . In February 1822 , Dillwyn obtained an injunction against Tennant , who then attempted to change Dillwyn 's opinion by sending a stream of important people to argue his case . Finally , in the autumn , Tennant offered the Neath Canal terms for the use of the junction which were so favourable to them that they accepted . Dillwyn , who was a Neath Canal shareholder , was sent a conciliatory letter and eventually agreed to negotiate with Tennant , whom he described as " that terrible plague Mr. Tennant . " The final section included the only lock on the main line , which was followed by a 340 @-@ foot ( 100 m ) ten @-@ arched aqueduct across the River Neath , and the junction with the Neath Canal . The total length of the canal , when it was opened on 13 May 1824 , was 8 @.@ 5 miles ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) , and it had cost around £ 20 @,@ 000 , which did not include the price of the land or of the harbour at Port Tennant . 
 At the Swansea end , Tennant built a sea @-@ lock , so that boats could enter Fabian Bay , and named the area Port Tennant . His terminus was destroyed when the Prince of Wales Dock was constructed by the Swansea Harbour Trust in 1881 . It occupied all of the area which had been Fabian Bay , and so a lock was constructed to enable boats to reach tidal water by passing through the dock , and a wharf for the canal was constructed at the eastern end of the dock . Tennant 's wharf was again destroyed in 1898 , when the dock was extended . <unk> was provided for the canal along the entire southern side of the extension , but no lock was built to allow canal boats to enter the dock , even though the Act of Parliament made provision for one . A new branch of the canal was built in 1909 , which included a lock into the newly constructed Kings Dock , where a lay @-@ by berth was provided on its north side . 
 Sometime before 1876 another branch was built along the south @-@ western edge of the Crymlyn Bog to transport coal from a mine at Tir @-@ isaf . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 Prior to its opening , Tennant estimated that the canal would carry 99 @,@ 994 tons per year , and generate £ 7 @,@ 915 in income . Traffic built up , and by the 1830s , annual tonnage was around 90 @,@ 000 tons , but revenues were less than anticipated , and produced a profit of about £ 2 @,@ 500 per year . Initially , it was known as the Neath and Swansea Junction Canal , but by 1845 it had become known as the Tennant Canal . The water was 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep between Red Jacket and Aberdulais , and 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) deep from Red Jacket to Swansea harbour . This provided a large reservoir of water , which was used to scour the tidal basin at Port Tennant . Boats typically carried 25 tons , which allowed them to work on the Neath Canal as well . Several short branches were built , including one to the Vale of Neath Brewery which opened in 1839 and was privately funded by the brewery . In the same year , the Glan @-@ y @-@ wern Canal was dredged and re @-@ opened . 
 Goods carried were mainly coal and culm , but also included timber , iron ore , sand , slag and copper ore , with smaller amounts of foodstuffs and general merchandise . Establishment of industries at Port Tennant , which included Charles Lambert 's <unk> in the 1850s and a patent fuel works in the 1860s , resulted in increased traffic of coal , from both Glan @-@ y @-@ wern and Tir @-@ isaf collieries . Tir @-@ isaf was served by a 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) branch built in 1863 by the Earl of Jersey , but leased to the <unk> . Traffic figures reached 225 @,@ 304 tons in 1866 , and then gradually declined after that , but this provided a steady revenue until 1895 . The river lock at Red Jacket had a chequered history . Once the line to Aberdulais basin had been opened , it was barely used , and Tennant thought about removing it in 1832 . However , it was back in use some time later , and was unused again in the 1880s , only to be rebuilt in 1898 . 
 = = Demise = = 
 The canals faced competition from the Vale of Neath Railway after 1851 , but remained profitable until the early 1880s , in the case of the Neath Canal , and the 1890s for the Tennant . An unusual aspect of the Tennant 's success was that tolls were maintained , although tonnage dropped . Most canals at this time made significant cuts to tolls in an attempt to remain competitive with the railways . After 1883 , the Neath Canal carried small amounts of silica and gunpowder , but traffic had virtually ceased by 1921 . Navigation on the Neath Canal came to an end in 1934 , and on the Tennant Canal soon afterwards . However , most of the infrastructure was maintained as the canals supplied water to local industries . 
 When the Glynneath bypass was built in the 1970s , the canal was culverted above Ysgwrfa lock , to allow the road to be straightened , and reduced in width beyond that , to allow the road to be widened . Above <unk> lock , the road was built over the canal bed , and all traces have gone . This road was superseded by the <unk> dual carriageway when it opened in 1996 , and has become the <unk> road . The part which covered the final section of the canal is no longer a road , although the dual carriageway runs over the site of the Glynneath basin . 
 At Port Tennant , the course of the canal has been covered over by railways , roads and other facilities of the port , but continues to supply water to the Prince of Wales dock through a large culvert , which helps to maintain water levels in the docks . The Tennant canal is still owned by the Coombe @-@ Tennant family . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 The canals are the subject of active restoration projects . Local interest resulted in the formation of the Neath and Tennant Canals Preservation Society in 1974 , to promote restoration of the canal , and carry out clearance and repairs using volunteers . In 2006 it was renamed the Neath and Tennant Canals Trust . They have worked alongside the two Canal companies , Neath Port Talbot Council , and a wide range of funders and bodies working for regeneration of the Neath valley , to enable significant sections of the canals to return to use . 
 = = = North @-@ eastern section = = = 
 From 1984 to 1990 the canal benefited from job creation schemes run by the Manpower Services Commission and Youth Training Scheme to work on the northern section from Resolven to Ysgwrfa . By 1990 there was 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) of navigable canal , including 7 restored locks and a slipway at Resolven basin . It received a 1998 Europa Nostra award for the quality of the work , and a Civic Trust Award in 1992 . The £ 4 million project was jointly funded by the Welsh Office and the Prince of Wales Trust . The <unk> aqueduct in the middle of this section was refurbished by the Canals Society in 1990 . The stream that is now carried under the canal had previously been carried over it in a cast iron trough , but was diverted through a channel cut across the canal bed after high flows overtopped the trough . This required the construction of a new aqueduct , and once completed , the Canals Society launched their trip boat , named Thomas Dadford , on 12 July 1990 , to provide canal trips for the public . The <unk> also provided boat trips for the <unk> Trust from the Tŷ Banc former lock @-@ keepers cottage at Resolven , until 2008 . 
 = = = South @-@ western section = = = 
 In 1993 the stretch of canal from Abergarwed locks to <unk> @-@ yr @-@ Heol lock at Tonna was polluted when iron @-@ bearing water began discharging from a mine <unk> of the <unk> coal mine . This turned the water orange , and deposited ferruginous sediment along the canal . A treatment plant and reedbeds were installed to clean the mine water , and this £ 1 @.@ 6 million project was commissioned in 1999 . 
 In 2000 the Thomas Dadford canal boat was transferred from the northern to the southern section , and began running boat trips from Neath town centre . Initially these could only run as far as Tonna . A £ 2 @.@ 7 million project involving staged draining of the polluted sections enabled the dredging and removal of 65 @,@ 000 tons of polluted sediment , and rebuilding of much of the infrastructure . This extended the navigable section north @-@ east past Aberdulais basin to Lock Machin , a stretch of 3 miles ( 5 km ) . 
 To extend the canal further to the north @-@ east , a £ 1 @.@ 6 million project was funded by the European Union Objective 1 project , the Welsh Assembly and Neath Port Talbot Council . This included complete replacement of the Ynysbwllog aqueduct , part of which had been washed away in a flood in 1979 . The commercial role of the canal at that time was to provide water to industries near Swansea , so the water flow had been maintained by replacing the missing arch with pipes . 20 years later a steel footbridge was built to reinstate the towpath . Finally , the canal itself was taken over a new aqueduct , completed in March 2008 . The 35 @-@ yard ( 32 m ) plate girder aqueduct is believed to be the longest single span aqueduct in the UK . It is 23 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) wide , and includes a footpath on both sides of the navigation channel . A new car park and slipway were provided from the <unk> , and the Clun locks were renovated , to give 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) of navigable canal from central Neath to <unk> . Following improvements , the towpath between Briton Ferry and Tonna has become a cycle route , in conjunction with Sustrans , the sustainable transport charity . 
 = = = Plans = = = 
 Several obstacles remain before the canal restoration can be completed . To join the two navigable sections a new bridge would be needed where the canal is culverted under Commercial Road , and the infilled section to Abergarwed would need to be excavated . The original bridge at Commercial Road is buried beneath the new embankment , and so there is sufficient headroom available through the embankment without major alterations to the road level . Rebuilding of the two Abergarwed locks and Resolven lock would then create a single stretch of canal some 10 miles ( 16 km ) long . Extension to the south is blocked by a bridge at water level in Neath , but in 2009 Neath Port Talbot Council commissioned the Prince 's Foundation and British Petroleum to investigate options for the regeneration of the Canal Green area , between the river and the railway line , and the proposals suggested that it should be replaced by a lifting or bascule bridge . 
 The Tennant Canal presents few problems beyond that of the aqueduct below Aberdulais basin , which is a scheduled ancient monument , and rebuilding of the lock below that . Resolution of these issues would create around 20 miles ( 32 km ) of navigable canal . 
 At Briton Ferry , the canal ends under the M4 motorway at a scrapyard , but there are plans to refurbish Brunel 's Briton Ferry dock , just to the south , and a short extension to it would provide a good terminus . In Neath itself , a masterplan for the Canal Green area , developing both the river frontage and canal sides , has the potential to provide a canal basin and moorings for Neath . 
 At the opposite end , at Ysgwrfa , the final five locks before Glynneath have been severed by a realignment of the road and the construction of a culvert , but the road has carried a lot less traffic since the <unk> bypass was opened , and could possibly be rerouted along its original course , where the bridge over the canal still exists . The Neath Canal Act has not been repealed , and so there is still a right of navigation along this section , which should ease the process of reinstating it . The terminus would then be near the Lamb and Flag public house , south of the final two locks , which are unlikely to be restored . 
 At Swansea , the Tennant Canal could be <unk> to the Prince of Wales Dock , and hence to the River Tawe , which has become a large marina since the construction of a tidal barrage . This could then provide a link to a restored Swansea Canal . Associated British Ports , who run Swansea Docks , rejected the idea of a canal link in 1997 , but since then the Prince of Wales Dock has become the subject of a regeneration scheme , and a route for the canal has been reserved in the planning document . The feasibility of this scheme and a possible route was investigated in a report by the engineers W. S. Atkins published in 2003 . A report for Natural Resources Wales by <unk> Ltd. recommended a range of initiatives to better connect the urban areas of the city to the more rural east of the county , including Crymlyn Bog . The reconnection of the Tennant Canal to the Prince of Wales Dock was again outlined in that report . 
 = = Canals in popular culture = = 
 The opening of the Tennant Canal in 1824 inspired Elizabeth Davies , who owned a lollipop @-@ shop in Neath , to write a 19 @-@ verse poem , which was published by Filmer Fagg of Swansea . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 = Sanctus Real = 
 Sanctus Real is an American Christian rock band formed in Toledo , Ohio , in 1996 . The group is composed of Chris Rohman ( lead guitar ) , Mark Graalman ( drums ) , Jake Rye ( bass ) , Seth Huff ( guitar , keys ) , and Dustin Lolli ( lead vocals ) . The band is best known for their number one singles " Lead Me " , " Forgiven " , " Whatever You 're Doing " , " I 'm Not Alright " , " Don 't Give Up " , " We Need Each Other " , " Everything About You " , and " The Fight Song " . Since 2002 , they have released five albums through the Sparrow Records label . 
 On July 1 , 2015 , lead singer and co @-@ founder , Matt Hammitt , announced that he was leaving the band , effective the end of 2015 . 
 Sanctus Real formed in 1996 , and the band released three independent albums over five years . After signing with Sparrow Records in 2002 , the group released their major label debut , Say It Loud , at the end of the year . In June 2004 it was followed by Fight the Tide , which garnered a GMA Dove Award win in 2005 , and two singles that charted at number 1 on Christian radio , according to R & R magazine . The band 's third album , The Face of Love , was released in April 2006 . The single " I 'm Not Alright " received a GMA Dove Award nomination in 2007 . 
 Their fourth album , We Need Each Other ( 2008 ) , was recorded in late 2007 and released in February . It received a Grammy Award nomination and spawned the single " We Need Each Other " . Sanctus Real released their fifth studio album in March 2010 , titled Pieces of a Real Heart also receiving a Grammy nomination with Christian Billboard chart topping hits " Lead Me " and " Forgiven " . The band 's music incorporates a modern alternative rock style , and has evolved from power pop to a more melodic and guitar @-@ driven sound . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1996 , lead singer and guitarist Matt Hammitt met guitarist Chris Rohman while they were tenth graders attending Toledo Christian School in Ohio . They led youth worship at their school and church , and began writing their own music that year . Drummer Mark Graalman and bassist Matt Kollar soon joined , forming the band 's original line @-@ up . The group performed their first concert for several friends in the back of a warehouse in December 1996 . They released a six @-@ track demo tape in August 1997 , and a five @-@ track EP titled All This Talk of Aliens in January 1998 . 
 Sanctus Real 's full @-@ length studio album Message for the Masses was released on June 18 , 1999 , and shortly afterward , bassist Matt Kollar was replaced by Steve Goodrum . Following Message for the Masses , which was recorded in a garage , the band made plans to record tracks at a major studio . To earn money for the endeavor , Hammitt and Goodrum took telemarketing jobs for a few months , which were difficult and described by Hammitt as " the most dreadful [ jobs ] ever " . They recorded three songs with producer Skidd Mills in Memphis , Tennessee , and after winning a local radio contest , decided to record an entire independent album with Mills . It was completed in 2000 under the title Nothing to Lose , and the band attended 2001 's Gospel Music Week in Nashville to distribute copies of the project . 
 From 1996 to 2001 , Sanctus Real toured areas of the United States , and also sent demos to several Christian and mainstream record labels . After they received multiple recording contract offers in 2001 , the band decided to sign with Sparrow Records . Matt Hammitt said , " At that point , we really had to do some soul searching and figure out where it was we were supposed to be ... Ultimately , we knew we could relate to kids in the church . We are passionate about our faith ... [ and ] from our personal experience , we felt this was the place we were supposed to be . " 
 = = = Say It Loud = = = 
 Toward the end of 2002 , before releasing their first non @-@ independent album , Sanctus Real performed as an opening act on the Festival Con Dios tour . The band also guested on Bleach 's first headlining tour , the We Are Tomorrow tour , in December 2002 . Sanctus Real 's major label debut , Say It Loud , was then released in December 2002 , through Sparrow Records . The album was produced by former <unk> lead vocalist Pete Stewart . Sanctus Real began touring again in February 2003 as a guest band on the See Spot Rock Tour , with Relient K , the O.C. <unk> , Pillar and John Reuben . 
 = = = Fight the Tide = = = 
 The band recorded a cover of U2 's song " Beautiful Day " for the compilation album In the Name of Love : Artists United for Africa , which was released at the beginning of 2004 . The track reached number 1 on R & R magazine 's Christian rock chart in 2004 , becoming their first chart @-@ topping single . " Beautiful Day " also received a GMA Dove Award nomination for Modern Rock Song of the Year in 2004 . 
 In February 2004 , the band went back in studio to record their second album ; almost all of the tracks were written in the previous month . It was recorded in six weeks with producer Tedd T , and soon released under the title Fight the Tide in June 2004 . The lead single " Everything About You " was released in mid @-@ 2004 , and by September it had stayed at number 1 on R & R 's Christian rock chart for six consecutive weeks . The song was later featured on the X 2006 compilation album in 2005 . In September 2004 , Sanctus Real launched their first headlining tour , the Fight the Tide Tour . The tour featured guest bands Hawk Nelson , Seven Places and Ever Stays Red , and traveled through more than 25 cities . 
 After being nominated in late 2004 , Fight the Tide won the GMA Dove Award for " Modern Rock Album of the Year " in early 2005 . Released near the beginning of the year , " The Fight Song " was Sanctus Real 's next single , and in May 2005 it reached the top of R & R 's Christian rock chart , becoming the band 's third number 1 song . In April 2005 , bass player Steve Goodrum left the band and was replaced by Dan Gartley , a previous touring member of Relient K. Gartley played his first concert with Sanctus Real at the Agape Festival in May 2005 . 
 = = = The Face of Love = = = 
 Sanctus Real 's third main studio album , The Face of Love , was released in April 2006 . The album 's first single was " I 'm Not Alright " which became a number 1 song on Christian contemporary hit radio ( CHR ) , as reported by R & R magazine . It was also the third most played song of 2006 on Christian radio formats . In early 2007 , the band received two GMA Dove Award nominations : " Rock Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year " for " I 'm Not Alright " and " Rock / Contemporary Album of the Year " for The Face of Love . Following the album 's release , Pete Prevost became the fifth member of Sanctus Real as an additional guitarist . 
 The album 's second single , " Don 't Give Up " , was released in the beginning of 2007 , and by May it became the band 's fifth number 1 track by placing at the top of R & R 's Christian CHR chart . At the end of 2006 they were named the most @-@ played artist of the year on R & R 's Christian CHR chart . The title track " The Face of Love " was also a radio single . Sanctus Real launched another headlining tour in April 2007 , The Face of Love tour , featuring Needtobreathe and This Beautiful Republic . 
 = = = We Need Each Other = = = 
 In August 2007 , Sanctus Real returned to the studio to record a fourth album , which was finished by the end of the year . In November 2007 , the album was originally slated for release under the title Turn on the Lights , the name of a track on the album . It was later changed to We Need Each Other , and was released in February 2008 , through Sparrow Records . The title track " We Need Each Other " was released earlier as the album 's lead single in November 2007 . The song stayed at number 1 on R & R 's Christian CHR chart for five consecutive weeks by February 2008 , and it was 2008 's eighth most @-@ played song of the year in the same format . 
 During early to mid @-@ 2008 , Sanctus Real guested on Third Day 's headlining tour , and that year they also appeared on an episode of Extreme Makeover : Home Edition . Two more singles from We Need Each Other were released : " Whatever You 're Doing ( Something Heavenly ) " in early 2008 , and " Turn On the Lights " in August 2008 . Later in the year , the band launched their own two @-@ month We Need Each Other Tour in the United States , passing through 16 states and over 30 cities ; the tour featured guest appearances from <unk> , Tenth Avenue North and speaker Sammy <unk> . In 2009 , We Need Each Other received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Rock Gospel Album . 
 = = = Pieces of a Real Heart = = = 
 In mid November 2009 , Matt Hammitt announced on Twitter that Sanctus Real finished recording their fifth album . The first radio single was titled " Forgiven " , and peaked at No. 6 on the Hot Christian Songs chart . On December 2 , 2009 , the band announced on Twitter and Facebook that they narrowed the final album name down to two options : A Million Hearts and Pieces of a Real Heart , and held a public vote for one hour . Shortly after , it was confirmed that the title Pieces of a Real Heart would be chosen . The album was released on March 9 , 2010 via Sparrow Records . 
 = = = Run = = = 
 The sixth studio album by the band was released on February 5 , 2013 , which was called Run , and the lead single from the album is " Promises " . Shortly after the album 's release , both Dan Gartley and Pete Prevost departed the band . 
 = = = The Dream = = = 
 Soon after Jake Rye and Seth Huff replaced Gartley and Prevost . The seventh studio album by the band , The Dream , was released on September 16 , 2014 . The first video from the album , " Lay It Down " , was released to YouTube June 24 , 2014 . The second lyric video , titled ' Same God ' , was released by the band on YouTube on October 21 , 2014 . 
 On July 1 , 2015 , it was made clear that Matt Hammitt , who had founded the band , was leaving in December . 
 = = = Greatest Hits : Best of Sanctus Real = = = 
 The Best of Sanctus Real was released on October 9 , 2015 via the Capitol Christian record label . It includes a selection of fourteen songs spanning the band 's previous seven albums and one new song written specifically for the release . It was announced earlier in year that this would be the final project with the band for lead singer , Matt Hammitt . 
 = = = Dustin Lolli : A new era = = = 
 The band changed their lead singer to Dustin Lolli in late 2015 , with the first release being an extended play , This Is Love , that was released on February 5 , 2016 , by the band themselves . 
 = = Touring = = 
 In April and May 2010 , Sanctus Real debuted the complete new album Pieces of a Real Heart while headlining the UNITED Spring 2010 Tour . Joining them on this 25 @-@ city nationwide tour was visionary and speaker David Nasser along with fellow artists Jonny Diaz and <unk> . Sanctus Real announced they would be touring with Winter Jam 2012 on the eastern side of the United States . During their 2012 tour , their tour bus burned to the ground . Sanctus posted a photo on their Facebook page on June 3 , adding all people got off the bus , but their personal belongings were lost . Sanctus Real began The Run Tour in September 2013 and finished in November 2013 . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Sanctus Real 's main genre is typically labeled as Christian rock and alternative CCM . Their first three independent albums were described by Allmusic as power pop . Say It Loud was characterized by increased guitars and a powerful modern rock style . Their second release , Fight the Tide , was described as " melodic power rock " with similarities to Foo Fighters , Jimmy Eat World , Switchfoot , U2 , and <unk> . The band 's music on The Face of Love blended the styles from their previous two albums , evolving into less of a heavier rock sound . With We Need Each Other , lead singer Matt Hammitt noted that he " just pushed the limits of what I can do vocally " during some songs , " whether it be on a soft , kind of rustic sounding vocal or whether it be this overdriven , rock high @-@ range kind of vocal . " 
 = = Members = = 
 Current members 
 Chris Rohman – guitar ( 1997 – present ) 
 Mark Graalman – drums ( 1996 – present ) 
 Jake Rye - bass ( 2013 – present ) 
 Seth Huff - keys / guitar ( 2013 – present ) 
 Dustin Lolli - lead vocalist ( 2016 – present ) 
 Former members 
 Matt Kollar – bass ( 1996 @-@ 1999 ) 
 Steve Goodrum – bass ( 1999 – 2005 ) 
 Michael Gee - Guitar ( 1996 – 97 ) 
 Dan Gartley – bass and bells ( 2005 – 2013 ) 
 Pete Prevost – guitar , banjo , piano ( 2006 – 2013 ) 
 Matt Hammitt – lead vocalist , guitar ( 1996 – 2015 ) 
 On July 1 , 2015 , Matt Hammitt announced that he was leaving the band , effective December 2015 . 
 On January 25 , 2016 , Dustin Lolli was announced as the new lead singer and a music video was released for the song " This Is Love " . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = GMA Dove Awards = = = 
 2004 : Modern Rock Song of the Year ( " Beautiful Day " ) – nominated 
 2005 : Modern Rock Album of the Year ( Fight the Tide ) – won 
 2007 : Rock / Contemporary Album of the Year ( The Face of Love ) – nominated 
 2007 : Rock / Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year ( " I 'm Not Alright " ) – nominated 
 2011 : Song of the Year ( " Lead Me " ) – nominated 
 2011 : Pop / Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year ( " Lead Me " ) – nominated 
 2011 : Rock / Contemporary Album of the Year ( Pieces of a Real Heart ) – nominated 
 = = = Grammy Awards = = = 
 2009 : Grammy Award nomination for Best Rock Gospel Album ( We Need Each Other ) – nominated 
 2010 : Grammy Award nomination for Best Contemporary / Pop Gospel Album ( Pieces of a Real Heart ) – nominated 
 = = Discography = = 
 1998 : All This Talk of Aliens – independent 
 1999 : Message for the Masses – independent 
 2001 : Nothing to Lose – independent 
 2002 : Say It Loud – Sparrow 
 2004 : Fight the Tide – Sparrow 
 2006 : The Face of Love – Sparrow 
 2008 : We Need Each Other – Sparrow 
 2010 : Pieces of a Real Heart – Sparrow 
 2010 : Pieces of Our Past : The Sanctus Real Anthology - Sparrow 
 2013 : Run – Sparrow 
 2014 : The Dream - Sparrow 
 = Themes in Minority Report = 
 The plot of the 2002 science fiction neo @-@ noir film Minority Report concerns itself with a number of themes . The film 's plot centers around a trio of psychics called " precogs " , who see future images called " <unk> " of crimes yet to be committed . These images are processed by " <unk> " , a specialized police department , which apprehends the criminals based on the precogs foreknowledge . The cast includes Tom Cruise as <unk> officer John Anderton , Colin Farrell as Department of Justice agent Danny Witwer , Samantha Morton as the senior precog Agatha , and Max von Sydow as Anderton 's superior Lamar Burgess . The film is a combination of whodunit , thriller , and science fiction . 
 Spielberg has characterized the movie 's story as " fifty percent character and fifty percent very complicated storytelling with layers and layers of murder mystery and plot . " The film 's central theme is the question of free will vs. determinism . It examines whether free will can exist if the future is set and known in advance . It also concerns itself with the role of preventative government in protecting its citizenry , which was apt of the time of the picture 's given America 's debates over the government 's expanding powers after 9 / 11 . 
 Minority Report presents a future of increasing electronic surveillance , personalized advertising , and it analyzes the role of media in a future state where electronic advancements make its presence nearly boundless , the potential legality of an infallible prosecutor , and Spielberg 's repeated theme of the broken family . Spielberg 's analysis of the familial aspect was motivated by his own parent 's divorce when he was a child . 
 = = Free will vs. determinism = = 
 The main theme of Minority Report is the classic philosophical debate of free will vs. determinism . One of the main questions the film raises is whether the future is set or whether free will can alter the future . As critic C.A. Wolski commented , " At the outset , Minority Report ... promises to mine some deep subject matter , to do with : do we possess free will or are we predestined to our fate ? " However , there is also the added question of whether the precogs ' visions are correct . As reviewer James Berardinelli asked , " is the Precogs ' vision accurate , or has it in some way been tampered with ? Perhaps Anderton isn 't actually going to kill , but has been set up by a clever and knowledgeable criminal who wants him out of the way . " The precog Agatha also states that since Anderton knows his future , he can change it . However , the film also indicates that Anderton 's knowledge of the future may actually be the factor that causes Leo Crow 's death . Berardinelli describes this as the main paradox regarding free will vs. determinism in the film , " [ h ] ere 's the biggest one of all : Is it possible that the act of accusing someone of a murder could begin a chain of events that leads to the slaying . In Anderton 's situation , he runs because he is accused . The only reason he ends up in circumstances where he might be forced to kill is because he is a hunted man . Take away the accusation , and there would be no question of him committing a criminal act . The prediction drives the act – a self @-@ fulfilling prophecy . You can see the vicious circle , and it 's delicious ( if a little maddening ) to ponder . " Film scholar Dean A. Kowalski argues that in this scenario free will still exists , as the perpetrators control their actions , and the precogs visions are but the facts that resulted from their choices . 
 The central theme of the movie is discussed in the film 's fourth scene . Witwer discusses the PreCrime system with the division 's staff . He believes that its main " legalistic drawback " is that it " arrests individuals who have broken no laws . " Jad responds , " But they will ! " When Anderton later arrives upon this discussion , he acknowledges the paradox Witwer raises ; that the precogs prevent an event accepted as fact , but one which will never happen . To show him that people regularly use predetermination , Anderton picks up a wooden ball and rolls it toward Witwer , who catches it before it lands on the ground . When asked why he caught the ball , Witwer says " Because it was going to fall . " Anderton replies , " But it didn 't . " Then confidently tells him , " The fact that you prevented it from happening doesn 't change the fact that it was going to happen . " Kowalski feels this example is faulty in the sense that the ball has no free will ; it merely acts according to the laws of physics , but he acknowledges that if an individual were to have freely chosen to commit murder , then it would hold . Film scholar Stephen Mulhall points out that unlike the laws of physics which have a series of scientifically testable causal laws , Anderton merely has the visions of the precogs , whose psychic abilities are not fully explained by science . 
 Another quandary is that if the precogs visions are infallible then the future cannot be otherwise , while if they are incorrect people will be punished for crimes they will never commit . Kowalski contends that the precogs only attain knowledge of what he calls the " conditional future " . He cites as evidence two examples : the scene where Agatha steers Anderton through the mall by foreseeing dangerous events and helping him circumnavigate them , and a later scene where she tells Anderton and his ex @-@ wife what would have happened to their child if he had lived . In the first example , Agatha knows what Anderton will freely choose to do when presented with specific facts so she provides them to him , and , in the second , she knows what will have happened to the Anderton 's son based on specific scenarios throughout his life , in which she can see what he would have freely chosen to do , and what selections various people in his life would have freely made . According to Kowalski , the PreCrime unit therefore removes individuals from precise situations where they would freely choose to become a murderer . 
 Philosophy professor Michael Huemer says " that the only way the otherwise predetermined future seen by the precogs can be averted , we are led to believe , is by the influence of the precogs themselves . " He argues that their " knowledge of their would @-@ be future " enables them to make changes to prevent its occurrence . This means that Howard Marks , the arrested potential killer from the film 's opening scene , is destined to his fate and no action he could undertake would change it . Individuals with minority reports however , have a chance to change their futures according to Huemer , and since there was no minority report ( i.e. ; no possible alternative fate ) for Anderton , he could only change his future by having access to the precogs visions . Huemer compares the humans situation to that of a robot ; since a robot controls itself , but has a set number of programmed actions , its fate falls within those actions . It lacks free will in the sense that it cannot choose any action outside of its programming , even if one may exist . He also considers a decaying atom which has a 50 % chance of survival within the next hour , since the atom has no actions which it can undertake to change those odds , its fate is pure chance . Thus he believes a person needs a set of options , the knowledge of those options , and the ability to choose between them to have free will . 
 = = Political and legal = = 
 Spielberg said that the arrest of criminals before they have a chance to commit their crimes in the movie had some real @-@ world background in post @-@ 9 / 11 America , saying that " [ w ] e ’ re giving up some of our freedom so that the government can protect us . " The future world in Minority Report of retinal scans , robotic human inspectors , and intrusive , individualized , public advertising arrived in American theaters as the country was debating how much governmental intrusion into personal matters was necessary to ensure safety of its citizens . Spielberg said he would be against a PreCrime system if it were ever possible , as he believes that if it did exist , those in control of it would undoubtedly abuse its powers . Kowalski questions what the benevolent precogs in the film could become in the hands of those who trained their skills for political intrigue . Science fiction scholar Gary Westfahl asserts that in a political context , PreCrime may be seen " a metaphor for racial profiling , and one could view the liberation of the precogs as the end of a form of slavery . " 
 Kowalski feels the isolation of the precogs ensures that they see their visions merely as facts , and removes them from having to justify them . The precogs ' ignorance of the results of their visions prevents them from knowing the effectiveness of the program . He feels the PreCrime officers are thus more qualified to evaluate their efficacy " than the precogs themselves . " In the December 2003 edition of the academic journal Film Criticism , scholar Mark Garrett Cooper moved past that point by asserting that not only have the precogs " yet to fully understand " their visions , but that the process by which the images are interpreted makes it so that no one individual could understand them without the use of the apparatus . The machinery is so effective and precise according to Cooper however , that the " omnipresent system effectively makes capture more certain than the crime . " When the system targets Cruise , instead of fleeing , he remains in the vicinity in the belief that the system will , in its inexorable logic , correct itself . The apparatus is considered so infallible according to Cooper that Cruise knows once he is cleared by it , his life can immediately return to normal . In this respect , Cooper feels that " far from indicting a security state , the film legitimates one . " Gareth Higgins argues that " [ t ] he government is playing God , using an all @-@ seeing eye to prevent murder . " 
 The film presents a legal system where the PreCrime office gathers the images from the minds of the precogs then organizes them into a coherent order for display in front of a set of judges . The judges appear via video feeds , analyze the images , and according to Cooper , they view the images , listen to Anderton rattle off " a string of legalistic verbiage " , then give it a " pro forma ratification . " Thus the accused is never present , is not allowed a defense , and is convicted before he is aware he is on trial . The program is marketed in a similar basic fashion , as in its tag line : " It works . " Cooper says that in a typical American courtroom drama , the audience is treated as if it were the jury , but in this system , instead of desiring the hero be proven innocent , the audience seeks instead to have the guilt transferred from Anderton to Burgess . But to do so , Anderton has to disprove the system , which he does by proving the existence of the minority report . This renders the PreCrime justice system inoperable , as if there is doubt related not merely to the gathering of the images , or their ability to be interpreted , but their ability to be correct even in perfect circumstances , then the system of infallible guilt can not exist . 
 = = Media = = 
 Spielberg conceived of the idea of a future world permeated with intrusive capitalism and government surveillance after everyone at the " think tank summit " told him that " the right of privacy is a diminishing commodity " which will soon be thrown " right out the window . " According to film critic J. Hoberman , Minority Report " visualizes ( as well as demonstrates ) a future where the unconscious has been thoroughly colonized . " When the movie first appeared in theaters a common source of reviewers ' complaints was the film 's product placement , which they found intrusive . Film scholar Martin Hall says that the purpose of the advertisements Anderton runs into are " encouraging him to buy certain products and , by extension , affirm his place in society . " The personalized advertising is disconcerting partly because of the invasion of privacy , but also , argues Cooper , because it is cold , <unk> , and insincere . 
 Cooper discusses how he feels Minority Report emphasizes the future importance over the control of imagery . According to him , the images captured from the precogs visions in the film bestow power on those who control their processing . He says the film warns viewers that those who control images must be carefully overseen so as to prevent the abuse of power , and that the film presents " governance as a problem of image arrangement . " The film also presents a future world where government probes use advanced media technology to monitor its citizenry . Cooper says the quandary arises when the film intimates that there were will be no way to escape the media industry 's omnipotence in the future , while at the same time defending " the need for image manipulating institutions . " He feels that this logically raises another issue in that the same concern could be leveled towards image @-@ makers such as DreamWorks , and he says the " film 's virtue lies in provoking this question . " He notes that the film 's tranquil ending concludes with the Andertons looking out into a peaceful exterior with only rain visible , and the precogs reading in their isolated , idyllic farm , and both families apparently free of electronic surveillance . 
 = = Self @-@ perception = = 
 Writing in the academic journal Rhizomes , scholar Martin Hall , while analyzing the movie , discusses the self @-@ perception an individual develops based on the views of those outside of themselves . The academician notes that when a child first comprehends the function of a mirror , they begin to develop the understanding that their perception of themselves is not self @-@ contained , and learn partly they are what they see in the mirror . He contrasts this to when Anderson discovers the precogs vision of his future self . At the beginning of the film , Anderton shows little concern for the precogs ; when Witwer feels pity for them , he responds : " It 's better if you don 't think of them as human . " Shortly thereafter , however , Anderton is shown in tears at his home , high on the hard drug <unk> while mourning the loss of his son . Agatha enters a similar period of self @-@ examination when she has visions of her mother 's death , and is informed they are merely " echoes " i.e. a faulty image in her memory . Anderton becomes flustered when he begins to interpret the images which show him about to commit murder and begins to frantically sort through , According to Hall he begins " searching for whatever possible versions of this representation are available to him , other than the one that represents him as a murderer . " Hall says that he is sorting through the images so feverishly , as he is convinced once they are sorted properly and understood , they will not show him to be the murderer , because he is convinced that he is not a murderer . He literally becomes obsessed with himself , seeking to resolve these images with put him at " discordance with his own reality . " Previously , at peace with himself , Hall says Anderton cannot accept the image he sees in the precogs visions . Unable to reconcile the two , Hall says that he is forced to decide that " it is likely that errors have occurred " in the PreCrime system . 
 When he escapes the building and enters the mall , Hall feels he is disturbed by advertisements calling to him by name not only because they will give away his presence , but also because they remind him of his lost place in society , and he begins " to see through the false consciousness his ( illusory ) previous position as fixed subject had allowed him . " Spielberg said that Anderton is being punished for his previous callous unconcern for anything but the effectiveness of the PreCrime program . " He 's dirtied by the fact that he doesn 't spend much time thinking about the moral consequences . It 's just like a sporting event almost — and then suddenly that whole sporting event makes him the soccer ball . " His doubts about his own future lead him to examine his previous life to better understand himself according to Hall . He runs through his role in the PreCrime system , and his son 's disappearance " to reconstruct his past . " After Leo Crow in fact kills himself , Anderton becomes healed , and later has " recreated himself as the subject he was previously through the knowledge that he is not a killer . " Although he has satisfactorily repaired his self @-@ image , Anderton is not the same person , as he not longer believes in the PreCrime system . Hall says that Burgess final dilemma ; namely , his desire to keep PreCrime running , his inability to bring himself to kill Anderton , and his desire to live , drives him to see his only suitable action to be suicide . " Burgess has been left truly alone by events , " argues Hall . " His wife fainted when she saw the images of the murder and Anderton has been the cause of this rupture . " 
 = = Broken family = = 
 I still carry my childhood along with me . I 'm old enough now to compartmentalise it - so I consciously try not to go too far back into my childhood , but the subconscious part of me still creates traces of it in Minority Report . Tom Cruise has suffered a tragic personal loss - he has lost his child and his wife has left him . It still reminds me of the divorce of my parents . As much as I try to get away from it I still can 't avoid it . 
 Minority Report also continues Spielberg 's tradition of depicting broken families . In Dick 's short story , Anderton is a childless , married man whose main motives are self @-@ preservation and preventing the disassembly of the PreCrime division . While he is also trying to save himself in the movie , his greater concern is uncovering the story behind his son 's disappearance . Spielberg would later transform his next science fiction film , War of the Worlds , from a story about a single man to one about a divorced father concerned with protecting his children . Buckland notes that the two tragic parent @-@ child relationships in the picture ( Agatha and Ann Lively , John and Sean Anderton ) have a common element . The movie has four shots of them submerged in water . Agatha 's face is shown in a close up shot , taken from directly above her , when she is submerged in her photon milk , nutrient bath . When photos of her mother 's submerged corpse are shown to her , the emphasized photograph is a similar image of her face taken from directly above . Anderton and his son are shown together in a pool flashback scene in which they have a contest to see who can hold their breath longest . John is underwater when his son is taken , and later in the apartment he is shown lying motionless , immersed in a filled bathtub , in a manner Buckland finds similar to the shots of Agatha and Ann . Buckland notes that co @-@ screenwriter Frank introduced the water theme , as he wrote Agatha and her mother 's back stories while adding the bathtub scene . 
 = Scottish art = 
 Scottish art is the body of visual art made in what is now Scotland , or about Scottish subjects , since prehistoric times . It forms a distinctive tradition within European art , but the political union with England has led its partial <unk> in British art . 
 The earliest examples of art from what is now Scotland are highly decorated carved stone balls from the Neolithic period . From the Bronze Age there are examples of carvings , including the first representations of objects , and cup and ring marks . More extensive Scottish examples of patterned objects and gold work are found the Iron Age . <unk> carved Pictish stones and impressive metalwork emerged in Scotland the early Middle Ages . The development of a common style of Insular art across Great Britain and Ireland influenced elaborate jewellery and illuminated manuscripts such as the Book of Kells . Only isolated examples survive of native artwork from the late Middle Ages and of works created or strongly influenced by artists of Flemish origin . The influence of the Renaissance can be seen in stone carving and painting from the fifteenth century . In the sixteenth century the crown began to employ Flemish court painters who have left a portrait record of royalty . The Reformation removed a major source of patronage for art and limited the level of public display , but may have helped in the growth of secular domestic forms , particularly elaborate painting of roofs and walls . Although the loss of the court as a result of the Union of Crowns in 1603 removed another major source of patronage , the seventeenth century saw the emergence of the first significant native artists for whom names are extant , with figures such as George Jamesone and John Michael Wright . 
 In the eighteenth century Scotland began to produce artists that were significant internationally , all influenced by neoclassicism , such as Allan Ramsay , Gavin Hamilton , the brothers John and Alexander Runciman , Jacob More and David Allan . Towards the end of the century Romanticism began to influence artistic production , and can be seen in the portraits of artists such as Henry Raeburn . It also contributed to a tradition of Scottish landscape painting that focused on the Highlands , formulated by figures including Alexander Nasmyth . The Royal Scottish Academy of Art was created in 1826 , and major portrait painters of this period included Andrew Geddes and David Wilkie . William Dyce emerged as one of the most significant figures in art education in the United Kingdom . The beginnings of a Celtic Revival can be seen in the late nineteenth century and the art scene was dominated by the work of the Glasgow Boys and the Four , led Charles Rennie Mackintosh , who gained an international reputation for their combination of Celtic revival , Art and Crafts and Art Nouveau . The early twentieth century was dominated by the Scottish Colourists and the Edinburgh School . Modernism enjoyed popularity during this period , with William Johnstone helping to develop the concept of a Scottish Renaissance . In the post @-@ war period , major artists , including John Bellany and Alexander Moffat , pursued a strand of " Scottish realism " . Moffat 's influence can be seen in the work of the " new Glasgow Boys " from the late twentieth century . In the twenty @-@ first century Scotland has continued to produce successful and influential artists such as Douglas Gordon and Susan Philipsz . 
 Scotland possess significant collections of art , such as the National Gallery of Scotland and National Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh and the Burrell Collection and Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum in Glasgow . Significant schools of art include the Edinburgh College of Art and the Glasgow School of Art . The major funding body with responsibility for the arts in Scotland is Creative Scotland . Support is also given by local councils and independent foundations . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistoric art = = = 
 The oldest known examples of art to survive from Scotland are carved stone balls , or petrospheres , that date from the late Neolithic era . They are a uniquely Scottish phenomenon , with over 425 known examples . Most are from modern Aberdeenshire , but a handful of examples are known from Iona , Skye , Harris , Uist , Lewis , Arran , Hawick , Wigtownshire and fifteen from Orkney , five of which were found at the Neolithic village of Skara Brae . Many functions have been suggested for these objects , most indicating that they were prestigious and powerful possessions . Their production may have continued into the Iron Age . 
 From the Bronze Age there are extensive examples of rock art . These include cup and ring marks , a central depression carved into stone , surrounded by rings , sometimes not completed . These are common elsewhere in Atlantic Europe and have been found on natural rocks and isolated stones across Scotland . The most elaborate sets of markings are in western Scotland , particularly in the Kilmartin district . The representations of an axe and a boat at the Ri Cruin Cairn in Kilmartin , and a boat pecked into Wemyss Cave , are believed to be the oldest known representations of real objects that survive in Scotland . Carved spirals have also been found on the cover stones of burial cists in Lanarkshire and Kincardine . 
 By the Iron Age , Scotland had been penetrated by the wider La Tène culture . The Torrs Pony @-@ cap and Horns are perhaps the most impressive of the relatively few finds of La Tène decoration from Scotland , and indicate links with Ireland and southern Britain . The Stirling torcs , found in 2009 , are a group of four gold torcs in different styles , dating from 300 BC and 100 BC Two demonstrate common styles found in Scotland and Ireland , but the other two indicate workmanship from what is now southern France and the Greek and Roman worlds . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 In the Early Middle Ages , four distinct linguistic and political groupings existed in what is now Scotland , each of which produced distinct material cultures . In the east were the Picts , whose kingdoms eventually stretched from the River Forth to Shetland . In the west were the Gaelic ( Goidelic ) -speaking people of Dál Riata , who had close links with Ireland , from where they brought with them the name Scots . In the south were the British ( Brythonic @-@ speaking ) descendants of the peoples of the Roman @-@ influenced kingdoms of " The Old North " , the most powerful and longest surviving of which was the Kingdom of Strathclyde . Finally , there were the English or " Angles " , Germanic invaders who had overrun much of southern Britain and held the Kingdom of Bernicia ( later the northern part of Northumbria ) , which reached into what are now the Borders of Scotland in the south @-@ east . 
 Only fragments of artifacts survive from the Brythonic speaking kingdoms of southern Scotland . Pictish art can be seen in the extensive survival of carved Pictish stones , particularly in the north and east of the country . These display a variety of recurring images and patterns , as at Dunrobin ( Sutherland ) and Aberlemno ( Angus ) . There are a few survivals of Pictish silver , notably a number of massive neck @-@ chains including the Whitecleuch Chain , and also the unique silver plaques from the cairn at Norrie 's Law . Irish @-@ Scots art from the kingdom of Dál Riata is much more difficult to identify , but may include items such as the Hunterston brooch , which with other items such as the Monymusk Reliquary , suggest that Dál Riata was one of the places , as a crossroads between cultures , where the Insular style developed . Early examples of Anglo @-@ Saxon art include metalwork , particularly bracelets , clasps and jewellery , that has survived in pagan burials and in exceptional items such as the intricately carved whalebone Franks Casket , thought to have been produced in Northumbria in the early eighth century , which combines pagan , classical and Christian motifs . After the Christian conversion of what is now Scotland in the seventh century , artistic styles in Northumbria interacted with those in Ireland and Scotland to become part of the common style historians have identified as insular or Hiberno @-@ Saxon . 
 Insular art is the name given to the common style that developed in Britain and Ireland after the conversion of the Picts and the cultural assimilation of Pictish culture into that of the Scots and Angles , and which became highly influential in continental Europe , contributing to the development of Romanesque and Gothic styles . It can be seen in elaborate penannular brooches , often making extensive use of semi @-@ precious stones , in the heavily carved high crosses found most frequently in the Highlands and Islands , but distributed across the country and particularly in the highly decorated illustrated manuscripts such as the Book of Kells , which may have been begun , or wholly created on Iona , the key location in Scotland for insular art . The finest era of the style was brought to an end by the disruption to monastic centres and aristocratic life by Viking raids in the late eighth century . Later elaborate metal work has survived in buried hoards such as the St Ninian 's Isle Treasure and several finds from the Viking period . 
 In the High Middle Ages , Scotland adopted the Romanesque in the late twelfth century and retained and revived elements of its style after the Gothic style had become dominant from the thirteenth century . Much of the best Scottish artwork of the High and Late Middle Ages was either religious in nature or realised in metal and woodwork , and did not survive the effect of time and of the Reformation . However , examples of sculpture are extant as part of church architecture , including evidence of elaborate church interiors such as the sacrament houses at Deskford and Kinkell and the carvings of the seven deadly sins at Rosslyn Chapel . From the thirteenth century , there are relatively large numbers of monumental effigies such as the elaborate Douglas tombs in the town of Douglas . Native craftsmanship can be seen in items such as the Bute mazer and the Savernake Horn , and more widely in the large number of high quality seals that survive from the mid thirteenth century onwards . Visual illustration can be seen in the illumination of charters , and occasional survivals such as the fifteenth @-@ century Doom painting at Guthrie . As in England , the monarchy may have had model portraits of royalty used for copies and reproductions , but the versions of native royal portraits that survive are generally crude by continental standards . 
 = = = European Renaissance = = = 
 Beginning in the fifteenth century , a number of works were produced in Scotland by artists imported from the continent , particularly the Netherlands , generally considered the centre of painting in the Northern Renaissance . The products of these connections included a fine portrait of William Elphinstone ; the images of St Catherine and St John brought to Dunkeld ; and Hugo van Der Goes 's altarpiece for the Trinity College Church in Edinburgh , commissioned by James III and the work after which the Flemish Master of James IV of Scotland is named . There are also a relatively large number of elaborate devotional books from the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries , usually produced in the Low Countries and France for Scottish patrons , including the prayer book commissioned by Robert Blackadder , Bishop of Glasgow , between 1484 and 1492 and the Flemish illustrated book of hours , known as the Hours of James IV of Scotland , given by James IV to Margaret Tudor and described by D. H. Caldwell as " perhaps the finest medieval manuscript to have been commissioned for Scottish use " . Records also indicate that Scottish palaces were adorned by rich tapestries , such as those that depicted scenes from the Iliad and Odyssey set up for James IV at Holyrood . Surviving stone and wood carvings , wall paintings and tapestries suggest the richness of sixteenth century royal art . At Stirling Castle , stone carvings on the royal palace from the reign of James V are taken from German patterns , and like the surviving carved oak portrait roundels from the King 's Presence Chamber , known as the Stirling Heads , they include contemporary , biblical and classical figures . 
 = = = Reformation = = = 
 During the sixteenth century , Scotland underwent a Protestant Reformation that created a predominantly Calvinist national Church of Scotland ( kirk ) , which was strongly Presbyterian in outlook . Scotland 's ecclesiastical art paid a heavy toll as a result of Protestant iconoclasm , with the almost total loss of medieval stained glass , religious sculpture and paintings . The nature of the Scottish Reformation may have had wider effects , limiting the creation of a culture of public display and meaning that art was channelled into more austere forms of expression with an emphasis on private and domestic restraint . 
 The loss of ecclesiastical patronage created a crisis for native craftsmen and artists , who turned to secular patrons . One result of this was the flourishing of Scottish Renaissance painted ceilings and walls , with large numbers of private houses of burgesses , lairds and lords gaining often highly detailed and coloured patterns and scenes , of which over a hundred examples survive . These include the ceiling at Prestongrange , undertaken in 1581 for Mark Kerr , Commendator of Newbattle , and the long gallery at Pinkie House , painted for Alexander Seaton , Earl of Dunfermline in 1621 . These were undertaken by unnamed Scottish artists using continental pattern books that often led to the incorporation of humanist moral and philosophical symbolism , with elements that call on heraldry , piety , classical myths and allegory . The tradition of royal portrait painting in Scotland was probably disrupted by the minorities and regencies it underwent for much of the sixteenth century , but began to flourish after the Reformation . There were anonymous portraits of important individuals , including the Earl of Bothwell ( 1556 ) and George , fifth Earl of Seaton ( c . 1570s ) . James VI employed two Flemish artists , Arnold Bronckorst in the early 1580s and Adrian Vanson from around 1584 to 1602 , who have left us a visual record of the king and major figures at the court . 
 The Union of Crowns in 1603 removed a major source of artistic patronage in Scotland as James VI and his court moved to London . The result has been seen as a shift " from crown to castle " , as the nobility and local lairds became the major sources of patronage . The first significant native artist was George Jamesone of Aberdeen ( 1589 / 90 @-@ 1644 ) , who became one of the most successful portrait painters of the reign of Charles I and trained the Baroque artist John Michael Wright ( 1617 – 94 ) . The growing importance of royal art can be seen in the post created in 1702 for George Ogilvie . The duties included " drawing pictures of our [ the Monarch 's ] person or of our successors or others of our royal family for the <unk> of our houses and palaces " . However , from 1723 to 1823 the office was a sinecure held by members of the Abercrombie family , not necessarily connected with artistic ability . 
 = = = Eighteenth century = = = 
 = = = = Enlightenment period = = = = 
 Many painters of the early part of the eighteenth century remained largely artisans , such as the members of the Norie family , James ( 1684 – 1757 ) and his sons , who painted the houses of the peerage with Scottish landscapes that were pastiches of Italian and Dutch landscapes . The painters Allan Ramsay ( 1713 – 84 ) , Gavin Hamilton ( 1723 – 98 ) , the brothers John ( 1744 – 68 / 9 ) and Alexander Runciman ( 1736 – 85 ) , Jacob More ( 1740 – 93 ) and David Allan ( 1744 – 96 ) , mostly began in the tradition of the Nories , but were artists of European significance , spending considerable portions of their careers outside Scotland , and were to varying degree influenced by forms of Neoclassicism . The influence of Italy was particularly significant , with over fifty Scottish artists and architects known to have travelled there in the period 1730 – 80 . 
 Ramsay studied in Sweden , London and Italy before basing himself in Edinburgh , where he established himself as a leading portrait painter to the Scottish nobility . After a second visit to Italy he moved to London in 1757 and from 1761 he was Principal Painter in Ordinary to George III . He now focused on royal portraits , often presented by the king to ambassadors and colonial governors . His work has been seen as anticipating the grand manner of Joshua Reynolds , but many of his early portraits , particularly of women are less formal and more intimate studies . Gavin Hamilton studied at the University of Glasgow and in Rome , and after a brief stay in London , primarily painting portraits of the British aristocracy , he returned to Rome for the rest of his life . He emerged as a pioneering neo @-@ classical painter of historical and mythical themes , including his depictions of scenes from Homer 's Iliad , as well as acting as an early archaeologist and antiquarian . 
 John and Alexander Runciman both gained reputations as painters of mythological and historical themes . They travelled to Italy , where John died in 1768 / 9 . Alexander returned home to gain a reputation as a landscape and portrait painter . His most widely known work , distributed in etchings , was mythological . More , having trained with the Nories , like his friend Ramsey , moved to Italy from 1773 and is chiefly known as a landscape painter . Allan travelled to Rome from 1764 to 1777 , where he studied with Hamilton . He produced historical and mythical scenes before moving to England , where he pursued portraiture . He then returned to Edinburgh in 1780 , became director and master of the Academy of Arts in 1786 . Here he produced his most famous work , with illustrations of themes from Scottish life , earning him the title of " the Scottish Hogarth " . 
 = = = = Romanticism = = = = 
 Scotland played a major part in the origins of the Romantic movement through the publication of James Macpherson 's Ossian cycle , which was proclaimed as a Celtic equivalent of the Classical epics . Fingal , written in 1762 , was speedily translated into many European languages , and its deep appreciation of natural beauty and the melancholy tenderness of its treatment of the ancient legend did more than any single work to bring about the Romantic movement in European , and especially in German literature , influencing Herder and Goethe . Ossian became a common subject for Scottish artists , and works were undertaken by Alexander Runciman and David Allan among others . This period saw a shift in attitudes to the Highlands and mountain landscapes in general , from viewing them as hostile , empty regions occupied by backwards and marginal people , to interpreting them as aesthetically pleasing exemplars of nature , occupied by rugged primitives , which were now depicted in a dramatic fashion . Produced before his departure to Italy , Jacob More 's series of four paintings " Falls of Clyde " ( 1771 – 73 ) have been described by art historian Duncan Macmillan as treating the waterfalls as " a kind of natural national monument " and has been seen as an early work in developing a romantic sensibility to the Scottish landscape . Alexander Runciman was probably the first artist to paint Scottish landscapes in watercolours in the more romantic style that was emerging towards the end of the eighteenth century . 
 The effect of Romanticism can also be seen in the works of late eighteenth and early nineteenth @-@ century artists including Henry Raeburn ( 1756 – 1823 ) , Alexander Nasmyth ( 1758 – 1840 ) and John Knox ( 1778 – 1845 ) . Raeburn was the most significant artist of the period to pursue his entire career in Scotland , born in Edinburgh and returning there after a trip to Italy in 1786 . He is most famous for his intimate portraits of leading figures in Scottish life , going beyond the aristocracy to lawyers , doctors , professors , writers and ministers , adding elements of Romanticism to the tradition of Reynolds . He became a knight in 1822 and the King 's painter and limner in 1823 , marking a return to the post being associated with the production of art . Nasmyth visited Italy and worked in London , but returned to his native Edinburgh for most of his career . He produced work in a large range of forms , including his portrait of Romantic poet Robert Burns , which depicts him against a dramatic Scottish background , but he is chiefly remembered for his landscapes and is described in the Oxford Dictionary of Art as " the founder of the Scottish landscape tradition " . The work of Knox continued the theme of landscape , directly linking it with the Romantic works of Scott and he was also among the first artists to take a major interest in depicting the urban landscape of Glasgow . 
 = = = Nineteenth century = = = 
 = = = = Painting = = = = 
 Andrew Geddes ( 1783 – 1844 ) and David Wilkie ( 1785 – 1841 ) were among the most successful portrait painters , with Wilkie succeeding Raeburn as Royal Limner in 1823 . Geddes produced some landscapes , but also portraits of Scottish subjects , including Wilkie and Scott , before he finally moved to London in 1831 . Wilkie worked mainly in London , and was most famous for his anecdotal paintings of Scottish and English life , including The Chelsea Pensioners reading the Waterloo Dispatch in 1822 and for his flattering painting of the King George IV in Highland dress commemorating the royal visit to Scotland in 1823 that set off the international fashion for the kilt . After a tour of Europe he was more influenced by Renaissance and Baroque painting . David Roberts ( 1796 – 1864 ) became known for his prolific series of detailed lithograph prints of Egypt and the Near East that he produced during the 1840s from sketches he made during long tours of the region . 
 The tradition of highland landscape painting was continued by figures such as Horatio McCulloch ( 1806 – 67 ) , Joseph Farquharson ( 1846 – 1935 ) and William McTaggart ( 1835 – 1910 ) . McCulloch 's images of places including Glen Coe and Loch Lomond and the Trossachs , became parlour room panoramas that helped to define popular images of Scotland . This was helped by Queen Victoria 's declared affection for Scotland , signified by her adoption of Balmoral as a royal retreat . In this period a Scottish " grand tour " developed with large number of English artists , including Turner , flocking to the Highlands to paint and draw . From the 1870s Farquharson was a major figure in interpreting Scottish landscapes , specialising in snowscapes and sheep , and using a mobile heated studio in order to capture the conditions from life . In the same period McTaggart emerged as the leading Scottish landscape painter . He has been compared with John Constable and described as the " Scottish Impressionist " , with free brushwork often depicting stormy seas and moving clouds . The fashion for coastal painting in the later nineteenth century led to the establishment of artist colonies in places such as Pittenweem and Crail in Fife , <unk> in the Borders , Cambuskenneth near Stirling on the River Forth and Kirkudbright in Dumfries and Galloway . 
 = = = = Sculpture = = = = 
 In the early decades of the century , sculpture commissions in Scotland were often given to English artists . Thomas Campbell ( c . 1790 – 1858 ) and Lawrence Macdonald ( 1799 – 1878 ) undertook work in Scotland , but worked for much of their careers in London and Rome . The first significant Scottish sculptor to pursue their career in Scotland was John Steell ( 1804 – 91 ) . His first work to gain significant public attention was his Alexander and <unk> ( 1832 ) . His 1832 design for a statue of Walter Scott was incorporated into the author 's memorial in Edinburgh . It marked the beginnings of a national school of sculpture based around major figures from Scottish culture and Scottish and British history . The tradition of Scottish sculpture was taken forward by artists such as Patrick Park ( 1811 – 55 ) , Alexander Handyside Ritchie ( 1804 – 70 ) and William Calder Marshall ( 1813 – 94 ) . This reached fruition in the next generation of sculptors including William Brodie ( 1815 – 81 ) , Amelia Hill ( 1820 – 1904 ) and Steell 's apprentice David Watson Stevenson ( 1842 – 1904 ) . Stevenson contributed the statue of William Wallace to the exterior of the Wallace Monument and many of the busts in the gallery of heroes inside . Public sculpture was boosted by the anniversary of Burns ' death in 1896 . Stevenson produced a statue of the poet in Leith . Hill produced one for Dumfries . John Steell produced a statue for Central Park in New York , versions of which were made for Dundee , London and Dunedin . Statues of Burns and Scott were produced in areas of Scottish settlement , particularly in North America and Australia . 
 = = = = Early photography = = = = 
 In the early nineteenth century Scottish scientists James Clerk Maxwell and David Brewster played a major part in the development of the techniques of photography . Pioneering photographers included chemist Robert Adamson ( 1821 – 48 ) and artist David Octavius Hill ( 1821 – 48 ) , who as Hill & Adamson formed the first photographic studio in Scotland at Rock House in Edinburgh in 1843 . Their output of around 3 @,@ 000 <unk> images in four years are considered some of the first and finest artistic uses of photography . Other pioneers included Thomas Annan ( 1829 – 87 ) , who took portraits and landscapes , and whose photographs of the Glasgow slums were among the first to use the medium as a social record . His son James Craig Annan ( 1864 – 1946 ) popularised the work of Hill & Adamson in the US and worked with American photographic pioneer Alfred Stieglitz ( 1864 – 1946 ) . Both pioneered the more stable photogravure process . Other important figures included Thomas Keith ( 1827 – 95 ) , one of the first architectural photographers , George Washington Wilson ( 1823 – 93 ) , who pioneered instant photography and Clementina Hawarden ( 1822 – 65 ) , whose posed portraits were among the first in a tradition of female photography . 
 = = = = Influence of the Pre @-@ Raphaelites = = = = 
 David Scott 's ( 1806 – 49 ) most ambitious historical work was the triptych Sir William Wallace , Scottish Wars : the Spear and English War : the Bow ( 1843 ) . He also produced etchings for versions of Coleridge 's Ancient Mariner , Bunyan 's Pilgrim 's Progress and J. P. Nichol 's Architecture of the Heavens ( 1850 ) . Because of this early death he was known to , and admired by , the Pre @-@ Raphaelite brotherhood mainly through his brother William Bell Scott ( 1811 – 90 ) , who became a close friend of founding member D. G. Rossetti . The London @-@ based Pre @-@ Raphaelites rejected the formalism of Mannerist painting after Raphael . Bell Scott was patronised by the Pre @-@ Raphaelite collector James <unk> . His most famous work , Iron and Coal was one of the most popular Victorian images and one of the few to fulfill the Pre @-@ Raphaelite ambition to depict the modern world . 
 The figure in Scottish art most associated with the Pre @-@ Raphaelites was the Aberdeen @-@ born William Dyce ( 1806 – 64 ) . Dyce befriended the young Pre @-@ Raphaelites in London and introduced their work to John Ruskin . His The Man of Sorrows and David in the Wilderness ( both 1860 ) , contain a Pre @-@ Raphaelite attention to detail , but puts the biblical subjects in a distinctly Scottish landscape , against the Pre @-@ Raphaelite precept of truth in all things . His <unk> Bay : a Recollection of October 5th 1858 has been described as " the archetypal pre @-@ Raphaelite landscape " . Dyce became head of the School of Design in Edinburgh , and was then invited to London , to head the newly established Government School of Design , later to become the Royal College of Art , where his ideas formed the basis of the system of training and he was highly involved in the national organisation of art . Joseph Noel Paton ( 1821 – 1901 ) studied at the Royal Academy schools in London , where he became a friend of John Everett Millais and he subsequently followed him into Pre @-@ Raphaelitism , producing pictures that stressed detail and melodrama such as The <unk> <unk> ( 1855 ) . Also influenced by <unk> was James Archer ( 1823 – 1904 ) and whose work included Summertime , Gloucestershire ( 1860 ) and who from 1861 began a series of Arthurian @-@ based paintings including La Morte d 'Arthur and Sir Lancelot and Queen Guinevere . 
 = = = = Arts and Crafts and the Celtic Revival = = = = 
 The beginnings of the Arts and Crafts movement in Scotland were in the stained glass revival of the 1850s , pioneered by James Ballantine ( 1808 – 77 ) . His major works included the great west window of Dunfermline Abbey and the scheme for St. Giles Cathedral , Edinburgh . In Glasgow it was pioneered by Daniel Cottier ( 1838 – 91 ) , who had probably studied with Ballantine , and was directly influenced by William Morris , Ford Madox Brown and John Ruskin . His key works included the Baptism of Christ in Paisley Abbey ( c . 1880 ) . His followers included Stephen Adam and his son of the same name . The Glasgow @-@ born designer and theorist Christopher Dresser ( 1834 – 1904 ) was one of the first , and most important , independent designers , a pivotal figure in the Aesthetic Movement and a major contributor to the allied Anglo @-@ Japanese movement . 
 The formation of the Edinburgh Social Union in 1885 , which included a number of significant figures in the Arts and Craft and Aesthetic movements , became part of an attempt to facilitate a Celtic Revival , similar to that taking place in contemporaneous Ireland , drawing on ancient myths and history to produce art in a modern idiom . Key figures were the philosopher , sociologist , town planner and writer Patrick Geddes ( 1854 – 1932 ) , the architect and designer Robert Lorimer ( 1864 – 1929 ) and stained @-@ glass artist Douglas Strachan ( 1875 – 1950 ) . Geddes established an informal college of tenement flats for artists at Ramsay Garden on Castle Hill in Edinburgh in the 1890s . 
 Among the figures involved with the movement were Anna Traquair ( 1852 – 1936 ) , who was commissioned by the Union to paint murals in the Mortuary Chapel of the Hospital for Sick Children , Edinburgh ( 1885 – 86 and 1896 – 98 ) and also worked in metal , illumination , illustration , embroidery and book binding . The most significant exponent was Dundee @-@ born John Duncan ( 1866 – 1945 ) , who was also influenced by Italian Renaissance art and French Symbolism . Among his most influential works are his paintings of Celtic subjects Tristan and Iseult ( 1912 ) and St Bride ( 1913 ) . Other Dundee Symbolists included Stewart Carmichael ( 1879 – 1901 ) and George Dutch Davidson ( 1869 – 1950 ) . Duncan was a major contributor to Geddes ' magazine The Evergreen . Other major contributors included the Japanese @-@ influenced Robert Burns ( 1860 – 1941 ) , E. A. <unk> ( 1864 – 1933 ) and Duncan 's student Helen Hay ( fl . 1895 – 1953 ) . 
 = = = = Glasgow School = = = = 
 For the late nineteenth century developments in Scottish art are associated with the Glasgow School , a term that is used for a number of loose groups based around the city . The first and largest group , active from about 1880 , were the Glasgow Boys , including James Guthrie ( 1859 – 1930 ) , Joseph <unk> ( 1861 – 1913 ) , George Henry ( 1858 – 1943 ) and E. A. Walton ( 1860 – 1922 ) . They reacted against the commercialism and sentimentality of earlier artists , particularly represented by the Royal Academy , were often influenced by French painting and incorporated elements of impressionism and realism , and have been credited with rejuvenating Scottish art , making Glasgow a major cultural centre . A slightly later grouping , active from about 1890 and known as " The Four " or the " Spook School " , was composed of acclaimed architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh ( 1868 – 1928 ) , his wife the painter and glass artist Margaret MacDonald ( 1865 – 1933 ) , her sister the artist Frances ( 1873 – 1921 ) , and her husband , the artist and teacher Herbert MacNair ( 1868 – 1955 ) . They produced a distinctive blend of influences , including the Celtic Revival , the Arts and Crafts Movement , and Japonisme , which found favour throughout the modern art world of continental Europe and helped define the Art Nouveau style . 
 = = = Early twentieth century = = = 
 = = = = Scottish Colourists = = = = 
 The next significant group of artists to emerge were the Scottish Colourists in the 1920s . The name was later given to four artists who knew each other and exhibited together , but did not form a cohesive group . All had spent time in France between 1900 and 1914 and all looked to Paris , particularly to the Fauvists , such as Monet , Matisse and Cézanne , whose techniques they combined with the painting traditions of Scotland . They were John Duncan Fergusson ( 1874 – 1961 ) , Francis Cadell ( 1883 – 1937 ) , Samuel Peploe ( 1871 – 1935 ) and Leslie Hunter ( 1877 – 1931 ) . They have been described as the first Scottish modern artists and were the major mechanism by which post @-@ impressionism reached Scotland . 
 = = = = Edinburgh School = = = = 
 The group of artists connected with Edinburgh , most of whom had studied at Edinburgh College of Art during or soon after the First World War , became known as the Edinburgh School . They were influenced by French painters and the St. Ives School and their art was characterised by use of vivid and often non @-@ naturalistic colour and the use of bold technique above form . Members included William Gillies ( 1898 – 1973 ) , who focused on landscapes and still life , John Maxwell ( 1905 – 62 ) who created both landscapes and studies of imaginative subjects , Adam Bruce Thomson ( 1885 – 1976 ) best known for his oil and water colour landscape paintings , particularly of the Highlands and Edinburgh , William Crozier ( 1893 – 1930 ) , whose landscapes were created with glowing colours , William Geissler ( 1894 @-@ 1963 ) , watercolourist of landscapes in Perthshire , East Lothian and Hampshire , William MacTaggart ( 1903 – 81 ) , noted for his landscapes of East Lothian , France and Norway and Anne Redpath ( 1895 – 1965 ) , best known for her two dimensional depictions of everyday objects . 
 = = = = Modernism and the Scottish Renaissance = = = = 
 Patrick Geddes coined the phrase Scottish Renaissance , arguing that technological development needed to paralleled in the arts . This ideas were taken up by a new generation , led by the poet Hugh MacDiarmid who argued for a synergy between science and art , the introduction of modernism into art and the creation of a distinctive national art . These ideas were expressed in art in the inter @-@ war period by figures including J. D. Fergusson , Stanley Cursiter ( 1887 – 1976 ) , William <unk> ( 1894 – 1970 ) and William Johnstone ( 1897 – 1981 ) . Fergusson was one of the few British artists who could claim to have played a part in the creation of modernism . His interest in machine imagery can be seen in paintings such as Damaged Destroyer ( 1918 ) . Cursiter was influenced by the Celtic revival , post @-@ impressionism and Futurism , as can be seen in his Rain on Princess Street ( 1913 ) and Regatta ( 1913 ) . <unk> 's early work was in a bold post @-@ impressionist style , but after World War I it became increasingly abstract and influenced by <unk> , as can be seen in Women on an Elevator ( 1925 ) and The Engineer and his Wife ( 1925 ) . Johnstone studied cubism , surrealism and new American art . He moved towards abstraction , attempting to utilise aspects of landscape , poetry and Celtic art . His most significant work , A Point in Time ( 1929 – 38 ) , has been described by art historian Duncan Macmillan as " one of the most important Scottish pictures of the century " . 
 Other artists strongly influenced by modernism included James McIntosh Patrick ( 1907 – 98 ) and Edward Baird ( 1904 – 49 ) . Both trained in Glasgow , but spent most of their careers in and around their respective native cities of Dundee and Montrose . Both were influenced by surrealism and the work of Bruegel and focused on landscape , as can be seen in McIntosh Patrick 's Traquair House ( 1938 ) and more overtly in Baird 's The Birth of Venus ( 1934 ) . Before his success in painting McIntosh Patrick first gained a reputation as an etcher . Leading figures in the field in the inter @-@ war period included William Wilson ( 1905 – 72 ) and Ian Fleming ( 1906 – 94 ) . 
 = = = = New Scottish Group = = = = 
 The longest surviving member of the Scottish Colourists , J. D. Fergusson , returned to Scotland from France in 1939 , just before the outbreak of the Second World War , where he became a leading figure of a group of Glasgow artists . Members of Fergusson 's group formed the New Art Club in 1940 , in opposition to the established Glasgow Art Club . In 1942 they held the first exhibition of their own exhibiting society , the New Scottish Group , with Fergusson as its first president . 
 The group had no single style , but shared left @-@ wing tendencies and included artists strongly influenced by trends in contemporary continental art . Painters involved included Donald Bain ( 1904 – 79 ) , who was influenced by expressionism . William Crosbie ( 1915 – 99 ) was strongly influenced by surrealism . Marie de <unk> ( 1918 – 90 ) , was influenced by expressionism and particularity post @-@ expressionist Gauguin . Isabel <unk> ( born 1920 ) , was influenced by expressionist Chaim <unk> . Expressionism can also be seen as an influence on the work of Millie <unk> ( 1900 – 88 ) , which included vivid colours and brushwork reminiscent of Van Gogh . <unk> 's urban scenes contain an element of social commentary and realism , influenced by Polish refugees Josef Herman ( 1911 – 2000 ) , resident in Glasgow between 1940 and 1943 and Jankel Adler ( 1895 – 1949 ) who was in Kirkudbright from 1941 to 1943 . Also influenced by Herman were husband and wife Tom MacDonald ( 1914 – 85 ) and Bet Low ( born 1924 ) , who with painter William Senior ( born 1927 ) formed the Clyde Group , aimed at promoting political art . Their work included industrial and urban landscapes such as MacDonald 's Transport Depot ( 1944 – 45 ) and Bet Low 's <unk> Steelworks ( c . 1946 ) . 
 = = Contemporary art = = 
 = = = Post @-@ War artists = = = 
 Notable post @-@ war artists included Robin Philipson ( 1916 – 92 ) , who was influenced by the Colourists , but also Pop Art and neo @-@ Romanticism . Robert <unk> ( 1913 – 66 ) , Robert Colquhoun ( 1914 – 64 ) and Joan Eardley ( 1921 – 63 ) , were all graduates of the Glasgow School of Art . <unk> and Colquhoun were influenced by neo @-@ Romanticism and the Cubism of Adler . The English @-@ born Eardley moved to Glasgow and explored the landscapes of Kincardineshire coast and created depictions of Glasgow tenements and children in the streets . Scottish artists that continued the tradition of landscape painting and joined the new generation of modernist artists of the highly influential St Ives School were Wilhelmina Barns @-@ Graham ( b . 1912 – 2004 ) , Margaret Mellis ( b . 1914 – 2009 ) . 
 Paris continued to be a major destination for Scottish artists , with William Gear ( 1916 – 97 ) and Stephen Gilbert ( 1910 – 2007 ) encountering the linear abstract painting of the avant @-@ garde COBRA group there in the 1940s . Their work was highly coloured and violent in execution . Also a visitor to Paris was Alan Davie ( born 1920 ) , who was influenced by jazz and Zen Buddhism and moved further into abstract expressionism . Ian Hamilton Finlay 's ( 1925 – 2006 ) work explored the boundaries between sculpture , print making , literature ( especially concrete poetry ) and landscape architecture . His most ambitious work , the garden of Little Sparta opened in 1960 . 
 = = = Scottish Realism and the Glasgow Pups = = = 
 John Bellany ( 1942 – 2013 ) , mainly focusing on the coastal communities of his birth , and Alexander Moffat ( born 1943 ) , who concentrated on portraiture , both grouped under the description of " Scottish realism " , were among the leading Scottish intellectuals from the 1960s . The artists associated with Moffat and the Glasgow School of Art who came to prominence in the 1980s are sometimes known as the " new Glasgow Boys " , or " Glasgow pups " and included Steven Campbell ( 1953 – 2007 ) , Peter Howson ( born 1958 ) , Ken Currie ( born 1960 ) and Adrian <unk> ( born 1958 ) . Their figurative work has a comic book @-@ like quality and puts an emphasis on social commentary . Campbell and <unk> 's post @-@ modern painting adopts a whimsical approach to history . Campbell often employs figures reminiscent characters from 1930s novels confronted by the disorder and confusion of the real world , as in his Young Men in Search of Simplicity ( 1989 ) . Currie has revived historical painting devoted to the socialist history of Glasgow in a series of paintings for the People 's Palace in 1987 . Currie also approached the problems of historical painting through his series of prints The Saracen Heads ( 1988 ) . 
 = = = Contemporary sculpture = = = 
 While sculptors Eric <unk> ( 1898 – 1974 ) and Hew Lorimer ( 1907 – 93 ) worked in the existing tradition of modelling and carving , sculptor and artist Eduardo Paolozzi ( 1924 – 2005 ) was a pioneer of pop art and in a varied career produced many works that examined juxtapositions between fantasy and the modern world . George Wyllie ( 1921 – 2012 ) , produced works of social and political commentary including the Straw Locomotive ( 1987 ) , an event which raised questions about the decline of heavy industry and the nature of colonialism . New sources of direct government arts funding encouraged greater experimentation among a new generation of sculptors that incorporated aspects of modernism , including Jake Harvey ( born 1948 ) , Doug Cocker ( born 1945 ) , Ainslie Yule ( born 1941 ) and Gavin Scobie ( 1940 – 2012 ) . In contrast Sandy Stoddart ( born 1959 ) works primarily on " nationalist " figurative sculpture in clay within the neoclassical tradition . He is best known for his civic monuments , including 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) bronze statues of the philosophers David Hume and Adam Smith , on the Royal Mile in Edinburgh . 
 = = = Photographic renaissance = = = 
 In the late twentieth century , photography in Scotland enjoyed a renaissance , encouraged by figures including Richard Hough ( 1945 – 85 ) who founded the Stills Gallery for photography in Edinburgh in 1977 and Murray Johnston ( 1949 – 90 ) , who was its director ( 1982 – 86 ) . Important practitioners in Scotland included the American Thomas Joshua Cooper ( born 1946 ) . More recent exponents who have received acclaim include Pradip <unk> ( born 1957 ) , Maud <unk> ( 1960 – 2008 ) and Owen Logan ( born 1963 ) . 
 = = = Contemporary artists = = = 
 Since the 1990s , the most commercially successful artist has been Jack <unk> ( born 1959 ) , whose work usually consists of figure compositions , with his most famous painting The Singing Butler ( 1992 ) , often cited as the best selling print in Britain . However , he has received little acclaim from critics . Contemporary artists emerging from Glasgow and Dundee include David Mach ( born 1960 ) , working in the medium of installation art , Richard Wright ( born 1960 ) , noted for his intricate wall paintings , James Lambie ( born 1965 ) who specialises in colourful sculptural installations and Susan Philipsz ( born 1965 ) who works in sound installations . A group that emerged from Glasgow in the early 1990s , and later described as " The Irascibles " , includes Roderick Buchanan ( born 1965 ) , who works in installations , film and photography , Douglas Gordon ( born 1966 ) working in video art , Christine Borland ( 1965 ) , whose work focuses on forensic science , and sculptor Martin Boyce ( born 1967 ) . In the generation of more recent artists Lucy McKenzie 's ( born 1977 ) painting is often sexually explicit , while Sandy Smith ( born 1983 ) has produced installation art that combines video and landscape art . 
 = = = Art museums and galleries = = = 
 Major art galleries in Edinburgh include the National Gallery of Scotland , which has a collection of national and international art . The National Museum of Scotland , was formed by the merger of the Royal Museum of Scotland and the National Museum of Antiquities and includes items from the decorative arts , ethnography and archaeology . The Scottish National Portrait Gallery has portraits of major national figures . The Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art , houses the national collection of twentieth @-@ century Scottish and international art . The Dean Gallery houses the Gallery of Modern Art 's collection of Dada and Surreal art . The Talbot Rice Gallery houses both old masters and contemporary Scottish works , and the Stills Gallery is the major gallery devoted to Scottish photography . Glasgow galleries include the Burrell Collection , housing the extensive and eclectic collection of art left to the city by shipping magnate Sir William Burrell . The Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum houses a collection of international art and products of the Glasgow School . The Hunterian Museum and Art Gallery houses sixty works by James McNeil Whistler and works by Mackintosh , as well as an international collection of masters from the seventeenth century onwards . Other major collections include the Aberdeen Art Gallery , which houses a major collection of British and international art and Dundee Contemporary Arts , which houses two contemporary art galleries . 
 = = = Art schools and colleges = = = 
 Scotland has had schools of art since the eighteenth century , many of which continue to exist in different forms today . Edinburgh College of Art developed from the Trustees Academy founded in the city in 1760 and was established in 1907 . After a long independent history , in 2011 it became part of the University of Edinburgh . Glasgow School of Art grew from the city 's School of Design , founded in 1845 . Grays School of Art in Aberdeen was founded in 1885 . Duncan of <unk> College of Art and Design was founded in Dundee in 1909 . There are also smaller private institutions such as the Leith School of Art founded in a former Lutheran church in 1988 . 
 = = = Organisations = = = 
 Creative Scotland is the national agency for the development of the arts in Scotland . It superseded the Scottish Arts Council , which was formed in 1994 following a restructuring of the Arts Council of Great Britain , but had existed as an autonomous body since a royal charter of 1967 . In addition , some local authorities and private interests have also supported to the arts , although this has been more limited since local government reorganisation in 1996 . Independent arts foundations that promote the visual arts include the Royal Scottish Academy , founded in 1826 and granted a Royal Charter in 1837 . 
 = Raphinae = 
 The Raphinae are a clade of extinct flightless birds formerly called <unk> or <unk> birds . They inhabited the Mascarene Islands of Mauritius and Rodrigues , but became extinct through hunting by humans and predation by introduced non @-@ native mammals following human colonisation in the 17th century . Historically , many different groups have been named for both the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire , not all grouping them together . Most recently , it is considered that the two birds can be classified in Columbidae , often under the subfamily Raphinae . The first person to suggest a close affinity to the doves was Johannes Theodor Reinhardt , whose opinions were then supported by Hugh Edwin Strickland and Alexander Gordon Melville . 
 Recent extractions of DNA from the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire , as well as 37 species of doves , has found where in Columbidae the raphines should be placed . Surprisingly , raphines are not the most primitive <unk> , instead they are grouped with the Nicobar pigeon as their closest relative , with other closely related birds being the crowned pigeons and tooth @-@ billed pigeon . A third raphine , Raphus solitarius , is now considered to be an ibis in the genus Threskiornis . 
 Both the Rodrigues solitaire and the dodo are now extinct . A common threshold of the extinction of the dodo is 1662 , but some possible sightings had been made as late as 1688 . The last sighting with a description was in 1662 , but a statistical analysis by Roberts and Solow found that the extinction of the dodo was in 1693 . The Rodrigues solitaire was killed off later than the dodo . The IUCN uses an extinction date of 1778 for the solitaire , although a more probable date would be in the 1750s or 1760s . Both birds became extinct as a consequence of human hunting and the introduction of mammals that ate the birds and their eggs . 
 = = Classification = = 
 This clade is part of the order Columbiformes and contains the monotypic genera Pezophaps and Raphus . The former contains the species Pezophaps solitaria ( the Rodrigues solitaire ) , the latter the dodo , Raphus cucullatus . These birds reached an impressive size as a result of isolation on islands free of predators , in accordance with Foster 's rule . 
 = = = History of classification = = = 
 Historically , the dodo was assigned the genus Didus , now a junior synonym of Raphus . In 1848 , a new species within the now defunct genus Didus , D. nazarenus , was named by Hugh Edwin Strickland and Alexander Gordon Melville . To house their new species , as well as the other species known at the time , Strickland and Melville named the subfamily <unk> . In 1893 three species were assigned to the group Pezophaps solitarius , Didus ineptus , and the possible species Didus borbonicus . Today , only two raphine species are known , with Didus ineptus becoming a junior subjective synonym of Raphus cucullatus ; Didus ? borbonicus now classified as the ibis Threskiornis solitarius ; and Didus nazarenus being identified as synonymous with Pezophaps solitarius . 
 A suborder named in 1893 by Sharpe , Didi was defined as a group including only the massive birds , that were sister to Columbidae , from the Mascarene Islands of Mauritius , Réunion , and Rodrigues . Features grouping Didi with Columbidae were the angle of the mandible and the hook at the end of the beak . 
 In 1811 , Johann Karl Wilhelm Illiger created a new family for the genus Didus . He named the family <unk> , and in it included only Didus ineptus , now a synonym of Raphus cucullatus . Illiger concluded that the dodo was related to ostriches and rheas , and so placed <unk> in the order <unk> , as the sister family to <unk> , <unk> ( a defunct group including Turnix and Syrrhaptes ) , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 In 1842 , Johannes Theodor Reinhardt proposed they were ground doves , based on studies of a dodo skull he had rediscovered in the royal Danish collection of Copenhagen . This view was met with ridicule , but later supported by Strickland and Melville , who suggested the common descent of the Rodrigues solitaire and the dodo in 1848 , after dissecting the only known dodo specimen with soft tissue and comparing it with the few solitaire remains then available . Strickland stated that although not identical , these birds shared many distinguishing features in the leg bones , features which were otherwise known only in pigeons . 
 The raphines are sometimes separated as a distinct family Raphidae , and their affinities were for long uncertain . They were initially placed in the ratites due to their peculiar , flightlessness @-@ related apomorphies , and a relationship to the <unk> has also been suggested . Osteological and molecular data , however , agrees that placement in the Columbidae is more appropriate . Many different affinities have historically been suggested for the dodo , including that it was a small ostrich , a rail , an albatross , or a vulture . 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 Comparison of mitochondrial cytochrome b and 12S rRNA sequences isolated from a dodo tarsal and a Rodrigues solitaire femur supported their close relationship and their placement within the family of pigeons and doves Columbidae . The genetic evidence was interpreted as suggesting the Southeast Asian Nicobar pigeon ( Caloenas nicobarica ) to be their closest living relative among 35 analyzed species of pigeons and doves , followed by the crowned pigeons ( genus Goura ) of New Guinea and the superficially dodo @-@ like tooth @-@ billed pigeon from Samoa . The genus of the latter is Didunculus ( " little dodo " ) , and it was called " <unk> " by Richard Owen . The following cladogram , from Shapiro and colleagues ( 2002 ) , shows the position of the dodo and solitaire within the pigeon and dove family . 
 A similar cladogram was published in 2007 , inverting the placement of Goura and Didunculus and including the pheasant pigeon and the thick @-@ billed ground pigeon at the base of the clade . Based on behavioural and morphological evidence , Jolyon C. Parish proposed that the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire should be placed in the Gourinae subfamily along with the Goura pigeons and others , in agreement with the genetic evidence . In 2014 , DNA of the only known specimen of the recently extinct spotted green pigeon ( Caloenas maculata ) was analysed , and it was found to be a close relative of the Nicobar pigeon , and thus also the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire . 
 For many years the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire were placed in a family of their own , the Raphidae ( formerly Dididae ) , because their exact relationships with other pigeons were unresolved . Each was placed in its own monotypic family ( Raphidae and Pezophapidae , respectively ) , as it was thought that they had evolved their similar features independently . Osteological and molecular data has since led to the dissolution of the family Raphidae , and the dodo and solitaire are now placed in their own subfamily , Raphinae , in the family Columbidae . 
 The " Réunion solitaire " , long considered a third extinct <unk> bird , has turned out to be an ibis ; it is now known as Threskiornis solitarius . 
 = = = Divergence = = = 
 The 2002 study indicated that the ancestors of the Rodrigues solitaire and the dodo diverged around the Paleogene @-@ Neogene boundary . The Mascarene Islands ( Mauritius , Réunion , and Rodrigues ) , are of volcanic origin and are less than 10 million years old . Therefore , the ancestors of both birds probably remained capable of flight for a considerable time after the separation of their lineage . The lack of mammalian herbivores competing for resources on these islands allowed the solitaire and the dodo to attain very large sizes . The DNA obtained from the Oxford specimen is degraded , and no usable DNA has been extracted from subfossil remains , so the age of the groups divergence from other pigeons still needs to be independently verified . The dodo lost the ability to fly owing to the lack of mammalian predators on Mauritius . Another large , flightless pigeon , the Viti Levu giant pigeon ( Natunaornis gigoura ) , was described in 2001 from subfossil material from Fiji . It was only slightly smaller than the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire , and it too is thought to have been related to the crowned pigeons . 
 It has been estimated that the group containing the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire diverged from genera like Goura about 1 @.@ 5 million years ago . However , that estimate appears highly unlikely . It was estimated that the relatives of the two species moved to the island about 35 million years ago , when a land bridge between Nazareth ( Rodrigues ) or St. Brandon banks and Mauritius formed . 
 = = Description = = 
 Many of the skeletal features that distinguish the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire , its closest relative , from pigeons have been attributed to their flightlessness . The pelvic elements were thicker than those of flighted pigeons to support the higher weight , and the pectoral region and the small wings were paedomorphic , meaning that they were underdeveloped and retained juvenile features . The skull , trunk and pelvic limbs were peramorphic , meaning that they changed considerably with age . The dodo shared several other traits with the Rodrigues solitaire , such as features of the skull , pelvis , and sternum , as well as their large size . It differed in other aspects , such as being more robust and shorter than the solitaire , having a larger skull and beak , a rounded skull roof , and smaller orbits . The dodo 's neck and legs were proportionally shorter , and it did not possess an equivalent to the knob present on the solitaire 's wrists . 
 As no complete dodo specimens exist , its external appearance , such as plumage and colouration , is hard to determine . Illustrations and written accounts of encounters with the dodo between its discovery and its extinction ( 1598 – 1662 ) are the primary evidence for its external appearance . According to most representations , the dodo had greyish or brownish plumage , with lighter primary feathers and a tuft of curly light feathers high on its rear end . The head was grey and naked , the beak green , black and yellow , and the legs were stout and yellowish , with black claws . Subfossil remains and remnants of the birds that were brought to Europe in the 17th century show that they were very large birds , 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 feet ) tall , and possibly weighing up to 23 kilograms ( 51 lb ) . The higher weights have been attributed to birds in captivity ; weights in the wild were estimated to have been in the range 10 @.@ 6 – 21 @.@ 1 kg ( 23 – 47 lb ) . A later estimate gives an average weight as low as 10 @.@ 2 kg ( 22 lb ) . This has been questioned , and there is still some controversy . It has been suggested that the weight depended on the season , and that individuals were fat during cool seasons , but less so during hot . The bird was sexually dimorphic : males were larger and had proportionally longer beaks . The beak was up to 23 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) in length and had a hooked point . A study of the few remaining feathers on the Oxford specimen head showed that they were pennaceous ( vaned feathers with barbs and quills ) rather than <unk> ( downy ) and most similar to those of other pigeons . 
 The beak of the solitaire was slightly hooked , and its neck and legs were long . One observer described it as the size of a swan . The skull was 170 millimetres ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) long , flattened at the top with the fore and hind parts elevated into two bony ridges structured with cancellous . A black band ( a contemporary description described it as a " frontlet " ) appeared on its head just behind the base of the beak . The plumage of the Rodrigues solitaire was described as grey and brown . Females were paler than males and had light @-@ coloured elevations on the lower neck . Sexual size dimorphism in the solitaire is perhaps the greatest in any neognath . One group , probably the males , were considerably larger than the other , measuring 90 cm ( 35 in ) in length and weighing up to 28 kg ( 62 lb ) , whereas the smaller group , probably females , were only 70 cm ( 28 in ) and weighed 17 kg ( 37 lb ) . This is only 60 % of the weight of a larger individual . Their weight may have varied substantially due to fat cycles , meaning that individuals were fat during cool seasons , but slim during hot seasons , and may have been as low as 21 kg ( 46 lb ) in the larger gender and 13 kg ( 29 lb ) in the smaller . Though male pigeons are usually larger than females , there is no direct evidence for the largest specimens actually being the males of the species , and this has only been assumed based on early works . Though the male was probably largest , this can only be confirmed by molecular sexing techniques , and not skeletal morphology alone . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Little is known of the behaviour of the dodo , as most contemporary descriptions are very brief . Based on weight estimates , it has been suggested the male could reach the age of 21 , and the female 17 . Studies of the cantilever strength of its leg bones indicate that it could run quite fast . Unlike the Rodrigues solitaire , there is no evidence that the dodo used its wings in intraspecific combat . Though some dodo bones have been found with healed fractures , it had weak pectoral muscles and more reduced wings in comparison . The dodo may instead have used its large , hooked beak in territorial disputes . Since Mauritius received more rain and had a more stable climate than Rodrigues , there was probably less need for male dodos to fight over territory . The solitaire was therefore probably the more aggressive of the two . 
 Observations of the Rodrigues solitaire in life indicate that they were highly territorial . They presumably settled disputes by striking each other with their wings ; to aid this purpose , they used the knobs on their wrists . Fractures in their wing bones also indicate that they were used in combat . It has also been suggested that these fractures may instead have been the result of a hereditary bone disease rather than battle @-@ injuries . But in all extant birds where carpal spurs and knobs are present , these are used as weapons without exceptions . Though some dodo bones have been found with healed fractures , it had weak pectoral muscles and more reduced wings in comparison with the Rodrigues solitaire . Since Rodrigues receives less rainfall and has more seasonal variation than Mauritius , which would have affected the availability of resources on the island , the solitaire would have more reason to evolve aggressive territorial behaviour . Several accounts state that they also defended themselves with a powerful bite . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 The last surviving raphine species , the Rodrigues solitaire , probably became extinct before 1778 . The dodo survived until 1662 or 1690 . The Rodrigues solitaire became extinct because of the introduction of feral cats and heavy hunting by the human population . Although the dodo became extinct earlier , the causes of extinction are related and involve the introduction of animals and hunting . 
 = = = Extinction of the dodo = = = 
 Like many animals that evolved in isolation from significant predators , the dodo was entirely fearless of humans . This fearlessness and its inability to fly made the dodo easy prey for sailors . The human population on Mauritius ( an area of 1 @,@ 860 km2 or 720 sq mi ) never exceeded 50 people in the 17th century , but they introduced other animals , including dogs , pigs , cats , rats , and crab @-@ eating macaques , which plundered dodo nests and competed for the limited food resources . At the same time , humans destroyed the dodo 's forest habitat . The impact of these introduced animals , especially the pigs and macaques , on the dodo population is currently considered more severe than that of hunting . Rats would not have caused such a problem for the dodo , as they would have been used to dealing with local land crabs . 
 The latest definite sighting of dodos , on Amber Island in 1662 , may not necessarily have been the last members of the species . The last claimed sighting of a dodo was reported in the hunting records of Isaac Johannes <unk> in 1688 . Statistical analysis of these records by Roberts and Solow gives a new estimated extinction date of 1693 , with a 95 % confidence interval of 1688 – 1715 . The authors also pointed out that because the last sighting before 1662 was in 1638 , the dodo was probably already quite rare by the 1660s , and thus a disputed report from 1674 by an escaped slave cannot be dismissed out of hand . 
 = = = Extinction of the Rodrigues solitaire = = = 
 Although the IUCN lists the Rodrigues solitaire as going extinct by 1778 , the species probably became extinct some time between the 1730s and 1760s ; the exact date is unknown . Its disappearance coincided with the tortoise trade between 1730 and 1750 , when traders burnt off vegetation , hunted solitaires , and released cats and pigs that preyed on eggs and chicks . In 1755 , Joseph @-@ François Charpentier de Cossigny attempted to obtain a live specimen , as he had been assured the Rodrigues solitaire still survived in remote areas of the island . After searching for 18 months and offering large rewards , he could find none . He noted that cats were blamed for decimating the species , but suspected that it was really due to hunting by humans . When he visited Rodrigues to observe the 1761 transit of Venus , Alexandre Guy Pingré encountered no solitaires , although he had been assured that they survived . 
 = Taiwan High Speed Rail = 
 Taiwan High Speed Rail ( abbreviated THSR or HSR ) is a high @-@ speed rail line that runs approximately 345 km ( 214 mi ) ( actual length in operation is 348 @.@ 5 km ( 217 mi ) ) along the west coast of Taiwan , from the national capital Taipei to the southern city of Kaohsiung . With construction managed by a private company , Taiwan High Speed Rail Corporation ( THSRC ) , which also operates the line , the total cost of the project was US $ 18 billion . At the time it was built , this was one of the world 's largest privately funded rail construction schemes . The system is based primarily on Japan 's Shinkansen technology . 
 The line opened for service on 5 January 2007 , with trains running at a top speed of 300 km / h ( 186 mph ) from Nangang to Zuoying in as little as 105 minutes , reaching almost 90 % of Taiwan 's population . Most intermediate stations on the line lie outside the cities served ; however , a variety of transfer options , such as free shuttle buses , conventional rail , and metros have been constructed to facilitate transport connections . 
 Ridership initially fell short of forecasts , but grew from fewer than 40 @,@ 000 passengers per day in the first few months of operation to over 129 @,@ 000 passengers per day in June 2013 . The system carried its first 100 million passengers by August 2010 and over 200 million passengers had taken this system by December 2012 . 
 In the initial years of operation , THSRC accumulated debt due to high depreciation charges and interest , largely due to the financial structure set up for the private company . In 2009 , THSRC negotiated with the government to change the method of depreciation from depending on concessions on rights to ridership . At the same time , the government also started to help refinance THSRC 's loans to assist the company so it could remain operational and profitable . 
 = = History = = 
 Taiwan 's rapid economic growth during the latter half of the twentieth century led to saturation of highways , conventional rail , and air traffic systems in the western transport corridor , which threatened to impede further growth . The idea of a new high @-@ speed rail line arose in the 1970s , and informal planning began in 1980 . In 1987 the executive branch of Taiwan 's government , the Executive Yuan , instructed the Ministry of Transportation to launch a feasibility study for a high @-@ speed rail line in the western Taiwan corridor , which was completed in 1990 . The study found that in a comparison of potential solutions to traffic problems in the corridor , a high @-@ speed rail line would offer the highest transit volume , lowest land use , highest energy savings , and least pollution . In July 1990 the Preparation Office of High Speed Rail ( <unk> ) was established and a route was selected in 1991 . Plans for the THSR were subsequently approved by the Executive Yuan in June 1992 and by Taiwan 's legislature , the Legislative Yuan , in 1993 . 
 = = = Build @-@ Operate @-@ Transfer = = = 
 In November 1994 , Taiwan passed a law regarding the use of private finance in infrastructure projects , which also applied to the up @-@ to @-@ then state @-@ run THSR project . Consequently , in 1995 , <unk> was transformed into the Bureau of High Speed Rail ( <unk> ) , which started to tender THSR as a build @-@ operate @-@ transfer ( BOT ) scheme in October 1996 . 
 The bidding process pitted Taiwan High Speed Rail Consortium ( THSRC ) against the <unk> High Speed Rail Consortium ( <unk> ) . THSRC 's bid was based on the high @-@ speed technology platform of Eurotrain , a joint venture between GEC @-@ Alsthom , the main maker of the French TGV , and Siemens , the main maker of the German ICE , while <unk> 's bid was based on Japanese Shinkansen technology supplied by Taiwan Shinkansen Consortium ( TSC ) , a joint venture of Japanese companies . THSRC , which submitted the lower bid and promised to build the line with zero net cost from the government , was chosen as preferred bidder in September 1997 . The group was renamed and formally established as the Taiwan High Speed Rail Corporation ( THSRC ) in May 1998 . THSRC and the government signed the BOT agreement on 23 July 1998 . 
 However , controversy arose during rolling @-@ stock selection . In May 1999 , as THSRC faced difficulties in raising capital , the government of Japan promised soft loans if THSRC switched to TSC . Although Eurotrain promised to match TSC 's financial offerings , the <unk> train disaster in combination with TSC offered the newer 700 Series Shinkansen , convinced THSRC to reopen core system bid , and ultimately resulting in TSC selected as the preferred rolling @-@ stock supplier in December 1999 . Although Eurotrain eventually conceded in the bid , in February 2001 it filed for a US $ 800 million damage claim against THSRC at the Singapore International Arbitration Centre . After a lengthy arbitration process , the court ruled in March 2004 that THSRC should pay a compensation for the US $ 32 @.@ 4 million Eurotrain spent on development and US $ 35 @.@ 7 million for unjust enrichment . THSRC agreed to pay US $ 65 million ( US $ 89 million with interest ) to Eurotrain in November 2004 . 
 = = Train and operation = = 
 = = = Train = = = 
 Taiwan High Speed Rail started operation with 30 THSR 700T trainsets supplied by a consortium led by Kawasaki Heavy Industries . In response to increasing ridership and new stations that would begin operation in 2015 , THSRC signed the contract for four new 700T trainsets with the Kawasaki consortium on May 2012 in Tokyo , Japan . The first ( TR 31 ) trainset was delivered to Taiwan on December 23 , 2012 ; the second ( TR 32 ) on January 21 , 2013 ; the third ( <unk> ) on January 25 , 2014 ; the fourth ( <unk> ) on August 12 , 2015 . 
 The THSR 700T trainset is based on the 700 Series Shinkansen trainset used by JR Central and JR West in Japan . This marked the first time Shinkansen technology was exported to a foreign country . Customization was focused on adapting to Taiwan 's climate and geography , and the nose shape was optimized for tunnels wider than those in Japan . 
 The maximum service speed of the trains was raised from the 700 Series Shinkansen 's 285 to 300 km / h ( 177 to 186 mph ) . The 12 cars of a 700T train are grouped in three traction units with three power cars and one trailer each , providing 10 @.@ 26 MW of power ; both end cars are trailers to avoid slip on powered bogies . The train is 304 m ( 997 ft ) long and has a mass of 503 t ( 554 short tons ) when empty . The trains have a passenger capacity of 989 seats in two classes : 66 seats in 2 + 2 configuration in the single Business Car and 923 seats in 2 + 3 configuration in the eleven Standard Cars . The per capita energy consumption of a fully loaded 700T train is 16 % of that of private cars and half that of buses ; carbon dioxide emissions are 11 % of private cars and a quarter that of buses . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 As the first high speed railway system in Taiwan , THSRC started operation in 2007 with a lot of foreign talents including French and German train drivers and operation controllers in the Operation Control Center ( OCC ) . At the same time , THSRC also started to train local drivers and controllers . Since May 2008 , all controllers working in the OCC have been Taiwanese , and since October 2008 , all train drivers have been Taiwanese . 
 The OCC 's main responsibility is to maintain safe train operations . THSRC has 132 controllers ( July 2012 ) , of which about one quarter are female , working 24 hours per day and 365 days per year in the OCC . Requirements for becoming a Chief Controller ( <unk> ) include experience in all nine OCC positions , 300 @-@ hours of on @-@ job @-@ training and to acquiring qualification . 
 THSRC has 144 drivers ( July 2012 ) , of which almost 10 % are female . All driver candidates must spend 8 months completing 1 @,@ 326 hours of professional training and pass the National Certification before they can drive the train . In addition , after becoming a certified high @-@ speed train driver , they undergo further on @-@ the @-@ job training at least three times each year in order to guarantee they can drive the train safely . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Taiwan frequently faces multiple types of natural disasters including typhoons , earthquakes , heavy rainfall , floods and landslides . For this reason , a primary focus of THSRC 's infrastructure design was how to respond to natural disasters such as earthquakes and how to ensure safety for all passengers and trains in any emergency situation . 
 THSRC has established a system to respond to natural disasters and unexpected intrusion onto the right @-@ of @-@ way , called DWS ( Disaster Warning Systems ) . This system consists of a network of sensors installed along the rail route to detect unexpected situations such as earthquakes , strong winds , heavy rainfall , floods , landslides , and intrusions . In case of an unexpected situation , the DWS will send signals to the OCC ( Operation Control Center ) immediately ; it will also activate contingency measures to ensure the safety of the passengers and trains , including decelerating or stopping trains in the affected area . 
 The DWS has functioned successfully since its initial operation in 2007 . The most powerful earthquake that THSRC has experienced measured 6 @.@ 4 on the Richter Scale with an epicenter 17 km from <unk> , Kaohsiung that shook southern Taiwan on 4 March 2010 ( <unk> ) . One operating train was slightly derailed in <unk> Tainan ( <unk> ) and six trains were stopped on the track . In spite of the temporary suspension of operations , there was no damage or casualties . All 2 @,@ 500 affected passengers were evacuated in two hours without injury . Service resumed the next day . Such a record was well noted , and provided valuable experience in operational safety to the global railway industry . 
 In April 2010 , it was reported that ground subsidence had been observed during construction on a 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) viaduct section in Yunlin County . The subsidence continued , reaching up to 55 cm ( 22 in ) over seven years . By 2010 subsidence had slowed , which was ascribed to the closure of some deep wells operating in the region . Although the situation was deemed safe with differential settlement between adjacent piers along the viaduct at only a sixth of the permissible level , the <unk> urged the closure of more wells . On 25 July 2011 , the government announced plans to close almost 1 @,@ 000 wells in Changhua and Yunlin Counties , reducing the amount of water pumped from deep wells by 210 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 2 @.@ 1 × 1011 kg ) by 2021 . 
 = = Service = = 
 According to THSR 's December 2013 timetable , there are 954 train services per week of operation , with operation times between 06 : 30 to 24 : 00 every day . Most southbound trains originate from Taipei station and most northbound trains originate from Zuoying ; however , a few trains operate just between Taipei and Taichung or between Taichung and Zuoying . Southbound trains are designated by odd train numbers , and northbound trains by even train numbers . 
 Each train consists of 1 Business Car ( car 6 ) and 11 Standard Cars ( including reserved seats and non @-@ reserved seats ) . Since July 2010 , non @-@ reserved seats are available in cars 10 through 12 ( some trains available in cars 9 through 12 ) . Car 7 of each train is fitted with 4 wheelchair accessible chairs and a disabled @-@ friendly restroom . Passengers can call THSR 's Customer Service Hot Line at ( Taiwan ) <unk> @-@ 3000 or visit any THSR station ticket window to reserve these seats . 
 By August 2012 , implementation of 4G <unk> on @-@ board trains is expected to provide smooth wireless broadband services , making THSR the first high @-@ speed ground transportation system equipped with this service . 
 In 2012 , THSRC rated highly in the CommonWealth Magazine ( <unk> ) “ Golden Service Award survey ” ( <unk> ) , not only far outpacing all rivals in the " long @-@ distance land transport " category , but also taking the top spot in the overall rankings of 300 industries . 
 = = = Stop Patterns = = = 
 = = = Ticket fare and discount = = = 
 In 2013 , for a one @-@ way Taipei – Zuoying trip , a THSR Standard Car adult ticket is NT $ 1 @,@ 630 , which was about US $ 55 ; a Business Car ticket fare is NT $ 2 @,@ 140 , which was about US $ 72 . The cost of a non @-@ reserved seat is approximately 3 % less than the regular price . Business and standard car reserved ticket reservations are available 28 days prior to the date of departure ( including the departure day ) . 
 Senior citizens ( Taiwan citizens above 65 years of age ) , registered disabled persons plus one accompanying passenger ( Taiwan citizens only ) , and children ( passengers under 12 years of age ) are eligible for concession ( half price ) tickets . 
 A group discount is offered for groups of 11 or more . A group discount cannot be used in combination with other discount offers and does not include non @-@ reserved seats . Passengers eligible for multiple discounts can only choose one discount offer . 
 Since 1 July 2010 , a smart card system has provided frequent travelers with multi @-@ ride ( eight trips ) or periodic tickets . THSR 's contact @-@ less smart cards allow the cardholder to travel between specific stations within a given time period for a certain number of rides . The card is sold in either registered ( name @-@ bearing ) or non @-@ registered form . Only adult tickets are available in this format , and cannot be used for rides between Banqiao and Taipei . 
 After purchasing or adding value to a multi @-@ ride card , the card balance is valid for 45 days counted from the day of first use . The ticket is good for 8 rides . The multi @-@ ride card provides a discount of about 21 % off the full fare of a reserved Standard Seat . Non @-@ registered and registered multi @-@ ride tickets can be purchased at the ticket windows of all THSRC stations . Upon first purchase of a multi @-@ ride ticket , a card deposit fee of NT $ 100 is required ( refundable if the card is returned ) . The registered multi @-@ ride ticket is limited to personal use by the registered cardholder . Since November 2012 , an Early Bird discount of 35 % has been offered for a limited number of tickets sold no later than 8 days before the departure date . If the 35 % off tickets sell out before the deadline , tickets with a discount of 20 % off are offered . If these tickets sell out before the deadline , tickets with a discount of 10 % off are offered . If all early bird tickets are sold out , then full fare tickets are offered . 
 = = = Train frequency = = = 
 THSRC operates additional train services during national holidays . On 29 June 2011 , a proposal by THSRC to increase the maximum number of train services to 210 per day ( compared to the existing 175 per day ) passed an environmental impact assessment , increasing the number of possible services on " high @-@ load days " . 
 = = = Ridership = = = 
 Original estimates predicted a daily ridership of 180 @,@ 000 after launch , growing to 400 @,@ 000 by 2036 . In view of a 50 % drop in airline passengers in the wake of the 1997 Asian financial crisis , forecasts were revised downwards . The final initial ridership estimate was 140 @,@ 000 passengers per day . Actual initial ridership did not match these projections . In September 2007 , six months after opening , THSRC carried 1 @.@ 5 million passengers monthly , translating to about 50 @,@ 000 passengers daily . In the second year , passenger numbers almost doubled . In the third year , average daily ridership continued to grow to 88 @,@ 000 passengers per day , jumping to over 120 @,@ 000 passengers per day in 2012 . ( updated to September 2012 ) Seat occupancy was around 45 % in the first three years , with a modest improvement achieved in 2009 , and reached 53 @.@ 91 % in 2012 . ( updated to September 2012 ) <unk> is stable above 99 % . 
 The 10 @-@ millionth passenger was carried after 265 days of operation on 26 September 2007 , while the 100 @-@ millionth passenger was carried after 1 @,@ 307 days on 3 August 2010 , and 200 @-@ millionth by December 2012 . On 10 October 2011 , the Double Ten Day holiday , THSRC transported a single @-@ day record of 189 @,@ 386 passengers . On 5 February 2011 , the third day of Chinese New Year ’ s celebration , a new record of 190 @,@ 596 passengers was achieved . The next single @-@ day record was reached on 25 January 2012 , also the third day of Chinese New Year ’ s celebration , at 191 @,@ 989 passengers . The most recent record is 212 @,@ 000 passengers transported on 1 January 2013 . 
 The high @-@ speed trains have successfully out @-@ competed planes : by August 2008 , half of the air routes between Taipei and the country 's western cities had been discontinued , including all connections between cities with THSR stations except for a single daily connection between Taipei and Kaohsiung . Total domestic air traffic was expected to be halved from 2006 to 2008 , and actually fell from 8 @.@ 6 to 4 @.@ 9 million . In June 2012 , officials announced the discontinuation of the last remaining commercial flight between Taipei and Kaohsiung . The share for conventional rail between Taipei and Kaohsiung fell from 9 @.@ 71 % in 2006 to 2 @.@ 5 % in 2008 , while high @-@ speed rail became the most common mode of transport at 50 % of all trips by 2008 . The opening of THSR led to a 10 % reduction of traffic on the parallel expressway in 2007 . Despite cheaper ticket prices , long @-@ distance bus companies reported that passenger volumes had fallen by 20 to 30 percent by 2008 . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 Construction of the system took more than 2 @,@ 000 professional engineers from 20 countries and over 20 @,@ 000 foreign and domestic workers six years to complete . Construction work was broken into several specialized lots that were contracted separately . One group of contracts was for civil works , covering the construction of the superstructure of open line sections . Stations and depots were the subject of separate groups of construction lots . A fourth group of lots was for track work . 
 The Taiwan North @-@ South High Speed Rail Project was awarded the first prize for the “ Outstanding Civil Engineering Project Award ” by the Asian Civil Engineering Coordination Council ( <unk> ) in Sydney on 10 August 2010 . The project 's award indicates that Taiwan 's engineering standards are gaining international recognition , and THSRC , running through the northern and southern region of Taiwan , has overcome the problems of topography and other technical challenges . 
 In 2011 , the Public Construction Commission ( <unk> ) organized an on @-@ line voting campaign that garnered over 330 @,@ 000 votes , to select the 100 best infrastructure projects ( <unk> ) in Taiwan to celebrate the centennial of the Republic ; Amongst all , Taiwan High Speed Rail top the list . 
 = = = Stations = = = 
 The construction of stations was contracted separately in 2001 and work started in May 2002 . The stations at Taipei and Banqiao are rent from TRA by THSRC . The Taoyuan , Hsinchu , Taichung , Chiayi , Tainan and Zuoying Stations are built in the first phase by THSRC . The second phase of the new stations planned for several years officially started in early 2013 . The construction of THSR new stations , Yunlin , Miaoli and Changhua , commenced on <unk> , January 28 and February @-@ 16 2013 . According to the plan , all the three stations could join the operation by the middle of 2015 . THSR also planned to extend its operation to Nangang , in the north part of Taipei City . The new THSR Nangang station is scheduled to join the operation in mid @-@ 2016 , which is a station refitted from an old TRA station . 
 The Parking facilities , station square , transport bus station , food and shopping service areas in each station were included in station design . Steel , glass , and reinforced concrete were used in the construction of all stations . Lighting systems for each station were contracted out to individual lighting designers . Stations were constructed with the possibility of connecting to future rapid transit or rail lines . 
 The construction contract between the THSR and the government consists of two parts : part one is the THSRC ’ s construction and operation of the High Speed Rail over the next 35 year ; part two is THSRC 's keeping the right of development of the areas around five stations for 50 years , including Taoyuan , Hsinchu , Taichung , Chiayi , and Tainan . 
 = = = = Taoyuan Station = = = = 
 The Taoyuan Station serves not only passengers arriving or leaving Taoyuan , but also travelers going in and out the Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport . The entire station area is about 20 hectares . It is constituted by three buildings , namely the station itself , the operation center at northeast side and the parking tower at southwest side . The volume of the station is smaller than the other two buildings , but it is the focal point as it stands at the center of the site and provides most of the services and functions . Large pieces of glass screens and metal shoulder eaves extending horizontally , the station is lit and transparent . The specially designed lighting , the clear tempered glass , the insulating glass and the truss system have emphasized the functions of the space and brought a bright look of the building . The 6M high lobby in the ground floor is connected by the escalators coming up from the entrance hall and the platforms built underground . 
 = = = = Hsinchu Station = = = = 
 As the gateway of Hsinchu , a city nurturing high @-@ tech industries , Hsinchu Station integrates the images of high @-@ tech into its natural and cultural traits , and integrates global perspective into locality . The Hsinchu Station is an oval @-@ shaped space with a curved parallelogram roof . It is designed to respond to the sunlight and winds in Hsin @-@ Chu . The cladding of the roof is durable stainless steel . It keeps the maintenance easier and enhances the high @-@ tech image . The roof opens up over the platform and rail to avoid a piston effect and the style responds to the local environment . The station will be the new landmark of Hsinchu . Either gate can be the front gate or this symmetric building under the elevated railway . The lobby on the ground floor greets visitors entering or exiting the building . Entering the ticket gate , travelers can take escalators or stairs to the waiting areas on the second floor . Two waiting areas for passengers go to north and south respectively are connected by an air bridge . Two escalators and one stairway send passengers to the platforms . There are ten emergent exits around the platforms . To avoid causing directional confusion , two arch walls in the lobby are erected to break the symmetry . These two walls are designed by <unk> known artists with themes of “ The Past ” and “ The Future ” The past wall is designed by Taiwanese artist Tsai Ken . He stacked traditional building materials such as bricks , tiles , stones , wood and bamboo to present the Hakka culture of building . The Future wall is designed by Chinese American artist Shan @-@ Shan Sheng . She applied glass , a material used frequently in Hsin Chu for handcraft , to decorate the wall . A set of glass bar codes suggests how the future might be . Standing at the air bridge , one can clearly see the walls that connect our past to our future . 
 = = = = Taichung Station = = = = 
 Taichung Station has the biggest space of all THSR stations . It is located in Wu @-@ Ri ( <unk> ) Village , 8 km from downtown . It is elevated . The development includes the High Speed Railway Station , Taiwan Railway Station , bus transit , parking lots , public squares , supporting facilities and the road system for the adjacent areas . The architectural image of the Taichung Station integrates the regional transit through middle Taiwan and a gateway to Taichung . It is the core of the future development and is to decide the image of the entire city . The planning sets out at three scales : regional , citywide and street @-@ level . The building group with vertical volume is designed in accordance with regional considerations ; the stations with the same structure are designed in accordance with city @-@ level concerns ; the supporting facilities are designed to respond to the street @-@ level needs of the site . In addition to the images and local elements applied in design , the capacity of the buildings , the nature of the space , the potential of the neighboring districts , the convenience of the traffic square , and the contrast of vertical and horizontal volumes of buildings that constitute the skyline are all considered . The horizontal volume of the station is due to the conditions of the site , functions and development regulations . Therefore , the contrast created by the vertical volumes of the supporting structures can characterize the space and enhance the image of the architecture in the surroundings . The images of the supporting facilities are suggestive , and the image of the stations is revealing . The three stories above ground are constructed of SRC , and the structure is shared by the building and the rails . A foyer , bus transit area , generator room , parking lot and taxi waiting lines are in the ground floor . The lobby , shops and staff offices are on the second floor . Train platforms are on the third floor . 
 = = = = Chiayi and Tainan Station = = = = 
 Both the Chiayi and Tainan stations are located on the Chia @-@ Nan Plain ( <unk> ) . The conditions of construction sites and the transportation needs of these two places are similar , but the architectural themes differ in order to reflect local characteristics . The oblique roof covering the eastern facade features a high @-@ tech image . The generator room is decorated with horizontal shutters that reflect a minimalist style . The columns and truss system in the station imitate trees ; as they extend toward the outside of the building , the artificial elements are integrated into nature . When night falls , the ceiling is lit with thousands of lights over the truss system , resembling a starry night over the branches of a forest . The pavement of the Chiayi Station ’ s front plaza reflects the natural landscape of the clouds enveloping Ah @-@ Li Mountain ( <unk> ) . The wall and the water feature design of the Tainan Station ’ s plaza reflect the old city fence and the An @-@ Ping Wharf ( <unk> ) . Chiayi Station is colored silver , gray and green to represent its well @-@ preserved surroundings . Tainan Station is colored reddish brown to represent its rich historical heritage . Art projects for Chiayi Station will respond to the natural landscape or the high @-@ tech images of the medical science park that will be constructed close by in the near future . Art projects for Tainan Station @-@ will respond to the city ’ s long history and to a bright future expected to be brought by the high @-@ tech industrial park nearby . 
 = = = = Zuoying Station = = = = 
 The Zuoying Station is located near Half Screen Mountain and Lotus Pond . The station not only provides travelers with safe , comfortable and convenient transportation but also serves as the gateway and landmark of this area . Extending from the station , the two plazas serve as the interface between the station and its surroundings , and the pedestrian walks around them are open to the public for various activities . The station and parking tower are the main architectural structures . They are the landmarks of Zuoying , and their scale meets the conditions of the environment . As the major public construction in the city , the station applies glass screens to frame Half @-@ Screen Mountain in the backdrop , a technique referred to as “ scenery @-@ borrowing . ” The glass screens are supported by a colonnade on the ground floor . As one of the architectural characteristics of southern Taiwan , the colonnade here can relieve the pressure the building might bring to the streets . The station structures include the station itself , parking tower , transformer power station , duty command center and the affiliated facilities . The structure of the station is designed to address the needs for convenient maintenance , high loading and large span . 
 = = = Stations transportation = = = 
 To improve local public transit connections to THSR stations , the TRA built two new spur lines branching off from its Western Line . 
 <unk> Line for Tainan opened on 2 January 2011 @,@ 
 <unk> Line for Hsinchu opened on 11 November 2011 . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 Reflecting a design speed of 350 km / h ( 217 mph ) , track layout was designed with a minimum curve radius of 6 @,@ 250 m ( 20 @,@ 505 ft ) , track @-@ centre distance of 4 @,@ 500 mm ( 177 @.@ 2 in ) , right @-@ of @-@ way width of 18 m ( 59 ft ) , and a maximum gradient of 2 @.@ 5 % , except for 3 @.@ 5 % at one location . All but 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) of track is <unk> , combining slab track of Japanese manufacture on open line sections with switches from a German supplier . Track laying began in July 2003 . The line was electrified with the 25 kV / 60 Hz AC system . The signalling and train control system was laid out for bi @-@ directional operation according to European specifications . Each track section has a checkpoint , and an automatic control system ensures that trains are spaced at least 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) apart to prevent collisions . 
 After four months of delays , trial runs using the first THSR 700T trains began on 27 January 2005 , on the Tainan – Kaohsiung section . On 30 October 2005 , a day after a test run passed the planned top service speed of 300 km / h ( 186 mph ) , the targeted maximum test speed of 315 km / h ( 196 mph ) was achieved . The section between Banqiao ( Taipei ) and Zuoying ( Kaohsiung ) opened to the public on 5 January 2007 . The HSR platforms at Taipei Station opened on 2 March 2007 , bringing the entire line into operation . 
 = = = Civil works = = = 
 Most of the line is carried on superstructures . About 251 km ( 156 mi ) or 73 % of the line runs on viaducts , mostly precast pre @-@ stressed concrete box girder spans , the first of which was put in place in October 2001 . A 157 @,@ 317 m ( 97 @.@ 752 mi ) continuous section from <unk> ( <unk> ) in Changhua County to Zuoying in Kaohsiung was the world 's longest elevated rail line section at the time of opening . <unk> were designed to be earthquake resistant to allow for trains to stop safely during a seismic event and for repairable damage following a maximum design earthquake . Bridges built over known fault lines were designed to survive fault movements without catastrophic damage . 
 About 61 km ( 38 mi ) or 18 % of the line is in tunnels , including 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) of the <unk> section in Taipei , as well as 48 tunnels with a total length of 46 @,@ 257 m ( 28 @.@ 743 mi ) on the other sections , the longest of which is <unk> Tunnel , at a finished length of 7 @,@ 364 m ( 24 @,@ 160 ft ) . Forty @-@ two of the tunnels included a total of 39 @,@ 050 m ( 24 @.@ 265 mi ) of mined sections , all of which were bored with the sequential excavation and support construction method , with excavated tunnel faces of 135 – 155 m2 ( 1 @,@ 450 – 1 @,@ 670 sq ft ) , between November 2000 and July 2003 . The finished interior cross @-@ sectional area of 90 m2 ( 970 sq ft ) , set according to wider European standards , provides space for two tracks with safety walkways . 
 = = = Environmental issues = = = 
 Environmental mitigation measures in the line 's construction phase included the construction of animal bridges over the line , the planting and re @-@ planting of trees along the track as noise screens , and the purchase of farmland to create a preservation area for jacana birds ( <unk> ) away from the line . 
 For more than 10 years , THSRC has been devoted to the preservation of the pheasant @-@ tailed jacana , a type of bird that is considered endangered in Taiwan . With NT $ 50 million invested , the first artificial habitat recovery project was completed in collaboration with the local government , country development organizations and non @-@ profit organizations . The pheasant @-@ tailed jacana population in Tainan , Taiwan , which at one point numbered less than 50 , has increased to over 300 . In 2007 , the recovery habitat was officially renamed “ Pheasant @-@ tailed Jacana Eco @-@ Educational Nature Park ” and since then , it has opened to the public . To educate students in matters concerning environmental protection , every year THSRC arranges for elementary and junior high school students to visit Pheasant @-@ tailed Jacana Eco @-@ Educational Nature Park ( <unk> — <unk> ) , where they are able to learn about the beauty of Taiwan ’ s natural habitats . 
 The other story about the balance between THSR construction and the environment is the protection plan of “ 300 @-@ year @-@ old camphor tree and the temple ” ( <unk> ) in the Hsinchu City for more than 10 years . The tree and the temple are located on the main route of the THSR , and both of them faced removal because of railway construction . The temple - “ Local Land God Temple ” ( <unk> ) established just beside the old tree is the belief center of the people there . In 1998 , THSRC adjusted the line and design to keep the tree and temple in their original place and cooperated with local government and people to protect the old tree and the temple until today . Afterwards , together with the local government , the Environment and the Resources Protection Committee , and cultural and historical authorities , THSRC drafted the Hsinchu Old Camphor Tree Medical Plan , which called for the repair of decayed branches as well as measures designed to maintain the long @-@ term growth and the health of the tree . 
 = = Financial = = 
 = = = Revenue and cost = = = 
 Most of THSRC 's revenue comes from ticket sales ; supplemental income comes from other activities such as advertising and renting spaces for standing shops and spots in plazas . Advertising spots on trains and station platforms have also been sold . Revenues grew along with ridership over the first three years , but ridership remained below expectations . In 2008 the second year of operation , revenues fell barely short of THSRC 's expectations a year earlier of a doubling of first @-@ year results . 
 The cost of running the trains and infrastructure , or cash operating costs , was initially over NT $ 1 billion a month , but was reduced to around NT $ 0 @.@ 85 – 0 @.@ 9 billion a month by 2008 . Revenues first exceeded this level , thus generating a positive operating cash flow , in the fourth month of operation ( April 2007 ) . 
 For THSRC , the over heavy accounting of the fixed cost of fixed assets like rolling stock and infrastructure ( depreciation ) is a significant non @-@ cash element of total operating costs . In its first two years of operation , THSRC applied straight @-@ line depreciation , distributing costs evenly over a period of 26 @.@ 5 years . As a result , the balance of operating revenues and costs ( operating income ) showed a high loss in the first year of operation , which was only reduced as revenues grew in the second year . The depreciation period set for THSRC reflected the length of the <unk> concession rather than the much longer lifespan of the infrastructure , and it is the factor for the operating loss . After adopting an activity depreciation method which is variable in time , THSRC posted its first operating profit for 2009 , the third year of operation . The company reported its first annual profit of NT $ 5 @.@ 78 billion for 2011 after five years of operation . 
 For the first time in its five @-@ year operation , the Company reported a net income of NT $ 5 @.@ 78 billion , with earnings per share of NT $ 0 @.@ 59 . Between 2010 and 2011 , revenues increased by 16 @.@ 65 % from NT $ 27 @.@ 64 billion to NT $ 32 @.@ 24 billion , with operating costs and expenses ( excluding depreciation and amortization ) rising by only 4 @.@ 98 % . Over the same period of time , gross profit totaled NT $ 12 @.@ 98 billion ( an increase of 30 @.@ 32 % ) , income from operations totaled NT $ 12 @.@ 06 billion ( an increase of 32 @.@ 93 % ) and EBITDA totaled NT $ 22 @.@ 73 billion ( an increase of 22 @.@ 34 % ) . 2011 gross profit , income from operation and EBITDA were all record highs . Since commencing operations in 2007 , THSRC has had a significant influence on Taiwan ’ s economy and on the lives of its people . In 2011 , the Company continued to pursue sustainable growth aligned with the interests of shareholders and society , achieving record profits even amid a challenging economic environment . 
 The interest cost is another major item of this company 's financing . In the first few years of operation , interest rates were well above market rates . Interest expense stood at around NT $ 1 @.@ 3 billion per month in April 2008 , when THSRC first achieved break @-@ even cash flow , with revenue and cash expenses ( which exclude depreciation ) both around NT $ 2 @.@ 1 billion . Interest rates fell in the first half of 2009 , reducing interest expenses and contributing to a reduced net loss . 
 In 2010 THSRC put through a new syndicate loan , which alleviated the company ’ s imminent financial burden . THSRC signed a NT $ 382 billion refinancing contract with a consortium of 8 domestic banks led by Bank of Taiwan in January , 2010 ; and utilized the new loan to pay off the previous syndicated loan which with higher interest . As of 30 June 2011 , the long @-@ term debts totaling NT $ 385 billion include NT $ 26 billion corporate bonds and NT $ 359 billion bank loans . In comparison with the terms and conditions of previous loans , the newly signed refinancing debts carried lower interest rates and longer tenors up to 22 years . The Company ’ s financial burden is therefore largely reduced . 
 = = = Financial and loan = = = 
 In cumulative figures , until July 2008 , depreciation and interest were equal to 95 % of THSRC 's accumulated debt . Both THSRC and a September 2009 government report identified an unreasonable financial structure and the resulting high interest rates and high depreciation charges as the main causes of negative financial performance , while the government assessed THSRC to have performed well in its core business , as measured by earnings before interest , taxes , depreciation and amortization ( EBITDA ) . To reduce its interest load , THSRC sought to revise its loan structure in 2008 and again in 2009 . To reduce depreciation costs by increasing the amortization time , THSRC requested an extension of its 35 @-@ year concession period . 
 By the summer of 2009 , THSRC 's cumulative losses were equivalent to two @-@ thirds of its equity capital . In response to global financial crisis and domestic economic recession , THSRC proposed to increase income and reduce expenditures in several aspects in the hope of raising operation performances . In February 2009 , THSRC announced to adjust train frequency , cut down salary payment by 10 ~ 20 % among management level , and measured to expand fare promotion to stimulate rider ship . While the media questioned whether the planned construction of three more intermediate stations and the extension to Nangang would be postponed , THSRC published press release on 26 September 2009 , stating that the company will comply with “ Taiwan High Speed . Rail Construction and Operation Contract ” , and the construction project of 3 intermediate stations , namely Miaoli , Changhua and <unk> will be initiated in July , 2012 , and is scheduled to start its operation from 2015 . By the time of completion , there will be a total of 12 stations along the THSRC operation route . The company was put under new management in September 2009 with the aim of turning around the company 's finances with government help in arranging refinancing of the loans . 
 The government took majority control of the company after the election of its new board on 10 November 2009 . In January 2010 , when accumulated losses already exceeded NT $ 70 billion , THSRC signed a government @-@ guaranteed refinancing deal in which eight government @-@ dominated banks provided NT $ 382 billion at lower interest rates and longer maturity . The government also approved the company 's new variable depreciation charge . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 On 12 April 2013 , suspicious luggage items were found inside the North bound train No. 616 toilet when it was heading towards THSR Hsinchu Station . The train was stopped at THSR Taoyuan Station and all of the passengers were evacuated . Later , it was determined the luggage contained an unidentified liquid in cans , alarm clock and white particulate matter . The items were dismantled by the bomb squad and taken for further investigation . Two KMT legislators , Hsu Hsin @-@ ying and Lu <unk> @-@ yen , were on board . 
 The train master on No. 616 received complaints from passengers at about 9 : 10am that the women ’ s toilet in cabin No. 11 contained two pieces of luggage which emitted a strange odor . THSRC informed the High Speed Rail Police Division , which later boarded the train when it stopped at Hsinchu station . The traffic control center decided to evacuate passengers after the train stopped at Taoyuan station at 9 : 45 am . More than 600 people were asked to disembark and continue their journey on another train . All passengers affected by the incident would be given a coupon allowing them to purchase a high @-@ speed ticket for their next journey at half price , even though the train company was not to blame for the incident . 
 Two bomber suspects were arrested in a hotel in Zhongshan City , Guangdong Province , China on 15 April and repatriated to Taiwan on 17 April 2013 . 
 Part of the tracks near Tainan were badly damaged during the earthquake on 6 February 2016 . All high @-@ speed rail services south of Chiayi Station were suspended until 7 February 2016 . 
 = = Public relation = = 
 = = = THSR Camp = = = 
 Since beginning operation , THSRC has planned a series of “ THSR Camp ” events together with the Railway Cultural Society of Taiwan , the National Chiao Tung University Railway Research Society and the China Youth Corps . Between 2009 and 2011 , 42 “ THSR Camp ” events have been organized , which include college / university , senior high school / vocational high school , junior high school , and elementary school students . Lectures are given at these gatherings to impart information about high @-@ speed rail in order to give pupils a better understanding of THSRC . 
 = = = Ride THSR and Join the Book Exhibition for Free = = = 
 In order to promote a national reading culture , since 2009 , THSRC have organized the “ Ride THSR and Join the Book Exhibition for Free ” event . Since then , THSRC have offered more than 39 @,@ 000 passengers free admission to the Taipei International Book Exhibition ( <unk> ) , which is held in February of each year . In 2012 , the “ THSR Reading Train ” was launched . This year ’ s <unk> spokesperson , singer Crowd Lu , read the classic novel “ The Old Man and the Sea ” for children aboard the train , allowing these students from remote areas to experience both the joy of reading and the marvel of high @-@ speed rail travel . 
 = = = One Word Maxim – “ <unk> ” Exhibition = = = 
 In May 2011 , THSRC co @-@ organized the “ One Word Maxim – <unk> ” exhibition together with renowned calligrapher Dong Yang @-@ zi at the THSR Taichung Station . On public display was an enormous 2 meter tall by 3 meter wide calligraphy sculpture created by Ms. Dong using naturally weathered wood from Taiwan . This is the first calligraphy sculpture in Taiwan that allows the spirit of calligraphy and the connotation of words to transcend the constraints of the writing brush , and its cultural and artistic significance enriched Taichung Station as well as the journeys of passengers transiting through the station . 
 = = = <unk> Spring Starlight – International A Cappella Performance at THSR = = = 
 In 2010 , THSRC sponsored the Taiwan Choral Music Center ( <unk> ) to organize the “ Taiwan International A Cappella Festival , ” which featured performances by musical groups at THSR stations . The performances were well received by passengers , with fans even forming groups to catch a glimpse of the musicians at various stations . In 2011 , THSRC once again sponsored <unk> , this time to hold the “ 2011 Spring Performance – <unk> Stars Spring Concert , ” which gave THSR passengers the opportunity to view live performances by prominent international musical groups . 
 = = = ROC Centennial – Love at THSR = = = 
 Owing to their unique architecture and design , THSR stations have become local scenic destinations , and they are also popular backdrops for wedding photos . To mark the ROC Centennial , THSRC organized the “ ROC Centennial – Love at THSR ” event which awarded unique gifts to selected couples taking wedding photos at 6 THSR stations – Taoyuan , Hsinchu , Taichung , Chiayi , Tainan and Zuoying . 
 = = = Visits = = = 
 In an effort to allow the general public to gain a deeper understanding about THSR , THSRC provides station tour guides who educate visitors about its operation and service . In addition , professional organizations are also permitted to visit the depots and OMC ( Operational Management Center ) to gain hands @-@ on knowledge about THSR . In 2011 , THSRC received 281 groups with a total of 10 @,@ 700 people . It also continues to actively conduct experience sharing with its fellow railway transportation operators to enhance the quality of public transportation and create better planning , design and service . By engaging with industry peers , THSRC can pinpoint areas of improvement , with the continual aim of providing high @-@ quality services to its passengers . 
 = = = Deliver Love with THSR to Remote Village Children = = = 
 Since 2010 , along with World Vision Taiwan , THSRC has offered a tuition assistance program to underprivileged children . The company invited passengers to support philanthropic effort , and raised over NT $ 23 million which was used to help 7 @,@ 200 underprivileged students pay their tuition fees . 
 = = = Corporate Social Responsibility ( CSR ) = = = 
 This event creating a sustainable and reliable relationship with the general public is a significant part of THSRC ’ s corporate vision and an important foundation of environmental and social sustainability . Therefore , it will continue making efforts to establish a good partnership with the general public as well as with the stakeholders , customers , employees , suppliers , communities and the government . To create greater value for each of these parties , it will move forward with its philosophy of “ Go Extra Mile ” to improve their lives through the provision of environmentally friendly high @-@ speed rail services , which play a central role in connecting the entire western corridor of Taiwan . Since operation in 2007 , THSRC has been dedicated to CSR initiatives , emphasizing environmental protection and giving support to all members of the communities served by THSRC . THSRC also published the first CSR Report in 2009 , which gave all stakeholders a better understanding of its CSR objectives and activities , and in 2011 , we received the 20th Annual Enterprises Environmental Protection Award , sponsored by the Environmental Protection Administration of Taiwan . 
 = = = THSRC Smile Program = = = 
 In cooperation with various nonprofit organizations , since 2008 the company has organized the THSRC Smile Program , which offers minority groups and families the chance to experience the comfort and convenience of high @-@ speed rail rides . THSRC Smile Program gave its first ride on 23 January 2008 to children , social workers and parents from the <unk> branch of the Taiwan Fund for Children and Families . As of the end of 2011 , 12 @,@ 231 people in total , comprising 229 underprivileged groups and families , have participated in the THSRC Smile Program . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 The “ National Geographic ” website chose travel by high speed rail in western Taiwan as the “ Best Winter Trip 2013 ” . The first film to feature THSR prominently was the 2007 Taiwanese movie Summer 's Tail , directed by Cheng Wen @-@ Tang . A group of teenagers , one of whom is the son of a Japanese engineer working on the high @-@ speed railway , hang out at a vacant lot under the elevated tracks of THSR in <unk> , Tainan . In Leg 10 of Season 12 of the internationally aired reality television game show The Amazing Race , which was watched by 11 @.@ 65 million Americans , competing teams travelled from Taipei to Taichung and back on the THSR . 
 Railfan : Taiwan High Speed Rail , a train simulator video game developed jointly by the Taiwanese company <unk> and the Japanese company <unk> on the basis of the latter 's Train Simulator series , was the first Taiwanese game for Sony Computer Entertainment 's PlayStation 3 system . The game features real video and was made with the help of THSRC 's European train drivers . It was first released in a Chinese / English language version in Taiwan , Hong Kong , and Singapore , in July 2007 , with the Japanese version released in November 2007 . 
 = 108 St Georges Terrace = 
 108 St Georges Terrace or <unk> Tower ( formerly known as Bankwest Tower , the Bond Tower and the R & I Tower ) is a 50 @-@ storey office tower in Perth , Western Australia . Completed in 1988 , the building measures 214 metres ( 702 ft ) to its roof and 247 metres ( 810 ft ) to the tip of its communications antenna . It was the tallest building in Perth from its completion in 1988 until 1992 when it was overtaken in height by Central Park . As of 2012 , it remains the third @-@ tallest building in the city . The concrete tower has a distinctive profile , with a triangular plan . 
 The site occupied by the tower was home to the Palace Hotel , and organised opposition was formed to try to save that building from demolition to make way for an office tower . The site was subsequently acquired by businessman Alan Bond and the tower was approved and constructed in a plan that would retain much of the Palace Hotel . The tower then remained the headquarters of Bond 's companies until their collapse . The tower has also been the headquarters of Western Australia 's state bank , Bankwest ( formerly known as the R & I Bank ) , between its completion and 2012 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ 1978 = = = 
 The tower 's prime location at the corner of William Street and St Georges Terrace was the site of the first licensed premises in Perth from the 1830s . The then @-@ opulent Palace Hotel opened on this corner in 1897 during the days of the Western Australian gold rush , and developed a " colourful " history , hosting numerous celebrities of the time . The plot was purchased by the Commonwealth Banking Corporation , which announced in 1972 that it planned to redevelop the site as high @-@ rise offices . During the 1950s and 1960s , many of Perth 's older buildings had been demolished to make way for modern developments , which led to wide criticism of the Perth City Council for approving such redevelopments . In this atmosphere , wide public protest resulted and a lobby group of concerned citizens calling themselves " The Palace Guards " worked to save the historic building . This outcry led to condemnation of the plans and heritage listing of the property by the National Trust , and forced the Commonwealth Bank to ask the Federal Government to take the property off its hands . The property was subsequently purchased from the Commonwealth Bank by businessman Alan Bond in 1978 along with the adjacent Terrace Arcade . 
 = = = Bond Corporation and construction : 1978 – 1988 = = = 
 In 1980 , Bond unveiled new plans for the redevelopment of the site . These plans made some effort at preservation of the Palace Hotel , by retaining the facade and main foyer area of the building . However , the construction of the modern office tower at the site 's north @-@ eastern corner required demolition of Terrace Arcade , the eastern accommodation wing and the hotel 's renowned dining room . The rationale given for the works required was that extensive renovations to the Palace Hotel in 1915 and the 1930s had weakened its structure significantly , as well as problems controlling white ants in the structure . The development exceeded the acceptable plot ratio in the town planning scheme , however the Perth City Council pre @-@ approved the plans nonetheless , on the condition that Bond Corporation kept the Palace Hotel operating as a hotel . 
 Demolition of parts of the site commenced in August 1981 , and by August 1983 construction had completed on the tower 's foundation and three levels of underground parking . However , there were continuing doubts about the viability of the building , slowing the pace of the development . This changed on 7 September 1984 when R & I Bank Chairman David Fischer signed a joint venture agreement over the development with <unk> International , a subsidiary of Bond Corporation . The bank , which was at the time wholly owned by the Government of Western Australia , consulted then @-@ Premier Brian Burke in deciding whether to invest in the project . 
 Following the investment in the project by the bank , the developers successfully sought modification of the original planning approval by the Perth City Council to allow the use of the Palace Hotel as a bank , rather than remaining as a public hotel . With this permission , construction of the development by Multiplex proceeded , and floor space was leased rapidly ; by October 1985 only four floors of the building remained for lease and it was expected to be fully let before completion . With construction finally proceeding once more , the Palace Hotel closed in June 1986 . In April 1987 , while the tower was still under construction , five men were arrested after illegally entering the site and parachuting from the top of the tower in the early hours of the morning . Construction proceeded at the rate of about one floor every eight to ten days . 
 The construction of the tower took three years to complete , with the first occupants moving into the tower in July 1988 . The tower was officially opened in October 1989 . Construction of the building cost A $ 120 million , up from the 1984 estimates of $ 100 million . Upon its completion , the building was the 55th @-@ tallest building in the world , the third @-@ tallest in Australia and the tallest in Perth ( overtaking St Martins Tower ) . It was also the eighth @-@ tallest concrete skyscraper in the world . However , at this time there were already plans to build a taller building on the site of the former David Jones department store between Hay Street and St Georges Terrace , which became Central Park . 
 = = = After completion : 1988 – 2012 = = = 
 The top three floors of the building were occupied by Alan Bond 's private investment company <unk> Investments , which owned a majority stake in Bond Corporation . In November 1987 , Alan Bond bought the Vincent van Gogh painting Irises and unveiled it in a purpose @-@ built secure art gallery on the 49th floor of the tower on 23 December 1988 . Amidst a worsening financial situation for the Bond companies , Bond Corporation sold its half share in the building to R & I Bank for $ 108 million , making R & I Bank its outright owner . In 1991 amid the collapse of the Bond empire , Bond shifted his offices out of the tower , leaving the top three floors vacant . These floors then remained vacant for almost a decade . 
 From when it opened , the tower was referred to as both the Bond Tower and the R & I Tower , owing to the presence of both logos on the building 's exterior . The Bond Corporation logos were later removed from the tower , and by the end of 1994 , the signage on the building was updated to match the new name and logo of its owner and head tenant , Bankwest . 
 Bankwest sold the building in November 1994 for $ 146 million to <unk> Pty Ltd , which was majority owned by the AMP Society . However , Bankwest retained the head lease over the building , and in 2000 the Bank occupied around 20 floors in the building . In 2002 , <unk> purchased a half @-@ share in the tower for $ 92 @.@ 5 million , which it then sold to Stockland in early 2007 . Meanwhile , Multiplex acquired its half @-@ stake in the tower from its merger with Ronin Property Group which was proposed in late 2004 . Brookfield Multiplex put its half share in the building up for sale in early 2008 , however an offer for the tower by Luke <unk> fell through and the half share in the tower was taken off the property market . 
 Bankwest announced in 2006 that it would not renew its occupancy lease , instead moving to a new tower proposed for Raine Square . Due to delays with the Raine Square development , the Bank was forced in November 2009 to seek a 5 @-@ year renewal of its lease in the Bankwest Tower , the remainder of which will be taken on by Raine Square property developer Saracen Properties . Saracen Properties announced in May 2009 that they would not seek to renew their lease , and would vacate at the termination of their lease in November 2009 . It was also revealed that the 50th floor office space once occupied by Alan Bond was still in the same condition as when he left in 1991 , with Bond 's former chair , desk and boardroom table available as part of the lease . 
 It was announced in January 2015 that base metal and mining company <unk> would sign 10 ½ -year lease for 8 @,@ 300 square metres ( 89 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of office space , starting from May 2015 . The company also took up the naming and rooftop signage rights for the tower . 
 = = Design = = 
 The tower was designed by architects Cameron Chisholm Nicol . The major parameter given to them in the planning of the building was that " all office areas should face the excellent views that exist of the Swan River " . Working within this brief , they selected a triangular cross @-@ section of the tower because it lent " itself to open plan office layouts " by allowing natural light to reach most parts of the working floors . Also , the stepped front of the building maximised the number of corner offices on each floor . The eastern and northern sides of the building are slip @-@ formed concrete shear walls , and have fewer windows . These sides house the services of the building , including the lift shafts and stairwells . Some difficulty was encountered in the design stage with how to execute the diagonal slopes forming the top of these walls alongside the top five floors of the building , since a standard concrete pour was not possible . Instead , reinforced concrete panels were prefabricated elsewhere and subsequently attached to the structure . 
 The floor plates of the tower are constructed from conventional reinforced concrete beams and slabs . The building 's 14 passenger lifts are divided into three zones : low @-@ rise ( floors G @-@ 17 ) , mid @-@ rise ( 18 – 29 ) and high @-@ rise ( 30 – 51 ) , thought to be the first building in Australia to use such a configuration . 
 The foyer of the tower was originally planned to be an open @-@ air forecourt between the building and the remains of the Palace Hotel , however extensive aeroelastic wind testing of the structure by the Institute of Environmental Sciences at Murdoch University forced this area to be covered with a glass canopy . <unk> of the curtain walls to be used in the tower were also tested to 1 @.@ 5 times the proof load to ensure they could withstand cyclone @-@ force weather and seismic shocks . The building is clad with green @-@ tinted double @-@ pane glass on windows , with the service core and structure of the building covered with aluminium sheeting skin coated with a light grey fluoropolymer paint . 
 Upon completion , the mass of the building above ground was 66 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 146 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 lb ) . The building rests upon 43 <unk> concrete and steel piles , of average length 30 metres ( 98 ft ) , which go " through 3 layers of swamp " to solid siltstone bedrock . These piles range in diameter from 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 ft 2 in ) to 2 @.@ 9 metres ( 9 ft 6 in ) . The basement of the building has a depth of 16 metres ( 52 ft ) , and has a 0 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 1 ft 8 in ) thick diaphragm wall to prevent water ingress . 
 While the building was under construction , on 21 September 1987 the Perth City Council approved the addition of a 48 @-@ metre ( 157 ft ) spire to the top of the tower to house television and radio antennas , microwave antennas , navigation lights and surveillance cameras . However , when asked about the surveillance cameras , the R & I Bank 's development spokesman Terry <unk> denied any knowledge about what any cameras would be used for . The spire was also approved by the Department of Transport and Communications , which said the spire would cause no air traffic problems , and the spire was added to the building upon completion . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Olvir Rosta = 
 Olvir Rosta ( Old Norse : Ölvir Rósta , and Ölvir <unk> ) , also known as Aulver Rosta , is a character within the mediaeval Orkneyinga saga , who is purported to have lived during the early 12th century . His Old Norse byname , rósta , means " brawl " , " riot " . His name , and byname , appear variously in English secondary sources . 
 Ölvir appears in the saga as the son of Þorljót , and Steinnvör ' the Stout ' . The mother of Steinnvör is Frakökk , who has been described as one of the great villains of the entire saga . One of Frakökk 's sisters , Helga , is the concubine of Earl Hákon Pálsson . Part of the saga relates of how the Earldom of Orkney is for a time jointly run by half @-@ brothers — Haraldr Hákonsson and Páll Hákonsson , who are both sons of Earl Hákon . With the death of Earl Haraldr , son of Helga , Frakökk 's family falls out of favour , and are forced to leave Orkney . In time , Frakökk conspire with the father of Earl Rögnvaldr , and agrees to a plan to take the Orkney by force and split it with Earl Rögnvaldr . She and Ölvir eventually make their way to the Suðreyjar , and may their return in a bid to win half of the earldom . However , their small fleet of ships are defeated in battle against Earl Páll . The saga also tells of how Ölvir kills an Orkney chieftain who fought against him during the sea @-@ battle — by burning the man to death within his house . The chieftain 's vengeful son later tracks down Ölvir and Frakökk , at their own home in Sutherland . After a short battle behind their homestead , Ölvir 's men are routed and Frakökk is burned to death within her house ; Ölvir flees from the scene , making for the Suðreyjar , and is not heard from again . 
 Ölvir has also been associated with several places in Sutherland , some of which may bear his name . It has been proposed that Ölvir Rosta may be an ancestor of either one of two Scottish clans from the Outer Hebridean island of Lewis . In 1962 a runestone was uncovered in the Inner Hebrides which bore the name Ölvir . It has been suggested that the men mentioned on this stone were family relations of Ölvir . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ölvir Rósta , is a character in the mediaeval Orkneyinga saga . His name in Old Norse is Ölvir rósta . The 17th @-@ century Icelandic historian Þormóður Torfason , who wrote Latin histories which covered events the Northern Isles and north @-@ east of Scotland , rendered Ölvir 's name as Aulver Rosta . Ölvir 's byname , rósta , means " brawl " , " riot " . Both his name and byname are represented various ways in English secondary sources . The saga describes him as " the tallest of men , and strong in limb , exceedingly overbearing , and a great fighter " . 
 The Orkneyinga saga states that Ölvir was the son of Þorljót , from <unk> . The 19th @-@ century historian Joseph Anderson was of the opinion that <unk> likely refers to Rackwick on the island of Hoy , Orkney ; or possibly , but less likely , to Rackwick on the island of Westray , Orkney . The saga states that Ölvir 's mother was Þorljót 's wife , Steinnvör ' the Stout ' . Ölvir 's parents had several other children in the saga : sons Magnús , <unk> , Moddan , <unk> ; and daughter <unk> . Steinnvör 's mother is given as Frakökk ; her father was Frakökk 's husband , Ljótr ' Villain ' , from Sutherland . The saga states that Frakökk was a daughter of Moddan , a wealthy and noble farmer from i Dali , " Dale " . According to 21st @-@ century historian Gareth Williams , this probably refers to a dale within the " Dales of Caithness " . The 21st @-@ century historian Barbara Crawford stated that the Dales of Caithness refer to " that part of Caithness which includes the river valleys running down towards the Pentland Firth " . The saga records that another daughter of Moddan 's was Helga , who was the concubine of the Orcadian earl , Hákon Pálsson , and the mother of the earl 's son , Earl Haraldr Hákonsson . According to the saga , Frakökk 's brothers included : <unk> ' the Generous ' ; and Earl Óttarr , from Thurso , who is described as " a man worthy of honour " . The saga declares that the descendants of Moddan " were high @-@ born and thought a lot of themselves " , and Williams suggested that they could be related to a powerful dynasty in the Irish Sea zone that included an Óttarr who seized control of the Kingdom of Dublin in 1142 . Williams noted that Frakökk appears as one of the great villains of the Orkneyinga saga . Williams noted that while some of Moddan 's descendants had legitimate claims for the earldom , Frakökk did not — however , she made a claim on behalf of her descendants , specifically Ölvir . 
 Williams was of the opinion that the power base of Moddan , and his son Earl Óttarr , was in Caithness and Sutherland , not in Orkney . The saga states that Frakökk held lands , which according to Williams , were located near the modern town of Helmsdale , Sutherland . Williams noted that the saga specifically states that Frakökk 's husband was from <unk> and in consequence , Williams considered that these lands probably passed to her through her marriage . The size of these lands is unknown . Crawford suggested that they covered most of Sutherland : that after the Frakökk 's death , and the departure of Ölvir , the lands were inherited by her relative Eiríkr ' Stay @-@ <unk> ' ( see illustrated family tree ) , and in turn by his son , before passing into the possession of the de Moravia family . In Williams ' opinion , Crawford may have exaggerated the extent of these lands somewhat . Williams observed that another base of power for Frakökk and Ölvir may have been the Suðreyjar ( " Southern Islands " ) — which can include both the Hebrides , and the Isle of Man . The saga states at one point , Frakökk and Ölvir travelled to the Suðreyjar to gather ships and men ; later the Suðreyjar are the destination of Ölvir in his last appearance in the saga . Williams noted that the Suðreyjar appear many times in the sagas as a target for raids , and conquests , for Orcadian earls ; as well as being the source for attacks on the earldom itself . Williams also noted that it is possible that saga 's association of Frakökk and Ölvir with the Suðreyjar may be a red @-@ herring . He stated that " if there was an Orcadian tradition of the Suðreyjar as a haunt of ne ’ er @-@ do @-@ wells , this would provide an alternative explanation for the references within Orkneyinga saga , including those to do with Moddan 's family " . Even so , Williams considered that the saga seems to imply that the family had dynastic connections with important individuals of the Suðreyjar , including ' Óláfr ' <unk> ' , King of Mann and the Isles . 
 = = Orkneyinga saga = = 
 The main source for the life of Ölvir is the Orkneyinga saga , which was compiled sometime around 1200 by an unknown Icelander . The saga is thought to have been based upon poetry , oral tradition , and other written material . The original version ended with the death of Sveinn Ásleifarson ( who is portrayed as an enemy of Ölvir and Frakökk ) . The saga is considered to become more accurate as events approach the writer 's own time . In the late 14th century , the saga was revised and edited and included in the Icelandic <unk> . The saga can be summed up as an account of the lives of many of the earls of Orkney , from the 9th to 13th centuries . According to research fellow Ian <unk> , the saga is useful not for the specific events it describes , but rather for the ability to learn of " the ideas shaping the texts during the periods of composition or revision " . For example , it is possible that even one of the main characters of the saga , Sveinn Ásleifarson , never existed ; or at least it is quite possible that the historical Sveinn was different from the saga 's portrayal of him . Another source which mentions Ölvir is Þormóður Torfason 's 17th @-@ century history of Orkney , which follows the Orkneyinga saga . 
 = = = Frakökk , and Helga , forced out of Orkney by Earl Páll = = = 
 The Orkneyinga saga relates how after the death of Earl Hákon Pálsson , his sons , Haraldr Hákonsson , and Páll Hákonsson , divided the earldom between themselves . However , the half @-@ brothers soon began to disagree with one another , and their vassals divided into competing factions . The saga relates how one day Frakökk , and her sister Helga ( mother of Earl Haraldr ) , were sewing a snow @-@ white garment embroidered with gold . This garment was enchanted , and the two sisters had intended it for Earl Haraldr 's half @-@ brother , Earl Páll . Unfortunately for the sisters , Earl Haraldr noticed the beautiful garment and , despite their protestations , put the garment on and soon after died . The saga states that Earl Páll immediately took control of his deceased half @-@ brother 's possessions , and that he was highly suspicious of the two sisters . In consequence , Frakökk and Helga were no longer welcome in the earldom , and they left for Caithness , and from there move to Sutherland where Frakökk had an estate . In time , several of Frakökk 's descendants were brought up in Sutherland — including her daughter , Steinnvör ' the Stout ' , and grandson , Ölvir . 
 = = = Alliance with Earl Rögnvaldr against Earl Páll = = = 
 The saga relates of how , during an earlier time , Kali Kolsson assisted Haraldr Gille in being recognised as an illegitimate son of the deceased Norwegian king , Magnús ' Barefoot ' . In consequence , the reigning king , Sigurðr Magnússon , was Haraldr Gille 's half @-@ brother . The Norwegian king , appointed Kali as an earl of one half of Orkney , and also had Kali 's name changed to Rögnvaldr ( after a prominent earl from the past ) . On the death of Sigurðr , his son , Magnús Sigurðarson , succeeded to the kingdom . When Haraldr Gille learned of Sigurðr 's death he gathered his supporters and successfully underwent an ordeal to prove his paternity , and was accepted as king of one half of the kingdom . For three years the joint @-@ kings maintained an uneasy peace with one another , but on the fourth year hostilities finally broke out . A battle was fought where the vastly outnumbered Haraldr Gille was defeated ; in consequence he fled to the protection of the King of Denmark . The following Yule @-@ tide , Haraldr Gille returned to Norway , captured Magnús and maimed him . Haraldr Gille then became king of the entire kingdom . That spring , in recognition for Rögnvaldr 's assistance , the king renewed the grant of islands and the title of earl to Rögnvaldr . James Gray , who summarised the events depicted within the saga , dated the death of Sigurðr Magnússon to the year 1126 ; he dated the capture and mutilation of Magnús Sigurðarson to 1135 . 
 According to the saga , sometime after Haraldr Gille 's victory over Magnús Sigurðarson , Earl Rögnvaldr 's father , Kolr , sent messengers to Earl Páll , demanding that Earl Páll hand over the lands which the Norwegian king had granted to Earl Rögnvaldr . When Earl Páll refused this , Kolr 's messengers proceeded to Caithness , where Frakökk lived . The messengers related to Frakökk of Kolr 's proposal — that if she and Ölvir were to defeat Earl Páll , half of the earldom would be theirs . Frakökk agreed to the plan , saying that she would attack in mid @-@ summer ; she promised that during upcoming winter she would gather forces from her kinsmen , friends , and connections in Scotland and the Suðreyjar for the task . The next winter Earl Rögnvaldr and two of his chiefs , <unk> and Jón , gathered a force of men and about five or six ships for their expedition . The following summer their forces sailed from Norway to Shetland , where they were well received by the local bondsmen . Meanwhile , Frakökk and Ölvir assembled a small fleet of twelve ships in the Suðreyjar — although the saga describes the ships as small and poorly manned . At the middle of summer , Frakökk and Ölvir sailed for Orkney to fulfil their pledge of wresting the earldom from Earl Páll . 
 = = = Sea @-@ battle against Earl Páll = = = 
 According to the Orkneyinga saga , when Earl Páll herd of Earl Rögnvaldr 's arrival in Shetland , he held council and decided to immediately gather forces and attack Earl Rögnvaldr before he could be reinforced by the incoming men he knew were coming from the Suðreyjar . That night Earl Páll was joined by five chieftains , with four ships — this brings his total forces to five ships . The fleet sailed to Rousay , where they arrive at sunset . During the night the force is further strengthened by arriving men . In the morning , as the fleet is about to set out for Shetland to meet Earl Rögnvaldr , about ten or twelve ships were spotted coming from the Pentland Firth . Earl Páll and his men were certain these ships were those of Frakökk and Ölvir ; in consequence , the earl ordered the fleet to intercept . The saga states that when Ölvir 's ships were east of Tankerness , they then sailed west from <unk> Head , Deerness . By this time , Earl Páll was further strengthened by a chieftain from Tankerness . The earl then ordered his ships to be bound together , and for a bondi to gather stones for the upcoming battle . When the earl and his troops have fully prepared themselves , the saga states that Ölvir 's forces made their attack . 
 Although the saga states that the forces of Ölvir were superior in numbers to those of Earl Páll , it also notes that Ölvir 's ships were smaller . Ölvir brought his own ship up next to the earl 's , where the fighting was the fiercest . One of the earl 's chieftains , Ólafr Hrólfsson , attacked Ölvir 's smallest ships , and cleared three of them in a short time . Ölvir urged his men forward and was the first to board Earl Páll 's own ship . When he spotted Earl Páll , Ölvir threw a spear at him , and although it was blocked by a shield , the force of the blow knocked the earl onto the deck . With the fall of Earl Páll , a great shout goes up ; but just at that moment , one of the earl 's best men , Sveinn ' <unk> ' , hurled a large stone at Ölvir , hitting him square in the chest and knocked him overboard . Although Ölvir 's men dragged him from the water , it was unclear to the <unk> whether he lived or not . Ölvir 's disheartened men were driven off the earl 's ship , and began to withdraw . Ölvir eventually recovered his wits , but was unable to rally his troops — the battle was lost . Earl Páll pursued Ölvir 's fleeing fleet into the Pentland Firth , before giving up the chase . Five of Ölvir 's ships were left behind , and were captured and manned by the forces loyal to Earl Páll . The earl is later further strengthened by two longships , and his forces swells to twelve ships . The next day , Earl Páll sailed to Shetland , where he destroyed Earl Rögnvaldr 's fleet . Although , Earl Rögnvaldr 's forces remained on Shetland itself , Earl Páll successfully held onto the earldom . Gray stated that these battles were fought in the year 1136 . 
 = = = Burning of Óláfr Hrólfsson = = = 
 The Orkneyinga saga states that three days before Yule , Ölvir , and his band of men , arrived in Duncansby . Williams stated that the farm of Duncansby , located near the Dales of Caithness , was then in hands of an Orkney chieftain , Óláfr Hrólfsson . Joshua Prescott stated that Óláfr appears to have been Earl Páll 's main supporter in Caithness ; according to Williams , Óláfr appears to have held these lands directly from the Earls of Orkney , rather than as a family possession . The saga relates of how at Duncansby , Ölvir and his party surprised Óláfr within his own house . They then set fire to the house , and burn Óláfr to death within . Ölvir and his men took all the movable property they could get their hands on , before leaving the scene . When Earl Páll heard of what has happened , he takes @-@ in the slain chieftain 's son , Sveinn Óláfsson . With the death of his father , Sveinn Óláfsson becomes known as Sveinn Ásleifarson — after his mother . Such house @-@ burnings — in which individuals are burnt to death , or slain as they flee the fire — are found throughout the sagas as a part of blood feuds . The saga states that some time later , Sveinn , who has spent time in the Suðreyjar and Atholl , returned to Orkney . On his way , Sveinn he stopped at Thurso , where his accomplice , Ljótólfr , negotiated a truce between Sveinn and Frakökk 's brother , Earl Óttarr . The earl paid Sveinn compensation for the death of Óláfr , and promised his friendship . In return , Sveinn promised to aid Earl Óttarr 's relative , <unk> Haraldsson , in a possible bid for the earldom of Orkney . 
 = = = Defeat of Ölvir , and the burning of Frakökk = = = 
 The saga states that some time later , Sveinn approached Earl Rögnvaldr , and asked the earl for men and ships to take vengeance upon Ölvir and Frakökk who were involved in the burning of his father . The earl consented to this request , and gave Sveinn two ships . Sveinn travelled south to <unk> , and then west to the trading place of Dúfeyrar . According to Anderson , <unk> may refer to the Moray Firth ; and Dúfeyrar likely refers to the shore in the parish of Duffus , on the coast of Moray . The saga states that from Dúfeyrar , Sveinn travelled to Ekkialsbakki , and from there went to Atholl , where he met Earl Maddaðr . Anderson stated that Ekkialsbakki , in this case , likely refers to the coast on the Moray Firth , next to Atholl ; The 19th @-@ century historian William Forbes Skene agreed with this , specifically locating it to Findhorn , where ships could enter an estuary and follow a route into Atholl . However , Hermann Pálsson and Paul Geoffrey Edwards , in their 1981 translation of the saga , identified the town of Banff with Dúfeyrar , and the River <unk> with Ekkialsbakki . 
 The saga then relates how the Earl Maddaðr gave Sveinn guides , and how Sveinn travelled through the interior of the country — over mountains , and through woods , away from inhabited areas — until he came upon Strath Helmsdale , near where Ölvir and Frakökk lived . Williams stated that since the saga records that Sveinn approached the area by land , the site of Ölvir and Frakökk 's estate was probably located somewhere in the dale of Helmsdale — not where the modern village is situated on the coast . Williams also noted that this area was quite remote from Orkney , and that it may have been outside of the control of the earldom . The saga states that Ölvir and Frakökk had spies on the lookout ; however , because of the route taken by Sveinn , they were unaware of his presence until <unk> occupied a certain slope behind their homestead . The saga states that Ölvir and sixty of his men confronted Sveinn , although Þormóður Torfason 's account of the incident gives forty . After a short clash , the saga states that , Ölvir 's men soon gave way , and many were killed in the ensuing rout . Ölvir survived the clash , and fled up Helmsdale river . Meanwhile , Sveinn and his men continued on towards the houses . The area was plundered , and the houses were burnt to the ground with their inmates still inside — and in this way Frakökk perished . The saga states that Sveinn and his men committed many ravages in Sutherland before returning home . Upon reaching the river , Ölvir fled through the mountains , and is last heard making for the Suðreyjar ; he is not mentioned again within the Orkneyinga saga . Later on within the saga , another of Frakökk 's grandsons , <unk> ' Clerk ' , who is a brother @-@ in @-@ law and close friend of Sveinn , has two of Sveinn 's men killed for their part in the burning . 
 While the saga records that Frakökk was killed to avenge the burning of Óláfr , recently scholars Angelo Forte , Richard Oram , and Frederick Pedersen , stated that her fate was actually sealed by her support of <unk> Haraldsson 's bid for the earldom , over the claim of Haraldr Maddaðarson . Haraldr was the son of Earl Maddaðr , and Margrét <unk> ( married in about 1134 ) . Margrét was a niece of Frakökk , and Earl Maddaðr was possibly a cousin of the David I. The union between Earl Maddaðr and Margrét benefited the Scottish Crown by increasing Scottish influence in the north at the expense of Norwegian influence . Also , in the 1120s and 1130s , David I had faced challenges to his authority . A large part of the support for these challengers came from Moray and Ross — these lands were directly between the northern lands of Caithness and Orkney , and David 's strength to the south . According to the Forte , Oram , and Pedersen , the prospect of having the son of one his northern supporters as the earl of Caithness was too good for the king to pass up — especially since Haraldr was still a minor , and would thus be under the direction of an appointed tutor . As it turned out , the installation of Haraldr as an earl of Orkney and Caithness was a triumph for the Scottish Crown : in the 1140s , Sutherland and Caithness were further integrated into the kingdom , and the Norwegian influence in Orkney was neutralised . 
 = = = = Locations associated with Ölvir , Frakökk , and Sveinn = = = = 
 Several writers have noted a place which is said to be the location of the burning . The <unk> website states that a supposed castle in which Frakökk was burned may be located at grid reference <unk> , near <unk> , within the parish of Kildonan . In 1769 , Thomas Pennant noted the episode of the burning , and stated that certain ruins at <unk> were called " Cairn <unk> " ; and that these were the remnants of the homestead that Sveinn burnt . Rev. Sage , in his account of the parish in the ( Old ) Statistical Account of Scotland , noted the ruins mentioned by Pennant ; he called them " Cairn @-@ <unk> " , and translated this to " Old Cairns " . Sage , however noted Þormóður Torfason 's account of the burning , and suggested that a possibly more <unk> etymology is " <unk> Field " . Pennant stated that " though the ruins are great , yet no man can tell of what kind they were ; that is , whether round like Pictish houses , or not " . According to the <unk> website , Pennant may have been referring to any of the chambered cairns in the area . The site of the supposed castle was visited by the Ordnance Survey in 1961 , but no evidence of it was found . In the mid @-@ 19th century , Alexander Pope noted " Carn <unk> " , and stated that nearby there were certain ruins called " Shu Carn Aulver " . Pope also stated that to the south @-@ west of this location there was a part of Helmsdale river called " <unk> Aulver " . Another location he connected with Ölvir was a hill , in the forest of " <unk> " , called " <unk> Aulver " . 
 = = Speculation of Scottish descendants = = 
 According to Williams , it is possible that after Sveinn defeated Ölvir and Frakökk , Ölvir may have fled to kinsmen of his in the Suðreyjar . Williams suggested that the blood feud between the families may be a reason for Sveinn 's military activities in the Hebrides and the Isle of Mann , afterwards ; although Sveinn had other interests in the area , since he is stated to have married the window of a Manx king . In the late 19th century , antiquary <unk> Thomas speculated that the memory of Ölvir may have been preserved in the Hebrides . Thomas stated that within the mythological history of the Outer Hebridean island of Lewis , the island clan of Macaulays were said to be the descendants of a man named <unk> , who was one of the twelve sons , or near relations , of a man named Oliver , among whom Lewis was divided . This Oliver was said to have been the eldest son of the Norse king who was given the Isles and Highlands by a son of Kenneth MacAlpin , for his assistance in driving his own brother from Scotland . Thomas speculated that Oliver could represent Ölvir Rósta ; meaning that he was the progenitor of the Macaulays . 
 It has also been suggested that Ölvir may be an ancestor of the MacLeods . Until quite recently , it was commonly believed by historians that the eponymous ancestor of the MacLeods , Leod , was the son of Olaf the Black , King of Mann and the Isles . In the late 20th century , William Matheson proposed that the MacLeods descended in the male line from Ölvir Rósta , rather than Olaf the Black . Matheson proposed that , within several Gaelic pedigrees which record ancestors of Leod , the great @-@ grandfather of Leod has Gaelic names which very likely represent the Old Norse name Ölvir . These Gaelic names are considered to equate to other Gaelic names found within the early bardic poetry of the MacLeods . About a century before , Thomas had noted the similarity in these names , when discussing Ölvir , but he did not pursue a specific link between Ölvir and the MacLeods . Matheson speculated that Leod 's great @-@ grandfather would have flourished at roughly the same time as when Ölvir is said to have fled to the Suðreyjar . Matheson noted that Leod 's name is derived from the Old Norse name Ljótr : a name which Matheson considered to be rare in Scandinavia and Iceland , and even more so in Scotland . In consequence , he considered it significant that Ölvir 's maternal grandfather ( Ljótr ' Villain ' ) also had this name . When comparing the relevant Gaelic pedigrees , Matheson noted that they were inconsistent in the generations preceding Leod 's great @-@ grandfather . In lieu of this , Matheson proposed that these inconsistencies may show that the Leod 's great @-@ grandfather was a newcomer to the Hebrides , like Ölvir . 
 Later , historian <unk> Sellar noted Matheson 's proposed link between the MacLeods and Ölvir , but commented that the evidence Matheson used was entirely circumstantial . Sellar was of the opinion that Ölvir was not such a rare name as Matheson had previously thought . Sellar also noted that the genealogy and family of Ölvir , recorded in the Orkneyinga saga , has no similarity with the line recorded in the Gaelic genealogies concerning the ancestry of Leod . Matheson 's association of Ölvir to the Macleods was also attacked by clan historian Alick Morrison . Morrison commented that the name <unk> was also not as rare as Matheson had proposed . Morrison noted that , in the previous century , Thomas had considered another saga character to be an eponymous ancestor of the MacLeods — this character was Ljótólfr ( mentioned earlier in the article ) , who would have lived on Lewis about a century before Leod 's time . In fact , Morrison did not consider Ölvir 's name — and the singled @-@ out Gaelic names — to be anything but other forms of Óláfr . However , Óláfr and Ölvir are considered by others to be quite different names , with separate origins . Morrison , and Sellar , also noted that the bynames of Ölvir , and Leod 's great @-@ grandfather , do not appear to match up — in three of the relevant Gaelic pedigrees , the byname of Leod 's great @-@ grandfather appears as <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Thomas considered these bynames to mean " <unk> " ; although , both Matheson and Sellar disagreed with this translation . Morrison considered these to equate to <unk> , " white " ; ' however , Sellar noted that Morrison gave no further explanation for this assertion . Sellar , himself , proposed that the byname may be not be Gaelic , but Norse in origin . He suggested that it may refer to some sort of deformity to the man 's nose ; another suggestion forwarded to him was that it may refer to a cleft palate . Later , A.P. MacLeod noted that the Gaelic <unk> — which has a secondary meaning of " grief " , and " trouble " — may be a nominative form of the genitive <unk> , and thus may equate to Ölvir 's byname . 
 = = Hebridean runes : possible family connections = = 
 In 1962 , on the Inner Hebridean island of Iona , close to <unk> <unk> grid reference <unk> , a fragment of a carved stone bearing the runic inscription of a man named Ölvir was found . It is one of only three examples of rune @-@ stones found in the west of Scotland . The fragment is about half the size of the original stone , which would have measured 1 @.@ 11 by 0 @.@ 77 metres ( 3 @.@ 6 by 2 @.@ 5 ft ) . The stone is decorated with a crude knotted cross ; the runes are located on the side , along the border . At the end of the inscription there are a few runes missing , due to the corner having been broken off . The full inscription translates into English : " Kali , son of Ölvir , laid this stone over Fugl his brother " . These three men do not appear in any other sources , and it is unknown who they were . In the 1980s , Norwegian runologist Aslak Liestøl proposed that the stone is evidence that the two brothers were Scandinavian speakers , who were members of a leading family in the district , who had the social status to be buried near <unk> <unk> . The runic inscriptions , and artwork , suggests that the stone dates to the late 10th century , or 11th century . 
 Liestøl suggested that the three men were somehow related to Ölvir . Liestøl noted that three names were those of characters in the Orkneyinga saga , which all had connections with the Hebrides . Kali was the original name of Earl Rögnvaldr , whom Ölvir fought for . The earl was named after his grandfather , Kali <unk> , who according to the saga , accompanied Magnús ' Barefoot ' to the Hebrides , and died there of wounds he received on Anglesey . According to Liestøl , the name Fugl , in a West Norse context , is only found on this inscription and of a minor character in the saga . This character was the son of Ljótólfr , from Lewis , who negotiated a truce between Sveinn Ásleifarson and Earl Óttarr . In 1922 , historian Alan Orr Anderson noted that the mediaeval Chronicle of Man records that <unk> , sheriff of Man , died in 1183 , and Anderson stated that it is possible that Ljótólfr 's son was the mentioned sheriff . Concerning the name Ljótólfr , Liestøl also noted that the saga names Ölvir 's father Þorljót , and his maternal @-@ grandfather Ljótr . He concluded that the men mentioned on the stone likely lived around the year 1000 , about four to six generations before their namesakes in the saga . In consequence , Liestøl suggested that Kali <unk> would have been a contemporary of the children of the rune @-@ stone 's Kali <unk> . The stone , among many others , is housed in the museum at Iona Abbey . 
 = G. Wayne Clough = 
 Gerald Wayne Clough ( born September 24 , 1941 ) is President Emeritus of the Georgia Institute of Technology ( Georgia Tech ) and former Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution . A graduate of Georgia Tech in civil engineering , he was the first alumnus to serve as President of the Institute . 
 Clough was president of Georgia Tech from 1994 to 2008 , when he oversaw dramatic changes in the institute , including $ 1 billion in new construction , increased retention and graduation rates , a higher nationwide ranking and a much larger student body . His administration championed programs which encouraged undergraduate research , offered international experiences , and made college more affordable for low @-@ income students . 
 The Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons , which officially opened its doors in August 2011 , is named in his honor . Clough has garnered many other awards and honors , including the title of President Emeritus , two Norman Medals , eight honorary degrees , and membership in the National Science Board . 
 = = Personal life and education = = 
 Clough was born on September 24 , 1941 in Douglas , Georgia , the youngest of three children born to Daniel and Bessie ( née Johnson ) Clough . Clough 's parents ran the local ice and coal plant . After electricity spread to south Georgia , the family moved to Chattanooga , Tennessee , where Clough attended City High School . Clough also met his future wife , Anne Olivia Robinson , during this time . They have two children , Eliza and Matthew . 
 Clough entered Georgia Tech in 1959 and earned a bachelor 's degree in civil engineering in 1964 . While an undergraduate at Georgia Tech , Clough participated in the cooperative education program , and was , against his wishes , a surveyor for a railroad company . Clough was a member of Georgia Tech 's chapter of the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity , and lived in their fraternity house on North Avenue for half a year . Clough originally planned to receive only a bachelor 's degree ; however , the faculty encouraged him to pursue a graduate degree , so he continued his education and received his master 's degree in civil engineering in 1965 . In 1969 , Clough received a Ph.D. in civil engineering from the University of California , Berkeley with the thesis " Finite element analyses of soil @-@ structures interaction in U @-@ frame locks " . 
 = = Research = = 
 After earning his doctorate , Clough began his academic career as an assistant professor at Duke University in 1969 . He joined the faculty at Stanford University in 1974 first as an associate professor and then later as full professor . In 1982 , he joined the faculty of Virginia Tech as a professor of civil engineering and served as head of their Department of Civil Engineering for seven years . In 1990 , Clough became dean of the Virginia Tech College of Engineering . Clough continued his research and instruction of graduate students at Virginia Tech in addition to his administrative responsibilities . Clough 's research focused on geotechnical engineering , including earthquake studies , numerical analysis , soil structure interaction , in @-@ situ testing , and underground openings . In 1993 , he became provost and vice president for academic affairs at the University of Washington . Clough cofounded the United States Universities Council of Geotechnical Engineering Research ( <unk> ) , and served as the organization 's first president during 1993 . 
 = = President of Georgia Tech = = 
 On September 1 , 1994 , Clough became the first Georgia Tech alumnus to serve as the President of the Institute , succeeding John Patrick Crecine , and was in office during the 1996 Summer Olympics . In 1998 , he separated the Ivan Allen College of Management , Policy , and International Affairs into the Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts and the College of Management , which he returned to independent status . This separation was a major organizational change that built upon the large ( and controversial ) reorganization of the institute by Clough 's predecessor . 
 During his tenure , research expenditures increased from $ 212 million to $ 425 million , computers became required for all students , and enrollment increased from 13 @,@ 000 to 18 @,@ 000 students . Tech also received the <unk> Award for support of undergraduate teaching and learning , and the Institute 's U.S. News & World Report rankings steadily improved . 
 Clough 's tenure was especially focused on a dramatic expansion of the Institute ; more than $ 1 billion was spent on projects to expand or improve the campus . These projects included the completion of several west campus dorms , the manufacturing complex , 10th and Home , Technology Square , The Biomedical Complex , the Student Center renovation , the expanded 5th Street Bridge , the Aquatic Center 's renovation into the Georgia Tech Campus Recreation Center , a new Health Center , the Klaus Advanced Computing Building , and the Nanotechnology Research Center . 
 Clough also spearheaded research opportunities for undergraduate students , later known as the Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program ( UROP ) , the creation of an International Plan , and the creation of a fund to make Georgia Tech more affordable for low @-@ income students ( the G. Wayne Clough Georgia Tech Promise Program ) . The students of Georgia Tech affectionately dubbed him " Funk Masta G. Wayne " during his presidency due to the expansion and growth he encouraged in urban Atlanta , and he was generally known to have a warm and friendly disposition and a distinctive beard . 
 In 2006 , members of Georgia Tech 's college Republican club sued Georgia Tech , aided by the Alliance Defense Fund , in a case known as Sklar v. Clough that lasted until April 2008 . The largest result of this case was a change to Georgia Tech 's Student Code of Conduct and Community Guide removing penalties for harassing or discriminating against other students . Clough stepped down after almost fourteen years as President on July 1 , 2008 , which he previously announced in an email to students and staff on March 15 , 2008 . 
 = = Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution = = 
 On January 1 , 2008 , the Smithsonian named a search committee for the position of Secretary . Clough 's primary competition for the position was Acting Secretary Cristián Samper , who had replaced Secretary Lawrence M. Small after Small 's resignation in 2007 . The Smithsonian 's board of regents , whose duties include electing the Smithsonian 's secretary , took at least two votes in the Lawyers ' Lounge at the U.S. Supreme Court to arrive at their decision . 
 Clough was elected the 12th Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution ; he was notified via a phone call with regents chairman Roger W. Sant on the afternoon of March 14 , 2008 . This decision was announced publicly at a press conference held at the Smithsonian Castle on March 15 , 2008 . Clough assumed office on July 1 , 2008 and was officially installed in an academic ceremony on January 26 , 2009 . His starting salary as Secretary was $ 490 @,@ 000 , a pay cut from his final compensation package at Georgia Tech ( $ 551 @,@ 186 ) and significantly lower than his predecessor , Lawrence Small 's annual salary of $ 900 @,@ 000 . 
 Since Clough assumed office , he has made plans to digitize the Museum 's collections , and offer more intensive K @-@ 12 educational programming . In November 2008 , for the first time , the Smithsonian opened a board meeting to the public . Clough has made efforts to improve the Smithsonian 's facilities and long @-@ term planning , as well as plans to reorganize and cut back on staff and budget . In February 2012 , Clough 's travel expenses were probed by senator Charles E. Grassley , despite increased controls ; Clough 's travel must be approved by the Smithsonian 's chief financial officer as part of the reforms enacted in the wake of alleged abuses by Secretary Small . 
 On November 30 , 2010 , Secretary Clough made the decision to remove the David Wojnarowicz video " A Fire in My Belly " from the National Portrait Gallery 's " Hide / Seek : Difference and Desire in American Portraiture " exhibition . The video artwork was perceived by some to be anti @-@ Christian and Clough believed it detracted from the entirety of the exhibition , which he said was " to be a powerful exhibit about the contributions of gay and lesbian artists " and not about " religious iconography " and " desecration " . This decision was widely criticized , but Clough responded that he was protecting the Smithsonian 's larger educational mission . After the controversy , the Smithsonian 's board of regents appointed an outside panel to examine the decision to remove the work from the exhibition ; the panel recommended that art not be removed from shows that have already opened . 
 On September 18 , 2013 , after six years as Secretary , Clough announced his retirement , which would be effective October 2014 . In announcing his retirement , he said , " When I became Secretary in 2008 , I believed strongly that the Smithsonian had enormous untapped potential , especially in digital technology , to reach millions of people and serve as a resource for those who cannot visit Washington . I am confident that with our initiatives underway in <unk> , education , digitization and fundraising , this is the right time to announce my plans for next fall so that an orderly transition can begin . " 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Clough has earned numerous awards and honors during his career . In his early career , he earned two Norman Medals , the State of the Art Award , and the Karl von <unk> Lectureship in 1994 . Clough has also earned a George Westinghouse Award from the American Society for Engineering Education . He was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1990 for his research into soil structure interaction problems and served as a chair of one of its summits in 2004 , The Engineer of 2020 : Visions of Engineering in the New Century . 
 In 2001 , President George W. Bush appointed him to the President 's Council of Science and Technology . In 2004 , Bush appointed him a member of the National Science Board , which oversees the National Science Foundation and provides advice to Congress and the president on issues of science and technology . Also in 2004 , the American Society of Civil Engineers presented him with the Outstanding Projects and Leaders award for his contribution to education , and the University of California , Berkeley College of Engineering honored him with one of the four Distinguished Engineering Alumni Awards . 
 In 2008 , Clough was made an honorary member of the ANAK Society , Georgia Tech 's oldest known secret society and honor society . In October 2008 , the National Academy of Engineering presented Clough with the Arthur M. <unk> Award for leadership in science , technology , and engineering policy . In February 2009 , he received the Joseph M. Pettit Alumni Distinguished Service Award that recognizes a lifetime of leadership , achievement and service to Georgia Tech ; and in March 2009 , he was inducted into the Technology Hall of Fame of Georgia . 
 Clough has received eight honorary Doctor of Science degrees . In 2011 , he received an honorary degree from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute ; in 2010 , he received honorary degrees from Oglethorpe University in Atlanta ; University of Maryland , Baltimore County ; and Williams College in Williamstown . He had previously received honorary doctorates from Shanghai Jiao Tong University , Florida Southern College and the University of South Carolina . In April 2010 , he was named a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . 
 During the ground breaking ceremony for the G. Wayne Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons building held in 2010 , President Bud Peterson and University System of Georgia Chancellor Erroll B. Davis Jr. presented to Clough a proclamation declaring him President Emeritus of the Georgia Institute of Technology . In 2011 , Georgia Tech opened the G. Wayne Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons building named in honor of his commitment to undergraduate students ; it was dedicated on Clough 's birthday , September 24 , 2011 . In May 2011 , he was awarded the 2011 Foreign Policy Association Medal . 
 In 2012 , he was elevated to National Honor Member of Chi Epsilon national civil engineering honor society . 
 = The Dark Knight Rises = 
 The Dark Knight Rises is a 2012 British @-@ American superhero film directed by Christopher Nolan , who co @-@ wrote the screenplay with his brother Jonathan Nolan , and the story with David S. Goyer . Featuring the DC Comics character Batman , the film is the final installment in Nolan 's Batman film trilogy , and the sequel to Batman Begins ( 2005 ) and The Dark Knight ( 2008 ) . Christian Bale reprises the lead role of Bruce Wayne / Batman , with a returning cast of allies : Michael Caine as Alfred Pennyworth , Gary Oldman as James Gordon , and Morgan Freeman as Lucius Fox . The film introduces Selina Kyle ( Anne Hathaway ) , and Bane ( Tom Hardy ) . Eight years after the events of The Dark Knight , merciless revolutionary Bane forces an older Bruce Wayne to resume his role as Batman and save Gotham City from nuclear destruction . 
 Christopher Nolan was hesitant about returning to the series for a second time , but agreed after developing a story with his brother and Goyer that he felt would conclude the series on a satisfactory note . Nolan drew inspiration from Bane 's comic book debut in the 1993 " Knightfall " storyline , the 1986 series The Dark Knight Returns , and the 1999 storyline " No Man 's Land " . Filming took place in locations including Jodhpur , London , Nottingham , Glasgow , Los Angeles , New York City , Newark , and Pittsburgh . Nolan used IMAX 70 mm film cameras for much of the filming , including the first six minutes of the film , to optimize the quality of the picture . A vehicle variation of the Batplane and <unk> termed the " Bat " , an underground prison set , and a new Batcave set were created specifically for the film . As with The Dark Knight , viral marketing campaigns began early during production . When filming concluded , Warner Bros. refocused its campaign : developing promotional websites , releasing the first six minutes of the film , screening theatrical trailers , and sending out information regarding the film 's plot . 
 The Dark Knight Rises premiered in New York City on July 16 , 2012 . The film was released in Australia and New Zealand on July 19 , 2012 , and in North America and the United Kingdom on July 20 , 2012 . It received positive reviews from critics , many of whom named it one of the best films of 2012 . Like its predecessor , the film grossed over $ 1 billion worldwide at the box office , making it the second film in the Batman film series to earn $ 1 billion . It is currently the 16th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of all time , the third @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2012 , and the fourth @-@ highest @-@ grossing superhero film of all time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Eight years after the death of district attorney Harvey Dent , the Dent Act grants the Gotham City Police Department powers which nearly eradicate organized crime . Police Commissioner James Gordon feels increasingly guilty for covering up the crimes committed by Dent , who was turned into a murderer by the Joker . He writes a resignation speech confessing the truth but decides not to use it . 
 Bruce Wayne has become a recluse , broken by the death of his childhood sweetheart Rachel Dawes and has retired as the vigilante Batman after taking the blame for Dent 's crimes , as well as Dent 's death . Cat burglar Selina Kyle obtains Wayne 's fingerprints from his home and kidnaps congressman Byron Gilley . She sells the fingerprints to Phillip Stryver , an assistant to Wayne 's business rival John Daggett . In return , she requests her payment : a " clean slate " that can wipe all traces of a person from the internet . 
 Stryver double @-@ crosses Kyle , but she uses Gilley 's phone to alert the police to their location . Gordon and the police arrive to find the congressman , and then pursue Stryver 's men into the sewers while Selina flees . The police attempt to follow them into the sewers , but the men that enter the sewers are killed , and Gordon is captured , while the rest of the police are assailed down by sniper fire . 
 The assailants drag Gordon to Bane , a masked mercenary , who has him searched and finds his resignation speech . Gordon escapes and is found by John Blake , a patrol officer . Gordon promotes Blake to detective , with Blake reporting directly to him . Bane and multiple accomplices attack the Gotham Stock Exchange , using Bruce 's fingerprints in a transaction that leaves Wayne bankrupt . Wayne 's butler Alfred Pennyworth reveals that Rachel had intended to marry Dent before she died . Alfred then resigns in an attempt to convince Bruce to move on from being Batman . 
 Wayne Enterprises is losing profits after Wayne discontinued his fusion reactor project when he learned that the core could be weaponized . Fearing that Daggett , Bane 's employer , would gain access to the reactor , Wayne asks Wayne Enterprises board member Miranda Tate to take over his company . Kyle agrees to take Batman to Bane but instead leads him into Bane 's trap . Bane reveals that he intends to fulfill Ra 's al Ghul 's mission to destroy Gotham with the League of Shadows remnant . He engages Batman and delivers a crippling blow to his back , before taking him to a foreign , well @-@ like prison where escape is virtually impossible . There , the inmates tell Wayne the story of Ra 's al Ghul 's child , born in the prison and cared for by a fellow prisoner before escaping — the only prisoner to have ever done so . Wayne assumes the child to be Bane . 
 Bane lures Gotham police underground and traps them there . He kills Mayor Anthony Garcia and forces Dr. Leonid Pavel , a Russian nuclear physicist he kidnapped from Uzbekistan six months prior , to convert the reactor core into a nuclear bomb . Bane uses the bomb to hold the city hostage and isolate Gotham from the world . Using Gordon 's stolen speech , Bane reveals the cover @-@ up of Dent 's crimes and releases the prisoners of Blackgate Penitentiary , initiating anarchy . The wealthy and powerful have their property expropriated , are dragged from their homes , and are given show trials presided over by Dr. Jonathan Crane , where all are sentenced to death . 
 After spending months recovering and re @-@ training , Wayne escapes from the prison . He enlists Kyle , Blake , Tate , Gordon , and Lucius Fox to help stop the bomb 's detonation . He hands the Batpod to Kyle , tasking her with helping people evacuate and saving herself . She asks him to come along , leaving Gotham to its fate , but he refuses . While the police and Bane 's forces clash , Batman overpowers Bane . He interrogates Bane for the bomb 's trigger , but Tate intervenes and stabs him . She reveals herself to be Talia al Ghul , Ra 's al Ghul 's daughter . Bane is her protector , who aided her escape from the prison . She uses the detonator , but Gordon has successfully approached the bomb and blocks her signal , preventing remote detonation . Talia leaves to find the bomb while Bane prepares to kill Batman , but Kyle returns on the Batpod and saves Batman by killing Bane . Batman and Kyle pursue Talia , hoping to bring the bomb back to the reactor chamber where it can be stabilized . Talia 's truck crashes , but she remotely floods and destroys the reactor chamber before dying . With no way to stop the detonation , Batman uses the Bat to haul the bomb over the bay , where it detonates . 
 In the aftermath , Batman is presumed dead and is honored as a hero . With Wayne also presumed dead , Wayne Manor becomes an orphanage , and his remaining estate is left to Alfred . Fox discovers that Wayne had fixed the Bat 's autopilot and Gordon finds the Bat @-@ Signal refurbished . Alfred finds that Wayne is alive and well , together with Selina , while visiting Florence . Blake resigns from the police force and , following Wayne 's instructions , discovers the Batcave and its contents . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Christian Bale as Bruce Wayne / Batman : 
 A billionaire socialite who dedicates himself to protecting Gotham City from its criminal underworld . Nolan has stated that , due to the eight @-@ year gap between The Dark Knight and The Dark Knight Rises , " he 's an older Bruce Wayne ; he 's not in a great state . " Bale employed a martial arts discipline called the Keysi Fighting Method , now modified for Bruce 's current state and Bane 's style . Bale has stated that The Dark Knight Rises will be his final Batman film . Bale acknowledged that Batman is " not a healthy individual , this is somebody that is doing good , but he 's right on the verge of doing bad " . Bale clarifies that " He doesn 't want to forget [ his parents ' deaths ] . He wants to maintain that anger he felt at that injustice " . Bale felt bittersweet about leaving the franchise , saying that it was like " saying goodbye to an old friend . " 
 Michael Caine as Alfred Pennyworth : 
 Bruce 's trusted butler and confidant , who acts as a father figure to Bruce but is unable to accept Bruce 's desire to revive his Batman persona , even resigning from his position to impress the seriousness of his position upon him . Christopher Nolan emphasized the emotional bond between Alfred and Bruce , stressing its importance in the previous films and predicting that the relationship will be strained as it never has before . 
 Gary Oldman as Commissioner James Gordon : 
 The Commissioner of the Gotham City Police Department , and one of the city 's few honest police officers . Oldman described the character 's work in cleaning up Gotham City as having left him world @-@ weary and slightly bored , likening Gordon to a soldier who leaps at the chance to be on the front lines . His life has taken a turn for the worse since The Dark Knight ; his wife has left him and taken their children , and the mayor is planning to dismiss him from his job . Gordon feels guilty over his role in covering up Harvey Dent 's crimes and is prepared to resign from his position as Commissioner over it , but then senses that Gotham is about to come under threat . 
 Anne Hathaway as Selina Kyle / Catwoman : 
 A professional cat burglar , grifter , and femme fatale who establishes a playful , teasing relationship with Bruce that " takes some of the somberness away from his character " , and pursues a " clean slate " ( a computer program rumored to be able to erase a person 's criminal history ) when she crosses paths with both Bruce and Batman . Hathaway auditioned not knowing what role she was being considered for . Hathaway described the role as being the most physically demanding she had ever played , and confessed that while she thought of herself as being fit she had to redouble her efforts in the gym to keep up with the demands of the role . Hathaway trained extensively in martial arts for the role , and looked to Hedy Lamarr — who was the inspiration for Catwoman 's character — in developing her performance . 
 Tom Hardy as Bane : 
 A mysterious and physically imposing revolutionary who was excommunicated from the League of Shadows and portrays himself as a " liberator of pain " . He is desperate to continue Ra 's al Ghul 's legacy by destroying Gotham . The character was chosen by Christopher Nolan because of his desire to see Batman tested on both a physical and mental level . According to costume designer Lindy Hemming , the character wears a mask that supplies him with an analgesic gas to relieve pain he suffers from an injury sustained " early in his story " . Hardy intended to portray the character as " more menacing " than Robert Swenson 's version of the character in Joel Schumacher 's Batman & Robin and that in order to do so , his portrayal entailed creating a contradiction between his voice and body . Hardy gained 30 pounds ( 14 kg ) for the role , increasing his weight to 198 pounds ( 90 kg ) . Hardy based Bane 's voice on several influences , which include Bartley Gorman as well as a desire to honor the character 's intellect and Caribbean heritage . Bane claims that his revolution 's enemies are the rich and the corrupt , who he contends are oppressing " the people " . Political theorist and cultural critic Slavoj Žižek sees Bane as fighting " structural injustice " , while likening him to a modern day Che Guevara who is counter @-@ intuitively driven to violence out of a sense of love . 
 Marion Cotillard as Miranda Tate / Talia al Ghul : 
 A recently promoted member of the Wayne Enterprises executive board who encourages a still @-@ grieving Bruce to rejoin with society and continue his father 's philanthropic works , but is later revealed to be the daughter of Ra 's al <unk> King as Young Talia al Ghul 
 Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt as Sgt. John Blake : 
 A young police officer whose instincts lead him to believe that there is trouble on the horizon and is promoted to detective by Gordon when the elder cop saw something of himself within the younger . Blake represents the idealism that Gordon and Bruce Wayne once held , but soon lost in their battle against crime in the city . The film reveals his legal name to be Robin John Blake , an homage to Batman 's sidekick in the comics , Robin . 
 Morgan Freeman as Lucius Fox : 
 The CEO and later Executive President of Wayne Enterprises , who runs the company on Bruce 's behalf and serves as his armorer for the Batsuit , providing him with high @-@ tech equipment and discreetly developing cutting @-@ edge technology and weaponry , even as Wayne Enterprises starts losing money . 
 Matthew Modine as Deputy Commissioner Peter Foley : 
 Gordon 's second @-@ in @-@ command that disdains Batman . 
 Ben Mendelsohn as John Daggett : 
 A rival billionaire socialite who employs Bane in his plan to take control of Wayne Enterprises . 
 Burn Gorman as Philip Stryver : 
 The Executive Vice President of Daggett Enterprises , who acts as Daggett 's assistant during Bane 's reign of terror . 
 Alon Abutbul as Dr. Leonid Pavel : 
 A Russian nuclear physician who is kidnapped from Uzbekistan by Bane and forced to convert the new Wayne Enterprises reactor core into a bomb . 
 Juno Temple as Jen : 
 Selina 's friend and accomplice . 
 Daniel Sunjata as Capt. Mark Jones : 
 A U.S. Special Ops officer who leads a task force into Gotham to assist Gordon and the GCPD in freeing the city from Bane 's rule . 
 Chris Ellis as Father Reilly : 
 A priest at the orphanage that Blake grew up in . 
 Nestor Carbonell as Mayor Anthony Garcia : 
 The 48 @-@ year @-@ old mayor of Gotham , who is killed by Bane at the ruined football game . 
 Brett Cullen as Byron Gilley : 
 A U.S. congressman who is kidnapped on Harvey Dent Day by Catwoman . 
 Liam Neeson as Ra 's al Ghul : 
 The recent leader of the League of Shadows , who briefly appears to the imprisoned Bruce in a hallucination . Neeson stated that he was unaware of his role or if he would actually be in the movie , due to its <unk> Pence as young Ra 's al Ghul : scenes set thirty years before the events of Batman Begins . 
 Cillian Murphy reprises his role as Dr. Jonathan Crane / Scarecrow from the previous films . Other cast members include Aidan Gillen as CIA agent Bill Wilson ; Rob Brown and Desmond Harrington as police officers ; Josh Stewart as Bane 's right @-@ hand man <unk> , Christopher Judge as one of Bane 's henchmen , Noel <unk> as Bane 's exile <unk> and Tom Conti as a prisoner . William Devane portrays the President of the United States . Aaron Eckhart expressed enthusiasm in returning for a sequel if asked , although he later stated Nolan verified that his character , Harvey Dent / Two @-@ Face , is dead , and only archive footage of Eckhart from The Dark Knight appears in the film . 
 Several members of the Pittsburgh Steelers have cameo appearances as members of the fictional Gotham Rogues football team in the film , including Ben Roethlisberger , Hines Ward , Troy Polamalu , Willie Colon , <unk> Pouncey , Mike Wallace , Heath Miller , Aaron Smith , Ryan Clark , James Farrior , LaMarr Woodley , and Casey Hampton , and former Steelers head coach Bill Cowher as the head coach of the Rogues . Pittsburgh mayor Luke Ravenstahl , a kicker in college , appears as the kicker for the Rogues ' opponents , the Rapid City Monuments . In 2008 , the Rooney family sold a minority stake in the team to Thomas Tull , the CEO and president of Legendary Pictures , which produced The Dark Knight Rises . United States Senator Patrick Leahy , who had made a cameo appearance in The Dark Knight , returned in The Dark Knight Rises , as a Wayne Enterprises board member . Thomas Lennon , who had appeared as a doctor in Memento , once again plays a doctor . India Wadsworth plays the wife of Ra 's al Ghul and the mother of Talia . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Warner Bros. president of production Jeff Robinov had hoped a third film would be released in 2011 or 2012 . Nolan wanted the story for the third installment to keep him emotionally invested . " On a more superficial level , I have to ask the question , " he reasoned , " how many good third movies in a franchise can people name ? " Nolan said that he never even thought a third film was possible in the foreword for his book The Art and Making of the Dark Knight Trilogy . Nolan only agreed to a third film on the basis of finding a worthwhile story , fearing that he would become bored halfway through production if he discovered the film to be unnecessary . By December 2008 , Nolan completed a rough story outline , before he committed himself to Inception . Later in December , Alan F. Horn confirmed that while discussions with Nolan about a third film were ongoing , no casting had been done , and Horn denied all such rumors . Before Nolan confirmed his involvement , Gary Oldman had said he was confident Nolan would return . 
 Following the success of the Joker in The Dark Knight , studio executives wished for the Riddler to be included as the primary villain as he was considered a similar character and encouraged the casting of Leonardo DiCaprio . However , Nolan wanted the antagonist to be vastly different from the previous incarnations and committed to using Bane instead , citing the need for a character with a physical presence within the film . He was initially unfamiliar with the character 's back @-@ story , but pointed out the appeal of an archetype , labelling it as " the extreme of some type of villainy " . When comparing the choice of Bane with the Joker , Nolan highlighted the Joker as an example of " diabolical , chaotic anarchy and has a devilish sense of humor " , juxtaposing him against Bane , whom he likened to " a classic movie monster [ ... ] with a terrific brain . " Nolan has said that his draft of the script was inspired by Charles Dickens ' 1859 novel A Tale of Two Cities , which centers around the French Revolution . This homage to Dickens was briefly illustrated by having Bane inconspicuously finger knit <unk> in the film , symbolizing his literary character Madame <unk> , and more overtly by Commissioner Gordon 's eulogy for Bruce Wayne at the end of the film , which is taken directly from the classic book . 
 It was not until February 9 , 2010 , that it was announced that Nolan had " cracked " the story of a sequel to The Dark Knight and was committed to return to the project . Shortly afterward , it was announced David S. Goyer and Jonathan Nolan were working on a screenplay . Goyer would leave the project during pre @-@ production to begin work on Man of Steel ; Jonathan continued writing the script based on the story by his brother Chris and Goyer . Chris Nolan said that his brother 's original draft was about 400 pages . The film 's storyline has been compared with the Batman comic book series ' story arc " Knightfall " ( 1993 ) , which showcased Bane ; the mini @-@ series The Dark Knight Returns ( 1986 ) , in which Batman returns to Gotham City after a ten @-@ year absence ; and the story arc " No Man 's Land " ( 1999 ) , which depicts a Gotham cut off from the rest of the world and overrun by gangs . The nickname " the Dark Knight " was first applied to Batman in Batman # 1 ( 1940 ) , in a story written by Bill Finger . Nolan confirmed the Joker would not return in the third film , and dismissed rumors that he considered using unused footage of Heath Ledger from The Dark Knight . The Dark Knight Rises reunited Nolan with many of his past collaborators , including cinematographer Wally Pfister , production designer Nathan Crowley , editor Lee Smith , costume designer Lindy Hemming , special effects supervisors Paul Franklin and Chris Corbould , and composer Hans Zimmer . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 During location scouting in December 2010 , Nolan began searching for locations such as India , Romania , and Michigan . According to the Romania Insider , Nolan was interested in Bucharest 's historical centers , Edgar Quinet Street , the Palace of the Parliament , and the Turda salt mine . The film had an estimated budget of $ 250 – 300 million , coming down to about $ 230 million after tax credits . Nolan elected not to film in 3 @-@ D , but instead stated that he intended to focus on improving image quality and scale using the IMAX format . The Dark Knight Rises featured over an hour of footage shot in IMAX ( by comparison , The Dark Knight contained 28 minutes ) . Nolan had several meetings with IMAX Vice @-@ President David Keighley to work on the logistics of projecting films in digital IMAX venues . Wally Pfister had expressed interest in shooting the film entirely in IMAX , but because of the considerable noise made by IMAX cameras , 35mm and 70mm cameras had to be used for shooting the film 's dialogue scenes , as dialogue had to be dubbed when shot with IMAX cameras . Chairman and president of the IMAX Corporation Greg Foster stated that IMAX planned to run the film in its theatres for two months , despite only being contractually committed to run the film for two weeks . Nolan also bypassed the use of a digital intermediate for the film , resulting in less manipulation of the filmed image and higher film resolution . 
 Filming was scheduled to start in May and conclude in November 2011 . Principal photography commenced on May 6 , 2011 , in Jodhpur , India at the Mehrangarh Fort before moving to Pittsburgh , where it operated under the working title Magnus Rex to reduce the visibility of the production . Shooting locations within the city included Heinz Field , the site of an American football game , with members of the Pittsburgh Steelers playing the Gotham Rogues football team . More than 11 @,@ 000 extras were used to depict the shot sequence . Filming in Pittsburgh also took place at the Mellon Institute and Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon University . A letter sent out to residents and business owners detailing road closures revealed that the streets of the city would be featured " as the start of [ the ] film " . 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 operators were told to expect an increase in calls related to gunshots and explosions in the film 's production . The Pittsburgh leg of production wrapped after three weeks on August 21 , 2011 . The next portion of the filming began in Los Angeles in late August and finished up on October 23 after nine weeks of filming . New York and New Jersey were the next places of filming . The Trump Tower replaced the Richard J. Daley Center as the location for the headquarters of Wayne Enterprises . In November 2011 , shooting shifted to Newark , New Jersey . Newark City Hall and Military Park were among the locations used for filming . Other shooting locations include London and Glasgow , the latter of which was used for " additional exterior filming " . Principal photography concluded on November 14 , 2011 . The external waterfall scene at the end of the film was shot at <unk> <unk> falls , on the edge of the Brecon Beacons National Park in Wales . 
 Production photos from filming in Pittsburgh showed a second Tumbler chassis after the first was destroyed , indicating that a new Batmobile would be in the film , following the destruction of the first in The Dark Knight . Further set photos revealed a " new vehicle " being transported to Wabash Tunnel , prompting speculation as to its nature . In June 2011 , <unk> confirmed the presence of the new Lamborghini <unk> on the film set . 
 Several accidents occurred during the production of the film . While filming at Wollaton Hall , Nottingham , a tractor @-@ trailer crashed into the main entrance , though no one was injured . A stuntman parachutist later crashed through the roof of a home in Cairngorm Gliding Club , <unk> in Scotland , and became wedged there after a failed landing during a skydiving stunt ; he was not seriously injured . While filming scenes in Pittsburgh , Hathaway 's stunt double crashed into an IMAX camera while filming a sequence that required her to ride a Batpod down a flight of stairs during a riot . There were no injuries , but the camera was destroyed . A second accident took place in Pittsburgh when the truck carrying the then @-@ unidentified vehicle later termed " the Bat " went off @-@ course and crashed into a lighting array , damaging the model of the aircraft . Production was delayed while the model was repaired . 
 Shortly before Christmas of 2011 , Christopher Nolan invited several prominent directors , including Edgar Wright , Michael Bay , Bryan Singer , Jon Favreau , Eli Roth , Duncan Jones and Stephen Daldry , to Universal CityWalk 's IMAX theatre for a private screening of the first six minutes of The Dark Knight Rises , which had been shot on IMAX film and edited from the original camera negative . Nolan , feeling that the use of film stock in cinema is currently being phased out due to the introduction of digital cinematography and projection , used this screening to make a case for the continued use of film , which he asserts still offers superior image quality to any digital format , and warned the filmmakers that unless they continued to assert their choice to use film in their productions , they may eventually lose it as an option . Nolan explained ; " I wanted to give them a chance to see the potential , because I think IMAX is the best film format that was ever invented . It 's the gold standard and what any other technology has to match up to , but none have , in my opinion . The message I wanted to put out there was that no one is taking anyone 's digital cameras away . But if we want film to continue as an option , and someone is working on a big studio movie with the resources and the power to insist [ on ] film , they should say so . I felt as if I didn 't say anything , and then we started to lose that option , it would be a shame . When I look at a digitally acquired and projected image , it looks inferior against an original negative anamorphic print or an IMAX one . " 
 = = = Design = = = 
 = = = = Costume design = = = = 
 Costume designer Lindy Hemming explained that Bane uses a mask to inhale an analgesic gas , which , in director Christopher Nolan 's words , " keeps his pain just below the threshold so he can function . " In designing Bane 's costume , Hemming needed it to look " like an amalgam of all sorts of bits and pieces he cobbled together , as he passed through some very remote places . We made parts of his vest , for example , from fragments of an old military tent . His clothes are militaristic , but are not in any way a uniform . " Hemming also designed Bane 's mask to look " animalistic " . Costume effects supervisor Graham Churchyard created a three @-@ dimensional model of actor Tom Hardy 's face and skull to design the mask , allowing the mask to perfectly conform to the contours of Hardy 's face . Hemming personally designed Bane 's coat , which she admitted took two years to complete . Taking inspiration from a Swedish army jacket and a frock coat from the French Revolution , it was designed to make Bane look like equal parts dictatorial and revolutionary . The design was difficult as Hemming struggled to find a tailor in Los Angeles who could work with <unk> . 
 The Batsuit consisted of 110 separate pieces , each of which had to be replicated dozens of times over the course of the production . The base layer was made of a polyester mesh that is utilized by the military and high @-@ tech sports manufacturers because of its <unk> and moisture @-@ <unk> properties . Molded pieces of flexible urethane were then attached to the mesh , to form the overall body armor plating . Carbon fiber panels were placed inside the sections on the legs , chest and abdomen . The cowl was sculpted from a cast of Bale 's face and head to become a perfect fit for Christian Bale . The suit remained unchanged for the film since The Dark Knight . 
 In creating Selina Kyle 's catsuit , two layers of material were used , with the outer layer being polyurethane coated spandex , embossed with a hexagonal pattern . The catsuit also consisted of elbow @-@ length gloves , a utility belt , and thigh @-@ high boots with spike heels . 
 = = = = Production design = = = = 
 Concept artist Tully Summers commented on Nolan 's style of cinematography when asked about the difference between his designs for this film and fantasy @-@ based designs for Men in Black 3 : " The difference for me was Christopher Nolan 's visual style . One of the things that makes his Batman movies so compelling is their tone of plausibility . He will often prefer a raw , grittier design over one that is very sleek and product design pretty . It 's sort of a practical military aesthetic . This stuff is made to work , not impress shoppers . The Dark Knight Rises is a war film . " Producer Emma Thomas stated this Batman film has a different visual aesthetic from the first two Nolan @-@ directed features , explaining that " it 's meant to be winter in Gotham , so that right there is going to lend a whole different look to the film . " 
 The film introduces a vehicle that has been compared with the Batplane and the <unk> , dubbed " the Bat " . In designing the Bat , Nathan Crowley approached it as if it were an actual military project , emphasising the need for it to " fit into the same family " as the Tumbler and the Batpod . The final version of the Bat takes its design cues from the Harrier Jump Jet , Bell Boeing V @-@ 22 Osprey and the Boeing AH @-@ 64 Apache . Chris Corbould described the Bat 's size and shape as presenting a major challenge for filming given Christopher Nolan 's emphasis on practical effects over computer @-@ generated imagery . In order to make the Bat " fly " , it was variously supported by wires , suspended from cranes and helicopters , and mounted on a purpose @-@ built vehicle with hydraulic controls to simulate movement . 
 When designing the Batcave set , Crowley and fellow production designer Kevin Kavanaugh hit upon the idea of flooding the Batcave and having Batman 's equipment , the Batsuit and a supercomputer rise from the water . Another set was designed at Cardington as an " underground prison " , a rough @-@ hewn labyrinth of stone cells in a vast abyss with a 120 foot ( 37 m ) vertical shaft leading to the surface . Exteriors above the prison were filmed in Jodhpur , India , chosen because the " forbidding landscape added to the desolation " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 In an interview in October 2010 , composer Hans Zimmer confirmed that he would be returning to score The Dark Knight Rises . James Newton Howard was offered to return and write the score with Zimmer as he did for Batman Begins and The Dark Knight , but he chose not to because he noted that the chemistry established between Zimmer and Nolan during the making of Inception would make him seem like a " third wheel " . Zimmer included several cues from the earlier scores , but explains that he wanted to go in a " completely different direction " for Bane 's theme . While the theme accompanying Selina Kyle is deliberately ambiguous , the musical thread spanning throughout the trilogy was composed exclusively for Bruce Wayne . 
 The film features a prevalent Moroccan chant of the phrase <unk> <unk> ( proper transliteration : <unk> <unk> ’ ah ) ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) , which translates to " rise up " ( literally : " come quickly " ) . In November 2011 , Zimmer crowdsourced online audio recordings of the chant to be used in the film 's score . When asked about the chant for clarification , Zimmer said , " The chant became a very complicated thing because I wanted hundreds of thousands of voices , and it 's not so easy to get hundreds of thousands of voices . So , we tweeted and we posted on the internet , for people who wanted to be part of it . It seemed like an interesting thing . We 've created this world , over these last two movies , and somehow I think the audience and the fans have been part of this world . We do keep them in mind . " 
 = = Marketing = = 
 The official website launched in May 2011 , introducing a viral marketing campaign similar to the one used to promote The Dark Knight . The website streamed an encrypted audio file described by users as chanting . Users decrypted the audio to the Twitter hashtag , " # <unk> " . Warner Bros. removed a pixel from the webpage for every tweet using the hashtag . The website revealed the first official image of Bane . 
 In July 2011 , a teaser trailer leaked online before its official release with Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 . The studio released the teaser three days after the leak . The trailer received mixed responses ; Stephen Spencer Davis of Slate wrote it successfully built hype , while Kofi Outlaw of ScreenRant showed disappointment , claiming it was more of an " announcement trailer " than an actual teaser trailer . Outlaw criticized the quality , writing that a scene depicting Commissioner Gordon in a hospital bed was overly dramatic , had " hammy " dialogue , and was difficult to understand due to Gordon 's labored breathing . Outlaw wrote that the sweeping shot of Gotham City had poor CGI and was too reminiscent of the Inception trailer . The theatrical trailer leaked online , like the teaser trailer , before being released the following week attached to theatrical prints of Sherlock Holmes : A Game of Shadows . Critics noted political undertones with dialogue foreshadowing the theme of income inequality and an " Occupy Gotham " campaign within the world of the story . Receiving more than 12 @.@ 5 million views in the first 24 hours after its release , the trailer set the record for most combined downloads from iTunes , beating the previous record held by The Avengers . However , the second trailer for The Avengers again set the record with 13 @.@ 7 million downloads . Warner Bros. attached a second theatrical trailer for The Dark Knight Rises to theatrical prints of The Avengers . An " unnamed " Warner Brothers executive clarified that " We see this placement as a good strategic decision . We always want our trailers to be seen with films that people want to see — and a lot of people will be going to The Avengers ! " The executive also commented that the trailer will " provide the best potential exposure for <unk> . " Warner Bros. released the trailer online on April 30 , 2012 , approximately four days before they attached it to theatrical prints of The Avengers . 
 Continuing a method used with The Dark Knight whereby the opening sequence of the film was attached to IMAX prints of I Am Legend seven months before release , a six @-@ minute prologue of The Dark Knight Rises was attached to 70mm IMAX prints of Mission : Impossible – Ghost Protocol , again approximately seven months before release . Critical reaction to the prologue was positive , with one critic commenting that " no one gets to make a film on this kind of scale anymore . Except for Christopher Nolan , " though a round @-@ up of reviews highlighted the way many critics found Tom Hardy 's dialogue very difficult to hear . Addressing the issue in an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Nolan said " I think when people see the film , things will come into focus . Bane is very complex and very interesting and when people see the finished film people will be very entertained by him . " 
 Viral marketing campaigns for the film continued as magazine companies Empire and Wired received " CIA documents " concerning a " Dr. Leonid Pavel " , with its mugshot connected to actor Alon Abutbul . According to the first document , Pavel is a missing Russian nuclear physicist , while the second document appears to be an edited transcript of a conversation discussing the handover of Dr. Pavel to the CIA by Georgian separatists , but with most of the conversation redacted . These were later shown to be plot elements of the six @-@ minute prologue . The official Twitter account later linked to another censored document , this time , referencing " Operation Early Bird " . A website of the same name was discovered , revealing a countdown timer . When the countdown finished , the site presented a map showing all available theaters that would be screening the film 's prologue earlier than its release . Various websites received a package that included a cylinder map of " strike zones " , and a " fire rises " T @-@ shirt . In April 2012 , the film 's official website was updated with a " dossier " on a suspect named " John Doe " also known as " the Batman " for an arrest , with a list of several accusations . The premise of the campaign starts when the mayor of Gotham City " <unk> " the effort to capture Batman and anyone supporting his return in preparation for the upcoming " Harvey Dent Day " . The site also includes an extensive list of real @-@ world locations where " graffiti related to movement in support of the vigilante 's return " is located . For each tweet of a specific location marked on the list , a frame of the second theatrical trailer for the film was released on a separate website . 
 In January 2012 , six months prior to the film 's release , tickets for midnight IMAX showings in New York , San Francisco , and Los Angeles went on sale and sold out immediately . Purchased tickets surfaced for sale online for over $ 100 , compared with their original price of $ 17 @.@ 50 . 
 At the American International Toy Fair , Mattel unveiled figures for Batman , Bane , and Catwoman , and Batman 's flying vehicle , the Bat . The Mattel figures were also released in the " Movie Masters " line , featuring more highly detailed and articulated presentation , and <unk> versions that feature interchangeable accessories . Lego released building sets and mini @-@ figures based on the film and incorporating other DC Comic characters . Additionally , Funko released a series of plush toys , Mezco Toyz released vinyl figures , and Hornby released the Batman Tumbler car . Other partners include Jakks Pacific , who created novelty and large @-@ scale figures and plush toys , and PPW Toys , who created a Batman themed Mr. Potato Head . Various clothing items including shoes , T @-@ shirts , hats and wallets were also produced . 
 A video game of the same name was released on the same day as the release of the film for the iOS and Android devices for promoting the movie . The game features an open world with primary focus on stealth and combat . The combat system of the game is inspired from Arkham Asylum and Arkham City . It takes place in Gotham City , with a somewhat similar but still significantly different plot from that of the movie . IGN gave it a mediocre score of 5 @.@ 5 / 10 . 
 The film novelization , written by author Greg Cox and published by Titan Books , was released alongside the film on July 24 , 2012 . 
 Warner Bros. partnered with Mountain Dew to do a cross @-@ promotion that included a special paint scheme on the number 88 Chevrolet Impala owned by Hendrick Motorsports and driven by Dale Earnhardt , Jr. in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series . On June 17 , 2012 , the car won the 2012 Quicken Loans 400 at Michigan International Speedway . On July 4 , 2012 , the studio signed a deal with Formula One team Lotus F1 to have the film 's logos appear on the Lotus <unk> driven by Kimi Räikkönen and Romain Grosjean at the 2012 British Grand Prix . Räikkönen and Grosjean went on to finish the race in fifth and sixth place respectively . Warner Bros. had previously followed a similar promotion at the 2008 British Grand Prix , when the now @-@ defunct Toyota F1 carried a livery to promote The Dark Knight . 
 Two digital comic books entitled Batman Origins and The Dark Knight : Prologue were released exclusively for Nokia Lumia devices . A special movie application has also been released , featuring trailers , wallpapers , movie schedules and Batman trivias . Limited editions of the Lumia 710 , Lumia 800 and Lumia 900 were also released featuring a laser @-@ etched Batman logo . 
 = = Shooting in Aurora , Colorado = = 
 On July 20 , 2012 , during a midnight showing of The Dark Knight Rises at the Century 16 cinema in Aurora , Colorado , a gunman wearing a gas mask opened fire inside the theater , killing 12 people and injuring 58 others . Police responding to the shooting apprehended a suspect later identified as 24 @-@ year @-@ old James Eagan Holmes shortly after arriving on the scene . Initial reports stated that Holmes identified himself as " the Joker " at the time of his arrest . 
 Warner Bros. cancelled the Paris , Mexico , and Japan premieres of The Dark Knight Rises , and suspended the film 's marketing campaign in Finland . Several broadcast networks also suspended television ads for the film in the United States . The trailer for Gangster Squad , another Warner Bros. movie included in the screening of The Dark Knight Rises , was removed as it contains a scene which shows gangsters shooting submachine guns at moviegoers through the screen , similar to the shooting in Aurora . 
 Director Christopher Nolan released a public statement calling the shooting " unbearably savage " . Other stars of the film released statements expressing their condolences , with star Christian Bale paying a personal visit to the survivors and the memorial in Aurora . 
 = = Release = = 
 On July 6 , 2012 , Warner Bros. held a special IMAX screening of The Dark Knight Rises for more than one hundred reporters and critics . However , technical issues with the computer device synchronizing the sound and picture forced the studio to postpone the screening by a day . The film later premiered on July 16 at the AMC Lincoln Square Theater in New York City , New York , followed by a European premiere on July 18 at Leicester Square in London , England . The film was released in Australia and New Zealand on July 19 , and was later released in North America and the United Kingdom on July 20 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 While The Dark Knight Rises received early generally favorable reviews from critics , the later reception was more mixed . Film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave The Dark Knight Rises a score of 87 % based on 327 reviews and a rating average of 8 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " The Dark Knight Rises is an ambitious , thoughtful , and potent action film that concludes Christopher Nolan 's franchise in spectacular fashion . " Metacritic , another review aggregator , assigned the film a weighted score of 78 out of 100 , based on 45 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film an A grade . 
 The Telegraph granted the film a maximum score of five stars , stating that it is " a superhero film without a superhero , " comparing it with The Godfather Part II and praising Hardy 's performance as well as the film 's intricate plot and narrative . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times thought the film was " potent , persuasive and hypnotic " and that it was " more than an exceptional superhero movie , it is masterful filmmaking by any standard . " The <unk> Todd Gilchrist wrote " A cinematic , cultural and personal triumph , The Dark Knight Rises is emotionally inspiring , aesthetically significant and critically important for America itself – as a mirror of both sober reflection and resilient hope . " IGN gave it a 9 out of 10 , noting similarities in tone and theme to Batman Begins over the trilogy 's second installment The Dark Knight , but also describing Bane as " that bit less interesting to watch " than Ledger 's Joker , despite praising his " menacing voice " and " body language @-@ driven performance " . The Guardian scored the film four out of five stars , calling it a film of " granite , monolithic intensity " , yet also calling it a " hammy , portentous affair " . Andrew O 'Hehir of Salon writes " if The Dark Knight Rises is a fascist film , it 's a great fascist film , and arguably the biggest , darkest , most thrilling and disturbing and utterly balls @-@ out spectacle ever created for the screen " . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film three out of four stars , stating " the film begins slowly with a murky plot and too many new characters , but builds to a sensational climax . " Film critic Richard Roeper gave the film an " A " , calling it " a majestic , gorgeous , brutal and richly satisfying epic " , and citing the final scenes of the picture as " the best five minutes of any film this year . " The London Film Review gave the film a B and said " Nolan 's film is a reminder that superheroes aren 't merely a frivolous distraction , but an embodiment of our best selves . " The film was crowned by Forbes as the best modern comic book superhero adaption on screen , outranking both its main summer blockbuster competitor , Marvel 's The Avengers , and the trilogy 's previous installment The Dark Knight . In 2014 , Empire ranked The Dark Knight Rises the 72nd greatest film ever made on their list of " The 301 Greatest Movies Of All Time " as voted by the magazine 's readers . 
 The Daily Mail 's Chris Tookey said that the film was bloated and overly long , and criticized the sombre tone and lack of humor , despite praising the film 's visually @-@ impressive set pieces . CNN 's Tom Charity said the film was a " disappointingly clunky and bombastic conclusion to a superior series " and called it Nolan 's worst film . Anthony Lane of The New Yorker says that the " story is dense , overlong , and studded with references that will make sense only to those intimate with Nolan 's previous excursions into <unk> " . 
 In reaction to fan backlash to some of the negative reviews , Rotten Tomatoes chose to disable user commentary for the film leading up to its release . Some fans had threatened violence against critics while others threatened to take down the websites of movie critics who had given the film a negative review . 
 = = = = Commentary = = = = 
 Writing in Salon , David Sirota , a progressive political commentator compared The Dark Knight Rises and the game Call of Duty to 1980s popular culture reflecting the political period of the time , accusing them of perpetuating a conservative agenda : " Just as so many 1980s pop culture products reflected the spirit of the Reagan Revolution 's conservative backlash , we are now seeing two blockbuster , genre @-@ shaping products not @-@ so @-@ subtly reflect the Tea Party 's rhetorical backlash to the powerful Occupy Wall Street zeitgeist . " An article in Variety reported Chuck Dixon , the co @-@ creator of the Bane character , as saying that Bane is " far more akin to an Occupy Wall Street type if you 're looking to cast him politically . " Catherine Shoard of the center @-@ left British publication The Guardian claimed the film " is a quite audaciously capitalist vision , radically conservative , radically vigilante , that advances a serious , stirring proposal that the wish @-@ fulfilment of the wealthy is to be championed if they say they want to do good . " In contrast , liberal commentator Jonathan <unk> opined in New York that " What passes for a right @-@ wing movie these days is The Dark Knight Rises , which submits the rather modest premise that , irritating though the rich may be , actually killing them and taking all their stuff might be excessive . " Writing in USA Today , Bryan Alexander called Bane " the ultimate occupier " and reported that Christian Bale was amazed that the script had " foreseen " the Occupy movement . 
 Nolan has denied the film criticizes the Occupy movement and insists that none of his Batman films are intended to be political : " I 've had as many conversations with people who have seen the film the other way round . We throw a lot of things against the wall to see if it sticks . We put a lot of interesting questions in the air , but that 's simply a backdrop for the story . What we 're really trying to do is show the cracks of society , show the conflicts that somebody would try to wedge open . We 're going to get wildly different interpretations of what the film is supporting and not supporting , but it 's not doing any of those things . It 's just telling a story . If you 're saying , ' Have you made a film that 's supposed to be criticizing the Occupy Wall Street movement ? ' – well , obviously , that 's not true . " 
 Alternatively , politically @-@ conservative commentator Rush Limbaugh alleged that the film was biased against 2012 Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney due to Bane 's name being a homophone for Bain Capital , the financial service company Romney used to head , despite the fact that the character has existed as a major Batman foe since 1993 . In response , Nolan said that the comments were " bizarre " , while Dixon and Freeman said that the comments were " ridiculous " . Democratic adviser Christopher Lehane has noted the similarities between the narratives of the film and the presidential campaign . 
 = = = = Accolades = = = = 
 = = = = Box office = = = = 
 Hours before the midnight release , several box office analysts suggested as much as a $ 198 million domestic opening weekend . However , in the wake of the mass shooting during a midnight screening of the film , Warner Bros. decided to not report further box office figures for the movie until Monday , July 23 , 2012 . As a result , other distributors also delayed the release of their official estimates as well . The shooting is also speculated to have hurt the ticket sales as E ! Online reported that a North Carolina audience member had stated that " this theater was kinda empty " . Some reports released on July 21 , 2012 said that rival studios estimated that the film grossed $ 75 million to $ 77 million on its opening day . Warner Brothers shortly after released a statement to ABC News stating that they delayed the release of their estimates for the opening day total of the film " out of respect for the victims and their families , " and added " Warner Bros. Pictures will not be reporting box office numbers for The Dark Knight Rises throughout the weekend . Box office numbers will be released on Monday . " 
 Worldwide 
 The Dark Knight Rises earned $ 448 million in North America , and $ 636 million in other countries , summing up to a worldwide total of $ 1 billion . Worldwide , it is the sixteenth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of all time and the third @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2012 . It had a worldwide opening weekend of $ 248 @.@ 9 million . The film set a worldwide IMAX opening @-@ weekend record with $ 23 @.@ 8 million ( overtaken by Avengers : Age of Ultron ) and also broke the record for the fastest movie to make over $ 50 million in IMAX theatres . IMAX CEO Richard L. Gelfond explained this by claiming , " Audiences are clearly seeking out and embracing the film the way it was meant to be seen – in IMAX . " On the 2012 Labor Day weekend , it became the third film distributed by Warner Bros. and the thirteenth film in cinematic history to cross the $ 1 billion mark . The film also became the second movie ( after Avatar ) to reach $ 100 million in worldwide IMAX grosses . 
 North America 
 The Dark Knight Rises opened on Friday , July 20 , 2012 . It earned an estimated $ 30 @.@ 6 million in midnight showings , which was the second @-@ highest midnight gross behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ( $ 43 @.@ 5 million ) . It did , however , set an IMAX midnight @-@ gross record with $ 2 @.@ 3 million ( overtaken by Avengers : Age of Ultron ) . The film made $ 75 @.@ 8 million during its opening day , achieving , at the time , the third @-@ highest single and opening day tally of all time . On July 23 , 2012 , it was announced that the film grossed $ 160 @.@ 9 million for its debut weekend , which was the third @-@ highest opening weekend ever , at the time , behind Marvel 's The Avengers ( $ 207 @.@ 4 million ) and Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ( $ 169 @.@ 2 million ) . However , it did set an opening @-@ weekend record for a 2D film ( previously held by The Dark Knight ) and an IMAX opening @-@ weekend record with $ 19 @.@ 0 million ( previously held by Marvel 's The Avengers ) . The film also held the top spot at the box office for its second and third weekends . In North America , it is the tenth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film , the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing 2012 film , as well as the fourth @-@ highest @-@ grossing superhero film and film based on comics . Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold more than 50 million tickets in the US . 
 Markets outside North America 
 Outside North America , the film opened with $ 88 @.@ 0 million from 7 @,@ 173 theaters in just 17 markets . It was in first place at the box office outside North America for four consecutive weekends . Its three largest markets are the UK , Ireland and Malta ( $ 90 @.@ 3 million ) , where it is the highest @-@ grossing superhero film , China ( $ 52 @.@ 8 million ) and Australia ( $ 44 @.@ 2 million ) . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Dark Knight Rises was released on November 28 , 2012 in Hong Kong and New Zealand . On December 3 , it was released in the United Kingdom , and on December 4 , it was released in the United States . It is available on Blu @-@ ray , DVD , and as a Digital download . Coinciding with the release of this film , a box set of The Dark Knight trilogy was released . 
 = Petlyakov Pe @-@ 8 = 
 The Petlyakov Pe @-@ 8 was a Soviet heavy bomber designed before World War II , and the only four @-@ engine bomber the USSR built during the war . Produced in limited numbers , it was used to bomb Berlin in August 1941 . It was also used for so @-@ called " morale raids " designed to raise the spirit of the Soviet people by exposing Axis vulnerabilities . Its primary mission , however , was to attack German airfields , rail yards and other rear @-@ area facilities at night , although one was used to fly the People 's Commissar of Foreign Affairs ( Foreign Minister ) Vyacheslav Molotov from Moscow to the United States in 1942 . 
 Originally designated the TB @-@ 7 , the aircraft was renamed the Pe @-@ 8 after its primary designer , Vladimir Petlyakov , died in a plane crash in 1942 . Supply problems complicated the aircraft 's production and the Pe @-@ 8s also had engine problems . As Soviet morale boosters , they were also high @-@ value targets for the Luftwaffe 's fighter pilots . The loss rate of these aircraft , whether from mechanical failure , friendly fire , or combat , doubled between 1942 and 1944 . 
 By the end of the war , most of the surviving aircraft had been withdrawn from combat units . After the war , some were modified as transports for important officials , and a few others were used in various Soviet testing programs . Some supported the Soviet Arctic operations until the late 1950s . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 Development of the Pe @-@ 8 began in July 1934 , when the Soviet Air Forces ( VVS ) issued requirements for an aircraft to replace the obsolete and cumbersome Tupolev TB @-@ 3 heavy bomber . These requirements specified a bomber that could carry 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) of bombs 4 @,@ 500 km ( 2 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed greater than 440 km / h ( 270 mph ) at an altitude of 10 @,@ 000 metres ( 32 @,@ 808 ft ) , figures that were twice the range , speed and service ceiling of the TB @-@ 3 . The task was assigned to the Tupolev Design Bureau ( OKB ) where Andrei Tupolev handed the work to a team led by Vladimir Petlyakov and the project received the internal bureau designation of ANT @-@ 42 . The resulting aircraft , a four @-@ engined , mid @-@ wing cantilever monoplane , was initially designated as the TB @-@ 7 ( Russian : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> — Heavy Bomber ) by the VVS and owed more to the streamlined design of the Tupolev SB than to the block @-@ like design of the TB @-@ 3 . 
 The bomber was built mainly of duralumin , with two steel spars in the wings , although the ailerons were fabric @-@ covered . The pear @-@ shaped monocoque fuselage required the pilots to sit in tandem , offset to the left . In the prototype , space for a fifth engine , an auxiliary Klimov M @-@ 100 , was reserved inside the fuselage , in a fairing above the wing spars and behind the pilots . It was intended to drive a supercharger that supplied pressurized air to the Mikulin AM @-@ <unk> engines , with the installation designated ATsN @-@ 2 ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> — Central <unk> Unit ) . Subsequent models omitted the internal engine , and provided seating for a flight engineer and radio operator , behind and below the pilots . The bombardier sat in the nose and manned a turret armed with a 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) ShVAK cannon that covered a 120 ° cone ahead . A prominent chin gondola , nicknamed the ' beard ' , protruded beneath the nose . The dorsal gunner sat at the rear of the ATsN fairing with a sliding hood covering a 7 @.@ 62 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) ShKAS machine gun and another ShKAS mounted in a ventral hatch . The tail gunner had a powered turret with a ShVAK and , most unusually , there were manually operated ShVAK cannon mounted at the rear of each inner engine nacelle . Crewmen had access to these positions through the wing or by a trapdoor in the upper wing surface . The large internal bomb bay racks held up to 4 @,@ 000 kg ( 8 @,@ 800 lb ) of bombs ; external racks held a single 500 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) FAB @-@ 500 ( <unk> <unk> - high explosive bomb ) bomb under each wing . 
 The maiden flight of the unarmed prototype , piloted by M. M. Gromov and without the ATsN installation , occurred at Khodynka Aerodrome on 27 December 1936 . After successful initial trials , the ATsN system was installed for the State acceptance trials in August 1937 and the AM @-@ <unk> engines were fitted during the tests . Gromov reported that the rudder was ineffective and that the outer engines overheated . Subsequent wind tunnel testing identified a problem with the aerodynamics of the radiators and nacelles . To solve this problem , the outer engines ' radiators were moved into deep ducts under the inner nacelles and the rudder was enlarged and redesigned with a smooth skin . 
 Construction of a second prototype began in April 1936 , incorporating lessons from the first aircraft and feedback from the VVS . Designers widened the fuselage by 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) ; the ' beard ' was also widened and the tail section was modified to lessen resistance and improve rudder function . A reconfigured control system included an autopilot and the engineers redesigned portions of the electrical system . The engines were changed to the more powerful AM @-@ <unk> and a redesigned undercarriage was fitted to the airframe . Two additional fuel tanks increased the craft 's range . The defensive and offensive armament was revised , and the bomber 's weaponry expanded to twin ShKAS guns in the nose , nacelle and tail turrets and a dorsal turret with a ShVAK ; this design eliminated the ventral gun . The bomb bay was modified to allow for a single 5 @,@ 000 @-@ kilogram ( 11 @,@ 000 lb ) FAB @-@ 5000 bomb to be carried and provisions were added to carry VAP @-@ 500 or VAP @-@ 1000 poison gas dispensers under the wings . 
 The arrests of both Tupolev and Petlyakov in October 1937 , during the Great Purge , disrupted the program and the second prototype did not make its first flight until 26 July 1938 . Although this prototype served as the basis for the series aircraft , further modifications were made to the armament . New weaponry included a retractable ShVAK in the MV @-@ 6 dorsal turret , another ShVAK in a <unk> tail turret and a 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) Berezin UBT machine gun in each <unk> barbette in each inner engine nacelle . Another fuel tank further increased the range , and the ' beard ' was removed entirely , replaced by a more streamlined nose . Authorization for production was slow for several reasons , including the Great Purge , but also due to the scarcity of resources , and a shortage of workers . Although production facilities in the Kazan Factory No. 124 were ready as early as 1937 , the order to begin was not given until 1939 . 
 = = = Manufacture and supply problems = = = 
 Engine supply problems complicated the construction of the aircraft . Production of the ATsN superchargers could not be organized in any systematic way and only the first four Pe @-@ 8s were equipped with them . Factory No. 124 shut down its Pe @-@ 8 production line at the beginning of 1940 while alternative engines were evaluated . Somewhere in the massive Soviet chain of command , the decision was made to proceed without the superchargers . The unavailability of the Klimov M @-@ 100 engine of the ATsN @-@ 2 installation required a design change , although this modification allowed a commander and radio operator to be carried in its place . Then , to compound the problem further , the production of AM @-@ <unk> engines ended in the second half of 1939 . Only two or four Pe @-@ 8s were equipped with them . Eighteen of the aircraft produced by the end of 1940 were fitted with AM @-@ 35A engines . 
 In 1940 , six aircraft without engines were fitted with Mikulin AM @-@ 35A engines , while VVS officials evaluated both the Charomskiy ACh @-@ 30 and Charomskiy M @-@ 40 aircraft Diesel engines . At least nine Pe @-@ 8s were fitted with Diesel engines in 1941 , but neither the ACh @-@ 30 nor the M @-@ 40 were entirely satisfactory , despite greatly increasing the range of the aircraft . All surviving Pe @-@ 8s were re @-@ engined with AM @-@ 35As by the end of 1941 . Production continued slowly at Factory No. 124 ; most of the factory 's resources were devoted to the higher @-@ priority Petlyakov Pe @-@ 2 , a successful light bomber . At this time , most of these aircraft , re @-@ designated as the Pe @-@ 8 after Petlyakov was killed in a Pe @-@ 2 crash on 12 January 1942 , were built with out @-@ of @-@ production AM @-@ 35A engines . 
 The 1 @,@ 380 @-@ kW ( 1 @,@ 850 @-@ hp ) Shvetsov ASh @-@ 82 radial engine was proposed as a replacement to alleviate the shortage of engines and this modification went into production in late 1942 . The exhaust arrangements of the ASh @-@ 82 were not compatible with the gun turrets in the rear of the engine nacelles and the guns were removed , reducing the aircraft 's defensive capability . At the end of 1943 , the nose turret was deleted in favor of a manually operated ShKAS machine gun in a more streamlined nose . This version of the aircraft proved to have much the same range as the diesel @-@ engined versions , but reliability was greatly improved . Production of the Pe @-@ 8s totaled 93 . 
 The last Pe @-@ 8s were completed in 1944 as Pe @-@ <unk> ( Russian : <unk> <unk> — Special Mission ) with Charomskiy ACh @-@ 30B engines and a fillet at the base of the vertical stabilizer . These were special VIP transports with a seating capacity of twelve and a cargo capacity of 1 @,@ 200 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 646 lb ) . Sources disagree if the armament was removed and , if it was , whether partly or entirely . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Wartime use = = = 
 When Operation Barbarossa began on 22 June 1941 , only the 2nd Squadron of the 14th Heavy Bomber Regiment ( Russian : <unk> <unk> Avia Polk — TBAP ) , based at <unk> was equipped with Pe @-@ 8s , but was not ready for combat . Two of its nine Pe @-@ 8s were destroyed by German air strikes shortly after the war began , before the Pe @-@ 8s were withdrawn out of reach of German bombers to Kazan . Stalin ordered that the squadron be reformed into a regiment , and that it strike targets deep inside German territory . Theoretically , this tactic would boost Soviet morale by demonstrating the vulnerability of the enemy . The squadron was re @-@ designated on 29 June as the 412th TBAP and began training for long @-@ range missions . On or about 27 July it was again renamed , this time as the 432nd TBAP . On the evening of 10 August , eight M @-@ 40 @-@ engined Pe @-@ 8s of the 432nd TBAP , accompanied by <unk> Yer @-@ 2s of the 420th Long @-@ Range Bomber Aviation Regiment ( DBAP ) , attempted to bomb Berlin from <unk> Airfield near Leningrad . One heavily loaded Pe @-@ 8 crashed immediately upon take off , after it lost an engine . Only four managed to reach Berlin , or its outskirts , and of those , only two returned to their base . The others landed elsewhere or crash @-@ landed in Finland and Estonia . The aircraft of the commander of the 81st Long @-@ Range Bomber Division , <unk> Mikhail <unk> , to which both regiments belonged , was attacked mistakenly by Polikarpov I @-@ 16s from Soviet Naval Aviation over the Baltic Sea and lost an engine ; later , before he could reach Berlin , German flak punctured a fuel tank . He crash @-@ landed his aircraft in southern Estonia . Five more Pe @-@ 8s were lost during the operation , largely due to the unreliability of the M @-@ 40s . Seven Pe @-@ 8s were lost during the month of August alone , rendering the regiment ineffective . During this period , the surviving aircraft were re @-@ equipped with AM @-@ 35As , which gave them a shorter range , but a more reliable engine . 
 By 1 October 1941 , the regiment mustered fourteen Pe @-@ 8s after having been replenished by new aircraft from the factory . It spent the rest of the year conducting night raids on Berlin , Königsberg , Danzig and as well as German @-@ occupied cities in the Soviet Union . The regiment was re @-@ designated as the 746th Separate Long @-@ Range Aviation Regiment ( Russian : Otdel 'nyy Avia Polk Dahl 'nevo Deystviya — <unk> ) on 3 December . No aircraft were reported on hand two days later after this designation , but eleven were on strength on 18 March 1942 . During the winter of 1941 – 42 , the regiment was assigned the destruction of a railroad bridge over the Volga River , near Kalinin . In April 1942 , one aircraft flew diplomatic personnel and mail on a non @-@ stop flight from Moscow to Great Britain . This was a test run for a flight carrying Soviet Foreign Minister Molotov and his delegation from Moscow to London and then to Washington , D.C. and back , for negotiations to open a second front against Nazi Germany ( 19 May – 13 June 1942 ) . The flight crossed German @-@ controlled airspace on the return trip without incident . From August 1941 to May 1942 , the regiment flew 226 sorties and dropped 606 tonnes ( 596 long tons ; 668 short tons ) of bombs . In the course of these missions , they lost 14 bombers , five in combat , and the rest from engine malfunction . The regiment received 17 Pe @-@ 8s as replacements . Sixteen aircraft were on hand on 1 May 1942 , but the number had only increased to seventeen two months later ; the regiment was losing aircraft almost as fast as they were being replaced . 
 The 890th Long @-@ Range Aviation Regiment ( Russian : Avia Polk Dahl 'nevo Deystviya — <unk> ) was formed on 15 June 1942 and both regiments were used to bomb German @-@ held transportation centers of , among others , Orel , Bryansk , Kursk and Poltava . The pace of activity increased and the regiments flew as many missions in August as they had in the first ten months of the war . By the eve of the Soviet counterattack at Stalingrad , Operation Uranus , on 8 November the regiments had fourteen Pe @-@ 8s on hand . Under the command of the 45th Long @-@ Range Bomber Aviation Division ( Russian : Dal <unk> Aviatsionnaya <unk> — DBAD ) , they did not participate in the Stalingrad air attacks . 
 In 1943 , from the division 's primary airfield at Kratovo , southeast of Moscow , the regiments bombed transportation centers , airfields and troop concentrations . The railroad yard at Gomel was a favorite target and the regiment dropped approximately 606 tonnes ( 596 long tons ; 668 short tons ) of bombs there between February and September 1943 . It is not clear if these sorties were made by Pe @-@ 8s alone or in combination with other aircraft . In addition , the regiment dropped the first FAB @-@ 5000 bomb on Königsberg in April 1943 , continuing the pin @-@ prick attacks against targets deep in the German rear . In May 1943 , efforts shifted to disrupt the German concentration of forces for the Battle of Kursk . In one sortie , the 109 bombers of the 45th DBAD struck the rail junction at Orsha during the evening of 4 May , most of which were not Pe @-@ 8s ; the German High Command reported the destruction of 300 rail wagons and three ammunition trains . 
 By 1 July , the regiment had 18 Pe @-@ 8s for deployment during the early phase of the Battle of Kursk . The long @-@ range aviation units continued to attack targets in the German rear areas at night , supporting the Soviet ground offensive in the Orel Bulge , called Operation Kutuzov , that began on 12 July . The Germans had transferred the <unk> of the Fourth Group of <unk> Wing 5 ( IV . / Nachtjagdgeschwader 5 ) , flying a mix of Junkers Ju 88 and Dornier Do 217 aircraft , to counter the Soviet raids near the Orel area . Initially , the night fighters were ineffective against the Soviet raids , until the deployment of their ground radar " eyes " . Once the Germans had use of their radar , after the night of 17 – 18 July , Soviet losses increased sharply . Although the Germans flew only fourteen sorties that night , they claimed eight kills . On the night of 20 – 21 July , Captain ( Hauptmann ) Heinrich Prinz zu Sayn @-@ Wittgenstein , commander of IV . / NJG 5 , shot down three himself . The exhaust plume of the ASh @-@ 82 engine may have been a contributing factor ; the engines lacked flame dampening exhausts , making their plume visible from a distance . Despite its losses , the 746th was re @-@ designated as the 25th Long @-@ Range Guards Aviation Regiment ( <unk> ) on 18 September 1943 in recognition of its achievements . 
 = = = Removal from combat = = = 
 The loss of Pe @-@ 8s to all causes — mechanical , combat , friendly fire — had steadily increased from one aircraft per 103 flights in 1942 to one per 46 sorties in 1944 . Despite the losses , production kept pace with need . The number of aircraft belonging to the 45th DBAD continued to rise ; 20 were on hand on 1 January 1944 and 30 on 1 June . The Pe @-@ 8s flew 276 sorties in 1944 against such targets as Helsinki , Tallinn and Pskov . Aviation historian Yefim Gordon maintains that the Pe @-@ 8 flew its last mission on the night of 1 – 2 August 1944 , but the Statistical Digest of the VVS contradicts this claim , showing 31 Pe @-@ 8s assigned to 45th DBAD on 1 January 1945 and 32 on hand on 10 May 1945 . However , during this period the 45th DBAD only had three regiments , none of which used the Pe @-@ 8 as their primary aircraft , so while the 45th DBAD may have had Pe @-@ 8s , these may not have been in use as the primary combat aircraft . 
 The 890th began to fly Lend @-@ Lease B @-@ 25 Mitchells in the spring of 1944 and was itself re @-@ designated as the 890th Bomber Aviation Regiment on 26 December 1944 . The 362nd <unk> was formed in early 1944 with four Pe @-@ 8s received from the other two regiments , but these were returned in the spring of 1944 , when the regiment began to convert to the Lend @-@ Lease Mitchells . 
 = = = Post @-@ war use = = = 
 After the war , the Pe @-@ 8 was used extensively as a testbed for trials involving Soviet derivatives of the German V @-@ 1 flying bomb and it was designated as the Pe @-@ <unk> for prototype piston engine trials . It was also used as a mother ship for the experimental rocket @-@ engined <unk> 5 in 1948 – 49 . Aeroflot received several of the surviving Pe @-@ 8s for polar exploration . Their military equipment removed , they had additional fuel tanks installed , were painted orange , and had their engines upgraded to either ASh @-@ <unk> or Shvetsov ASh @-@ <unk> . One landed at the North Pole in 1954 and others helped to monitor the drift ice stations NP @-@ 2 , NP @-@ 3 and NP @-@ 4 during the late 1950s . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Soviet Union 
 Soviet Air Forces 
 = = Specifications ( Pe @-@ 8 / AM @-@ 35A ) = = 
 Data from Gordon , Soviet Airpower in World War 2 , p . 398 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : Eleven 
 Length : 23 @.@ 2 m ( 76 ft ¼ in ) 
 Wingspan : 39 @.@ 13 m ( 128 ft 4 in ) 
 Height : 6 @.@ 20 m ( 20 ft 4 in ) 
 Wing area : 188 @.@ 66 m ² ( 2 @,@ 030 @.@ 7 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 18 @,@ 571 kg ( 40 @,@ 941 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 27 @,@ 000 kg ( 59 @,@ 400 lb ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 35 @,@ 000 kg ( 77 @,@ 000 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 4 × Mikulin AM @-@ 35A liquid @-@ cooled V12 engine , 999 kW ( 1 @,@ 340 hp ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 443 km / h ( 275 @.@ 2 mph ) 
 Range : 3 @,@ 700 km ( 2 @,@ 299 mi ) 
 Service ceiling : 9 @,@ 300 m ( 30 @,@ 504 ft ) 
 Rate of climb : 5 @.@ 9 m / s ( 1 @,@ 154 ft / min ) 
 Wing loading : 143 kg / m ² ( 29 lb / ft ² ) 
 Power / mass : 140 W / kg ( 0 @.@ 2 hp / lb ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 2 x 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) ShVAK cannons ( dorsal and tail turrets ) 
 2 x 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) UBT machine guns ( engine nacelles ) 
 2 x 7 @.@ 62 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) ShKAS machine guns ( nose turret ) 
 Bombs : Up to 5 @,@ 000 kg ( 11 @,@ 000 lb ) 
 = Wage reform in the Soviet Union , 1956 – 62 = 
 During the Khrushchev era , especially from 1956 through 1962 , the Soviet Union attempted to implement major wage reforms intended to move Soviet industrial workers away from the mindset of <unk> quotas that had characterised the Soviet economy during the preceding Stalinist period and toward a more efficient financial incentive . 
 Throughout the Stalinist period , most Soviet workers had been paid for their work based on a piece @-@ rate system . Thus their individual wages were directly tied to the amount of work they produced . This policy was intended to encourage workers to toil and therefore increase production as much as possible . The piece @-@ rate system led to the growth of bureaucracy and contributed to significant inefficiencies in Soviet industry . In addition , factory managers frequently manipulated the personal production quotas given to workers to prevent workers ' wages from falling too low . 
 The wage reforms sought to remove these wage practices and offer an efficient financial incentive to Soviet workers by standardising wages and reducing the dependence on overtime or bonus payments . However , industrial managers were often unwilling to take actions that would effectively reduce workers ' wages and frequently ignored the directives they were given , continuing to pay workers high overtime rates . Industrial materials were frequently in short supply , and production needed to be carried out as quickly as possible once materials were available — a practice known as " storming " . The prevalence of storming meant that the ability to offer bonus payments was vital to the everyday operation of Soviet industry , and as a result the reforms ultimately failed to create a more efficient system . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Existing system = = = 
 During the period of Stalinism , the Soviet Union attempted to achieve economic growth through increased industrial production . In 1927 – 28 , the sum total of Soviet production of capital goods amounted to 6 billion rubles , but by 1932 , annual production increased to 23 @.@ 1 billion rubles . Factories and industrial enterprises were actively encouraged to " achieve at whatever cost " , with a strong emphasis placed on <unk> stated targets so as to produce as much as possible . For example , the slogan for the first Five @-@ Year Plan , " The Five @-@ Year Plan In Four Years ! " , called on workers to fulfill the state 's objectives a year earlier than planned . 
 Frantically rushed production was very common in Soviet industry , and in particular a process known as " storming " ( Russian : <unk> , pronounced <unk> ) was endemic ; it involved crash programs in which factories tried to undertake all their monthly production quota in a very short space of time . This was usually the result of a lack of industrial materials that left factories without the resources to complete production until new supplies arrived at the end of the month . Workers then worked as many hours as possible to meet monthly quotas in time ; this exhausted them and left them unable to work at the beginning of the next month ( although lack of raw materials meant there would have been very little for them to produce at this point anyway ) . 
 To encourage individual workers to work hard and produce as much as they possibly could , most workers in Soviet industry were paid on a piece @-@ rate ; their wage payments depended upon how much work they personally completed . Soviet workers were given individual quotas for the amount of work they should personally deliver and would earn a basic wage ( <unk> ) by fulfilling 100 percent of their quota . The wage rate for work would grow as production over this level increased . If a worker produced 120 percent of his own personal quota for the month ( for example , if he was supposed to produce 1 @,@ 000 items , but actually produced 1 @,@ 200 ) he would receive his basic wage for the first 100 percent , a higher rate for the first 10 percent of over production and an even higher rate for the next 10 percent . Soviet authorities hoped that this would encourage a <unk> spirit of overfulfillment of quotas among the Soviet workforce . In 1956 , approximately 75 percent of Soviet workers were paid under such a piece @-@ rate system , so the majority of Soviet workers could significantly boost their earnings by increasing their output . 
 Average wage rates in the Soviet Union were published relatively rarely . Some academics in the West believed this was because the Soviet government wanted to conceal low average earnings . Alec Nove wrote in 1966 ( when wage statistics were published for the first time since the Second World War ) that the lack of transparency surrounding average wages was intended to prevent Soviet workers from discovering the huge disparities that existed between wages in different sectors of the Soviet economy . 
 = = = Problems = = = 
 The piece @-@ rate approach to wages had been introduced in the first Five @-@ Year Plan in 1928 and had changed very little since then . In practice the piece @-@ rate system led to many inefficiencies in Soviet industry . One issue was the vast bureaucracy that was involved in administering wage payments . Each Soviet ministry or government department would set its own rates and wage scales for work in the factories or enterprises for which they were responsible . Within one ministry there could be great variation in pay rates for jobs requiring largely identical responsibilities and skills , based on what the factory was producing , the location of the factory and other factors that Moscow considered important . Basing payments on these central directives often led to long and costly processes in the calculation of wages . Historian Donald Filtzer wrote of one 1930s machinist who in one month completed 1 @,@ 424 individual pieces of work . Amongst these had been 484 differing tasks , all of which had been assigned a basic individual payment rate of between 3 and 50 <unk> each ( 1 ruble was equal to 100 <unk> ) . To calculate this worker 's wage , his employer had to process 2 @,@ 885 documents which had required some 8 @,@ 500 signatures on 8 kilograms of paper , costing the factory 309 rubles , a fifth of what they would pay the worker , whose total earnings for the labour amounted to 1 @,@ 389 rubles . 
 Time workers — workers who were paid for the time they spent working rather than by how much they individually produced — also received bonuses based on performance . Factory managers , who did not want these workers to lose out to their piece @-@ rate colleagues , often manipulated output figures to ensure that they would ( on paper ) overfulfill their targets and therefore receive their bonuses . Typically , managers were loath to see their employees ' wages fall too low , so they frequently kept quotas deliberately low , or offered ways for workers to manipulate their work outputs to achieve a higher bonus . They generally did this to ensure that their factory could run smoothly , rather than out of concern for the workers ' personal welfare . The erratic and seemingly arbitrary way that quotas had been set across different industries led to a high level of uncompleted production in industries where it was more difficult to overfulfill production quotas . Managers therefore tried to keep quotas deliberately low to attract workers to their factories to ensure their factories were able to meet their targets . 
 Even without managerial manipulation , quotas were very often low and easy to overfulfill . Quotas had been lowered during the Second World War so that new workers would be able to fulfill their output expectations ; in industries such as engineering , it was common for workers to double their basic pay through bonuses . 
 = = Reform = = 
 After the death of Stalin , the Soviet Union went through a process of moving away from Stalinist policies known as de @-@ Stalinization . The purpose of de @-@ Stalinization included not only ending the use of terror and the Gulag system that had existed under Stalin , but also reforming the economic policies of the Soviet Union . In the 1950s , the Soviet economy had begun to fall behind schedule in the output of several key materials including coal , iron and cement , and worker productivity was not growing at the rate expected . In May 1955 , Pravda ( the official newspaper of the Central Committee of the Communist Party ) announced that a State Committee on Labour and Wages had been formed to investigate changes to wages and a centralised system of wage adjustments . In July 1955 , Soviet Premier Nikolai Bulganin spoke of the need for Soviet industry to end outdated work quotas and reform wages , so that the Soviet Union could better incentivise workers and reduce labour turnover . The subsequent sixth Five @-@ Year Plan for 1956 to 1960 included calls for a reform of wages . The reforms had several objectives , the most important of which was to create a more consistent system of incentives for workers . It was also hoped that the reforms would help to reduce the levels of waste and misallocation of labour that were frequently found in Soviet industry . 
 = = = Provisions = = = 
 The Sixth Five Year Plan made several key changes to Soviet workers ' wages . Firstly , basic wages were increased so that there would be less pressure to overfulfill quotas , and therefore less pressure to manipulate or distort results . Wage increases were restricted to the lowest paid jobs , as Nikita Khrushchev sought to be seen as the " friend to the underdog " . It was also hoped that wage rises for lower paid jobs would encourage more women to enter industry and that freezes on higher paid jobs would deter people from leaving employment . 
 Secondly , quotas were raised to limit the ability of workers to overfulfill targets . In the case of time workers , this was sometimes done by keeping quotas the same but reducing hours ; for example , coal miners saw their working day shortened to six hours . Some rises were very steep ; in the case of engineering enterprises , quotas were raised by 65 percent . 
 The number of wage rates and wage scales was drastically reduced ; this not only cut bureaucracy , but also ensured that workers would be more eager to take on a wider range of tasks . Time workers , for example , would be paid the same regardless of which task they carried out during their shift . This allowed managers to better distribute labour and reduce the frequency of bottlenecks occurring in production . They could do this because workers would be paid a similar rate no matter what they undertook , so it became easier to move workers between tasks . 
 A major change was made in the way overfulfillment was rewarded . Progressive piece @-@ rates , where rates increased as outputs grew , were ended , and workers were paid a one @-@ off bonus upon overachieving a quota . Where bonus rates were retained for each percentage of overfulfillment , they were capped . For example , in engineering , bonuses could not exceed 20 percent of their normal earnings . 
 Lastly , workers whose tasks were considered too important to be paid on a piece @-@ rate basis were moved to a time @-@ rate method . This was largely done in consideration of safety grounds and usually applied to those conducting maintenance or the repair of equipment . 
 = = Successes = = 
 The reform 's clearest effect was to reduce the proportion of Soviet industrial labour that was paid by piece @-@ rate , and by August 1962 , 60 @.@ 5 percent of Soviet workers were paid by piece @-@ rate , down from the 1956 level of 75 percent . Around half of those who remained on piece @-@ rates would continue to receive some kind of bonus payment , but the progressive piece @-@ rate bonuses were mostly eliminated , with only 0 @.@ 5 percent of workers continuing to receive them in 1962 . Workers who were taken off piece @-@ rate payments were then paid an hourly rate or received a salary . 
 By 1961 , workers ' basic wages had risen to an average of about 73 percent of their total earnings ; piece @-@ rate workers saw an average of 71 percent and time workers 76 percent of their earnings as their basic wage . There was also a reduction in the overall level of quota overfulfillment — with quotas raised , many could not meet their own personal quota . The proportion of workers who achieved 100 percent or less of their quota varied from as low as 5 @.@ 1 percent in iron and steel industries , to 31 @.@ 4 percent in coal mining . Across Soviet industry , the average level of quota fulfillment fell from 169 percent before the reform , to 120 percent in October 1963 . 
 Overall wages rose much more slowly throughout the period than planned : wages across the entire state ( not only industrial wages ) rose by 22 @.@ 9 percent between 1959 and 1965 , against a plan for growth of 26 percent . Wage rises during the reform were made up for by increases in industrial productivity . For example , in the RSFSR ( Russia ) wages rose by 7 percent between 1959 and 1962 , whilst productivity increased by some 20 percent . 
 The wage reform was linked to a program that reduced the length of the overall working week in the Soviet Union , and in 1958 , the working week was reduced from 48 hours to 41 . This was to apply to all Soviet workers , and by 1961 , 40 million Soviet workers ( approximately two thirds of the workforce ) were working a 41 @-@ hour week . It was planned to decrease this further to 40 hours in 1962 , but this was eventually not carried out . Khrushchev had stated a longer @-@ term aim of giving Soviet workers the shortest working hours in the world , aiming for a 30- to 35 @-@ hour week by 1968 . He had spoken previously of the reduction of working hours as a basic goal of a communist movement and had hoped that communism would eventually achieve a working day of 3 – 4 hours . 
 = = Failures = = 
 Whilst the reform did remove some of the peculiarities of the Stalinist era , the overall impact of program created additional problems for the Soviet worker . In many areas , large variations in wages continued to exist . In engineering , for example , factory managers often ignored wage directives to try to encourage workers into roles that had lost much of their attraction after basic wages were cut to match pay throughout an area . Managers would therefore offer higher wages to new trainees . This had the effect of encouraging some to take a high @-@ paid training position and then leave for a new training position upon qualification . In coal mining , managers had long held the ability to vary wages based on local considerations , such as geological factors or hazard levels , and after the reform they continued to vary wages through manipulation of quotas or rates to protect workers ' wages . A further problem with a centrally directed bonus system was that it encouraged factories to continue producing well established , more familiar products because it was far easier to overfulfill targets on familiar products than to start work on new items . 
 Sometimes in areas where the new wages were applied , factories would struggle to recruit workers for important tasks because the reform had given a low pay grade to a task that was considered to require a lower level of skill . For example , machine @-@ tool operation was given a low pay grade , and at one factory in <unk> some 30 machine @-@ tools sat unused as factory managers were unable to recruit workers to operate them . 
 In other instances , managers deliberately used the reforms as an opportunity to cut wages , exaggerating wage cuts made by the ministries so that they would be able to cut back on overall expenditure . In one case , a manager of a concrete factory was sentenced to eight months corrective labour after being found guilty of using the reforms as a pretext to extract unpaid overtime from workers . 
 = = Results = = 
 Overall , the wage reform failed to create a stable and predictable incentives system . Filtzer wrote that wider issues in Soviet industry and relations between managers and workers are important in understanding the failure . Filtzer noted a myriad of issues in Soviet production that had meant a more formal bonus system was unworkable in the Soviet Union : irregular availability of supplies that were often of variable quality , an irrational division of labour and a reliance on " storming " that made it difficult to motivate workers through a more conventional payments system . In such cases , it was vital to have the ability to offer additional overtime payments and even use bribes or " palm @-@ greasing " to incentivise workers to meet monthly quotas on time . 
 Filtzer also stated that because Soviet workers were unable to organise against their superiors in the same way that their counterparts in the West could ( for example by forming an independent trade union or joining a political party in opposition to the ruling Communist Party of the Soviet Union ) they had undergone a process of " hyper <unk> " , a process that had been heavily influenced by the overall incentive process . This had led to a situation where workers who could not count on a Western @-@ style meritocracy ( where they might expect to find their pay and conditions improve with promotions ) would instead have to rely on the decisions of managers to give bonuses and overtime payments if they wanted to increase their wages . Because managers needed to be able to give rewards and bonuses at their own discretion , sticking to a centrally directed system of wages was very difficult . 
 In terms of labour process theory — the attempt to understand the relationship between management control , worker skill and wages in industrial workplaces — Filtzer emphasised the continuing absence of control by Soviet workers over their own labour process . The Soviet elite would not radically change the labour process by <unk> it and introducing truly equal wages for everyone in society , but nor could they generate the culture of consumerism that in the West was used to help explain the wage and skill structure . In these circumstances , attempts to coordinate production quotas , wages and expected levels of worker effort failed and continued to fail into the 1980s . The wage reform of 1956 – 1962 was a failure , as it could neither fix nor improve the economic conflict between workers and the elite in the Soviet Union . On the shop floor , workers continued to directly bargain with low @-@ level management over effort , wages and what " skill " they would exert . In particular , Filtzer notes that Soviet workers were constantly forced into a position of exerting more skill than was officially called for in plans or quotas . This was because Soviet workers often had to find their own ways of working around problems that made their efforts difficult , such as building their own tools to carry out tasks that could not be performed with the tools provided , or by devising entirely new production processes of their own when existing processes were not suitable . This was a condition only seen to such an extent in the West in industries that were insulated from market forces . Because this was common in Soviet industry , workers and managers in the Soviet Union had many reasons to work together in the setting of wages , quotas and skill expectations , even after the wage reform . Filtzer wrote that Mikhail Gorbachev attempted a very similar series of wage reforms in 1986 ( Perestroika ) , which ultimately failed and had to be replaced with a decentralised system in 1991 . 
 = Prince George of Denmark = 
