 Prince George of Denmark and Norway , Duke of Cumberland ( Danish : Jørgen ; 2 April 1653 – 28 October 1708 ) , was the husband of Queen Anne , who reigned over Great Britain from 1702 . 
 His marriage to Anne was arranged in the early 1680s with a view to developing an Anglo @-@ Danish alliance to contain Dutch maritime power . As a result , George was unpopular with his Dutch brother @-@ in @-@ law William of Orange , who was married to Anne 's elder sister , Mary . William and Mary became joint monarchs of Britain , with Anne as their heiress presumptive , in 1689 after the " Glorious Revolution " deposed James II and VII , the father of both Anne and Mary . 
 William excluded George from active military service , and neither George nor Anne wielded any great influence until after the deaths of William and Mary , when Anne became queen . During his wife 's reign , George occasionally used his influence in support of his wife , even when privately disagreeing with her views . He had an easy @-@ going manner and little interest in politics ; his appointment as Lord High Admiral in 1702 was largely honorary . 
 Anne 's seventeen pregnancies by George resulted in twelve miscarriages or stillbirths , four infant deaths , and a chronically sick son , William , who died at the age of eleven . Despite the history of their children , George and Anne 's marriage was a strong one . George died aged 55 from a recurring and chronic lung disease and was buried in Westminster Abbey . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George was born in Copenhagen Castle , and was the younger son of King Frederick III of Denmark and Norway and Sophie Amalie of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg . His mother was the sister of Ernest Augustus , Duke of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg , later Elector of Hanover . From 1661 , his governor was Otto Grote , later Hanoverian minister to Denmark . Grote was " more courtier and statesman than educator " and when he left for the Hanoverian court in 1665 , he was replaced by the more effective Christen <unk> . George received military training , and undertook a Grand Tour of Europe , spending eight months in 1668 – 69 in France and mid @-@ 1669 in England . His father died in 1670 , while George was in Italy , and George 's elder brother , Christian V , inherited the Danish throne . George returned home through Germany . He travelled through Germany again in 1672 – 73 , to visit two of his sisters , Anna Sophia and Wilhelmine Ernestine , who were married to the electoral princes of Saxony and the Palatinate . 
 In 1674 , George was a candidate for the Polish elective throne , for which he was backed by King Louis XIV of France . George 's staunch Lutheranism was a barrier to election in Roman Catholic Poland , and John Sobieski was chosen instead . In 1677 , George served with distinction with his elder brother Christian in the Scanian War against Sweden . His brother was captured by the Swedes at the Battle of Landskrona , and George " cut his way through the enemies ' numbers , and rescued him at the imminent danger of his own life . " 
 As a Protestant , George was considered a suitable partner for the niece of King Charles II of England , Lady Anne . Although they were distantly related ( second cousins once removed ; they were both descended from King Frederick II of Denmark ) , they had never met . George was hosted by Charles II in London in 1669 , but Anne had been in France at the time of George 's visit . Both Denmark and Britain were Protestant countries , and Louis XIV was keen on an Anglo @-@ Danish alliance to contain the power of the Dutch Republic . Anne 's uncle Laurence Hyde , 1st Earl of Rochester , and the English Secretary of State for the Northern Department , Robert Spencer , 2nd Earl of Sunderland , negotiated a marriage treaty with the Danes in secret , to prevent the plans leaking to the Dutch . Anne 's father , James , Duke of York , welcomed the marriage because it diminished the influence of his other son @-@ in @-@ law , Dutch Stadtholder William III of Orange , who was naturally unhappy with the match . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 George and Anne were married on 28 July 1683 in the Chapel Royal at St James 's Palace , London , by Henry Compton , Bishop of London . The guests included King Charles II , Queen Catherine , and the Duke and Duchess of York . Anne was voted a parliamentary allowance of £ 20 @,@ 000 a year , while George received £ 10 @,@ 000 a year from his Danish estates , although payments from Denmark were often late or incomplete . King Charles gave them a set of buildings in the Palace of Whitehall known as the Cockpit ( near the site of what is now Downing Street in Westminster ) as their London residence . 
 George was not ambitious , and hoped to live a quiet life of domesticity with his wife . He wrote to a friend : " We talk here of going to tea , of going to Winchester , and everything else except sitting still all summer , which was the height of my ambition . God send me a quiet life somewhere , for I shall not be long able to bear this perpetual motion . " 
 Within months of the marriage , Anne was pregnant but the baby , a girl , was stillborn in May . Anne recovered at the spa town of Tunbridge Wells , and over the next two years , she gave birth to two daughters in quick succession , Mary and Anne Sophia . In early 1687 , within a matter of days , George and his two young daughters caught smallpox , and Anne suffered another miscarriage . George recovered , but both his daughters died . Lady Russell wrote that George and Anne had " taken [ the deaths ] very heavily . The first relief of that sorrow proceeded from the threatening of a greater , the Prince being so ill of a fever . I never heard any relation more moving than that of seeing them together . Sometimes they wept , sometimes they mourned in words ; then sat silent , hand in hand ; he sick in bed , and she the <unk> nurse to him that can be imagined . " He returned to Denmark for a two @-@ month visit in mid @-@ 1687 , while Anne remained in England . Later that year , after his return , Anne gave birth to another dead child , this time a son . 
 In February 1685 , King Charles II died without legitimate issue , and George 's father @-@ in @-@ law , the Roman Catholic Duke of York , became king as James II in England and Ireland and James VII in Scotland . George was appointed to the Privy Council and invited to attend Cabinet meetings , although he had no power to alter or affect decisions . William of Orange refused to attend James 's coronation largely because George would take precedence over him . Although they were both sons @-@ in @-@ law of King James , George was also the son and brother of a king and so outranked William , who was an elected stadtholder of a republic . 
 Anne 's older sister Mary had moved to the Netherlands after her marriage to William of Orange . Protestant opposition to James was therefore increasingly focused around Anne and George instead of Mary , who was heiress presumptive . The social and political grouping centred on George and Anne was known as the " Cockpit Circle " after their London residence . On 5 November 1688 , William invaded England in an action , known as the " Glorious Revolution " , which ultimately deposed King James . George was forewarned by the Danish envoy in London , Frederick Gersdorff , that William was assembling an invasion fleet . George informed Gersdorff that James 's army was disaffected , and as a result he would refuse any command under James , but only serve as an uncommissioned volunteer . Gersdorff 's alternative plan to evacuate George and Anne to Denmark was rejected by George . George accompanied the King 's troops to Salisbury in mid @-@ November , but other nobles and their soldiers soon deserted James for William . At each defection , George apparently exclaimed , " Est @-@ il possible ? " ( Is it possible ? ) . He abandoned James on 24 November , and sided with William . " So ' Est @-@ il possible ' is gone too " , James supposedly remarked . In his memoirs , James dismissed George 's defection as trivial , saying the loss of one good trooper was of more consequence , but Gersdorff claimed the defection greatly perturbed the King . The defection of George and other nobles was instrumental in whittling away the King 's support . In December , James fled to France , and early the following year William and Mary were declared joint monarchs , with Anne as heiress presumptive . In early April 1689 , William assented to a bill naturalizing George as an English subject , and George was created Duke of Cumberland , Earl of Kendal and Baron of <unk> ( Wokingham ) by the new monarchs . He took his seat in the House of Lords on 20 April 1689 , being introduced by the Dukes of Somerset and Ormonde . 
 = = Duke of Cumberland = = 
 The mistrust between George and William was set aside during the revolution of 1688 – 89 but dogged relations during the latter 's reign . George held mortgages on <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , Schleswig @-@ Holstein , which he surrendered to the Duke of Holstein as part of the peace of Altona of 1689 negotiated by William between Denmark and Sweden . William agreed to pay George interest and the capital in compensation , but George remained unpaid . During the military campaign against James 's supporters in Ireland , George accompanied the Williamite troops at his own expense , but was excluded from command , and was even refused permission to travel in his brother @-@ in @-@ law 's coach . <unk> from the army by William , George sought to join the navy , without rank , but was again thwarted by his brother @-@ in @-@ law . When William 's Dutch guards failed to salute George , Anne assumed they were acting under orders . George and Anne retired from court . Some degree of reconciliation was achieved following Queen Mary 's sudden and unexpected death from smallpox in 1694 , which made Anne heiress apparent . In November 1699 , William finally recommended that Parliament pay the mortgage debt to George , and in early 1700 , the debt was honoured . 
 By 1700 , Anne had been pregnant at least seventeen times ; twelve times , she miscarried or gave birth to stillborn children , and two of their five children born alive died within a day . The only one of the couple 's children to survive infancy — Prince William , Duke of Gloucester — died in July 1700 at the age of 11 . With Gloucester 's death , Anne was the only person in the line of succession to the throne , as established by the " Glorious Revolution " . To extend the line and secure the Protestant succession , Parliament passed the Act of Settlement 1701 , which designated William and Anne 's nearest Protestant cousins , the House of Hanover , as the next in line after Anne . 
 George did not play a senior role in government until his wife Anne succeeded as queen on William 's death in 1702 . George was the chief mourner at William 's funeral . Anne appointed him generalissimo of all English military forces on 17 April , and Lord High Admiral , the official but nominal head of the Royal Navy , on 20 May . Actual power at the Admiralty was held by George Churchill , whose elder brother was John Churchill , 1st Duke of Marlborough , a great friend of Anne 's and the captain @-@ general of English land forces . Prince George had known the Churchills for years : another brother Charles Churchill , had been one of his gentlemen of the bedchamber in Denmark , and Marlborough had accompanied George on his journey from Denmark to England for his marriage to Anne in 1683 . His secretary in the 1680s was Colonel Edward Griffith , brother @-@ in @-@ law of the Duchess of Marlborough , who was Anne 's close confidante and friend . George followed William III as Captain @-@ General of the Honourable Artillery Company , and was made Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports . Anne failed , however , in her attempts to persuade the States General of the Netherlands to elect her husband captain @-@ general of all Dutch forces , to maintain the unified command of the Maritime Powers that William had held . 
 Anne obtained a parliamentary allowance of £ 100 @,@ 000 a year for George in the event of her death . The bill sped through the House of Commons easily but it was only narrowly passed by the House of Lords . Marlborough supported the bill , but one of the lords against was Marlborough 's son @-@ in @-@ law , Charles Spencer , 3rd Earl of Sunderland . Marlborough dissuaded her from asking Parliament to make " her dearly loved husband King Consort " . 
 Generally , during her reign , Anne and her husband spent the winter at Kensington and St James 's Palaces , and the summer at Windsor Castle or Hampton Court Palace , where the air was fresher . George had recurrent asthma , and the cleaner air in the country was better for his breathing . They visited the spa town of Bath , Somerset , in mid @-@ 1702 , on the advice of George 's doctors , and again in mid @-@ 1703 . They occasionally visited Newmarket , Suffolk , to view the horse racing . On one visit , Anne bought George a horse , Leeds , for the vast sum of a thousand guineas . 
 At the end of 1702 , the Occasional Conformity Bill was introduced to Parliament . The bill aimed to disqualify Protestant Dissenters from public office by closing a loophole in the Test Acts , legislation that restricted public office to Anglican conformists . The existing law permitted nonconformists to take office if they took Anglican communion once a year . Anne was in favour of the measure , and forced George to vote for the bill in the House of Lords , even though , being a practising Lutheran , he was an occasional conformist himself . As he cast his vote , he reportedly told an opponent of the bill , " My heart is vid you " [ sic ] . The bill did not gather sufficient parliamentary support and was eventually dropped . The following year , the bill was revived , but Anne withheld support , fearing its reintroduction was a deliberate pretence to cause a quarrel between the two main political groups : the Tories ( who supported the bill ) and the Whigs ( who opposed it ) . Once again it failed . George never became a member of the Church of England , which was headed by his wife throughout her reign . He remained Lutheran even after her accession , and had his own personal chapel . 
 In the first years of Anne 's reign , the Whigs gained more power and influence at the expense of the Tories . In his capacity as Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports , George held influence in parliamentary boroughs on the south coast of England , which he used to support Whig candidates in the general election of 1705 . In that year 's election for Speaker of the House of Commons , George and Anne supported a Whig candidate , John Smith . George instructed his secretary , George Clarke , who was a Member of Parliament , to vote for Smith , but Clarke refused , instead supporting the Tory candidate William Bromley . Clarke was sacked , and Smith was elected . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 In March and April 1706 , George was seriously ill . There was blood in his sputum , but he seemed to recover , although he was too ill to attend a thanksgiving service at St Paul 's Cathedral in June for a British victory in the Battle of Ramillies . He missed another thanksgiving service in May 1707 , to celebrate the union of England and Scotland , as he was recuperating at Hampton Court . 
 The Scilly naval disaster of 1707 , in which a fleet commanded by Sir Cloudesley Shovell foundered , highlighted mismanagement at the Admiralty , for which George was nominally responsible . Pressure grew to replace Admiral Churchill with someone more dynamic . By October 1708 , five powerful politicians , known as the Whig Junto — Lords Somers , Halifax , Orford , Wharton and Sunderland — were clamouring for the removal of both Prince George and Churchill . Marlborough wrote to his brother telling him to resign , but Churchill refused , protected by Prince George . 
 Amid the political pressure , George was on his deathbed , suffering from severe asthma and dropsy . He died at 1 : 30 p.m. on 28 October 1708 at Kensington Palace . The Queen was devastated . James Brydges wrote to General Cadogan , " His death has flung the Queen into an unspeakable grief . She never left him till he was dead , but continued kissing him the very moment his breath went out of his body , and ' twas with a great deal of difficulty my Lady Marlborough prevailed upon her to leave him . " Anne wrote to her nephew , Frederick IV of Denmark , " the loss of such a husband , who loved me so dearly and so devotedly , is too crushing for me to be able to bear it as I ought . " Anne was desperate to stay at Kensington with the body of her husband , but under pressure from the Duchess of Marlborough , she reluctantly left Kensington for St James 's Palace . Anne resented the Duchess 's intrusive actions , which included removing a portrait of George from the Queen 's bedchamber and then refusing to return it in the belief that it was natural " to avoid seeing of papers or anything that belonged to one that one loved when they were just dead " . Anne and the Duchess had been very close , but their friendship had become strained over political differences . The immediate aftermath of George 's death damaged their relationship further . He was buried privately at midnight on 13 November in Westminster Abbey . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Anne refused initially to appoint a new Lord High Admiral , and insisted on carrying out the duties of the office herself , without appointing a member of the government to take George 's place . She burst into tears on the first occasion she was brought papers to sign in George 's stead . Undeterred , the Junto demanded the appointment of Lord Orford , a member of the Junto and one of Prince George 's leading critics , as First Lord of the Admiralty . Admiral Churchill retired , and Anne appointed the moderate Tory Lord Pembroke to lead the Admiralty , instead of a Whig . The Junto Whigs Somers and Wharton , however , were appointed to the Cabinet in Pembroke 's vacated posts of Lord President of the Council and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland . The Whigs were still dissatisfied , and continued to pressure Pembroke and the Queen . Pembroke resigned after less than a year in office . Another month of arguments followed before the Queen finally consented to put Orford in control of the Admiralty as First Lord in November 1709 . 
 = = = Personal traits and portrayal = = = 
 Charles II , Anne 's uncle , famously said of Prince George , " I have tried him drunk , and I have tried him sober and there is nothing in him " . He was quiet and self @-@ effacing . John Macky thought him " of a familiar , easy disposition with a good sound understanding but modest in showing it ... very fat , loves news , his bottle & the Queen . " In making fun of George 's asthma , Lord Mulgrave said the Prince was forced to breathe hard in case people mistook him for dead and buried him . By the time of Queen Victoria , George had a reputation as a dullard , and was the target of disdain . Victoria hoped her own husband , Prince Albert , would never fill the " subordinate part played by the very stupid and insignificant husband of Queen Anne " . In the 1930s , Winston Churchill said he " mattered very little " , except to Anne . 
 He had little impact on the running of the navy , but he was interested enough in navigation and welfare at sea to sponsor the publication of John Flamsteed 's Observations in 1704 . He was not one of the most colourful political characters of his day — he was content to spend his time building model ships — but he was a loyal and supportive husband to Queen Anne . Their marriage was a devoted , loving and faithful one , though beset by personal tragedy . 
 The previous husband of a British queen regnant , William of Orange , had become king , refusing to take a subordinate rank to Mary . William and Mary had exemplified the traditional gender roles of seventeenth @-@ century Europe : Mary was the dutiful wife and William held the power . George and Anne , however , reversed the roles : George was the dutiful husband and it was Anne who exercised the royal prerogatives . William had assumed incorrectly that George would use his marriage to Anne as a means of building a separate power base in Britain , but George never challenged his wife 's authority and never strove to accrue influence . Anne occasionally used the image of wifely virtue to escape unpalatable situations by claiming , as a woman , she knew " nothing except what the prince tells me " , but it was an artifice . Husbands had a legal right to their wife 's property , and it was argued that it was unnatural and against the church 's teachings for a man to be subject to his wife . George made no such claim or demand ; he was content to remain a prince and duke . " I am her Majesty 's subject " , he said , " I shall do naught but what she commands me . " In the words of historian Anne Somerset , " the fact that Prince George was widely regarded as a nonentity helped reconcile people to his anomalous status , and so , almost by accident , George achieved a major advance for feminism . " Winston Churchill wrote that he " was a fine @-@ looking man , tall , blond , and good @-@ natured ... He was neither clever nor learned — a simple , normal man without envy or ambition , and disposed by remarkable appetite and thirst for all the pleasures of the table . Charles 's well @-@ known verdict ... does not do justice to the homely virtues and unfailing good @-@ humour of his staid and trustworthy character . " 
 The Prince of Denmark 's March by Jeremiah Clarke was written in his honour , and Prince George 's County , Maryland , was named after him in 1696 . Portraits by Sir Godfrey Kneller are at the National Maritime Museum in Greenwich , Drumlanrig Castle in Dumfriesshire , and ( in a double portrait with George Clarke ) All Souls College , Oxford . Portraits in Denmark include one by Willem Wissing in the <unk> @-@ <unk> collection and one by Karel van Mander in the national collection at Frederiksborg Palace . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles = = = 
 2 April 1653 – 10 April 1689 : His Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark and Norway 
 10 April 1689 – 28 October 1708 : His Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark and Norway , Duke of Cumberland 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 R af E : Knight of the Elephant , from birth 
 KG : Knight of the Garter , 1 January 1684 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 The royal coat of arms of Denmark with a label of three points Argent , each with three Ermine points . The whole surmounted by a crown of a prince of Denmark . His crest was " out of a coronet Or , a demi @-@ lion rampant guardant Azure , crowned of the first " . 
 = = Issue = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = History of Bristol = 
 Bristol is a city with a population of nearly half a million people in south west England , situated between Somerset and Gloucestershire on the tidal River Avon . It has been amongst the country 's largest and most economically and culturally important cities for eight centuries . The Bristol area has been settled since the Stone Age and there is evidence of Roman occupation . A mint was established in the Saxon burgh of Brycgstow by the 10th century and the town rose to prominence in the Norman era , gaining a charter and county status in 1373 . The change in the form of the name ' Bristol ' is due to the local pronunciation of ' ow ' as ' ol ' . 
 Maritime connections to Wales , Ireland , Iceland , western France , Spain Portugal brought a steady increase in trade in wool , fish , wine and grain during the Middle Ages . Bristol became a city in 1542 and trade across the Atlantic developed . The city was captured by Royalist troops and then recaptured for Parliament during the English Civil War . During the 17th and 18th centuries the transatlantic slave trade and the Industrial Revolution brought further prosperity . Edmund Burke , MP for Bristol , supported the American Revolution and free trade . Prominent reformers such as Mary Carpenter and Hannah More campaigned against the slave trade . 
 The late 18th and early 19th centuries saw the construction of a floating harbour , advances in shipbuilding and further industrialisation with the growth of the glass , paper , soap and chemical industries aided by the establishment of Bristol as the terminus of the Great Western Railway by I. K. Brunel . In the early 20th century , Bristol was in the forefront of aircraft manufacture and the city had become an important financial centre and high technology hub by the beginning of the 21st century . 
 = = Pre @-@ Norman = = 
 = = = Palaeolithic and Iron age = = = 
 There is evidence of settlement in the Bristol area from the palaeolithic era , with 60 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old archaeological finds at Shirehampton and St Annes . Stone tools made from flint , chert , sandstone and quartzite have been found in terraces of the River Avon , most notably in the neighbourhoods of Shirehampton and Pill . There are Iron Age hill forts near the city , at Leigh Woods and Clifton Down on either side of the Avon Gorge , and at <unk> , near Henbury . Bristol was at that time part of the territory of the Dobunni . Evidence of Iron Age farmsteads has been found at excavations throughout Bristol , including a settlement at Filwood . There are also indications of seasonal occupation of the salt marshes at Hallen on the Severn estuary . 
 = = = Roman era = = = 
 During the Roman era there was a settlement named Abona at the present Sea Mills ; this was important enough to feature in the 3rd @-@ century Antonine Itinerary which documents towns and distances in the Roman empire , and was connected to Bath by a road . Archaeological excavations at Abona have found a street pattern , shops , cemeteries and wharves , indicating that the town served as a port . Another settlement at what is now Inns Court , Filwood , had possibly developed from earlier Iron Age farmsteads . There were also isolated villas and small settlements throughout the area , notably Kings Weston Roman Villa and another at Brislington . 
 = = = Saxon era = = = 
 A minster was founded in the 8th century at Westbury on Trym and is mentioned in a charter of 804 . In 946 an outlaw named <unk> killed Edmund I in a brawl at a feast in the royal palace at <unk> , which lies about six miles from Bristol . The town of Bristol was founded on a low hill between the rivers Frome and Avon at some time before the early 11th century . The main evidence for this is a coin of <unk> issued c . 1010 . This shows that the settlement must have been a market town and the name Brycg stowe indicates " place by the bridge " . It is believed that the Bristol L ( the tendency for the local accent to add a letter L to the end of some words ) is what changed the name Brycg stowe to the current name Bristol . 
 It appears that St Peter 's church , the remains of which stand in modern Castle Park , may have been another minster , possibly with 8th @-@ century origins . By the time of Domesday the church held three hides of land , which was a sizeable holding for a mere parish church . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records that in 1052 Harold Godwinson took ship to Brycgstow and later in 1062 he took ships from the town to subdue the forces of Gruffydd ap Llywelyn of Wales , indicating the status of the town as a port . 
 Brycg stowe was a major centre for the Anglo @-@ Saxon slave trade . Men , women and children captured in Wales or northern England were traded through Bristol to Dublin as slaves . From there the Viking rulers of Dublin would sell them on throughout the known world . The Saxon bishop of Worcester , Wulfstan , whose diocese included Bristol , preached against the trade regularly and eventually it was forbidden by the crown , though it carried on in secret for many years . 
 = = Middle Ages = = 
 = = = Norman era = = = 
 At some time after the Norman conquest of England in 1066 a motte @-@ and @-@ bailey was erected on the present site of Castle Park . Bristol was held by Geoffrey de Montbray , Bishop of Countances , one of the knights who accompanied William the Conqueror . William ordered stone castles to be built so it is likely that the first parts of Bristol Castle were built by Geoffrey in his reign . After the Conqueror 's death ( 1087 ) , Geoffrey joined the rebellion against William Rufus . Using Bristol as his headquarters , he burned Bath and ravaged Somerset before submitting to Rufus . He eventually returned to Normandy and died at Coutances in 1093 . 
 Rufus created the Honour of Gloucester , which included Bristol , from his mother Queen Matilda 's estates and granted it to Robert Fitzhamon . Fitzhamon enlarged and strengthened Bristol castle and in the latter years of the 11th century conquered and subdued much of south and west Wales . His daughter Mabel was married in 1114 to Henry I 's bastard son Robert of Caen . Her dowry was a large part of her father 's Gloucestershire and Welsh estate and Robert of Caen became the first Earl of Gloucester , c . 1122 . He is believed to have been responsible for completing Bristol castle . 
 In 1135 Henry I died and the Earl of Gloucester rallied to the support of his sister Matilda against Stephen of Blois who had seized the throne on Henry 's death . Stephen attempted to lay siege to Robert at Bristol in 1138 but gave up the attempt as the castle appeared impregnable . When Stephen was captured in 1141 he was imprisoned in the castle , but when Robert was captured by Stephen 's forces , Matilda was forced to exchange Stephen for Robert . Her son Henry , later to become Henry II of England , was kept safe in the castle , guarded and educated by his uncle Robert . The castle was later taken into royal hands , and Henry III spent lavishly on it , adding a barbican before the main west gate , a gate tower , and magnificent hall . 
 The Earl of Gloucester had founded the Benedictine priory of St James in 1137 . In 1140 St Augustine 's Abbey was founded by Robert Fitzharding , a wealthy Bristolian who had loyally supported the Earl and Matilda in the war . As a reward for this support he would later be made Lord of Berkeley . The abbey was a monastery of Augustinian canons . In 1148 the abbey church was dedicated by the bishops of Exeter , Llandaff , and St. Asaph , and during Fitzharding 's lifetime the abbey also built the chapter house and gatehouse . 
 In 1172 , following the subjugation of the Pale in Ireland , Henry II gave Bristolians the right to reside in and trade from Dublin . A surviving Jewish ritual bath or mikveh , Jacob 's Well , indicates that there was a small Jewish community in the city in the early Middle Ages . 
 = = = Later middle ages = = = 
 By the 13th century Bristol had become a busy port . Woollen cloth became its main export during the fourteenth to fifteenth century , while wine from Gascony and Bordeaux , was the principal import . In addition the town conducted an extensive trade with the Anglo @-@ Irish ports of southern Ireland , such as Waterford and Cork , as well as with Portugal . From about 1420 @-@ 1480 the port also traded with Iceland , from which it imported a type of freeze @-@ dried cod called ' stockfish ' . In 1147 Bristol men and ships had assisted in the Siege of Lisbon , which led to that city 's recapture from the Moors . A stone bridge was built across the Avon , c . 1247 and between the years of 1240 and 1247 a Great Ditch was constructed in St Augustine 's Marsh to straighten out the course of the River Frome and provide more space for berthing ships . 
 Redcliffe and Bedminster were incorporated into the city in 1373 . Edward III proclaimed " that the town of Bristol with its suburbs and precincts shall henceforth be separate from the counties of Gloucester and Somerset and be in all things exempt both by land by sea , and that it should be a county by itself , to be called the county of Bristol in perpetuity , " This meant that disputes could be settled in courts in Bristol rather than at Gloucester , or at Ilminster for areas south of the Avon which had been part of Somerset . The city walls extended into Redcliffe and across the eastern part of the march which now became the Town Marsh . The major surviving part of the walls is visible adjacent to the only remaining gateway under the tower of the Church of St John the Baptist . 
 By the mid @-@ 14th century Bristol is considered to have been England 's third @-@ largest town ( after London and York ) , with an estimated 15 – 20 @,@ 000 inhabitants on the eve of the Black Death of 1348 – 49 . The plague inflicted a prolonged demographic setback , with the population estimated at between 10 @,@ 000 and 12 @,@ 000 during the 15th and 16th centuries . 
 One of the first great merchants of Bristol was William Canynge . Born c . 1399 , he was five times mayor of the town and twice represented it as an MP . He is said to have owned ten ships and employed over 800 sailors . In later life he became a priest and spent a considerable part of his fortune in rebuilding St Mary Redcliffe church , which had been severely damaged by lightning in 1446 . 
 The end of the Hundred Years War in 1453 meant that Britain , and thus Bristol , lost its access to Gascon wines and so imports of Spanish and Portuguese wines increased . Imports from Ireland included fish , hides and cloth ( probably linen ) . Exports to Ireland included broadcloth , foodstuffs , clothing and metals . 
 = = = Exploration = = = 
 In 1497 Bristol was the starting point for John Cabot 's voyage of exploration to North America . For many years Bristol merchants had bought freeze @-@ dried cod , called stockfish , from Iceland for consumption in England . However the Hanseatic League , which was trying to control North Atlantic trade at this time , sought to cut off supplies to English merchants . It has often been suggested that this drove Bristol 's merchants to look West for new sources of cod fish . On the other hand , while Bristol merchants did largely abandon Iceland in the late @-@ 15th century , Hull merchants continued to trade there . Moreover , recent research has shown that England 's fisheries off Iceland actually grew significantly from the 1490s , albeit the center for this activity shifted from Bristol to East Anglia . This makes it hard to sustain the argument that Bristol merchants were somehow ' pushed out ' of Iceland . 
 In 1481 two local men , Thomas Croft and John Jay , sent off ships looking for the mythical island of Hy @-@ Brasil . There was no mention of the island being discovered but Croft was prosecuted for illegal exports of salt , on the grounds that , as a customs officer , he should not have engaged in trade . Professor David Beers Quinn , whose theories form the basis for a variety of popular histories , suggested that the explorers may have discovered the Grand Banks off Newfoundland , waters rich in cod . 
 John Cabot was sponsored by Henry VII on his voyage in 1497 , looking for a new route to the Orient . Having discovered North America instead , on his return Cabot spoke of the great quantities of cod to be found near the new land . In 1498 Cabot set sail again from Bristol with an expedition of five ships . Whether he returned from this voyage is uncertain – although recent research conducted at the University of Bristol , suggests that he might . 
 From 1499 to 1508 a number of other expeditions were launched from Bristol to the ' New found land ' , the earliest being undertaken by William Weston . One of these , led by John Cabot 's son , Sebastian Cabot , explored down the coast of North America until he was ‘ almost in the latitude of Gibraltar ’ and ‘ almost the longitude of Cuba ’ . This would suggest that he reached as far as the Chesapeake , close to what is now Washington D.C. 
 = = Early modern = = 
 = = = Tudor and Stuart periods = = = 
 Bristol was made a city in 1542 , with the former Abbey of St Augustine becoming Bristol Cathedral , following the Dissolution of the Monasteries by Henry VIII . The Dissolution also saw the surrender to the king of all of Bristol 's friaries and monastic hospitals , together with St James ' Priory , St Mary Magdalen nunnery , a Cistercian abbey at Kingswood and the College at Westbury on Trym . In the case of the friaries at Greyfriars and Whitefriars , the priors had fled before the arrival of the royal commissioners , and at Whitefriars a succession of departing priors had plundered the friary of its valuables . Although the commissioners had not been able to point to as much religious malpractice in Bristol as elsewhere , there is no record of Bristolians raising any objections to the royal seizures . In 1541 Bristol 's civic leaders took the opportunity of buying up lands and properties formerly belonging to St Mark 's Hospital , St Mary Magdalen , Greyfriars and Whitefriars for a total of a thousand pounds . Bristol thereby became the only municipality in the country which has its own chapel , at St Mark 's . 
 Bristol Grammar School was established in 1532 by the Thorne family and in 1596 John Carr established Queen Elizabeth 's Hospital , a <unk> school charged with ' the education of poor children and orphans ' . 
 Trade continued to grow : by the mid @-@ 16th century imports from Europe included , wine , olive oil , iron , figs and other dried fruits and dyes ; exports included cloth ( both cotton and wool ) , lead and hides . Many of the city 's leading merchants were involved in smuggling at this time , illicitly exporting goods like foodstuffs and leather , while under @-@ declaring imports of wine . 
 In 1574 Elizabeth I visited the city during her Royal Progress through the western counties . The city burgesses spent over one thousand pounds on preparations and entertainments , most of which was raised by special rate assessments . In 1577 the explorer Martin Frobisher arrived in the city with two ships and samples of ore , which proved to be worthless . He also brought , according to Latimer " three savages , doubtless <unk> , clothed in deerskins , but all of them died within a month of their arrival . " 
 Bristol sent three ships to the Royal Navy fleet against the Spanish Armada in 1588 , and also supplied two levies of men to the defending land forces . Despite appeals to the Privy Council no reimbursement was made for these supplies . The corporation also had to repair the walls and gates of the city . The castle had fallen into disuse in the late Tudor era , but the City authorities had no control over royal property and the precincts became a refuge for lawbreakers . 
 = = = English Civil War = = = 
 In 1630 the city corporation bought the castle and when the First English Civil War broke out in 1642 , the city took the Parliamentary side and partly restored the fortifications . However Royalist troops under the command of Prince Rupert captured Bristol on 26 July 1643 , in the process causing extensive damage to both town and castle . The Royalist forces captured large amounts of booty and also eight armed merchant vessels which became the nucleus of the Royalist fleet . Workshops in the city became arms factories , providing muskets for the Royalist army . 
 In the summer of 1645 , Royalist forces were defeated by the New Model Army at the Battle of Langport , in Somerset . Following further victories at Bridgwater and Sherborne , Sir Thomas Fairfax marched on Bristol . Prince Rupert returned to organise the defence of the city . The Parliamentary forces besieged the city and after three weeks attacked , eventually forcing Rupert to surrender on 10 September . The First Civil War ended the following year . There were no further military actions in Bristol during the second and third civil wars . In 1656 , Oliver Cromwell ordered the destruction of the castle . 
 = = = Slave trade = = = 
 William de la <unk> , a wealthy Bristol merchant has been identified as the first recorded English slave traders . Of Gascon origin , in 1480 he was one of the four <unk> granted a licence " to trade in any parts " . Renewed growth came with the 17th @-@ century rise of England 's American colonies and the rapid 18th @-@ century expansion of Bristol 's part in the " Triangular trade " in Africans taken for slavery in the Americas . Over 2 @,@ 000 slaving voyages were made by Bristol ships between the late 17th century and abolition in 1807 , carrying an estimated half a million people from Africa to the Americas in brutal conditions . Average profits per voyage were seventy percent and more than fifteen per cent of the Africans transported died or were murdered on the Middle Passage . Some slaves were brought to Bristol , from the Caribbean ; notable amongst these were Scipio Africanus , buried at Henbury and Pero Jones brought to Bristol by slave trader and plantation owner John Pinney . 
 The slave trade and the consequent demand for cheap brass ware for export to Africa caused a boom in the copper and brass manufacturing industries of the Avon valley , which in turn encouraged the progress of the Industrial Revolution in the area . Prominent manufacturers such as Abraham Darby and William Champion developed extensive works between <unk> and Keynsham which used ores from the Mendips and coal from the North Somerset coalfield . Water power from tributaries of the Avon drove the hammers in the brass batteries , until the development of steam power in the later 18th century . Glass , soap , sugar , paper and chemical industries also developed along the Avon valley . 
 Edmund Burke was elected as Whig Member of Parliament for Bristol in 1774 and campaigned for free trade , Catholic emancipation and the rights of the American colonists , but he angered his merchant sponsors with his detestation of the slave trade and lost the seat in 1780 . 
 Anti @-@ slavery campaigners , inspired by Non @-@ conformist preachers such as John Wesley , started some of the earliest campaigns against the practice . Prominent local opponents of both the trade and the institution of slavery itself included Anne Yearsley , Hannah More , Harry <unk> , Mary Carpenter , Robert Southey , William Wordsworth and Samuel Coleridge . The campaign itself proved to be the beginning of movements for reform and women 's emancipation . 
 = = 18th and 19th centuries = = 
 The Bristol Corporation of the Poor was established at the end of the 17th century and a workhouse , to provide work for the poor and shelter for those needing charity , was established , adjacent to the Bridewell . John Wesley founded the very first Methodist Chapel , The New Room in Broadmead in 1739 , which is still in use in the 21st century . Wesley had come to Bristol at the invitation of George Whitfield . He preached in the open air to miners and <unk> in Kingswood and Hanham . 
 Bristol Bridge , the only way of crossing the river without using a ferry , was rebuilt between 1764 and 1768 . The earlier medieval bridge was too narrow and congested to cope with the amount of traffic that needed to use it . A toll was charged to pay for the works , and when , in 1793 , the toll was extended for a further period of time the Bristol Bridge Riot ensued . 11 people were killed and 45 injured , making it one of the worst riots of the 18th century . 
 Competition from Liverpool from 1760 , the disruption of maritime commerce through war with France ( 1793 ) and the abolition of the slave trade ( 1807 ) contributed to the city 's failure to keep pace with the newer manufacturing centres of the North and Midlands . The cotton industry failed to develop in the city ; sugar , brass and glass production went into decline . Abraham Darby left Bristol for Coalbrookdale when his advanced ideas for iron production received no backing from local investors . Buchanan and <unk> cite " a certain complacency and inertia [ from the prominent mercantile families ] which was a serious handicap in the adjustment to new conditions in the Industrial Revolution period . " 
 The long passage up the heavily tidal Avon Gorge , which had made the port highly secure during the Middle Ages , had become a liability which the construction of a new " Floating Harbour " ( designed by William Jessop ) in 1804 – 09 failed to overcome . Nevertheless , Bristol 's population ( 61 @,@ 000 in 1801 ) grew fivefold during the 19th century , supported by growing commerce . It was particularly associated with the leading engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel , who designed the Great Western Railway between Bristol and London , two pioneering Bristol @-@ built steamships , the SS Great Western and the SS Great Britain , and the Clifton Suspension Bridge . 
 The new middle class , led by those who agitated against the slave trade , in the city began to engage in charitable works . Notable were Mary Carpenter , who founded ragged schools and reformatories , and George Müller who founded an orphanage in 1836 . Badminton School was started in Badminton House , Clifton in 1858 and Clifton College was established in 1862 . University College , the predecessor of the University of Bristol , was founded in 1876 and the former Merchant Venturers Navigation School became the Merchant Venturers College in 1894 . This later formed the nucleus of Bristol Polytechnic , which in turn became the University of the West of England . 
 The Bristol Riots of 1831 took place after the House of Lords rejected the second Reform Bill . Local magistrate Sir Charles Wetherall , a strong opponent of the Bill , visited Bristol to open the new Assize Courts and an angry mob chased him to the Mansion House in Queen Square . The Reform Act was passed in 1832 and the city boundaries were expanded for the first time since 1373 to include " Clifton , the parishes of St. James , St. Paul , St. Philip , and parts of the parishes of Bedminster and Westbury " . 
 Bristol lies on one of the UK 's lesser coalfields , and from the 17th century collieries opened in Bristol , and what is now North Somerset and South Gloucestershire . Though these prompted the construction of the Somerset Coal Canal , and the formation of the Bristol Miners ' Association , it was difficult to make mining profitable , and the mines closed after nationalisation . 
 At the end of the 19th century the main industries were tobacco and cigarette manufacture , led by the dominant W.D. & H.O. Wills company , paper and engineering . The port facilities were migrating downstream to Avonmouth and new industrial complexes were founded there . 
 = = Modern history = = 
 The British and Colonial Aeroplane Company , which later became the Bristol Aeroplane Company , then part of the British Aircraft Company and finally BAE Systems , was founded by Sir George White , owner of Bristol Tramways in 1910 . During World War I production of the Bristol Scout and the Bristol F.2 Fighter established the reputation of the company . The main base at Filton is still a prominent manufacturing site for BAE Systems in the 21st century . The Bristol Aeroplane Company 's engine department became a subsidiary company Bristol Aero Engines , then Bristol Siddeley Engines ; and were bought by Rolls @-@ Royce Limited in 1966 , to become Rolls @-@ Royce plc which is still based at Filton . Shipbuilding in the city docks , predominately by Charles Hill & Sons , formerly <unk> , remained important until the 1970s . Other prominent industries included chocolate manufacturers J. S. Fry & Sons and wine and sherry importers John Harvey & Sons . 
 Bristol City F.C. ( formed in 1897 ) joined the Football League in 1901 and became runners up in the First Division in 1906 and losing FA Cup finalists in 1909 . Rivals Bristol Rovers F.C. ( formed in 1883 ) joined the league in 1920 . Gloucestershire County Cricket Club was formed in 1870 and have been runners up in the County Championship many times since . 
 Bristol City Council built over 15 @,@ 000 houses between 1919 and 1939 , enabling clearance of some of the worst slums in the city centre . The new estates were at Southmead , Knowle , Filwood Park , Sea Mills and Horfield . The city boundaries were extended to north and south to accommodate this growth . In 1926 , the Portway , a new road along the Avon Gorge built at a cost of around £ 800 @,@ 000 , was opened linking the floating harbour to the expanding docks at Avonmouth . 
 As the location of aircraft manufacture and a major port , Bristol was a target of bombing during the Bristol Blitz of World War II . Bristol 's city centre also suffered severe damage , especially in November and December 1940 , when the Broadmead area was flattened , and Hitler claimed to have destroyed the city . The original central area , near the bridge and castle , is still a park featuring two bombed out churches and some fragments of the castle . Slightly to the north , the Broadmead shopping centre and Cabot Circus were built over bomb @-@ damaged areas . 
 As with other British cities , there was immigration from various Commonwealth countries in the post war years , which did lead to some racist tension . In 1963 , a colour bar operated by Bristol Omnibus Company , which at that time refused to employ Black or Asian bus crews , was successfully challenged in the Bristol Bus Boycott , which was considered to have been instrumental in the eventual passage of the Race Relations Act 1968 . In 1980 a police raid on a cafe in St Paul 's sparked the St Pauls riot , which highlighted the alienation of the city 's ethnic minorities . 
 Bristol aviation continued to develop in post war years . The Bristol Brabazon was a large trans @-@ Atlantic airliner built in the late 1940s , based on developments in heavy bombers during the World War , but it received no sales orders and never went into production . Concorde , the first supersonic airliner was built in the 1960s , first flying in 1969 . The aircraft never achieved commercial success , but its development did lay the foundation for the successful Airbus series of airliners , parts of which are produced at Filton in the 21st century . 
 In the 1980s the financial services sector became a major employer in the city and surrounding areas , such as the business parks on the northern fringe of what was now referred to as Greater Bristol or the Bristol Urban Area comprising the city , Easton @-@ in @-@ Gordano , Frampton Cottrell and Winterbourne , Kingswood , Mangotsfield and Stoke Gifford . High technology companies such as IBM , Hewlett Packard , Toshiba , and Orange , along with creative and media enterprises become significant local employers as traditional manufacturing industries declined . 
 Like much of British post @-@ war planning , regeneration of Bristol city centre was characterised by large , cheap tower blocks , brutalist architecture and expansion of roads . Since the 1990s this trend has been reversed , with the closure of some main roads and the regeneration of the Broadmead shopping centre . In 2006 one of the city centre 's tallest post @-@ war blocks was torn down . Social housing tower blocks have also been demolished to be replaced by low rise homes . 
 The removal of the docks to Avonmouth , seven miles ( 11 km ) downstream from the city centre , relieved congestion in the central zone of Bristol and allowed substantial redevelopment of the old central dock area ( the Floating Harbour ) in the late 20th century . The deep @-@ water Royal Portbury Dock was developed opposite Avonmouth Docks in the 1970s and following privatisation of the Port of Bristol has become financially successful . 
 At one time the continued existence of the old central docks was in jeopardy as it was seen merely as derelict industry rather than an asset to be developed for public use . Since the 1980s millions of pounds have been spent regenerating the harbourside . 1999 saw the redevelopment of the city centre and the construction of Pero 's footbridge ; which now links the At @-@ Bristol science centre at Canon 's Marsh , opened in 2000 , with other Bristol tourist attractions . Private investors are also constructing studio apartment buildings . The regeneration of the Canon 's Marsh area is expected to cost £ 240 million . Crest Nicholson were the lead developers constructing 450 new flats , homes and waterside offices , under the guidance of The Harbourside Sponsors ’ Group which is a partnership between the City Council , developers , businesses , and public funders . 
 = Thomas Hinde = 
 Doctor Thomas Hinde ( July 10 , 1737 – September 28 , 1828 ) was Northern Kentucky 's first physician , a member of the British Royal Navy , an American Revolutionary , personal physician to Patrick Henry , and treated General Wolfe when he died in Quebec , Canada . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Thomas Hinde is the patriarch of the Hinde family in the United States , and many of his children , grandchildren , and other descendants became prominent historical figures . His youngest son , Thomas S. Hinde , was a notable Methodist minister and businessman , Charles T. Hinde , his grandson , was a shipping magnate , and Edmund C. Hinde , another grandson , was an adventurer . The Kavanaugh and Southgate branches of his family held elected office and positions of leadership in the Methodist church . 
 As personal physician to Patrick Henry , Hinde played a critical role in the American Revolutionary War through his vaccinations against smallpox and treatment of wounded soldiers . For his service he received a large land grant in Kentucky , where he moved with his family . Hinde was northern Kentucky 's first physician , and a memorial was erected in Campbell County , Kentucky to honor his services to the state . He died in 1828 aged 91 , which was unusually old for the time . According to Otto <unk> in 1909 , who was a famous medical doctor and medical historian , Hinde " never wrote a line in his life . " His life has been described as being like a " romance " , and he was called a " patriarch " to the American medical profession . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hinde was born in Oxfordshire , England , in July 1737 . He received a classical education in Oxfordshire and , after completing his studies , was sent to London , England to study medicine . He studied physics and surgery under Dr Thomas Brooke at Saint Thomas Hospital in London and , at the age of nineteen , was presented to the Company of Surgeons for a licence . Shortly after , he was commissioned as a Surgeons ' Mate in the Royal Navy and sailed for America with the forces commanded by General Amherst . After landing in New York on June 10 , 1757 , he spent time at Halifax and Louisbourg . Hinde spent the winter of 1758 in Halifax and assisted Amherst with the reduction of Louisburg . He was attached to the ship which bore the commander in chief , General James Wolfe , on his way to Quebec . 
 = = Death of General Wolfe = = 
 Wolfe died in Hinde 's arms during the 1759 Battle of Quebec of the Seven Years ' War . According to one source , Hinde 's relationship with General Wolfe and his experiences in Quebec were some of the most " cherished " experiences of his life . A painting of the death shows Dr Hinde feeling the pulse of the wounded Wolfe . It is an oil on canvas of the Enlightenment period . Benjamin West , who painted it , made a nearly identical painting of the same scene for King George III in 1771 . After Wolfe 's death , Hinde remained in the British Navy and was present for the reduction of Bell <unk> . Shortly after , Hinde was promoted and remained as a physician for a warship after the peace of 1763 . He eventually resigned his commission . 
 The Death of General Wolfe is currently in the collection of the National Gallery of Canada , the Royal Ontario Museum ( Canadiana art collection ) , and the William L. Clements Library at the University of Michigan . 
 = = After Quebec = = 
 After the fall of Quebec , Hinde returned briefly to England . Peace with France was reached in 1763 , and Hinde then returned to Virginia and settled . He formed a close friendship with an unnamed Virginian who persuaded him to settle in a place called Hobbs Hole in Essex County , Virginia and practice medicine . Another source states that an aged physician in Virginia wrote to Dr Thomas Brooke , Hinde 's mentor , asking Brooke to send a young physician to assist him in his practice . Brooke reportedly choose Hinde and " earnestly advised " him to " avail himself of the situation which was offered " . Hinde accepted , but moved soon after to settle in Newton , now in West Virginia , where he met his wife . After their wedding Hinde moved again and settled in Hanover County , Virginia . 
 = = Physician to Patrick Henry = = 
 In 1765 , after he settled in Virginia , Hinde became acquainted with Patrick Henry one of the founding fathers of the United States , Samuel Davis , and Lord Dunmore . Two years later he married Mary T. Hubbard , settled near Henry , and became his family physician . His association with Henry and settlement in Virginia helped Hinde become acquainted with many of the leading members of society during the period . When Hinde first met Hubbard , he found her to " possess a great flow of animal spirits , full of humor , gay and lively inner temperament and disposition , with strong powers of mind , and at the same time active and sociable " . The couple married on September 24 , 1767 . According to a biography written by George Coles in 1857 , Henry 's statesmanlike eloquence and political principles made a strong impression on Hinde and shifted him from being a staunch royalist to a " sturdy republican " . 
 Hinde took an active part in the American Revolutionary War serving as a surgeon with Patrick and in various campaigns and battles . At the time of the 1775 Gunpowder Incident , Hinde was Chief Surgeon for Patrick Henry . His involvement in it was the turning point that led him to embrace the cause of the oppressed colonies against Lord Dunmore and the English royalty . The Gunpowder Incident was a conflict early in the American Revolutionary War , between Lord Dunmore , the Royal Governor of the Colony of Virginia , and militia led by Henry . Hinde originally planned to take a front @-@ line post in Henry 's regiment , but when Henry was elected Governor , Hinde was instead appointed to inoculate all members of the continental service . Because of insufficient funds in the continental army , Hinde was forced to cover the costs of inoculations , which " seriously impaired his private fortune " . One source states that Hinde amputated limbs during the war by the " cart @-@ load " . After the war , Hinde continued to live in Hanover County for many years , primarily practicing medicine . 
 = = Military land grant = = 
 After the American Revolutionary War , Hinde moved his family from Virginia to Kentucky , having received a large land grant for his services in the war . One source describes the land grant as follows : 
 At the close of the war , having drawn no part of his salary , and from his great skill as a surgeon having endeared himself to the Virginians , in settling up his accounts he was presented with a land warrant , to be located in lands selected in Kentucky , leaving a blank within the warrant for the number of acres to filled by Dr Hinde himself . The blank was filled with twenty thousand , and placed in the hands of Patrick Henry to select and locate the lands . 
 For undisclosed reasons , Henry was unable to complete the land grant to Hinde due to surveying difficulties , who then used his nephew Hubbard Taylor to go to Kentucky , find the location , and complete the transaction . Hinde gave Taylor half of the lands for this service . The land was in Clark County , Kentucky , between Winchester and Lexington . 
 = = Conversion to Methodism = = 
 During his early years in England , Hinde was a member of the Church of England , but he abandoned the church as an adult and had become a Deist . One biographer stated that for a time Hinde " took pride and pleasure in ridiculing Christianity " . In later years , however , his religious views " underwent a radical change " . 
 In 1798 , Methodist ministers arrived in Hinde 's neighborhood and began to convert people . Susanna , one of Hinde 's daughters , converted , causing distress to the family . Hinde banished her from his home , and she went to live with her aunt forty miles away . However , this failed because the aunt had already converted , and Hinde 's wife converted soon after . Hinde became convinced that the disorder was in their heads , and treated them with medical procedures of the day , such as a " blistering plaster to the whole length of the spine , which he left on for several days " . Drake states that , through this " measure of violence , he hoped to deter her from further attendance at places of public worship " . The procedures were painful , but his wife stated afterwards that " it was a punishment , but I never was so happy in all my life " . Hinde later felt guilt for having banished his daughter and performed medical operations on his wife , and he converted to Methodism . His daughter returned home and his wife began attending Methodist gatherings regularly . Two of his daughters married traveling preachers , and another daughter converted to Methodism too . By the end of his life , Hinde was a devout Methodist . According to one account : 
 At another time he was taking a morning walk and met Gen. James Taylor , a relative by marriage , who said , ' Good @-@ morning , doctor ; where are you going ? ' ' I am going to heaven ; where are you going , general ? ' The general , at that time , had some doubts about whether his road led to the same country , and made no reply ; but it is hoped he found the way to everlasting life before he left the <unk> 
 One of Hinde 's grandchildren states that Hinde built " little houses of sticks and wood " where he would pray . The grandchildren called them " Grandpa 's prayer @-@ houses " . Hinde could be heard praying from a " considerable distance " . 
 = = Family = = 
 Hinde married Mary Todd Hubbard , the daughter of Benjamin Hubbard , an English merchant , and they were married for 61 years . They had eight children that lived to adulthood . His daughter Ann Winston Hinde married Richard Southgate on July 30 , 1799 , in Newport , Kentucky . Hinde and his family were members of the Grace Methodist Episcopal Church in Newport , Kentucky . 
 One of Hinde 's sons was Thomas S. Hinde , who was a cofounder of Mount Carmel , Illinois , and became a well @-@ respected Methodist minister . Hinde 's grandson Captain Charles T. Hinde was a successful businessman and riverboat captain . Charles was one of the principal investors in the Hotel del Coronado in San Diego , California , and inspired Frederick Hinde Zimmerman , Dr Hinde 's great @-@ grandson , to build the Grand Rapids Hotel in Mount Carmel , Illinois . 
 In his later life , Hinde lived with his daughter Mary McKinney of Newport , Kentucky . 
 = Portuguese conquest of the Jaffna kingdom = 
 The Portuguese conquest of the Jaffna kingdom occurred after Portuguese traders arrived at the rival Kotte Kingdom in the southwest of modern Sri Lanka in 1505 . Many kings of Jaffna , such as Cankili I , initially confronted the Portuguese in their attempts at converting the locals to Roman Catholicism , but eventually made peace with them . 
 By 1591 , the king of Jaffna Ethirimanna Cinkam was installed by the Portuguese . Although he was nominally a client , he resisted missionary activities and helped the interior Kandyan kingdom in its quest to get military help from South India . Eventually , a usurper named Cankili II , resisted Portuguese overlordship only to find himself ousted and hanged by Phillippe de Oliveira in 1619 . The subsequent rule by the Portuguese saw the population convert to Roman Catholicism . The population also decreased due to excessive taxation , as most people fled the core areas of the former kingdom . 
 = = Initial contact = = 
 Portuguese traders reached Sri Lanka in 1505 ; their initial forays were against the southwestern coastal Kotte kingdom , which enjoyed a lucrative monopoly on the spice trade , which was also of interest to the Portuguese . The Jaffna kingdom came to the attention of Portuguese officials in Colombo for multiple reasons , which included their interference in Roman Catholic missionary activities ( which was assumed to be supporting Portuguese interests ) , the lucrative markets and strategic benefits of Jaffna 's Vannimai chieftaincies , and their support of anti @-@ Portuguese factions within the Kotte kingdom , such as the chieftains from <unk> . By the late 16th century , Portuguese influence strengthened in the courts of the Kandyan and Kotte kingdoms and some of Jaffna 's Vannimai chieftaincies were subdued by these kings . The Jaffna kingdom functioned as a logistical base for the Kandyan kingdom , located in the central highlands without access to any seaports . They gained access to the seaports of Trincomalee and Batticaloa in the east , but the Jaffna peninsula proved more convenient as an entry port for military aid arriving from South India . Furthermore , it was feared by the Portuguese that ( due to its strategic location ) the Jaffna kingdom might become a beachhead for Dutch landings . It was king Cankili I who resisted contacts with the Portuguese , and even massacred six to seven hundred <unk> Catholics in the island of Mannar . These Catholics had been brought from India to Mannar to take over the lucrative pearl fisheries extending to Puttalam from the Jaffna kings . 
 = = Client state = = 
 The first expedition , led by Viceroy Dom Constantino de Bragança in 1560 , failed to subdue the kingdom but captured Mannar Island . Although the circumstances are unclear , by 1582 the Jaffna king was paying a tribute to the Portuguese of ten elephants or an equivalent in cash . In 1591 , during the second expedition , led by André Furtado de Mendonça , King <unk> <unk> was killed and his son Ethirimanna Cinkam was installed as the monarch . This arrangement gave the Catholic missionaries freedom of action and monopoly in elephant export to the Portuguese , which the incumbent king , however , resisted . He helped the Kandyan kingdom under kings <unk> I and Senarat ( 1604 – 35 ) during the period 1593 – 1635 with the intent of securing help from South India to resist the Portuguese . He , however , maintained autonomy of the kingdom without overtly provoking the Portuguese . 
 = = End of the Kingdom = = 
 With the death of Pararasasekaran in 1617 , Cankili II , an usurper , took control of the throne after killing the regent nominated by the Ethirimanna Cinkam . Unable to secure Portuguese acceptance of his kingship , Cankili II invited military aid from the Thanjavur Nayaks and allowed corsairs from Malabar to use a base in <unk> , hence posing a threat to Portuguese shipping routes through the Palk Strait . By June 1619 , there were two Portuguese expeditions : a naval expedition that was repulsed by the <unk> corsairs led by <unk> <unk> Nayak , and a land expedition by Phillippe de Oliveira and his army of 5000 , which was able to defeat Cankili . Cankili , along with every surviving member of the royal family , was captured and taken to Goa , where he was hanged . The remaining captives were asked to become monks or nuns in the holy orders , and as most obliged , their celibacy avoided the production of further claimants to the Jaffna throne . Although the Portuguese attempted to eliminate the Jaffna royal family through celibacy , a number of families of Sri Lankan Tamil origin claim descent from the royal family today . 
 = = Portuguese and the Kandyan kingdom = = 
 According to the Description of the Isle of Ceylon ( Amsterdam 1672 ) by the Dutch Rev. <unk> <unk> , who travelled in Sri Lanka in the 17th century. the Kingdom of <unk> consisted of the Jaffna Peninsula , the Islands off Jaffna and the Island of Mannar . But in dealing with the limitations of the kingdom , Queirós , an historian of Portuguese origin , says : 
 " This modest kingdom is not confined to the little district of <unk> because to it are also added the neighboring lands and those of the Vanni which is said to be name of the lordship which they held before we obtained <unk> of them , separated from the proceeding by a salty river and connected only in the extremity or <unk> of <unk> within which the lands of <unk> , <unk> and <unk> forming that peninsula and outside of it stretch the lands of Vanni . <unk> , from the side of Mannar to that of <unk> , being separated also from the country of <unk> in the jurisdiction of Captain of Mannar by the river <unk> ; which ( lands ) ends in the river of the Cross in the midst of the lands of Vanni and of others which stretch as far as <unk> which according to the map appears to be a large tract of country " . 
 which indicated the kings of the kingdom just prior to capitulation to the Portuguese had jurisdiction over an area corresponding to the modern Northern Province of Sri Lanka and parts of the northern half of the eastern province and that the Portuguese claimed these based on their conquest . 
 At the time , the mainland south of Elephant Pass was claimed by the King of Kandy , <unk> ; he and his troops were consistently harassing the Portuguese in the Jaffna Peninsula . His wife 's two sons , <unk> and <unk> , were also married to princesses from Jaffna . After the fall of Jaffna to the Portuguese , Senarat dispatched a 10 @,@ 000 strong army to Jaffna under the command of <unk> <unk> . The Portuguese withdrew and the Kandyan army occupied Jaffna . The Portuguese General Constantino de Sá de Noronha later attacked with reinforcements from Colombo and defeated <unk> <unk> 's army and seized Jaffna . According to Portuguese and Dutch publications , the last battle for Jaffna was fought between the King of Kandyan kingdom and the Portuguese , and the Europeans seized Jaffna from the Kandyan king . Following Portuguese defeat by the Dutch , the Jaffna Mannar islands and most of Jaffna 's Vannimai lands had been <unk> into the Tamil <unk> <unk> Country by the 18th century . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 Over the next forty years , starting from 1619 until the Dutch capture of Jaffna fort in 1658 , there were three rebellions against Portuguese rule . Two were led by <unk> <unk> , during that period , Portuguese destroyed every Hindu temple and the Saraswathy Mahal library in Nallur , the royal repository of all literary output of the kingdom . Due to excessive taxation , population decreased and many people moved to Ramanathapuram in India and the Vanni Districts further south . External commerce was negatively impacted , though elephants , Jaffna 's principal export , were traded for saltpetre with various kingdoms in India and sent to Lisbon . Thus , decline in trade made it difficult to pay for essential imports , and such items ceased to be imported . In the words of Fernão De Queirós , the principal chronicler of Portuguese colonial exploits in Sri Lanka , the people of Jaffna were " reduced to the uttermost misery " during the Portuguese colonial era . 
 = North @-@ Western Area Command ( RAAF ) = 
 North @-@ Western Area Command was one of several geographically based commands raised by the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) during World War II . Its wartime sphere of operations included the Northern Territory , adjacent portions of Queensland and Western Australia , and the Dutch East Indies . The command was formed in January 1942 , following the outbreak of the Pacific War , from the western part of Northern Area Command , which had covered all of northern Australia and Papua . Headquartered at Darwin , North @-@ Western Area Command was initially responsible for air defence , aerial reconnaissance and protection of the sea lanes within its boundaries . 
 In the official history of the RAAF in the Pacific theatre , George Odgers described the North @-@ Western Area Campaign as " almost entirely an air war , with raid and counter @-@ raid " . From 1943 , North @-@ Western Area Command 's role became increasingly offensive in nature , as the Allies began to advance in New Guinea and the Dutch East Indies . The command continued to operate following the end of the war , its boundaries being reduced to Australian territory . In February 1954 , its responsibilities were subsumed by the RAAF 's newly established functional command @-@ and @-@ control system ; the headquarters was disbanded the following year . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 = = = = Formation = = = = 
 North @-@ Western Area Command was formed at RAAF Station Darwin , Northern Territory , on 15 January 1942 , taking over the western portion of what was Northern Area Command . Northern Area had been established on 8 May 1941 as one of the RAAF 's four geographically based command @-@ and @-@ control zones , and covered northern New South Wales , Queensland , the Northern Territory , and Papua . The roles of the area commands were air defence , protection of adjacent sea lanes , and aerial reconnaissance . Each was led by an Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) responsible for the administration and operations of air bases and units within his boundary . 
 The outbreak of the Pacific War in December 1941 was the catalyst for Northern Area being split into North @-@ Western Area ( NWA ) and North @-@ Eastern Area ( NEA ) , to counter distinct Japanese threats to Northern Australia and New Guinea , respectively . NWA 's inaugural AOC was Air Commodore Douglas Wilson . His senior air staff officer was Group Captain Frederick Scherger . Staff numbered 137 , including twenty @-@ four officers . In early February 1942 , Air Commodore George Jones , soon to be appointed Chief of the Air Staff , inspected NWA and found the morale and serviceability of its combat units — Nos. 2 , 12 and 13 Squadrons — to be lacking . 
 = = = = 1942 – 43 : Raids and counter @-@ raids = = = = 
 On 19 February 1942 , NWA 's complement of aircraft included seventeen Lockheed Hudson light bombers of Nos. 2 and 13 Squadrons based at Darwin and Daly Waters , fourteen obsolescent CAC Wirraway fighters of No. 12 Squadron based at Darwin and Batchelor , and ten P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighters of the United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) that were <unk> through Darwin to Java . Half of the Hudsons were without crews , five of the Wirraways were out of service , and the Kittyhawk pilots were considered inexperienced . In Wilson 's absence at ABDA Command Headquarters in Java , Scherger was acting AOC . Just before 10 am , Darwin suffered its first air raid by the Japanese , a force of 188 aircraft that bombed the harbour and town . A further attack by fifty @-@ four bombers , directed mainly at the RAAF airfield , followed at around midday . The raids on 19 February destroyed civil and military infrastructure , twenty @-@ three aircraft and ten ships , and killed approximately 250 people . As well , 278 RAAF personnel deserted Darwin in an exodus that became known as the " Adelaide River Stakes " . " There was " , in Scherger 's words , " an awful panic and a lot of men simply went bush " . The Kittyhawks and anti @-@ aircraft gunners were credited with shooting down five Japanese aircraft and probably destroying five others . 
 In the wake of the disaster , NWA headquarters moved to a bush camp south of the RAAF Station , and the senior leadership was changed . Wilson and Scherger were posted out , the latter in spite of being praised for his actions during the attack by the Federal government 's commission of inquiry . Air Commodore Frank Bladin took over as AOC on 25 March , his initial objectives being to restore morale and deal with the perceived threat of an imminent invasion , tasks complicated by poor communications , transport and early warning systems . Proceeding to instigate more intense combat training and construct new satellite airfields with which to disperse his forces , Bladin became , in the words of Air Force historian Alan Stephens , " the RAAF 's outstanding area commander of the war " , and the first Australian in the Pacific theatre to be decorated by the Americans when he was awarded the Silver Star for gallantry after personally leading a raid by USAAF B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses on Celebes in the Dutch East Indies . Despite northern Australia 's obvious vulnerability to attack , NWA was without a garrison of interceptors until the arrival in March and April of three squadrons of USAAF Kittyhawks comprising the 49th Pursuit Group ( soon redesignated the 49th Fighter Group ) under the command of Colonel Paul Wurtsmith . The Darwin area would suffer a total sixty @-@ four air raids between February 1942 and November 1943 . 
 As of 20 April 1942 , operational authority over all RAAF combat infrastructure , including area commands , was invested in the newly established Allied Air Forces ( AAF ) Headquarters under South West Pacific Area Command ( SWPA ) . NWA 's boundaries were <unk> in August : as well as covering the Northern Territory , the command took responsibility for the portion of Western Australia north of a line drawn south @-@ east from Yampi Sound to the Northern Territory border , and part of Queensland adjacent to the Barkly Tableland . The 49th Fighter Group flew its final sorties in August and transferred to New Guinea the following month , having claimed seventy @-@ nine Japanese aircraft destroyed for the loss of twenty @-@ one Kittyhawks . NWA 's two Hudson squadrons had meanwhile conducted unescorted bombing missions against Japanese bases and shipping in the Timor and Arafura Seas , and in support of Sparrow Force on Timor . Three RAAF fighter squadrons — Nos. 76 and 77 equipped with Kittyhawks and No. 31 equipped with Bristol Beaufighters — arrived in September and October . September also saw the formation of RAAF Command , led by Air Vice Marshal Bill Bostock , to oversee the majority of Australian flying units in the SWPA . Bostock exercised overall control of air operations through the area commands , although RAAF Headquarters continued to hold administrative authority over Australian units . Bladin 's remit was to defend the Northern Territory , the northern coast of Western Australia , and the Torres Strait , protecting the flank of General Douglas MacArthur 's offensives in New Guinea . Bostock was to coordinate operations when they involved more than one area command , for instance when the fighter squadrons of both NWA and NEA were required to repulse a major attack . 
 By December 1942 , NWA 's flying units included six RAAF squadrons operating mainly Kittyhawks , Beaufighters , Hudsons , and Vultee Vengeance dive bombers , as well as No. 1 Photographic Reconnaissance Unit , which flew a mix of Wirraways , Brewster Buffalos , P @-@ 38 Lightnings and P @-@ 43 Lancers and continued to operate out of the Darwin area ( as No. 87 Squadron from September 1944 ) for the duration of the war . These units were soon augmented by one squadron each of Dutch East Indies B @-@ 25 Mitchell medium bombers and USAAF B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bombers , with which NWA was able to conduct heavier strikes against Japanese forces north of Australia . Also in December , No. 34 ( Transport ) Squadron , which had been formed under NWA 's control in Darwin four days after the first air raid , divested its aircraft to the newly formed No. 6 Communications Unit , which remained in the Northern Territory until disbanding shortly after the end of hostilities . No. 44 RDF Wing was formed under NWA at Adelaide River on 14 December . It was responsible for the radar stations that acted as an early warning system for Japanese attacks . The wing coordinated air defence in the region with No. 5 Fighter Sector Headquarters . As the raids continued into 1943 , Bladin placed his bombers inland and his fighters close to the coast , where they could intercept the attackers . No. 61 ( Works ) Wing was responsible for airfield construction squadrons and their associated support units . According to historian Chris Coulthard @-@ Clark , NWA was " one of the few areas where the RAAF was free to run its own show " in World War II . Bladin often employed his own judgement in selecting targets for offensive strikes , as detailed directives from superior headquarters were not always forthcoming . On 27 February , acting on intercepted radio transmissions , he launched a raid on Penfui airfield near Koepang , destroying or damaging twenty @-@ two Japanese bombers that had been destined to make a major raid on Darwin . 
 To help protect northern Australia from ongoing air attack , three squadrons of Supermarine Spitfire fighters were transferred from the United Kingdom and became operational in March 1943 as No. 1 Fighter Wing under Group Captain Allan Walters . A major engagement over Darwin on 2 May resulted in the loss of five Spitfires during combat , and several others in forced landings owing to fuel starvation or engine failure , for the destruction of one Japanese bomber and five fighters . Bladin immediately ordered a retaliatory Beaufighter strike led by Wing Commander Charles Read against Penfui airfield , on the assumption ( correct as it happened ) that this was where the Japanese raiders were based ; four enemy aircraft were destroyed on the ground . Between March and May 1943 , the number of sorties flown by NWA 's combat squadrons rose from 211 to 469 . The Allies claimed a total of forty @-@ six Japanese aircraft destroyed for the loss of thirty of their own on operations , seventeen to enemy action and thirteen from other causes . On 17 June , under the command of Group Captain Clive Caldwell , No. 1 Wing recorded NWA 's most successful interception to date , claiming fourteen Japanese raiders destroyed and ten damaged , for the loss of two Spitfires . The same month , the USAAF 's 380th Bombardment Group , consisting of four squadrons of Liberators , came under NWA 's control , enhancing its strategic strike capability . By this time , NWA headquarters staff numbered 385 , including ninety @-@ six officers . 
 = = = = 1943 – 45 : Offensive operations = = = = 
 Bladin handed over NWA to Air Vice Marshal Adrian Cole in July 1943 . Cole reported that the command was " well organised , keen and in good shape " , but considered its air defence capability inadequate , recommending augmentation by long @-@ range fighters such as Lightnings . He nevertheless had to make do with the three Spitfire squadrons of No. 1 Wing , and the possibility of calling on the USAAF 's Fifth Air Force for reinforcements as necessary . Having started out as a primarily defensive command , by mid @-@ 1943 NWA was able to support Allied advances in New Guinea . During August and September , Cole reduced regular reconnaissance missions to " increase bombing activity to the limit " , following a request from MacArthur to provide all available support for Allied assaults on Lae – Nadzab ; NWA Liberators , Hudsons , Beaufighters and PBY Catalinas carried out raids to destroy Japanese bases and aircraft , and divert enemy forces from Allied columns . No. 79 Wing was established under the aegis of NWA at Batchelor on 30 November 1943 . Consisting of four attack squadrons flying Bristol Beauforts , Mitchells and Beaufighters , it was commanded by Group Captain Charles Eaton . 
 By December 1943 , the character of the air war in northern Australia had changed markedly , as the Japanese were no longer able to mount air raids against Darwin ; rather than merely securing NWA , Cole was keen to adopt an offensive strategy in the Dutch East Indies . According to David Horner , " In the sense that he had to plan and conduct his own campaign , the AOC Northwestern Area was one of the RAAF 's few operational level commanders , even if the campaign was somewhat static and limited " . During March – April 1944 , NWA had thirteen squadrons under its control , including those of No. 79 Wing , and supported amphibious operations against Hollandia and Aitape . In May , its aircraft bombed Surabaya as part of Operation Transom . Under NWA 's direction , No. 79 Wing took part in the Allied attack on Noemfoor in June – July ; sorties by all NWA aircraft in July totalled 704 . No. 79 Wing was subsequently earmarked for transfer from NWA to Northern Command ( formerly No. 9 Operational Group ) in Papua New Guinea , to undertake operations against the Japanese in New Britain . No. 1 Wing received two fresh British squadrons of Spitfires in July , to replace two that had been transferred to No. 80 Wing , which had formed in Darwin for a planned assault on Selaru that did not eventuate . No. 44 Wing was disbanded on 22 August 1944 , and its radar stations divested to other units in the area . The same month , No. 61 Wing departed the Northern Territory for Morotai Island , where it later came under the control of the RAAF 's main mobile strike force , First Tactical Air Force . 
 In September 1944 , Cole handed NWA over to Air Commodore Alan Charlesworth . At this stage of the war , the Allies were advancing north and the tempo of operations in the Darwin area had decreased . Charlesworth raised concerns regarding No. 80 Wing , warning higher command that its morale would drop if it was not either given a more active role in the war or transferred to southern Australia for rest . By October , the wing had received orders to depart NWA for Morotai to join the First Tactical Air Force ; this left NWA with twelve squadrons at its disposal , including one Liberator unit and three other Spitfire squadrons . In the meantime , NWA supported the assault on Leyte with attacks on enemy ports , oil facilities , and shipping in the Dutch East Indies using Beaufighters , Mitchells , and Liberators . These operations continued through November and December . By then , NWA headquarters staff numbered 651 , including 156 officers . 
 The same month Charlesworth assumed command , No. 76 Wing arrived from Cairns , Queensland , to coordinate and control minelaying operations in NWA by three Catalina squadrons . The Catalinas mined Manila Bay in December 1944 , to support the Allied landing at Mindoro . No. 82 ( Heavy Bomber ) Wing — the RAAF 's first — became operational under NWA 's control at Fenton Airfield on 11 January 1945 . Comprising two Liberator squadrons , the wing replaced the USAAF 's 380th Group when the latter was transferred to the Fifth Air Force in the Philippines . The Liberators of No. 82 Wing sank seven Japanese ships in the Dutch East Indies during March . On 6 April , all of its available aircraft joined Mitchells of No. 79 Wing in an assault on a Japanese convoy that included the cruiser Isuzu . Anti @-@ aircraft fire and attacks by enemy fighters resulted in the loss of two Liberators ; Allied submarines sank the damaged Isuzu the following day . 
 Another squadron of Liberators was added to No. 82 Wing 's strength in late @-@ April 1945 . The bombers attacked targets in Java in the lead @-@ up to Operation Oboe One , the invasion of Tarakan , which commenced on 1 May . During this and the two subsequent Oboe operations , the invasions of Labuan and Balikpapan , NWA was responsible for mining operations , convoy escort , aerial reconnaissance , and attacks on Japanese bases and troops . No. 76 Wing 's Catalinas mined harbours as far north as Hong Kong and the Gulf of Hainan , China . By July , NWA had been denuded of much of its offensive capability as Nos. 79 and 82 Wings had been transferred to the First Tactical Air Force in Morotai . No. 85 Wing was formed the same month under NWA 's control ; it comprised two Liberator squadrons but only one became operational before the end of the Pacific War . 
 = = = Post @-@ war activity and disbandment = = = 
 Following the end of the war in August 1945 , SWPA was dissolved and RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne again assumed full control of all its operational formations , including the area commands . The Liberator and Catalina squadrons were mainly used for repatriating Australian prisoners of war . No. 76 and 85 Wings were disbanded at Darwin in November . Darwin would subsequently function mainly as a transit centre and a base for peacetime exercises , rather than as a permanent station for flying squadrons . Charlesworth continued to serve as AOC NWA until January 1946 , when Group Captain Frank Headlam , formerly NWA 's senior administrative staff officer , took over as officer commanding ( OC ) . Headlam remained in command until October , by which time the headquarters staff numbered 108 , including twenty @-@ three officers . 
 In September 1946 , the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal Jones , proposed reducing the five extant mainland area commands ( North @-@ Western , North @-@ Eastern , Eastern , Southern , and Western Areas ) to three : Northern Area , covering Queensland and the Northern Territory ; Eastern Area , covering New South Wales ; and Southern Area , covering Western Australia , South Australia , Victoria and Tasmania . The Federal government rejected the plan and the wartime area command boundaries essentially remained in place ( although NWA no longer covered the Dutch East Indies ) . 
 Between October 1949 and February 1950 , NWA hosted its largest exercise since the war when No. 82 Wing Avro Lincolns , specially modified with advanced radar and other instrumentation , flew into and out of Darwin as part of Operation Cumulative , a joint program with the Royal Air Force gathering long @-@ range navigation and bombing data for use in potential air campaigns against the Soviet Union . Wing Commander Glen Cooper served as OC NWA from September 1952 to December 1953 . Commencing in October 1953 , the RAAF was reorganised from a geographically based command @-@ and @-@ control system into one based on function . In February 1954 , the newly constituted functional organisations — Home , Training , and Maintenance Commands — assumed control of all Air Force operations , training and maintenance from North @-@ Western Area Command . NWA headquarters remained in existence , but only as one of Home Command 's " remote control points " . The headquarters was finally disbanded on 29 June 1955 . 
 = = Orders of battle = = 
 = = = April 1942 = = = 
 As at April 1942 , NWA controlled the following squadrons : 
 No. 2 Squadron , equipped with Hudson general @-@ reconnaissance bombers , based at Daly Waters 
 No. 12 Squadron , equipped with Wirraway general @-@ purpose aircraft , based at Batchelor 
 No. 13 Squadron , equipped with Hudsons , based at Daly Waters 
 No. 34 Squadron , equipped with Dragon and Anson transports , based at Daly Waters 
 49th Group USAAF 
 7th Squadron USAAF , equipped with Kittyhawk fighters , based at Batchelor 
 8th Squadron USAAF , equipped with Kittyhawks , based at Darwin 
 9th Squadron USAAF , equipped with Kittyhawks , based at Darwin 
 = = = April 1943 = = = 
 As at April 1943 , NWA controlled the following squadrons : 
 No. 1 Wing 
 No. 54 Squadron RAF , equipped with Spitfire fighters , based at Darwin 
 No. 452 Squadron , equipped with Spitfires , based at Strauss 
 No. 457 Squadron , equipped with Spitfires , based at Livingstone 
 No. 2 Squadron , equipped with Hudsons , based at Hughes 
 No. 12 Squadron , equipped with Vengeance dive bombers , based at Batchelor 
 No. 13 Squadron , equipped with Hudsons , based at Hughes 
 No. 18 ( Netherlands East Indies ) Squadron , equipped with Mitchell medium bombers , based at McDonald 
 No. 31 Squadron , equipped with Beaufighter long @-@ range fighters , based at Coomalie 
 No. 319 Squadron USAAF , equipped with Liberator heavy bombers , based at Fenton 
 = = = April 1944 = = = 
 As at April 1944 , NWA controlled the following squadrons : 
 No. 1 Wing 
 No. 54 Squadron RAF , equipped with Spitfires , based at Darwin 
 No. 452 Squadron , equipped with Spitfires , based at Strauss 
 No. 457 Squadron , equipped with Spitfires , based at Livingstone 
 No. 43 Squadron , equipped with Catalina long @-@ range minelayers , based in Darwin Harbour 
 No. 83 Squadron , equipped with Boomerang fighters , based at Gove 
 No. 79 Wing 
 No. 1 Squadron , equipped with Beaufort general @-@ reconnaissance bombers , based at Gould 
 No. 2 Squadron , equipped with Beauforts , based at Hughes 
 No. 18 ( Netherlands East Indies ) Squadron , equipped with Mitchells , based at Batchelor 
 No. 31 Squadron , equipped with Beaufighters , based at Coomalie 
 380th Group USAAF 
 528th Squadron USAAF , equipped with Liberators , based at Fenton 
 <unk> Squadron USAAF , equipped with Liberators , based at Long 
 <unk> Squadron USAAF , equipped with Liberators , based at Fenton 
 <unk> Squadron USAAF , equipped with Liberators , based at Long 
 = Lightning Bolt ( Pearl Jam album ) = 
 Lightning Bolt is the tenth studio album by the American rock band Pearl Jam . Produced by long @-@ time Pearl Jam collaborator Brendan O 'Brien , the album was released in the United States on October 15 , 2013 , through the band 's own Monkeywrench Records , with Republic Records handling the international release . 
 The band began composing new songs in 2011 , and had the album 's first recording sessions in early 2012 before the musicians decided to take a break . As all the band members got into side projects afterwards , work on Lightning Bolt only resumed in March 2013 . The music for Lightning Bolt has a harder rock sound with longer songs to contrast predecessor Backspacer ( 2009 ) , and the lyrics convey singer Eddie Vedder 's feelings on aging and mortality . 
 Preceded by a promotional campaign focusing on Pearl Jam 's website and social network profiles and two moderately successful singles , " Mind Your Manners " and " Sirens " , Lightning Bolt was well received by critics , who considered the album an effective return to the band 's old sound , and topped the charts in the United States , Canada , and Australia . 
 = = Production = = 
 Soon after completing Backspacer in 2009 , Pearl Jam and producer Brendan O 'Brien intended to soon repeat the experience given that according to O 'Brien " we had a really good time doing it . " . In 2011 , amidst preparations for the documentary Pearl Jam Twenty and its accompanying tour , the band recorded some tracks with O 'Brien at Los Angeles ' Henson Recording Studios , with the song " Olé " being issued as a free download . O 'Brien considered that the studio helped the band get to a " submarine mentality , and everybody going into the ship together " , and bassist Jeff Ament added that working outside the band 's hometown Seattle led the musicians to work more efficiently . 
 After some time developing demos , the musicians returned to Henson in March 2012 , recording seven songs before the band decided to take a break , as according to guitarist Mike McCready " we had to take some time to figure out what we wanted to do . " Guitarist Stone Gossard added that despite the bandmembers thinking that after the productive sessions the album was nearing completion , eventually they considered the tracks " didn ’ t feel strong enough for a record . Work on the album resumed only in March 2013 as the bandmembers regrouped with new compositions , mostly done <unk> in each member 's home studio — though McCready at times worked along with drummer Matt Cameron — before the group reunited to finish the songs together . O 'Brien attributed the long break to the band 's busy schedule , as the musicians got into side projects after putting the Pearl Jam album on hold : singer Eddie Vedder started a solo tour , drummer Matt Cameron returned to Soundgarden , guitarist Stone Gossard rejoined side project Brad , Ament recorded solo album While My Heart Beats and started the project <unk> , and McCready formed the group Walking Papers while also taking part in a partial reunion of Mad Season . Vedder still considered that all the diversions helped Pearl Jam to have " more importance placed on the records " and focusing on making the best album possible . Like with previous records the songs had their first recordings with all the musicians playing together , though O 'Brien added that with Lightning Bolt " we don ’ t keep as much of [ the live recordings ] as we used to . " Guest musicians include O 'Brien himself at the keyboards , long time keyboardist Boom Gaspar , and violinist Ann Marie Calhoun . After six weeks of new recording sessions , the album was mixed in Seattle at the band 's desire , with the process taking place in Studio X. 
 = = Composition = = 
 In contrast to the short tracks of Backspacer , Lightning Bolt features longer songs , and a more experimental sound that McCready declared to aim for " a logical extension of what Backspacer was " . Stone Gossard added that the band being more comfortable with the composing and recording process lead to " a slight return to some of the more sort of peculiar things we did , say , between No Code and Binaural . " McCready said that " there 's a Pink Floyd vibe to some of it , there 's a punk rock edge to other stuff " , with the lead singles " Mind Your Manners " and " Sirens " being inspired by the Dead Kennedys and a concert in Roger Waters ' The Wall Live , respectively . Neil Young was noted as an influence in " Yellow Moon " . O 'Brien considered the track listing to have " a lot of drama " from the intensity of the musicians ' work , but that the band itself were united and enjoying themselves during the creation process . According to Gossard , the album 's simpler arrangements , " <unk> out " songwriting and less production than in Backspacer made for songs that were easier to learn and play live . One of the tracks , " Sleeping by Myself " , had been previously featured in Vedder 's 2011 solo album Ukulele Songs . O 'Brien suggested the re @-@ recording as he thought that the composition was " a Pearl Jam song as far as I ’ m concerned . " Another , " Pendulum " , was originally composed during the Backspacer sessions . 
 While writing the lyrics to Lightning Bolt , Vedder tried to be less cryptic in expressing his feelings compared to the " word games " of previous Pearl Jam albums . The songs discuss lasting relationships , bad faith ( " Getaway , " " Mind Your Manners " ) , the state of the world ( " <unk> " ) and life 's transience ( " Pendulum " ) , which Vedder summed up as " the same mysteries that I ’ ve been trying to unravel for a few decades now . " Gossard explained that the reflective tone was indicative of the bandmembers ' age : " [ At ] 40 @-@ something , almost 50 @-@ something , you 're looking at life through your kids ' eyes , through the filter of relationships that are 20 or 30 years long , through the filter of your parents getting older and the passing of friends and relatives @-@ relationships and all that they encompass , the difficulties of them and the sacrifices you make in them and also the joy they bring you . " Vedder at first was afraid of writing songs about mortality , but relented given he felt that " death is everywhere " and writing about death would help " getting through it " , as " living to the day you die , and being cognizant of the end , you might lead a more appreciative life " . One of the compositions about the theme was " Future Days " , which discusses the loss of Vedder 's friend Dennis Flemion , who accidentally drowned in 2012 . The <unk> in the songs also owed to Vedder being a father , as the singer detailed that " It ’ s going to be their world and what is their future ? It feels like there is a lot that can be lost in the next 50 years if people don ’ t pay attention . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Pearl Jam 's website and social network pages were extensively used to create expectations create excitement for their upcoming album , with two countdown clocks being posted on the band 's website . The first was revealed on July 1 , 2013 , and once it hit zero one week later , the site had an announcement of a 24 date two @-@ leg tour in North America from October 11 , 2013 , through December 6 , 2013 . After the tour was revealed , the <unk> countdown clock reset , showing a new countdown which was set to end on July 11 , 2013 , and afterwards lead to news of the band 's tenth studio album Lightning Bolt being released on October 15 , 2013 . On the same day the band revealed lead single " Mind Your Manners " through digital download , radio airplay and an audio @-@ only YouTube video . The track had heavy airplay on rock radios , debuting at 12th on the Billboard Rock Airplay charts , and with 14 @,@ 000 downloads reached number 14 at Rock Digital Songs and 12 on the Alternative Rock Tracks charts . An official Pearl Jam app was made available on iTunes on July 25 , 2013 , and through the final week of August , the band 's Twitter revealed Lightning Bolt 's track list through the artwork made by designer Don Pendleton for each track . " Mind Your Manners " was played live for the first time at their show in London , Ontario on July 16 , 2013 . Three days later the band debuted two more songs , " Lightning Bolt " and " Future Days " , at their show at Wrigley Field . On August 23 , 2013 , the music video was released for " Mind Your Manners " , directed by Danny Clinch . 
 On September 18 , 2013 , the band released Lightning Bolt 's second single , " Sirens " , and put online a short documentary directed by Danny Clinch where the bandmembers discussed the new album with friends Carrie Brownstein , Judd Apatow , Mark Richards and Steve Gleason . Ament suggested the concept of the video inspired by the Vanity Fair Comedy Issue , thinking it would be a variant on traditional press interviews . On September 23 , 2013 , the music video was released for " Sirens " , also directed by Clinch . A special listening party with fans was held by Sirius XM at Seattle 's Studio X eleven days before the album 's release . Monkeywrench Records and Republic Records sent the album 's title track , " Lightning Bolt " to mainstream rock and modern rock radio on March 4 , 2014 as the album 's third single . 
 Pearl Jam released the album through Monkeywrench Records / Republic Records in conjunction with Universal Music Group in the United States . The album also saw release through the band 's official website , independent record stores and online retailers . It was made available to stream for free for a limited time on iTunes on October 7 , 2013 , in the run up to the official release . The band promoted the release of the album with a week @-@ long programme of shows on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon , which included live performances of " Sirens " and the title track " Lightning Bolt " . Pearl Jam also licensed the songs of Lightning Bolt along with 36 other tracks from their catalog to Fox Sports for the network 's coverage of the 2013 World Series . 
 = = = Lightning Bolt Tour = = = 
 Pearl Jam promoted the album with shows in North America in 2013 before a tour of Oceania in January 2014 . The band headlined the Voodoo Music + Arts Experience on November 1 , 2013 . The shows in Oceania were part of the Big Day Out festival . On November 15 , 2013 , drummer Matt Cameron announced that he would not be touring with Soundgarden in 2014 , due to prior commitments promoting Lightning Bolt . On December 13 , 2013 , the band announced an eleven @-@ date European leg starting on June 16 , 2014 . In May 2014 , the band announced a ten @-@ date tour of the American Midwest starting on October 1 , 2014 , to coincide with two appearances at the Austin City Limits Music Festival . To conclude the tour , the band played at the annual Bridge School Benefit in Mountain View , California . In March 2015 the band announced a nine @-@ date tour of Latin America , scheduled to start in November . 
 = = = Packaging = = = 
 The artwork for Lightning Bolt was made by Don Pendleton , who is best known as a skateboard graphic artist . Ament bought some of Pendleton 's paintings " in 2008 or 2009 " and later asked the artist to do a logo for their upcoming album , which would later develop into all the illustrations . The bassist then kept in contact with Pendleton to guide his work , sending him the song lyrics , some sketches he had done and an unmastered copy of the album . The intention was to " make something that was a total package " , according to Pendleton , who said that there was an attempt to bring back " these classic LPs in the days where you would read the lyrics . You related the band to the imagery to the song to the lyrics . " Pendleton tried to " keep it iconic with some symbols but also really heavy with archetypes " , given the body of images could be used consistently with all of the promotion . While some of the graphics evolved directly from Ament 's sketches , Pendleton took some inspiration from his past work , such as a series of skateboards he painted " based around icons and logos " , and the very first image sent to Ament , an eye with a lightning bolt which Pendleton made back in 2006 for a failed project , that evolved into the album cover . Said cover was painted by hand as Pendleton wanted " something so geometric that there would be some flaws in it , especially compared to the vector / computer stuff " . Republic Records art designer Joe <unk> then handled the presentation , with particular detail in the vinyl packaging . Pendleton also painted Ament 's bass , Pearl Jam @-@ themed shirts for <unk> , and posters for the Barclays Center concerts in October 2013 . At the 57th Annual Grammy Awards in February 2015 , the album won the award for Best Recording Package . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Upon its release , Lightning Bolt was met with generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 73 , based on 33 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic gave the album four out of five stars , stating that the band seemed more settled and comfortable while " accentuating the big riffs and bigger emotions , crafting songs without a worry as to whether they 're hip or not and , most importantly , enjoying the deep @-@ rooted , nervy arena rock that is uniquely their own . " Jim Farber of the New York Daily News gave the album four out of five stars , commenting that while " some key sounds and sensibilities " and uplifting lyrics were unlike Pearl Jam 's earlier style , the music in Lightning Bolt marked a return to the " thick @-@ bottomed rhythms , hard @-@ nosed guitars and darkened tone of classic Pearl Jam " compared to predecessor Backspacer . Cole Waterman of PopMatters gave the album an eight out of ten , praising " Pearl Jam thriving in their persona , building on what worked in the past without trying to copy it while adding new elements to the mix " and feeling that despite " the closing songs get [ ting ] monotonous in their united balladry " , " Future Days ” was a good album closer , comparing it to Tom Waits . 
 Dom Lawson of The Guardian gave the album three out of five stars , describing it as " a sturdy return to great form " . Tom Willmott of The Independent gave the album three out of five stars , considering Lightning Bolt to " offer a broad range of styles " and praising the rock @-@ focused tracks . Will Hermes of Rolling Stone gave the album three and a half stars out of five , saying that Eddie Vedder 's earnest lyrics and vocals made for compelling tracks , and that the musicians " <unk> , <unk> and overreach — fruitfully " . Josh Modell of The A.V. Club gave the album a B + , complaining about the excessive length and " a couple too many songs that revisit the past without any fresh insight " while feeling that " the album still feels fresher and more relevant than the world at large might expect at this point . " Marc Hirsh of The Boston Globe considered the album to showcase that Pearl Jam " has plenty of spark left " , comparing it to both the " dense eclecticism " of the band 's own Vitalogy ( 1994 ) , and " The Who ’ s solidity of purpose " . 
 Some reviewers still felt that Lightning Bolt was not up to the standards set by the band 's previous work . Blue Sullivan of Slant Magazine gave the album three out of five stars , saying that the album had a " familiar spark " and was dragged down by " Pearl Jam 's antiseptic ' 70s @-@ album @-@ rock @-@ radio conservatism , along with frontman Eddie Vedder 's ham @-@ fisted lyrics " , ultimately concluding that " Lightning Bolt is no masterwork . Years removed from the raw emotion and desperate appetites of youth , Pearl Jam has slipped into alt @-@ rock elder statesmanship as one would a comfortable old sweater . " Rob Harvilla of Spin gave the album a six out of ten , describing it as " far from an implosion , far from spectacular " , criticizing the focus on calm songs and considering that Backspacer " barked louder and bit harder overall . " In his 5 @.@ 0 out of 10 review for Pitchfork Media , Stuart Berman also had a negative reaction to what he described as " centerpiece ballads [ that ] tread on odious Lite @-@ FM territory and forcefully tip the scales from poignant to maudlin " . Philip Cosores of Paste gave the album a 4 @.@ 0 out of 10 , saying " The album does grow on the listener , as Vedder 's voice and the band 's seeming ambivalence to all musical trends and developments outside of them is strangely comforting . And maybe some of these songs will come alive when performed , but there is not a single one to love in the set . Essentially , the cruise control is running onward with disregard for all the maintenance and repairs that an engine needs , and the result is the worst album of their career . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Lightning Bolt became Pearl Jam 's fifth studio album to have debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart , with first @-@ week sales of 166 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In its second week the album sold 46 @,@ 000 copies holding the number two position on the chart . The album also debuted at number one in Canada , selling 23 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , and becoming the band 's second consecutive album to debut at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart . In Australia , Lightning Bolt became Pearl Jam 's eighth chart @-@ topper at the ARIA Charts . Lightning Bolt debuted at second at the UK Albums Chart , being Pearl Jam 's highest charting album in the United Kingdom since 1993 's Vs .. The album also topped the music charts in Belgium , Ireland , Croatia and Portugal , and held the second spot in the Netherlands , Italy , New Zealand , Norway and Switzerland . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Eddie Vedder , all music composed by Vedder , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Pearl Jam 
 Jeff Ament – bass , background vocals , bowed guitar and keyboard on " Pendulum " 
 Matt Cameron – drums , background vocals 
 Stone Gossard – guitar , background vocals , bongo drums on " Pendulum " 
 Mike McCready – guitar , background vocals , six string bass on " My Father 's Son " 
 Eddie Vedder – lead vocals , guitar , ukulele on " Sleeping By Myself " 
 Additional personnel 
 Ann Marie Calhoun – strings 
 Boom Gaspar – piano , keyboards 
 Brendan O 'Brien – piano on " Future Days " , mixing , production 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Mind of a Man = 
 Mind of a Man is a game show broadcast by Game Show Network , with DeRay Davis as host . On each episode , two female contestants attempt to figure out what men believe about marriage , dating , work , and other subjects . Similar to Family Feud , the questions have previously been answered by a survey of one hundred men . Over the course of four rounds , a celebrity panel consisting of two men and a woman helps the contestants by offering their opinions about the correct answers to the surveys . The winner advances to the bonus round , which features a top prize of $ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 The series , green @-@ lit on August 16 , 2013 , began airing on January 8 , 2014 and concluded on May 14 , 2014 . Critical reception for the series was mixed , with one writer calling it " a lot of fun " while another arguing the premise to be " low @-@ minded . " 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In the first round , the contestants are asked to predict the most popular answer to each of three questions . Each question has three multiple choice options , and was asked to a group of 100 men . The panel is allowed to offer their opinion on the correct answer while the contestants submit their answers on their tablet computers . Each correct prediction is worth $ 200 . 
 The second round plays almost exactly the same as the first round ; however , the questions were asked to men who belong to a specific group ( e.g. , married men , African @-@ American men , or men under the age of 25 ) . Each correct prediction is worth $ 300 . The last question of Round 2 is designated as the " VIP " question , which is focused on one specific group of men and asked to a special guest related to the question . When the VIP question is about a specific man , before the question is asked , the panel is allowed 30 seconds to " interrogate " the VIP about their background , personal preferences , etc . , and then the question is played out as normal , with the VIP giving his answer verbally after the contestants give their prediction . Actor Ted Lange ( most well known for his role on The Love Boat ) appeared in some episodes as the show 's bartender and was often the man who was previously asked the VIP question . 
 In the third round ( entitled " The Male Order " ) , each contestant , starting with the current leader ( or the winner of a pre @-@ show coin toss , in case of a tie ) , is given one question , and may choose any panelist to assist them on the question . For the Male Order question , the contestant is asked to rank the three answers from most popular to least popular . Although the panelist will give their opinion as to the correct ranking , the contestant has the final decision . The contestant picks up $ 100 for one answer correctly ranked , or $ 500 for all three . 
 The fourth round is titled the " Men 's High Five " and is an open @-@ ended question asked to 200 men . The top five answers are placed on the board in a random order , and the panel again gives their opinion on what would be the most popular answer . If the score going into this question is tied , each contestant is allowed to select one answer , with the winner of the pre @-@ show coin toss deciding who makes the first selection . If one contestant has the lead , that contestant goes first and is given a selection ; her opponent is then allowed one provided the first contestant did not pick the most popular answer . If the most popular answer has not yet been revealed , the first contestant is given one more selection . The contestant who selects the highest @-@ ranked answer wins the game , keeps her money , and plays the bonus round . 
 = = = Bonus Round = = = 
 For this round ( entitled the " $ 10 @,@ 000 Tag Team Round " ) , the contestant chooses one panelist to assist her . The host reads a series of pairs of related items , and each member of the team , in turn , tries to determine which answer was more popular . If , between the contestant and the panelist , a total of seven correct answers are given within 30 seconds , the contestant 's winnings are increased to $ 10 @,@ 000 ; if not , the contestant wins an additional $ 300 for every correct answer given . 
 = = Production = = 
 The series originally appeared during GSN 's New York City upfront presentation on April 9 , 2013 . On August 16 , 2013 , GSN announced that the network had ordered forty episodes of Mind of a Man , and officially announced Davis as host on September 25 . 
 The series premiered January 8 , 2014 . The final episode aired on May 14 , 2014 ; while GSN did not renew the show for a second season , the series was pitched for syndication in the 2015 − 16 season . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mind of a Man garnered mixed reception from critics . Neil Genzlinger of The New York Times argued that the questions were " frivolous " and previewed the series as being " vacuous but often amusing . " The Washington Post 's Marc Silver called the series " low @-@ minded " and claimed that after watching an episode , his " mind need [ ed ] to go take a shower . " Acting rather neutral , Hank Stuever , also from The Washington Post , argued that the series ' title " sound [ s ] like the premise for an SNL sketch . " Carrie Grosvenor of About Entertainment , however , was pleased with the series , calling it " a lot of fun " and deeming Davis a " great host . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The series premiere on January 8 , 2014 , garnered average ratings , with the premiere episode earning 497 @,@ 000 total viewers and 112 @,@ 000 viewers among adults 18 − 49 ; GSN debuted the series that night with four consecutive episodes , which averaged around 407 @,@ 000 viewers during the two @-@ hour programming stack . 
 = Underneath the Stars ( song ) = 
 " Underneath the Stars " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey . The romance song was written and produced by Carey and Walter Afanasieff , for her fifth studio album , Daydream ( 1995 ) . It was released on April 5 , 1996 through Columbia Records , as the sixth and final single from the album , and as a B @-@ side to " Forever " in Australia . The R & B @-@ influenced song , which has been considered by Carey as one of her personal favorites , features a soft melody and retro @-@ style melody , and had music critics drawing comparisons to earlier works from one of her vocal inspirations , Minnie Riperton . 
 " Underneath the Stars " received a limited number of pressings in the United States , and failed to chart on the US Billboard Hot 100 . However , the song did manage to chart at number sixty @-@ nine on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs airplay component chart . Critically , it was considered one of the best songs on Daydream by music reviewers . A music video was shot for " Underneath the Stars " in Europe , but the video remains unreleased . The song was performed throughout the Daydream World Tour and the performance at the Tokyo Dome was later included on a rare DVD titled " Mariah Carey Live In Japan . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Throughout 1993 , Carey began conceptualizing Music Box ( 1993 ) , which became the highest selling album of Carey 's career . For her past two albums , Carey 's creative choices were heavily controlled by her label Columbia Records , as well as her husband and CEO of the company , Tommy Mottola . Carey 's previous effort , Emotions ( 1991 ) , drew influence from 1950s , 60s , and 70s balladry , gospel , R & B and soul music , and failed to achieve the same success matched by her debut album . Following its tepid commercial performance , Columbia aimed for Music Box to be a vehicle for very commercial singles that could garner strong radio airplay . The album was formed as a pop record , and more mainstream than anything on Emotions . Music Box went on to sell over 32 million copies worldwide , and earned its place among the best @-@ selling albums of all time . Due to the album 's success , Columbia allowed Carey more control over the music she recorded for Daydream ( 1995 ) . 
 Before Carey knew or began searching for the direction she wanted the album to follow , Carey already had the idea and melody for " Underneath the Stars , " and felt that it would fit into the album no matter what the eventual sound would be . As such , it became the first song Carey wrote and recorded for the album , and served as a sort of tribute to the music which she grew up listening to , as well as one of her main vocal inspirations , Minnie Riperton . " Underneath the Stars " was the first song Carey recorded for her fifth studio album , Daydream ( 1995 ) . The song was eventually chosen as the sixth and final single from the album , and was released on April 5 , 1996 through Columbia Records . In Australia , the song was released as a b @-@ side to Carey 's previous single , " Forever " ( 1996 ) . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Throughout 1998 , Carey was compiling songs for her first compilation album , # 1 's . The album , alongside " Underneath the Stars " and " Breakdown " , led to a publicized conflict with Columbia Records . Carey wanted to include the two songs on the album , and felt that a greatest hits record should reflect on her most personal and favorite songs , not her most commercial . Sony on the other hand , wanted to release an album that featured her U.S. number one singles , void of any new material . To accompany her thirteen number ones , Carey recorded four new songs . She felt that not including any new material would result in cheating her fans . While compromised , Carey often expressed distaste towards the album 's song selection , expressing her disappointment in the omission of her " favorite songs . " 
 For this reason , Sony titled the album # 1 's , as Carey felt the need to express the album 's true content , a collection of her number one hits . In December 2001 , Columbia released the album Greatest Hits , which featured Carey 's number one singles alongside songs she said " needed to be really heard , " such as " Underneath the Stars " and " Forever . " In an interview with MTV , Carey made the following statement regarding the album . " There 's a lot of songs that I 'm happy are gonna see the light of day . I think people are going to like this Greatest Hits because there are songs on it that were not necessarily singles . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Underneath the Stars " features a " ' 70s soul vibe , " courtesy of the use of a Rhodes piano , as well as synthetic record scratches , in order to the give the song an authentic aged sound . The song also incorporates Carey 's usage of double voice , in which she sings the verses in a lower octave , and then sings the crescendo and climax in a higher register over it . Carey felt the additions were simple steps taken to further display a contemporary R & B groove , and pay homage to the style of Minnie Riperton , who was one of Carey 's biggest vocal influences growing up . According to author Chris Nickson , the song has a soft sound , and " a lot of texture " and bass , showing a more creative side to Carey . While reviewing Daydream , Stephen Holden from The New York Times described the song 's double voice , as well as its lyrical content : " ' Underneath the Stars , ' in which all the voices are Ms. Carey 's , achieves the same dissolving synergy between a lyric and <unk> vocal lines as she sings : " Beautifully and <unk> / You were fading into me . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 While not commercially released , " Underneath the Stars " has been lauded with a widespread acclaim , becoming one of the album 's best @-@ received tracks , with music critics complimenting its instrumentation and vocals . Rolling Stone stated that , " Afanasieff cowrote his one of strongest tunes yet , the sweet , bouncy ' Underneath the Stars . ' " Chris Nickson , author of Mariah Carey Revisited : Her Story ( 1998 ) , said the song was as " strong as any slow jam released in the nineties , and one that would find a lot of flavor late at night with dancers . " Chris Dickinson from St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch called the song one of Carey 's best compositions , and wrote " it easily evokes a languid dreamy sensuality with its throbbing bass @-@ line and synthetic record scratches . " Writer and journalist Christopher John Farley from Time described " Underneath the Stars " as " cool and blissfully nostalgic , " while Cheo H. Coker called it " dynamic but subtle . " The song received a limited number of pressings in the United States , where it charted weakly on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , peaking at number sixty @-@ nine . 
 = = Music video and live performances = = 
 On February 11 , 2012 , Carey revealed through her Twitter account that a music video for the song was actually recorded . Filming sessions occurred in Netherlands , England and France ; Carey commented , however , that it " never got released & I don 't know where it is ! " Due to its limited release and chart performance , " Underneath the Stars " was only performed during Carey 's Daydream World Tour ( 1996 ) . During the shows in Japan , Carey featured the song as the tenth track on the set @-@ list . Appearing on stage wearing a long black evening gown , Carey discussed the song 's composition and development with the audience , prior to its recital . The live performance from the Tokyo Dome on March 7 , 1996 was recorded and released on a rare DVD titled " Mariah Carey Live In Japan . " The song has recently been performed in 2012 in Carey 's performances in Austria in April and Morocco in May . She often performs portions of the song a cappella in between songs during engagements off screen . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 CD single and 12 " Vinyl 
 " Underneath the Stars " — 3 : 33 
 " Underneath the Stars " ( <unk> Re @-@ Mix ) — 4 : 00 
 " Underneath the Stars " ( <unk> Re @-@ Mix W / O Rap ) — 4 : 00 
 AUS CD single 
 " Forever " — 4 : 01 
 " Underneath The Stars " — 3 : 33 
 " Forever " ( Live ) — 4 : 12 
 " Make It Happen " ( Live ) — 4 : 43 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the Daydream liner notes . 
 Mariah Carey – vocals , songwriting , producer 
 Walter Afanasieff – songwriting , producer , mixing 
 Herb Powers – mastering 
 = Russian battleship Imperator Aleksandr III = 
 Imperator Aleksandr III ( Emperor Alexander III ) was the third , and last , ship of the Imperatritsa Mariya @-@ class dreadnoughts of the Imperial Russian Navy . She was begun before World War I , completed in 1917 and saw service with the Black Sea Fleet . She was renamed Volia or Volya ( Russian : <unk> , Freedom ) before her completion and then General Alekseyev ( Russian : Генерал <unk> ) in 1920 . The ship did not take part in operations during World War I because her sister ships were given a higher priority for completion . She was delivered in 1917 , but the disruptions of the February Revolution rendered the Black Sea Fleet ineffective and she saw no combat . 
 Volia was surrendered to the Germans in 1918 , but they were forced to turn her over to the British by the terms of the Armistice . The British turned her over to the White Russians in 1919 and they used her to help evacuate the Crimea in 1920 . She was interned in Bizerte by the French and ultimately scrapped by them in 1936 to pay her docking fees . Her guns were put into storage and were later used by the Germans and Finns for coastal artillery during World War II . The Finns and the Soviets continued to use them throughout the Cold War . 
 = = Description = = 
 Imperator Aleksandr III was 168 meters ( 551 ft ) long at the waterline . She had a beam of 27 @.@ 43 meters ( 90 @.@ 0 ft ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 36 meters ( 27 @.@ 4 ft ) . Her displacement was 23 @,@ 600 tonnes ( 23 @,@ 200 long tons ; 26 @,@ 000 short tons ) at load , 1 @,@ 000 t ( 980 long tons ; 1 @,@ 100 short tons ) more than her designed displacement of 22 @,@ 600 t ( 22 @,@ 200 long tons ; 24 @,@ 900 short tons ) . Imperatritsa Mariya had proved to be very bow heavy in service and tended to ship large amounts of water through her forward casemates . Imperator Aleksandr III 's forward pair of 130 mm guns were removed before she was completed in an attempt to compensate for her trim . 
 Imperator Aleksandr III was fitted with four Parsons @-@ type steam turbines imported from John Brown & Company of the United Kingdom . They were designed for a total of 26 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) , but produced 27 @,@ 270 shp ( 20 @,@ 340 kW ) on trials . 20 mixed @-@ firing triangular Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers powered the turbines with a working pressure of 17 @.@ 5 atm ( 257 psi ) . Her designed speed was 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . Her maximum coal capacity was 1 @,@ 700 long tons ( 1 @,@ 727 t ) plus 500 t ( 490 long tons ; 550 short tons ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 1 @,@ 640 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 040 km ; 1 @,@ 890 mi ) at 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . All of her electrical power was generated by three Curtis 360 @-@ kilowatt main turbo generators and two 200 @-@ kilowatt auxiliary units . 
 The ship 's main armament consisted of a dozen Obukhovskii 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Pattern 1907 52 @-@ calibre guns mounted in four triple turrets distributed the length of the ship . Her secondary armament consisted of eighteen 130 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) B7 Pattern 1913 55 @-@ calibre guns mounted in casemates . They were arranged in two groups , five guns per side from the forward turret to the rear funnel and the remaining four clustered around the rear turret . She was fitted with four 38 @-@ calibre 76 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 00 in ) ' Lender ' anti @-@ aircraft guns , two each mounted on the roof of the fore and aft turrets . Four 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes were mounted , two tubes on each broadside abaft the forward magazine . 
 = = Service = = 
 Imperator Aleksandr III was built by the Russud Shipyard at Nikolayev . She was laid down on 30 October 1911 , but this was just a ceremonial event as the design had not yet been finalized or the contract signed . She suffered from a number of delays during construction . First the method of fastening the armour to its supports was changed and the armour plates were locked together by a type of mortise and tenon joint to better distribute the shock of an impact based on the full @-@ scale armour trials conducted using the hulk of the old pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Chesma in 1913 . This added almost 500 long tons ( 508 t ) of weight to the ship and raised her cost by 220 @,@ 000 rubles . Then her priority was reduced after the start of World War I to concentrate efforts on her more advanced sister ships to complete them more quickly . She was not expected to be finished before 1916 , but her British @-@ built turbines were also delayed . Imperator Aleksandr III was launched on 15 April 1914 , but did not arrive at Sevastopol for fitting out until 17 July 1917 , by which time the ship had been renamed Volia ( Freedom ) . She conducted her sea trials over the next several months . By this time the Black Sea Fleet was totally ineffective as a result of the political situation after the February Revolution and Volia did not see any combat . 
 Volia sailed from Sevastopol to Novorossiysk on 1 May 1918 to avoid capture by advancing German troops . While at Novorossiysk she received an order to scuttle on 19 June 1918 , but the majority of the crew ( 933 versus 640 ) refused to do so and decided to return to Sevastopol . Upon arrival she was disarmed and only guards were left on board , but the Germans took control on 1 October . The ship made a brief cruise with a German crew on 15 October , but her guns were still inoperable . Less than a month later the Germans were forced to turn her over to the British on 24 November in accordance with the Armistice when a party from the light cruiser HMS Canterbury took charge of her . A month later she was sailed for the port of İzmit , on the Sea of Marmara , by a crew from the pre @-@ dreadnought HMS Agamemnon , which also escorted her . 
 On 29 October 1919 she was sailed back to Sevastopol by a crew from HMS Iron Duke and turned over to the White Russians on 1 November . They renamed her General Alekseyev and carried out shore bombardments with only three of her of twelve guns operable . With the collapse of the White Russian armies in Southern Russia in 1920 , the ship helped to evacuate the Whites from the Crimea to Bizerte , where she was interned with the rest of Wrangel 's fleet . The French decided not to sell her back to the Soviet Union and she was sold for scrap in the late 1920s to pay her docking costs although she was not actually broken up until 1936 . 
 The ship 's guns were placed into storage in Bizerte . In January 1940 France gave them to Finland , after refusing to sell seven to the Finns in the summer of 1939 . Of the twelve main guns , eight made it to Finland , while four were seized by Germany when it invaded Norway in April 1940 and captured them on board the SS Nina in Narvik harbor . The Germans emplaced all four guns , after rebuilding them to accept German ammunition , in armoured turrets in ' Batterie <unk> ' on Guernsey . The Finns used four guns in coastal artillery positions at <unk> and <unk> . Two other guns were used to repair Soviet TM @-@ 3 @-@ 12 railway guns abandoned at Hanko when the Soviets evacuated in 1941 . After the war these handed over to the Soviet Union , where they were kept operational until the 1990s . The remaining two guns were kept as spares for the others , one of which was used to replace one gun damaged during tests with ' super charges ' in the 1970s . One gun turret is now a memorial at <unk> while the remaining spare barrel is preserved at the Finnish Coast Artillery Museum at <unk> . 
 The Nina also carried some of the General Alekseyev 's 13 @-@ cm guns . Several of these were used at the fort at <unk> on the island of <unk> . They engaged the British light cruiser HMS Kenya , reportedly scoring one hit on the cruiser , during Operation Archery in 1941 , but saw no other combat during the war . 
 = Brazilian monitor Alagoas = 
 The Brazilian monitor Alagoas was the third ship of the Pará @-@ class river monitors built for the Brazilian Navy during the Paraguayan War in the late 1860s . Alagoas participated in the Passagem de Humaitá in February 1868 and provided fire support for the army for the rest of the war . The ship was assigned to the Upper Uruguay ( Portuguese : Alto Uruguai ) Flotilla after the war . Alagoas was transferred to Rio de Janeiro in the 1890s and participated in the Fleet Revolt of 1893 – 94 . The ship was scrapped in 1900 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Pará @-@ class monitors were designed to meet the need of the Brazilian Navy for small , shallow @-@ draft armored ships capable of withstanding heavy fire . The monitor configuration was chosen as a turreted design did not have the same problems engaging enemy ships and fortifications as did the casemate ironclads already in Brazilian service . The oblong gun turret sat on a circular platform that had a central pivot . It was rotated by four men via a system of gears ; 2 @.@ 25 minutes were required for a full 360 ° rotation . A bronze ram was fitted to these ships as well . The hull was sheathed with Muntz metal to reduce biofouling . 
 The ships measured 39 meters ( 127 ft 11 in ) long overall , with a beam of 8 @.@ 54 meters ( 28 ft 0 in ) . They had a draft between of 1 @.@ 51 – 1 @.@ 54 meters ( 4 ft 11 in – 5 ft 1 in ) and displaced 500 metric tons ( 490 long tons ) . With only 0 @.@ 3 meters ( 1 ft 0 in ) of freeboard they had to be towed between Rio de Janeiro and their area of operations . Their crew numbered 43 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Pará @-@ class ships had two direct @-@ acting steam engines , each driving a single 1 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 4 ft 3 in ) propeller . Their engines were powered by two tubular boilers at a working pressure of 59 psi ( 407 kPa ; 4 kgf / cm2 ) . The engines produced a total of 180 indicated horsepower ( 130 kW ) which gave the monitors a maximum speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) in calm waters . The ships carried enough coal for one day 's steaming . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Alagoas carried a single 70 @-@ pounder Whitworth rifled muzzle loader ( RML ) in her gun turret . The 70 @-@ pounder gun had a maximum elevation of 15 ° . It had a maximum range of 5 @,@ 540 meters ( 6 @,@ 060 yd ) . The 70 @-@ pounder gun weighed 8 @,@ 582 pounds ( 3 @,@ 892 @.@ 7 kg ) and fired a 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 140 mm ) shell that weighed 81 pounds ( 36 @.@ 7 kg ) . Most unusually the gun 's Brazilian @-@ designed iron carriage was designed to pivot vertically at the muzzle ; this was done to minimize the size of the gunport through which splinters and shells could enter . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The hull of the Pará @-@ class ships was made from three layers of wood that alternated in orientation . It was 457 millimeters ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) thick and was capped with a 102 @-@ millimeter ( 4 in ) layer of peroba hardwood . The ships had a complete wrought iron waterline belt , 0 @.@ 91 meters ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) high . It had a maximum thickness of 102 millimeters amidships , decreasing to 76 millimeters ( 3 in ) and 51 millimeters ( 2 in ) at the ship 's ends . The curved deck was armored with 12 @.@ 7 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) of wrought iron . 
 The gun turret was shaped like a rectangle with rounded corners . It was built much like the hull , but the front of the turret was protected by 152 millimeters ( 6 in ) of armor , the sides by 102 millimeters and the rear by 76 millimeters . Its roof and the exposed portions of the platform it rested upon were protected by 12 @.@ 7 millimeters of armor . The armored pilothouse was positioned ahead of the turret . 
 = = Service = = 
 Alagoas was laid down at the Arsenal de Marinha da Côrte in Rio de Janeiro on 8 December 1866 , during the Paraguayan War , which saw Argentina and Brazil allied against Paraguay . She was launched on 29 October 1867 and completed in November 1867 . She arrived on the Paraná River in January 1868 , although her passage further north was barred by the Paraguayan fortifications at Humaitá . On 19 February 1868 , six Brazilian ironclads , including Alagoas , steamed past Humaitá at night . Alagoas and her two sister ships , Rio Grande and Pará were lashed to the larger ironclads in case any engines were disabled by the Paraguayan guns . Barroso led with Rio Grande , followed by Bahia with Alagoas and Tamandaré with Pará . The cable tying Alagoas to Bahia was severed by Paraguayan shells and the monitor drifted down below the guns . The commander of the Alagoas was ordered not to attempt to pass the guns during daylight , but disregarded this order and successfully rendezvoused with the rest of the squadron upstream of the fortifications . Both Alagoas , which had taken an estimated 200 hits , and Pará had to be beached after passing the fortress to prevent them from sinking . Alagoas was under repair at São José do Cerrito until mid @-@ March . Accompanied by Tamandaré , Alagoas bombarded and destroyed the Paraguayan artillery battery at Timbó , upstream of <unk> , on 23 March . The monitor bombarded artillery positions defending the Tebicuary River in July and again in August . 
 On 15 October she bombarded Angostura Fort , south of Asunción , in company with Brasil , Silvado , Pará and her sister Ceará . 
 After the war Alagoas was assigned to the newly formed Alto Uruguai Flotilla , based at <unk> . In the 1880s the ship 's armament was reinforced with a pair of 11 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 43 in ) machine guns . Alagoas was transferred to Rio de Janeiro in the 1890s and joined the rebels in the Fleet Revolt of 1893 – 94 . Her engines had been removed by this point and she had to be towed into position to fire on the government forts . She was scrapped in 1900 . 
 = Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem ( video game ) = 
 Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem is an action game exclusive to the PlayStation Portable , developed by Rebellion Developments and published by Sierra Entertainment . It was released in November 2007 in North America and Europe , and December 2007 in Australia . It is part of the Alien vs. Predator franchise , an amalgamation of the Alien and Predator franchises . Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem is a tie @-@ in to the film of the same title , which was released shortly after the game . 
 The game 's plot is loosely based on the film , as players take the role of the film 's primary Predator . After the events of the first film of the Alien vs. Predator franchise , the Predator has been charged by his society to hunt down and destroy any trace of Alien activity taking place in a small American town , in order to avoid its detection by humanity . 
 The game received negative reviews from critics and was described as another entry in a long line of poorly developed movie tie @-@ ins . Reviewers enjoyed the opportunity to play as a Predator , but complained that the game was too easy and not rewarding , particularly the simple artificial intelligence of enemies . The visuals and audio of the game were also considered of poor quality . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem is a third @-@ person action @-@ adventure game . The single @-@ player campaign is composed of 15 missions and features the Predator from the film . The player has access to Predator weapons as seen in movies and other sources in the franchise , including claws and a shoulder @-@ mounted energy cannon . New weapons from the corresponding film include an energy pistol . 
 The player character also has stealth camouflage and several vision modes that allow him to see in the dark , such as infrared vision . Health is represented by a segmented life bar that regenerates after a successful kill , and an energy bar is also available to provide power for the Predator 's weapons . In addition to destroying Aliens , the Predator must eradicate other traces of their presence , including facehugger husks . Aliens , husks , humans , and other potential targets are all represented by icons on a heads @-@ up display . The game 's camera is manipulated by pressing the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) ' s triggers , and the Predator can " lock on " to opponents using a first @-@ person view to target them with his ranged weapons . 
 Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem uses a system of " honor points " to award points to players for actions considered honorable for Predators . For instance , " tagging " an enemy in first @-@ person mode before killing it adds points , while killing humans reduces points . Honor points are used at the end of each mission to upgrade the Predator 's weapons and equipment . In addition to the campaign , a single @-@ player mode called " Skirmish " is available , in which players have five minutes to dispose of as many Aliens as possible in one of the game 's maps . Skirmish can also be played in a cooperative setting with one other player using the PSP 's " ad @-@ hoc " local wireless mode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The protagonist predator has come to Earth in response to a distress signal from a comrade 's ship . Upon his arrival in the small Colorado town of Gunnison , he learns that Aliens have begun terrorizing the local populace . His mission is to destroy the Aliens and remove any trace of their activity . After reaching his comrades ' ship and erasing its traces from Earth , the Predator 's only mission is to exterminate all Aliens in the vicinity . 
 The Predator travels through rural and urban areas of Gunnison , fighting more Aliens along the way , and occasionally being harassed by human soldiers and civilians . Finally , the main Alien lair is found in a hospital , where several mines are set by the Predator to bring the Hive down . The game concludes with the final fight against an attacking helicopter and the hospital 's destruction . Suddenly , the Alien Queen is seen appearing out of the hospital 's rubble , only to be destroyed , along with the entire town , by a nuclear warhead , while the Predator successfully leaves Earth . 
 = = Development = = 
 Alien vs. Predator began as a franchise in February 1990 , when Dark Horse Comics published a comic book featuring Aliens from the Alien series of films in battle against the title characters of Predator . Both franchises are owned by Twentieth Century Fox . In November 1990 , Fox released Predator 2 , and one of the final scenes in the film showed an Alien skull inside a trophy case aboard a Predator ship . Fox began licensing merchandise for the new franchise , including comic books and video games . In 1993 , the first Aliens vs. Predator video game was released ; Alien vs Predator for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . 
 British independent game studio Rebellion Developments became involved with the franchise in 1994 with the release of Alien vs Predator for the Atari Jaguar , described by 1UP.com as " probably the only good Jaguar game ever made " . Rebellion later developed an enhanced remake of the game for the PC , which was the first PC game to require a video card and went on to win a BAFTA award . The first feature film in the franchise , Alien vs. Predator , was released in 2004 and did not include a tie @-@ in video game . In August 2007 , Sierra Entertainment announced that the company had partnered with Fox to produce a video game corresponding with the sequel film Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem . Rebellion was identified as the game 's developer . The company , while not strictly handheld @-@ focused , has a reputation in the industry for developing PSP games . 
 Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem was developed exclusively for the PSP . Regarding PSP exclusivity , Rebellion lead designer Tim Jones explained " It was basically a matter of logistics . We have a strong heritage with the PSP and have done a number of successful titles such as Star Wars Battlefront : Renegade Squadron " . Rebellion decided to forego the first @-@ person shooter format of their earlier Alien vs. Predator games and instead focused on a third @-@ person perspective , with the player taking the role of a lone Predator . Unlike previous Rebellion Alien vs. Predator titles , Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem does not permit players to take the role of Aliens or human Marines . The company used a game engine of its own creation , and Hal <unk> , associate producer at Sierra Entertainment , said " ... the challenge was to deliver high quality graphics while not sacrificing game performance and this is something that Rebellion achieved and will be noticed by players right away . " 
 Rebellion was given materials from the film 's production , including footage and the full script , in order to recreate the feel of the film and lend authenticity to the game . The game 's plot is loosely based on the film 's , with the player character working to remove traces of Alien and Predator presence in a small American town . Despite similarities to the movie , the ending is different and the game does not feature the " <unk> " , a Predator @-@ Alien hybrid introduced in Alien vs. Predator . The directors of the film , the Brothers Strause , are fans of Rebellion 's PC Aliens vs. Predator game and worked with the studio to develop Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem 's premise . In an interview with IGN , Rebellion 's Tim Jones said " Fox is very protective of their franchise and take [ sic ] great care to make sure it is treated properly . We had to work within strict confines to remain consistent with the movie and everything we did had to be approved by the studio . " The game 's system of honor points was considered crucial by Rebellion , who felt that the Predators , despite being the " bad guys " , were characterized by a strict code of honor . 
 " <unk> Requiem PSP is set in Gunnison , the same small town as seen in the movie . The player assumes the role of the new elite Predator from the film . While many of the locations , weapons , and scenarios are nearly identical to the film , the game designers were given the freedom to make the best game possible , which meant at times rearranging some of the story elements and action set pieces . " 
 Sierra described the game 's development as challenging because portable consoles lack the processing power of larger machines . Rebellion complained about the PSP 's lack of a second analog thumbstick , stating that it made creating a usable control scheme challenging . They also stated that because the game 's protagonist preferred to work alone , Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem would not contain a multiplayer cooperative mode for the single @-@ player campaign , but a " Survival Mode " minigame would be available where two players could work together to fight Aliens . The game had a relatively short development cycle , and was made in less time than the movie . 
 Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem was released on November 13 , 2007 in North America , over a month ahead of the film 's December 25 opening . It was released on November 30 in Europe and December 6 in Australia . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem received mostly negative reviews among gaming publications . It was considered a poor movie tie @-@ in , an analysis typical of such games . Reviewers specifically said the game wasn 't " bad " , just not " good " — IGN , for instance , said " AVP doesn 't suck , but that isn 't to say it 's good . " GameSpot 's reviewer said " Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem isn 't a terrible game ; it 's just really mediocre . " Eurogamer 's Ellie Gibson described the game by referencing a colleague 's review of Miami Vice : The Game , a previous Rebellion PSP title , which stated " [ Miami Vice : The Game is ] one of those games that 's not bad , but nor is it ever that good . " The week before the movie 's release , Requiem was listed at # 5 on GameFly 's most @-@ rented PSP titles list . 
 One critique was the game 's difficulty level , which was described as too easy . Gameplanet called it " shockingly easy " and claimed that upgrades gained through the honor system made the protagonist invincible rather than stronger . Eurogamer noted that " furiously button mashing " was generally sufficient to kill most of the game 's enemies . 
 " Although it 's true that a game 's difficulty is hardly the sole indicator of its overall quality , every other part of the game is far too mired in blandness to prevent you from drifting off under the spell of mindlessly simple gameplay . " 
 The artificial intelligence of the game 's enemies , the Aliens , was regarded as lacking , and one reviewer noted that their blood was not acidic , a defining characteristic of the creatures from the films . Several reviewers did praise the game 's representation of the Predator , however , especially in the early levels . 
 The game 's graphics and audio were not well @-@ received , with IGN commenting " There 's never a moment that makes you step back and say wow . The textures are muted , the Predator looks alright , but everything is pretty forgettable . " 
 Reviewers also took the opportunity to mock the franchise itself , with Eurogamer suggesting that the series be made into a sitcom . Regarding the multiplayer , IGN 's Greg Miller said " This mode was so boring I made up my own story . I was the Mommy Predator and Ryan from the IGN News Team was the Daddy Predator . We were protecting our children -- the cars in the large empty lot we were running around -- from the aliens " . 1UP 's Patrick Klepek said " Aliens vs. Predator : Requiem fails to capitalize on its gaming heritage , instead falling prey to the same substandard licensed schlock we 're used to from the films . " 
 = The Child ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " The Child " is the first episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , the 27th episode overall . It was originally released on November 21 , 1988 , in broadcast syndication . The story was originally written by Jaron Summers and Jon Povill for the cancelled late 1970s series Star Trek : Phase II . Due to the tight deadlines caused by the 1988 Writers Guild of America Strike , the producers of The Next Generation searched the records of that earlier television project , resulting in the script being amended by show runner Maurice Hurley . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Federation starship Enterprise . In this episode , ship 's Counsellor Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) becomes pregnant by an alien entity and gives birth to a mysterious child . This causes problems for the Enterprise , which is transporting dangerous plague strains . The child 's presence on the ship begins to endanger the crew due to the effects on a virus sample being transported by the ship . It sacrifices its physical body , turning into an energy being , telling Troi why it visited before departing . 
 Being the first episode of the second season , " The Child " was the first episode to feature Diana Muldaur as Doctor Katherine Pulaski and Whoopi Goldberg as Guinan . Director Rob Bowman was allowed to use additional camera equipment to improve the style of filming , resulting in a change to the opening shot of the episode . It was watched by 10 @.@ 9 million viewers , but critics held a negative opinion of the episode saying that there was no ongoing effect to Troi . Further criticism also compared the means of the character 's pregnancy to rape , and that the reactions of the other crew were irrational . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The new Chief Medical Officer , Dr. Katherine Pulaski ( Diana Muldaur ) , is brought aboard the Enterprise as it prepares to travel to <unk> IX in order to take on dangerous virus samples , which will be carried to a Starfleet Medical station in order to devise a cure for a plague epidemic in the <unk> System . Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) meets her in the Ten Forward lounge , as well as the ship 's new bartender , Guinan ( Whoopi Goldberg ) . On leaving the starbase , a ball of energy passes through the hull and enters the ship unnoticed , eventually settling into ship 's counselor Deanna Troi 's ( Marina Sirtis ) quarters . The next day , Pulaski finds that Troi is pregnant ; the foetus is developing at an accelerated rate and will be fully developed in 36 hours . Troi does not know who the father is , but is aware of a " presence " entering her body the night before . Though the senior staff debate terminating the pregnancy , Troi decides she will carry the child to term . 
 While the Enterprise arrives at <unk> IX and begins to transport the samples into a highly secure storage vessel , Troi gives birth to an apparently normal boy , whom she names Ian Andrew after her father . Ian continues to develop rapidly ; within a day , he appears as a four @-@ year @-@ old child with corresponding mental faculties . Troi , Picard and Pulaski observe Ian ( Zachary Benjamin ) purposely putting himself in harm 's way , seemingly just for the experience . When asked if he is ready to explain who or what he is , though , Ian responds " not yet . " Having completed the transfer of the virus samples , the Enterprise heads for Starfleet Medical , but the crew finds one of the plague strains is growing inexplicably ; should it continue growing , it will rupture the storage vessel and result in the catastrophic exposure of all on board . 
 They discover that an unknown source of <unk> radiation is causing the growth . Separately , Ian ( R.J. Williams ) , now appearing as an eight @-@ year @-@ old , confides to Troi that he is the source of the crew 's problems and will have to leave . Troi realizes Ian is dying and calls for medical assistance . As Pulaski tries to keep Ian alive , Lt. Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) scans him and discovers that he is the source of radiation . Ian dies in Troi 's arms , and turns into a ball of energy , which settles into Troi 's hands , communicating telepathically with her for a moment , then leaves the ship . The lifeform told her that he wished to experience childhood and living among the crew . With Ian gone , the plague sample returns to normal and the crew continues on to Starfleet Medical . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Phase II = = = 
 The origins of an episode based on a female crew member becoming pregnant first materialised in Gene Roddenberry 's initial pitch for Star Trek : The Original Series . Entitled " Infection " , the episode was described as " A female crew member is discovered to be pregnant , and the growing realization it could be the larvae of an alien , using her body like some insects plant their eggs in other living insects . " A similar idea was created for the Star Trek : Phase II television series in the late 1970s . Jaron Summers pitched a premise for " The Child " in a meeting with Jon Povill , Roddenberry 's assistant , and producer Harold Livingston . Povill suggested changes in the meeting , and Summers subsequently submitted a revised draft treatment . Livingston asked Povill to re @-@ write it , who did a complete re @-@ write in the space of a week . Livingston was subsequently so impressed with his efforts that he demanded Roddenberry make him story editor . Roddenberry refused , until Livingston threatened to quit if Povill didn 't get the job . This changed Roddenberry 's mind but Livingston found that it seriously damaged their working relationship . 
 The story would have seen the <unk> , Ilia ( Persis Khambatta ) , becoming pregnant by an alien entity as the ship passes near a nebula . She gives birth to a baby girl , who she names <unk> . The Enterprise suffers multiple near @-@ disasters , which are each resolved by the intervention of the child . Meanwhile the ship 's hull is slowly dissolving and the vessel will break apart in a matter of hours . The new Vulcan science officer Xon ( David <unk> ) mind melds with the child and discovers that it needs to be transported directly into a bright light which had been pursuing the Enterprise . This procedure is completed and as the child enters the light , it transforms into a higher life form . The episode ends with the crew musing that Ilia acted as the being 's first womb and the Enterprise was the second . The series was cancelled as it went into initial production for the pilot , " In Thy Image " , with that being rewritten as Star Trek : The Motion Picture . The script for the Phase II version of " The Child " was later reprinted in full in Judith and Garfield Reeves @-@ Stevens ' 1997 book Star Trek : Phase II : The Lost Series . Povill and Summers adapted the script for use in the fan @-@ series Star Trek : Phase II , also known as Star Trek : New Voyages . Povill also directed the episode . 
 = = = The Next Generation = = = 
 In response to the success of the first season , Paramount Television increased the budget per episode for Star Trek : The Next Generation , but also changed the financing structure so that funds could be carried over from episode to episode . But due to the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike , the work on the second season was delayed and the length of it overall was reduced . The producers sought to go into production immediately upon the strike being lifted , so they studied the story ideas put forward as part of Phase II . " The Child " was held up as one possibility , with the position of Ilia in the story changed to become Troi . Sirtis praised this development , as she felt she had been overlooked during the first season due to the presence of both Gates McFadden and Denise Crosby . 
 Show runner Maurice Hurley later admitted that he had never looked at the Phase II script , while executive producer Rick Berman later explained that the writers did not have as much time to redevelop the script due to the restricted time @-@ scale imposed by the strike . Despite this , director Rob Bowman wanted to give the fans of the show a good episode to start the second season , the idea of which Berman agreed with . So Bowman said that his direction " went a bit further " than he would normally , in order to compensate for the script difficulties . He was allowed to use additional cameras and equipment to improve the style of filming , including the opening shot of the episode . 
 Making their first appearances in The Next Generation in " The Child " were Diana Muldaur as Doctor Katherine Pulaski , and Whoopi Goldberg as Guinan . Muldaur had previously appeared in episodes of The Original Series as other characters , and had been written in to replace Gates McFadden as Beverly Crusher . Officially McFadden had chosen to leave as she didn 't like her character development , the same reason given for Crosby departing during the first season . However , she had actually been fired by Hurley . It had been intended for Pulaski to bring more of a Doctor Leonard McCoy vibe to the series . Meanwhile , Academy Award winner Goldberg had been actively pursuing a role on the show as Nichelle Nichols ' portrayal of Uhura in The Original Series had inspired her to become an actress . Her agent was initially ignored by the producers as they did not believe that she wanted to be on the show , until Goldberg called them herself . Her character , was named after Mary " Texas " Guinan , a prohibition @-@ era speakeasy owner . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Child " was released in broadcast syndication on November 18 , 1988 . It was watched by 10 @.@ 9 million viewers , the highest for the series since the first season episode " Too Short a Season " , broadcast on February 14 of the same year . Dennis McCarthy 's composition for this episode was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Music Composition for a Series in 1989 , but lost to Joel Rosenbaum for an episode of Falcon Crest . 
 The episode was described as " uneven " and an " inauspicious start to the second season " by James Van Hise and Hal Schuster in their book The Complete Trek : The Next Generation . While the duo praised the addition of Muldaur and Goldberg , the lack of a follow @-@ up to the episode was criticised as they felt that the events should have had some type of lasting effect on Troi . It was suggested that either she would want to have a child , or she would be wary of them in general due to the impact of the loss of Ian . Keith DeCandido pointed out several changes at the start of this season in " The Child " that would recur throughout the rest of the run of The Next Generation in his review for Tor.com. These included moving Geordi La Forge to become chief engineer , placing Miles O 'Brien as transporter chief and Riker growing a beard . However , he criticised that Worf calling for Troi to have an abortion was never mentioned again , but added that it was discussed in a non @-@ canon novel , A Rock and a Hard Place by Peter David . 
 James Hunt , in his review for Den of Geek , was surprised that no @-@ one in the episode reacted to Troi undergoing what he saw as a form of rape . He also felt that her eagerness to have the child could have been a type of mind control , but none of the crew seem to consider that as a possibility . He said that the crew failed to act rationally for the sake of the plot , which was one of his pet <unk> in television , adding that you could " Replace any main character in this episode with a parsnip and the outcome will be unchanged . " Hunt also described the introduction of new elements as " clunky " , feigning " wonder " that " someone doesn 't say ' Nice facial hair , <unk> ' to Riker because that 's the level of subtlety they go for . " Zack Handlen , in reviewing the episode for the A.V. Club gave it a score of D + , criticising the passive nature of Troi and equated her pregnancy to rape . The entire life of the child was presented as a " joyous life experience " , and Handlen described the lack of issues in a three @-@ day pregnancy as " bunk " . He felt that the episode would have been better served by concentrating on the hard science fiction concept of the plasma plague , which was only used as a macguffin . 
 The first home media release of " The Child " was on VHS cassette , appearing on August 25 , 1994 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season two DVD box set , released in on May 7 , 2002 . The most recent release was as part of the season two Blu @-@ ray set on December 4 , 2012 . 
 = Free Expression Policy Project = 
 The Free Expression Policy Project ( FEPP ) is an organization devoted to assisting researchers with assembling information related to freedom of speech , media democracy , and copyright , and advocating for these issues . Civil liberties lawyer Marjorie Heins founded the nonprofit organization in 2000 . Based in Manhattan , New York , it was initially associated with the National Coalition Against Censorship , and subsequently operated as part of the Democracy Program of the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University Law School . 
 The FEPP conducted a survey in 2001 which revealed that online monitoring software , including Net Nanny , SurfWatch , and <unk> , cast too broad a net and often blocked legitimate educational websites in their attempts to censor material from youths . In 2003 , the organization assisted 33 academics in filing a friend @-@ of @-@ the @-@ court brief challenging a law which restricted the sale of violent video games to minors . In coordination with the Brennan Center for Justice , the FEPP released a public policy report in 2006 on the inefficiency of Internet filtering ; the report concluded that freedom of expression was harmed by such online censorship activity . In 2007 , the FEPP became an independent organization . 
 The New Walford Guide to Reference Resources praised the FEPP website for its links to resources on freedom of expression and censorship . FEPP has been characterized by the Austin American @-@ Statesman as a think tank devoted to researching the First Amendment to the United States Constitution . The Denver Post described the organization as a censorship watchdog organization , and a separate article from the same newspaper called it a left @-@ of @-@ center politically aligned group , which advocated for both intellectual freedom and artistic freedom . 
 = = History = = 
 The Free Expression Policy Project was founded by Marjorie Heins , who became its initial director . It was formed as a nonprofit organization . Founded in 2000 , the organization formed with goals of assisting researchers with assembling information related to freedom of speech , media democracy , and copyright , and advocating for these issues . It started as an outgrowth of the National Coalition Against Censorship . Prior to founding the organization , Heins served as director of the Art Censorship Project at the American Civil Liberties Union . The FEPP monitors incidents of censorship against artists , and is based in Manhattan , New York . 
 A 2001 survey conducted by the organization found that popular online filters including Net Nanny , SurfWatch , and <unk> had significant problems , and blocked legitimate websites , including the website of US Congressman Richard Armey because his site included his nickname , " Dick " . The University of Kansas Archie R. Dykes Medical Library was blocked by SurfWatch because the word " dykes " appeared on the site . In 2003 , Stephanie Greist served as communications director for the Free Expression Policy Project . 
 In 2003 , the Free Expression Policy Project assisted 33 academics specializing in journalism , with filing a friend @-@ of @-@ the @-@ court brief challenging a law which restricted the sale of violent video games to youths . In 2004 the organization operated at the National Coalition Against Censorship . In 2005 the organization was part of the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University Law School . Within the Brennan Center for Justice , the FEPP operated through the Democracy Program at the law school . In 2006 the organization , in collaboration with the Brennan Center for Justice , released a report on the inefficiency of Internet filtering . The 87 @-@ page report concluded that academic @-@ based censorship of material on the Internet was far too broad and harmed free expression of ideas . The FEPP became independent from both the National Coalition Against Censorship and the Brennan Center for Justice in 2007 . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The New Walford Guide to Reference Resources praised the FEPP website for its links to other websites about freedom of expression and censorship . Austin American @-@ Statesman described the Free Expression Policy Project as a think tank dedicated to the First Amendment to the United States Constitution . A 2002 article in The Denver Post called the FEPP a watchdog organization which monitored censorship . In a 2004 article , The Denver Post characterized the organization as a think tank from the left @-@ of @-@ center political alignment , which advocated for both intellectual freedom and artistic freedom . The New York Times called the FEPP an organization which was critical of censorship of depictions of violence in the media . 
 = Captain Jack ( Billy Joel song ) = 
 " Captain Jack " is a song by Billy Joel featured on his 1973 album Piano Man with a live version on his 1981 album Songs in the Attic . 
 It is considered by some to be the most important and pivotal of his early compositions because his performance of the song at an April 15 , 1972 live radio concert at Sigma Studios on WMMR in Philadelphia , and the subsequent airplay this live version received on the station , brought him to the attention of major record labels , including Columbia , with whom he would sign a recording contract in 1973 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Joel wrote " Captain Jack " in late 1971 , while sitting in his apartment in Oyster Bay , Long Island , looking out the window , trying to find inspiration for a song . Across the street was a housing project , and he observed suburban teenagers going into the project and obtaining heroin from a dealer known as " Captain Jack " . " It 's about coming out of the New York suburbs , " Joel told John Kalodner in 1974 . " But in my travels I have seen a lot of the same suburb all over the country . The song is sort of brutal , but sometimes it is good to be brutal and offend people — it keeps them on their toes . " 
 The song , according to Joel , is an anti @-@ drug song . He says , " What 's so horrible about an affluent young white teenager 's life that he 's got to shoot heroin ? It 's really a song about what I consider to be a pathetic loser kind of lifestyle . I 've been accused of , ' Oh , this song promotes drug use and masturbation . ' No , no , no . Listen to the song . This guy is a loser . " In writing about the song in the liner notes of his Songs in the Attic album , Joel once again emphasized the point : " ... so many friends shoveled under the Long Island dirt . The miracle of modern chemistry killed them if Vietnam didn 't . " 
 = = Pre @-@ release = = 
 To promote his debut album , Cold Spring Harbor , Joel undertook a tour that lasted through most of the spring and into the early summer of 1972 . One of the people who noticed and liked the LP was the music director of Philadelphia radio station WMMR @-@ FM , Dennis <unk> . He arranged to have Joel perform a concert for radio @-@ station listeners who won tickets . On Saturday night , April 15 , 1972 , Joel performed an hour @-@ long concert in front of these contest winners at Sigma Sound Studios in Philadelphia . Joel and his touring band from 1971 @-@ 1972 ( Larry Russell on bass guitar , Al Hertzberg on lead guitar , Rhys Clark on drums ) performed 12 songs , seven from Cold Spring Harbor and five songs he had not yet recorded . Some of the songs were later recorded for the Piano Man LP , including " The Ballad of Billy The Kid " , " Travelin ' Prayer " , and " Captain Jack " . 
 " Captain Jack " was immediately embraced by WMMR 's audience . For the next year and a half , the station kept its live version of the song in regular rotation . Listeners called in , wanting to know where they could find the song and on what album it appeared . The song was such a big hit in Philadelphia that several New York radio stations got their own tape copies and began to play it as well . Though Columbia Records ' then @-@ president , Clive Davis , first noticed Joel at the Mar y Sol festival in Puerto Rico on Easter Sunday , April 2 , 1972 , the constant airplay of Joel 's unreleased song kept the label 's attention . Columbia Records did their best to track Joel down . After turning down a record deal from Atlantic Records , Joel signed with Columbia in the spring of 1973 . 
 = = Release and reaction = = 
 " Captain Jack " was one of the 10 songs recorded in Los Angeles for Joel 's Columbia debut , Piano Man . It quickly became a staple of FM rock stations after the album 's release in November 1973 . This song , along with the songs " Piano Man " and " The Entertainer " , were the songs that Joel was best known for before the release of The Stranger in 1977 . 
 Reception for the song was mostly positive . Jack <unk> of Rolling Stone called it one of Joel 's " best efforts " . Ira Mayer called it Joel 's " signature piece , " and Stephen Holden said the song , a " centerpiece " of the album , " compelled attention for [ its ] despairing portraits of urban fringe life , despite [ the ] underlying shallowness . " Holden also believed that the song had a Bob Dylan feel to it . " As with so many rock stars , one of his most important early influences was Bob Dylan – in fact , ' Piano Man ' and ' Captain Jack , ' two of his more ambitious early tunes , as well as the more recent and better ' She 's Always a Woman , ' are practically keyboard parodies of Dylan critiques , " Holden says . Author Hank <unk> called " Captain Jack " " as bleak a portrait of growing up in the affluent suburbs as anything before L.A. punk hit nearly a decade later " . Stuart Levine of Variety called the song " lyrically expansive " and " dark . " Ron Rosenbaum of Slate , in a very negative review of Joel 's work , criticized " Captain Jack , " summarizing the song as , " Loser dresses up in poseur clothes and masturbates and shoots up heroin and is an all @-@ around phony in the eyes of the songwriter who is so , so superior to him . " 
 Joel made his first television appearance in the wake of the release of Piano Man , on the syndicated Don Kirshner 's Rock Concert program , in a performance recorded live in Chicago in March 1974 . " Captain Jack " was one of the three songs that were broadcast . In keeping with U.S. broadcast television standards of the time , Joel was forced to alter the lyrics slightly . Instead of singing the line " You just sit at home and masturbate " , he sang , " You just sit at home and la la la " . Kirshner recalled , " I knew he was going to be a big star , and so did he . " 
 By 1980 , " Captain Jack " had mostly disappeared from Joel 's concert setlists . Nevertheless , he always played it in Philadelphia , because he never forgot the role the song and the city played in his early career . A version recorded at The Spectrum in July 1980 was used on his live album , Songs in the Attic . Joel wrote , " ' Captain Jack ' plays with much more power and conviction when a roaring Philadelphia audience sets off a kind of internal explosion and the adrenaline screams through our veins ... When we play ' Captain Jack ' , we are actually committing an act of pure brutality . " Timothy White of Rolling Stone did not like this version , calling it " grating " . 
 The song entered the news again in 2000 when it was mistakenly used during Hillary Clinton 's announcement that she would be campaigning for U.S. Senate . According to an NPR report on worst campaign songs , a staffer notes that the playing of " Captain Jack " was a mistake . It was played from the Billy Joel compilation CD Greatest Hits Volume 1 , and the song intended to be played was " New York State of Mind " , which was track five on the CD . The Clinton staffer inadvertently played track two , which was " Captain Jack " . Her presumed opponent , Rudolph Giuliani , who ended up not running for the Senate , criticized the song 's use because of its alleged glorification of drugs . Giuliani even read the lyrics to the song in a live press conference . Joel replied in a statement , " There are a lot of important issues facing the voters in this Senate race . Is a politician 's interpretation of a song I wrote nearly 30 years ago an issue to the voters of New York state ? I do not think so . " 
 = Jan Matejko = 
 Jan Alojzy Matejko ( Polish pronunciation ) ( also known as Jan <unk> ; June 24 , 1838 – November 1 , 1893 ) was a Polish painter known for paintings of notable historical Polish political and military events . His works include large oil on canvas paintings like Rejtan ( 1866 ) , Union of Lublin ( 1869 ) or Battle of Grunwald ( 1878 ) , numerous portraits , a gallery of Polish kings , and murals in St. Mary 's Basilica , Kraków . He is counted among the most famous Polish painters . 
 Matejko spent most of his life in Kraków . His teachers at the Kraków Academy of Fine Arts included Wojciech Korneli Stattler and Władysław <unk> . Later , he became a director at this institution , which eventually was renamed the Jan Matejko Academy of Fine Arts . A number of his students became prominent painters themselves , including Maurycy Gottlieb , Jacek Malczewski , Józef Mehoffer and Stanisław Wyspiański . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 Matejko was born on June 24 , 1838 , in the Free City of Kraków . His father , Franciszek Ksawery Matejko ( Czech : František Xaver <unk> ) ( born 1789 or January 13 , 1793 , died October 26 , 1860 ) , a Czech from the village of <unk> , was a graduate of the Hradec Králové school who later became a tutor and music teacher . He first worked for the <unk> family in <unk> , Poland , then moved to Kraków , where he married the half @-@ German , half @-@ Polish Joanna Karolina <unk> ( <unk> ) . Jan was the ninth child of eleven that his parents had . He grew up in a <unk> building on Floriańska Street . After the death of his mother in 1845 , Jan and his siblings were cared for by his maternal aunt , Anna <unk> . 
 At a young age he witnessed the Kraków revolution of 1846 and the 1848 siege of Kraków by the Austrians , the two events which ended the existence of the Free City of Kraków . His two older brothers served in them under General Józef Bem ; one died and the other was forced into exile . He attended St. Ann 's High School , which he dropped out of in 1851 because of poor results . From his earliest days Matejko showed artistic talent , but he had great difficulty with other subjects . He never mastered a foreign language . Despite that and because of his exceptional talent he studied at the School of Fine Arts in Kraków from 1852 to 1858 . His teachers included Wojciech Korneli Stattler and Władysław <unk> . He selected historical painting as his specialization , and finished his first major work , Tsars <unk> before Zygmunt III ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> III ) , in 1853 ( he would return to this topic in a year before his death , in 1892 ) . During this time , he began exhibiting historical paintings at the Kraków Society of Friends of Fine Arts ( starting with 1855 ) . His seminal project for his graduation in 1858 was Sigismund I the Old <unk> the professors of the Jagiellonian University ( Zygmunt I <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . 
 Following his graduation , Matejko received a scholarship to study under Hermann Anschütz at the Academy of Fine Arts , Munich in 1859 . Next year he also received a scholarship to study at Academy of Fine Arts Vienna , but after a few days and a major quarrel with Christian Ruben , Matejko returned to Kraków . There he opened a studio at his family house at Floriańska Street . It would however be years before he would gain commercial success ; for a time he was the proverbial " starving artist " , who celebrated when he sold a canvas ( the Tsars <unk> ... ) for five gulden . 
 In 1860 Matejko issued an illustrated album , Clothing in Poland ( <unk> w Polsce ) , a project reflecting his intense interest in historical records of all kinds and his desire to promote such interest among the Polish people in an effort to intensify their patriotic feelings . His financial situation improved with the sale of two paintings , Death of <unk> during the <unk> of Henry Valois ( <unk> <unk> w czasie <unk> <unk> <unk> , 1861 ) and Jan Kochanowski mourning his daughter <unk> ( Jan Kochanowski nad <unk> <unk> , 1862 ) , which settled his debts . In 1862 he finished a painting , Stańczyk . ; initially received without much applaud , in time it would become known as one of Matejko 's most famous masterpieces . In Matejko 's art style , it visibly marks a transition from simply illustrating history to being the artist 's philosophical and moral commentary of it . 
 During the January Uprising of 1863 , in which he did not participate because of poor health , Matejko gave financial support , donating most of his savings to the cause , and personally transported arms to the insurgents ' camp . His Skarga 's Sermon ( <unk> <unk> ) , finished in May 1864 , was displayed in the gallery of the Kraków Society of Friends of Fine Arts , which gained him much publicity . On 5 November that year , in recognition for his contributions to recreating historical themes , he became a member of the Kraków Scientific Society ( Towarzystwo <unk> Krakowskie ) . Soon afterward , on 21 November , he married Teodora <unk> , with whom he would have five children : Beata , Helena , Tadeusz , Jerzy and Regina . Helena , his daughter , also an artist , helped victims in World War I and was awarded the Cross of Independence by president Stanisław Wojciechowski . 
 = = = Rise to fame = = = 
 At that time Matejko started to gain international recognition . In 1865 Matejko 's painting Skarga 's Sermon was awarded a gold medal at the yearly Paris salon ; soon afterwards Count Maurycy Potocki bought it for 10 @,@ 000 guldens . In 1867 , his painting Rejtan was awarded a gold medal at the World Exhibition in Paris and acquired by Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria for 50 @,@ 000 <unk> . His next major painting was the Union of Lublin ( Unia <unk> ) , created in the years 1867 @-@ 1869 . Once again applauded in Paris , it yielded Matejko a Cross of the French Légion d 'honneur . It was purchased by the Sejm of Galicia . Union ... was followed by Stefan Batory at Pskov ( Stefan Batory pod <unk> ) , finished in 1871 . In 1872 he visited Istanbul in the Ottoman Empire , and upon his return to Kraków he finished Astronomer Copernicus , or Conversations with God ( <unk> <unk> , czyli <unk> z <unk> ) , which was acquired by the Jagiellonian University . From the 1870s he was aided in many tasks by a secretary , Marian <unk> , who would become his " right hand " , his closest friend , a model for a number of paintings , and an author of memoirs about Matejko . 
 In 1872 during an exhibition in Prague he was offered a directorship of Academy of Fine Arts , Prague , and soon afterwards , a similar position at the Kraków 's School of Fine Arts . He accepted the Kraków 's offer , and was for many years the principal ( rector ) of the Academy of Fine Arts . In 1874 he finished Zawieszenie dzwonu Zygmunta ( The Hanging of the Sigismund bell ) . In 1878 he finished another masterpiece , Battle of Grunwald . That year he received an " honorary grand gold " medal in Paris , and the city council of Kraków presented him with a ceremonial scepter , a symbol of his " royal status in fine arts " . In year 1879 he finished working on Rok 1863 - Polonia ( Year 1863 - Polonia ) , his take on the contemporary January Uprising . Begun in 1864 , a year after the Uprising he himself lived through and where he lost a number of friends and family members , Matejko abandoned work on this canvas until prince Władysław Czartoryski became interested in acquiring it ; it is still considered unfinished . 
 Years 1880 @-@ 1882 marked his work on another large painting , Prussian Tribute ( <unk> <unk> ) . Matejko gifted this painting to " the Polish nation " , and it earned him honorary citizenship of Kraków ; one of the squares in the city was also named Matejko Square . In 1883 he finished Sobieski at Vienna ( Sobieski pod <unk> ) . Sobieski ... was gifted to Pope Leo XIII as a " gift of the Polish nation " and Matejko who was one of the members of the group delivering it received a Knight Commander with Star Order of Pius IX . At that time he also became a vocal spokesman in a number of political issues , publishing letters on issues such as Polish @-@ Russian relations . Another arena he was very engaged in were efforts to protect and reconstruct various historical monuments in the city of Kraków . In 1886 he finished a painting focusing not on Polish , but on French history : Virgin of Orléans , portraying Joan of Arc . Next year Matejko received the degree of Doctor of Philosophy , honoris causa , from the Jagiellonian University , and the Austrian <unk> et <unk> . In 1888 he finished <unk> of Racławice ( Bitwa pod <unk> ) . In 1888 @-@ 1899 , to justify his new academic title , he published a cycle of twelve sketches with an accompanying commentary , History of civilization in Poland ( <unk> <unk> w Polsce ) . From 1890 to 1892 he published another cycle of sketches , this time of Polish kings ( <unk> <unk> i <unk> <unk> - Fellowship of the kings and princes of Poland ) , which over the years became so popular they are seen as their canon portrayals . 1891 saw him finishing Constitution of the 3 May ( Konstytucja 3 Maja ) . He then began composing another large painting , Oaths of Jan Kazimierz ( <unk> Jana Kazimierza ) , but it remained unfinished due to his death . In 1892 , a year before his death , he finished a Self @-@ portrait ( <unk> ) . 
 Suffering from a peptic ulcer , on 30 October 1893 he suffered from internal bleeding , and died in Kraków on November 1 that year . His funeral on November 5 drew large crowds , and his death was mentioned in at least thirty two European newspapers . He was buried in the Kraków 's <unk> Cemetery . 
 = = Significance , style and themes = = 
 He is counted among the most famous Polish painters , described as " Poland 's greatest historical painter " and " a cult figure to the nation at large ... [ already ] by the time of his death . " . His style was praised for being " colourful , detailed and imaginative " . He succeeded in propagating Polish history , and reminding the world about Poland , while his country remained partitioned and without any independent political representation . His works , disseminated in thousands of reproductions , have become almost standard illustrations of many key events in Polish history . His 1860 illustrated album <unk> w Polsce ( Clothing in Poland ) is seen as a valuable historical reference . Critics of his work have pointed to his use of traditional painting style ( " antiquarian realism " , " theatrical effects " ) . At exhibitions abroad the nuanced historical context of his works would be often lost on foreign audiences . Occasionally his paintings would cause controversy ; for example Rejtan offended a number of prominent members of Polish nobility , who saw the painting as an indictment of their entire social class . His paintings were subject to censorship in the Russian Empire , and Nazi Germany planned to destroy Battle of Grunwald and the Prussian Homage , which the Nazi authorities considered offensive to the German view of history ( those paintings were among many that the Germans planned to purposefully destroy in their war on Polish culture ; both were however successfully hidden by the members of Poland resistance ) . 
 Many of his works are dedicated to famous events in Polish history . Matejko was focusing on major themes in Polish history and using historical sources to paint events in minute historical detail . His earliest paintings are simple historical paintings with no hidden messages . The later ones , starting with the painting Stańczyk ( 1862 ) , are intended to inspire the viewers with a patriotic message . Stańczyk focuses on the court jester , portrayed as a symbol of country 's conscience , sitting in a chair in the background of a party - a sole figure reflecting on the war , ignored by the joyful crowd . 
 In addition to history paintings Matejko made also numerous portraits . Among others : portraits of Jagiellonian University rectors Józef Szujski and Stanisław Tarnowski , and numerous portraits of family and friends , including Wife in the wedding dress ( " <unk> w <unk> <unk> " ) ( 1865 , destroyed by his wife during a quarrel and recreated in 1879 ) and a self @-@ portrait ( 1892 ) . Altogether Matejko authored 320 oil paintings and several thousands drawings and watercolors . He also designed the polychrome in St. Mary 's Basilica , Kraków ( 1889 – 1891 ) . 
 His paintings are on display in numerous Polish museums ; including the National Museum in Warsaw , National Museum in Kraków , National Museum in Poznań and National Museum in Wrocław . National Museum in Kraków has a branch dedicated to Matejko - House of Jan Matejko ( Dom Jana <unk> ) located in his former studio and family house at Floriańska Street , opened in 1898 . Another museum dedicated to Matejko , <unk> Jana <unk> , opened in <unk> ( where <unk> acquired a manor ) in 1865 . 
 Over 80 painters have been Matejko 's students at some point , many influenced during his tenure as the director of the Kraków School of Fine Arts , and are referred to as members of " Matejko School " . Prominent among them are Maurycy Gottlieb , Ephraim Moses Lilien , Jacek Malczewski , Józef Mehoffer , Antoni Piotrowski , Witold <unk> , Leon <unk> , and Stanisław Wyspiański . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Following is the list of Matejko 's selected works , in a chronological order . 
 = Aerodramus = 
 Aerodramus is a genus of small , dark , cave @-@ nesting birds in the <unk> tribe of the swift family . Its members are confined to tropical and subtropical regions in southern Asia , Oceania and northeastern Australia . Many of its members were formerly classified in Collocalia , but were first placed in a separate genus by American ornithologist Harry Church Oberholser in 1906 . 
 This is a taxonomically difficult group of very similar species . Echolocation , DNA sequencing and parasitic lice have all been used to establish relationships , but some problems , such as the placement of the Papuan swiftlet are not fully resolved . These swiftlets can pose major identification problems where several species occur . 
 What distinguishes Aerodramus swiftlets from other swifts , and indeed almost all other birds , is their ability to use a simple but effective form of echolocation . This enables them to navigate within the breeding and roosting caves . 
 The nests of Aerodramus swiftlets are constructed with saliva as a major component . In two species , saliva is the only material used , and the nests are collected for the famous Chinese delicacy ' bird 's nest soup ' , the over @-@ collection of which puts pressure on the swiftlet populations . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The range of these swiftlets is confined to tropical southern Asia , Oceania , northeastern Australia and the Indian Ocean , with the greatest diversity in Southeast Asia , Indonesia and Papua New Guinea . Several of the species are restricted to small islands , and their limited range can make them vulnerable , like the Seychelles , Whitehead 's and Guam swiftlets . The Mangaia swiftlet is a recently extinct species known only from fossils . 
 = = Description = = 
 Aerodramus swiftlets are in many respects typical swifts , having narrow wings for fast flight , and a wide gape and small reduced beak surrounded by bristles for catching insects in flight . They have dull plumage which is mainly in shades of black , brown , and grey . Members of this genus typically have dark brown upper wings and upper body , sometimes with a paler rump , light brown underparts , a paler throat , and brownish @-@ white under @-@ wings with dark brown " armpits " . Males and female plumages are similar in appearance , as is that of the juvenile , for those species for which it has been described ; in some species the juvenile shows pale fringes to the flight feathers . 
 The legs , as with many swifts , are very short , preventing the birds from perching , but allowing them to cling to vertical surfaces . The flight is mainly gliding due to very long primary feathers and small breast muscles . Aerodramus swiftlets , depending on species , weigh 8 – 35 grammes ( 0 @.@ 28 – 1 @.@ 23 oz ) and are 9 – 16 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 28 – 1 @.@ 23 in ) long . These swiftlets are very similar , and where several species occur , such as Borneo , New Guinea and the Philippines , may not be separable in the field . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Aerodramus swiftlets are aerial insectivores , which take prey like flies on the wing . They roost and breed in caves ; during the day they leave the caves to forage for food , and return to roost at night . They are monogamous and both partners take part in caring for the nestlings . Males perform aerial displays to attract females and mating occurs at the nest . The breeding season overlaps the wet season , which corresponds to an increased insect population . 
 Clutch size depends on the location and the food source , but generally Aerodramus swiftlets lay one or two eggs . The eggs are a dull white , and are laid every other day . Many , if not all , species are colonial nesters ; some build their nests in high , dark corners on cave walls . 
 Most Aerodramus swiftlets live in the tropical Indo @-@ Pacific region and do not migrate . These birds usually remain in one cave or other roosting / nesting site . Examples of cave sites include the Niah Caves and Gunung Mulu National Park , which are both located in Sarawak , Malaysian Borneo . 
 Characteristics of behaviour , such as what materials apart from saliva the nests contain , can be used to differentiate between certain species of Aerodramus . 
 = = Echolocation = = 
 The genus Aerodramus is of special interest due to its use of echolocation . The swiftlets use this technique to navigate in darkness through the chasms and shafts of the caves where they breed and roost at night . Apart from swiftlets , the only other avian species to use echolocation is the unrelated <unk> . 
 The Aerodramus swiftlets ' echolocating double clicks are within the normal human hearing range and up to 3 milliseconds apart , with the interval becoming shorter in darker locations . Unlike the rest of the genus ( for those species which have been studied ) , the Atiu swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> , and the black @-@ nest swiftlet , A. maximus , emit only single clicks . Interestingly , the former species also uses echolocation outside its caves . 
 The use of echolocation was once used to separate Aerodramus from the other non @-@ echolocating cave swiftlet genera Collocalia and Hydrochous ( virtually nothing is known about <unk> ) . However , recently , the pygmy swiftlet , Collocalia troglodytes , was discovered making similar clicking noises both inside and outside its roosting cave . 
 It has recently been determined that the echolocation vocalizations do not agree with evolutionary relationship between swiftlet species as suggested by DNA sequence comparison . This suggests that as in bats , echolocation sounds , once present , adapt rapidly and independently to the particular species ' acoustic environment . 
 A study suggested that the echolocation subunits were mainly located in the central nervous system , while the subunits in the vocal apparatus were already present and capable of use before echolocation even evolved . This study supports the hypothesis of independent evolution of echolocation in Aerodramus and Collocalia , with the subsequent evolution of complex behaviour needed to complement the physical echolocation system , or just possibly that the vocal apparatus @-@ parts of the echolocation system might even be inherited from some prehistoric nocturnal ancestor . 
 It has been suggested that the giant or waterfall swiftlet , Hydrochous gigas , which cannot echolocate , may be descended from an echolocating ancestor . 
 = = Saliva nests = = 
 The intricately constructed saliva nests of this swiftlet genus , which in some species contain no other material , are collected to make the delicacy bird 's nest soup . They therefore command extremely high prices . 
 Authentic bird 's nest soup is made from the nests of the edible @-@ nest swiftlet ( or white @-@ nest swiftlet ) , Aerodramus fuciphagus , and the black @-@ nest swiftlet , Aerodramus maximus . Instead of incorporating twigs , feathers and straw like others in the genus , these two swiftlets make their nest only from strands of their gummy saliva , which harden when exposed to air . Once the nests are harvested , they are cleaned and sold to restaurants . Over the past twenty years , the high demand for the nests of these Aerodramus species has had an adverse effect on their populations . The Niah caves population of black @-@ nest swiftlets plunged from around 1 @.@ 5 million pairs in 1959 to 150 @,@ 000 – 298 @,@ 000 pairs in the early 1990s through over @-@ harvesting . 
 Early authors had doubts about the material used to make the nest , with whale and fish sperm and sea foam being proposed as the basis for construction . Even in the 1830s , when the use of saliva had been fairly well established , it was believed that it was only a cement to bind a sea plant which provided the bulk of the gelatinous material of the nest . 
 = = Lice = = 
 As with other taxonomically difficult groups , ectoparasites can give information on relationships . A study of swiftlet parasites in northern Borneo involved transferring lice between closely related swiftlet species . The survival of lice in most of these transfers was significantly reduced in proportion to the mean difference in feather barb size between the donor and recipient species of hosts . Thus , adaptation to a particular resource on the body of the host appears to govern the specificity of swiftlet lice . In transfers where lice survived , the lice moved to different areas on the body of the host where the mean barb diameter of the feathers on which the lice occurred had the required value . 
 = = Papuan swiftlet = = 
 The Papuan swiftlet , Aerodramus papuensis , has three toes instead of the usual four in this group . It has the ability to echolocate , but whereas other previously studied species use echolocation primarily while flying in their caves , the Papuan swiftlet appears to be nocturnal or crepuscular and uses echolocation while active outside at night . It uses single , not double , clicks . DNA sequence data provides strong support for a basal relationship between A. papuensis and other Aerodramus taxa and suggest that this species and the waterfall swift Hydrochous gigas , are sister taxa , a relationship that would indicate paraphyly of the genus Aerodramus . 
 = = Species in taxonomic order = = 
 Seychelles swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Mascarene swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Indian swiftlet , Aerodramus unicolor 
 Philippine swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Moluccan swiftlet group 
 Halmahera swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Sulawesi swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Seram swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Mountain swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 White @-@ rumped swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Australian swiftlet , Aerodramus terraereginae 
 Himalayan swiftlet , Aerodramus brevirostris 
 Indochinese swiftlet , Aerodramus rogersi ( sometimes included in A. brevirostris ) 
 Volcano swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Whitehead 's swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Bare @-@ legged swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Mayr 's swiftlet , Aerodramus orientalis 
 Palawan swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Mossy @-@ nest swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> ( sometimes included in A. vanikorensis ) 
 Uniform swiftlet , Aerodramus vanikorensis 
 <unk> swiftlet , Aerodramus ( vanikorensis ) <unk> 
 Palau swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Mariana swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Island swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Mangaia swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> ( prehistoric extinction ) 
 Atiu swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Tahiti swiftlet , Aerodramus leucophaeus 
 <unk> swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Black @-@ nest swiftlet , Aerodramus maximus 
 Edible @-@ nest swiftlet , Aerodramus fuciphagus 
 Brown @-@ rumped swiftlet , Aerodramus ( fuciphagus ) <unk> 
 Germain 's swiftlet , Aerodramus <unk> 
 Three @-@ toed swiftlet , Aerodramus papuensis 
 = Streatham portrait = 
 The " Streatham " portrait is an oil painting on panel from the 1590s believed to be a later copy of a portrait of the English noblewoman Lady Jane Grey dating to her lifetime ( 1536 / 1537 – 54 ) . It shows a three @-@ quarter @-@ length depiction of a young woman in Tudor @-@ period dress holding a prayer book , with the faded inscription " Lady Jayne " or " Lady <unk> " in the upper @-@ left corner . It is in poor condition and damaged , as if it has been attacked . Although of historical interest , it is generally considered to be of poor artistic quality . As of January 2015 the portrait is in Room 3 of the National Portrait Gallery in London . 
 The work is thought to have been completed as part of a set of paintings of Protestant martyrs . It was in the possession of a collector in Streatham , London , by the early 20th century . In December 2005 the portrait was examined by the art dealer Christopher Foley . He saw it as an accurate , though poorly executed , reproduction of a contemporary painting of Jane , had it verified and on that basis negotiated its sale . The work was acquired by the National Portrait Gallery in London for a rumoured £ 100 @,@ 000 . The historian David Starkey was highly critical of the sale and challenged Foley 's identifications . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lady Jane Grey was the great @-@ granddaughter of Henry VII through his youngest daughter Mary Tudor , and first cousin once removed to his grandson , King Edward VI . After Edward 's death , a Protestant faction proclaimed her queen over Henry VIII 's daughters , hoping to prevent the Catholic Mary Tudor from taking the throne . Two weeks after the death of her brother , Mary , with the support of the English people , claimed the throne , which Jane relinquished only nine days after being installed . She and her husband , Lord Guildford Dudley , were imprisoned in the Tower of London on charges of high treason . Jane 's trial was conducted in November , but her sentence of death was suspended . In February 1554 , Jane 's father Henry , who had been pardoned , participated in Wyatt 's rebellion . On 12 February , Mary had Jane , then aged 16 , and her husband beheaded ; Jane 's father suffered the same fate two days later . 
 Jane was a devout Protestant during the English Reformation , when the Church of England violently rejected the authority of the Pope and the Roman Catholic Church . Known for her piety and education , she corresponded with Protestant leaders in Continental Europe , such as Heinrich Bullinger . A modest person who dressed plainly , her last words before her execution are reported as " Lord , into thy hands I commend my spirit ! " Jane 's execution by a Catholic queen made her into what the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography terms a " Protestant martyr " , and by the end of the century Jane had become , in the words of the historian Eric Ives , " a Protestant icon " . Depictions of Jane in the 16th and 17th centuries , such as in John Foxe 's Actes and Monuments ( 1563 ) , published after Protestant Elizabeth took the throne , " presented [ Jane ] as primarily a figure in a national narrative about an elect nation possessed of a pure Protestant faith which had risen supreme over Catholic Europe " . 
 Jane was long thought to be the only 16th @-@ century English monarch without a surviving contemporary portrait ; one was documented in a 1590 inventory , but is now considered lost . Some identified as her were later deemed to be of other sitters , such as one of Catherine Parr , the last of the six wives of King Henry VIII , which was identified as Lady Jane Grey until 1996 . Other works , such as The Execution of Lady Jane Grey ( 1833 ) by Paul Delaroche , were painted years or centuries after her death . As a result , Cynthia Zarin of The New Yorker writes , " the blank where [ Jane 's ] face should be has made it that much easier for succeeding generations to imprint their political and personal fantasies on her " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The three @-@ quarter @-@ length portrait measures 85 @.@ 6 cm × 60 @.@ 3 cm ( 33 @.@ 7 in × 23 @.@ 7 in ) , and is painted with oil on Baltic oak . A faded inscription , reading " Lady Jayne " or " Lady <unk> " , is in the upper @-@ left corner , above the woman 's shoulders . The sitter is described by art critic Charlotte Higgins as a slender and " demure , pious young woman " , and has been tentatively identified as Lady Jane Grey . Ives notes a familial resemblance between the sitter and Grey 's sisters , Catherine and Mary , which " may give conjectural support " to the identification of Grey . 
 The subject wears an opulent red gown with turned @-@ back trumpet sleeves and a <unk> with standing collar ; the latter is embroidered with a fleur @-@ de @-@ lis pattern , the heraldic emblem of French royalty . The design on her <unk> shows a pattern variously identified as strawberries , <unk> , Scots thistles or pinks ; the last of these was an emblem of the Grey family . A French hood on her head covers most of her red hair . She wears numerous pieces of jewellery , including a necklace finished with medallions and pearls ; these indicate a person of high social and economic status , which is reinforced by the silk and velvet of her gown . The sitter is not , however , wearing a wedding ring , suggesting she was not yet married . Instead she is holding a prayer book . This type of costume was popular during the Tudor period , particularly in the 1550s , and the accuracy of its depiction has been used to advance the portrait 's authenticity as a depiction of Jane Grey . 
 The independent historian J. Stephan Edwards writes , however , that the fleur @-@ de @-@ lis give him pause as , before June 1553 , Jane " would have had no right to the French heraldic emblems " as she was not yet an heir to the throne . After the discovery of an inscribed portrait of Catherine Parr , in 2014 Edwards published a tentative identification of said painting as the original on which the Streatham portrait was based . He wrote that the Parr painting had been " adapted to ' become ' Jane Grey in the absence of an accessible authentic portrait " in the Streatham portrait and similar , supporting this with an analysis of the similar styles of dress and the jewellery ( including a necklace of festooned pearls ) . 
 Reception of the painting as a work of art has been predominantly negative . The historian David Starkey described it as an " appallingly bad picture " , a sentiment which the art dealer Christopher Foley echoed . <unk> Cooper of the National Portrait Gallery gave less sharp criticism , stating " it 's a paint @-@ by @-@ number , labored copy " , and " its value is as a historical document rather than a work of art " . Zarin describes the painting as looking bleached in comparison with other portraits of monarchs , with " the flat face of a paper doll " . Edwards writes " the quality might be described as naive , primitive , or even folk art " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Production and early history = = = 
 The portrait is undated and unattributed . It is thought to have been completed in the 1590s , some forty years after Jane 's death , probably as a copy of a lost portrait contemporaneous with Jane ; dendrochronology dates the wood panel to c . 1593 . 
 Another strikingly similar portrait , depicting a woman also credited as Jane – although the costume differs slightly – was once owned by Richard Monckton Milnes , 1st Baron Houghton , but is now in an undisclosed private collection . Owing to similarities between the two works , Edwards suggests they are both copies of a lost original , perhaps completed by the same studio . A third copy , once owned by the English costume designer Herbert Norris , is known through records , although its whereabouts are unknown . 
 The Streatham portrait may have been part of a collection of Protestant martyr paintings . Damage to the painting 's mouth and eyes suggests that it was vandalised , possibly by a Catholic partisan ; as the seventeen scratches did not splinter the paint , this attack was probably not long after the portrait 's completion . Owing to the painting 's crudeness , Foley suggests that it was hurriedly completed for Jane 's family from an original that " had to be destroyed because it would have been too dangerous to own once Mary became queen " . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 The portrait was in the possession of a family in Streatham , London , by the 20th century . They had long believed the portrait was of Jane , and since 1923 had tried to convince others of its authenticity , without success . It was passed from generation to generation . In December 2005 , Sir John Guinness informed Foley of the family and their portrait . Foley visited the owner , hoping " to go shut the fellow up " , but upon seeing the work on an easel in their attic " knew it was right " for the period . 
 The identity of the sitter has been debated since the panel 's discovery . Foley has identified at least four Jane Greys among the English nobility at the time of the portrait . However , owing to " the ages and marital status of the other candidates " , Lady Jane Grey was the only viable choice ; the others were too young , already married and using a different surname , or had lost their title . Starkey was more reserved , arguing " there isn 't that over @-@ the @-@ top quality you get with royal portraits of the period , where the sitters look as though they 've just come back from Asprey " , and that there was no documentation of Jane owning the jewellery seen in the portrait . 
 After the discovery , Libby Sheldon of University College London conducted several tests to verify the painting 's age , including spectroscopy and laser microscopy . The age of the inscription was taken into consideration , and found to be contemporaneous with the rest of the painting . Pigments , including a type of yellow pigment rarely found after 1600 , were appropriate for the 16th century . Dendrochronological analysis later showed that the work was too late to be a life portrait of Jane , but did not rule out the possibility of reproduction . 
 = = = National Portrait Gallery = = = 
 The painting was purchased in 2006 by the National Portrait Gallery , London , with funds raised through their 150th anniversary gala , after more than nine months ' consideration . The cost was rumoured to be more than £ 100 @,@ 000 , though Zarin gives a price of £ 95 @,@ 000 . The acquisition was criticised by Starkey , who said , " if the National Portrait Gallery has public money to burn , then so be it ... [ the decision ] depends on mere hearsay and tradition , and it is not good enough " . Foley countered , " The evidence has been supported by people who know far more about the science of painting than David Starkey . I don 't know what his problem is – is it because he didn 't find it ? " 
 Privately Starkey acted on behalf of the Philip Mould Gallery and examined another portrait thought to be Jane , held by the Yale Center for British Art . This 2 @-@ centimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) miniature had been identified as Elizabeth I during a 1983 exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum ; Starkey , however , was " 90 per cent certain " it depicted Jane . After the March 2007 exhibition Lost Faces , when the miniature was displayed after a recent resurgence of interest in Jane , Foley published a lengthy letter challenging Starkey 's judgement . He cited the sitter 's brooch and emblem as indicative that she was not Jane Grey . 
 The Streatham portrait bears the accession number of NPG <unk> and is considered part of the gallery 's primary collection . From January 2007 until early 2010 it was displayed in the Tudor Gallery . Beginning in early 2013 , the painting was hung in Room 2 of the gallery 's regional outpost at Montacute House in Somerset , part of an exhibition of Tudor @-@ era portraits . 
 = Wipeout ( video game ) = 
 Wipeout ( stylised as wipE 'out " ) is a 1995 futuristic racing game developed and published by Psygnosis . It is the first game in the Wipeout series and is set in the year 2052 . It was originally released in 1995 for PlayStation and PCs running MS @-@ DOS , and in 1996 for Sega Saturn , being a launch title for the PlayStation in Europe and North America . It has since been re @-@ released as a downloadable game for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable via the PlayStation Network in 2007 . 
 Set in the year 2052 , players compete in the F3600 anti @-@ gravity racing league , piloting one of a selection of craft in races on several different tracks around the world . Unique at the time , Wipeout was noted for its futuristic setting , weapons designed to both stall and destroy enemy opponents and its marketing campaign which was designed by Keith Hopwood and The Designers Republic . The game featured music from CoLD SToRAGE , Leftfield , The Chemical Brothers and Orbital . The game was critically acclaimed upon release ; critics praised the game for its originality and its vast " unique techno soundtrack " . However , it was criticised for its in @-@ game physics . Wipeout managed to spawn several sequels to critical acclaim . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Wipeout is a racing game that is set in the year 2052 , where players compete in the F3600 anti @-@ gravity racing league . The game allows the player to pilot one of a selection of craft in races on several different tracks . There are four different racing teams to choose from , and two ships for each team . Each ship with its own distinct characteristics of acceleration , top speed , mass , and turning radius . By piloting their craft over power @-@ up pads found on the tracks , the player can pick up various weapons and power @-@ ups such as shields , turbo boosts , mines , shock waves , rockets , or missiles . The power @-@ ups allow the player to either protect their own craft or disrupt the competitors ' craft . 
 There are seven race tracks in the game total , six of them located in futuristic versions of countries including Canada , Germany , Greenland , United States , China and Japan . After all tracks have been completed on the highest difficulty , a hidden track set on Mars is unlocked . Multiplayer mode is only available in the PlayStation version of the game , and features the option of having a competitive two player mode throughout the seven tracks , with the usual six remaining AI competitors . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Wipeout was developed and published by Liverpudlian developer Psygnosis ( later known as SCE Studio Liverpool ) , with production starting in the second half of 1994 . The marketing and artwork of the game was designed by Keith Hopwood and The Designers Republic in Sheffield . Aimed at a fashionable , club @-@ going , music @-@ buying audience , Keith Hopwood and The Designers Republic created art for the game 's packaging , in @-@ game branding , and other promotional materials . An early beta version of Wipeout appeared in the teen cult film Hackers ( 1995 ) , in which both protagonists were playing the game in a nightclub . Shortly after the film 's release , Sony expressed some interest Psygnosis on the basis of their " impressive work it had done with 3D graphics " . In September 1995 Sony Computer Entertainment purchased Psygnosis and later renamed SCE Studio Liverpool in 2000 . 
 The game 's vehicle designs were based on Matrix Marauders , a 3D grid @-@ based strategy game whose concept was developed by Psygnosis employee Jim Bowers and released for the Amiga in 1994 . Nick <unk> , the game 's future designer , was inspired to create a racing game using the same types of ' anti @-@ gravity ' vehicles from his experience with <unk> and F @-@ Zero . The name " Wipeout " was given to the game during a pub conversation , and was inspired by the instrumental song Wipe Out by The Surfaris . Designing the game 's tracks proved to be difficult due to the lack of draw distance possible on the system . Players received completely random weapons , resembling Super Mario Kart in their capability to stall rather than destroy opponents . 
 Wipeout gained a significant amount of controversy upon its initial release . A marketing campaign created and launched by Keith Hopwood and The Designers Republic included an infamous promotional poster , featuring a bloodstained Radio 1 DJ Sara Cox , which was accused by some of depicting a drug @-@ overdose . The poster branded Wipeout " a dangerous game " , with Wipeout 's designer Nick <unk> suggesting that the " E " in Wipeout stood for ecstasy . 
 Wipeout was first released alongside the PlayStation in Europe in September 1995 . It was the PlayStation 's best @-@ selling launch title in Europe . Two months later in November 1995 , it was released in the United States . The game went to number one in the all format charts , with over 1 @.@ 5 million units of the franchise having been sold to date throughout Europe and North America . Wipeout was ported to the Sega Saturn in 1996 , however because the company behind the PlayStation , Sony , owned the applicable rights to most of the PlayStation version 's soundtrack , new music was recorded for the Saturn version by Psygnosis 's in @-@ house music team , CoLD SToRAGE . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The game 's electronica soundtrack was mostly composed by Welsh video game music composer Tim Wright under the alias CoLD SToRAGE . Music tracks were licensed from non @-@ mainstream electronica acts to create an original soundtrack album titled Wipeout that was released to promote the game in 1996 . This music album featured a selection which contrasted against the music included within the game , with CoLD SToRAGE being the most notable omission given his prevalence within both Wipeout and numerous successors . Additional songs featured in Wipeout are from Leftfield , The Chemical Brothers , and Orbital and were included in the PAL version of the PlayStation game , while the Saturn version included three songs by Rob Lord and Mark <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon release , the game was critically acclaimed . IGN staff praised the game for its originality and unique techno soundtrack , but criticised the difficulty with manoeuvring the vehicles and also the difficulty of the game itself , stating that " there aren 't nearly enough competitors " and that the player would have " [ pulled ] ahead of the other racers with no problem " . Edge cited that it was hard to criticise " such a beautifully realised and well @-@ produced game which [ exploited ] the PlayStation ’ s power so well " , but did show similar concerns over the game 's longevity regarding its " reliance on track @-@ based power @-@ ups " that would " limit Wipeout ’ s lifespan " in comparison to Super Mario Kart . GamePro gave the PlayStation version a rave review , predicting that " Wipeout 's taut action and grueling courses will lure many diehard racing fans to this new system . " They particularly praised the challenging gameplay and precision controls . They said the fact that multiplayer is only through the PlayStation Link Cable is the game 's one major flaw , since the PlayStation still had a low installed base at this point and thus this would not be an option for most players . Maximum opined that of all the games in the PlayStation 's European launch lineup , " not one title can match up to the awesome nature of Psygnosis ' <unk> . It 's an amazing spectacle to behold , it sounds absolutely fantastic and it 's the best playing racing game yet beheld on a next generation super console . " Making particular note of the lack of pop @-@ up , the coherent style and concept , the soundtrack , the unlockable Rapier mode , and the PAL optimization , they gave it their " Maximum Game of the Month " award . 
 The later Saturn version also received generally positive reviews , though most critics agreed that it was not as good as the PlayStation version . In Sega Saturn Magazine , Rad Automatic praised the large number of tracks and the distinctive flavour of each one , and remarked that the gameplay is very easy to get into but provides more than enough challenge . He criticised it as not being as good as the PlayStation version , though he noted that none of the shortcomings impact the gameplay . The four reviewers from Electronic Gaming Monthly similarly praised the number and variety of tracks along with the strong challenge the game presented , and were much more approving of the graphics than Sega Saturn Magazine , describing them as " vibrant " and " gorgeous " . Both Air Hendrix of GamePro and a reviewer for Maximum argued that the Saturn version is noticeably not as polished as the PlayStation version but still excellent in absolute terms , making it a pointless purchase for PlayStation owners but recommended for Saturn @-@ only players . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The game 's initial success led to Psygnosis developing several sequels which would later become part of the Wipeout franchise . A direct sequel , Wipeout 2097 , was released for the PlayStation and Sega Saturn in 1996 , which was met with positive reviews , especially aimed towards the vastly improved game engine and new physics the game offered . A Nintendo 64 spin @-@ off , Wipeout 64 , was released in 1998 and was met with considerable praise from critics , but was noted to be too similar to the original Wipeout . After the release of Wipeout in 1995 , the awareness of the underground techno community in England was significantly boosted , with critics praising the vast " unique techno soundtrack " the game offered . 
 Wipeout has been described as being synonymous with Sony 's debut gaming hardware and as an early showcase for 3D graphics in console gaming . It has since been re @-@ released as a downloadable game for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable via the PlayStation Network in 2007 . 
 = Shoot ' em up = 
 Shoot ' em up ( also known as shmup or STG ) is a subgenre of the shooter genre of video games . In a shoot ' em up , the player character engages in a lone assault , often in a spacecraft or aircraft , shooting large numbers of enemies while dodging their attacks . There is no consensus as to which design elements compose a shoot ' em up . Some restrict the definition to games featuring spacecraft and certain types of character movement ; others allow a broader definition including characters on foot and a variety of perspectives . Shoot ' em ups call for fast reactions and for the player to memorize levels and enemy attack patterns . " Bullet hell " games feature overwhelming numbers of enemy projectiles . 
 The genre 's origins can be traced back to Spacewar ! , one of the earliest computer games , developed in 1962 and eventually released in amusement arcades in the early 1970s . However , Tomohiro Nishikado , creator of Space Invaders , is generally credited with inventing the genre . Space Invaders premiered in Japanese arcades in 1978 . Shoot ' em ups were popular throughout the 1980s and early 1990s . In the mid @-@ 1990s , shoot ' em ups became a niche genre based on design conventions established in the 1980s , and increasingly catered to specialist enthusiasts , particularly in Japan . 
 = = Definition = = 
 A " shoot ' em up " , also known as a " shmup " or " STG " ( the common Japanese abbreviation for " shooting games " ) , is a game in which the protagonist combats a large number of enemies by shooting at them while dodging their fire . The controlling player must rely primarily on reaction times to succeed . Beyond this , critics differ on exactly which design elements constitute a shoot ' em up . Some restrict the genre to games featuring some kind of craft , using fixed or scrolling movement . Others widen the scope to include games featuring such protagonists as robots or humans on foot , as well as including games featuring " on @-@ rails " ( or " into the screen " ) and " run and gun " movement . Mark Wolf restricts the definition to games featuring multiple antagonists ( " ' em " being short for " them " ) , calling games featuring one @-@ on @-@ one shooting " combat games " . Formerly , critics described any game where the primary design element was shooting as a " shoot ' em up " , but later shoot ' em ups became a specific , inward @-@ looking genre based on design conventions established in those shooting games of the 1980s . 
 = = = Common elements = = = 
 Shoot ' em ups are a subgenre of shooter game , in turn a type of action game . These games are usually viewed from a top @-@ down or side @-@ view perspective , and players must use ranged weapons to take action at a distance . The player 's avatar is typically a vehicle under constant attack . Thus , the player 's goal is to shoot as quickly as possible anything that moves or threatens him . In some games , the player 's character can withstand some damage ; in others , a single hit will result in his destruction . The main skills required in shoot ' em ups are fast reactions and memorising enemy attack patterns . Some games feature overwhelming numbers of enemy projectiles and the player has to memorise their patterns to survive . These games belong to one of the fastest @-@ paced video game genres . 
 Large numbers of enemy characters are typically featured . These enemies may behave in a certain way dependent on their type , or attack in formations that the player can learn to predict . The basic gameplay tends to be straightforward and many games offset this with boss battles and a variety of weapons . Shoot ' em ups rarely have realistic physics . Characters can instantly change direction with no inertia , and projectiles move in a straight line at constant speeds . The player 's character can collect " power @-@ ups " which may afford the character greater protection , an " extra life " , or upgraded weaponry . Different weapons are often suited to different enemies , but these games seldom keep track of ammunition . As such , players tend to fire indiscriminately , and their weapons only damage legitimate targets . 
 = = Types = = 
 Shoot ' em ups are categorized by design elements , particularly viewpoint and movement : 
 Fixed shooters ( such as Space Invaders ) restrict the protagonist to a single axis of motion , enemies attack in a single direction ( such as descending from the top of the screen ) , and each level is contained within a single screen . These games are sometimes called " gallery shooters " . Atari 's Centipede is a hybrid , in that the player can move freely , but that movement is constrained to a small area at the bottom of the screen , and the game otherwise meets the fixed shooter definition . 
 Rail shooters limit the player to moving around the screen while the game follows a specific route ; these games often feature an " into the screen " viewpoint , with which the action is seen from behind the player character , and moves " into the screen " , while the player retains control over dodging . Examples include Captain Skyhawk ( 1990 ) , Panzer Dragoon ( 1995 ) , Star Fox 64 ( 1997 ) , and Sin and Punishment ( 2000 ) . Light @-@ Gun games that are " on @-@ rails " are not in the shoot @-@ em @-@ up category but the FPS category , and the term has also been applied to scripted events in first @-@ person shooters such as Call of Duty . 
 Tube shooters feature craft flying through an abstract tube . Technically , most tube shooters are also fixed shooters , because the player is still constrained to left / right movement , but it 's mapped to the shape of the tube . 
 Scrolling shooters include vertical or horizontal scrolling games . 
 Vertically scrolling shooters : In a vertically scrolling shoot ' em up ( or " vertical scroller " ) , the action is viewed from above and scrolls up ( or very occasionally down ) the screen . 
 <unk> scrolling shooters : In a " horizontal shooter " or " side @-@ scrolling shooter " , in which the action is viewed side @-@ on and scrolls horizontally . 
 <unk> scrolling shooters : A small number of scrolling shooters , such as Sega 's <unk> , feature an isometric point of view . 
 <unk> shooters feature 360 degree movement where the protagonist may rotate and move in any direction . <unk> shooters with one joystick for movement and one joystick for firing in any direction independent of movement are called " twin @-@ stick shooters . " 
 Bullet hell ( <unk> , <unk> , literally " barrage " or " bullet curtain " ) is a shoot ' em up in which the entire screen is often almost completely filled with enemy bullets . This type is also known as " curtain fire " , " manic shooters " or " maniac shooters " . This style of game originated in the mid @-@ 1990s , and is an offshoot of scrolling shooters . 
 Cute ' em ups feature brightly coloured graphics depicting surreal settings and enemies . Newer , particularly Japanese , cute ' em ups may employ overtly sexual characters and innuendo . Cute ' em ups tend to have unusual , oftentimes completely bizarre opponents for the player to fight , with the <unk> franchise being an example . 
 Run and gun ( or " run ' n ' gun " ) describes a shoot ' em up in which the protagonist fights on foot , perhaps with the ability to jump . Run and gun games may use side scrolling , vertical scrolling or isometric viewpoints and may feature <unk> movement . 
 Arena based shooters or area based shooters take place in a single screen , e.g. Robotron . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and rise = = = 
 The genre 's exact origins are a matter of some confusion . Video game journalist Brian Ashcraft pinpoints Spacewar ! ( one of the very earliest computer games ) as the first shoot ' em up , but the later Space Invaders is more frequently cited as the " first " or " original " in the genre . Spacewar ! was developed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1961 , for the amusement of the developers ; it was , however , remade four times as an arcade game in the early to mid @-@ 1970s . The game featured combat between two spacecraft . 
 However , it was not until 1978 's seminal Space Invaders , created by Nishikado at Japan 's Taito Corporation , that the shooter genre became prolific . Space Invaders pitted the player against multiple enemies descending from the top of the screen at a constantly increasing rate of speed . The game used alien creatures inspired by The War of the Worlds ( by H. G. Wells ) because the developers were unable to render the movement of aircraft ; in turn , the aliens replaced human enemies because of moral concerns ( regarding the portrayal of killing humans ) on the part of Taito Corporation . As with subsequent shoot ' em ups of the time , the game was set in space as the available technology only permitted a black background . The game also introduced the idea of giving the player a number of " lives " . Space Invaders was a massive commercial success , causing a coin shortage in Japan , and gaining mainstream popularity in America . It popularised a more interactive style of gameplay with the enemies responding to the player @-@ controlled cannon 's movement , and it was the first video game to popularise the concept of achieving a high score , being the first to save the player 's score . The aliens of Space Invaders return fire at the protagonist , making them the first arcade game targets to do so . It set the template for the shoot ' em up genre , and has influenced most shooting games released since then . 
 = = = Golden age and refinement = = = 
 In 1979 , Namco 's Galaxian — " the granddaddy of all top @-@ down shooters " , according to IGN — was released . Its use of colour graphics and individualised antagonists were considered " strong evolutionary concepts " among space ship games . That same year saw the release of SNK 's debut shoot ' em up Ozma Wars , notable for being the first action game to feature a supply of energy , resembling a life bar , a mechanic that has now become common in the majority of modern action games . It also featured vertically scrolling backgrounds and enemies . 
 In 1981 , Defender established scrolling in shoot ' em ups , offering horizontally extended levels . Unlike most later games in the genre , the player could move in either direction . The game 's use of scrolling helped remove design limitations associated with the screen , and though the game 's minimap feature had been introduced before , Defender integrated it into the gameplay in a more essential manner . Konami 's Scramble , released in 1981 , is a side @-@ scrolling shooter with forced scrolling . It was the first scrolling shooter to offer multiple , distinct levels . Atari 's Tempest , released in 1981 , is one of the earliest tube shooters and an early attempt to incorporate a 3D perspective into shooter games . Tempest ultimately went on to influence major rail shooters . 
 Vertical scrolling shooters emerged around the same time . Namco 's Xevious , released in 1982 , is frequently cited as the first vertical scrolling shooter and , although it was in fact preceded by several other games of that type , it is considered one of the most influential . Xevious is also the first to convincingly portray realistic landscapes as opposed to purely science fiction settings . While Asteroids ( 1979 ) allowed the player to rotate the game 's spacecraft , 1982 's highly acclaimed Robotron : 2084 was most influential on subsequent multi @-@ directional shooters . 
 Sega 's Space Harrier , a rail shooter released in 1985 , broke new ground graphically and its wide variety of settings across multiple levels gave players more to aim for than high scores . 1985 also saw the release of Konami 's Gradius , which gave the player greater control over the choice of weaponry , thus introducing another element of strategy . The game also introduced the need for the player to memorise levels in order to achieve any measure of success . Gradius , with its iconic protagonist , defined the side @-@ scrolling shoot ' em up and spawned a series spanning several sequels . The following year saw the emergence of one of Sega 's forefront series with its game Fantasy Zone . The game received acclaim for its surreal graphics and setting and the protagonist , Opa @-@ Opa , was for a time considered Sega 's mascot . The game borrowed Defender 's device of allowing the player to control the direction of flight and along with the earlier <unk> ( 1985 ) , is an early archetype of the " cute ' em up " subgenre . R @-@ Type , an acclaimed side @-@ scrolling shoot ' em up , was released in 1987 by Irem , employing slower paced scrolling than usual , with difficult levels calling for methodical strategies . 1990 's Raiden was the beginning of another acclaimed and enduring series to emerge from this period . 
 Shoot ' em ups such as SNK 's Ikari Warriors ( 1986 ) featuring characters on foot , rather than spacecraft , became popular in the mid @-@ 1980s in the wake of action movies such as Rambo : First Blood Part II . The origins of this type go back to Berzerk by Stern Electronics , released in 1980 . Taito 's Front Line ( 1982 ) established the upwards @-@ scrolling formula later popularized by Commando , in 1985 . Commando also drew comparisons to Rambo and indeed contemporary critics considered military themes and protagonists similar to Rambo or Schwarzenegger prerequisites for a shoot ' em up , as opposed to an action @-@ adventure game . In 1986 , <unk> Software released <unk> , a shooter that switched between a 2D side @-@ scrolling view in outdoor areas to a fully 3D polygonal third @-@ person perspective inside buildings , while bosses were fought in an arena @-@ style 2D battle , with the game featuring a variety of weapons and equipment . In 1987 , Square 's 3 @-@ D <unk> was an early stereoscopic 3 @-@ D shooter played from a third @-@ person perspective , followed later that year by its sequel JJ , and the following year by Space Harrier 3 @-@ D which used the <unk> 3 @-@ D shutter glasses . That same year , Sega 's Thunder Blade switched between both a top @-@ down view and a third @-@ person view , and introduced the use of force feedback , where the joystick vibrates . Also in 1987 , Konami created Contra as an coin @-@ op arcade game that was particularly acclaimed for its multi @-@ directional aiming and two player cooperative gameplay . However , by the early 1990s and the popularity of 16 @-@ bit consoles , the scrolling shooter genre was overcrowded , with developers struggling to make their games stand out ( one exception being the inventive Gunstar Heroes , by Treasure ) . 
 = = = Bullet hell and niche appeal = = = 
 A new type of shoot ' em up emerged in the early 1990s : variously termed " bullet hell " , " manic shooters " , " maniac shooters " and <unk> ( <unk> , " barrage " ) , these games required the player to dodge overwhelming numbers of enemy projectiles and called for still more consistent reactions from players . Bullet hell games arose from the need for 2D shoot ' em up developers to compete with the emerging popularity of 3D games : huge numbers of missiles on screen were intended to impress players . <unk> 's <unk> ( 1993 ) provided the prototypical template for this new breed , with Cave ( formed by former employees of <unk> , including <unk> 's main creator <unk> Ikeda , after the latter company collapsed ) inventing the type proper with 1995 's <unk> . Manic shooter games marked another point where the shoot ' em up genre began to cater to more dedicated players . Games such as Gradius had been more difficult than Space Invaders or Xevious , but bullet hell games were yet more inward @-@ looking and aimed at dedicated fans of the genre looking for greater challenges . While shooter games featuring protagonists on foot largely moved to 3D @-@ based genres , popular , long @-@ running series such as Contra and Metal Slug continued to receive new sequels . Rail shooters have rarely been released in the new millennium , with only Rez and Panzer Dragoon Orta achieving cult recognition . 
 Treasure 's shoot ' em up , Radiant Silvergun ( 1998 ) , introduced an element of narrative to the genre . It was lavished with critical acclaim for its refined design , though it was not released outside Japan and remains a much sought after collectors ' item . Its successor Ikaruga ( 2001 ) featured improved graphics and was again acclaimed as one of the best games in the genre . Both Radiant Silvergun and Ikaruga were later released on Xbox Live Arcade . The Touhou Project series spans nineteen years and twenty @-@ four games as of 2015 and was listed in the Guinness World Records in October 2010 for being the " most prolific fan @-@ made shooter series " . The genre has undergone something of a resurgence with the release of the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 and Wii online services , while in Japan arcade shoot ' em ups retain a deep @-@ rooted niche popularity . Geometry Wars : Retro Evolved was released on Xbox Live Arcade in 2005 and in particular stood out from the various re @-@ releases and casual games available on the service . The PC has also seen its share of dōjin shoot ' em ups like <unk> Clover , Jamestown : Legend of the Lost Colony , and the <unk> series . However , despite the genre 's continued appeal to an enthusiastic niche of players , shoot ' em up developers are increasingly embattled financially by the power of home consoles and their attendant genres . 
 = Speed Grapher = 
 Speed Grapher ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a 2005 anime series created by Gonzo . The series ran for 24 episodes from April to October 2005 on TV Asahi . It tells the story of former war photographer , Tatsumi Saiga and his quest to save Kagura Tennōzu from <unk> Suitengu and the members of a fetish club , the Roppongi Club . In 2006 , the series was licensed for release in North America by Funimation Entertainment and aired on the Independent Film Channel between March 7 and August 15 , 2008 . 
 The series was adapted into a manga by <unk> . Originally serialized by MediaWorks in Monthly Dengeki Comic GAO ! , it was released to three tankōbon between September 2005 and September 2006 . The manga series was then licensed to Chuang Yi , who released the three volumes in English and Chinese in Singapore , and later to Tokyopop , who released the first two volumes in North America in September and December 2008 . A light novel was also created and was written by Minoru Niki . It was published by Hayakawa Publishing and released on July 21 , 2005 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Speed Grapher follows the exploits of former war photographer Tatsumi Saiga , who investigates a secret fetish club for the ultra @-@ wealthy called the Roppongi Club . He tries to photograph the club 's " goddess , " a 15 @-@ year @-@ old , exploited girl named Kagura , but is discovered . As he is about to be killed , Kagura kisses him , granting him the ability to destroy anything he photographs . Saiga soon discovers that Kagura 's body fluids , like her saliva , in combination with a certain " virus " , can give people bizarre abilities relating to their secret desires , fetishes , and obsessions . Club members strive for the honor of becoming " gifted " via Kagura 's power . Saiga soon becomes entangled in this secret underground society and the powerful and corrupt Tennōzu Group mega @-@ corporation that operates it . He attempts to free Kagura , a move that puts the two of them on the run from the Tennōzu Group and blood @-@ thirsty members of the club with bizarre and often horrifying special powers . 
 Saiga and Suitengu engage in a game of cat and mouse ; Saiga and Kagura manage to evade capture several times before Suitengu himself attacks Saiga , severely injuring him , and takes Kagura captive . To take over Tennōzu Group , Suitengu murders its president , <unk> Tennōzu , who also is Kagura 's mother . Kagura inherits the group , so Suitengu marries her and takes legal control of it . Saiga , having recovered from his wounds , interrupts the wedding and rescues Kagura . Together , they attempt to leave Japan but are enticed back by the prospect of defeating Suitengu once and for all . The plan , however , ends up being a trap set up by Prime Minister Kamiya , Seiji <unk> and other Cabinet members as a way to control Suitengu and take control over the club . But , Suitengu knew of their betrayal and after trapping all the Cabinet members , the police superintendent and other members of government inside the club , he went to Kamiya 's mansion to exact his revenge against him . He then took away Kagura from Saiga by promising not to kill Saiga if Kagura comes with him willingly . Saiga and his policewoman friend Hibari Ginza make one final attack on Suitengu 's stronghold — the main building of Tennōzu Group . In addition , a group of politicians from around the world fire missiles at Tokyo to kill Suitengu . Saiga and Suitengu battle , but Saiga is unable to defeat Suitengu before going blind from overusing his power . Suitengu spares Saiga 's life , and , in a final act of defiance , destroys all the money he gathered before being killed by the missiles . The world collapses into a financial crisis , but Saiga and Kagura finally reunite , no longer under threat of attack . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 The episodes of Speed Grapher are directed by <unk> <unk> , animated by Gonzo , and produced by TV Asahi . They initially aired on TV Asahi between April 8 , 2005 and September 30 , 2005 in Japan . It was then released to twelve DVD compilations , each containing two episodes , between July 2005 and June 2006 by Sony Pictures Entertainment . 
 The North American adaptation was licensed to Funimation , who released it to DVD and on iTunes . The six DVD compilations , containing four episodes each , were released to Region 1 between July 2006 and March 2007 . Several " Limited Edition " DVDs were also released on the same dates as the regular DVDs . On March 11 , 2008 , a box set was released . Speed Grapher aired on the Independent Film Channel between March 7 and August 15 , 2008 . On September 28 , 2006 , Madman Entertainment revealed that it had received a license to distribute Speed Grapher to Australia and New Zealand . Madman released the first DVD volume with a collector 's box on October 11 , 2006 . A box release , with all six DVD compilations , was released on March 19 , 2008 . In the United Kingdom , Speed Grapher was licensed to MVM Films , who released six DVD compilations between April 16 , 2007 and February 4 , 2008 . Speed Grapher was also aired internationally by Animax . In Latin America , Animax aired the series in Brazil , Argentina , Venezuela , and Mexico . Future showings are also planned in Asia . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Based directly on the anime , a manga series , also entitled Speed Grapher , was released in Japan by MediaWorks and was originally serialized in Monthly Dengeki Comic GAO ! . Illustrated by <unk> , the series was collected into three tankōbon , which were released between September 2005 and September 2006 . 
 The series was licensed to Chuang Yi in Singapore , who released all three volumes of the manga in English on December 11 , 2007 , July 22 , 2008 , and November 2009 respectively . Chuang Yi also released the series in Chinese . The Speed Grapher manga received another English release by Tokyopop in North America , who released the first two volumes on September 16 , 2008 and December 2 , 2008 respectively . The third volume was set to be released on March 10 , 2009 , but was cancelled shortly beforehand . In Germany , the manga was licensed to Carlson Comics , who released all three volumes . 
 = = = Light novel = = = 
 A light novel version of Speed Grapher , written by Minoru Niki , was also released . Hayakawa Publishing released it on July 21 , 2005 . The novel was also licensed to Tokyopop in North America and was set to be released on November 11 , 2008 , but was cancelled alongside volume three of the manga . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 A drama CD was released in Japan on September 22 , 2005 by King Records . In addition , " Break the Cocoon , " the second ending theme by <unk> , has been released as a single . The other pieces of theme music , " Girls on Film " by Duran Duran was placed on the Japanese edition . Funimation was unable to obtain legal rights to use Duran Duran 's theme so they re @-@ edited the opening with an in house recording of their own theme song . " Hill of Poppies " ( <unk> , <unk> no Oka ) by <unk> Yukawa , and " Shutter Speed " by Shinkichi Mitsumune , which were never released in an album related to Speed Grapher . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Speed Grapher received mixed reviews from critics . Zac Bertschy and Theron Martin of Anime News Network both found the animation to be sub @-@ par when compared to other Gonzo releases . In addition , Zac found the storyline to be " totally silly " and strange though it was possibly very entertaining because of its uniqueness . Theron found that later episodes felt " more natural " and cited the characters to be part of this improvement , though the animation was " still second @-@ class ( at best ) . " Compared to the Japanese release , Theron Martin greatly preferred the English dubs , noting that " the English dialogue has more punch and better flow than the drier and sometimes awkwardly @-@ worded Japanese . " Tasha Robinson of Sci Fi Weekly found Speed Grapher to have a " rich feel that 's mirrored in the lovely visuals " and a complicated storyline . She also commented that " Its dry , serious central plotline is also clearly aimed at viewers who value sophisticated , drawn @-@ out serial stories over instant gratification . " D. F. Smith of IGN disliked the storyline , though for different reasons . He felt that the series was " trying way too hard to push the content envelope " and that the characters were not likable . However , in contrast to the Anime News Network reviewers , he found the art and animation to be a " first @-@ rate job . " 
 = Argon = 
 Argon is a chemical element with symbol Ar and atomic number 18 . It is in group 18 of the periodic table and is a noble gas . Argon is the third most abundant gas in the Earth 's atmosphere , at 0 @.@ 934 % ( 9340 ppmv ) more than twice as abundant as water vapor ( which averages about 4000 ppmv , but varies greatly ) , 23 times as abundant as carbon dioxide ( 400 ppmv ) , and more than 500 times as abundant as neon ( 18 ppmv ) . Argon is the most abundant noble gas in Earth 's crust , comprising 0 @.@ <unk> % of the crust . 
 Nearly all of the argon in Earth 's atmosphere is radiogenic argon @-@ 40 , derived from the decay of potassium @-@ 40 in the Earth 's crust . In the universe , argon @-@ 36 is by far the most common argon isotope , being the preferred argon isotope produced by stellar nucleosynthesis in supernovas . 
 The name " argon " is derived from the Greek word <unk> , neuter singular form of <unk> meaning " lazy " or " inactive " , as a reference to the fact that the element undergoes almost no chemical reactions . The complete octet ( eight electrons ) in the outer atomic shell makes argon stable and resistant to bonding with other elements . Its triple point temperature of 83 @.@ <unk> K is a defining fixed point in the International Temperature Scale of 1990 . 
 Argon is produced industrially by the fractional distillation of liquid air . Argon is mostly used as an inert shielding gas in welding and other high @-@ temperature industrial processes where ordinarily unreactive substances become reactive ; for example , an argon atmosphere is used in graphite electric furnaces to prevent the graphite from burning . Argon is also used in incandescent , fluorescent lighting , and other gas discharge tubes . Argon makes a distinctive blue @-@ green gas laser . Argon is also used in fluorescent glow starters . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Argon has approximately the same solubility in water as oxygen , and is 2 @.@ 5 times more soluble in water than nitrogen . Argon is colorless , odorless , nonflammable and nontoxic as a solid , liquid , and gas . Argon is chemically inert under most conditions and forms no confirmed stable compounds at room temperature . 
 Although argon is a noble gas , it can form some compounds . Argon fluorohydride ( HArF ) , a compound of argon with fluorine and hydrogen that is stable below 17 K , has been demonstrated . Although the neutral ground @-@ state chemical compounds of argon are presently limited to HArF , argon can form clathrates with water when atoms of argon are trapped in a lattice of water molecules . Ions , such as <unk> + , and excited state complexes , such as ArF , have been demonstrated . Theoretical calculation predicts several more argon compounds that should be stable but have not yet been synthesized . 
 = = History = = 
 Argon ( ’ <unk> , neuter singular form of ’ <unk> , Greek meaning " inactive " , in reference to its chemical inactivity ) was suspected to be a component of air by Henry Cavendish in 1785 . Argon was first isolated from air 1894 by Lord Rayleigh and Sir William Ramsay at University College London by removing oxygen , carbon dioxide , water , and nitrogen from a sample of clean air . They had determined that nitrogen produced from chemical compounds was one @-@ half percent lighter than nitrogen from the atmosphere . The difference was slight , but it was important enough to attract their attention for many months . They concluded that there was another gas in the air mixed in with the nitrogen . Argon was also encountered in 1882 through independent research of H. F. Newall and W. N. Hartley . Each observed new lines in the color spectrum of air that did not match known elements . Argon was the first noble gas to be discovered . Until 1957 , the symbol for argon was " A " , but now is " Ar " . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 Argon constitutes 0 @.@ 934 % by volume and 1 @.@ 288 % by mass of the Earth 's atmosphere , and air is the primary industrial source of purified argon products . Argon is isolated from air by fractionation , most commonly by cryogenic fractional distillation , a process that also produces purified nitrogen , oxygen , neon , krypton and xenon . The Earth 's crust and seawater contain 1 @.@ 2 ppm and 0 @.@ 45 ppm of argon , respectively . 
 = = Isotopes = = 
 The main isotopes of argon found on Earth are 40Ar ( 99 @.@ 6 % ) , 36Ar ( 0 @.@ 34 % ) , and <unk> ( 0 @.@ 06 % ) . Naturally occurring 40K , with a half @-@ life of 1 @.@ 25 × 109 years , decays to stable 40Ar ( 11 @.@ 2 % ) by electron capture or positron emission , and also to stable 40Ca ( 88 @.@ 8 % ) via beta decay . These properties and ratios are used to determine the age of rocks by K @-@ Ar dating . 
 In the Earth 's atmosphere , 39Ar is made by cosmic ray activity , primarily with 40Ar . In the subsurface environment , it is also produced through neutron capture by <unk> or alpha emission by calcium . <unk> is created from the neutron capture by 40Ca followed by an alpha particle emission as a result of subsurface nuclear explosions . It has a half @-@ life of 35 days . 
 Between locations in the Solar System , the isotopic composition of argon varies greatly . Where the major source of argon is the decay of 40K in rocks , 40Ar will be the dominant isotope , as it is on Earth . Argon produced directly by stellar nucleosynthesis , is dominated by the alpha process nuclide , 36Ar . Correspondingly , solar argon contains 84 @.@ 6 % 36Ar ( according to solar wind measurements ) , and the ratio of the three isotopes 36Ar : <unk> : 40Ar in the atmospheres of the outer planets is 8400 : 1600 : 1 . This contrasts with the abundance of primordial 36Ar in Earth 's atmosphere , which is only 31 @.@ 5 ppmv ( = 9340 ppmv × 0 @.@ 337 % ) , comparable with that of neon ( 18 @.@ 18 ppmv ) on Earth and with interplanetary gasses , measured by probes . 
 The Martian atmosphere contains 1 @.@ 6 % of 40Ar and 5 ppm of 36Ar . The Mariner probe fly @-@ by of the planet Mercury in 1973 found that Mercury has a very thin atmosphere with 70 % argon , believed to result from radioactive decay of materials in the planet crust . In 2005 , the Huygens probe discovered the presence of exclusively 40Ar on Titan , the largest moon of Saturn . 
 The predominance of radiogenic 40Ar is the reason the standard atomic weight of terrestrial argon is greater than that of the next element , potassium , a fact that was puzzling when argon was discovered . Mendeleev positioned the elements on his periodic table in order of atomic weight , but the inertness of argon suggested a placement before the reactive alkali metal . Henry Moseley later solved this problem by showing that the periodic table is actually arranged in order of atomic number . ( See History of the periodic table ) . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 Argon 's complete octet of electrons indicates full s and p subshells . This full outer energy level makes argon very stable and extremely resistant to bonding with other elements . Before 1962 , argon and the other noble gases were considered to be chemically inert and unable to form compounds ; however , compounds of the heavier noble gases have since been synthesized . In August 2000 , the first argon compound was formed by researchers at the University of Helsinki . By shining ultraviolet light onto frozen argon containing a small amount of hydrogen fluoride with caesium iodide , argon fluorohydride ( HArF ) was formed . It is stable up to 40 kelvin ( − 233 ° C ) . The metastable <unk> + 
 2 <unk> , which is valence isoelectronic with carbonyl fluoride and phosgene , was observed in 2010 . Argon @-@ 36 , in the form of argon hydride ( <unk> ) ions , has been detected in cosmic dust associated with the Crab Nebula supernova ; this was the first noble @-@ gas molecule detected in outer space . 
 Solid argon hydride ( Ar ( H2 ) 2 ) has the same crystal structure as the <unk> <unk> phase . It forms at pressures between 4 @.@ 3 and 220 GPa , though Raman measurements suggest that the H2 molecules in Ar ( H2 ) 2 dissociate above 175 GPa . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Industrial = = = 
 Argon is produced industrially by the fractional distillation of liquid air in a cryogenic air separation unit ; a process that separates liquid nitrogen , which boils at 77 @.@ 3 K , from argon , which boils at 87 @.@ 3 K , and liquid oxygen , which boils at 90 @.@ 2 K. About 700 @,@ 000 tonnes of argon are produced worldwide every year . 
 = = = In radioactive decays = = = 
 40Ar , the most abundant isotope of argon , is produced by the decay of 40K with a half @-@ life of 1 @.@ 25 × 109 years by electron capture or positron emission . Because of this , it is used in potassium @-@ argon dating to determine the age of rocks . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Argon has several desirable properties : 
 Argon is chemically inert gas . 
 Argon is the cheapest alternative when nitrogen is not sufficiently inert . 
 Argon has low thermal conductivity . 
 Argon has electronic properties ( ionization and / or the emission spectrum ) desirable for some applications . 
 Other noble gases would be equally suitable for most of these applications , but argon is by far the cheapest . Argon is inexpensive since it occurs naturally in air and is readily obtained as a byproduct of cryogenic air separation in the production of liquid oxygen and liquid nitrogen : the primary constituents of air are used on a large industrial scale . The other noble gases ( except helium ) are produced this way as well , but argon is the most plentiful by far . The bulk of argon applications arise simply because it is inert and relatively cheap . 
 = = = Industrial processes = = = 
 Argon is used in some high @-@ temperature industrial processes where ordinarily non @-@ reactive substances become reactive . For example , an argon atmosphere is used in graphite electric furnaces to prevent the graphite from burning . 
 For some of these processes , the presence of nitrogen or oxygen gases might cause defects within the material . Argon is used in some types of arc welding such as gas metal arc welding and gas tungsten arc welding , as well as in the processing of titanium and other reactive elements . An argon atmosphere is also used for growing crystals of silicon and germanium . 
 Argon is used in the poultry industry to asphyxiate birds , either for mass culling following disease outbreaks , or as a means of slaughter more humane than the electric bath . Argon is denser than air and displaces oxygen close to the ground during gassing . Its non @-@ reactive nature makes it suitable in a food product , and since it replaces oxygen within the dead bird , argon also enhances shelf life . 
 Argon is sometimes used for extinguishing fires where valuable equipment may be damaged by water or foam . 
 = = = Scientific research = = = 
 Liquid argon is used as the target for neutrino experiments and direct dark matter searches . The interaction between the hypothetical WIMP particle and an argon nucleus produces scintillation light that is detected by photomultiplier tubes . Two @-@ phase detectors containing argon gas are used to detect the ionized electrons produced during the WIMP @-@ nucleus scattering . As with most other liquefied noble gases , argon has a high scintillation light yield ( c . 51 photons / keV ) , is transparent to its own scintillation light , and is relatively easy to purify . Compared to xenon , argon is cheaper and has a distinct scintillation time profile which allows the separation of electronic recoils from nuclear recoils . On the other hand , its intrinsic beta @-@ ray background is larger due to 39Ar contamination , unless one uses argon from underground sources , which has much less 39Ar contamination . Most of the argon in the Earth ’ s atmosphere was produced by electron capture of long @-@ lived 40K ( 40K + e − → 40Ar + ν ) present in natural potassium within the earth . The 39Ar activity in the atmosphere is maintained by cosmogenic production through 40Ar ( n , 2n ) 39Ar and similar reactions . The half @-@ life of 39Ar is only 269 years . As a result , the underground Ar , shielded by rock and water , has much less 39Ar contamination . Dark matter detectors currently operating with liquid argon include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Neutrino experiments include <unk> and <unk> , both of which use high purity liquid argon in a time projection chamber for fine grained three @-@ dimensional imaging of neutrino interactions . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Argon is used to displace <unk> and moisture @-@ containing air in packaging material to extend the shelf @-@ lives of the contents ( argon has the European food additive code of <unk> ) . Aerial oxidation , hydrolysis , and other chemical reactions that degrade the products are retarded or prevented entirely . High @-@ purity chemicals and pharmaceuticals are sometimes packed and sealed in argon . 
 In winemaking , argon is used in a variety of activities to provide a barrier against oxygen at the liquid 's surface , which can spoil wine by fueling both microbial metabolism ( as with acetic acid bacteria ) and standard redox chemistry . 
 Argon is sometimes used as the propellant in aerosol cans for such products as varnish , polyurethane , and paint , and to displace air when preparing a container for storage after opening . 
 Since 2002 , the American National Archives stores important national documents such as the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution within argon @-@ filled cases to inhibit their degradation . Argon is preferable to the helium that had been used in the preceding five decades , because helium gas escapes through the intermolecular pores in most containers and must be regularly replaced . 
 = = = Laboratory equipment = = = 
 Argon may be used as the inert gas within <unk> lines and gloveboxes . Argon is preferred to less expensive nitrogen in cases where nitrogen may react with the reagents or apparatus . 
 Argon may be used as the carrier gas in gas chromatography and in electrospray ionization mass spectrometry ; it is the gas of choice for the plasma used in ICP spectroscopy . Argon is preferred for the sputter coating of specimens for scanning electron microscopy . Argon gas is also commonly used for sputter deposition of thin films as in microelectronics and for wafer cleaning in microfabrication . 
 = = = Medical use = = = 
 <unk> procedures such as <unk> use liquid argon to destroy tissue such as cancer cells . It is used in a procedure called " argon enhanced coagulation " , a form of argon plasma beam <unk> . The procedure carries a risk of producing gas embolism and has resulted in the death of at least one patient . 
 Blue argon lasers are used in surgery to weld arteries , destroy tumors , and correct eye defects . 
