 When the game started gaining popularity in June 2012 , Iranian conservative newspaper <unk> published pieces naming the game " pro @-@ Western propaganda " , and accusing director Navid Khonsari of espionage , and he felt afraid to reenter the country as a result . Members of the development team were also prompted to use aliases to protect themselves , and the game 's concept artist fled Iran due to his involvement in the development . " Anytime Iran has something written about them in the west , they feel as if it is propaganda against them , " Khonsari said . Following the release of 1979 Revolution in April 2016 , the National Foundation for Computer Games ( NFCG ) blocked all websites distributing the game in Iran , and began an operation to gather all copies illegally distributed in the country . NFCG director Hassan Karimi claimed the game has " hostile intentions and objectives " , stating that it may " poison the minds of the youth and young adults ... by means of false and distorted information " . Executive producer <unk> Khonsari felt that the ban is a result of the game documenting " the facts that different ideologies , different economic classes , different social classes came together to overthrow the Shah " , which she described as the " gray area " that the NFCG accused of being inaccurate . 
 = Bijeljina massacre = 
 The Bijeljina massacre involved the killing of between 48 and 78 civilians by Serb paramilitary groups in Bijeljina on 1 – 2 April 1992 during the Bosnian War . The majority of those killed were Bosniaks ( or Bosnian Muslims ) . Members of other ethnicities were also killed , such as Serbs deemed <unk> by the local authorities . The killing was committed by a local paramilitary group known as Mirko 's Chetniks and by the Serb Volunteer Guard ( SDG , also known as Arkan 's Tigers ) , a Serbia @-@ based paramilitary group led by Željko Ražnatović ( aka Arkan ) . The SDG were under the command of the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) , which was controlled by Serbian President Slobodan Milošević . 
 In September 1991 , Bosnian Serbs proclaimed a Serbian Autonomous Oblast with Bijeljina as its capital . In March 1992 , the Bosnian referendum on independence was passed with overwhelming support from Bosniaks and Bosnian Croats , although Bosnian Serbs either boycotted it or were prevented from voting by Bosnian Serb authorities . A poorly organized , local Bosniak Patriotic League paramilitary group had been established in response to the Bosnian Serb proclamation . On 31 March , the Patriotic League in Bijeljina was provoked into fighting by local Serbs and the SDG . On 1 – 2 April , the SDG and the JNA took over Bijeljina with little resistance ; murders , rapes , house searches , and pillaging followed . These actions were described as genocidal by the historian Professor Eric D. Weitz of the City College of New York . Professor Michael Sells of the University of Chicago concluded that they were carried out to erase the cultural history of the Bosniak people of Bijeljina . 
 Around 3 April , Serb forces removed the bodies of those massacred in anticipation of the arrival of a Bosnian government delegation tasked with investigating what had transpired . A number of sources put the figure of civilians killed in the hundreds or possibly a thousand , but the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) and the Serbian War Crimes Prosecutor 's Office were only able to verify between 48 and 78 deaths . Post @-@ war investigations have documented the deaths of a little over 250 civilian of all ethnicities in the Bijeljina municipality during the course of the war . After the massacre , a campaign of mass ethnic cleansing of non @-@ Serbs was carried out , all mosques were demolished , and nine detention camps were established . Many deaths in Bijeljina were not officially listed as civilian war victims and their death certificates claim they " died of natural causes . " 
 As of December 2014 , local courts had not prosecuted anyone for the killings , and no members of the SDG had been prosecuted for any crimes the unit carried out in Bijeljina or elsewhere in Croatia or Bosnia and Herzegovina . Milošević was indicted by the ICTY and charged with carrying out a genocidal campaign that included Bijeljina and other locations , but died during the trial . Republika Srpska leaders Biljana Plavšić and Momčilo Krajišnik were convicted for the deportations and forcible transfers in the ethnic cleansing that followed the massacre . Radovan Karadžić , the former President of Republika Srpska , is currently on trial for the massacre and other crimes against humanity committed in Bijeljina . At the end of the war , fewer than 2 @,@ 700 Bosniaks still lived in the municipality from a pre @-@ war population of 30 @,@ 000 . The Serbs of Bijeljina celebrate 1 April as " City Defense Day " , and a street in the city has been named after the SDG . 
 = = Background = = 
 According to the 1991 census , the municipality of Bijeljina had approximately 97 @,@ 000 inhabitants . The demographic proportions were approximately 59 % Bosnian Serbs , 31 % Bosniaks and 10 % belonged to other ethnicities . The town of Bijeljina itself had 36 @,@ 414 inhabitants , 19 @,@ 024 of whom were Bosniaks ( or 52 % of the town 's population ) , while the Serbs were the second largest ethnic group in the town . 
 During 1990 , a group of Serb Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) officers and experts from the JNA 's Psychological Operations Department had developed the RAM Plan with the intent of organizing Serbs outside of Serbia , consolidating control of the Serbian Democratic Party ( SDS ) , and preparing arms and ammunition . In 1990 and 1991 , Serbs in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina had proclaimed a number of Serbian Autonomous Oblasts with the intent of later unifying them into a homogeneous Serb territory . As early as September or October 1990 , the JNA began arming Bosnian Serbs and organizing them into militias . That same year , the JNA disarmed the Territorial Defense Force of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( TORBiH ) . By March 1991 , the JNA had distributed an estimated 51 @,@ 900 firearms to Serb paramilitaries and 23 @,@ 298 firearms to the SDS . Throughout 1991 and early 1992 , the SDS heavily <unk> the police force in order to increase Serb political control . In September 1991 , Bijeljina was established by the Bosnian Serbs as the capital of the Serbian Autonomous Oblast of Northern Bosnia , later renamed in November as the Serbian Autonomous Oblast of Semberija , renamed again in December as the " Serbian Autonomous Oblast of Semberija and Majevica " . In response , local Bosniaks established the paramilitary Patriotic League of Bosnia and Herzegovina , shortened to the Patriotic League . 
 In January 1992 , the SDS assembly proclaimed the " Republic of the Serbian People of Bosnia and Herzegovina " and Radovan Karadžić , its soon @-@ to @-@ be president , announced that a " unified Bosnia and Herzegovina no longer exists " . In March , the Bosnian referendum on independence passed with overwhelming support from Bosniaks and Bosnian Croats , having been boycotted by most Bosnian Serbs . The SDS , claiming that independence would result in the Serbs becoming " a national minority in an Islamic state " , had used armed irregular units to block the delivery of ballot boxes , and dropped leaflets encouraging the boycott . Despite this , thousands of Serbs in larger cities did participate in the referendum and voted for independence , and several violent incidents were triggered across Bosnia and Herzegovina . According to historian Noel Malcolm the " steps taken by Karadžić and his party – [ declaring Serb ] " Autonomous Regions " , the arming of the Serb population , minor local incidents , non @-@ stop propaganda , the request for federal army " protection " – matched exactly what had been done in Croatia . Few observers could doubt that a single plan was in operation . " Bijeljina was strategically significant because of its location , which enabled the easy movement of military personnel , weaponry , and goods into Posavina and the Bosnian Krajina where Serb forces were gathered . 
 = = Provocation , takeover , and massacre = = 
 Željko Ražnatović ( " Arkan " ) , leader of the Serb Volunteer Guard ( SDG ) , spent a month in Bijeljina devising battle plans prior to the attack . On 30 March 1992 , Blagoje Adžić , Bosnian Serb chief @-@ of @-@ staff of the JNA , announced that the army was " ready to protect Serbs from open aggression " . Fighting broke out in Bijeljina on 1 April , after local Serbs and SDG personnel threw grenades into shops , including a Bosniak @-@ owned cafe , provoking the poorly organized Patriotic League into an armed conflict . About a thousand SDG members and Mirko 's Chetniks , a paramilitary formation commanded by Mirko Blagojević , were involved and captured important structures in the town . According to journalist and political analyst Miloš Vasić , Bijeljina was defended by 35 or 38 Bosnian policemen . According to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , Bijeljina was the " first municipality of Bosnia and Herzegovina to be taken over by the Bosnian Serbs in 1992 " . Despite the pro @-@ Serb activities of the JNA during the Croatian War of Independence , the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina , Alija Izetbegović apparently believed that the JNA would act differently in Bosnia and Herzegovina , and asked the JNA to defend Bijeljina against the SDG . 
 On 1 – 2 April 1992 , the town was surrounded by JNA forces , ostensibly to keep the peace . According to Human Rights Watch ( HRW ) , Serb paramilitaries wearing balaclavas took up positions around the city , including sniper positions in windows on the top floor of buildings . Meeting little resistance , the SDG , under JNA command and reporting directly to Serbian President Slobodan Milošević , swiftly captured Bijeljina . Artillery units shelled the town in coordination with the street fighting . According to photojournalist Ron Haviv , Serb forces struck first , with several busloads of soldiers arriving in the city , seizing the radio station , and forcing local Serbs to reveal the identities of the city 's non @-@ Serb residents . The Panthers , a paramilitary group led by Ljubiša Savić ( " Mauzer " ) , who was a founder of the SDS , also participated in the assault or arrived shortly after . Together with the SDG , they began a campaign of violence against local Bosniaks and some of the Serb population , committing several rapes and murders , and searching residents ' houses and pillaging their property . Subsequently , Bosnian President Izetbegović tasked the JNA with occupying Bijeljina and stopping the violence . At Karadžić 's trial , the former Mayor of Bijeljina <unk> Simić , testified that the only real fighting that took place in the town on 1 – 2 April happened around the city hospital , where the most fatalities occurred . 
 As the fighting progressed , the SDS and the Bosnian Serbs created the Ministry of Interior of Republika Srpska ( MUP RS ) , an independent Serb police force . According to HRW , a pattern of violence , fueled by " the strive to create a Greater Serbia " , developed in Bijeljina that was later repeated in other municipalities in north @-@ eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina by similar paramilitary groups from Serbia . This pattern was described by the United Nations Commission of Experts in the following terms : 
 First , Bosnian Serb paramilitary forces , often with the assistance of the JNA , seize control of the area . In many cases , Serbian residents are told to leave the area before the violence begins . The homes of non @-@ Serb residents are targeted for destruction and cultural and religious monuments , especially churches and mosques , are destroyed . Second , the area falls under the control of paramilitary forces who terrorize the non @-@ Serb residents with random killings , rapes , and looting . Third , the seized area is administered by local Serb authorities , often in conjunction with paramilitary groups . During this phase , non @-@ Serb residents are detained , beaten , and sometimes transferred to prison camps where further abuse , including mass killings , have occurred . Non @-@ Serb residents are often fired from their jobs and their property is confiscated . Many have been forced to sign documents relinquishing their rights to their homes before being deported to other areas of the country . 
 The exact number killed in the takeover is unknown . Several sources put the figure anywhere between several dozen and a thousand . According to the ICTY , at least 48 civilians were killed of which 45 were non @-@ Serbs . Around 3 April , a local policeman was ordered to guard a hearse which was picking up bodies from the streets and houses of the town . The killings were <unk> with the aim of erasing cultural history and included " political leaders , businessmen , and other prominent Bosniaks " , but also included women and children . A number of Serbs who had attempted to stop the massacre were also killed . An investigation by the ICTY later stated that the victims had been shot " in the chest , mouth , temple , or back of the head , some at close range " and that none had been wearing military uniforms . According to the historian Professor Eric D. Weitz of the City College of New York , the killing of Bosniaks in Bijeljina was a genocidal act . The acts against civilians in Bijeljina and those carried out by the JNA and special forces that followed were an attempt to intimidate and <unk> the Bosnian government and general public from pursuing independence . 
 Haviv , who had been invited by Arkan to take photographs , witnessed the killings and one of his pictures , which depicted an SDG member kicking a dying Bosniak woman , was later published in the international media prompting Arkan to put out a death warrant for Haviv . Meanwhile , the Serbian state @-@ owned Radio Belgrade network reported that Bijeljina had been " liberated " with the help of " members of the Serbian National Guard of Semberija and Majevica , in cooperation with Serbian volunteers , Arkan 's men , and the Serbian ' radicals ' " . 
 = = Bosnian delegation investigation and response = = 
 Serb forces ordered the removal of the bodies of those killed , in anticipation of a delegation of high @-@ ranking Bosnian officials due to arrive on 4 April . The delegation included Biljana Plavšić , a Serb representative of the Presidency ; Fikret Abdić , a Bosniak representative ; the Croat Minister of Defense , Jerko Doko ; and the chief @-@ of @-@ staff of the JNA 2nd Military District , General <unk> <unk> . They were sent by Izetbegović for the purpose of investigating the alleged atrocities . On the same day , the JNA moved into Bijeljina , but the violence continued . On 4 April , the SDG established themselves in the local headquarters of the SDS . Local police , who were engaged in arresting the town 's Party of Democratic Action ( SDA ) presidency , joined them for several days , as did members of the White Eagles paramilitary group and local Territorial Defense ( TO ) members . Serb flags were mounted on two mosques in Bijeljina , and checkpoints and roadblocks were established , preventing journalists and European monitors from entering . The delegation visited the crisis staff and a military barracks where they were made aware of the situation . 
 During the visit , Plavšić requested that Arkan transfer control of Bijeljina to the JNA . Arkan refused , citing unfinished business , and said he would target Bosanski Brod next . Plavšić consequently withdrew her request and commended Arkan for " protecting " Bijeljina 's Serbs from the Bosniaks . She called him a " Serb hero ... who was prepared to give his life for his people " , adding that " we need such people " . She then thanked and kissed Arkan in public to which the local members of the SDS responded with " shouts of approval " . In a conversation with Cedric Thornberry , a United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) representative , she described Bijeljina as a " liberated " town . Abdić was initially turned back at gunpoint , but was later able to enter . He was then kept in custody by Arkan until Plavšić arrived to release him . " Bijeljina was practically empty , " he recalled . " I met with the local authorities , they told me what had happened , but there wasn 't a single Muslim there , so we couldn 't discuss the problem as a whole . Muslims didn 't answer our appeal . They were too scared to come out , and specially scared to talk about it at all . " General Sava Janković , commander of the JNA 's 17th Corps , reported that : 
 A big influence of the SDS and Arkan 's propaganda is felt in the 38th [ Partisan Division ] and the 17th [ Mixed Artillery Regiment ] , because of which some [ conscripts ] have left their units with arms . ... The situation in the territory is extremely complex . The town of Bijeljina is controlled by the SDS and Arkan 's men , who do not even allow our anti @-@ tank unit to reach certain positions in the town . There are about 3 @,@ 000 refugees in the barracks and the Cooperative Hall area in <unk> . A team from the BH Presidency led by Fikret Abdić , Biljana Plavšić , the chief @-@ of @-@ staff of the 2nd Military District and the commander of the 17th Corps , has been in Bijeljina barracks since 1200 hours . 
 " In the following days , " he predicted , " further deterioration of the entire security and political situation is expected . There is a threat that interethnic conflicts in Posavina and Semberija might spread to other parts of the zone of responsibility ... Direct armed provocations by SDA , HDZ [ Croatian Democratic Union ] , and SDS paramilitary units against commands and units are also possible , as well as attacks by them on military warehouses and isolated facilities . " On the same day , Bosnian Defense Minister <unk> <unk> and Croat members of the coalition government urged Izetbegović to mobilize the TORBiH due to the inability of the JNA to stop the violence . Izetbegović described the images coming out of Bijeljina as " unbelievable " . " I thought it was a photomontage , " he explained . " I couldn 't believe my eyes . I couldn 't believe it was possible . " He described the takeover as " criminal " , and said he considered the JNA responsible for Bijeljina 's fall because it " passively stood by and watched what was happening " . Izetbegović mobilized the Territorial Defense later that day so as to " enable people to defend themselves ... from future <unk> " . The Serb members of the Bosnian Presidency , Plavšić and Nikola <unk> , denounced the mobilization as illegal and resigned . On 8 April , Izetbegović announced a " state of imminent war danger " . The JNA rejected requests from the Bosnian Presidency to return the TORBiH 's weapons that they had confiscated in 1990 . Karadžić and the Bosnian Serb leadership used Izetbegović 's mobilization order as a pretext to independence and mobilized their Municipal Crisis Headquarters , reserve police units , and TO forces . 
 = = Ethnic cleansing , mosque destruction , and detainment = = 
 The SDG stayed in Bijeljina until at least May 1992 . General <unk> Milovanović , chief @-@ of @-@ staff of the Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) , commented on Arkan 's activities in Bijeljina and Zvornik in April and May 1992 : " The return of Serb voluntary units from the Republika Srpska and Republika Srpska Krajina was characterized by long formations consisting of both personnel carriers and tanks and a great number of trucks . This was a clear sign of looting . " The ICTY concluded that Serb forces killed a minimum of 52 people , mostly Bosniaks , between April and September 1992 in the Bijeljina municipality . In April , an " organized campaign " had begun to remove the Bosniak population of Bijeljina . The SDS in Bijeljina put forth a plan and proposed that a Bosniak family be killed " on each side of town to create an atmosphere of fear " . On 23 September 1992 , the SDG and Mirko 's Chetniks handed over control of Bijeljina to the SDS and the plan was carried out by Duško <unk> 's special police unit . On 24 and 25 September , in the village of <unk> , 22 people including seven children were removed from their homes and taken to the village of <unk> where they were killed and thrown into the Drina river . It is suspected that they were killed by members of the Special Unit of the MUP RS under the supervision of local police and the former State Security . All were under the direct command of Mićo Stanišić the then Minister of MUP RS . Mass ethnic cleansing was committed and nine detention camps were established following the massacre . All seven mosques in Bijeljina were destroyed . They were systematically destroyed using explosives under the supervision of police and experts , and after their collapse the remains were removed with military construction equipment . Trees were planted where they once stood . 
 A " State Commission for the Free transfer of the Civilian Population " or " Commission for the Exchange of Population " was created and headed by <unk> Đurković , a Major in the SDG , and included Mauzer 's Panthers . Its purpose was to completely expel all non @-@ Serbs from Bijeljina . Đurković claimed that the Bosniaks had left voluntarily and said Bijeljina was " sacred Serbian land " . According to him " after a time , the [ Bosnian Serb ] People 's Deputies , Milan Teslić and <unk> <unk> , expanded the Commission in the name of the [ Serb Democratic Party ] Deputies Club , and later the Commission was approved by the Parliament of the Serbian Republic [ of Bosnia and Herzegovina ] . " He explained that " travel [ expulsion ] was undertaken in the following manner : the State Commission for the Free Transfer of the Civilian Population had as its duty to inform the State Security Service of the Serbian Republic [ of Bosnia and Herzegovina ] ( Republika Srpska ) of that travel . The latter , by fax , would then pass that on to that ministry in the Republic of Serbia which has jurisdiction . The transit [ on to Hungary ] would occur in broad daylight , at noon . " <unk> continued into 1994 , and in July a " systematic program " was implemented with the goal of " expelling the remaining Bosniaks and extorting property and money from them " . Đurković was promoted by Arkan to Lieutenant Colonel in 1995 . Mauzer 's Panthers later became a special unit of the VRS . Mauzer was killed in 2000 . 
 = = War crimes prosecution = = 
 Bosnian courts have not filed any war crimes indictments for the massacre . In 2008 , Branko Todorović , the President of the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Bijeljina , criticized the " lethargic " and " unacceptable behavior " of the Republika Srpska judiciary . However , since 2003 , the prosecution of war crimes has mostly been under the jurisdiction of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina . In 2000 , the International Crisis Group named three individuals from Bijeljina as " potentially indictable for war crimes " : 
 Mirko Blagojević : who is alleged to have led Mirko 's Chetniks , which took part in the attack and in the ethnic cleansing of Bijeljina . He served as the head of the Serbian Radical Party ( SRS ) in Bijeljina and is now a lawyer . 
 <unk> Đurković : who is suspected of forcing Bosniak civilians " to hand over all their money , valuables and documents , and to sign away their property " . He is also reported to have worked with the Panthers and other groups in the " forcible expulsion of the civilian population " . He was arrested in November 2005 , but released from police custody less than a month later . 
 Jovan Aćimović : who is alleged to have played a major role in the last initiative to remove Bosniaks from Bijeljina shortly prior to the signing of the Dayton Agreement in November 1995 . He reportedly continued to evict Bosniaks from their houses during peace time . He later became a member of the police in <unk> . 
 In 1997 , the ICTY secretly indicted Arkan for war crimes carried out in Sanski Most in 1995 , but not for those in Bijeljina . In January 2000 , he was killed in a Belgrade hotel lobby by masked gunmen , and did not face trial . In 1999 , Milošević was indicted for carrying out a genocidal campaign that included Bijeljina and other locations in Bosnia and Herzegovina , among other charges , but he died mid @-@ trial in March 2006 . In February 2000 , Plavšić and Momčilo Krajišnik , the speaker of the National Assembly of Republika Srpska , were indicted for the same genocidal campaign in Bosnia and Herzegovina , among other charges . On 2 October 2002 , Plavšić pleaded guilty to persecuting the non @-@ Serb populations in 37 municipalities in Bosnia and Herzegovina , including Bijeljina . This plea was entered under an agreement that involved the prosecution moving to dismiss the remaining charges . She was subsequently sentenced to 11 years imprisonment . On 27 September 2006 , Krajišnik was found guilty on a five counts of crimes against humanity , including the same count as Plavšić regarding the persecution of non @-@ Serb populations in municipalities including Bijeljina , but he was found not guilty of genocide . In 2009 , he was handed a twenty @-@ year prison sentence . After serving two @-@ thirds of her sentence , Plavšić was released in October 2009 . Krajišnik was released in August 2013 , having served two @-@ thirds of his sentence ( including time spent in custody ) . 
 In 2010 , the Serbian War Crimes Prosecutor 's Office investigated Borislav <unk> , a former SDG member and a member of the Serbian National Assembly . The investigation was ultimately dropped due to lack of evidence . In 2012 , former SDG member <unk> <unk> was arrested in Belgrade at the request of the Prosecutor 's Office . <unk> was charged with an indictment listing the names of 78 victims . Clint Williamson , the lead prosecutor , said that other members of the SDG could not be identified because their faces had been covered with masks . As of October 2014 , closing arguments had been concluded in the trial of Karadžić , the former President of Republika Srpska , for the massacre , and other crimes against humanity committed in Bijeljina , among other areas , as well as for the genocide at Srebrenica . The ICTY is expected to deliver judgment in Karadžić 's case in the first quarter of 2016 . 
 As of December 2014 no member of the SDG has been prosecuted for the murders , rapes , or looting committed in Bijeljina , or any of the crimes allegedly committed by the unit elsewhere in Croatia or Bosnia and Herzegovina . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Research and Documentation Center in Sarajevo has recorded a total of 1 @,@ 078 fatalities in the Bijeljina municipality during the war , including approximately 250 civilians of all ethnicities . Many deaths in Bijeljina were not officially listed as civilian war victims and their death certificates claim they " died of natural causes . " Several hundred Bosniaks from Bijeljina and Janja fought alongside Serbs throughout the war in the Army of Republika Srpska . After the war ended , less than 2 @,@ 700 people of the pre @-@ war Bosniak population of over 30 @,@ 000 still lived in the municipality of Bijeljina ( the town itself had 19 @,@ 000 Bosniak inhabitants ) . Many faced difficulties in returning to their homes including discrimination from the police , being unable to receive an identification card , or reconnect their phone lines . Local authorities prevented the Islamic community from reconstructing a mosque and , for a while , did not allow them to have their own local meeting place . Meaningful Bosniak participation in the politics and administration of the municipality was also blocked . As of 2012 , 5 @,@ 000 Bosniaks have returned to Bijeljina . 
 In 2007 , the Bijeljina truth commission was created with a four @-@ year mandate . It held two public hearings in 2008 , but by March 2009 , although it was not formally disbanded , the commission was effectively dissolved when the majority of its members resigned . A number of factors have been cited as contributing to its failure , such as the inclusion of the commander of the <unk> concentration camp in its delegation , its limited legal standing , disputes over the commission 's scope , and poor funding . 
 Local Serbs celebrate 1 April as " City Defense Day " , and a street in the town is presently named after the Serbian Volunteer Guard . In 2012 , the Bijeljina municipal veterans organization , municipal officials , and city leaders marked the occasion stating that " on this day the Serbian people of Semberija were organized to defend against and prevent a new Jasenovac and notorious 13th Handschar division . " 
 = Mega Man 5 = 
 Mega Man 5 , known as Rockman 5 : Blues no Wana ! ? ( <unk> <unk> ! ? , lit . " Rockman 5 : Blues 's Trap ! ? " ) in Japan , is an action @-@ platform video game developed by Capcom for the Nintendo Entertainment System . It is the fifth game in the original Mega Man series and was released in Japan on December 4 , 1992 . It saw a release during the same month in North America and in 1993 in Europe . 
 Taking place after the events of Mega Man 4 , Mega Man 's brother and ally Proto Man uncharacteristically leads a group of menacing robots in attacks on the world and kidnaps his own creator Dr. Light , leaving the title character little choice but to take up arms in a fight against his once trusted sibling . Mega Man 5 carries over the same graphical style and action @-@ platforming gameplay as the four preceding chapters in the series . The game introduces a new character , Beat , a robotic bird that the player can use as a weapon once a series of eight collectable letters are found . Keiji Inafune , co @-@ designer of the Mega Man character , had to re @-@ illustrate the bosses several times but described his work as fun . 
 Mega Man 5 was met with a positive critical reception for its graphics and music , while receiving criticism for its lack of innovation in its plot or gameplay . Like other NES games in the series , Mega Man 5 has been re @-@ released in Japan on the PlayStation , PlayStation Network , and mobile phones ; in North America as part of the Mega Man Anniversary Collection ; and in both regions on the Wii Virtual Console . It has also been released in North America , Europe , and Japan on the 3DS and Wii U Virtual Console . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mega Man 5 takes place during the 21st century , about two months after the events of Mega Man 4 , when the mad scientist Dr. Wily once again attempted to take over the world . Proto Man , secret brother and once ally to the world 's greatest hero Mega Man , leads an army of robots in a series of destructive attacks on the world . To cripple the world 's defenders , he kidnaps his own creator , the genius scientist Dr. Light . Mega Man wonders why Proto Man is doing this , but with little choice left , he sets out to stop him , assisted by Beat , a robot bird gifted to him by Dr. Cossack . 
 Mega Man prevails over a new group of eight powerful " Robot Masters " working under Proto Man : Star Man , Gravity Man , <unk> Man , Stone Man , Crystal Man , Charge Man , Napalm Man , and Wave Man . Mega Man then makes his way to Proto Man 's fortress and confronts his fellow creation , who nearly destroys the protagonist in the process . However , a second Proto Man arrives just in time , revealing the first as Dark Man , one of Dr. Wily 's newest robots . Mega Man vanquishes the impostor , then pursues Wily to his newest hideout , defeats him , and saves Dr. Light . However , the fortress begins collapsing , and while Mega Man is distracted from holding up the ceiling from crushing himself and Dr. Light , Wily manages yet another retreat . Just after Wily escapes , a familiar whistle is heard , and part of the ceiling is blasted away , allowing Mega Man and Dr. Light to also escape . As the two watch the castle collapse from a distance , their mystery savior is revealed to be Proto Man , who quietly slips off unnoticed . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mega Man 5 is an action @-@ platform game that is very similar to previous titles in the series . Gameplay revolves around the player using the central character Mega Man to run , jump , and shoot his way through a set of stages . If the player takes damage , Mega Man 's life meter can be refilled by picking up energy capsules scattered about each level or from fallen enemies . Mega Man 's default Mega Buster arm cannon can be fired an unlimited amount of times . The Mega Buster 's charge feature , introduced in Mega Man 4 , has been upgraded to allow its powerful , charged shots to encompass a slightly wider area . Each stage ends with a boss battle with a Robot Master ; destroying that Robot Master lets the player copy its special " Master Weapon " , which can be toggled and used throughout the remainder of the game . Unlike the Mega Buster , Master Weapons require weapon energy to use and must be replenished if it is depleted in the same selected stage . Other power @-@ ups including extra lives , " Energy Tanks " , and a new " Mystery Tank " , which fully refills health and all item power , can be picked up as well . 
 After completing certain stages , the player can call on Mega Man 's faithful dog Rush to reach higher platforms or cross large gaps using his " Coil " and " Jet " transformations . These abilities require refills with the same weapon energy that Master Weapons use . Some of the level designs in Mega Man 5 are different from earlier games in the series . For example , in Gravity Man 's stage , the gravitation is reversed from the floor to the ceiling , while in Wave Man 's stage , the player drives a water craft from the halfway point to the boss room . Hidden within each of the eight Robot Master stages is a collectible circuit board . Gathering all eight of these boards ( spelling " M @-@ E @-@ G @-@ A @-@ M @-@ A @-@ N @-@ V " ) gives the player access to a robot @-@ bird friend by the name of Beat . The player can then call on Beat to attack any onscreen enemies . 
 = = Development = = 
 Mega Man 5 was developed by Capcom . Having had major involvement in the development in all prior Mega Man games , artist Keiji Inafune , credited as " Inafking " , worked under a new project leader for Mega Man 5 . As with past entries in the series , Inafune used his experience to guide his supervisor and the other team members . He did this in order to avoid making what he considered to be an " unreasonable game , [ ... ] an affront to the players " . As a result of this leadership , Inafune felt Mega Man 5 turned out with a lower difficulty level . The team already felt they had accomplished all the gameplay they could with the release of Mega Man 4 , so they decided to simply " introduce powered up versions of everything " , such as the Mega Buster . After working diligently on the fourth installment of the series and being the man behind the concept of the chargeable Mega Buster , Hayato Kaji , credited as " <unk> " , was called in to help out during the middle of Mega Man 5 's development . The game was " taking a while to come together " at that point according to Kaji . Inafune summarized his work on Mega Man 5 as being fun , but he admitted having trouble with the designs , balance , and colors . 
 In a new direction Capcom held a contest in collaboration with Nintendo Power Magazine requesting submissions for new villain characters , the eight Robot Master bosses in Mega Man 5 are a result of fans sending in their own designs to Capcom . Capcom received over 130 @,@ 000 character submissions for the game . Inafune recounted having a difficult time getting approval on the chosen bosses , having had to re @-@ illustrate them several times . However , the artist had little trouble in designing Beat , whose first draft was accepted by Inafune 's superiors . The idea for Beat originated in the development of Mega Man 3 , where the concept support robots included a dog and bird . The team chose to keep the dog character as Rush for this earlier game , while the bird would serve as the basis for the character Beat in Mega Man 5 . The musical score of Mega Man 5 was composed by Mari Yamaguchi ( credited as " Mari " ) . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Mega Man 5 has enjoyed generally positive reactions from printed and online publications . Many critics were complimentary of the game 's graphics , music , play control , and challenge level . IGN 's Lucas M. Thomas holds Mega Man 5 as one of his favorite entries in the series and , because of its lowered difficulty compared to its predecessors , considers it the easiest of the bunch to casually pick up and play through . IGN lists Mega Man 5 as the 84th best game on the NES . 
 Like other sequels in the Mega Man series , Mega Man 5 has suffered criticism for its lack of innovative gameplay and storytelling . GamePro summarized the game as " déjà vu all over again for disciples of the series " and that " Capcom must get some kind of cash rebate for recycling video games " . 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish considered Mega Man 5 as " a painfully phoned @-@ in episode lacking not only innovation , but pretty much all the polish and balance that made the earlier games so enjoyable " . 
 In 1999 , Mega Man 5 was re @-@ released for the PlayStation as part of the Japan @-@ exclusive Rockman Complete Works series . It featured a helpful " navi mode " for beginners , arranged music , encyclopedia modes , and artwork . A port of this version with fewer extras was released in North America for the PlayStation 2 and Nintendo GameCube in 2004 and Xbox in 2005 as part of Mega Man Anniversary Collection . Another port of the game was released in Japan in 2007 for mobile phones compatible with Yahoo ! Mobile and EZweb applications . Finally , in 2011 , the NES version was made available on the Wii Virtual Console service in both Japan and North America , and the PlayStation Network in Japan . It has also been released on the Wii U 's Virtual Console as well as the 3DS eShop . 
 The Mega Man series from Archie Comics went on hiatus before it could reach an adaptation of Mega Man 5 , but some characters and elements from the game were foreshadowed . In particular , the final issue saw Dr. Light experience a vision of the events of this game , noting that it seemed as thought Proto Man were attacking but that something seemed wrong . 
 = You Have 0 Friends = 
 " You Have 0 Friends " is the fourth episode of the fourteenth season of the American animated television series South Park , and the 199th episode of the series overall . It first aired on Comedy Central in the United States on April 7 , 2010 . In the episode , Kyle , Cartman and Kenny make Stan a Facebook profile against his will and he becomes extremely frustrated with everyone asking him for friend requests . After he gets fed up with Facebook , Stan tries to delete his profile but is sucked into a virtual Facebook world . Meanwhile , Kyle starts trying to find ways to get more friends on Facebook after he drastically starts losing them due to his befriending of a third @-@ grade friendless Facebook user , whom everyone considers a loser . 
 The episode was written and directed by co @-@ creator Trey Parker and was rated TV @-@ MA L in the United States . " You Have 0 Friends " features several references to the popular social networking service Facebook , and Stan 's plotline parodies the 1982 Disney film Tron with Stan in the role of Kevin Flynn . The episode also parodies the CNBC series Mad Money , as well as the online chat website Chatroulette , and the social network game FarmVille . 
 " You Have 0 Friends " has received positive reviews from critics , and according to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was viewed by 3 @.@ 071 million viewers and became the cable lead in the 18 – 49 Wednesday night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Kyle , Cartman and Kenny surprise Stan by creating a Facebook account for him . Stan protests , but is quickly pressured by family and friends to add them as friends . To his annoyance and frustration , Stan finds people such as Randy , his grandmother and even Wendy confronting him over his supposed disregard for them and judging his real @-@ world friendship solely by his Facebook configuration . Meanwhile , Kyle adds shy nerdy student Kip <unk> to his thriving friends list out of pity . Kyle 's number of Facebook friends rapidly declines when he does this , in part due to a Mad Friends podcast he finds Cartman has set up in which he berates Kyle for choosing a loser as a friend and asserts nobody will want to hang out with Kyle . Kyle understands this , but , on principle and out of pity , cannot bring himself to delete Kip to please others . Desperate to stem the loss of friends , he asks Cartman for advice . Cartman introduces Kyle to Chatroulette as a way to make new friends , which fails as most of the people on the site are either jacking off or showing their genitals , until Cartman finally finds another Jewish kid named Isiah , who agrees to be Kyle 's friend , much to Kyle 's delight . 
 Meanwhile , Stan now has 845 @,@ 323 friends ( almost all of whom he hardly knows or does not know ) on his account and has finally decided to delete it , only to find that Facebook refuses to allow him to . Instead of deleting his account , Stan is forcibly transported by the software into the virtual world of Facebook , where he meets " profiles " of everyone he knows who communicate in Facebook lingo , and is forced to engage in Facebook activities such as Yahtzee . Unexpectedly winning on the first roll , Stan escapes and finds his way to Kyle 's Farm Town farm , blaming Kyle for getting him " sucked into Facebook " in the first place . Stan orders Kyle to check out his profile status and Kyle finds out that Stan is supposedly hosting a party elsewhere in Facebook at Café World . Kyle makes it to Stan 's party , only to find that Isiah has refused to be his friend because of Kip . Desperate to retain some friends , Kyle finally deletes Kip , leaving him with no friends . Kip , too , is disheartened to find his friend has abandoned him . 
 At the party , Stan encounters his online profile , which has the form of a huge monstrous version of himself . It challenges him to a game of Yahtzee and Stan wins , again on the first roll , causing the profile to be finally deleted . The victory returns Stan to the real world once more . He now has no Facebook friends , and Randy , upon realizing that Stan is no longer his friend , asks Stan why he deleted him . Stan explains what just happened to him and that he has " sent all his friends somewhere else " . Back at Kip 's house , Kip is still depressed about Kyle deleting him as a friend , but is then overjoyed when all 845 @,@ 323 friends Stan had prior to deletion are suddenly transferred to his account as friends . 
 = = Production and cultural references = = 
 " You Have 0 Friends " was written and directed by co @-@ series creator Trey Parker . Trey Parker came up with the episode after signing up for Facebook and actually being sucked into it until people were angry that he did not respond to anyone on Facebook . He came up with the idea of doing something similar to Tron . The episode prominently features several aspects of the online website Facebook , including the Facebook games Farmville , Café World and a digital version of the Milton Bradley game Yahtzee . Also , many aspects of the virtual Facebook world Stan gets sucked into in the episode parody the film Tron . Stan 's Facebook account is based on the Master Control Program . Cartman 's podcast , Mad Friends , is a parody of a segment from the financial show Mad Money hosted by Jim Cramer on CNBC . 
 = = Reception and release = = 
 " You Have 0 Friends " originally aired on April 7 , 2010 , with a TV @-@ MA rating in the United States , on Comedy Central . In its original American broadcast , it was watched by 3 @.@ 071 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . This made it the second most viewed cable show of the night after In Plain Sight and attracting more viewers than the previous episode , " Medicinal Fried Chicken " . The episode also received an 18 – 49 rating of 1 @.@ 7 and a share of 5 % edging out Tyler Perry 's House of Payne for the cable lead in the demographic . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from critics . The Indiana Daily Student 's Brian Welk called the episode " fairly enjoyable , " joking that his Facebook status would say that he " hopes the 200th episode [ of South Park ] is as good as the Facebook one ! " Tucker of Entertainment Weekly said " The half @-@ hour was shrewdly precise in its targets : The older audience that communes on Facebook ( such as parents and grandparents ) as well as lonely kids ; as usual , " South Park " is merciless when it smells a baby @-@ boomer @-@ adopted trend . " Ramsey Isler of IGN gave the episode a 9 / 10 , calling it " brilliant from beginning to end , and one of the best episodes the series has served up in a while . " Carlos Delgado of iF Magazine wrote that " You have 0 Friends has the right amount of humor , intelligence , and sarcasm to match any South Park episode . The question is , does it become an instant classic ? " Cristina Everett of the New York Daily News called the episode " hilarious , yet heartwarming " , adding that the Kip <unk> subplot was " endearing " . 
 There have been less favorable reviews of " You Have 0 Friends " that criticize the use of its cultural Facebook jokes . TV Fanatic , who gave the episode 3 / 5 , said there was " too much Facebook " in the episode and that " it was a great parody , but just a decent episode that could have had more LOL moments " . Grading it a D + , The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff opined the episode " mostly made all of the jokes about [ Facebook ] that the rest of us did back when Facebook first invaded all of our lives . It doesn 't give me high hopes for the inevitable Twitter episode the show does in 2013 . " 
 " You Have 0 Friends " , along with the thirteen other episodes from South Park 's fourteenth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set and two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set in the United States on April 26 , 2011 . 
 = Leggo My Meg @-@ O = 
 " Leggo My Meg @-@ O " is the twentieth episode of the tenth season of the animated television series Family Guy . The episode originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 6 , 2012 . In this episode , Meg travels to Paris with her friend Ruth after being treated badly in school , but her exciting adventure comes to a halt when she gets kidnapped . Brian and Stewie embark on an action @-@ packed mission to find her before it is too late . This plot is a parody of the film Taken . 
 This episode was written by Brian Scully and directed by John Holmquist . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and cultural references . It was viewed by 5 @.@ 64 million U.S. viewers in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode 's guest stars were Omid Abtahi , Bill English , Ralph Garman , Mark Hentemann , Jerry Lambert , Rachael MacFarlane , Natasha Melnick , Kim Parks , Julius Sharpe , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin , Fred Tatasciore , John Viener and Lisa Wilhoit . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After being assaulted with <unk> by Connie D 'Amico and other girls during gym class , Meg talks to her friend Ruth about how much she hates being at school and wonders if she can tolerate the rest of the semester . She then learns that Ruth is going to spend a semester in Paris and is invited to join her in the program . Using the money she has saved from part @-@ time jobs , Meg is able to enroll in the program . The family sees her leave as she enters the airport . Once she and Ruth land in Paris , they meet a man who offers to share a cab with them as they go to their apartment . When the two of them arrive at the apartment , a group of men arrive and kidnap Ruth while Meg is talking to Peter on the phone . When she tells Peter what she witnessed , he tells her to hide under the bed . She complies , but the men find and take her anyway . After Peter talks to the kidnappers , one of them tells him " Drakkar Noir " before hanging up . After that , Peter calls " Lois , Meg 's dead ! " 
 The Griffins call the FBI to hopefully get Meg back , but the FBI say that a person must be missing for 96 hours before they could take action ( <unk> , the FBI agents admit it 's not likely they 'll find her alive after she 's been missing that long ) . Concerned by it , Brian and Stewie get to Paris themselves to take matters into their own hands and save Meg . They find out where the men took Meg , who is about to be sold as a sex slave . At the auction , Stewie dresses up as a slave and Brian dresses as an Arab to get in , and Stewie is sold to Brian ( for $ 500 @,@ 000 ) . However , Brian cannot afford to pay for Stewie , and the guard uncovers their disguises . They are chained to a pipe downstairs , but Brian breaks free and overpowers the guard . They then follow Meg and her captors to a yacht traveling down the River Seine . On board , Meg is delivered to an Arab emir waiting in the master stateroom . After Meg refuses to be his sex slave , The emir reveals he bought her not to be a sex slave but to be his son 's wife . The king introduces his teenage son , the young prince of the kingdom , who calls Meg a " goddess " and asks her to marry him or if she declines he will have her flown back to America on their private jet . Meg agrees to marry him , But Stewie then kills the prince , uses a <unk> on Meg , and takes her to a French hospital for treatment before taking her home safely . 
 Back at home , the family is happy to see Meg , who admits remembering nothing between the proposal and being in a French hospital . Lois tells Meg that they found Ruth with her tongue cut out . Peter states that he has saved Meg 's mail then reveals that to be a joke as Meg had not received any mail . 
 = = Production and cultural references = = 
 The episode was written by Brian Scully and directed by John Holmquist . Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin and Wellesley Wild served as executive producers , and James Purdum and Domonic Bianchi as supervising directors . 
 Guest stars and recurring actors Omid Abtahi , Bill English , Ralph Garman , Mark Hentemann , Jerry Lambert , Rachael MacFarlane , Natasha Melnick , Kim Parks , Julius Sharpe , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin , Fred Tatasciore , John Viener and Lisa Wilhoit made appearances throughout the episode . 
 Some cultural references were included in this episode . The plot of this episode is based on the film Taken . Peter 's phone call to the kidnappers is a reference to the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast on May 6 , 2012 on Fox , " Leggo My Meg @-@ O " was watched by 5 @.@ 64 million viewers according to Nielsen ratings , and aired on the same night as MacFarlane 's other show American Dad ! . It gained a 2 @.@ 7 / 7 rating share in the 18 – 49 demographic group , having the same rating as Desperate Housewives , and beating American Dad ! . The ratings decreased from the previous episode , " Mr. and Mrs. Stewie " . 
 The episode received average reviews from critics . Kevin McFarland of The A.V. Club gave the episode B- rating . He said the episode " [ was ] filled with more laughs than [ he ] predicted " . While stating that Meg 's humor comes from the same place each time , he enjoyed the action scenes in the episode . Carter <unk> of TV Fanatic gave the episode a 2 @.@ 5 / 5 rating . He noted that the episode leaned on Taken too much , however he enjoyed some funny moments in it . He stated that " the story seriously follows the same arc as the movie , just in 20 minutes . They find the Eastern Europeans who sold her to slavers , go on a car chase to rescue her and enter into a shootout on a boat to rescue her . " He continued , " Of course , there are jokes thrown in , and some humorous deconstructions of action movies and of the movie it parodies . For example , the ' car chase GPS ' scene . " 
 = Outflow boundary = 
 An outflow boundary , also known as a gust front , is a storm @-@ scale or mesoscale boundary separating thunderstorm @-@ cooled air ( outflow ) from the surrounding air ; similar in effect to a cold front , with passage marked by a wind shift and usually a drop in temperature and a related pressure jump . Outflow boundaries can persist for 24 hours or more after the thunderstorms that generated them dissipate , and can travel hundreds of kilometres ( miles ) from their area of origin . New thunderstorms often develop along outflow boundaries , especially near the point of intersection with another boundary ( cold front , dry line , another outflow boundary , etc . ) . Outflow boundaries can be seen either as fine lines on weather radar imagery or else as arcs of low clouds on weather satellite imagery . From the ground , outflow boundaries can be co @-@ located with the appearance of roll clouds and shelf clouds . 
 Outflow boundaries create low @-@ level wind shear which can be hazardous during aircraft takeoffs and landings . If a thunderstorm runs into an outflow boundary , the low @-@ level wind shear from the boundary can cause thunderstorms to exhibit rotation at the base of the storm , at times causing tornadic activity . Strong versions of these features known as downbursts can be generated in environments of vertical wind shear and mid @-@ level dry air . <unk> have a diameter of influence less than 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) , while <unk> occur over a diameter greater than 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) . Wet microbursts occur in atmospheres where the low levels are saturated , while dry microbursts occur in drier atmospheres from high @-@ based thunderstorms . When an outflow boundary moves into a more stable low level environment , such as into a region of cooler air or over regions of cooler water temperatures out at sea , it can lead to the development of an <unk> bore . 
 = = Definition = = 
 An outflow boundary , also known as a gust front or arc cloud , is the leading edge of gusty , cooler surface winds from thunderstorm downdrafts ; sometimes associated with a shelf cloud or roll cloud . A pressure jump is associated with its passage . Outflow boundaries can persist for over 24 hours and travel hundreds of kilometers ( miles ) from their area of origin . A wrapping gust front is a front that wraps around the mesocyclone , cutting off the inflow of warm moist air and resulting in occlusion . This is sometimes the case during the event of a collapsing storm , in which the wind literally " rips it apart " . 
 = = Origin = = 
 A microburst is a very localized column of sinking air known as a downburst , producing damaging divergent and straight @-@ line winds at the surface that are similar to but distinguishable from tornadoes which generally have convergent damage . The term was defined as affecting an area 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) in diameter or less , distinguishing them as a type of downburst and apart from common wind shear which can encompass greater areas . They are normally associated with individual thunderstorms . <unk> soundings show the presence of mid @-@ level dry air , which enhances evaporative cooling . 
 Organized areas of thunderstorm activity reinforce pre @-@ existing frontal zones , and can outrun cold fronts . This outrunning occurs within the westerlies in a pattern where the upper level jet splits into two streams . The resultant mesoscale convective system ( MCS ) forms at the point of the upper level split in the wind pattern in the area of best low level inflow . The convection then moves east and toward the equator into the warm sector , parallel to low @-@ level thickness lines . When the convection is strong and linear or curved , the MCS is called a squall line , with the feature placed at the leading edge of the significant wind shift and pressure rise which is normally just ahead of its radar signature . This feature is commonly depicted in the warm season across the United States on surface analyses , as they lie within sharp surface troughs . 
 A <unk> , normally associated with squall lines , is a strong downburst larger than 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) . A wet microburst consists of precipitation and an atmosphere saturated in the low @-@ levels . A dry microburst emanates from high @-@ based thunderstorms with virga falling from their base . All types are formed by precipitation @-@ cooled air rushing to the surface . <unk> can occur over large areas . In the extreme case , a derecho can cover a huge area more than 200 miles ( 320 km ) wide and over 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) long , lasting up to 12 hours or more , and is associated with some of the most intense straight @-@ line winds , but the generative process is somewhat different from that of most downbursts . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 At ground level , shelf clouds and roll clouds can be seen at the leading edge of outflow boundaries . Through satellite imagery , an arc cloud is visible as an arc of low clouds spreading out from a thunderstorm . If the skies are cloudy behind the arc , or if the arc is moving quickly indicate that high wind gusts are likely behind the gust front . Sometimes a gust front can be seen on weather radar , showing as a thin arc or line of weak radar echos pushing out from a collapsing storm . The thin line of weak radar echoes is known as a fine line . Occasionally , winds caused by the gust front are so high in velocity that they also show up on radar . This cool <unk> can then energize other storms which it hits by assisting in updrafts . Gust fronts colliding from two storms can even create new storms . Usually , however , no rain accompanies the shifting winds . An expansion of the rain shaft near ground level , in the general shape of a human foot , is a telltale sign of a downburst . <unk> , short @-@ lived vertical circulations near ground level , can be spawned by outflow boundaries . 
 = = Effects = = 
 Gust fronts create low @-@ level wind shear which can be hazardous to planes when they takeoff or land . Flying insects are swept along by the prevailing winds . As such , fine line patterns within weather radar imagery , associated with converging winds , are dominated by insect returns . At the surface , clouds of dust can be raised by outflow boundaries . If squall lines form over arid regions , a <unk> known as a haboob can result from the high winds picking up dust in their wake from the desert floor . If outflow boundaries move into areas of the atmosphere which are stable in the low levels , such as over colder pockets of ocean or through the cold sector of extratropical cyclones , they can create a phenomenon known as an <unk> bore , which shows up on satellite and radar imagery as a series of transverse waves in the cloud field oriented perpendicular to the low @-@ level winds . 
 = Cave Junction , Oregon = 
 Cave Junction , incorporated in 1948 , is a city in Josephine County , Oregon , United States . As of the 2010 census , the city population was 1 @,@ 883 . Its motto is the " Gateway to the Oregon Caves " , and the city got its name by virtue of its location at the junction of Redwood Highway ( U.S. Route 199 ) and Caves Highway ( Oregon Route 46 ) . Cave Junction is located in the Illinois Valley , where , starting in the 1850s , the non @-@ native economy depended on gold mining . After World War II , timber became the main source of income for residents . As timber income has since declined , Cave Junction is attempting to compensate with tourism and as a haven for retirees . Tourists visit the Oregon Caves National Monument and Preserve , which includes the Oregon Caves Chateau , as well as the Out <unk> treehouse resort and the Great Cats World Park zoo . 
 = = History = = 
 For thousands of years , the Takelma Indians inhabited the Illinois Valley . Their culture was destroyed when gold was discovered in the early 1850s , causing the subsequent Rogue River Wars . After an 1853 treaty , most of the <unk> lived on the Table Rock Reservation . In 1856 , after the wars ended , they were moved to the Grand Ronde Reservation and the Siletz Reservation . 
 The first gold in Oregon history was found in the Illinois Valley , as well as the largest gold nugget ( 17 lb or 7 @.@ 7 kg ) . In 1904 , more than 50 years after prospectors had started combing the valley for gold , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old named Ray Briggs discovered what newspapers at the time called " the most wonderful gold discovery ever reported in Oregon history . " While hunting along Sucker Creek , he discovered gold lying on the ground . He staked a claim and called it the " Wounded Buck Mine , " which produced 1 @,@ 777 ounces ( 50 @.@ 4 kg ) of gold . The " mine " was a small vein of gold 12 to 14 inches ( 30 to 36 cm ) wide , 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) long and 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) deep . 
 As gold mining in the Illinois Valley became exhausted in the 1860s and 1870s , the residents diversified into ranching , fishing , logging , tourism and agriculture . In 1874 , Elijah Davidson found a cave while on a hunting trip , and is now credited with discovering the Oregon Caves . In 1884 , Walter C. Burch heard about the cave from Davidson , and staked a squatter 's claim at the mouth of the caves . He and his brothers @-@ in @-@ law charged one dollar for a guided tour . According to their advertisement in the Grants Pass Courier , this included camping , plentiful pasture land and " medicinal " cave waters . They attempted to acquire title to the land , but as the land was unsurveyed , they abandoned the idea a few years later . 
 President William Howard Taft established the 480 @-@ acre ( 190 ha ) Oregon Caves National Monument on July 12 , 1909 , to be administered by the U.S. Forest Service . In 1923 , the Forest Service subcontracted the building of a hotel and guide services to a group of Grants Pass businessmen . By 1926 , the monument had a chalet and seven two @-@ bedroom cabins . Traffic into the caves led to a community developing at the junction of the Redwood Highway and the branch highway to the caves ( now known as Oregon Route 46 ) . Cave Junction , originally known as Cave City , was established in 1926 on land donated by Elwood Hussey . In 1935 , a post office was applied for and was named " Caves City " , however postal authorities disapproved of the name , partly because " City " implied the place was incorporated . Among the other names suggested was " Cave Junction " , which was adopted by the United States Board on Geographic Names in 1936 with the post office being renamed the same year . The locality was incorporated as Cave Junction in 1948 , and is the only incorporated area in the Illinois Valley . 
 In 1950 Cave Junction had a population of 283 , which decreased to 248 in 1960 and increased to 415 in 1970 . Its growth was fast in the 1960s , increasing at an average of 6 @.@ 8 percent annually . The city population 's primary growth period occurred in the 1970s , with an average annual increase of 9 @.@ 9 percent . Growth slowed in the 1980s when the population increase averaged only 1 @.@ 7 percent annually . The rate fell further between 1990 and 1998 , averaging 1 @.@ 6 percent , which was less than the state and county averages . 
 = = = Forest fires = = = 
 A number of wildfires have threatened Cave Junction over the years . The Longwood Fire in 1987 , part of the 150 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 61 @,@ 000 ha ) Silver Fire complex , was ignited by lightning strikes following a three @-@ year drought . Numerous residents of Cave Junction evacuated . 
 In 2002 , the Florence and Sour Biscuit fires converged , creating the Biscuit Fire . This fire threatened Cave Junction , Kerby , Selma and a number of Northern California communities . Ultimately , the Biscuit Fire lasted 120 days , burned 499 @,@ 965 acres ( 202 @,@ 329 ha ) in southern Oregon and northern California , and destroyed four homes and nine outbuildings in the Cave Junction area . In 2003 , a wildfire destroyed a home in Cave Junction . In 2004 , a downed power line caused a fire that briefly threatened over 100 homes and forced 200 people to evacuate . One person died , apparently of stress related to the fire . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Cave Junction is located on U.S. Route 199 at its junction with Oregon Route 46 . It is about 48 kilometres ( 30 mi ) southwest of Grants Pass , Oregon and 85 kilometres ( 53 mi ) northeast of Crescent City , California . The city lies in the Illinois Valley , on the northwest slope of the Siskiyou Range , at an elevation of about 480 metres ( 1 @,@ 570 ft ) above MSL . According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 1 @.@ 82 square miles ( 4 @.@ 71 km2 ) , of which , 1 @.@ 81 square miles ( 4 @.@ 69 km2 ) is land and 0 @.@ 01 square miles ( 0 @.@ 03 km2 ) is water . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Cave Junction has an average low of 33 ° F ( 1 ° C ) in January and high of 91 ° F ( 33 ° C ) in July . On average , there are 196 sunny days , and 108 days with precipitation . The city receives an average of 61 inches ( 1 @,@ 500 mm ) of rain each year . According to the Köppen climate classification system , Cave Junction has a warm @-@ summer Mediterranean climate ( Köppen Csb ) . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = 2010 census = = = 
 As of the census of 2010 , there were 1 @,@ 883 people , 815 households , and 469 families residing in the city . The population density was 1 @,@ 040 @.@ 3 inhabitants per square mile ( 401 @.@ 7 / km2 ) . There were 916 housing units at an average density of 506 @.@ 1 per square mile ( 195 @.@ 4 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was 90 @.@ 3 % White , 0 @.@ 4 % African American , 2 @.@ 0 % Native American , 1 @.@ 3 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 1 @.@ 9 % from other races , and 3 @.@ 9 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8 @.@ 3 % of the population . 
 There were 815 households of which 26 @.@ 9 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 38 @.@ 9 % were married couples living together , 13 @.@ 3 % had a female householder with no husband present , 5 @.@ 4 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 42 @.@ 5 % were non @-@ families . 34 @.@ 8 % of all households were made up of individuals and 15 @.@ 8 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 30 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 94 . 
 The median age in the city was 43 years . 23 @.@ 7 % of residents were under the age of 18 ; 8 @.@ 8 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 19 @.@ 1 % were from 25 to 44 ; 27 @.@ 4 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 21 % were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 46 @.@ 0 % male and 54 @.@ 0 % female . 
 = = = 2000 census = = = 
 As of the census of 2000 , there were 1 @,@ 363 people , 603 households , and 356 families residing in the city . The population density was 828 @.@ 8 people per square mile ( 320 @.@ 9 / km2 ) . There were 730 housing units at an average density of 443 @.@ 9 per square mile ( 171 @.@ 9 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was 92 @.@ 3 % White , 0 @.@ 3 % African American , 2 @.@ 1 % Native American , 0 @.@ 7 % Asian , 0 @.@ 4 % Pacific Islander , 1 @.@ 2 % other races , and 3 @.@ 2 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5 @.@ 6 % of the population . 
 There were 603 households out of which 28 @.@ 7 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 39 @.@ 8 % were married couples living together , 14 @.@ 3 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 40 @.@ 8 % were non @-@ families . 33 @.@ 7 % of all households were made up of individuals and 20 @.@ 6 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 26 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 87 . 
 In the city , the age population was spread out with 26 @.@ 8 % under the age of 18 , 7 @.@ 7 % from 18 to 24 , 21 @.@ 9 % from 25 to 44 , 21 @.@ 9 % from 45 to 64 , and 21 @.@ 8 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 40 years . For every 100 females there were 85 @.@ 7 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 79 @.@ 8 males . 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 17 @,@ 161 , and the median income for a family was $ 22 @,@ 500 . Males had a median income of $ 20 @,@ 893 versus $ 16 @,@ 333 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 10 @,@ 556 . About 23 @.@ 6 % of families and 28 @.@ 7 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 35 @.@ 8 % of those under age 18 and 11 @.@ 9 % of those age 65 or over . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 Residents range from very liberal , to strongly right @-@ wing to survivalists . As of 2002 , the city has 13 employees , with an average wage of $ 35 @,@ 799 , the largest categories of employees are Sewerage and Water Supply , with four employees each . In total , Cave Junction 's monthly employee outlay is $ 35 @,@ 799 , or $ 465 @,@ 384 a year . As of 2007 , Josephine County Sheriff volunteers man a sub station in Cave Junction , and the Sheriff 's Office has plans to begin a pilot program in the City Hall building , staffed by volunteers , that will include three temporary holding cells and the ability to take incident reports . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Starting in the early 1850s , gold mining was the main source of income in the Illinois Valley . As gold mining dwindled in the 1860s and 1870s , the economy diversified into ranching , fishing , logging , tourism and agriculture . In the years after World War II , timber became an increasingly large part of the county 's finances . There were 30 lumber mills operating in the valley after the war , but by the late 1980s the number had dwindled to just one . 
 Because of President Roosevelt 's creation of the Siskiyou National Forest , and the reversion of Oregon and California Railroad lands to federal government control , by 1937 the U.S. Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management were in charge of 70 % of the land in Josephine county , and a large part of the Illinois Valley . Because this decreased the county 's potential tax base , the government shared money earned from timber sales with the county , and payments in lieu of taxes from the federal government became a large part of its tax base . In 1989 , Josephine County received $ 16 @,@ 756 @,@ 000 in various federal payments ; by 1999 , the payments had fallen to $ 9 @.@ 6 million . 
 Because of these budget cutbacks , Southern Oregon has used tourism as a means of attracting small businesses and retirees . The movement of California retirees in particular has helped the economy grow . Although jobs have been created as a result , they are usually low @-@ paying . Today the principal industries are tourism , timber and agriculture . Since about 1960 , the community has evolved into a center for wine , retirement , tourism , and small businesses . One timber mill remains in Cave Junction , Rough & Ready Lumber Co . , located six miles ( 10 km ) south of town . In November 2007 , Rough & Ready completed a $ 6 million biomass plant to replace their existing wood @-@ fired boiler , as market forces have increased demand for dry timber . 
 The Illinois Valley Community Development Organization ( IVCDO ) , formed in 1974 , has attracted notice for its work directed at improving the Illinois Valley economy . In 2006 , Cave Junction was awarded the Great Strides Award by the Northwest Area Foundation for the IVCDO 's efforts to reduce long @-@ term poverty . In 2004 , the IVCDO began a partnership with the National Park Service that resulted in the assumption of 40 seasonal and year @-@ around jobs managing the Oregon Caves Chateau . The project uses local produce , food products and wine at the Chateau , and the proceeds are directed back into the local community . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Cave Junction has a number of points of interest , including a museum , a zoo , and a resort consisting of treehouses . It also has a number of historic sites , many related to gold mining , as well as an Oregon state park and a national monument and preserve , all located in the greater Cave Junction area . A newspaper and two radio stations also serve this area . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 Cave Junction 's main point of interest is the Oregon Caves National Monument and Preserve , which is a 480 @-@ acre ( 190 ha ) area of hiking trails and caverns . Located at the end of a 20 @-@ mile ( 32 km ) " stomach churning " drive along State Route 46 , there are limestone caves discovered in 1874 by a hunter and his dog . At the caves , there is a 23 @-@ room chateau that was built in 1932 . 
 Each year Cave Junction features an ArtWalk on the second Friday of each month , except during the winter , with the city 's businesses exhibiting various types of art such as pottery , iron art , music and fire dancing . The ArtWalk adds significantly to the Illinois Valley 's positive image and increases tourism and adds to the local economy . According to surveys conducted in 2006 by the Arts Council of Southern Oregon , the city sees a 30 – 50 percent increase in sales and visitors during the event . Attendance is approximately 150 – 200 people , with roughly 15 percent coming from outside the community . Local artists , including students of Lorna Byrne Middle School in 2007 , participate while local businesses , including thrift stores and art galleries , serve as hosts . 
 Located about 10 miles ( 16 km ) southeast of Cave Junction , in Takilma , Oregon , is the home of the Out <unk> Treehouse <unk> , a multi @-@ treehouse resort run by Michael Garnier using Garnier limbs . Garnier developed the Garnier limb , which is a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ inch @-@ thick bolt surrounded by a cuff , both made of Grade 5 steel , and is able to support 8 @,@ 000 lb ( 3 @,@ 600 kg ) . As of 2007 , the <unk> has nine treehouses , three with bathrooms . Garnier had to fight local government ordinances for almost ten years before gaining the right to house guests in his nine treehouses . 
 Great Cats World Park is located a few miles south of Cave Junction . As of 2007 , it has 32 cats , of 17 different species , including cougars , leopards , jaguars , lions , Siberian tiger cubs , a fishing cat , and an ocelot . Other attractions include the It 's a Burl handcrafted wood gallery and the <unk> Museum , both in Kerby . Cave Junction 's Wild River Brewery serves one of the smallest communities of any Oregon brewery . Founded in 1975 as the Pizza Deli , a microbrewery was added in 1989 . In 1994 , the name Wild River was adopted and a Wild River restaurant and pub was opened in Grants Pass . 
 = = = Wine = = = 
 The Illinois Valley is the coolest and wettest of the three valleys in the Rogue Valley American Viticultural Area . In the late 1960s and early 1970s a new group of Oregonians started experimenting with growing grapes and making wine . Initially this group was not very successful , but 40 years later , Oregon is considered a prestigious growing area . Southern Oregon is higher , and its climate is often warmer , than better known wine producing valleys such as Napa Valley to the south and Willamette Valley and Columbia Valley to the north . The Illinois Valley has dry warm summers and cold nights , which make it well suited for pinot noir , in contrast to the hotter and dryer Rogue and Umpqua valleys . Several vineyards and wineries are located near Cave Junction , including Bridgeview Vineyards , Foris Vineyards Winery , and Bear Creek Winery which are all discussed in Fodor 's 2004 book " Oregon Wine Country . " 
 Cave Junction is the home of Bridgeview Vineyards , one of the largest wineries in Oregon . Bridgeview is noted for its chardonnay , pinot gris and pinot noir . At the 2000 American Wine Awards , Bridgeview 's 1998 Bridgeview Oregon Blue Moon was selected as the best pinot noir under $ 15 . Its 85 @-@ acre ( 34 ha ) estate in the Illinois Valley is planted in the European style of dense 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) row and 4 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) vine spacing . Bridgeview also has an 80 @-@ acre ( 32 ha ) vineyard in the Applegate Valley . Foris Vineyards Winery is also located in the Cave Junction area . Established in 1986 , as of 2007 , they produced 48 @,@ 000 cases of wine , making it the 14th largest bonded winery in Oregon . 
 = = = Historic sites = = = 
 Cave Junction has a number of historic sites related to its early gold mining days , including various mines , ditches , and Logan Cut . The historic Osgood Ditch in Takilma provided water for early mining operations in the Illinois Valley . Although mining in the Illinois Valley started in the rivers , gold was soon discovered in gravel beds high up the slopes above the rivers . It had been deposited by ancient rivers that then eroded deep into the earth . To extract this gold , prospectors created ditches to bring the water to these areas . The water was then moved through piping to the desired location . The pressure the water built up as it dropped was used for hydraulic mining . Water cannons fired water over 100 feet ( 30 m ) , and the debris was run through a sluice box . Gold was located within pockets in the gravel , and because the miners could not predict where the pockets were , almost every gravel deposit in the Illinois Valley was mined . The Illinois Valley 's largest gold rush town , Waldo , Oregon , was located on a gravel deposit and was eventually destroyed when its gravel bed was run through a sluice box , along with most of the town . Today nothing of Waldo remains . The Osgood Ditch provided water for mining operations near Waldo . One building of note in the area is the Oregon Caves Chateau , which is a National Historic Landmark . 
 One of the well known mining communities <unk> established the <unk> Church in 1893 about a 1 / 4 mile down on Dick George Road . This church is one of the oldest building in the valley still standing and still in use . Between 1895 – 99 the church was moved down to its present site on Holland Loop Road where it has served the community till this day . It is currently known as Bridgeview Community Church ( since the 1920s ) . A newer building was built in 1986 where services are now being held every Sunday . The original church is currently under restoration and will continue to be as the builders back then said ; " A place for us or children and grandchildren to worship " . Updated status and pictures can be seen at the church 's website at <unk> 
 = = = Sports and recreation = = = 
 Cave Junction has a golf course and a state park . The Illinois Valley Golf Course has 9 holes , and as of 2007 there are plans for an expansion to 18 holes . The Illinois River Forks State Park is located at the confluence of the east and west forks of the Illinois River . The park includes restrooms , picnic tables , and a variety of rare plants . In 2014 a new disc golf course was built at the Illinois River Forks State Park . There is also a skate park at Jubilee Park in Cave Junction , which was built largely by volunteers and money raised through fundraisers and community involvement . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Cave Junction has one newspaper and two radio stations . The local paper , the Illinois Valley News , was established in 1937 when Cave Junction was known as Cave City , and as of 2010 has a circulation of 2 @,@ 448 . It is published by Daniel J. Mancuso and edited by Kevan Moore . The first issue was four pages long , and included ads for businesses ranging from Cave City to Medford , Oregon , with the ads priced at one or two dollars . The city 's only licensed radio station is KCNA @-@ FM ( FM 102 @.@ 7 The Drive ) , a Classic Hits station , however <unk> @-@ LP ( FM 107 @.@ 9 ) , a Christian station , was operating until May 2011 . 
 The Cave Junction area had a pirate radio station , Hope Mountain Radio . It broadcast out of Takilma until repeated interference from government agents caused them to shut down . The station then began broadcasting legally on the internet at <unk> , although this caused their costs to go up and necessitated fundraising activities . As of January 2007 , Hope Mountain Radio broadcasts 24 hours a day with an all volunteer staff . 
 = = Education = = 
 Cave Junction has three schools : Illinois Valley High School , Lorna Byrne Middle School , and Evergreen Elementary School . These schools are part of the Three Rivers School District , which also encompasses schools from Grants Pass and Applegate , Oregon . 
 Two individuals linked to Illinois Valley High School ( <unk> ) have been inducted into regional halls of fame . In 2004 , Sam Hutchins became a member of the Wild Salmon Hall of Fame for creating the non @-@ profit Oregon Stewardship Program . Begun in 1992 to teach Illinois Valley High School students about wild steelhead in the Illinois River , by 2004 the program had been expanded to 25 schools and 1 @,@ 500 students . In 2007 , <unk> wrestling coach <unk> “ Jay ” Miller was inducted into the Oregon Chapter of The National Wrestling Hall of Fame & Museum . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 The Illinois Valley Airport , also known as the Siskiyou <unk> Base , was built by the U.S. Forest Service . It operated from 1943 to 1981 as a smokejumper base , during which time the smokejumpers parachuted on 1445 fires for <unk> fire jumps . As of 2007 , the airport had a fixed @-@ base operator , aircraft rentals and instruction , hangar rentals , and a restaurant . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Cave Junction has a number of notable residents and past residents . Actor John Wayne was a visitor to a ranch in Selma , Oregon , about 10 miles ( 16 km ) north of town . He grew fond of the area after filming Rooster Cogburn along the Rogue River . This ranch has since become the Deer Creek Center which houses the Siskiyou Field Institute . Kristy Lee Cook , who was a contestant on American Idol 7 , was also raised in Selma , where she used to live before joining the competition . Arthur B. Robinson is the head of the Oregon Institute of Science and Medicine , which is about 7 miles ( 11 km ) from Cave Junction . 
 = Ten Nights in a Bar Room ( 1910 film ) = 
 Ten Nights in a Bar Room is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . Adapted from the novel Ten Nights in a Bar @-@ Room and What I Saw There by Timothy Shay Arthur , the production focuses on Joe Morgan after he has become a hopeless drunkard . Often Morgan 's young daughter , Mary , comes to beg her father to return home . One day , she appears during a fight between the two men and is fatally struck by a bottle thrown by the saloon @-@ keeper . Before Mary dies she asks her father to promise to swear off alcohol and he accepts . He is reformed and becomes successful , while the saloon @-@ keeper is killed in a fight in an irony of fate . The film was released on November 4 , 1910 and met with mixed reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The work was an adaptation of Timothy Shay Arthur 's novel Ten Nights in a Bar @-@ Room and What I Saw There . The Moving Picture World synopsis states : " Despite the fact that he is a loving husband and father , Joe Morgan ruins his life by his fondness for drink and finally becomes a seemingly hopeless drunkard . He spends his time and money in the saloon kept by Slade , the man who took away Joe 's mill and largely caused his financial ruin . Slade 's saloon , when he first opened it , was well furnished , the landlord courteous and well groomed , and the customers happy and seemingly unaffected by their surroundings . But as time passed , a change for the worse was noted in everything . Probably this escaped Joe 's notice , for a sharp shot , indeed , was needed to reform him . That shock came . Joe 's only daughter , Mary , was in the habit of going to the saloon and <unk> urging her father to come home . She knew that no matter how intoxicated he might be , he would never harm her . But one evening when she appeared her father and Slade had been quarreling , and the saloonkeeper threw a bottle at Morgan , who dodged . The missile struck the child , entering . The blow resulted fatally , but before Mary died , she extracted a promise from her grief @-@ stricken father that he would never drink again , a promise which he ever @-@ afterward kept . In later years Joe became wealthy and respected , and influenced by the thought of his daughter in heaven he kept in the straight and narrow path . The saloon keeper who killed Mary was never punished by the law - but through the irony of fate his taking off was much like that of Joe Morgan 's helpless child . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Frank H. Crane as Joe Morgan 
 Marie Eline as Little Mary 
 = = Production = = 
 The production was based on Ten Nights in a Bar @-@ Room and What I Saw There by Timothy Shay Arthur . The plot focused on the dangers of alcoholism and the downfall of those taken in by its effects . In the 1850s , sales of the novel were second only to Harriet Beecher Stowe 's Uncle Tom 's Cabin . The production was adapted for the stage in 1858 and while it did not perform well on Broadway , it proved to be a lasting success . Dozens of productions would cross the United States for the next sixty years and the play proved to be a major influence on the Temperance movement , resulting in the passage of temperance laws . It is likely that the writer of the scenario was Lloyd Lonergan . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Carl Louis Gregory , and Alfred H. Moses , Jr. though none are specifically credited . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . Only the roles of Frank H. Crane and Marie Eline are known . The other cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on November 4 , 1910 . The film was released outside of the planned order due to a scheduling conflict . Originally The American and the Queen was planned to be released on this date , but it was instead pushed back to November 11 . The film received mixed reviews from critics , H. <unk> of The Moving Picture News stated that the costuming and lace curtains on the windows of the home betrayed the supposed poverty of the Morgan family . Walton , also of The Moving Picture News , stated , " This title would be completely misunderstood by the majority of moving picture show attendants . Some sporadic ' reformer ' who does not know the original and who has never seen the film will fill ' space ' on the iniquity of moving pictures founded on this title . If he did see the film it has not the necessary power to grapple with the terrible reality of a too common incident in daily life . " The New York Dramatic Mirror was more picky in its wording and praise , stating : " It was to be supposed that some company would finally present this familiar drama in pictorial form , and a reviewer must feel glad that it is over , for the film doesn 't materially exalt the level of film output . " The review found the acting to be good , but found fault in the shadows of the actors fell towards a lamp instead of away from it . The New York Dramatic Mirror was not a neutral party for reviews and took a shot at the Thanhouser Company by running an article that stated : " The Selig Company announces the production of Ten Nights in a Bar Room will not be confined to one reel , but will be given all the film that it requires for proper production . This departure from the restrictive limit of 1 @,@ 000 feet gives promise that the drama will have adequate treatment . " Bowers states that the paper " was acting the role of a spoiler , for the Selig version was not released until a half year later , in June 1911 , and , except for spite , there was no reason to mention it now . " 
 Thomas S. Hischak , author of American Literature on Stage and Screen : 525 Works and Their Adaptations , claims that the Thanhouser production is the earliest known film adaptation of the novel . This is an error because Lubin would produce an adaptation , 700 feet in length , by October 1903 . 
 = 1st Army ( Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) = 
 The 1st Army was a Royal Yugoslav Army formation commanded by Armijski đeneral Milan Rađenković during the German @-@ led Axis invasion of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in April 1941 during World War II . It consisted of one infantry division , one horsed cavalry division , and two brigade @-@ strength infantry detachments . It formed part of the 2nd Army Group , and was responsible for the defence of the section of the Yugoslav @-@ Hungarian border between the Danube and the Tisza rivers . 
 The 1st Army was not directly attacked during the first few days after the invasion commenced , but attacks on its flanks resulted in successive orders to withdraw to the lines of the Danube and then the Sava . The Hungarians then crossed the border in the sector for which the 1st Army had been responsible , but the Yugoslavs were already withdrawing and the Hungarians faced almost no resistance . This was followed by the German capture of Belgrade and the rear area units of 1st Army . Remnants of the 1st Army continued to resist along the line of the Sava , within days , tens of thousands of Yugoslav soldiers had been captured . The Germans closed on Sarajevo , and accepted the unconditional surrender of the Royal Yugoslav Army on 17 April , which came into effect at the following day . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The 1st Army was commanded by Armijski đeneral Milan Rađenković , and his chief of staff was Brigadni đeneral Todor <unk> . It was organised and mobilised on a geographic basis from the 1st Army District , which was divided into divisional districts , each of which was subdivided into regimental regions . The 1st Army consisted of : 
 7th Infantry Division Potiska 
 3rd Cavalry Division 
 Infantry Detachment Senta ( brigade @-@ strength ) 
 Infantry Detachment Sombor ( brigade @-@ strength ) 
 Its support units included the 56th Army Artillery Regiment , the 1st Anti @-@ Aircraft Battalion , and the 1st Army Anti @-@ Aircraft Company . The 1st Air Reconnaissance Group comprising fifteen Breguet 19s was attached from the Royal Yugoslav Air Force and was based at Ruma just south of Novi Sad . 
 = = Deployment = = 
 The 1st Army was part of the 2nd Army Group , which was responsible for the eastern section of the Yugoslav @-@ Hungarian border , with the 1st Army deployed in the Bačka region between the Danube and the Tisza , and the 2nd Army in the Baranya and Slavonia regions between Slatina and the Danube . On the right flank of the 1st Army was the 6th Army , an independent formation that was responsible for the defence of the Yugoslav Banat region east of the Tisza . The boundary with the 2nd Army ran just east of the Danube to Vukovar , then south towards Bijeljina . The boundary with the 6th Army ran just to the east of the Tisza to the confluence with the Danube , then south across the Sava through Obrenovac . The Yugoslav defence plan saw the 1st Army deployed with one division forward with an infantry detachment on each flank , and a cavalry division held in depth . All of the formations of the 1st Army had only commenced mobilisation . The deployment of the 1st Army from west to east was : 
 Infantry Detachment Sombor around Sombor 
 7th Infantry Division Potiska centred on Bačka Topola with its forward elements in Subotica 
 Infantry Detachment Senta around Senta 
 3rd Cavalry Division south of the Danube in the Fruška Gora region between Novi Sad and Sremska Mitrovica 
 The 44th Infantry Division <unk> , which was under the direct command of the General Headquarters of the VKJ , was deployed in the 1st Army area to the east of the 3rd Cavalry Division , centred on Stara <unk> on the road between Novi Sad and Belgrade . 
 = = Operations = = 
 = = = 6 – 10 April = = = 
 The 1st Army faced the Hungarian 3rd Army , and during the first few days after the commencement of the invasion , there were exchanges of fire with Hungarian border guards , but the 1st Army faced no direct attacks . Neither the 1st Army or the Hungarians were ready for full @-@ scale fighting , as they were still mobilising and deploying their forces . On 9 April , due to events in other parts of Yugoslavia , the 6th Army on the right flank of the 1st Army was ordered to withdraw south of the Danube and deploy on a line facing east to defend against an attack from the direction of Sofia , Bulgaria . 2nd Army Group also received orders to withdraw south of the line of the Drava and Danube . 1st Army began to withdraw , and on the same day elements were approaching the Danube crossing . 
 The following day , the situation deteriorated significantly when the German XLI Motorised Corps crossed the Yugoslav @-@ Romanian border into the Yugoslav Banat and struck the 6th Army , halting its withdrawal and disrupting its ability to organise a coherent defence behind the Danube . Also on 10 April , the main thrust of the XLVI Motorised Corps of the 2nd Army , consisting of the 8th Panzer Division leading the 16th Motorised Infantry Division crossed the Drava at Barcs in the 4th Army sector . The 8th Panzer Division turned southeast between the Drava and Sava rivers , and meeting almost no resistance and with strong air support , had reached Slatina by evening , despite poor roads and bad weather . 
 Later that day , as the situation was becoming increasingly desperate throughout the country , Dušan Simović , who was both the Prime Minister and Yugoslav Chief of the General Staff , broadcast the following message : 
 All troops must engage the enemy wherever encountered and with every means at their disposal . Don 't wait for direct orders from above , but act on your own and be guided by your judgement , initiative , and conscience . 
 The bulk of the 1st Army were able to cross the Danube and began to prepare defences . By the evening of 10 April , the 1st Army was ordered to withdraw from this line and form a defensive line behind the Sava from Debrc to the confluence with the Vrbas river , for which one or two days would be needed . On the night of 10 / 11 April , the whole 2nd Army Group continued its withdrawal , but units of the 2nd Army on the left flank of the 1st Army that included significant numbers of Croats began to dissolve due to the fifth column activities of the fascist Ustaše and their sympathisers . 
 = = = 11 – 12 April = = = 
 At dawn on 11 April , Hungarian forces , consisting with the Mobile , IV and V Corps of Altábornagy ( Lieutenant General ) Elemér Gorondy @-@ Novák 's 3rd Army , crossed the Yugoslav border north of Osijek and near Subotica , overcame Yugoslav border guards and advanced on Subotica and Palić . The XLVI Motorised Corps continued to push east south of the Drava , with the 8th Panzer Division capturing Našice , Osijek on the Drava , and Vukovar on the Danube , followed by the 16th Motorised Infantry Division which advanced east of Našice , despite bridge demolitions and poor roads . The 8th Panzer Division had effectively routed the 2nd Army Group by 11 April . On the same day , Messerschmitt Bf 110 's of I Group of the 26th Heavy Fighter Wing ( German : Zerstörergeschwader 26 , ZG 26 ) destroyed several 1st Air Reconnaissance Group Breguet 19s at Ruma . The rest were flown to Bijeljina , but were destroyed the following day when I / ZG 26 swept over the airfield in one of the most effective attacks of the campaign . On the night of 11 / 12 April , the 8th Panzer Division captured Sremska Mitrovica on the Sava at 02 : 30 , destroyed a bridge over the Danube at Bogojevo , and advanced on Lazarevac about 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) south of Belgrade . These advances delayed the withdrawal of the 2nd Army Group south of the Sava . 
 By 12 April , the withdrawal of the 2nd Army Group was being threatened from the left flank , with 2nd Army having " no combat importance at all " . On the right flank , 6th Army attempted to regroup while being pressed by the 11th Panzer Division as it drove towards Belgrade . West of Belgrade , remnants of the 2nd Army Group tried to establish a line along the Sava , but XLVI Motorised Corps had already captured the bridges . When elements of the 8th Panzer Division captured Zemun without a fight , they captured 1st Army 's rear area units . On 12 April , the 1st Army 's 3rd Cavalry Division counter @-@ attacked at Šabac and pushed the Germans back across the Sava . The Hungarians pursued the 1st Army south , and occupied the area between the Danube and the Tisza meeting virtually no resistance . Serb Chetnik irregulars fought isolated engagements , and the Hungarian General Staff considered irregular resistance forces to be their only significant opposition . The Hungarian 1st Parachute Battalion captured canal bridges at Vrbas and Srbobran . This , the first airborne operation in Hungarian history , was not without incident . The battalion 's aircraft consisted of five Italian @-@ made Savoia @-@ Marchetti SM.75 transport aircraft formerly with the civilian airline MALERT , but pressed into service with the Royal Hungarian Air Force ( Hungarian : Magyar Királyi Honvéd Légierő , MKHL ) at the start of the European war . Shortly after takeoff from the airport at Veszprém @-@ Jutas on the afternoon of 12 April , the command plane , code E @-@ 101 , crashed with the loss of 20 or 23 lives , including 19 paratroopers . This was the heaviest single loss suffered by the Hungarians during the Yugoslav campaign . Meanwhile , Sombor was captured against determined Chetnik resistance , and Subotica was also captured . 
 On the evening of 12 April , elements of the SS Motorised Infantry Division Reich , under command of XLI Motorised Corps crossed the Danube in pneumatic boats and captured Belgrade without resistance . About the same time , most of the elements of XLVI Motorised Corps that were approaching Belgrade from the west were redirected away from the capital . Elements of the 8th Panzer Division did continue their thrust to capture the Sava bridges to the west of Belgrade , and entered the city during the night . The rest of the 8th Panzer Division turned southeast and drove towards Valjevo to link up with the left flank of the First Panzer Group southwest of Belgrade . The 16th Motorised Infantry Division was redirected south across the Sava , and advanced toward Zvornik . 
 = = Fate = = 
 On 13 April , the Hungarians occupied Baranja without resistance , and pushed south through Bačka to reach the line of Novi Sad and the Great Bačka Canal . Early on 14 April , the remnants of 2nd Army Group , including the 1st Army , continued to fight against the 8th Panzer Division and 16th Motorised Infantry Division along the Sava . On 14 and 15 April , tens of thousands of Yugoslav soldiers were taken prisoner by the Germans during their drive on Sarajevo in the centre of the country , including 30 @,@ 000 around Zvornik and 6 @,@ 000 around Doboj . On 15 April , the 8th and 14th Panzer Divisions entered Sarajevo . After a delay in locating appropriate signatories for the surrender document , the Yugoslav High Command unconditionally surrendered in Belgrade effective at 12 : 00 on 18 April . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Journals and papers = = = 
 = = = Web = = = 
 = Kidung Abadi = 
 " Kidung Abadi " ( Indonesian for " Eternal Ballad " ) is a song written by father and daughter team Erwin and Gita Gutawa for the Kidung Abadi Chrisye concert ; the concert was held on 5 April 2012 to commemorate the fifth anniversary of Chrisye 's death . The song was created over a period of three months by splicing syllables from previously recorded vocals by Chrisye . At the concert , spliced black @-@ and @-@ white footage of Chrisye was shown lip synching to the song while Erwin 's orchestra performed the music . The song was well received : the audience gave it a rowdy ovation , while critics praised its lyrics and described it as one of the best parts of the concert . 
 = = Background = = 
 Chrisye had a forty @-@ year career in Indonesia 's music industry , starting as a bassist with Sabda Nada before his first stint as a vocalist on the indie album Guruh Gipsy ( 1976 ) . After the success of the song " Lilin @-@ Lilin Kecil " ( " Small Candles " ; 1977 ) and album Badai Pasti Berlalu ( The Storm Shall Surely Pass ; 1977 ) , he began a solo career with Musica Studios . Before his death of lung cancer on 30 March 2007 , he released nineteen albums with Musica . In 2011 Rolling Stone Indonesia listed Chrisye as the third @-@ greatest Indonesian musician of all time . 
 Towards the fifth anniversary of Chrisye 's death , Chrisye 's widow Yanti Noor , director Jay Subiyakto , and composer Erwin Gutawa began collaborating for a concert ; the concert was announced on 29 February 2012 and marketed as Chrisye 's fourth concert . It was held on 5 April 2012 at Plenary Hall in the Jakarta Convention Centre and featured a hologram of Chrisye singing with Once <unk> , Vina Panduwinata , Sophia Latjuba , and the band Gigi . Another feature of the concert was " Kidung Abadi " ( " Eternal Ballad " ) . 
 = = Composition and performance = = 
 The song was composed by Erwin Gutawa , who had previously collaborated with Chrisye on five albums . In an interview with The Jakarta Post , he said that he felt guilty as he had never written anything for Chrisye in the time they had worked together ; he had intended to make a new song with Chrisye 's voice since soon after the latter 's death . The lyrics were written by Gutawa 's daughter , Gita , who was asked by her father to write as if Chrisye were singing about having died , but his songs living on . Gita , who also sang at the concert , felt she owed something to Chrisye as her first stage performance was at his 2003 Dekade concert . 
 To record the vocals , the elder Gutawa and a ten @-@ member team of researchers compiled thousands of syllables from Chrisye 's older songs , obtained from the masters , in a database . Some syllables were kept unaltered , while others were amalgamated to form a single sound or more than one ; according to Kompas , the " ku " syllables in " Kidung Abadi " were an amalgamation of 1 @,@ 056 " ku " syllables in Chrisye 's previous songs . Ultimately , a total of 246 syllables were combined in Pro Tools to form the new song ; the program was also used to change the pitch of numerous syllables . Gutawa inserted pauses where he assumed Chrisye would have paused if singing the song in real life ; he based his choices on his previous experience with Chrisye . The entire process , from writing to recording , took three months . 
 The song was initially performed at the Kidung Abadi concert on as the penultimate song . It was overlaid on a black @-@ and @-@ white video of Chrisye singing projected on an 8 @-@ by @-@ 4 @-@ metre ( 26 by 13 ft ) screen . The video was created by Jay Subiyakto , who spliced together archived footage of Chrisye performing . Chrisye 's lips were synchronised to move in time with the vocals . Subiyakto stated that he did not base the work on foreign shows , choosing instead to start from scratch . The music was provided by a live orchestra . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Eko <unk> , writing for <unk> , called the song one of the best parts of the concert , although he considered the synchronisation off . Frans <unk> wrote in Kompas that the song was " touching " , quoting the lyrics " See the times pass , I 'm here and you 're there .... Though now I 'm far from you , I 'll keep singing . Hear my melody flow ; this is for you " as reflecting Chrisye 's unique style . The thousands @-@ strong crowd gave the song a rowdy ovation after the performance . 
 = HMS Concorde ( 1783 ) = 
 Concorde was a 32 @-@ gun frigate of the French Navy , lead ship of her class . Built in Rochefort in 1777 , she entered service with the French early in the American War of Independence , and was soon in action , capturing HMS Minerva in the West Indies . She survived almost until the end of the war , but was captured by HMS Magnificent in 1783 . Not immediately brought into service due to the draw @-@ down in the navy after the end of the war , she underwent repairs and returned to active service under the White Ensign with the outbreak of war with France in 1793 as the fifth @-@ rate HMS Concorde . 
 Initially part of squadrons cruising off the French coast , she played an important part in the Action of 23 April 1794 , capturing the French frigate Engageante , and at a later engagement , where she helped to capture the French frigate Virginie . From 1797 until the early 19th century she had especial success against privateers , capturing a large number in the West Indies and in the Atlantic . She had a narrow escape from a superior French force in 1801 , but was able to batter her pursuer , the 40 @-@ gun Bravoure into submission . She was prevented from capturing her by the arrival of French reinforcements . Her last years were spent on a variety of stations , including at the Cape of Good Hope and the East Indies . Laid up in 1807 , she was sold for breaking up in 1811 . 
 = = Construction and French career = = 
 Concorde was one of a three @-@ ship class of Concorde @-@ class frigates built for the French Navy to a design by Henri <unk> . She was built at Rochefort between April 1777 and January 1778 , being launched on 3 September 1777 . She went out to the West Indies after the French entry to the American War of Independence , and reached Martinique on 17 August 1778 . On 28 August 1778 she came up on the 32 @-@ gun HMS Minerva , under Captain John Stott , and after two and a half hours of fighting , captured her . Minerva was towed to Cap Français on Saint @-@ Domingue , where she was joined shortly afterwards by the captured HMS Active , which a hurricane had dismasted in late August and which the French frigates <unk> and Dédaigneuse had captured on 1 September . 
 In 1781 Concorde was responsible for vital transfers of personnel , funds , and communications that contributed to the allied success at Yorktown . In March 1781 she carried despatches to George Washington and the Comte de Rochambeau from France . These despatches included a request from the comte de Grasse , commander of the West Indies fleet , for information on planned allied operations and the delivery of pilots familiar with the American coast . She also carried 6 million livres to support the war effort , and the new commander of the French naval squadron at Newport , Rhode Island , the comte de Barras . Following a conference of allied leaders in May , Concorde was sent to Cap @-@ Français with despatches for de Grasse and the requested pilots . When de Grasse received these despatches , he made the critical decision to sail his fleet to the Chesapeake Bay to assist in land operations against British forces operating under the command of Charles Cornwallis in Virginia . Concorde carried de Grasse 's letters for Washington , Rochambeau , and de Barras back to Newport ; arrival of this news set in motion Washington 's march to Virginia and the eventual entrapment of Cornwallis at Yorktown . 
 On 7 January 1783 , Concorde was in company with Nymphe . They sighted HMS Raven , which initially sailed towards them until she realized that they were not British frigates . An all @-@ day chase ensued until about <unk> when one of the frigates got within pistol @-@ shot and fired a broadside that took away Raven 's main topgallant @-@ mast . The chase continued until about 10 : <unk> when one of the frigates was again in range , with the other coming up rapidly . At this point , Raven , which was under the command of Commander John Wells , struck . The French Navy took Raven into service under the name <unk> , which she had born when under French colours between 1778 and 1782 . 
 = = = Capture = = = 
 On 15 February the 74 @-@ gun HMS Magnificent , under Captain Robert Linzee , sighted Concorde . Magnificent had sailed from Gros Islet Bay on 12 February on a cruise in company with the 64 @-@ gun ships HMS Prudent and HMS St Albans , and on sighting the strange sail , Magnificent gave chase . She was close enough to identify the mysterious ship as a frigate by 18 : 00 , and by 20 : 00 as darkness fell Concorde opened fire on her pursuer with her stern guns . Magnificent overhauled the French ship by 21 : 15 , and after fifteen minutes forced her to strike her colours . Magnificent took possession of Concorde , the latter being described as carrying 36 guns and 300 men , and being under the command of M. le Chevalier du <unk> . Shortly after surrendering the Concorde 's <unk> caught fire , forcing the crew to cut away the mainmast to extinguish it . Prudent and St Albans came up two hours later and Magnificent towed Concorde to St. John 's , Antigua . 
 = = Interwar years = = 
 Concorde was bought into the navy and commissioned in the West Indies for a return to Britain later in the year , though her commander for this voyage is unknown . She arrived in Britain and was paid off in September at Chatham . With the end of the American War of Independence and the draw @-@ down in the navy , Concorde was not brought into immediate service but remained laid up at Chatham until November 1790 , when a great repair was begun by Wilson , of Frindsbury . The work , which cost a total of £ 18 @,@ 259 , was completed by April 1793 , by which time the French Revolutionary Wars had broken out . She was fitted for service at Chatham between April and May 1793 , at a cost of £ 6 @,@ 600 , and was commissioned in April under Captain Thomas Wells . 
 = = Cruising the French coast = = 
 In 1794 she passed to Captain Sir Richard Strachan , and joined Commodore John Borlase Warren 's squadron off the French coast . The squadron consisted of Concorde , Warren 's 36 @-@ gun HMS Flora , the 38 @-@ gun HMS Arethusa under Captain Sir Edward Pellew , and the 36 @-@ gun frigates HMS Melampus , under Captain Thomas Wells , and HMS Nymphe , under Captain George Murray . 
 = = = Concorde and Engageante = = = 
 While sailing off the Channel Islands on 23 April the British squadron came across a French squadron under Commodore <unk> consisting of the 36 @-@ gun Engageante , the 44 @-@ gun Pomone , the 36 @-@ gun Résolue and the 24 @-@ gun <unk> . Warren chased and engaged them , leading the attack in Flora . When the Flora was badly damaged from the combined fire from the French ships , the remaining British ships came up in support , and forced the rear @-@ most French ships , <unk> and Pomone , to surrender . Melampus , Nymphe and Concorde gave chase to the fleeing Résolue and Engageante . Strachan in Concorde attempted to damage the rearmost of the French ships , Engageante , before pushing on to chase Résolue , but the Résolue dropped back to support the Engageante , damaging Concorde 's sails and rigging . With Nymphe and Melampus still too far astern , and unable to catch Résolue himself , Strachan engaged Engageante and after 105 minutes of fighting , forced her to surrender , while Résolue made her escape . The Concorde lost one man killed and 12 wounded in the fighting . 
 = = = Concorde and Virginie = = = 
 Concorde was then assigned to Rear @-@ Admiral George Montagu 's squadron in May 1794 , and took part in the manoeuvres during the Atlantic campaign of May 1794 . Strachan left Concorde in July 1794 to take command of HMS Melampus , and in August Captain Anthony Hunt took over command of Concorde . Concorde was part of John Warren 's squadron off Quiberon between June and July 1795 , supporting the Quiberon Expedition , after which she joined Sir Edward Pellew 's squadron . On 20 April 1796 Pellew 's squadron , then consisting of Concorde , Pellew 's 38 @-@ gun HMS Indefatigable and the 36 @-@ gun HMS Amazon under Captain Robert Carthew Reynolds , spotted and chased a mysterious sail . After chasing her for 15 hours over 168 miles they caught up with her , with Indefatigable leading the attack . Both ships exchanged fire , considerably damaging each other , upon which Concorde came up under her stern and forced her to surrender . She was discovered to be the 40 @-@ gun Virginie , under Captain Jacques <unk> . The captured French ship was towed to port and taken into the navy . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Command of Concorde passed from Hunt to Captain Richard Bagot in November 1796 , and he in turn was succeeded by Captain <unk> Roberts in June 1797 . Concorde captured the 4 @-@ gun privateer Poisson Volant off Cape Finisterre on 24 July 1797 . She was bound from Bordeaux to Guadeloupe carrying wines and merchandise , after which she intended to cruise as a privateer in the West Indies . Concorde was later commanded by Captain Robert Barton , who took a number of privateers in a series of cruises in the West Indies in 1798 , capturing the 16 @-@ gun Caye du Pont off St Bartholomew on 3 January , the 8 @-@ gun Proserpine off Montserrat on 8 January , the 8 @-@ gun Hardi off Barbuda on 11 February , the 2 @-@ gun Hazard off Montserrat on 13 February and the 2 @-@ gun Rosière off Montserrat on 1 April . In an action with HMS Lapwing on 8 and 9 September she captured four privateers , the 8 @-@ gun Buonaparte , 10 @-@ gun Amazone , 4 @-@ gun Sauveur and 2 @-@ gun Fortune . 
 Concorde 's success against privateers continued with the capture of the 18 @-@ gun Prudente on 14 February 1799 and the 6 @-@ gun San Josef off Oporto in December 1800 and the 1 @-@ gun San Miguel el Volante on 1 December 1800 . Concorde had a narrow escape from a French squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral Honoré Joseph Antoine Ganteaume , which had sailed from Brest on 23 January 1801 . The French sighted Concorde off Cape Finisterre on 27 January , and the 40 @-@ gun Bravoure was sent to chase her down . Concorde cast off a Swedish ship she was towing and drew the French frigate away from the main body of the fleet . Barton then turned and engaged her for forty minutes , silencing her guns . By now the main French fleet was fast approaching , and with his sails and rigging damaged , Barton did not attempt to take possession of Bravoure and instead made for a British port to report the encounter . Concorde had four men killed and 19 wounded in the engagement , while Bravoure had 10 killed and 24 wounded . 
 Captain John Wood succeeded Barton in 1802 , and the following year Concorde went out to the Cape of Good Hope . On 7 November 1804 , she captured the 24 @-@ gun privateer Fortune , under François @-@ Thomas Le <unk> , after a ten @-@ hour running battle . In the battle Fortune lost two men killed and had four wounded ; Concorde had no casualties . Fortune also suffered extensive damage to her rigging . A few days earlier at Qais Island Fortune had captured and scuttled Fly , a 14 @-@ gun brig belonging to the Bombay Marine of the British East India Company . Captain Wood received his prisoners " with distinction " and Concorde returned to Bombay . Fortune , reduced to a poor condition , limped in several days later . 
 Concorde was under Captain John Cramer , probably from February 1806 . She was still in the East Indies in 1807 , where in July she captured the 2 @-@ gun privateer Vigilant . 
 = = Fate = = 
 Concorde returned to England and was paid off in September 1807 . She spent several years laid up in Ordinary . The Navy sold her at Deptford on 21 February 1811 . 
 = Freedom of Worship ( painting ) = 
 Freedom of Worship or Freedom to Worship is the second of the Four Freedoms oil paintings produced by the American artist Norman Rockwell . The series was based on the goals known as the Four Freedoms enunciated by the 32nd President of the United States , Franklin D. Roosevelt , in his State of the Union Address delivered on January 6 , 1941 . Rockwell considered this painting and Freedom of Speech the most successful of the series . Freedom of Worship was published in the February 27 , 1943 , issue of The Saturday Evening Post alongside an essay by philosopher Will Durant . 
 = = Background = = 
 Freedom of Worship is the second of a series of four oil paintings by Norman Rockwell entitled Four Freedoms . The works were inspired by President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's State of the Union Address delivered to the 77th United States Congress on January 6 , 1941 , known as Four Freedoms . Of the Four Freedoms , the only two described in the United States Constitution are freedom of speech and freedom of religion . The Four Freedoms ' theme was later incorporated into the Allies ' World War II policy statement , the Atlantic Charter , and became part of the charter of the United Nations . The series of paintings ran on four consecutive weeks in The Saturday Evening Post , accompanied by essays from noted writers : Freedom of Speech ( February 20 ) , Freedom of Worship ( February 27 ) , Freedom from Want ( March 6 ) and Freedom from Fear ( March 13 ) . For the essay accompanying Freedom of Worship , Post editor Ben Hibbs chose Durant , who was a best @-@ selling author at the peak of his fame . At the time , Durant was in the midst of working on his ten @-@ volume The Story of Civilization , coauthored with his wife , Ariel Durant . Will Durant also lectured on history and philosophy . Eventually , the series of paintings became widely distributed in poster form and became instrumental in the U.S. Government War Bond Drive . 
 = = Description = = 
 The painting shows the profiles of eight heads in a modest space . The various figures represent people of different faiths in a moment of prayer . Particularly , three figures on the bottom row ( right to left ) : a man with his head covered carrying a religious book who is Jewish , an older woman who is Protestant , and a younger woman with a well @-@ lit face holding rosary beads who is Catholic . In 1966 , Rockwell used Freedom of Worship to show his admiration for John F. Kennedy in a Look story illustration entitled JFK 's Bold Legacy . The work depicts Kennedy in profile in a composition similar to Freedom of Worship along with Peace Corps volunteers . 
 = = Production = = 
 The original version of the painting was set in a barbershop with patrons of a variety of religions and races all waiting their turn in the barber 's chair . His first workup was a 41 @-@ by @-@ 33 @-@ inch ( 104 cm × 84 cm ) oil on canvas depicting tolerance as " the basis for a democracy 's religious diversity " . It included a Jew being served by a Protestant barber as a black man and a Roman Catholic priest awaited the barber 's services . The problem was painting easily recognizable depictions of different religions and races because there was little agreement on what a person of a certain religion should look like . However , as he attempted to clarify the characters ' depictions he found himself resorting to offensive <unk> , especially of the non @-@ clerical characters . Making a Jewish man appear stereotypically Semitic , making a white customer preppy and relegating the black man to agrarian workman attire bogged down the work without speaking on behalf of the government as it should . Rockwell 's intended theme was religious tolerance , but he felt the original composition did not successfully make this point . 
 In June 1942 , Post editor Ben Hibbs became supportive of Rockwell 's Four Freedoms sketches , and gave Rockwell two months to complete the works . By October , the Post was worried about Rockwell 's progress on the Four Freedoms and sent their art editor to Arlington to evaluate . At that time Rockwell was working on Freedom of Worship , his second painting in the series . Rockwell spent two months ( October and most of November 1942 ) on this work , that was inspired by the phrase " Each according to the dictates of his own conscience . " His Arlington , Vermont , neighbors served as his models : Three months pregnant with her hair upbraided , Rose Hoyt posed as a Catholic with a rosary , even though she was actually Protestant of the Episcopal Church . Other models were a Mrs. Harrington , Rockwell 's carpenter Walter Squires , Squire 's wife Clara Squires ( at the right @-@ hand edge ) , Winfield <unk> , and Jim Martin ( center ) . His final version relied on other visual clues , including a rosary and a religious book . The work had dark @-@ skinned black worshipers juxtaposed on the edges . This placement did not rock the boat with The Post who had not yet featured blacks prominently on its pages . Rockwell said he made these ethnics palatable by " ' furtively ' painting the face of the black woman at the top ; the man at the bottom , with his fez , was too obviously foreign to offend . " The image is commonly enhanced and often darkened in reproduction because it uses a color combination of soft greys , <unk> and browns . The paint was applied thinly , which allows the weave of the canvas to contribute to the image . 
 Rockwell has stated that he feels hands are second only to heads in importance to the expression of a story . He stated with regards to Freedom of Worship , " I depended on the hands alone to convey about half of the message I wish to put over . " Rockwell 's extensive effort on this work was due to his belief that religion " is an extremely delicate subject . It is so easy to hurt so many people 's feelings . " 
 = = Critical review = = 
 Post editor Ben Hibbs said of Speech and Worship , " To me they are great human documents in the form of paint and canvas . A great picture , I think is one which moves and inspires millions of people . The Four Freedoms did — and do . " Walt Disney wrote , " I thought your Four Freedoms were great . I especially loved the Freedom of Worship and the composition and symbolism expressed in it . " Rockwell believed that Freedom of Worship and Freedom of Speech were his better results in the series . Laura Claridge has written that the inspirational phrase " Each according to the dictates of his own conscience " is a " platitude that suggests the plurality of Rockwell 's own thoughts on religion : its likely source was a phrase included in the Thirteen Articles of Faith by Joseph Smith . " In fact , Rockwell repeatedly asked colleagues about possible sources of the quote and was not told about Smith 's writing until after the series was published . The expression " according to the dictates of his conscience " ( or a similar variation ) was used in many United States state constitutions in the eighteenth century . 
 Critical review of the painting shows that some practitioners of particular faiths are disappointed by the acceptance of all faiths expressed in Freedom of Religion . Claridge feels that 
 the tight amalgam of faces ... and even the <unk> skin on elderly hands , which have become the objects of worship , push the theme over the edge from idealistic tolerance into gooey sentiment , where human differences seem caught up in a magical moment of dispensation from the Light . The restraint demanded by art that deals with heightened emotion is lacking . 
 Claridge stated that the earlier version was " clean , impressively sparse , in counterpoise to a dense narrative content . Beautifully painted even at the preliminary oil sketch stage . " Murray and McCabe note that the work is a divergence from the " storytelling style " that Rockwell is known for . 
 Deborah Solomon considers the painting the least satisfactory of the series as she feels it is congested and somewhat " didactic " . Maureen Hart Hennessey , chief curator of the Norman Rockwell Museum , and curator Anne Knutson consider the scale of the picture that only shows heads and hands in prayer as disruptive . Bruce Cole of The Wall Street Journal noted that Rockwell 's " depiction of spectral close @-@ up faces and hands raised in prayer is bland , without any real message about religious freedom — again , no wallop . This is because faith , like the absence of fear and the absence of want , is essentially private , something personal , intangible and <unk> . " 
 = Lawrence Hill railway station = 
 Lawrence Hill railway station is on the Severn Beach Line and Cross Country Route , serving the inner @-@ city districts of Easton and Lawrence Hill in Bristol , England . It is 1 @.@ 0 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . Its three letter station code is <unk> . As of 2015 , the station has two platforms , two running lines and minimal facilities . It is managed by Great Western Railway , the seventh company to be responsible for the station and the third franchise since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , the standard service being a train every 40 minutes along the Severn Beach Line , an hourly service to Bristol Parkway and another hourly service to Westbury . 
 The station was opened in 1863 by the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway , with a single track and platform . The line was doubled in 1874 when the Clifton Extension Railway opened , then expanded to four tracks and platforms in 1891 . There were buildings on all platforms and a goods yard to the west . Service levels reduced significantly over the second half of the twentieth century . The goods facilities were closed in 1965 , staff were withdrawn in 1967 and the eastern two platforms were taken out of service by 1974 . 
 The line is due to be electrified as part of the 21st @-@ century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line , which will also see the addition of two new running lines to increase capacity . Service frequency will be improved as part of the Greater Bristol Metro scheme . 
 = = Description = = 
 Lawrence Hill railway station serves the Lawrence Hill and Easton areas of Bristol . The surrounding area is primarily residential , with the City Academy school to the east and a First Bristol bus depot to the north @-@ west . A supermarket and industrial estate occupy the old goods yard directly west of the station . The station is on the Cross Country Route between Bristol Temple Meads and Bristol Parkway , and on the Severn Beach Line from Bristol Temple Meads to Severn Beach , 1 mile 4 chains ( 1 @.@ 7 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . The next station north is Stapleton Road , the next station south is Bristol Temple Meads . 
 The station is on an alignment of 012 degrees , curving towards the east . There are two sets of tracks through the station , and two platforms : the western platform , platform 1 , serves northbound trains ; the eastern platform , platform 2 , serves southbound trains . Platform 1 is 228 metres ( 249 yd ) long , platform 2 is 234 metres ( 256 yd ) long , however both have the northern ends of the platform fenced off , giving operational platform lengths of 116 metres ( 127 yd ) and 114 metres ( 125 yd ) respectively . Platform 2 was part of an " island " platform which , along with a further platform to the east , served the northbound " up fast " southbound " down fast " lines . These platforms were removed around 1970 , the fast lines were removed in 1984 . Directly to the south of the station , the A420 Church Road crosses the railway on a bridge . The main access to the station is using steps from Church Road , however the northbound platform can be accessed step @-@ free from the adjacent supermarket car park . There is no step @-@ free access to the southbound platform . To the north is a bridge carrying the Bristol and Bath Railway Path , a cycle path built on the trackbed of the Midland Railway Bristol to Gloucester line . Just north of this bridge is Lawrence Hill Junction , where a goods line diverges to the west , serving a waste terminal . To the south there are crossover points , and the line widens to four tracks . 
 As of 2013 facilities at the station are minimal . The station is unstaffed and there are no facilities for buying tickets . There are metal and glass shelters and seating on each of the two platforms , as well as customer help points which give next train information and allow the user to contact a <unk> . The station is covered by CCTV . There is no car park or taxi rank , but there are 12 bicycle stands on the platform . The nearest bus stop is directly outside the station on the A420 Church Road . 
 The line through Lawrence Hill has a speed limit of 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) northbound and 75 miles per hour ( 121 km / h ) southbound . The loading gauge is W8 , and the line handles over 15 million train tonnes per year . It is not electrified , though it is planned that it will be electrified by 2017 as part of the 21st @-@ century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line . 
 = = Services = = 
 Services at Lawrence Hill are all operated by Great Western Railway . As of the December 2013 timetable , Monday to Friday , three trains every two hours run along the Severn Beach Line from Bristol Temple Meads to Avonmouth via Clifton Down , with one extended to St Andrew 's Road and Severn Beach . Most services start at Bristol , but one evening service to Avonmouth begins at Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . On Saturdays only two trains per hour each direction call . Sunday sees an hourly service to and from Bristol , with only two services extending to Severn Beach , except during the May – September timetable period when all services are extended . The first and last Sunday trains towards Bristol are extended to Taunton via Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and there are similar workings in the other direction . In 2012 , the single fare to Clifton Down or Bristol was £ 1 @.@ 50 , and £ 3 return for the whole line . 
 Southbound services from Great Malvern and Gloucester to Westbury and Weymouth call at Lawrence Hill , with one train per hour . Hourly northbound services from Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare to Bristol Parkway also call , as do some peak northbound services from Taunton to Cardiff Central and two late night southbound services from Cardiff to Bristol . All trains northbound call at Stapleton Road , and all trains southbound call at Bristol Temple Meads , although this requires Gloucester @-@ Westbury trains to reverse . CrossCountry trains pass Lawrence Hill non @-@ stop throughout the day , operating two trains per hour each direction between the South West , Bristol , Manchester and Scotland . Many Great Western Railway services also pass through non @-@ stop , including the hourly Cardiff @-@ Taunton service , southbound Bristol Parkway to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare services and northbound Westbury to Gloucester services . 
 Services from Lawrence Hill are operated using a mix of Class 150 Sprinter , Class 153 Super Sprinter and Class 158 Express Sprinter diesel multiple units . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have mostly been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . 
 As of the December 2013 timetable , the standard journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is 7 minutes , to Bristol Parkway 15 minutes , and to Avonmouth 25 minutes . 
 = = History = = 
 Lawrence Hill opened on 8 September 1863 when services began on the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway ( BSWUR ) , which ran from Bristol Temple Meads to New Passage Pier , north of the city on the banks of the River Severn . At New Passage , passengers were transferred to a ferry to cross the Severn to continue on in to Wales . In 1874 , the Clifton Extension Railway opened , connecting the Bristol Port Railway and Pier to the Great Western Railway at Narroways Hill Junction , north of Stapleton Road . To cope with the expected increase in traffic , the line was doubled , and a second platform was added to the east of the two tracks . Two more tracks were added in 1891 , giving a layout of two sets of two tracks , with platforms on the outside and on an island in the middle . Trains to and from Clifton Down and Avonmouth used the western platforms while trains to and from South Wales used the eastern platforms . There were buildings on all the platforms , which were linked by a large covered footbridge . There was a goods yard to the west of the station and a signal box on the central platform . 
 In 1886 , the daily Great Western service along the Clifton Extension Railway was 6 trains each way between Avonmouth and Temple Meads , 24 trains from Clifton Down to Temple Meads and 26 the other direction . By 1910 there were 17 services daily from Avonmouth to Temple Meads and 15 the other way , a further 20 trains each day operating between Clifton Down and Temple Meads . From 1924 , many trains to Avonmouth were extended to Severn Beach , a growing seaside resort , and some on to Pilning , then back to Temple Meads via Patchway . Circular trips via Henbury were also common . The station was also used by excursion trains , and by trains of evacuees during the Second World War . By 1947 , just before the start of the British Rail era , there were 33 daily services each direction between Avonmouth and Temple Meads , and 18 on Sundays . Many trains would pass through Lawrence Hill non @-@ stop - in 1930 , 350 trains would pass the station each day , of which roughly 40 % would stop . 
 When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , Lawrence Hill came under the control of the Western Region of British Railways , which oversaw a gradual decline of services at Lawrence Hill . Passenger numbers along the Clifton Extension Railway , now known as the Severn Beach Line , also dropped , and in 1963 the Beeching report suggested that all services along the line be withdrawn . In the end , services continued to Severn Beach but were discontinued via Henbury and Pilning . Staff were withdrawn from the station from 17 July 1967 as a cost @-@ saving measure . The footbridge was demolished by 1970 , forcing passengers to change platform via the steps to Church Road at the south end of the station . Most of the station buildings were demolished in August 1970 , but there were still some on the westernmost platform in 1979 . By 1974 the platforms serving the eastern tracks had been removed , with the tracks themselves removed in 1984 . Plans to use the disused trackbed as part of a light rail scheme linking the city centre to the northern suburbs were formed in the late 1990s , with the aim of an operational scheme by 2008 , but the plans had been shelved by 2004 . It was suggested in 2008 that the trackbed could be used as a cycle path to join together communities which had been separated by the construction of the M32 motorway , however this was dropped due to Network Rail asserting that the trackbed might be necessary for future rail expansion . 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Stapleton Road passed to Regional Railways . All trains along the Severn Beach Line ran to Severn Beach , but the service pattern was irregular . This was changed in the mid @-@ 1990s , with a more frequent service to Avonmouth but very few on to Severn Beach and no Sunday services . When the railway was privatised in 1997 , local services were franchised to Wales & West , which was succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . Services along the Severn Beach Line were increased to 10 per day in each direction by 2005 , with Bristol City Council providing a subsidy to Wessex Trains . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup , which was rebranded in 2015 as Great Western Railway . A minimum service requirement was written into the franchise agreement , ensuring an hourly service along the Severn Beach Line . Passenger traffic increased significantly , and in 2010 , Sunday services to Severn Beach were restored . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . 
 The line through Lawrence Hill is due to be electrified by 2017 as part of the Great Western Main Line electrification project . However , the Severn Beach Line will not be electrified , so services at Lawrence Hill will still be provided by diesel trains , with " Sprinter " units expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification continuing beyond the main lines , as does MP for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare John Penrose . The electrification scheme also includes the four @-@ tracking of Filton Bank , including the reinstatement of the disused trackbed at Lawrence Hill , to allow more services between Parkway and Bristol Temple Meads and separate fast inter @-@ city services from local stopping services . Enhancement works to allow disabled access to both platforms will be carried out at the same time . 
 Lawrence Hill is on the Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare / Yate corridor , one of the main axes of the Greater Bristol Metro , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area , including half @-@ hourly services along the Severn Beach Line . The scheme could see the reopening of the Henbury Loop Line to passengers , with the possibility of services from Bristol Temple Meads to Bristol Parkway via Clifton Down and Henbury . Plans for a loop were rejected by the West of England Joint Transport Board , however Bristol City Councillors voted to send the decision back to the board for further discussion . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 A collision occurred near Lawrence hill on 8 January 1930 , approximately 500 yards ( 460 m ) north of the station . At 5 : <unk> , an express train from Shrewsbury to Penzance ran into the back of a minerals train which had stopped to pick up the brakes after descending Filton Bank . The express locomotive , GWR 4000 Class number <unk> " Bath Abbey " , was derailed and badly damaged , with several coaches also being damaged . The incident was blamed on signalman A. H. Toop of the Lawrence Hill signal box , with contributing factors including lax working standards and the driver of the goods train , W. G. Atkins , failing to pull up to the signal box as required . 
 A similar crash occurred at Lawrence Hill on 1 November 2000 , when a Royal Mail train passed two red signals and ran into the back of a coal train at around 3 : 30am . The mail train , hauled by English Welsh & Scottish Class 67 diesel locomotive number <unk> " Special Delivery " , with <unk> at the rear , was travelling at 50 mph when the incident occurred . The locomotive climbed over the back of the coal train , coming to rest 40 yards ( 37 m ) later on top of a coal wagon and against the A420 Church Road bridge . The driver of the mail train suffered a broken arm and cuts to the face and chest , but there were no other injuries . The incident was initially suspected to be caused by faulty brakes , but was later found to be caused by misunderstanding and incorrect use of the locomotive 's <unk> cock by railway staff . 
 Lawrence Hill is considered a blackspot for railway trespass and vandalism . 
 = Ælfheah of Canterbury = 
 Ælfheah ( Old English : <unk> , " elf @-@ high " ; c . 953 – 19 April 1012 ) , officially remembered as Saint Alphege within some churches , and also called <unk> , Alfege , or Godwine , was an Anglo @-@ Saxon Bishop of Winchester , later Archbishop of Canterbury . He became an anchorite before being elected abbot of Bath Abbey . His reputation for piety and sanctity led to his promotion to the episcopate , and eventually , to his becoming archbishop . Ælfheah furthered the cult of Dunstan and also encouraged learning . He was captured by Viking raiders in 1011 and killed by them the following year after refusing to allow himself to be ransomed . Ælfheah was canonised as a saint in 1078 . Thomas Becket , a later Archbishop of Canterbury , prayed to him just before his own murder in Canterbury Cathedral . 
 = = Life = = 
 Purportedly born in Weston on the outskirts of Bath , Ælfheah became a monk early in life . His birth took place around 953 . He first entered the monastery of Deerhurst , but then moved to Bath , where he became an anchorite . He was noted for his piety and austerity , and rose to become abbot of Bath Abbey . The 12th century chronicler William of Malmesbury recorded that Ælfheah was a monk and prior at Glastonbury Abbey , but this is not accepted by all historians . Indications are that Ælfheah became abbot at Bath by 982 , perhaps as early as around 977 . He perhaps shared authority with his predecessor <unk> after 968 . 
 Probably due to the influence of Dunstan , the Archbishop of Canterbury ( 959 – 988 ) , Ælfheah was elected Bishop of Winchester in 984 , and was consecrated on 19 October that year . While bishop he was largely responsible for the construction of a large organ in the cathedral , audible from over a mile ( 1600 m ) away and said to require more than 24 men to operate . He also built and enlarged the city 's churches , and promoted the cult of Swithun and his own predecessor , Æthelwold of Winchester . One act promoting Æthelwold 's cult was the translation of Æthelwold 's body to a new tomb in the cathedral at Winchester , which Ælfheah presided over on 10 September 996 . 
 Following a Viking raid in 994 , a peace treaty was agreed with one of the raiders , Olaf Tryggvason . Besides receiving danegeld , Olaf converted to Christianity and undertook never to raid or fight the English again . Ælfheah may have played a part in the treaty negotiations , and it is certain that he confirmed Olaf in his new faith . 
 In 1006 Ælfheah succeeded Ælfric as Archbishop of Canterbury , taking Swithun 's head with him as a relic for the new location . He went to Rome in 1007 to receive his pallium — symbol of his status as an archbishop — from Pope John XVIII , but was robbed during his journey . While at Canterbury he promoted the cult of Dunstan , ordering the writing of the second Life of Dunstan , which Adelard of Ghent composed between 1006 and 1011 . He also introduced new practices into the liturgy , and was instrumental in the Witenagemot 's recognition of Wulfsige of Sherborne as a saint in about 1012 . 
 Ælfheah sent Ælfric of Eynsham to Cerne Abbey to take charge of its monastic school . He was present at the council of May 1008 at which Wulfstan II , Archbishop of York , preached his Sermo Lupi ad Anglos ( The Sermon of the Wolf to the English ) , castigating the English for their moral failings and blaming the latter for the tribulations afflicting the country . 
 In 1011 the Danes again raided England , and from 8 – 29 September they laid siege to Canterbury . Aided by the treachery of <unk> , whose life Ælfheah had once saved , the raiders succeeded in sacking the city . Ælfheah was taken prisoner and held captive for seven months . Godwine ( Bishop of Rochester ) , <unk> ( abbess of St Mildrith 's ) , and the king 's reeve , Ælfweard were captured also , but the abbot of St Augustine 's Abbey , <unk> , managed to escape . Canterbury Cathedral was plundered and burned by the Danes following Ælfheah 's capture . 
 = = Death = = 
 Ælfheah refused to allow a ransom to be paid for his freedom , and as a result was killed on 19 April 1012 at Greenwich ( then in Kent , now part of London ) , reputedly on the site of St Alfege 's Church . The account of Ælfheah 's death appears in the E version of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle : 
 ... the raiding @-@ army became much stirred up against the bishop , because he did not want to offer them any money , and forbade that anything might be granted in return for him . Also they were very drunk , because there was wine brought from the south . Then they seized the bishop , led him to their " hustings " on the Saturday in the octave of Easter , and then pelted him there with bones and the heads of cattle ; and one of them struck him on the head with the butt of an axe , so that with the blow he sank down and his holy blood fell on the earth , and sent forth his holy soul to God 's kingdom . 
 Ælfheah was the first Archbishop of Canterbury to die a violent death . A contemporary report tells that Thorkell the Tall attempted to save Ælfheah from the mob about to kill him by offering everything he owned except for his ship , in exchange for Ælfheah 's life ; Thorkell 's presence is not mentioned in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , however . Some sources record that the final blow , with the back of an axe , was delivered as an act of kindness by a Christian convert known as " Thrum . " Ælfheah was buried in St Paul 's Cathedral . In 1023 his body was moved by King Cnut to Canterbury , with great ceremony . Thorkell the Tall was appalled at the brutality of his fellow raiders , and switched sides to the English king Æthelred the Unready following Ælfheah 's death . 
 = = Veneration = = 
 Pope Gregory VII canonised Ælfheah in 1078 , with a feast day of 19 April . Lanfranc , the first post @-@ Conquest archbishop , was dubious about some of the saints venerated at Canterbury . He was persuaded of Ælfheah 's sanctity , but Ælfheah and Augustine of Canterbury were the only pre @-@ conquest Anglo @-@ Saxon archbishops kept on Canterbury 's calendar of saints . Ælfheah 's shrine , which had become neglected , was rebuilt and expanded in the early 12th century under Anselm of Canterbury , who was instrumental in retaining Ælfheah 's name in the church calendar . After the 1174 fire in Canterbury Cathedral , Ælfheah 's remains together with those of Dunstan were placed around the high altar , at which Thomas Becket is said to have commended his life into Ælfheah 's care shortly before his martyrdom during the Becket controversy . The new shrine was sealed in lead , and was north of the high altar , sharing the honour with Dunstan 's shrine , which was located south of the high altar . A Life of Saint Ælfheah in prose and verse was written by a Canterbury monk named Osbern , at Lanfranc 's request . The prose version has survived , but the Life is very much a hagiography : many of the stories it contains have obvious Biblical parallels , making them suspect as a historical record . 
 In the late medieval period , Ælfheah 's feast day was celebrated in Scandinavia , perhaps because of the saint 's connection with Cnut . Few church dedications to him are known , with most of them occurring in Kent and one each in London and Winchester ; as well as St Alfege 's Church in Greenwich , a nearby hospital ( 1931 @-@ 1968 ) was named after him . In 1929 a new church in Bath was dedicated to Ælfheah , under the name Alphege , designed by Giles Gilbert Scott in homage to the ancient Roman church of Santa Maria in <unk> . 
 = Cognitive flexibility = 
 Cognitive flexibility has been described as the mental ability to switch between thinking about two different concepts , and to think about multiple concepts simultaneously . Despite some disagreement in the literature about how to operationally define the term , one commonality is that cognitive flexibility is a component of executive functioning . Research has primarily been conducted with children at the school age ; however , individual differences in cognitive flexibility are apparent across the lifespan . Measures for cognitive flexibility include the A @-@ not @-@ B task , Dimensional Change Card Sorting Task , Multiple Classification Card Sorting Task , Wisconsin Card Sorting Task , and the Stroop Test . Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging ( fMRI ) research has shown that specific brain regions are activated when a person engages in cognitive flexibility tasks . These regions include the prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) , basal ganglia , anterior cingulate cortex ( ACC ) , and posterior parietal cortex ( PPC ) . Studies conducted with people of various ages and with particular deficits have further informed how cognitive flexibility develops and changes within the brain . Cognitive flexibility also has implications both inside and outside of the classroom . A person ’ s ability to switch between modes of thought and to simultaneously think about multiple concepts has been shown to be a vital component of learning . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 Cognitive flexibility can be seen from a variety of viewpoints . A synthesized research definition of cognitive flexibility is a switch in thinking , whether that is specifically based on a switch in rules or broadly based on a need to switch one ’ s previous beliefs or thoughts to new situations . Moreover , it refers to simultaneously considering multiple aspects of thought at once , whether they be two aspects of a specific object , or many aspects of a complex situation . Other terms for cognitive flexibility include mental flexibility , mental set shifting , cognitive shifting , task switching / shifting , and attention switching / shifting . 
 Most commonly , cognitive flexibility refers to the mental ability to adjust thinking or attention in response to changing goals and / or environmental stimuli . Researchers have more specifically described cognitive flexibility as the capacity to shift or switch one ’ s thinking and attention between different tasks or operations typically in response to a change in rules or demands . For example , when sorting cards based on specific rules , children are considered cognitively flexible if they are able to successfully switch from sorting cards based on the color of the object to sorting based on the type of object on the card . 
 Cognitive flexibility has been more broadly described as the ability to adjust one ’ s thinking from old situations to new situations as well as the ability to overcome responses or thinking that have become habitual and adapt to new situations . As such , if one is able to overcome previously held beliefs or habits ( when it is required for new situations ) then they would be considered cognitively flexible . Lastly , the ability to simultaneously consider two aspects of an object , idea , or situation at one point in time refers to cognitive flexibility . According to this definition , when sorting cards based on specific rules , children are considered cognitively flexible if they can sort cards based on the color of the objects and type of objects on the card simultaneously . Similarly , cognitive flexibility has been defined as having the understanding and awareness of all possible options and alternatives simultaneously within any given situation . 
 = = = Contributing factors = = = 
 Regardless of the specificity of the definition , researchers have generally agreed that cognitive flexibility is a component of executive functioning , higher @-@ order cognition involving the ability to control one ’ s thinking . Executive functioning includes other aspects of cognition , including inhibition , memory , emotional stability , planning , and organization . Cognitive flexibility is highly related with a number of these abilities , including inhibition , planning and working memory . Thus , when an individual is better able to suppress aspects of a stimulus to focus on more important aspects ( i.e. inhibit color of object to focus on kind of object ) , they are also more cognitively flexible . In this sense , they are better at planning , organizing , and at employing particular memory strategies . 
 Researchers have argued that cognitive flexibility is also a component of multiple classification , as originally described by psychologist Jean Piaget . In multiple classification tasks , participants ( primarily children , who have already developed or are in the process of developing this skill ) must classify objects in several different ways at once - thereby thinking flexibly about them . Similarly , in order to be cognitively flexible they must overcome <unk> , which is the tendency for young children to solely focus on one aspect of an object or situation . For example , when children are young they may be solely able to focus on one aspect of an object ( i.e. color of object ) , and be unable to focus on both aspects ( i.e. both color and kind of object ) . Thus , research suggests if an individual is <unk> in their thinking , then they will be more cognitively inflexible . 
 Research has suggested that cognitive flexibility is related to other cognitive abilities , such as fluid intelligence , reading fluency , and reading comprehension . Fluid intelligence , described as the ability to solve problems in new situations , enables fluid reasoning ability . When one is able to reason fluidly , they are in turn more likely to be cognitively flexible . Furthermore , those who are able to be cognitively flexible have been shown to have the ability to switch between and / or simultaneously think about sounds and meanings , which increases their reading fluency and comprehension . Cognitive flexibility has also been shown to be related to one ’ s ability to cope in particular situations . For example , when individuals are better able to shift their thinking from situation to situation they will focus less on stressors within these situations . 
 In general , researchers in the field focus on development of cognitive flexibility between the ages of three and five . However , cognitive flexibility has been shown to be a broad concept that can be studied with all different ages and situations . Thus , with tasks ranging from simple to more complex , research suggests that there is a developmental continuum that spans from infancy to adulthood . 
 = = Measures / assessments = = 
 A variety of assessments are appropriate for distinguishing between different levels of cognitive flexibility at different ages . Below are the common tests used to assess cognitive flexibility in the order of the developmentally appropriate age . 
 = = = A @-@ not @-@ B task = = = 
 In the A @-@ not @-@ B task , children are shown an object hidden at Location A within their reach , and are then prompted to search for the object at Location A , where they find it . This activity is repeated several times , with the hidden object at Location A. Then , in the critical trial , the object is hidden in Location B , a second location within easy reach of child . Typically , children younger than one year old search for the object under Location A , where the object was previously hidden . However , after their first birthday , children are capable of mentally switching to locate the object in Location B , demonstrating flexibility . Researchers have agreed that the A @-@ not @-@ B task is a simple task that effectively measures cognitive flexibility during infancy . 
 = = = Dimensional Change Card Sorting Task = = = 
 In the Dimensional Change Card Sorting Task ( <unk> ) , children are initially asked to sort cards by a single dimension ( such as color ) , and are subsequently required to alter their strategy to sort cards based on a second dimension ( such as shape ) . Typically , three @-@ year @-@ old children are able to sort cards based on a single dimension , but are unable to switch to sort the cards based on a second dimension . However , five @-@ year @-@ old children are able to sort cards based on one dimension and can then switch to sorting cards on a second dimension . 
 = = = Multiple Classification Card Sorting Task = = = 
 In the Multiple Classification Card Sorting Task , children are shown cards and asked to sort them based on two different dimensions ( e.g. by color , such as yellow and blue , and object type , such as animals and food ) simultaneously into four piles within a matrix ( e.g. yellow animals , yellow foods , blue animals and blue foods ) . This task appears to be more difficult as research has shown that seven @-@ year @-@ old children were incapable of sorting cards based on the two dimensions simultaneously . These children focused on the two dimensions separately , whereas at the age of eleven , children were capable of sorting cards based on these two dimensions simultaneously . This demonstrates an increase in cognitive flexibility between the ages of seven and eleven . 
 = = = Wisconsin Card Sorting Test = = = 
 The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test ( <unk> ) is used to determine an individual 's competence in abstract reasoning , and the ability to change problem @-@ solving strategies when needed . In this test , a number of cards are presented to the participants . The figures on the cards differ with respect to color , quantity , and shape . The participants are then given a pile of additional cards and are asked to match each one to one of the previous cards . Typically , children between ages nine and eleven demonstrate the cognitive flexibility needed for this test . 
 = = = Stroop Test = = = 
 The Stroop Test is also known as the Color @-@ word Naming Test . In this measure , there are three types of cards in the deck . The " color card " displays patches of different colors , which participants are asked to identify as quickly as possible . The " word card , " displays the names of colors printed in black and white ink , which participants are again asked name as quickly as possible . The final card type is the " color @-@ word card " , which displays the names of the colors printed in an ink of a conflicting color ( e.g. the word RED would be printed in yellow ) , and requires participants to name the ink colors while ignoring the conflicting color names . The basic score on each card is the total time ( in seconds ) that the participant takes to respond verbally . Typically , naming the color of the word takes longer and results in more errors when the color of the ink does not match the name of the color . In this situation , adults tend to take longer to respond than children because adults are more sensitive to the actual color of the word and thus are more likely to be influenced by it when naming the conflicting color word printed . 
 = = Neural underpinnings = = 
 The mechanisms underlying cognitive flexibility have been explored extensively using various methods . Human studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) have revealed a variety of distinct regions of the brain that work in concert from which flexibility could be predicted reliably , including the prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) , basal ganglia , anterior cingulate cortex ( ACC ) , and posterior parietal cortex ( PPC ) . 
 The regions active during engagement of cognitive flexibility depend on the task and various factors involved in flexibility that are used to assess the behavior , as flexible thinking requires aspects of inhibition , attention , working memory , response selection , and goal maintenance . Several studies using task switching paradigms have demonstrated the complexities of the network involved in cognitive flexibility . Activation of the dorsolateral PFC has been shown during resolution of interference of irrelevant task sets . Another study further extended these results by demonstrating that the level of <unk> of the switch type influenced recruitment of differing regions in the PFC depending on whether the participant was asked to make a cognitive set switch , a response switch , or a stimulus or perceptual switch . A set switch would require switching between task rules , as with the <unk> , and is considered to be the most abstract . A response switch would require different response mapping , such as circle right button and square left button and vice versa . Lastly , a stimulus or perceptual set switch would require a simple switch between a circle and a square . Activation is mediated by the level of <unk> of the set switch in an anterior to posterior fashion within the PFC , with the most anterior activations elicited by set switches and the most posterior activations resulting from stimulus or perceptual switches . The basal ganglia is active during response selection and the PPC , along with the inferior frontal junction are active during representation and updating of task sets called domain general switching . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Children can be strikingly inflexible when assessed using traditional tests of cognitive flexibility , but this does not come as a surprise considering the many cognitive processes involved in the mental flexibility , and the various developmental trajectories of such abilities . With age , children generally show increases in cognitive flexibility which is likely a product of the protracted development of the frontoparietal network evident in adults , with maturing synaptic connections , increased <unk> and regional gray matter volume occurring from birth to mid @-@ twenties . 
 = = = Deficits = = = 
 Diminished cognitive flexibility has been noted in a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders such as anorexia nervosa , obsessive – compulsive disorder , schizophrenia , autism , and in a subset of people with ADHD . Each of these disorders exhibit varying aspects of cognitive inflexibility . For example , those with obsessive – compulsive disorder experience difficulty shifting their attentional focus as well as inhibiting motor responses . Children with autism show a slightly different profile with deficits in adjusting to changing task contingencies , while often maintaining the ability to respond in the face of competing responses . Potential treatments may lie in neurochemical modulation . Juveniles with <unk> nervosa have marked decreases in set @-@ shifting abilities , possibly associated with incomplete maturation of prefrontal <unk> associated with malnutrition . One can also consider people with addictions to be limited in cognitive flexibility , in that they are unable to flexibly respond to stimuli previously associated with the drug . 
 = = = Aging = = = 
 The elderly often experience deficits in cognitive flexibility . The aging brain undergoes physical and functional changes including a decline in processing speed , central sensory functioning , white matter integrity , and brain volume . Regions associated with cognitive flexibility such as the PFC and PC atrophy , or shrink , with age , but also show greater task @-@ related activation in older individuals when compared to younger individuals . This increase in blood flow is potentially related to the evidence that atrophy heightens blood flow and metabolism , which is measured as the BOLD response , or blood @-@ oxygen @-@ level dependence , with fMRI . Studies suggest that aerobic exercise and training can have plasticity inducing effects that could potentially serve as an intervention in old age that combat the decline in executive function . 
 = = Implications for education and general learning = = 
 = = = Educational applications = = = 
 Cognitive flexibility and other executive function skills are crucial to success both in classroom settings and life . A study examining the impact of cognitive intervention for at @-@ risk children in preschool classrooms found that children who received such intervention for one to two years significantly outperformed their peers . Compared to same @-@ age children who were randomly assigned to the control condition ( a literacy unit developed by the school district ) , preschoolers who received intervention achieved accuracy scores of 85 % on tests of inhibitory control ( self @-@ discipline ) , cognitive flexibility , and working memory . Their peers in the control ( no intervention ) condition , on the other hand , demonstrated only 65 % accuracy . Educators involved in this study ultimately opted to implement the cognitive skills training techniques instead of the district @-@ developed curriculum . 
 Further indicative of the role cognitive flexibility plays in education is the argument that how students are taught greatly impacts the nature and formation of their cognitive structures , which in turn affect students ’ ability to store and readily access information . A crucial aim of education is to help students learn as well as appropriately apply and adapt what they have learned to novel situations . This is reflected in the integration of cognitive flexibility into educational policy regarding academic guidelines and expectations . For example , as outlined in the Common Core Standards Initiative , a standards @-@ based education reform developed to increase high school graduation rates , educators are expected to present within the classroom “ high level cognitive demands by asking students to demonstrate deep conceptual understanding through the application of content knowledge and skills to new situations . ” This guideline within the Common Core Initiative is the essence of cognitive flexibility , and a teaching style focused on promoting it has been seen to foster understanding especially in disciplines where information is complex and nonlinear . A counterexample is evident in cases where such material is presented in an oversimplified manner and learners fail to transfer their knowledge to a new domain . 
 = = = = Impact on teaching and curriculum design = = = = 
 An alternative educational approach informed by cognitive flexibility is hypertext , which is frequently computer @-@ supported instruction . Computers allow for complex data to be presented in a multidimensional and coherent format , allowing users to access that data as needed . The most widely used example of hypertext is the Internet , which dynamically presents information in terms of interconnection ( e.g. hyperlinks ) . Hypertext documents , therefore , include nodes – bits of information – and links , the pathways between these nodes . Applications for teacher education have involved teacher @-@ training sessions based on video instruction , whereby novice teachers viewed footage of master teachers conducting a literacy workshop . In this example , the novice teachers received a laserdisc of the course content , a hypertext document that allowed the learners to access content in a self @-@ directed manner . These cognitive flexibility <unk> ( <unk> ) provide a “ three @-@ dimensional ” and “ open @-@ ended ” representation of material for learners , enabling them to incorporate new information and form connections with preexisting knowledge . While further research is needed to determine the efficacy of <unk> as an instructional tool , classrooms where cognitive flexibility theory is applied in this manner are hypothesized to result in students more capable of transferring knowledge across domains . 
 Researchers in the field advocate a teaching style that incorporates group problem @-@ solving activities and demands higher @-@ level thought . According to this process , a teacher initially poses a single question in a number of ways . Next , students discuss the problem with the teacher and amongst themselves , asking questions . In forming these questions , students are actively brainstorming and recalling prior knowledge . At this point , the teacher provides specific conditions of the issue discussed , and students must adapt their prior knowledge , along with that of their peers , to generate a solution . Other curriculum designs tailored to young children such as “ Tools of the Mind ” incorporate practices which aim to improve students ’ capacity to shift and prolong attention as well as think “ outside the box ” ( i.e. generate creative solutions ) . 
 = = = = Learning applications beyond the classroom = = = = 
 A vastly different application can be seen in the study of cognitive flexibility and video games . Examining the trait under the guise of “ mental flexibility , ” Dutch researchers observed that players of first @-@ person shooter games ( e.g. Call of Duty , Battlefield ) exhibited greater “ mental flexibility ” on a series of measures than did non @-@ gamers . The researchers posit that , while video game play may be controversial due to frequently graphic content , harnessing the effect of such games could lead to similar gains in various populations ( e.g. the elderly , who face cognitive decline ) and is therefore socially relevant . 
 Public awareness of cognitive flexibility has increased in recent years . As a result , several online programs marketed to those seeking to increase cognitive ability – by way of specifically focusing on cognitive flexibility training techniques - have been created to enhance " brain fitness . " Programs claim to train speed , accuracy , memory , attention , cognitive flexibility and problem @-@ solving , amongst others . Presently , the efficacy of such programs requires further research and analysis before any clear benefits can be determined . 
 = Jeremy Affeldt = 
 Jeremy David Affeldt ( / <unk> / ; born June 6 , 1979 ) is an American retired professional baseball pitcher . He threw and batted left @-@ handed and played in Major League Baseball for the Kansas City Royals , Colorado Rockies , Cincinnati Reds and San Francisco Giants . 
 Affeldt was a third @-@ round draft pick by the Kansas City Royals in 1997 . He made the team in 2002 , and started part of the year for them . In five seasons with the Royals , Affeldt bounced back and forth between the starting rotation and the bullpen . In 2006 , he was traded to the Colorado Rockies at the trade deadline , and was a member of the Rockies 2007 World Series team . After one season with the Cincinnati Reds , he signed with the San Francisco Giants in 2009 , where he was a member of the 2010 , 2012 , and 2014 World Series championship teams . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Affeldt was born in Phoenix , Arizona to David and Charlotte Affeldt . His father was a member of the United States Air Force , and Affeldt lived in Guam , Merced , California , and Spokane , Washington , growing up . While in Merced , Affeldt and his father would frequently attend Oakland Athletics games , and Affeldt enjoyed watching Mark McGwire , Jose Canseco , and Dave Stewart . Affeldt attended Northwest Christian High School , a Division 2 @-@ B school in Colbert , Washington . He participated in three sports while there , but it was baseball that drove several major league scouts to the school to see him pitch . He graduated in 1997 . 
 = = Draft and minor league career = = 
 Affeldt was drafted by the Kansas City Royals in the third round of the 1997 MLB draft . He spent 1997 pitching for the rookie – league Gulf Coast League Royals . While with them , he went 2 – 0 with a 4 @.@ 50 ERA in ten games ( nine starts ) . 
 Affeldt improved with the GCL Royals the next year , going 4 – 3 with a 2 @.@ 89 ERA in twelve games ( nine starts ) . His performance even earned him a promotion to the single @-@ A Lansing Lugnuts . Affeldt did not do well in his time with them , though , as he went 0 – 3 with a 9 @.@ 53 ERA in six games ( three starts ) . 
 In 1999 , Affeldt spent the entire season with the Royals ' single @-@ A affiliate , which had changed to the Charleston Alley Cats during the offseason . Although he only went 7 – 7 , he had a 3 @.@ 83 ERA in twenty – seven games ( twenty – four starts ) . 
 Affeldt pitched with the Wilmington Blue Rocks of the single @-@ A advanced Carolina League in 2000 . While with Wilmington , he led the entire Kansas City Royals ' organization ( and the Carolina League ) with fifteen losses ( to go with only five wins ) . He also threw seventeen wild pitches . However , his ERA was 4 @.@ 09 , and the Blue Rocks were only a half – game ahead of the worst team in the league ( the Potomac Cannons ) . 
 2001 was a better season for Affeldt , as he went 10 – 6 with a 3 @.@ 90 ERA in twenty – five starts for the double @-@ A Wichita Wranglers . He was selected to pitch in the Texas League All @-@ Star Game , and he was named to the postseason All – Star team . 
 = = Kansas City Royals = = 
 = = = 2002 = = = 
 Affeldt was not expected to make the Kansas City Royals ' roster in 2002 , but he was added to the bullpen after he had an 0 @.@ 64 ERA and fourteen strikeouts ( to go with just two walks ) in fourteen innings in Spring training . His major league debut came on April 6 against the Chicago White Sox . He pitched two innings , giving up three hits and a run in a 14 – 0 loss . On April 24 , Affeldt picked up his first major league win by pitching 3 @.@ 2 innings of relief in an 8 – 2 win over the Detroit Tigers . 
 Affeldt 's time in the bullpen did not last long . On May 3 , he replaced Bryan <unk> in the Royals ' starting rotation . In his first start , he pitched four innings , gave up one run , and earned a no – decision in a 4 – 3 loss to the Baltimore Orioles . Affeldt 's time as a starter garnered so @-@ so results , as he was 0 – 4 with a 5 @.@ 45 ERA in seven starts . In his last start , on June 8 , Affeldt picked up the loss as the Royals fell 11 – 3 to the St. Louis Cardinals . After getting pulled in the fourth inning due to an injury , Affeldt was placed on the disabled list with fingernail and blister problems . 
 After making three rehab starts in Wichita , Affeldt returned to the Royals on August 2 and threw a perfect inning against the Minnesota Twins . He remained in the bullpen for the remainder of the 2002 season . After the season , he pitched in a winter league in the Dominican Republic . 
 = = = 2003 = = = 
 In 2003 , Affeldt found himself competing with <unk> Hernández for the first spot in the Royals ' starting rotation during Spring training . Because Tony Peña , the Royals ' manager , was unable to decide which one would be the ace , he flipped a coin to determine who would be number one . Hernández won the toss . 
 Affeldt was placed on the disabled list after only four games with blister problems again . His time on the DL was brief and he returned to the Royals on May 6 . On May 28 , he struck out a career high eight hitters in a win against the Minnesota Twins . Later , on June 6 , he notched his first hit . 
 Affeldt 's final start of the year came on July 23 , in a game he won against Minnesota . After the start , the Royals moved him to the bullpen to try to fix his blister problems . The move was originally thought to be temporary . While in the bullpen , on August 3 , he got his career first save in a 2 – 0 win over the Tampa Bay Devil Rays . On August 21 , the Royals announced that Affeldt would spend the rest of the year in the bullpen . Two days later , he got another save against Minnesota . He picked up two more saves before the end of the year and finished with a 7 – 6 record and a 3 @.@ 93 ERA . After the season , to try to help with his blister problems , he had part of a fingernail on the middle finger of his left hand removed . Also , the Royals announced that if he developed blister problems again , he would be sent to the bullpen for good . 
 = = = 2004 = = = 
 In 2004 , Affeldt was named the Royals ' third starter out of Spring training . He went 0 – 3 with a 5 @.@ 24 ERA in eight starts . His final start of 2004 came on May 18 against the Texas Rangers . Affeldt gave up five runs in four innings and received a no – decision in a 7 – 6 victory by the Royals . Afterwards , although his blister problems had not resurfaced , manager Tony Peña named him the Royals closer on May 21 due to poor pitching and injury problems with the other Royals closers . 
 Affeldt blew his first save opportunity of 2004 against the Oakland Athletics on May 22 , but he converted in his next outing on May 25 against the Detroit Tigers . He converted eight of ten save opportunities before he was placed on the disabled list on June 27 with a partially torn rib – cage muscle . He was out for almost eight weeks . 
 After making four rehab appearances for AAA Omaha , Affeldt returned to the Royals on August 21 . He made his first appearance since returning from the DL on August 22 , but he did not get another save until September 1 in a 1 – 0 victory over the Tigers . He picked up four more saves to finish the year with a career – high 13 saves and a 4 @.@ 95 ERA . 
 = = = 2005 = = = 
 In 2005 , Affeldt was again expected to be the Royals ' closer . However , he did not get a save opportunity until April 16 against Detroit , and he was unable to finish that game because of a groin injury that landed him on the disabled list again . After rehabbing in Omaha , Affeldt returned to the Royals on June 4 . He was no longer the closer , however , because Mike MacDougal had been closing well in his absence . Affeldt was not healthy for long , as he returned to the disabled list on June 20 after <unk> the groin injury . 
 Affeldt returned to the Royals on July 7 . Through July 27 , he had a 2 @.@ 18 ERA . He did not give up more than one earned run until August 5 , when he got his first loss of the year against the Oakland Athletics . However , Affeldt had a 12 @.@ 71 ERA in his next eighteen appearances , which raised his ERA to 6 @.@ 93 . He held opposing batters scoreless for the final nine games of the season to bring it down to a season – ending 5 @.@ 26 . 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 Affeldt returned to Kansas City 's starting rotation in 2006 when he was named the fourth starter during Spring training . However , he was moved up to the third spot before the season began when <unk> Hernández was demoted to the fifth spot . Affeldt struggled as a starter , going 2 – 5 with a 7 @.@ 80 ERA in nine starts . His final major league start came on May 27 against the New York Yankees . He gave up ten runs on eleven hits in a 15 – 4 loss . After the start , he was sent to the bullpen , and Bobby Keppel filled his place in the starting rotation . Affeldt improved in the bullpen , posting a 2 @.@ 91 ERA there through July 31 . 
 Years later , reflecting on his tenure with the Royals , Affeldt said , " I was pretty frustrated . I wanted to quit . I didn 't want to go to the ballpark . I was just failing a lot . I was getting hurt . I didn 't understand my role . I bounced around and I just didn 't enjoy the game . " At the trade deadline on July 31 , Affeldt was traded along with Denny Bautista to the Colorado Rockies for Ryan Shealy and Scott <unk> . Affeldt recalled , " When [ Royals General Manager Dayton Moore ] traded me , he said , ' I feel like I need to give you a fresh start . You can learn to enjoy the game again . ' I have a lot of respect for him now because he saw that . It was a move that had to be made for me to be able to continue playing baseball . I 'm very thankful for it . " 
 = = Colorado Rockies = = 
 With the Rockies , Affeldt was used exclusively out of the bullpen . He got his only save of the season on September 19 in a 12 – 4 win over the San Francisco Giants . Affeldt finished the 2006 season with a 6 @.@ 20 ERA in fifty – nine games . 
 Affeldt spent the entire 2007 season in the bullpen , where he was used as a lefty specialist . Affeldt had a 2 @.@ 15 ERA through his first fifty – six games of the year . He did not give up a home run until Pete <unk> hit one off of him in an 11 – 9 loss to the San Diego Padres on August 16 . He struggled at the end of the year , with a 7 @.@ 30 ERA in his final nineteen games . He still finished the year 4 – 3 , with a 3 @.@ 51 ERA in seventy @-@ five games , and the Rockies made the playoffs as the NL Wild Card . He made his postseason debut on October 4 in the Division Series against the Philadelphia Phillies and gave up one run ( on a home run by Ryan Howard ) in one inning in a 10 – 5 win by Colorado . The Rockies swept the series to advance to the Championship Series against the Arizona Diamondbacks . In the first game , Affeldt entered with two outs and the bases loaded with the Rockies leading 5 – 1 . He retired Stephen Drew to help the Rockies win 5 – 1 . The Rockies swept the Diamondbacks to meet the Boston Red Sox in the World Series . Affeldt pitched in all four games of the World Series without giving up a run , but the Rockies were swept by the Red Sox . Affeldt became a free agent after the season . 
 = = Cincinnati Reds = = 
 Affeldt was signed to a one – year deal by the Cincinnati Reds on January 23 , 2008 , to compete for a spot in the starting rotation . He said of signing and competing to start , " My heart skipped a beat when they offered that deal . I went with my heart there . " However , he was placed in the bullpen , where he stayed for the entire year . He won his first game as a Red when the Reds beat the Arizona Diamondbacks 6 – 5 on April 2 . He made the three hundredth appearance of his career on May 2 in a 2 – 0 loss to the Atlanta Braves . His only other decision of the year came on September 3 when he was the losing pitcher in a 6 – 5 loss to the Pittsburgh Pirates . 
 Affeldt finished the 2008 season with a 3 @.@ 33 ERA in seventy – four games . He was also one of only five NL relievers to pitch seventy @-@ five innings and average one strikeout per inning , along with Joel Hanrahan , Aaron Heilman , Hong @-@ Chih Kuo , and Carlos Mármol . Following the season , Affeldt again became a free agent . 
 = = San Francisco Giants = = 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 On November 17 , 2008 , Affeldt signed a two – year deal with the San Francisco Giants . He said of signing with them , " With that starting rotation , the bullpen won 't get burned out . " Affeldt immediately began having a career year with the Giants . He was used on Opening Day against the Milwaukee Brewers , and he pitched a scoreless inning in the Giants ' 10 – 6 win . On April 12 , he entered a game against the Padres with one out and the bases loaded in the sixth inning . Affeldt got Brian Giles to ground into a double play to end the inning , but he gave up two runs ( one earned ) in the seventh as the Padres won 6 – 1 . 
 From May 8 through July 24 , Affeldt had a twenty – eight inning scoreless streak . During the streak , on May 15 , he struck out a season – high four batters in an 8 – 6 loss to the Mets . On May 31 , he entered a game against St. Louis with runners on first and third and Albert Pujols on deck in the eighth , and he struck out Joe Thurston to end the inning and help the Giants win 5 – 3 . The streak did not end until July 28 , when Brandon <unk> allowed one of Affeldt 's runners to score in a game against Pittsburgh . On August 2 , with runners on first and second with one out in the eighth inning against the Philadelphia Phillies , he retired Chase Utley and Ryan Howard to help the Giants win 7 – 3 . He won the final game of the season against San Diego by pitching two scoreless innings as the Giants won 4 – 3 in ten innings . Affeldt finished the season with a career best 1 @.@ 73 ERA in seventy – four games . He was named tenth on one writer 's ballot for MVP voting , placing him in a tie for twenty – eighth on the list . On December 17 , he won the This Year in Baseball Setup Man of the Year Award . 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 In 2010 , Affeldt again spent the entire season in the bullpen for the Giants . On March 28 , the Giants extended his contract through the 2011 season with an option for 2012 . Affeldt picked up his first save with the Giants in a 6 – 3 victory over the Atlanta Braves on April 11 . He struggled for most of the season and was placed on the disabled list on July 24 with an oblique strain . After rehabbing in the minors , Affeldt returned to the Giants on August 18 . He finished the season with four saves and a 4 @.@ 14 ERA in fifty – three games . 
 Despite his struggles , Affeldt was named to the Giants ' playoff roster . Affeldt made his first playoff appearance for the Giants in Game 2 of the 2010 NLCS against Philadelphia . He struck out one batter and intentionally walked another one , but Santiago Casilla allowed him to score as the Giants lost 6 – 1 . Affeldt faced ( and retired ) one batter in Game 5 , but the Phillies won that game 4 – 2 . In Game 6 , Affeldt entered the game in the third inning with runners on first and second and nobody out after starting pitcher Jonathan Sánchez was taken out early . He pitched two hitless , scoreless innings , and the Giants won the game 3 – 2 to advance to the World Series . Affeldt pitched in two games in the World Series , which the Giants won in five games to give Affeldt his first World Series ring . 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
 Affeldt returned to the Giants in 2011 and posted a solid season , going 3 – 2 with a 2 @.@ 63 ERA in 67 appearances , including 3 saves . In addition , he posted a career best WHIP of 1 @.@ 151 . Left @-@ handed batters hit only <unk> off of Affeldt in 2011 . On September 8 , 2011 , Affeldt suffered a season @-@ ending injury as he gashed his non @-@ throwing ( right ) hand trying to separate frozen hamburger patties and underwent surgery to address nerve damage . After the season , the Giants picked up Affeldt 's $ 5 million contract option for the 2012 season . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 On May 1 , 2012 , Affeldt suffered another off @-@ the @-@ field injury , spraining the MCL in his right knee while picking up his four @-@ year @-@ old son . The injury was listed as number two on an ESPN list of strangest injuries , and was named Jayson Stark 's " Strangest But <unk> Injury of the Year " . Affeldt finished the regular season 1 – 2 with a 2 @.@ 70 ERA in 67 appearances in 63 ⅓ innings . 
 In the 2012 postseason , Affeldt appeared in 10 games , pitching 10 ⅓ innings , allowing 5 hits and 3 walks against 10 strikeouts and no runs . In Game 4 of the 2012 World Series , Affeldt provided key relief , striking out Detroit Tigers power hitters Miguel Cabrera , Prince Fielder , and Delmon Young in the eighth inning to preserve a 3 – 3 tie . The Giants would go on to win the game in the tenth inning , completing a sweep of the Tigers , earning Affeldt his second World Series ring . On November 13 , 2012 , Affeldt signed a three @-@ year , $ 18 million contract to remain with the Giants through the 2015 season . 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 Affeldt struggled with injury in 2013 , recording a 3 @.@ 74 ERA in 33 ⅔ innings pitched . He went on the 15 @-@ day disabled list after suffering a right oblique strain on April 14 . Given Affeldt 's history of unusual injuries , Giants broadcaster Jon Miller joked that Affeldt suffered the injury during a sneezing fit . Affeldt clarified that he suffered the injury while pitching the night before in Chicago . He missed 50 games between July 21 and September 12 with a left groin strain . After returning for one game in September , Affeldt was shut down for the rest of the season . 
 = = = 2014 = = = 
 Affeldt started the 2014 season on the disabled list with a strained MCL in his right knee . Appearing in 62 games , Affeldt recorded a 2 @.@ 28 ERA with 41 strikeouts and 14 walks . 
 In Game 5 of the 2014 NLCS against the St. Louis Cardinals , Affeldt entered the game in the top of the ninth with two outs and the bases loaded , retiring Oscar Taveras on a <unk> to preserve a 3 – 3 tie . Affeldt was credited with the win when Travis Ishikawa hit a walk off home run in the bottom of the ninth to clinch the pennant for the Giants . 
 Affeldt earned the win in Game 7 of the 2014 World Series against his first Major League team the Kansas City Royals . Affeldt was brought in from the bullpen in the 2nd inning and pitched 2 ⅓ innings of scoreless baseball before giving way to series MVP Madison Bumgarner , who finished the game . In the 2014 postseason , Affeldt pitched in 11 games , allowing just 5 hits and no runs over 11 ⅔ innings . Affeldt entered games in seven different innings and pitched in nine different innings overall , from the 2nd through the 10th . Through three postseasons with the Giants , Affeldt recorded 22 consecutive scoreless outings , a streak bettered only by Mariano Rivera ( 23 ) . 
 On getting the Game 7 win at Kauffman Stadium where he started his career , Affeldt said , " To be able to do it in Kansas City , with my past history , it just means a lot to me . It means my end was better than my beginning . " 
 = = = 2015 = = = 
 Affeldt struggled with injury and inconsistency in 2015 . By late June , he had a 5 @.@ 96 ERA and allowed five home runs , more than he allowed from 2012 to 2014 combined . He was placed on the disabled list with a left shoulder strain on June 26 . Affeldt returned July 22 , but on August 24 , he suffered another off @-@ the @-@ field injury , a left knee <unk> , while spending time at a lake with his family on an off @-@ day . On October 1 , 2015 , Affeldt announced he would retire after the 2015 season . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 After retiring as a player , Affeldt joined CSN Bay Area as a studio analyst for Giants Pregame Live and Giants Postgame Live for the 2016 season . Affeldt also rejoined the Giants organization as a community ambassador . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 Affeldt had three different kinds of pitches : a sinking fastball ( which is rare for a lefty ) , a curveball , and a split . His fastball travelled in the low nineties , and while his curveball was not fast , it had late breaking action and got a lot of swing @-@ throughs . Affeldt induced groundballs at a high rate with his sinking fastball and could also get the strikeout when the situation called for it . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Affeldt is a devout Christian and a strong advocate for ending child poverty . He writes a weekly blog about his Christian faith and his desire to stir a movement in the cause of helping the suffering and marginalized . In October 2010 , during a visit to a Bay Area elementary school alongside former Giants pitcher Juan Marichal , Affeldt told the students , " I try to make sure everybody , all the young people in the world , also have a chance to dream really big . " In 2009 , Affeldt donated five thousand dollars to the Not For Sale campaign for opening a medical clinic in Thailand for former child slaves . He also became a prominent member of Not For Sale 's <unk> campaign , pledging a $ 100 donation for every strikeout and recruiting other professional athletes , including his teammate Matt Cain and the St. Louis Cardinals ' Matt Holliday . 
 In 2009 , Affeldt was recognized for his anti – slavery efforts by a nomination for the Jefferson Award for Public Service , and in 2010 , he was the San Francisco Giants ' nominee for the Roberto Clemente Award . Affeldt also founded an organization known as Generation Alive that exists to develop a generation of young leaders , committed to serving others and responding to the needs in their community . In 2013 , Affeldt released a book entitled To Stir a Movement : Life , Justice , and Major League Baseball . In the book , Affeldt recounted a contract situation in 2010 where he voluntarily returned $ 500 @,@ 000 to the Giants after discovering a clerical error . In 2015 , Affeldt received an honorary degree from Whitworth University for his humanitarian efforts . 
 Affeldt , his wife Larisa , and their three sons live in Spokane , Washington . 
 = Tropical Storm Colin ( 2010 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Colin was a tropical cyclone that brought squally weather to Bermuda and caused extensive rip currents across the East Coast of the United States in August 2010 . The fourth tropical cyclone and third named storm of the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season , Colin developed as a tropical depression from a low @-@ pressure area in the central Atlantic on August 2 . After forming , the storm initially strengthened gradually , attaining tropical storm status early on August 3 . However , due to its acceleration to the west @-@ northwest , Colin was unable to maintain a closed circulation and subsequently degenerated into a trough later that day . The National Hurricane Center noted the possibility of regeneration over subsequent days , and by August 5 , Colin had once again become a tropical cyclone . Despite moderate wind shear impacting the system , Colin reached a peak intensity of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) on August 5 . However , vertical wind shear prevented further intensification and eventually weakened the storm . By early on August 8 , Colin had weakened to a tropical depression , and dissipated near Bermuda shortly after . Though it remained well offshore , Colin produced rough seas along the East Coast of the United States . At least 205 ocean rescues were made . In Bermuda , effects were generally minimal . Less than 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of rain fell and winds remained below tropical storm force . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Tropical Storm Colin can be traced back to an elongated tropical wave that moved westward from Nigeria to Senegal on July 28 . A nearly stationary trough separated from the wave as it continued westward . A larger tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa a few days later . A broad area of low pressure resulted from the consolidation of the two waves on August 1 , when it was situated about 750 mi ( 1210 km ) west @-@ southwest of the Cape Verde Islands . Over the course of the next 24 hours , shower and thunderstorm activity became increasingly consolidated with the low , but the system lacked a well @-@ defined circulation to be considered a tropical cyclone at the time . However , on the next day , an Advanced Scatterometer ( ASCAT ) pass revealed that the circulation center had become sufficiently defined , and the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) initiated advisories on Tropical Depression Four at 1200 UTC on August 2 . Further organization occurred as the depression moved around the southern periphery of a strong subtropical ridge . Thunderstorm activity became increasingly defined , and it is estimated that the depression became Tropical Storm Colin at 0600 UTC on August 3 while centered 840 mi ( 1350 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . 
 Early on August 3 , Colin 's forward motion increased , and the cyclone was unable to maintain a closed circulation . The tropical storm degenerated into a trough at 1800 UTC , although tropical storm @-@ force winds persisted . As the remnants passed north of the northern Leeward Islands , a reconnaissance aircraft investigated the system on August 4 , but no closed circulation was found . As the remnants approached a weakness in the subtropical ridge across the western Atlantic on August 5 , its forward speed gradually slowed as well . A combination of microwave and satellite imagery during the morning hours of August 5 revealed the reformation of a closed low , and Colin 's remnants regained tropical storm status at this time while located 280 mi ( 450 km ) north @-@ northeast of San Juan , Puerto Rico . 
 Despite relatively unfavorable vertical wind shear impacting Colin , deep thunderstorm activity developed atop its center of circulation . Data from a reconnaissance aircraft during the afternoon hours of August 5 revealed that the system reached a peak intensity with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1005 mbar ( 29 @.@ 68 inHg ) . A few computer models , namely the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory ( GFDL ) and Hurricane Weather Research and Forecasting model ( HWRF ) , predicted that Colin would briefly attain hurricane status . However , the surrounding moderate vertical wind shear prevented this . While turning towards the north on August 6 , the cyclone entered an area increasingly unfavorable wind shear and cooler sea surface temperatures , subsequently prompting the NHC to downgrade Colin to a tropical depression by 0000 UTC on August 8 . Further weakening occurred over the next few hours as the cyclone 's center of circulation became elongated , and Colin once again degenerated into a trough of low pressure at 1200 UTC while located approximately 100 mi ( 160 km ) southwest of Bermuda . The remnant trough persisted until early on August 9 , at which time it was situated 150 mi ( 240 km ) northwest of the island . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Following Colin 's regeneration into a tropical cyclone on August 5 , the Government of Bermuda simultaneously issued a tropical storm warning for the island . Along south @-@ facing beaches , Colin was expected to produce a storm surge between 2 and 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 and 0 @.@ 91 m ) , possibly reaching as high as 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) . Significant rainfall was also anticipated , with totals averaging 4 to 6 in ( 100 to 150 mm ) . These values were later decreased after Colin weakened on August 6 , with only a minimal storm surge forecast and rainfall roughly 1 in ( 25 mm ) less than previously stated . By August 7 , all beaches were closed across the island due to rough seas and dangerous rip currents . The Royal Caribbean cruise ship , MS Explorer of the Seas , arrived in Bermuda that same day and was scheduled to set sail again on August 8 ; however , due to the threat of Colin , the vessel was forced leave later in the day instead of staying overnight . On August 8 , the tropical storm warning in place for Bermuda was downgraded to a watch as Colin weakened to a tropical depression ; it was discontinued hours later as the storm quickly dissipated . 
 Due to Colin 's weakening to a tropical depression prior to its closest pass to Bermuda , its effects were significantly less than initially anticipated . Winds from the storm reached 31 mph ( 50 km / h ) , with gusts to 37 mph ( 60 km / h ) . Rainfall was limited to isolated showers and thunderstorms ; the Bermuda International Airport measured 0 @.@ 16 in ( 4 @.@ 1 mm ) of rain in relation to Colin . Throughout the island , there were no reports of damage . 
 Although situated several hundred miles off the coast of the East Coast of the United States , the outer effects of Colin were expected to create dangerous rip currents along the North and South Carolina coastlines , as well as waves as high as 3 to 4 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 to 1 @.@ 22 m ) . On August 7 , a 51 @-@ year @-@ old man drowned off the coast of Ocracoke , North Carolina after being caught in a rip current . Shortly after his death , officials issued rip current and undertow threats for the region . Between August 7 and 9 , at least 205 ocean rescues were made along the North Carolina coastline due to rough seas produced by Colin . 
 = Station Group Banak = 
 Station Group Banak ( Norwegian : <unk> Banak ) , formerly Banak Air Station ( Banak <unk> ) , is a military airbase located at Banak , just north of Lakselv in Porsanger , Norway . Operated by the Royal Norwegian Air Force ( RNoAF ) , it serves a detachment of the 330 Squadron , which operates two Westland Sea King helicopters used for search and rescue operations in Finnmark , Svalbard and surrounding Arctic sea areas ( the northern Norwegian Sea , the Barents Sea and the Arctic Sea ) . Of the station 's two helicopters , one is on standby at any given time . The station group is co @-@ located with the civilian Lakselv Airport , Banak and is administratively under the 132nd Air Wing and Bodø Main Air Station . Banak is RNoAF 's most northerly base and has fifty employees . 
 The airfield was first built with triangular runways in 1938 . It was taken over by the Luftwaffe in 1940 , who expanded it and laid down two wooden runways . Banak was taken over by the RNoAF in 1945 , but abandoned in 1952 . Plans for re @-@ opening emerged in 1955 , but uncertainty regarding its value in a war caused a prolonged debate about financing . The air station was largely funded by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) and was opened on 4 May 1963 , along with a civilian terminal . During the Cold War , Norway did not allow allies peacetime use of the airfield . The runway was extended in 1968 and the 330 Squadron was established in 1973 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First airfield = = = 
 The first proposals for an airport in Lakselv stemmed from military considerations . Despite a Norwegian policy of neutrality , there was a fear that Norway could be occupied by foreign powers to take advantage of the country 's strategic position . The Norwegian military therefore wanted airfields constructed throughout the country to increase the air force 's mobility . Finnmark was regarded as a key location , given the increased Soviet militarization on the Kola Peninsula . Increased military funding was granted from 1937 , which allowed triangular runway to be built Banak the following year . It was used by a detachment of the Royal Norwegian Navy Air Service . 
 Banak was taken over by the Luftwaffe during the German occupation of Norway during World War II . The Wehrmacht was planning an attack on the Soviet Union from Finnmark and designated Banak as their primary air base in Northern Norway . By September 1940 , the main runway was extended to 1 @,@ 000 by 200 meters ( 3 @,@ 280 by 660 ft ) , constructed in wood . Three hangars were built , allowing the air base to house bombers . The air station 's prime function during the war was to facilitate attacks on the Arctic convoys . Expansion continued , and by 1943 there were two parallel runways , both 1 @,@ 800 meters ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) long . The air station was blasted in October 1944 during Operation Nordlicht , the German retreat from Finnmark . 
 In 1945 the Norwegian Air Force took control over the airfield and commenced reconstruction . That year , the air force operated a service from Bardufoss Air Station via Banak to Kirkenes Airport , Høybuktmoen , with correspondence to Oslo at Bardufoss . The service lasted only the one season . Later the runway was used to serve air ambulances . During the late 1940s , part of the wooden runway was removed and used for other construction projects . 
 Interest in Banak rose with the Czechoslovak coup d 'état of 1948 and fears of Soviet intervention in Norway . Finnmark , located on the Norway – Soviet Union border , became of particular interest for the military . Although specific plans were articulated , no construction of an airbase was carried out . However , Norway 's entry into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) in 1949 had a dramatic effect on the military strategy and Banak . Finnmark was regarded as a tripwire and was to be sacrificed in case of a Soviet invasion . The airfield was closed in 1952 , but the runway remained , consisting of a short section of unmaintained wooden runway and the rest a grass strip . It was occasionally used by small aircraft . 
 = = = Plans for reestablishment = = = 
 Interest from military leaders for an airport at Banak returned in 1955 . The Air Force was mainly concerned that they could not reach the easternmost parts of Norway from Bodø Main Air Station . This allowed for several Soviet infringements of Norwegian air space . Alternative locations were considered , such as Kautokeino , were a radar had been built . NATO supported a reconstruction of Banak , partially raised by increased focus towards NATO 's northern flank , and also to serve as part of the nuclear program . NATO was ready to provide funding in 1957 , but by then Norwegian authorities were wanting to delay its construction . They cited lack of personnel to man the station as well as a lack of usability in times of war . The government decided in 1957 to disallow nuclear warheads to be stored in Norway during peacetime , thus eliminating NATO 's strategic need for Banak . The air station was therefore removed from the investment program . 
 By 1959 the United States was concerned that the militarization of the Kola Peninsula would become the prime source of a Soviet attack on North America . A new discussion about location arose , with Alta and Kautokeino as the main alternatives . Banak was estimated to cost NOK 4 @.@ 9 million , NOK 2 @.@ 8 million less than Alta , had better instrument landing and weather conditions and allowed a longer runway . The main advantage of Alta was that it would be better suited for civilian traffic . The government and Parliament approved construction of Banak in 1959 on condition that it receive NATO funding . 
 By then new concerns had been raised by NATO regarding the defense of Banak , caused by its proximity to the Soviet Union , lack of military forces in Finnmark and lack of natural obstacles . The initial response from the Norwegian Air Force was that the airfield could easily be used by the Soviet Union in its current shape and that a means of destruction could make it useless following a Norwegian retreat . Later costs estimates rose to NOK 8 @.@ 9 million , which would include a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ meter ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) runway , a 400 @-@ meter ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) taxiway and a 1 @,@ 000 square meters ( 11 @,@ 000 sq ft ) apron . Lack of funding meant the airport would not meet all of NATO 's air base standards . This would be permitted because the airfield , from NATO 's point of view , would only be used for emergency landings . 
 NATO 's proposal for an investment program was approved by the Norwegian Government on 7 December 1959 and by the North Atlantic Council on 1 June 1960 . Parliament passed the plans on 5 August . Construction was carried out simultaneously at Banak , Alta Airport and Kirkenes Airport , Høybuktmoen , which would combined give Finnmark three primary airports . All three airports opened on 4 May 1963 . 
 = = = Cold War = = = 
 The dwindling credibility of the massive retaliation strategy caused NATO to shift to the flexible response strategy . This increased the importance of Banak , as it would be used to fly in reinforcements in a war situation . In 1962 , both RNoAF and NATO proposed that Banak be expanded to full NATO standards . RNoAF planned that Banak should host a detachment of up to six fighters or fighter @-@ bombers and act as a stopover for fighters , transports and helicopters . The airfield was to stockpile supplies , including fuel and ammunition , for one month of war efforts . NATO saw need , in case of a Soviet attack on Finnmark , to deploy two brigades consisting of 10 @,@ 000 men in the course of a week and simultaneously host a squadron of tactical aircraft . 
 The expansion was estimated to cost NOK 17 @.@ 8 million , of which NATO would fund 15 @.@ 6 million , and approved by Parliament on 7 May 1965 . NATO adjusted the plans later that year , reducing the apron area by 9 @,@ 000 square meters ( 97 @,@ 000 sq ft ) while increasing from one to two hangars . Construction lasted from 1967 to 1968 . It consisted of extending the runway with 600 meters ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) , constructing two hangars , a communications building and a network of internal roads and taxiways . The upgrades were followed up by pressure from the armed forces to establish an squadron of fighters at Banak . Following the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August – September 1968 , the ministry decided to upgrade the Garrison of Porsanger from 400 to 1000 men . This was followed up with an extension of the runway and better air defense at Banak . 
 Throughout the Cold War , Norway enforced a policy to disallow allied aircraft to operate further north than Bardufoss and Andøya , in an effort to minimize tension with the Soviet Union . Specifically , allied aircraft were not permitted to operate east of the 24th meridian east , which was just west of Banak , thus hindering use of the airfield . This was motivated in part to not unnecessarily provoke the Soviet Union , with which Norway shared a land border , and in part because increased allied military presence could decrease the popular support for NATO membership . The restrictions were strengthened following the 1960 U @-@ 2 incident , in which a US spy aircraft en route to Bodø was shot down over Soviet territory . During the mid @-@ 1960s , NATO unsuccessfully attempted to convince Norwegian authorities to move the allied operational border from the 24th to the 27th meridian east . 
 Norway prohibited nuclear warheads to be stored on its soil , preventing Banak from serving in a role as a base for US nuclear @-@ armed bombers . NATO 's military interest for Banak peaked during the late 1960s . Increased range of Soviet aircraft during the 1970s diminished the need for troops in Finnmark ; combined with Norwegian tension and nuclear policies , this caused the United States to favor Vestfjorden and Troms over Banak as the primary areas of defense . 
 Since 1970 , the 332 Squadron and later the 334 Squadron and 336 Squadron have operated regular training missions out of Banak with fighter aircraft . In 1969 Parliament decided to establish a search and rescue squadron . Ten Sea King helicopters were bought by the Ministry of Justice in December 1970 and the 330 Squadron was re @-@ enacted on 25 May 1973 . Banak was one of four original stations for the helicopters , the others being Bodø , Ørland and Sola . The first major mission was on 7 April 1974 , when thirteen fishermen were rescued when the trawler <unk> sank in the <unk> at Cape <unk> . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 The responsibility for Banak 's Sea Kings originally included Svalbard . After a 1992 sinking , the government decided to instead lease a Super Puma helicopter for Svalbard , removing the archipelago from Banak 's portfolio . Banak 's runway was extended in 1992 and 1993 , including widening to 45 meters ( 148 ft ) and receiving new runway lighting . The range of the Sea Kings is in part determined by their radio range . Until 1998 , some long @-@ range missions with Sea Kings were flown with assistance of P @-@ 3 Orion aircraft to serve as radio relays , at one point allowing for a record 3 @,@ 148 kilometers ( 1 @,@ 956 mi ) mission . The air station was in 1998 converted to a station group under Bodø Main Air Station . 
 In 2001 , the Ministry of Justice considered reorganizing the search and rescue services , and looked into moving the 330 Squadron from Banak to Hammerfest Airport . The rationale was the proximity to Hammerfest Hospital and a typical 40 @-@ minute shorter flight time to the coast . However , such a location would give longer travel time to the inner parts of Finnmark . The plans were hindered by opposition from the Air Force , as they would have to establish a military station at Hammerfest . The Norwegian Armed Forces announced in 2007 that they would carry out a major restructuring and decrease of activity in Finnmark , with the long @-@ term plan to close the Garrison of Porsanger . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Station Group Banak is located on the Banak peninsula , which sticks into <unk> , just north of Lakselv . It is the northern @-@ most station of the RNoAF . The military facilities are located on the western side of the runway , while the civilian facilities are on the eastern side . The runway is 2 @,@ 788 by 45 meters ( 9 @,@ 147 by 148 ft ) and aligned 17 – 35 ( roughly north – south ) . It is mostly asphalt , although parts are concrete . There is instrument landing system category I in both directions . The airfield saw 10 @,@ 953 aircraft movements in 2011 , including civilian . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The 330 Squadron has a detachment with two Westland Sea King Mk 43B helicopters at Banak . They are part of the Norwegian Air Ambulance service , organized by the four regional health authorities . Medical personnel is provided by Finnmark Hospital Trust , while the remaining personnel are military . The detachment flew 271 missions and 854 hours in 2009 . The Sea Kings ' primary role is for search and rescue ( SAR ) mission , with a portfolio of northern Troms , Finnmark and the Barents Sea . In SAR missions , the squadron operates under the management of the Joint Rescue Coordination Centre of Northern Norway located in Bodø . The detachment 's secondary responsibility is as an air ambulance , under management of Hammerfest Hospital . 
 During winter the helicopters must often follow a coastal flight route of <unk> before heading east to Kirkenes or west to Tromsø , to avoid icing . The Sea Kings have an operational radius of 740 kilometers ( 460 mi ) ; in combination with refueling possibilities at Bjørnøya and Hopen , this allows all parts of the Norwegian exclusive economic zone to be covered . Because of issues with icing , the helicopters cannot fly higher than 200 meters ( 660 ft ) altitude . 
 The General Dynamics F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcons based at Bodø regularly use Banak both for monitoring and training . Fighter aircraft can reach the Norway – Russia border in about ten minutes , while helicopters can reach the border in thirty minutes . The primary use for fighters is training is <unk> Shooting Range . 
 = = Civilian sector = = 
 Lakselv Airport , Banak is the main airport serving central Finnmark , with its catchment areas including the municipalities of Porsanger , Karasjok and <unk> . Widerøe is the primary airline operating at the airport , with daily flights to Alta and Tromsø using Bombardier Dash 8 aircraft . In 2011 , the airport had 63 @,@ 537 passengers . It is classified as an international airport . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On 12 June 1985 , an F @-@ 16B with two people on board experienced control problems north of Banak . The pilot ejected and survived while an officer was killed . 
 On 23 March 1992 , an F @-@ 16A lost power at 5 @,@ 500 meters altitude ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) . The pilot survived after aiming the aircraft at an unpopulated area and ejecting at an altitude of 1 @,@ 400 meters ( 4 @,@ 600 feet ) . 
 On 29 June 2005 , an ICP Savannah micro aircraft crashed only a few minutes after its departure from Banak , with two flight instructors on board . Both instructors were killed in the accident . 
 = 2001 UEFA Super Cup = 
 The 2001 UEFA Super Cup was a football match between German team Bayern Munich and English team Liverpool on 24 August 2001 at Stade Louis II , the annual UEFA Super Cup contested between the winners of the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Cup . Bayern were appearing in the Super Cup for the third time , their two previous appearances in 1975 and 1976 had ended in defeat . Liverpool were appearing in their fourth Super Cup , they won the competition in 1977 , and lost twice in 1978 and 1984 . 
 The teams had qualified for the competition by winning the two seasonal European competitions . Both Bayern and Liverpool beat Spanish teams in the finals of the competitions . Bayern won the 2000 – 01 UEFA Champions League , defeating Valencia 5 – 4 in a penalty shoot @-@ out after the match had finished 1 – 1 . Liverpool won the 2000 – 01 UEFA Cup , beating Alavés 5 – 4 . 
 Watched by a crowd of 13 @,@ 824 , Liverpool took the lead in the first half when John Arne Riise scored . Liverpool extended their lead before half @-@ time when Emile Heskey scored . Liverpool scored immediately after the start of the second half to lead the match 3 – 0 after Michael Owen scored . Hasan Salihamidžić and Carsten Jancker scored in the second half , but Liverpool held out until the end of the match to win 3 – 2 , their second Super Cup win . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Bayern Munich qualified for the Super Cup as the reigning UEFA Champions League winners . They had won the 2000 – 01 UEFA Champions League beating Valencia 5 – 4 in a penalty shoot @-@ out after the match had finished 1 – 1 . It would be Bayern 's third appearance in the Super Cup . Their two previous appearances in 1975 and 1976 against Dynamo Kiev and Anderlecht respectively had both ended in defeat . 
 Liverpool had qualified for the Super Cup as a result of winning the 2000 – 01 UEFA Cup . They had beaten Alavés 5 – 4 to win their third UEFA Cup . Liverpool were appearing in their fourth Super Cup . They had previously won the competition in 1977 beating Hamburg . The two other appearances in 1978 and 1984 had resulted in losses to Anderlecht and Juventus respectively . 
 Both sides had played several matches already , Bayern had already played four matches in the 2001 – 02 Fußball @-@ Bundesliga and were fifth . They had won two matches , drew one and lost one . Liverpool had played two legs in the third qualifying round of the 2001 – 02 UEFA Champions League . They beat Finnish team FC Haka 9 – 1 on aggregate . As winners of the 2000 – 01 FA Cup , Liverpool faced Manchester United in the 2001 FA Charity Shield , which they won 2 – 1 . Liverpool had also played one match in the 2001 – 02 FA Premier League ; a 2 – 1 win over West Ham United . 
 Bayern and Liverpool had injury concerns ahead of the match . Four members of Bayern 's Champions League winning side were missing through injury . Mehmet Scholl , Stefan Effenberg , Paulo Sérgio and Jens <unk> were all unavailable for selection for the German side . Liverpool were without Patrik Berger after he had undergone surgery on his knee . Despite being injured for Liverpool 's previous matches , Steven Gerrard was expected to feature . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Bayern kicked off , but Liverpool had the first chance of the match . Michael Owen crossed the ball into the penalty area from the right side of the pitch towards Emile Heskey , whose shot was deflected out for a corner . Bayern responded immediately , although Owen Hargreaves ' shot went high over the Liverpool goal . Nine minutes after the start of the match , Liverpool were awarded a free kick after a foul by Robert Kovač on Owen . The free @-@ kick taken by Gary McAllister was met by Markus Babbel , but he headed over the goal . With more fouls starting to occur , the first booking was awarded in the 14th minute . Liverpool midfielder Dietmar Hamann was shown a yellow card after he tackled Hasan Salihamidžić from behind . Bayern started to control the match midway through the first @-@ half , however it was Liverpool who scored the first goal of the match . Liverpool defender John Arne Riise dispossessed Hargreaves , McAllister took control of the loose ball and passed to Steven Gerrard . Gerrard 's pass to Owen meant he was in space down the right side of the pitch , Owen put a low @-@ cross into the penalty area , which by @-@ passed <unk> but found Riise who scored to give Liverpool the lead . 
 Bayern were immediately on the attack following Liverpool 's goal . A foul on Bayern defender Bixente Lizarazu by Gerrard resulted in a free @-@ kick for Bayern . The subsequent free @-@ kick taken by Ciriaco Sforza was headed over the Liverpool goal by Pablo Thiam . Liverpool regrouped and their next attack almost resulted in another goal . Heskey 's pass to Owen put him clear of the Bayern defence and one @-@ on @-@ one with Oliver Kahn . Owen attempted to chip the ball over Kahn , however the Bayern goalkeeper was able to save the shot . Immediately afterwards Bayern were on the attack . Bayern defender Willy <unk> held off Riise and the crossed the ball into the penalty area , the cross was met by Giovane Élber whose header went wide of the Liverpool goal . With the first half coming to an end , Liverpool had another attack . Hamann passed the ball to Heskey on the edge of the Bayern penalty area , Heskey subsequently moved past Bayern defender 's Thomas Linke and Kovač , and shot low beyond Kahn to give Liverpool a 2 – 0 lead . 
 Liverpool kicked @-@ off the second half , and within 13 seconds they had scored to lead the match 3 – 0 . Liverpool defender Jamie Carragher kicked the ball into the Bayern half , defender Thiam missed his header , which meant the ball dropped to Owen , who controlled the ball with his right foot and then put the ball into the Bayern goal with his left foot . Bayern reduced the deficit in the 57th minute when Salihamidžić scored . He headed the ball into the Liverpool goal from Bayern 's first corner of the match to reduce the deficit to two goals . Midway through the half both teams made substitutions . Bayern replaced Sforza , Claudio Pizarro and Salihamidžić for Niko Kovač , Carsten Jancker and Roque Santa Cruz respectively . Liverpool substituted Gerrard and Riise for Igor Bišćan and Danny Murphy respectively . Liverpool started to pass the ball around their midfield and defence in an attempt to waste time , however in the 82nd minute Bayern scored again . Substitute Jancker headed into the Liverpool goal from a cross by <unk> . Immediately afterwards Bayern had an opportunity to equalise , however Lizarazu 's shot was straight at Liverpool goalkeeper Sander Westerveld . No further goals were scored and the referee blew for full @-@ time with the final score 3 – 2 to Liverpool . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Liverpool 's victory meant that they had won five competitions in five months , after winning the FA Cup , Football League Cup and UEFA Cup during the 2000 – 01 season . They had also won the FA Charity Shield at the start of the current season . Manager Gérard Houllier congratulated his players on their achievements : " I must congratulate the players for what they achieved in these six months . We know we are not perfect and we will continue to improve . But the team have shown they possess the winning edge , and this is what we have tried to develop . " Man of the match Owen received a £ 10 @,@ 000 cheque from match sponsors Carlsberg to be forwarded to a charity of his choice . 
 Bayern 's loss in the Super Cup extended German clubs winless streak in the competition ; Bayern 's loss was the seventh by a German club . Manager Ottmar Hitzfeld admitted that his team needed time to co @-@ ordinate their defence : " It took us time to get into top gear and to organise ourselves . And when you are too slow playing a team like Liverpool , then you expect to get punished . " <unk> was critical of his players stating that " individual mistakes cost us the match . " He also praised man of the match Michael Owen stating that Bayern " could not counter his threat . " 
 = Bangladeshi cricket team in Australia in 2003 = 
 The Bangladesh national cricket team played two Test matches and three One Day International ( ODI ) matches on a mid @-@ year tour of Australia in 2003 . They were captained by all @-@ rounder Khaled Mahmud . The Australians were under a split captaincy — Steve Waugh in the Tests and Ricky Ponting in the following ODIs . The series marked the first time a Test match had been played outside an Australian state capital city ; with matches played at Bundaberg Rum Stadium in Cairns , and the newly upgraded <unk> Oval in Darwin . 
 Australia easily won the two @-@ match Test series . Bangladesh 's performances ' did not get any better during the ODI series — failing to score more than 147 in any innings — as Australia completed a clean @-@ sweep . 
 = = Background = = 
 Bangladesh had struggled to come to terms with International cricket since becoming the tenth Test team in November 2000 . Before their 2003 tour of Australian , Bangladesh had only one Test draw , which came against lowly ranked Zimbabwe , and not a single test win . Their One Day International ( ODI ) form had also been poor since their historic victory over Pakistan in the 1999 Cricket World Cup . The victory subsequently paved the way for their admission to Test cricket . In Bangladesh 's last series before Australia , they were defeated by an innings in both matches by South Africa . Australia , however , had a 3 – 1 away Test victory — starting in April — against the West Indies , and a 4 – 3 ODI victory over the same opposition . Earlier in the year , they remained unbeaten ( 10 matches ) in winning the 2003 ODI Cricket World Cup in South Africa . Led by Ricky Ponting , Australia defeated India in the final , despite losing leg @-@ <unk> Shane Warne . Prior to the start of the World Cup , Warne — Australia 's highest Test wicket @-@ taker — was sent home from South Africa after a drug test during the recent one @-@ day series in Australia returned a positive result for a banned diuretic . He was consequently banned from International and first @-@ class cricket for a year . 
 The day before the first Test , former Australian batsman David Hookes said Bangladesh were not worthy of Test status . He also indicated that Australia could win either Test within a day . 
 = = Test series = = 
 = = = First Test = = = 
 <unk> Oval became the 89th Test venue — and the eighth in Australia . On a slow and low drop @-@ in pitch airlifted from Melbourne a month before the match , Australia won the toss and elected to field . Bangladesh collapsed and were bowled out for 97 within three hours , with only Mohammad Ashraful ( 23 ) and Khaled Mahmud ( 21 ) providing resistance . All four Australian bowlers chimed in , as Glenn McGrath and Brett Lee took three wickets apiece . McGrath and Jason Gillespie surpassed the duo of Keith Miller and Ray Lindwall as Australia 's most successful opening @-@ bowling combination . Bangladesh 's shot selection did not impress coach <unk> Whatmore who said , " A few players presented their wickets and that 's just the area we 're trying to improve . " Australia initially struggled to come to terms with the pitch , falling to 2 / 43 when Ricky Ponting was dismissed for 10 . Darren Lehmann started the carnage , scoring his second Test century ( 110 ) . Steve Waugh then became only the second player after Gary Kirsten to score a century against all Test playing nations . Upon reaching the milestone , he promptly declared Australia 's innings on 7 / 407 . Only Bangladesh 's fastest bowler , Mashrafe Mortaza proved threatening , taking three wickets for 74 runs ( 3 / 74 ) in 23 overs . After the days play , Lehmann said , " It was hard work out there . They stuck to their guns pretty well , they put it in the right areas and made it tough to score runs . " When asked about becoming only the second batsman to score a hundred against all nine Test @-@ playing nations , Waugh said : 
 If you play long enough you are going to reach milestones and records are going to be passed and I 'm sure someone down the track will beat those . But it is nice to achieve things and to score a hundred against every country is something I 'm proud of . I 'm not too concerned about records . I just want to go out there and play well and I 've said if I don 't think I can improve then I shouldn 't be there . 
 The Bangladeshis — needing 310 runs to make Australia bat again — counterattacked before the conclusion of day two . Despite losing Javed Omar , leg before wicket to McGrath for five , opening batsman Hannan Sarkar and their leading International run @-@ scorer , <unk> Bashar took the score to 89 . The pair scored at a run @-@ rate of 3 @.@ 98 runs per over , before the partnership was ended when Sarkar was caught behind for 35 . This sparked a collapse , with Bangladesh bowled out for 178 . Australian leg spinner Stuart MacGill took 5 / 65 — his seventh Test five @-@ wicket haul — as Australia won by an innings and 132 runs . Along with being named man of the match , Waugh overtook West Indian Clive Lloyd as the most successful captain in Test history , enjoying his 37th victory . 
 = = = Second Test = = = 
 Bundaberg Rum Stadium became the 90th Test venue — and the ninth in Australia . According to Wisden , " ... Rain had left question marks about the quality of the pitch , which looked green and enticing for the Australian fast bowlers . " When Australia won the toss and sent Bangladesh into bat , there were fears Bangladesh would struggle to score 100 in either innings . On a surface which " played much better than expected , " and was a " much faster pitch than that in Darwin , " Sarkar scored 76 , hitting nine boundaries in the process . He and Bashar put on 108 for second wicket as the Australian bowlers lacked penetration . Omar ( 26 ) , Bashar ( 46 ) , <unk> Hossain ( 46 ) and Khaled <unk> ( 44 ) all got starts , but could not continue their good work as Bangladesh were eventually bowled out for 295 early on the second morning . MacGill took another five @-@ wicket haul as the rest of the bowlers apart from Gillespie had limited success , with Waugh bowling himself for five overs in search of a breakthrough . Despite Langer ( 1 ) falling early , Hayden ( 50 ) and Ponting ( 59 ) both scored half @-@ centuries , taking Australia to 2 / 105 . Both Lehmann and Waugh continued with their Darwin form , scoring 177 and 156 respectively . This was Waugh 's 32nd Test century , taking him ahead of Sachin Tendulkar and behind only Sunil Gavaskar ( 34 ) . Lehmann 's innings included 105 runs between tea and the close of play on day two . When eventually dismissed , Martin Love compiled his first Test century . With 2 / 128 , Hossain was the only bowler who took more than one wicket . His suspect bowling action would later be reported to the International Cricket Council . 
 Sarkar scored another half @-@ century in Bangladesh 's second innings before succumbing to a ' wild swipe ' off MacGill . The leg @-@ spinner took his third five @-@ wicket haul in as many innings and Gillespie took three wickets in the space of eight balls . Despite being dismissed for 163 , Waugh thought Bangladesh 's batting was " a lot better than a lot of efforts by the West Indies in recent years and Pakistan in Sharjah . " Despite two centuries from Lehmann and Waugh , MacGill was named man of the series , with 17 wickets . Whatmore was also pleased with the Bangladesh improvement between Tests . 
 Well we stretched the game out to a day longer than we did in Darwin . I thought there was definite improvement . To fight back and get 295 in the first innings , I thought was excellent . Playing against that quality of opposition is not easy . Maybe against other opposition in future it might be just that little bit easier and we can progress . Most people were talking about the pace battery of the Australian team but the person who won man of the series and got the most wickets was the spinner [ Stuart MacGill ] . I think maybe we didn 't apply the same amount of effort against the slower bowler as we did against the quicks . " 
 = = Test squads = = 
 = = One Day series = = 
 = = = 1st ODI = = = 
 After putting Bangladesh into bat , the Australians soon took early wickets . On a pitch that was quicker than the Test strip , Bangladesh looked all at sea against the pace of Lee and Gillespie . They soon crashed to 4 / 19 and never recovered , eventually bowled out for 105 in the 34th over . Only three batsmen managed double figures as the pace duo took seven wickets between them . Andy Bichel also chimed in with 2 / 24 . 
 Because of Bangladesh 's meagre batting performance , the Australian innings began before lunch and opener Adam Gilchrist scored a typically quick @-@ fire 18 before he was caught behind from Mortaza . Hayden ( 46 ) and Ponting then got valuable batting practice as they shared a 74 @-@ run partnership . Ponting was eventually bowled by Rafique for 29 . Damien Martyn 's stay at the crease was cut short , in his first International match since breaking his finger in the 2003 Cricket World Cup , he faced just one ball before Australia won by eight wickets with more than 27 overs to spare . Along with the wicket of Ponting , Rafique conceded just seven runs in five overs . 
 = = = 2nd ODI = = = 
 The Bangladeshis won the toss and elected to bat . Their openers put on a steady opening partnership , before Sarkar ( who was now playing as a wicket @-@ keeper in the absence of Khaled <unk> ) was caught behind off Ian Harvey for 19 , with the score at 37 after 14 overs . His opening partner , Javed Omar , fell nine runs later , for 11 . Hossain also came and went quickly , as Bangladesh were restricted to 3 / 52 , despite surviving Lee 's spell . Only Bashar ( 31 ) offered any sort of resistance , as the middle order crumbled under the spin of Brad Hogg , who took 3 / 31 . Alok Kapali provided some lower @-@ order entertainment , striking 34 from 44 balls . Lehmann finished off the tail , collecting 3 / 16 , as Bangladesh were dismissed for 147 in the 46th over . 
 In the absence of Bangladesh 's opening bowler , Mortaza , Australia opened the innings with Andrew Symonds and Michael Bevan — giving the usual middle @-@ order batsmen time at the crease . The Symonds experiment did not last long , as he was dismissed by <unk> Hossain for seven . Martyn joined Bevan at the crease and quickly put the bowlers on the back foot with aggressive batting . Despite returning in the series for the first time since the 2003 Cricket World Cup because of a broken finger , he scored Australia 's second fastest ODI half @-@ century — 22 balls — and was on track to overtake Gilchrist 's and Allan Border 's record for the fastest Australian ODI century ; 78 deliveries . Together they added 131 runs from 91 balls , seeing Australia home by nine wickets . Named man of the match , Martyn finished with 92 from 51 balls , dominating the partnership with Bevan , who scored 40 from 62 balls . Martyn was especially severe on Bangladeshi captain Khaled Mahmud , hitting three fours and a six from successive balls in Mahmud 's second over . The captain finished with the unflattering figures of 0 / 34 from three overs . 
 = = = 3rd ODI = = = 
 The series finished in Darwin , with Australian skipper Ricky Ponting winning the toss and electing to bat . They were restricted to 4 / 114 — partly due to the tight bowling of Rafique who picked up two wickets — before the Australian captain stabilised the innings . He scored a composed century , as he and Bevan put on a run @-@ a @-@ ball 127 run stand . Strangely , Ponting 's 14th ODI century , included only two fours , despite hitting four sixes . Australia finished on 7 / 254 from their 50 overs . On return , Mortaza took two late innings wickets ; however , the rest of the bowling ( apart from Rafique and Kapali ) again lacked penetration . 
 Thanks to some tight bowling , Bangladesh slumped to 5 / 36 . Both Bashar ( 2 ) and Mohammad Ashraful ( 4 ) were dismissed charging Bichel and Harvey respectively , before Kapali compiled a determined 49 in a 66 run sixth @-@ wicket partnership with Hossain . These shots were possibly caused by tight bowling from Jason Gillespie , who took 1 / 16 in 10 overs . Bangladesh were bowled out for 142 in the 48th over , with Ian Harvey taking four for 16 . Ponting received the man of the match and series awards , as Australia won by 112 runs . According to cricket historian Gideon Haigh , " Almost a quarter of the combined populations of Cairns and Darwin attended the cricket " during the Test and ODI series . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Australia 's next assignment was a home series against Zimbabwe in October 2003 . Australian opener Matthew Hayden scored the then highest Test score of 380 in the First Test at the Western Australia Cricket Association Ground ( WACA ) . Australia swept the series 2 – 0 , after comfortably winning the Second Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground ( SCG ) in Sydney . They then drew a four @-@ Test series at home against India in December and January . The Fourth Test was captain Steve Waugh 's last , and it was played at his home ground the SCG . Australia won the following VB one @-@ day series that included India and Zimbabwe . 
 = = One Day International squads = = 
 = North Carolina Highway 98 = 
 North Carolina Highway 98 ( NC 98 ) is a 44 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 71 km ) state highway and a semi @-@ urban traffic artery connecting Durham , Wake Forest , and Bunn as well as many small to medium @-@ sized towns in the north portion of The Triangle region of North Carolina . Running from downtown Durham , the route leaves the city to the east , running into a rural area near Falls Lake . As the road approaches Wake Forest , it widens to a four @-@ lane divided highway and runs along the southern side of the city . Once leaving Wake Forest NC 98 becomes a two lane road again , running through rural areas east of Bunn . After a short concurrency with NC 39 , NC 98 continues southeast to reach its eastern terminus at U.S. Route 64 Alternate ( US 64 Alt . ) and NC 231 west of Spring Hope . 
 NC 98 first appeared in 1930 as a state route connecting NC 91 and NC 102 in the coastal region of North Carolina . That routing was abolished in 1931 in favor of an extended NC 58 . The current routing of NC 98 was established in 1934 with the road 's western terminus at NC 91 ( present @-@ day Jones Dairy Road ) to US 64 west of Spring Hope . In 1941 , NC 98 was moved to a new section of road running from Zebulon Road to US 1 in Youngsville , which would later become part of NC 96 . In 1952 , NC 98 was again relocated along NC 264 through Wake Forest to Durham , and NC 96 took over its abandoned section . In 2003 , a bypass was completed around Wake Forest leading to the rerouting of mainline NC 98 to the bypass and the establishment of a business route through the town center . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NC 98 begins at US 15 Bus . / US 501 Bus. in downtown Durham . The eastbound lanes of the road begin at Roxboro Street , however the westbound lanes continue to Magnum Street along a one @-@ way road . From its terminus , the road heads east along Holloway Street , following a concurrency with US 70 Bus . Holloway Street continues to the US 70 interchange , where the US 70 Bus. concurrency ends . NC 98 continues running along Holloway Street , until intersecting Clayton Road , where it then become Wake Forest Highway . Wake Forest Highway continues to be the name for NC 98 throughout Durham County . The highway passes by Oak Grove Elementary School and Neal Middle School on the outskirts of Durham . Before leaving Durham County , the road passes over an extension of Falls Lake . 
 As the highway enters Wake County , the name changes to Durham Road , which stays the name of the road until Wake Forest . After an intersection with Old <unk> Road , NC 98 and NC 50 have a cloverleaf interchange . Continuing to the east , the road intersects Six Forks and New Light Roads , before once again crossing over Falls Lake . After passing by several neighborhoods and crossing over Falls Lake two more times , the road intersects Thompson Mill Road , where it widens from a two lane road to a four lane divided highway . After about one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) , the road intersects both Falls of the Neuse Road and NC 98 Bus . The name Durham Road changes to follow NC 98 Business and NC 98 continues to become the Dr. Calvin Jones Highway . After passing by the Wakefield neighborhood , the road has an single point urban interchange with US 1 ( Capital Boulevard ) . Continuing straight it goes on to intersects Galaxy Drive , US 1A ( South Main Street ) , Franklin Street , and Heritage Lake Road , before meeting back up with NC 98 Bus. at the Wait Avenue / Jones Dairy Road intersection . After the intersection , NC 98 changes back into a two lane road , carrying the Wait Avenue name . The highway passes through a very rural area east of Wake Forest , with a few neighborhoods present . Wait Avenue intersects <unk> Road at a stoplight , and then continues on to intersect NC 96 just north of <unk> . 
 Continuing with the same Wait Avenue name into Franklin County , the highway intersects US 401 at an intersection with slip ramps . From there the road continues to go through a rural area east of Bunn with very few neighborhoods nearby . As the road enters into the downtown areas of Bunn , its name changes to Jewett Avenue . The road travels through a mainly residential area of the town before intersects NC 39 in the center of town . NC 98 turns right onto South Main Street to begin a concurrency with NC 39 , which it follows for a little over one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . South Main Street runs through the main commercial center of the town , and passes by Bunn High School before NC 39 turns off to the south . NC 98 continues southeast along its own highway , toward Spring Hope running through very rural areas of Nash County . As the highway reaches its terminus , a few houses appear along the southern side of the road . NC 98 has its eastern terminus at an intersection with US 64 Alt . , which continues east to Spring Hope and south to the US 64 freeway . This spot also marks the northern terminus of NC 231 . 
 = = History = = 
 NC 98 was established in 1934 as a renumbering of a section of NC 581 ; from NC 91 ( Jones Dairy Road ) in Wake Forest to US 64 west of Spring Hope . In 1940 , it was truncated to a relocated NC 91 ( Zebulon Road ) , with its routing west into Wake Forest becoming part of NC 91 . In 1941 , NC 98 was extended north as a new primary routing to US 1 in Youngsville . In 1952 , NC 98 was rerouted west through Wake Forest ending in Durham , replacing NC 264 ; its former alignment became part of NC 96 . 
 In 1975 , NC 98 was rerouted in Durham : replacing the old alignment to US 15 Bus . / US 501 Bus. via Miami Boulevard and Greer Street , to Holloway Street ( westbound ) / Chapel Hill Street @-@ Liberty Street ( eastbound ) and its current western terminus . In 1978 , NC 98 replaced part of US 64 's routing to its current eastern terminus . In 1981 , part of NC 98 was abandoned and placed on new construction as a result of the creation of Falls Lake ; remnants of the old alignment that were not submerged became secondary roads . In 2006 , NC 98 was rerouted south along US 1 and onto a new four @-@ lane bypass south of Wake Forest to Jones Dairy Road ; its old alignment becoming NC 98 Business . In 2011 , NC 98 was removed from US 1 and placed onto new construction east of Falls of Neuse Road ; NC 98 Business was also realigned , starting further east along a new alignment of Durham Road . 
 The first NC 98 was established in 1930 as a new primary routing from NC 91 near Wilson , to NC 102 near Snow Hill . In 1931 , it was decommissioned in favor of becoming part of NC 58 . 
 = = = North Carolina Highway 264 = = = 
 North Carolina Highway 264 ( NC 264 ) was formed in 1941 as a renumbering of NC 91 . It went from the intersection at Roxboro and Greer streets in Durham to US 64 / US 264 in Zebulon . It was renumbered in 1952 . The route from current NC 98 to Zebulon was renumbered as NC 96 . The rest of the route was renumbered as NC 98 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Bannered routes = = 
 = = = Wake Forest business loop = = = 
 North Carolina Highway 98 Business ( NC 98 Bus . ) begins at the NC 98 / Falls of the Neuse Road intersection just north of Wakefield . The road runs northeast along the western edge of the Crenshaw Hall Plantation neighborhood . After about one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) the road turns a more eastern direction following the old routing of NC 98 ( Durham Road ) . The road has an interchange with US 1 ( Capital Boulevard ) in the western sections of Wake Forest . NC 98 Bus. continues to the east toward downtown Wake Forest . Once reaching downtown the road runs along the southern side of the Southeastern Baptist Seminary before having a roundabout intersection with US 1A . US 1A joins NC 98 Business and continues along the eastern side of the seminary . NC 98 Bus. turns right onto Roosevelt Avenue and enters downtown Wake Forest . The road merges into Wait Avenue and continues east out of downtown Wake Forest . Just before the road ends at NC 98 the road makes a 90 degree right turn before ending at the NC 98 / Jones Dairy Road / NC 98 Bus. intersections . The road name Wait Avenue continues along NC 98 east . 
 NC 98 Bus. was first created running along Wait Avenue through Downtown and met NC 98 at the US 1A roundabout . This was a renumbering of NC 98 as the first sections of the Wake Forest bypass were put into place . As NC 98 was expanded to US 1 , NC 98 Bus. expanded to cover all of the previous NC 98 routing east of US 1 and west of Jones Dairy Road . In September 2010 the third segment of NC 98 was opened from US 1 to Thompson Mill Road with the old routing between Thompson Mill Road and Fawn Drive being torn up and replaced with new routing which became NC 98 Business . 
 Junction list 
 The entire route is in Wake Forest , Wake County . 
 = Banker horse = 
 The Banker horse is a breed of feral horse ( Equus ferus caballus ) living on barrier islands in North Carolina 's Outer Banks . It is small , hardy , and has a docile temperament . Descended from domesticated Spanish horses and possibly brought to the Americas in the 16th century , the ancestral foundation bloodstock may have become feral after surviving shipwrecks or being abandoned on the islands by one of the exploratory expeditions led by Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón or Sir Richard Grenville . Populations are found on Ocracoke Island , Shackleford Banks , Currituck Banks , and in the Rachel Carson Estuarine Sanctuary . 
 Although they can trample plants and ground @-@ nesting animals and are not considered to be indigenous to the islands , Bankers are allowed to remain due to their historical significance . They survive by grazing on marsh grasses , which supply them with water as well as food , supplemented by temporary freshwater pools . 
 To prevent overpopulation and inbreeding , and to protect their habitat from being overgrazed , the horses are managed by the National Park Service , the state of North Carolina , and several private organizations . The horses are monitored for diseases , such as equine infectious anemia , an outbreak of which was discovered and subsequently eliminated on Shackleford in 1996 . They are safeguarded from traffic on North Carolina Highway 12 . Island populations are limited by adoptions and by birth control . Bankers taken from the wild and trained have been used for trail riding , driving , and occasionally for mounted patrols . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The typical Banker is relatively small , standing between 13 @.@ 0 and 14 @.@ 3 hands ( 52 and 59 inches , 132 and 150 cm ) high at the withers and weighing 800 to 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 360 to 450 kg ) . The forehead is broad and the facial profile tends to be straight or slightly convex . The chest is deep and narrow and the back is short with a sloped croup and low @-@ set tail . Legs have an oval @-@ shaped cannon bone , a trait considered indicative of " strong bone " or soundness . The <unk> known as chestnuts are small , on some so tiny that they are barely detectable . Most Bankers have no chestnuts on the hind legs . The coat can be any color but is most often brown , bay , dun , or chestnut . Bankers have long @-@ <unk> gaits and many are able to pace and amble . They are easy keepers and are hardy , friendly , and docile . 
 Several of the Bankers ' characteristics indicate that they share ancestry with other Colonial Spanish horse breeds . The presence of the genetic marker " Q @-@ ac " suggests that the horses share common ancestry with two other breeds of Spanish descent , the Pryor Mountain Mustang and Paso Fino . These breeds diverged from one another 400 years ago . The breed shares skeletal traits of other Colonial Spanish horses : the wings of the atlas are lobed , rather than semicircular ; and they are short @-@ backed , with some individuals possessing five instead of six lumbar vertebrae . No changes in function result from these spinal differences . The convex facial profile common to the breed also indicates Spanish ancestry . 
 = = Breed history = = 
 Since they are free @-@ roaming , Bankers are often referred to as " wild " horses ; however , because they descend from domesticated ancestors , they are feral horses . It is thought that the Bankers arrived on the barrier islands during the 16th century . Several hypotheses have been advanced to explain the horses ' origins , but none have yet been fully verified . 
 One theory is that ancestors of the Banker swam ashore from wrecked Spanish galleons . Ships returning to Spain from the Americas often took advantage of both the Gulf Stream and continental trade winds , on a route that brought them within 20 miles ( 32 km ) of the Outer Banks . Hidden shoals claimed many victims , and earned this region the name of " Graveyard of the Atlantic " . At least eight shipwrecks discovered in the area are of Spanish origin , dating between 1528 and 1564 . These ships sank close enough to land for the horses to have made the shores . Alternatively , during hazardous weather , ships may have taken refuge close to shore , where the horses may have been turned loose . However , the presence of horses on Spanish treasure ships has not been confirmed — cargo space was primarily intended for transporting riches such as gold and silver . 
 Another conjecture is that the breed is descended from the 89 horses brought to the islands in 1526 by Spanish explorer Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón . His attempted colonization of San Miguel de <unk> ( near the Santee River in South Carolina ) failed , forcing the colonists to move , possibly to North Carolina . Vázquez de Ayllón , and about 450 of the original 600 colonists subsequently died as a result of desertion , disease , and an early frost . Lacking effective leadership , the new settlement lasted for only two months ; the survivors abandoned the colony and fled to Hispaniola , leaving their horses behind . 
 A similar theory is that Sir Richard Grenville brought horses to the islands in 1585 , during an attempt to establish an English naval base . All five of the expedition 's vessels ran aground at <unk> ( present @-@ day Ocracoke ) . Documents indicate that the ships carried various types of livestock obtained through trade in Hispaniola , including " mares , <unk> [ cattle ] , <unk> , <unk> , swine [ and ] sheep . " While the smaller vessels were easily refloated , one of Grenville 's larger ships , the Tiger , was nearly destroyed . Scholars believe that as the crew attempted to lighten the ship , they either unloaded the horses or forced them overboard , letting them swim to shore . In a letter to Sir Francis Walsingham that same year , Grenville suggested that livestock survived on the island after the grounding of his ships . 
 = = Life on the barrier islands = = 
 About 400 Bankers inhabit the long , narrow barrier islands of North Carolina 's Outer Banks . These islands are offshore sediment deposits separated from the mainland by a body of water such as an estuary or sound . The islands can be up to 30 miles ( 48 km ) from the shore ; most are less than one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) wide . Vegetation is sparse and consists mainly of coarse grasses and a few stunted trees . Each island in the chain is separated from the next by a tidal inlet . 
 The Bankers ' small stature can be attributed , in part , to limited nutrients in their diet . They graze mostly on Spartina grasses but will feed on other plants such as bulrush ( Typha latifolia ) , sea oats , and even poison ivy . Horses living closer to human habitation , such as those on Currituck Banks , have sometimes grazed on residential lawns and landscaping . Domesticated Bankers raised on manufactured horse feed from an early age tend to exhibit slightly larger frames . 
 Water is a limiting resource for Bankers , as the islands are surrounded by salt water and have no freshwater springs or permanent ponds . The horses are dependent on ephemeral pools of rainwater and moisture in the vegetation they consume . Bankers will dig shallow holes , ranging from 2 @.@ 5 to 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 to 1 @.@ 22 m ) in depth , to reach fresh groundwater . Occasionally , they may resort to drinking seawater . This gives them a bloated appearance , a consequence of water retention caused by the body 's effort to maintain osmotic balance . 
 = = Land use controversies = = 
 The National Park Service ( NPS ) is concerned about the impact of Bankers on the environmental health of North Carolina 's barrier islands . Initially , the NPS believed that the non @-@ native Bankers would completely consume the Spartina alterniflora grasses and the maritime forests , as both were thought to be essential to their survival . Research in 1987 provided information on the horses ' diet that suggested otherwise . Half of their diet consisted of Spartina , while only 4 % of their nutrients came from the maritime forest . The study concluded that sufficient nutrients were replenished with each ocean tide to prevent a decline in vegetative growth from overgrazing . A 2004 study declared that the greatest impact on plant life was not from grazing but from the damage plants sustained when trampled by the horses ' hooves . Bankers pose a threat to ground @-@ nesting animals such as sea turtles and shorebirds . Feral horses interrupt nesting activities and can crush the young . 
 = = Management and adoption = = 
 As the Bankers are seen as a part of North Carolina 's coastal heritage , they have been allowed to remain on the barrier islands . To cope with the expanding population , prevent inbreeding and attempt to minimize environmental damage , several organizations partner in managing the herds . 
 = = = Ocracoke = = = 
 Since 1959 , Bankers on Ocracoke Island have been confined to fenced areas of approximately 180 acres ( 0 @.@ 73 km2 ; 0 @.@ 28 sq mi ) . The areas protect the horses from the traffic of North Carolina Highway 12 , as well as safeguarding the island from overgrazing . The NPS , the authority managing the Ocracoke herd , supplements the horses ' diet with additional hay and grain . In 2006 , as a precaution against inbreeding , two colts from the Shackleford herd were transported to Ocracoke . 
 = = = Shackleford = = = 
 Public Law 105 @-@ 229 , commonly referred to as the Shackleford Banks Wild Horses Protection Act , states that the Bankers on Shackleford Island are to be jointly managed by the National Park Service and another qualified nonprofit entity ( currently the Foundation for Shackleford Horses ) . The herd is limited to 120 – 130 horses . Population management is achieved through adoption and by administering the contraceptive vaccine <unk> zona pellucida ( PZP ) to individual mares via dart . The island 's horse population is monitored by freeze branding numbers onto each animal 's left hindquarter . The identification of individuals allows the National Park Service to ensure correct gender ratios and to select which mares to inject with PZP . 
 Since 2000 , adoptions of Bankers from Shackleford have been managed by the Foundation for Shackleford Horses . As of 2007 , 56 horses had found new homes , 10 resided with another herd on Cedar Island , and two had been moved to the Ocracoke herd . 
 On November 12 , 1996 , the Shackleford horses were rounded up by the North Carolina Department of Agriculture 's Veterinary Division and tested for equine infectious anemia ( EIA ) . EIA is a potentially lethal disease , a <unk> transmitted by bodily fluids and insects . Seventy @-@ six of the 184 captured horses tested positive . Those that tested negative were allowed to remain on the island and those with the disease were transported to a temporary quarantine facility . Finding a permanent , isolated area for such a large number of Bankers was a challenging task for the Foundation ; eight days later the state declared all proposed locations for the herd unsuitable . It ordered the <unk> of the 76 infected horses . Two more horses died in the process — one that was fatally injured during the roundup , and an uninfected foal that slipped into the quarantined herd to be with its mother . 
 = = = Currituck Banks = = = 
 As a consequence of Corolla 's development in the 1980s , horses on Currituck Banks came into contact with humans more frequently . By 1989 , eleven Bankers had been killed by cars on the newly constructed Highway 12 . That same year , the Corolla Wild Horse Fund , a nonprofit organization , was created to protect the horses from human interference . As a result of its efforts , the remainder of the herd was moved to a more remote part of Currituck Banks , where they were fenced into 1 @,@ 800 acres ( 7 @.@ 28 km2 ; 2 @.@ 81 sq mi ) of combined federal and privately donated land . Corolla commissioners declared the site a horse sanctuary . The population is now managed by adopting out yearlings , both fillies and gelded colts . Conflicts over the preservation of the horses continued into 2012 . In 2013 , legislation was introduced to help preserve the herd on Currituck . 
 = = = Rachel Carson Site , North Carolina National Estuarine Research Reserve = = = 
 A herd lives on the Rachel Carson component of the North Carolina National Estuarine Research Reserve , a series of five small islands and several salt marshes . There were no horses at the Sanctuary until the 1940s . It is unclear whether the Bankers swam over from nearby Shackleford or were left by residents who had used the islands to graze livestock . They are owned and managed by the state of North Carolina and regarded as a cultural resource . 
 No management action was taken until the late 1980s and early 1990s , when after years of flourishing population , the island 's carrying capacity was exceeded . <unk> caused by overcrowding resulted in the deaths of several horses ; the reserve 's staff instituted a birth control program to restrict the herd to about 40 animals . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Adopted Bankers are often used for pleasure riding and driving . As they have a calm disposition , they are used as children 's mounts . The breed has also been used in several mounted patrols . 
 Before 1915 , the United States Lifesaving Service used horses for beach watches and rescues . In addition to carrying park rangers on patrols , the horses hauled equipment to and from shipwreck sites . During World War II , the Coast Guard used them for patrols . In the 1980s Bankers were used for beach duty at Cape Hatteras National Seashore . 
 In 1955 , ten horses were taken from the Ocracoke herd as a project for Mounted Boy Scout Troop 290 . After taming and branding the horses , the scouts trained them for public service activities . The Bankers were ridden in parades and used as mounts during programs to spray mosquito @-@ ridden salt marshes . 
 = Brevet Lt. General Winfield Scott = 
 Brevet Lt. General Winfield Scott is an equestrian statue in Washington , D.C. , that honors career military officer Winfield Scott . The monument stands in the center of Scott Circle , a traffic circle and small park at the convergence of 16th Street , Massachusetts Avenue and Rhode Island Avenue NW . The statue was sculpted by Henry Kirke Brown , whose best @-@ known works include statues of George Washington in New York and Nathanael Greene in Washington , D.C. It was the first of many sculptures honoring Civil War generals that were installed in Washington , D.C. ' s traffic circles and squares and was the second statue in the city to honor Scott . 
 The sculpture is one of the city 's 18 Civil War monuments that were collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 . The monument and park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . The bronze statue rests on a granite base that at the time was the largest stone ever quarried in the United States . Much criticized for its depiction of Scott and the proportions of the horse , it is considered one of the worst equestrian sculptures in the city by authors and historians . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Winfield Scott ( 1786 – 1866 ) , nicknamed " Old Fuss and Feathers " and the " Grand Old Man of the Army " , served on active duty as general longer than any other American officer . During his 53 @-@ year career , he led forces during several wars , including the War of 1812 , Black Hawk War , Mexican – American War , Seminole Wars , and Civil War . He served under every president from Thomas Jefferson to Abraham Lincoln . His twenty @-@ year service as Commanding General of the United States Army was the longest in that post 's history . His popularity following the Mexican – American War resulted in Scott being nominated the Whig Party candidate in the 1852 presidential election . 
 Following Scott 's death in 1866 , veterans and other citizens began lobbying for a monument to honor the general . On March 3 , 1867 , Congress authorized $ 35 @,@ 000 for the erection of an equestrian statue . The monument was reauthorized by Congress on July 15 , 1870 , and on June 10 , 1872 . The artist selected was Henry Kirke Brown ( 1814 – 1886 ) , a sculptor from New York whose 1856 equestrian statue of George Washington in Union Square , Manhattan , had been well received by critics . His other works in Washington , D.C. include Major General Nathanael Greene in Stanton Park and busts of Vice Presidents George Clinton and John C. Breckinridge , poet William Cullen Bryant , Major General Philip Kearny , and Senators Henry Clay and Richard Stockton . 
 The model of the statue was completed around 1872 . The federal government contributed bronze cannons captured by Scott during the Mexican – American War to use for casting the statue . Before the casting began , descendants of Scott saw the model and protested the design . Brown had designed the horse to be a small mare , which Scott preferred to ride , instead of a stallion . The descendants argued that no other general had been portrayed riding a mare and that a horse with flared nostrils and arched neck would be more suitable . Brown was annoyed by the requests and only made minimal modifications to the design , resulting in Scott , a tall and heavy man measuring 6 @.@ 5 ft ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) and weighing 300 lb ( 140 kg ) , riding a small mare with the external genitalia of a stallion . The statue was founded by Robert Wood & Company , whose other works in Washington , D.C. include Major General Nathanael Greene , Major General James B. McPherson and General John A. Rawlins . 
 The architect selected to design the base is disputed . Historian James M. Goode , author of Outdoor Sculpture of Washington , D.C. , cites General Orville E. Babcock of the Corps of Engineers as the architect , while a 1985 report by the National Park Service credits George Edward Harney . The stonework was completed by Jonas French of the Cape Ann Granite Company . The base was carved from a single block of granite weighing more than 150 tons . It was the largest single stone ever quarried in the United States at the time . 
 The original planned site for the statue was present @-@ day McPherson Square . Scott Circle , a tract of land previously known as Jamaica , was renamed in honor of Scott when the monument was installed in 1874 at a total cost of $ 77 @,@ 000 . Although there was no formal dedication , the park surrounding the site was landscaped with trees and ornamental flowers before the monument was installed . The monument was the first of many memorials to Civil War generals in Washington , D.C. ' s traffic circles and squares , although Scott is the only Civil War official to be represented by two statues in the nation 's capital . The second statue , by sculptor Launt Thompson , was erected on the grounds of the United States Soldiers ' Home in 1873 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The statue received much criticism after it was installed . Critics said Scott was being portrayed as " too old , too fat , too stiff , too short @-@ legged . " He was described as looking like " an old sack of flour " and irritated because his hand was resting on his hip . The horse was ridiculed even more . One reporter said the horse looked like it was " suffering slightly from <unk> lameness and not daring to travel faster than a walk . " The proportions of the horse received the greatest amount of criticism , with observers calling it " too light , too delicate , too thin , too timid , and dreadfully proportioned . " Upon seeing the monument , General Philip Sheridan reportedly told his wife to never let him be immortalized in such a manner . Kathryn <unk> Jacob , author of Testament to Union : Civil War Monuments in Washington , D.C. , considers it one of the worst equestrian monuments in the city , especially when compared to the nearby Major General George Henry Thomas statue , considered one of the city 's best . A 2000 article in The Washington Post described it as the city 's oddest equestrian statue . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 The introduction of the monument spurred development around Scott Circle and the immediate area . Soon after the monument was installed , notable individuals including Secretary of the Treasury William Windom and The Washington Post founder Stilson Hutchins built mansions around the circle . The area continued to be a desirable location for wealthy Washingtonians until most of the mansions were demolished in the 1940s . In 1941 , the monument was temporarily removed when a four @-@ lane tunnel was built beneath the circle . 
 The statue is one of eighteen Civil War monuments in Washington , D.C. that were collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) on September 20 , 1978 , and the District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites on March 3 , 1979 . The monument and surrounding park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . 
 = = Design and location = = 
 The Scott monument is located in the center of Scott Circle , a traffic circle and park at the convergence of 16th Street , Massachusetts Avenue and Rhode Island Avenue NW , on the border of the Dupont Circle and Logan Circle neighborhoods . Scott Circle is considered the southeastern terminus of Embassy Row with the Embassy of Australia overlooking the circle and statue . The statue faces south down 16th Street towards the White House . The park is flanked by two small , triangular reservations . The Daniel Webster Memorial , listed on the NRHP , is on the west reservation and the Samuel Hahnemann Monument , also listed on the NRHP , is on the east reservation . The statue and park are not intended for pedestrian use as there are no sidewalks on or around the circle . Pedestrians use the side reservations to maneuver around the circle . 
 The bronze statue is 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) tall and 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) long while the granite base it rests on is 24 ft ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) wide and 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) long . The inscription " <unk> " is on the south side of the base . The statue depicts Scott wearing a field uniform of a lieutenant general , including a hat and long jacket with fringed epaulets and decorative sash . He is riding his horse while holding the reins in his left hand . Scott 's right hand is holding a pair of field glasses and resting on his hip . His sword is on his left side . The tiered base is adorned with architectural decoration . 
 = Japanese battleship Fuji = 
 Fuji ( <unk> ) was the lead ship of the Fuji class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Japanese Navy by the British firm of Thames Iron Works in the late 1890s . The ship participated in the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 1905 , including the Battle of Port Arthur on the second day of the war with her sister Yashima . Fuji fought in the Battles of the Yellow Sea and Tsushima and was lightly damaged in the latter action . The ship was reclassified as a coastal defence ship in 1910 and served as a training ship for the rest of her career . She was hulked in 1922 and finally broken up for scrap in 1948 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Fuji was 412 feet ( 125 @.@ 6 m ) long overall and had a beam of 73 feet 6 inches ( 22 @.@ 4 m ) and a full @-@ load draught of 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 925 m ) . She normally displaced 12 @,@ 533 long tons ( 12 @,@ 734 t ) and had a crew of 637 officers and enlisted men . The ship was powered by two Humphrys Tennant vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines using steam generated by ten cylindrical boilers . The engines were rated at 13 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 100 kW ) , using forced draught , and designed to reach a top speed of around 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Fuji , however , reached a top speed of 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ; 21 @.@ 3 mph ) on her sea trials . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 200 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 200 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 4 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 400 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship 's main battery consisted of four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns mounted in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The secondary battery consisted of ten 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) quick @-@ firing guns , four mounted in casemates on the sides of the hull and six mounted on the upper deck , protected by gun shields . A number of smaller guns were carried for defence against torpedo boats . These included fourteen 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) 3 @-@ pounder guns and ten 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns of the same calibre . She was also armed with five 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes . Fuji 's waterline armour belt consisted of Harvey armour and was 14 – 18 inches ( 356 – 457 mm ) thick . The armour of her gun turrets was six inches thick and her deck was 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Fuji , named after Mount Fuji , was ordered as part of the 1894 Naval Programme and the ship was laid down by Thames Iron Works at their Blackwall , London shipyard on 1 August 1894 . The ship was launched on 31 March 1896 and completed on 17 August 1897 . The work was supervised by a team of over 240 engineers and naval officers from Japan , including future Prime Ministers Saitō Makoto and Katō <unk> . While fitting out at Portland , she participated in the fleet review marking Queen Victoria 's Diamond Jubilee on 26 June 1897 at Spithead before departing for Japan via the Suez Canal . 
 In 1901 , the ship exchanged 16 of her 47 mm guns for an equal number of QF 12 pounder 12 cwt guns . This raised the number of crewmen to 652 and later to 741 . 
 At the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War , Fuji , commanded by Captain Matsumoto Kazu , was assigned to the 1st Division of the 1st Fleet . She participated in the Battle of Port Arthur on 9 February 1904 when Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō led the 1st Fleet in an attack on the Russian ships of the Pacific Squadron anchored just outside Port Arthur . Tōgō had expected his surprise night attack on the Russians by his destroyers to be much more successful than it actually was and expected to find them badly disorganized and weakened , but the Russians had recovered from their surprise and were ready for his attack . The Japanese ships were spotted by the Boyarin which was patrolling offshore and alerted the Russian defences . Tōgō chose to attack the Russian coastal defences with his main armament and engage the Russian ships with his secondary guns . Splitting his fire proved to be a bad idea as the Japanese 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) and six @-@ inch guns inflicted very little significant damage on the Russian ships who concentrated all their fire on the Japanese ships with some effect . Although a large number of ships on both sides were hit , Russian casualties numbered only 17 while the Japanese suffered 60 killed and wounded before Tōgō disengaged . Fuji was hit by two shells during the battle that killed two and wounded 10 crewmen . 
 On 10 March , Fuji and her sister Yashima , under the command of Rear Admiral Nashiba Tokioki , blindly bombarded the harbour of Port Arthur from Pigeon Bay , on the southwest side of the Liaodong Peninsula , at a range of 9 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 9 mi ) . They fired 154 twelve @-@ inch shells , but did little damage . When they tried again on 22 March , they were attacked by Russian coast defence guns that had been transferred there by the new Russian commander , Vice Admiral Stepan Makarov , and also from several Russian ships in Port Arthur using observers overlooking Pigeon Bay . The Japanese ships disengaged after Fuji was hit by a 12 @-@ inch shell . 
 Fuji participated in the action of 13 April when Tōgō successfully lured out a portion of the Pacific Squadron , including Makarov 's flagship , the battleship Petropavlovsk . When Makarov spotted the six battleships of the 1st Division , he turned back for Port Arthur and Petropavlovsk struck a minefield laid by the Japanese the previous night . The Russian battleship sank in less than two minutes after one of her magazines exploded , Makarov one of the 677 killed . Emboldened by his success , Tōgō resumed long @-@ range bombardment missions , which prompted the Russians to lay more minefields . 
 During the Battle of the Yellow Sea in August 1904 , Fuji was not hit because the Russian ships concentrated their fire on the leading ship of the column , Tōgō 's flagship , the battleship Mikasa . During the Battle of Tsushima in May 1905 , she was hit a dozen times ; the most serious of which penetrated the hood of the rear barbette , ignited some exposed propellant charges and killed eight men and wounded nine . After the ammunition fire was put out , the left gun in the barbette resumed firing and apparently fired the coup de grâce that sank the battleship Borodino . 
 On 23 October 1908 , Fuji hosted a dinner for the American Ambassador and the <unk> officers of the Great White Fleet during their circumnavigation of the world . In 1910 , her cylindrical boilers were replaced by Miyabara water @-@ tube boilers and her main armament was replaced by Japanese @-@ built guns . Fuji was reclassified as a first @-@ class coast defence ship that same year , and was used for training duties in various capacities until disarmed in 1922 . She spent all of World War I based at Kure . Her hulk continued to be used as a floating barracks and training center at Yokosuka until 1945 . Fuji was damaged by American carrier aircraft during their 18 July 1945 attack on Yokosuka and capsized after the end of the war . The ship was scrapped in 1948 . 
 = Star Trek : Voyager ( season 4 ) = 
 The fourth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Voyager commenced airing on UPN in the United States on September 3 , 1997 , and concluded on May 20 , 1998 , after airing 26 episodes . Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the Starfleet and Maquis crew of the starship USS Voyager after they were stranded in the Delta Quadrant , far from the rest of the Federation . Series four featured the debut of new main cast member Jeri Ryan as Seven of Nine ( Seven ) , and the departure after two episodes of Jennifer Lien , who portrayed Kes during the first three seasons of the show . 
 Following the end of the third season , executive producer Michael Piller left the staff . Brannon Braga was brought on as co @-@ executive producer because Jeri Taylor was intending to leave the show and wanted a hand @-@ over period . When she left at the end of the season , Braga became executive producer in her place . With the addition of Seven , a series of episodes focused on her backstory and relationship with other characters . The season opened with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 % for " Scorpion " , which was higher than any episode since the pilot . " Unforgettable " received the lowest rating with 3 @.@ 4 % . 
 The fanbase initially responded negatively to Ryan 's addition to the cast , raising concerns over Seven 's sexual attractiveness , which had the potential to overshadow the story . But following the airing of the episodes , critics applauded Ryan 's acting skills and her role as Seven , noting that it would improve the quality of the stories and the series itself . Acclaimed episodes like " Scorpion " , " Year of Hell " , and " Hope and Fear " , led critics to describe the fourth season as one of the best . The episode " Living Witness " , directed by Tim Russ , received special critical accommodation as one of the best episodes of the entire series . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 The fourth season of Voyager introduces Seven of Nine ( Seven ) as a new crew member as she becomes separated from the Borg collective after the crew help the Borg to defeat Species 8472 . Captain Kathryn Janeway mentors Seven and helps her to rediscover her individuality and her humanity . Kes leaves the vessel after her powers increase , but pushes Voyager ten years closer to home as she departs . B 'Elanna Torres faces her Klingon heritage , while the Doctor confronts the rights of sentient holograms for the first time . 
 After the construction of a new <unk> lab , the crew enter Krenim space and go through the " Year of Hell " foretold in the season three episode " Before and After " . But the events of this year are undone with the destruction of the Krenim <unk> . Voyager continues to encounter the Borg and enters Hirogen space , establishing contact with Starfleet for the first time since being stranded in the Delta Quadrant . The crew are cloned by an intelligent silver liquid on a demon class planet and the season ends with an alien seeking revenge who tries to trick the crew with a fake Starfleet vessel that can take them home to Earth . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 An audition process was held for Seven of Nine ( Seven ) , a new character in the fourth season . Jeri Ryan attended for readings , and was cast in the role . She previously appeared in the science fiction television series Dark Skies on NBC , and found the change of characters amusing . " I was fighting the collective , the Hive on ' Dark Skies ' . Now I 'm part of the collective , the Borg " , she remarked . Ryan described Seven as " a dark character , stronger and more forceful than many female characters have been on Star Trek so far . " The initial fan reaction to Seven was mixed . Some fans accused the show of adding her to attract more 18 – 35 male audience members , which co @-@ executive producer Brannon Braga denied . 
 The original Borg costume Ryan wore during the second part of " Scorpion " took approximately two and a half hours to apply . When Ryan was first measured for the outfit , the costume designers failed to take into account the full head prosthetic required for the first and second episodes of the season . Because of this error in measurement , the costume cut off Ryan 's carotid artery , causing her to pass out . After a nurse was called twice to supply oxygen , the costume was modified to prevent it from happening again . 
