 A new costume was required for Ryan once Seven had the majority of her Borg implants removed . She wore a new silver jumpsuit for the following several episodes . During the filming of the episode " Day of Honor " , director Jesús Salvador Treviño criticized the outfit , saying that " almost any camera angle inevitably winds up emphasizing her sexuality . " Ryan described the new costume as " a little snug " ; she wore a corset @-@ like device which gave her the appearance of mechanical ribs . Treviño praised Ryan 's third costume , which replaced the silver jumpsuit , noting how it reduced her sexual characteristics : " It is much more sensible , because she 's still an attractive person but then you get away from that titillation stuff which I think is so demeaning not only to the audience , but it 's kinda of demeaning to what Star Trek is about " . 
 Season four also saw the departure of Jennifer Lien as Kes after her contract was not renewed . Lien appeared in the first two episodes of the season before being written out . Braga said that the character was not working on the show and that they needed to make room for Ryan in the cast . Lien later reprised her role as Kes in the season six episode " Fury " . Robert Picardo thought that the writers were partly responsible for the problems with Lien 's character due to the limitations they placed on Kes in the original concept for Voyager . As a member of the Ocampa species , for example , Kes was only allowed a short , seven @-@ year lifespan . Tim Russ , who portrays Tuvok , described the departure of <unk> from the series as " gracious " and " poignant " . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Michael Piller left the staff of Voyager after the third season to work with Rick Berman on the script for the film Star Trek : Insurrection ( 1998 ) . Previously , he had worked as a consultant script editor for the series . Brannon Braga came in as a co @-@ executive producer after Jeri Taylor sought to reduce her involvement on the show . Braga originally joined the franchise when he was an intern on Star Trek : The Next Generation ; he went on to write more than 40 episodes as well as Star Trek Generations ( 1994 ) and Star Trek : First Contact ( 1996 ) . Taylor was initially daunted by the departure of Piller , but found that it opened up the ability to explore other types of stories . For example , the episode " Distant Origin " would not have been made with Piller on the staff because of its unusual plot structure ; the story focuses first on an alien race , not just the crew of Voyager . After watching the episode , Piller believed it was the best installment of Voyager at that time . After Taylor left the show at the end of the season , Braga became the executive producer . 
 With the addition of Seven to the crew , the writers incorporated the character 's backstory into the show . " The Raven " explores how Seven arrived in the Delta quadrant , while a variety of episodes show Seven rediscovering her humanity . Seven also brought a third @-@ party view of humanity that had previously been missing from Voyager . This outsider perspective was used earlier in the franchise , with the roles of Spock in Star Trek : The Original Series and Data in Star Trek : The Next Generation . Russ felt that the majority of the episodes during the fourth season concentrated on the new character of Seven . 
 The writers also introduced relationships between Voyager 's crew , focusing on developing the connection between Tom Paris and B 'Elanna Torres , Tuvok and Neelix , and Kathryn Janeway and Chakotay . Both Russ and Kate Mulgrew believed that the writing improved during the fourth season . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The season opened to a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 percent for the second part of " Scorpion " when it aired on September 3 , 1997 . A Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 percent means the episode was watched by 8 @.@ 8 percent of those watching television at the time of broadcast . This was the highest rating for the series since " Caretaker " , the original pilot episode . Ratings for " The Gift " , the second episode of the fourth season , dropped to 5 @.@ 6 percent . However , only two other episodes during season four had ratings of 5 percent or higher , with " <unk> " and the second part of " Year of Hell " gaining ratings of 5 percent and 5 @.@ 2 percent respectively . " Unforgettable " received the lowest rating of the season with 3 @.@ 4 percent . The season closed with " Hope and Fear " , which received a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 1 % . 
 The series remained UPN 's highest rated show . In September 1997 , Dean Valentine , the incoming chief of the network , promised to increase promotion of the show . In November 1997 , Voyager swapped timeslots with The Sentinel , moving from a 9 p.m. to 8 p.m. slot . The timeslot was changed because Voyager received higher ratings . It was hoped that the swap would have a lead @-@ in effect into The Sentinel . This timeslot change placed Voyager in direct competition against 3rd Rock from the Sun on NBC , The Drew Carey Show on ABC and Party of Five on Fox . Nevertheless , local providers started to swap from UPN to The WB in early 1998 , and ratings suffered . To combat this problem , the series was moved back to 9 p.m. from May onwards . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Some members of the online Star Trek community complained about the addition of Seven of Nine ( Seven ) to the show before the season premiere , referring to Voyager as " Melrose Space " . The nickname amused Ryan , who hoped the fans would be won over during the course of the season . Once the episodes started to air for the first time , Ryan 's character increased in popularity amongst the fan base . Two months after the start of the season , Ryan attended her first science fiction convention ; she was overwhelmed by the fan response . The critics credited Seven 's presence on Voyager as a significant improvement , with the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer concluding that Voyager had " finally ... found its groove " . Writing for Dreamwatch , Gary Russell said that Ryan 's character worked well on the season from her first appearance . However , the Boston Herald argued that the show had swapped " sci @-@ fi for sex appeal " during the fourth season , but acknowledged Ryan was a good actress . It gave the season three out of five stars at the time of the DVD release . 
 In a review of " Scorpion , Part II " , the first episode of the fourth season , Tony Norman of the Pittsburg Post @-@ Gazette noted several new elements . The episode , according to Norman , established the first ideological debate between Janeway and Chakotay since the original series pilot . Norman also noted that the new character of Seven would create a " source of tension " and " infuse the show with the edginess it desperately needs " . The addition of a Borg crew member , Norman argued , was the same type of " bold move " that occurred when Worf was added to the USS Enterprise in Star Trek : The Next Generation . 
 Writing for Den of Geek , Juliette Harrisson described the fourth season as the best of the series . She praised Seven 's introduction as an opportunity for existing characters , such as Tuvok . Harrisson highlighted several of the episodes of the season , pointing to " Living Witness " as a candidate for the best of the entire series . She criticized " Mortal Coil " and " Retrospect " for concentrating too much on the relationship between Seven and Janeway , to the detriment of other characters . 
 On the website Blastr , Lisa Granshaw included " Scorpion " , " Year of Hell " , " Living Witness " and " Hope and Fear in an unordered list of the top ten episodes of Voyager . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The series was nominated for two Emmy Awards following the fourth season : " Year of Hell " was nominated for Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series , while " The Killing Game " received a nomination for Outstanding Hairstyling for a Series . Kate Mulgrew won the Saturn Award for Best Actress on Television for her performance as Captain Janeway . The Satellite Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Series - Drama was awarded to Jeri Ryan at the 3rd Golden Satellite Awards . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 = Chuck Versus the Cliffhanger = 
 " Chuck Versus the Cliffhanger " is the fourth season finale of the American NBC action @-@ comedy television series Chuck . Aired on May 16 , 2011 , it is the season 's 24th episode , and the 78th overall episode of the series . The episode was directed by Robert Duncan McNeill and written by series co @-@ creator Chris Fedak , along with Nicholas Wootton . Despite the episode 's eponymous cliffhanger ending , supposedly leading into a fifth season , it was anticipated that Chuck would be cancelled after the fourth season for declining viewership , making " Chuck Versus the Cliffhanger " the de facto series finale . However , a fifth and final season was ordered on May 13 , 2011 . 
 Chuck revolves around the Intersect , a government database designed by Stephen J. Bartowski . In the pilot episode of the series , Stephen 's son Chuck ( Zachary Levi ) receives the database and accidentally uploads it to his brain . Chuck is then forced from his life as an employee at the big @-@ box store Buy More to the spy world . By the fourth season , Chuck is a Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) agent and is engaged to one of his handlers , Sarah Walker ( Yvonne Strahovski ) . 
 In the season , Chuck and his team fulfill Stephen Bartowski 's last wish to destroy Volkoff Industries , led by international arms dealer Alexei Volkoff ( Timothy Dalton ) . It is then revealed that Volkoff was actually Hartley Winterbottom , an MI6 scientist who worked with Stephen in the 1980s . In preparation for an undercover assignment as an arms dealer named Alexei Volkoff , Winterbottom became the first person to upload the Intersect . However , the upload malfunctioned , overwriting Winterbottom 's personality with that of his cover , and Stephen spent the last 20 years of his life trying to fix his mistake . At the end of " Chuck Versus the Last Details " , Volkoff 's daughter Vivian ( Lauren Cohan ) learns of her father 's true identity , and , holding Chuck responsible , poisons Chuck 's fiancée Sarah with a Volkoff Industries weapon called " the Norseman " . To save Sarah 's life and stop Vivian from destroying his and Sarah 's wedding , Chuck turns to Alexei for help . To keep secret Volkoff 's true identity , the CIA sends its " toughest " agent , Clyde Decker ( Richard Burgi ) , to stop Chuck . 
 " Chuck Versus the Cliffhanger " received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it drew 4 @.@ 53 million viewers , with a 1 @.@ 5 / 4 rating among those aged 18 – 49 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Volkoff Industries heiress Vivian Volkoff ( Lauren Cohan ) decides to make Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) Agent Chuck Bartowski ( Zachary Levi ) suffer , based on the misconception that the CIA forced her father , MI6 scientist Hartley Winterbottom ( Timothy Dalton ) , to upload a government database called the Intersect to his brain , accidentally overwriting his personality with that of his cover identity , arms dealer Alexei Volkoff . Vivian poisons Chuck 's fiancée Sarah Walker ( Yvonne Strahovski ) with the Volkoff Industries " Norseman " weapon , and Sarah is rushed into the emergency room . Chuck , his mother Mary ( Linda Hamilton ) , and ally John Casey ( Adam Baldwin ) set out to find an antidote to the Norseman 's effects , but when Chuck breaks into the prison holding Alexei , he discovers that elite agent Clyde Decker ( Richard Burgi ) has anticipated his move and relocated Alexei . To protect Alexei 's true identity and conceal the government 's botched experiment , Decker revokes Chuck 's clearance to CIA facilities . 
 With General Beckman 's ( Bonita Friedericy ) aid , Chuck intercepts the transport carrying Alexei , only to find that Decker has <unk> Alexei and restored his previous identity and memories of Hartley Winterbottom . Hartley administers an antidote , but it fails to cure Sarah . Mary then remembers that Alexei had developed a stronger antidote , but it is stored at the Volkoff Industries Headquarters in Moscow , Russia . As they leave the hospital , Chuck , Casey , Mary , and Hartley are captured by Decker and taken to Castle , a government base under the big @-@ box store Buy More , where Decker suppresses the Intersect in Chuck 's mind . Casey helps Chuck and Hartley escape , giving Chuck discs containing clean fabricated identities for him and Sarah . 
 Chuck and Hartley go to Volkoff Industries , and Hartley reveals to Vivian that he went undercover voluntarily , resulting in his transformation into the villainous Volkoff . Chuck gives up the discs from Casey so Vivian and her father can start a new life . Chuck returns with the antidote to Burbank , California , where Decker is waiting for him . A standoff occurs , but as Chuck is backed up by a superior force made up of his friends , family , the C.A.T. Squad ( Mini <unk> and Mercedes <unk> ) , and Volkoff 's <unk> paratroopers , Decker is forced to stand down . Using the information about Alexei as leverage against Decker , Chuck delivers the antidote . 
 The scene then changes to Chuck and Sarah 's wedding , after which they receive a wedding present from Hartley . Two weeks later , Chuck returns from his honeymoon to a deserted Castle , where he learns from Decker that he has been manipulated his entire spy career , leading to him receiving the Intersect and facing Fulcrum , the Ring , Daniel Shaw , and Volkoff . It is then revealed that Hartley 's gift was all of Volkoff Industries ' assets , giving Chuck and Sarah almost a billion dollars . Chuck purchases the Buy More from the government 's front company , and he , Sarah , Casey , and Morgan Grimes ( Joshua Gomez ) set up their own freelance spy operation in Castle to investigate the conspiracy involving Chuck . Morgan then spots a pair of glasses in a box of Chuck 's belongings sent from Beckman . Morgan puts them on and accidentally uploads an Intersect . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Chuck Versus the Cliffhanger " was one of many episodes to be directed by producer Robert Duncan McNeill , and was written by Chris Fedak , who co @-@ created the series , and Nicholas Wootton , both of whom serve as executive producers . It originally aired in the United States on May 16 , 2011 , on NBC as the 24th episode of Chuck 's fourth season and the 78th episode overall . The episode was filmed in April 2011 at North Hollywood Medical Center . Guest stars Linda Hamilton , Timothy Dalton , Lauren Cohan , Mekenna Melvin , Mini <unk> , and Mercedes <unk> reprised their recurring roles as Mary Bartowski , Alexei Volkoff , Vivian Volkoff , Alex McHugh , Carina Miller , and Zondra , respectively . The episode also introduced Richard Burgi as Clyde Decker , the CIA 's " toughest " agent . 
 Michael Ausiello had revealed in March 2011 that the fourth season finale would be titled " Chuck Versus the Cliffhanger " . Chris Fedak later confirmed that the episode , as the title suggests , would have a cliffhanger ending leading into a fifth season . Fedak stated that cliffhangers tell " more story " , citing The Empire Strikes Back and Batman Begins as examples . The season had suffered two major declines in viewership , one before " Chuck Versus the Push Mix " , and another after three weeks of repeated episodes , and it was predicted that NBC would cancel Chuck before the fourth season ended , making " Chuck Versus the Cliffhanger " the de facto series finale . However , a fifth and final season was ordered on May 13 , 2011 , and is set to premiere October 21 , 2011 . 
 " Chuck Versus the Cliffhanger " is one of the few episodes since season one 's " Chuck Versus the Helicopter " not to feature the series ' full credits sequence with the instrumental version of Cake 's " Short Skirt / Long Jacket " , instead displaying the main cast credits over action in the episode 's second act . HitFix Senior Editor Alan Sepinwall has called the episode a " tying together of everything the character [ Chuck ] and the show have been about " , including the use of a recurring spy strategy , " The Magnet " , to fool Decker . As Chuck and Sarah walk to their limousine , clips of their budding romance are shown through archive footage from several earlier episodes , including the pilot episode , " Chuck Versus the Intersect " . Fedak stated in an interview that the inspiration for Volkoff 's true identity being a gun @-@ shy British scientist was Dalton 's portrayal of Gregory Tuttle , Volkoff 's guise as Mary Bartowski 's MI6 handler , in " Chuck Versus the First Fight " , his first appearance on the series . Chuck 's quest to save Sarah serves as a reversal of " Chuck Versus Phase Three " . 
 Yvonne Strahovski is given limited screen time in the episode due to her character , Sarah , being in a coma . However , the episode is augmented with flashbacks taking place five days before the events of the episode , in which Chuck and Sarah deal with pre @-@ wedding jitters by having their own rehearsal in their apartment . Thus , Chuck and Sarah 's wedding vows are given added weight due to Sarah 's being said early in the episode , and Chuck 's being improvised from Sarah 's . 
 Fedak stated in an interview on the day of the episode 's airing that " Chuck Versus the Cliffhanger " marks a major transition in the series . As of the episode 's ending , the main characters of the series are no longer government spies and no longer work for General Beckman ; Chuck and Sarah have received an immense wealth ; and Chuck has become the leader of a team to investigate a conspiracy involving his spy career . According to Fedak , the episode institutes a storyline in which the series returns to its roots . Morgan will be portrayed by Joshua Gomez much like Chuck was by Zachary Levi in the early seasons of the series : as a newcomer to the spy world due to the presence of the Intersect in his brain . Meanwhile , Chuck will be portrayed as Morgan 's protector , much like Casey and Sarah were to him in past seasons . 
 = = Music and cultural references = = 
 Fedak revealed that the music for the season finale was completed the Wednesday night before the episode aired . The episode 's soundtrack includes the songs " Here With Me " by <unk> when Chuck and Sarah are anxious about their wedding , " Conscience Killer " by Black Rebel Motorcycle Club while Chuck intercepts Alexei 's transport , " Firewood " by Typhoon while Chuck and Sarah practice their vows , " I 'm A Pilot " by <unk> while Chuck rushes to administer the antidote , and " Sinking Friendships " by Jónsi during the wedding . 
 Multiple references are made to former United States President Ronald Reagan . Upon seeing Casey 's framed photograph of Reagan , Hartley asks , " Is he still in charge ? " , to which Casey replies , " If only ! " Casey later comments , " That 's smart . Real smart . Reagan smart . " Adam Baldwin stated that he established Casey 's habit of referencing Reagan on the series . The CIA 's Nighthawk motorcycle used in the episode alludes to Street Hawk . During Chuck and Sarah 's wedding , Morgan , acting as the minister , claims to be ordained by the Intergalactic Federation of Planets , a reference to Star Trek . When Chuck asks him to close the partition in the limo after the wedding , Morgan responds , " As you wish ! " , referencing The Princess Bride . In archive footage from " Chuck Versus the Balcony " , Sarah tells Chuck that she did not fall in love with James Bond . After Morgan downloads the Intersect , he says " Guys , I know kung fu " , a reference to The Matrix . The series has featured variations on this line before , when Chuck downloaded versions of the Intersect in " Chuck Versus the Ring " and " Chuck Versus the Leftovers " . 
 When Sarah asks Chuck what was in the letter from Hartley he responds with " Oh boy ! " , a reference to the television show Quantum Leap . Quantum Leap featured Scott Bakula who also played Chuck 's father Stephen J. Bartowski . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Chuck Versus the Cliffhanger " drew 4 @.@ 53 million viewers , with a 1 @.@ 5 / 4 rating among those aged 18 – 49 . The episode had the most viewers since " Chuck Versus the A @-@ Team " , making it the sixth least @-@ watched episode in Chuck 's history to that point . 
 The episode received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix wrote that " as Chuck began laying out his plan to be freelance spies , and as Morgan took out the Intersect sunglasses General Beckman had so thoughtfully hidden in Chuck 's going @-@ away box , all I could feel was gratitude : I 'm so glad NBC ordered one more season , because that is a show I want to see ! " Sepinwall praised Timothy Dalton 's ability to deliver both a comic and serious performance , writing that , while on other series Volkoff 's back @-@ story " would be an incredibly dark , tragic storyline " , Dalton acted well enough that his emotions were not overwhelming . Sepinwall continued that the storyline " would have sucked every last bit of joy out of the episode " if the character had been portrayed by another Chuck actor . In contrast , Sepinwall wrote that he felt no empathy for Volkoff 's daughter , as " Lauren Cohan has never managed to make a cohesive and interesting character out of a bunch of jarring personality shifts " . Brody Gibson of Boom Tron wrote , " The writers of Chuck sure know how to pull together a great finale . I was floored . " Gibson agreed with Sepinwall on Timothy Dalton 's range of acting skills , praising Zachary Levi and Yvonne Strahovski as well . Gibson wrote that Levi deserved an Emmy nomination for a scene in which Chuck surrenders himself to Vivian to plead for the antidote to save Sarah 's life . Gibson also praised Levi and Strahovski 's performance in Chuck and Sarah 's " practice wedding " : " These two have always had such great chemistry , you could swear they 're actually in love and not just actors pretending . " 
 Brittany Frederick of Starpulse.com wrote , " It wasn 't the whiz @-@ bang finale I was expecting after all the hype , but it was one that was true to what the show stands for , and that 's good enough for me . " Like Sepinwall and Gibson , Frederick praised the performance by Levi and Dalton , writing , " Chuck 's heartbreak and desperation were incredibly poignant throughout the bulk of the episode . " Like Gibson , Frederick also praised the scene depicting Chuck 's surrender to Vivian , calling it " sniffle @-@ inducing " . Frederick continued that Dalton " plays Hartley Winterbottom with a great sincerity and vulnerability . " Frederick also called it " a great reward to the fans that the episode didn 't cheat us out of the Chuck / Sarah wedding at all . " Frederick wrote , " While I 'm not blown away by this finale , I still am satisfied with it , because it represents the values we 've come to expect from Chuck : the ideas of hope , family , and sticking together in the face of the most adverse of circumstances . " Ryan McGee of The Onion 's A.V. Club rated the episode a B + on an A + to F scale , although criticizing its " mechanics " . Eric Goldman of IGN gave the episode a rating of 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 , a series high alongside season two 's " Chuck Versus Santa Claus " and " Chuck Versus the Colonel " , season three 's " Chuck Versus the Beard " and " Chuck Versus the Subway " , and season five 's " Chuck Versus the Kept Man " and " Chuck Versus the Goodbye " . Goldman wrote , " Chuck 's had more ups and downs than usual this season , but it ended on a very strong note . With Sarah 's life in danger , Chuck and all his friends and family proved they would risk everything to save her , and it made for a very compelling , involving hour . " 
 = Skin ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Skin " is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna from her fifth studio album , Loud ( 2010 ) . The song was written by Kenneth Coby and Ursula Yancy , with production helmed by Soundz . Musically , " Skin " is influenced by pop , dance @-@ pop and dubstep genres , whilst lyrically , the song is about being in a relationship with someone and only wanting to feel their skin close to the protagonists . " Skin " received generally positive reviews from critics , as part of their overall review of Loud , praising " Skin " ' s compositions as well as Rihanna 's sensual vocal performance . The song was included on the set list of the Loud Tour ( 2011 ) , where Rihanna retrieves a man or woman from the audience near the end of the song , and performs a lap @-@ dance whilst on an elevated platform . " Skin " was also used in Rihanna 's advertisement campaign for Armani Jeans . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Skin " was written by Kenneth Coby and Ursula Yancy , with production helmed by Coby under his stage name Soundz . The song was recorded at Studio at the Palms Casino Resort in Las Vegas , Nevada . " Skin " is written in the key of G minor and is set in common time with a moderate groove of 62 beats per minute . " Skin " contains elements of pop , dance @-@ pop and dubstep , while the song is composed with bass instruments , synthesizers and an electric guitar . As commented by Robbie Daw of Idolator , the song 's " real " hook is " the fuzzy electric guitar " that begins sawing through the melody about three minutes in , and continues building until it reaches " a , er , climactic [ sic ] solo at the very end . " Rihanna 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of G3 to the high note of B ♭ 4 . As noted by Emily Mackay of NME , her vocals sound " restrained " and " controlled " . Throughout the song , Rihanna sounds " suspenseful " and " sultry " as she sings the lyrics " I got secrets that I wanna show you " . Thomas Conner of Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote that the singer " teases her man " and " lets him at her " as she sings the line " You 've waited long enough " before instructing " Don 't hold back / you know I like it rough " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Of the multiple music critics who commented on the song , the majority praised " Skin " ' s musical structure and Rihanna 's vocal performance . Apart from writing about the song 's composition , Daw called the ballad " smoldering " and compared the last minute of the song to Sade 's " No Ordinary Love " for the song 's sensual content , but noted that Adu 's song is not as lyrically graphic as " Skin " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times commented that Rihanna 's sensuality in the song is evoked though her use of sexually suggestive moaning and heavy breathing , adding to the " slow , torrid buildup " . Colin Gentry of 4Music noted that Rihanna appears to be transitioning from singing songs about partying and dancing in clubs to singing about her sexual fantasies and desires , writing " Rihanna <unk> through the album as a woman on the prowl , taking her conquests from the clubs to the bedroom . Demanding to know ' why are you standing over there with your clothes on ? ' on sultry track Skin , the Barbadian clearly means business . " Ryan Dombell of Pitchfork Media concurred with Stern with regard to " Skin " being the singer 's most mature song to date , writing " ' Skin ' is her sexiest song yet , a haunted , near @-@ dubstep stunner that wouldn 't sound totally out of place on Massive Attack 's Mezzanine . " 
 Ryan Burleson of Consequence of Sound commented that Rihanna 's combines different emotions in the song to increase the level of provocativeness , writing " For its part , the Soundz @-@ produced ' Skin ' combines these emotions into a five @-@ minute space @-@ hop excursion into the boudoir , driving deep into the id with an austere , though undeniably potent amount of minor chords and bass . " Andy Kellman of AllMusic chose " Skin " as one of the highlights on Loud , writing , " One song that sounds nothing like anything else in Rihanna 's past is ' Skin , ' a contender for anti @-@ gravity slow jam of 2010 – a match for Trey Songz 's ' Red Lipstick ' and Usher 's ' Mars vs Venus . ' " USA Today 's Steve Jones also put the song in his list of tracks from Loud to consider downloading . Jerry Shriver of the same publication found " down @-@ and @-@ dirty @-@ ness " in the chorus of the song . James Skinner of BBC Online said that the line " I like it rough " was a little " uncomfortable in the light of her personal history " . Thomas Conner of Chicago Sun @-@ Times commented on Rihanna 's sex appeal in the song , writing " the art of her seduction is oh @-@ so slow and merciless " . 
 = = Armani Jeans campaign = = 
 The song was also used in Rihanna 's advertisement campaign for Armani Jeans and Emporio Armani Underwear . The advert , which launched the brand 's Fall 2011 line , was directed by Johan Renck and photographed by Steven Klein . In the advert , " Rihanna wears a short blonde wig and enters a vintage car with a bag of clothing , changing in the car and visible in her underwear while a bodyguard keeps watch . She then leaves the car wearing a dark leather jacket and Armani jeans and takes an elevator out of the underground parking lot to meet her partner @-@ in @-@ crime or love interest " . Giorgio Armani said that Rihanna was a " pleasure to work with " and said that she " perfectly embodies " the spirit of his company . The advert , which was filmed in New York City and shot in monochrome , was also used to launch Armani 's e @-@ commerce site . 
 The advertisement received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics , with The Huffington Post claiming that it was " sizzling " . The magazine Stylist called the advert " saucy " and praised the fact that it " combines traces of metropolitan storytelling , cops ' n robbers movies with an ode to film noir , but with a lighter and ironic touch " . Claiming that Rihanna is " at her steamy @-@ best " in the " sultry " piece , the Hindustan Times said that the piece " is a must @-@ watch , not just for its steam factor but for its visual and aesthetic sense too " . Grazia also gave a positive review by saying that the advert was , among other things , " saucy " and " exciting " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Though the song has never been performed live as part of a televised performance , the song was featured on the set list of the Loud Tour . Before she performed " Skin " , Rihanna appeared on stage with a set similar to that of her performance of " S & M " remix with Britney Spears at the 2011 Billboard Music Awards , wearing a black tuxedo and pink tie to perform a cover of Prince 's " Darling Nikki " , before transitioning into " S & M " . As " S & M " started , Rihanna removed her tuxedo to reveal a white PVC body suit . After performing " S & M " , Rihanna performed " Skin " while laying on raised platform , and at near the end of the performance said " this is the part of the show when we like to have a little fun – who wants to come up here and get freaky with me ? " and takes a man out of the audience and pins them down on the platform , where she provocatively and sexually gyrates and grinds him as they are lowered under the stage as the song 's instrumental ends and the lights go out . Rihanna has caused controversy by occasionally opting to perform the act with a woman instead . 
 The sexually suggestive performances of " Skin " have been met with mixed reactions from critics . The Daily Mail was critical of the routine ; they branded it " lewd " , compared the routine with Rihanna 's previous sexual performances and voiced the belief that the singer had " outdone herself " with the " raunchy and overtly sexualised " routine . A few months later , the paper claimed that Rihanna had " pushed the boundaries " by lap dancing an older man at her show in Barbados and a review for the Evening Herald voiced similar sentiments , arguing that Rihanna 's " good girl gone bad image is getting tired " . The Daily Record praised Rihanna 's Glasgow performance but argued that the lap dance at the end of the " Skin " routine was " a move that had parents covering their children 's eyes " . Catriona Stewart Lotte Jeffs , editor of ES Magazine , was one of the audience members who received a lap dance from Rihanna and reacted positively , saying " [ i ] t was a night I will never forget " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Robyn " Rihanna " Fenty – Vocals 
 Kenneth Coby and Ursula Yancy – Songwriting 
 Soundz – Producer 
 Makeba Riddick – Vocal production 
 Kuk Harrel – Additional vocal production 
 Nuno Bettencourt – guitar 
 Rob Katz and Bobby Campbell – Assistant Engineering 
 Mixed by Jayden Joshua at Larrabee Sound Studios , Los Angeles , California – Mixing 
 Jesus Garnica – Assistant mixing 
 Chad " C Note " Roper at Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles – Music recording 
 Recorded by Kuk Harrel , Josh Gudwin and Marcus Tovar at Studio , Palms Casino Resort , Paradise , Nevada – Vocal recording 
 Credits and personnel adapted from the liner notes of Loud . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Loud , " Skin " charted at number 66 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart for the issue dated November 14 , 2010 . 
 = Oswald of Worcester = 
 Oswald of Worcester ( died 29 February 992 ) was Archbishop of York from 972 to his death in 992 . He was of Danish ancestry , but brought up by his uncle , Oda , who sent him to France to the abbey of Fleury to become a monk . After a number of years at Fleury , Oswald returned to England at the request of his uncle , who died before Oswald returned . With his uncle 's death , Oswald needed a patron and turned to another kinsman , Oskytel , who had recently become Archbishop of York . His activity for Oskytel attracted the notice of Archbishop Dunstan who had Oswald consecrated as Bishop of Worcester in 961 . In 972 , Oswald was promoted to the see of York , although he continued to hold Worcester also . 
 As bishop and archbishop , Oswald was a supporter and one of the leading promoters ( together with Æthelwold ) of Dunstan 's reforms of the church , including monastic reforms . Oswald founded a number of monasteries , including Ramsey Abbey , and reformed other seven , including Winchcombe in Gloucestershire and Pershore and Evesham in Worcestershire . Oswald also switched the cathedral chapter of Worcester from secular clergy to monks . While archbishop , he brought the scholar Abbo of Fleury to teach , and he spent two years in England , mostly at Ramsey . Oswald died in 992 , while washing the feet of the poor . A hagiographical life was written shortly after his death , and he was quickly hailed as a saint . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Oswald , of Danish parentage , was brought up by his uncle Oda , Archbishop of Canterbury , and was also related to Oskytel , later Archbishop of York . He was also related to the <unk> Osulf , who received land while Oswald was bishop of Worcester . Oswald was instructed by a Frankish scholar Frithegod . He held the office of dean of Winchester , but he was sent by his uncle to France and entered the monastery of Fleury about 950 , where he was ordained in 959 . While at Fleury he met <unk> of Abingdon and Germanus of Winchester . The influence of Fleury was to be evident later in Oswald 's life , when it was one of the inspirations for the Regularis Concordia , the English code of monastic conduct agreed to in 970 . 
 = = Return to England = = 
 Oswald returned to England in 958 at the behest of his uncle , but Oda died before Oswald returned . Lacking a patron , Oswald turned to Oskytel , recently named Archbishop of York . It is possible that Oswald along with Oskytel travelled to Rome for Oskytel 's pallium , but this story is only contained in a 12th @-@ century Ramsey Abbey chronicle , so it may not be authentic . Even if he did not travel to Rome , Oswald was active in ecclesiastical affairs at York until Dunstan obtained Oswald 's appointment to the see , or bishopric , of Worcester . He was consecrated as Bishop of Worcester in 961 . Soon after his consecration , he persuaded Germanus to come back to England and made him head of a small religious community near Westbury @-@ on @-@ Trym . After the establishment of this group about 962 , Oswald grew worried that because the monastery was located on lands owned by the see of Worcester , his successors in the see might disrupt the community . He was offered the site of Ramsey Abbey in Huntingdonshire by Æthelwine , son of Æthelstan Half @-@ King , and Oswald established a monastery there about 971 that attracted most of the members of the community at Westbury . This foundation at Ramsey went on to become Ramsey Abbey . Ramsey was Oswald 's most famous foundation , with its church dedicated in 974 . Later , Oswald invited Abbo of Fleury to come and teach at Ramsey . Oswald directed the affairs of Ramsey Abbey until his death , when the dean Eadnoth became the first abbot . He gave a magnificent Bible to Ramsey , which was important enough to merit a mention in Oswald 's Life . Alongside the gift of the book , Oswald also contributed wall hangings and other textiles to the abbey . 
 Oswald supported Dunstan and Æthelwold , Bishop of Winchester , in their efforts to purify the Church from secularism . Aided by King Edgar , he took a prominent part in the revival of monastic discipline along the precepts of the Rule of Saint Benedict . His methods differed from Æthelwold 's , who often violently ejected secular clergy from churches and replaced them with monks . Oswald also organised the estates of his see into administrative hundreds known as the <unk> , which helped stabilise the ecclesiastical revenues . He constantly visited the monasteries he founded , and was long remembered as father of his people both as bishop and archbishop . It was Oswald who changed the cathedral chapter of Worcester from priests to monks , although the exact method that he employed is unclear . One tradition says that Oswald used a slow approach in building up a new church of monks next to the cathedral , allowing the cathedral 's priests to continue performing services in the cathedral until the monastic foundation was strong enough to take over the cathedral . Another tradition claims that , instead , Oswald expelled any of the clergy in the cathedral that would not give up their wives and replaced them with monks immediately . Oswald also reformed Winchcombe Abbey , along with the monasteries of Westbury Priory , Pershore Abbey , and Evesham Abbey . It is also possible that monasteries were established in Gloucester and Deerhurst , but evidence is lacking for their exact foundation dates . 
 = = Archbishop of York = = 
 In 972 Oswald was made Archbishop of York and journeyed to Rome to receive a pallium from Pope John XIII . It is possible that he also traveled on Edgar 's behalf to the court of the Emperor Otto I , and that these two journeys had been combined . He continued to hold the see of Worcester in addition to York . The holding of Worcester in addition to York became traditional for almost the next fifty years . Although it was uncanonical , it had many advantages for York in that it added a much richer diocese to their holdings , and one which was more peaceful as well . When Edgar died in 975 , Ælfhere , Ealdorman of Mercia , broke up many monastic communities , some of which were Oswald 's foundations . Ramsey , however , was not disturbed , probably due to the patronage of Æthelwine , Ealdorman of East Anglia , son of Æthelstan Half @-@ King . Ælfhere was a supporter of Ethelred the Unready , the son of Edgar 's third marriage , while Oswald supported the son of Edgar 's first marriage , Edward the Martyr , in the dispute over who would succeed King Edgar . 
 In 985 , Oswald invited Abbo of Fleury to come to Ramsey to help found the monastic school there . Abbo was at Ramsey from 985 to 987 , where he taught computus , or the methods for calculating Easter . It was also often used in trying to calculate the date of the Last Judgment . A surviving manuscript gives a list compiled by Oswald , setting forth estates that had been taken from the diocese of York . 
 = = Death and sainthood = = 
 Oswald died on 29 February 992 in the act of washing the feet of the poor at Worcester , as was his daily custom during Lent , and was buried in the Church of Saint Mary at Worcester . He promoted the education of the clergy and persuaded scholars to come from Fleury and teach in England . A Life of Oswald was written after his death , probably by Byrhtferth , a monk of Ramsey Abbey . Two manuscripts , a psalter ( Harley MS <unk> in the British Library ) and a pontifical ( MS 100 , part 2 from Sidney Sussex College of Cambridge University ) , probably belonged to Oswald and would have been used in his daily devotions . 
 Almost immediately after his death miracles were reported at his funeral and at his tomb . His remains were translated to a different burial spot in the cathedral ten years after his death . His feast day is celebrated on 28 February during common years and 29 February during leap years . 
 = Katie Melua = 
 Ketevan " Katie " Melua ( / <unk> / ; Georgian : <unk> " <unk> " <unk> IPA : [ <unk> <unk> ] , born 16 September 1984 ) is a Georgian @-@ British singer , songwriter and musician . She moved to Northern Ireland at the age of eight and then to England at fourteen . Melua is signed to the small <unk> record label , under the management of composer Mike Batt , and made her musical debut in 2003 . In 2006 , she was the United Kingdom 's best @-@ selling female artist and Europe 's highest selling European female artist . 
 In November 2003 , at the age of nineteen , Melua released her first album , Call Off the Search , which reached the top of the United Kingdom album charts and sold 1 @.@ 8 million copies in its first five months of release . Her second album , Piece by Piece , was released in September 2005 and to date has gone platinum four times . Melua released her third studio album Pictures in October 2007 . 
 According to the Sunday Times Rich List 2008 , Melua had a fortune of £ 18 million , making her the seventh richest British musician under thirty . It was reported in 2009 that she may have lost millions as a result of the global economic downturn . As of May 2011 , Melua could have a £ 12m fortune and she came second in the under 30 rich list . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ketevan Melua , known as <unk> to her family , was born to <unk> and Tamara Melua in Kutaisi , Georgia , which was then part of the Soviet Union . She spent her first years with her grandparents in Tbilisi before moving with her parents and brother to the town of Batumi , <unk> , where her father worked as a heart specialist . During this time , Melua sometimes had to carry buckets of water up five flights of stairs to her family 's flat and according to her , " Now , when I 'm staying in luxurious hotels , I think back to those days " . 
 In 1993 , in the aftermath of the Georgian Civil War , the family moved to Belfast , Northern Ireland , where her father took up a position at the Royal Victoria Hospital . The family remained in Belfast , living close to Falls Road , until Melua was thirteen . During her time in Northern Ireland , Melua attended St Catherine 's Primary School on the Falls Road and later moved to Dominican College , <unk> . The Melua family then moved to Sutton , London , and some time later moved again to Redhill , Surrey . In 2008 , Melua moved out of her parents ' home in Maida Vale to an apartment in Notting Hill , where she transformed the spare bedroom into a recording studio . Melua is fluent in English and Russian ; despite still speaking Georgian fluently she has admitted that she cannot write songs in the language . Melua is also partly of Canadian and Russian ancestry . 
 During the South Ossetia War in 2008 , Melua 's brother and mother were staying with relatives in the Georgian capital , Tbilisi . Melua was due to travel to Georgia herself less than a month later . 
 She is a baptised Georgian Orthodox Christian . Whilst living in Belfast , Melua attended the Roman Catholic schools St Catherine 's Primary School and Dominican College , <unk> , while her younger brother attended Protestant schools . After completing her GCSEs at the all @-@ girls ' grammar school Nonsuch High School in Cheam , Sutton , Melua attended the BRIT School for the Performing Arts in the London Borough of Croydon , undertaking a BTEC with an A @-@ level in music . 
 Melua has not attended university , though she has often stated her desire to do so , saying that English literature , history and physics would be her courses of choice should she have the chance to go to university . 
 = = Nationality = = 
 On 10 August 2005 , Melua became a British citizen with her parents and brother . The citizenship ceremony took place in Weybridge , Surrey . On gaining British nationality , Melua was eligible for a British passport . Becoming a British citizen meant that Melua had held three <unk> before she was 21 ; first , Soviet , then , Georgian and finally , British . After the ceremony , Melua stated her pride at her newest nationality . " As a family , we have been very fortunate to find a happy lifestyle in this country and we feel we belong . We still consider ourselves to be Georgian , because that is where our roots are , and I return to Georgia every year to see my uncles and grandparents , but I am proud to now be a British citizen " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Melua is occasionally referred to as an ' adrenaline junkie ' because she enjoys roller coasters and funfairs and often <unk> and hang glides . She has <unk> four times and taken several flying lessons , and in 2004 she was lowered from a 200 @-@ metre building in New Zealand at 60 mph . When asked about Melua being an ' adrenaline junkie ' , Mike Batt said , " she enjoys extremes , but in life her emotions are always in check " . In November 2009 , Melua came near to drowning after she breathed in and choked on a <unk> of water when diving in a lake near Heathrow Airport . 
 In September 2010 , Melua was ordered by her doctors to stop working for a few months after suffering a nervous breakdown , resulting in her hospitalisation for six weeks . As a result , all touring and promotional activities were postponed until the following year . 
 In January 2012 , Melua confirmed her engagement to World Superbike racer James Toseland . The couple married on 1 September 2012 in the Nash Conservatory at the Royal Botanical Gardens in London . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early stage = = = 
 Due to her upbringing in politically unstable Georgia and troubled Belfast , Melua initially planned to become either a historian or a politician . This changed in 2000 , at the age of fifteen , when Melua took part in a talent competition on British television channel ITV called " Stars Up Their <unk> " ( a spoof of Stars in Their Eyes ) as part of the children 's programme Mad for It ! . Melua won the contest by singing Badfinger 's " Without You " . The prize was £ 350 worth of MFI vouchers , with which she bought a chair for her father . Had she lost the contest , she would have been <unk> . 
 = = = BRIT School and Mike Batt = = = 
 After completing her GCSEs , Melua attended the BRIT School for the Performing Arts in the London Borough of Croydon , undertaking a BTEC with an A @-@ level in music . When studying at the school , Melua began to write songs and met her future manager and producer , Mike Batt . 
 While performing at BRIT School showcase , Melua caught the eye of songwriter and producer Mike Batt . Batt was originally looking for an acid @-@ rock band , bass player and a singer capable of singing " jazz and blues in an interesting way " . After hearing Melua sing " Faraway Voice " ( a song she wrote about the death of her idol Eva Cassidy ) Batt signed the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Melua to his small <unk> recording and management company and took her into the studio , producing her first three albums during the ensuing years . 
 = = = William Orbit = = = 
 For her fourth album , The House ( 2010 ) , Melua worked with producer William Orbit . She said about the experience : " The whole thing has been really exciting . It was the same feeling I had the first time I went skydiving . I was really quite nervous , but I knew all I had to do was let myself go and it was going to feel amazing . I wasn 't trying to get away from anything . It was more about going towards something . I wanted the music to be inspired by the future , something unknown that 's never been heard before , but at the same time hold on to the values of the music of the past , to try and tap into something that 's so ancient and old that it 's kind of forgotten . I thought that , if we went far enough in both directions , we could end up in the same place " . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 = = = Call Off the Search ( 2003 ) = = = 
 Melua 's debut album , Call Off the Search , was released on 3 November 2003 and featured two songs written by Melua : " Belfast ( Penguins and Cats ) " , a song about Melua 's experience of her time in the troubled capital of Northern Ireland , and " Faraway Voice " , a song about the death of Eva Cassidy . Melua also covered songs by Delores J. Silver ( " <unk> ' the Blues " ) , John Mayall ( " Crawling up a Hill " ) , Randy Newman ( " I Think It 's Going to Rain Today " ) and James Shelton ( " Lilac Wine " , originally a UK hit for singer Elkie Brooks ) . The other six songs on the album were by Mike Batt . 
 It was initially difficult for Melua and Batt to obtain airplay for the album 's lead single , " The Closest Thing to Crazy " . This changed when BBC Radio 2 producer Paul Walters heard the single and played it on the popular Terry Wogan breakfast show . Wogan played " The Closest Thing to Crazy " frequently in the summer of 2003 . Wogan 's support raised Melua 's profile and when Call Off the Search was released in November 2003 supported by a TV campaign financed by Batt , it entered the top 40 UK albums chart . The single achieved the number 10 spot in the UK chart . After an appearance on the Royal Variety Show the album was further boosted and Batt continued a relentless marketing campaign which saw the album hit the number one spot in January 2004 . Call Off the Search reached the top five in Ireland , top twenty in Norway and top thirty in a composite European chart . In the UK the album sold 1 @.@ 9 million copies , making it six times platinum , and spent six weeks at the top of the UK charts . It sold 3 @.@ 6 million copies worldwide . Subsequent singles from the album did not repeat the success of the first – the second single and album title track " Call Off the Search " reached number 19 , and the third single " Crawling up a Hill " got to number 41 . The album achieved <unk> platinum status in UK , 3X platinum in Norway , 2X platinum in Germany , Holland , Denmark and Ireland , Platinum in South Africa , Australia and Switzerland and Gold in New Zealand and Hong Kong . 
 = = = Piece by Piece ( 2005 ) = = = 
 Melua 's second album , Piece by Piece , was released on 26 September 2005 . Its lead single was " Nine Million Bicycles " , which was released a week before the album on 19 September and was number 3 in the UK singles chart . The album contains four more songs written by Melua herself , four more by Batt ( including " Nine Million Bicycles " ) , one Batt / Melua collaboration and three more songs described as new versions of " great songs " . The band line @-@ up was the same as on the first album . The album debuted at the number one spot on the UK Albums Chart on the week of 3 October 2005 . This album broke Melua across Europe where it sold 1 million copies in Germany alone and achieved the number one position in Billboard 's " European " albums chart . It was 4X platinum in UK and in Ireland , 3X platinum in Norway , Denmark , Holland and Germany , 2X platinum in Poland and Switzerland and at least platinum or gold in France , Iceland , South Africa , Austria , Belgium , New Zealand and Sweden . Worldwide sales to date are in excess of 3 @.@ 5 million . 
 On 30 September 2005 , Melua came under criticism in The Guardian from writer and scientist Simon Singh for the lyrics of the track " Nine Million Bicycles " . Melua 's disputed lyrics were : 
 We are 12 billion light @-@ years from the edge . That 's a guess – no @-@ one can ever say it 's true , but I know that I will always be with you . 
 They were interpreted by Singh as an assault on the accuracy of the work of cosmologists which sparked a series of letters from other Guardian readers , agreeing or disagreeing . On 15 October , Melua and Singh appeared on the BBC 's Today programme , and Melua unveiled a re @-@ recording of the song which included Singh 's tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek amendments to the lyrics : 
 We are 13 @.@ 7 billion light @-@ years from the edge of the observable universe / That 's a good estimate with well @-@ defined error bars / And with the available information / I predict that I will always be with you . 
 Both sides amicably agreed that the new lyrics were less likely to achieve commercial success , amidst a discussion about scientific accuracy versus artistic licence . Melua said that she " should have known better " because she used to be a member of the astronomy club at school . 
 A double A @-@ side of the Melua @-@ penned " I Cried for You " and a cover of The Cure 's " Just Like Heaven " ( 1988 ) , which is the theme song to the film Just Like Heaven , was released in the UK on 5 December and peaked at number 35 . " I Cried for You " was inspired by a meeting with the writer of Holy Blood , Holy Grail . 
 A third single , " Spider 's Web " was released on 17 April 2006 and peaked at number 52 in the UK . Melua embarked on a concert tour in support of Piece by Piece , the UK leg of which started in Aberdeen , Scotland on 20 January 2006 . Towards the end of 2006 , Melua released the single , " It 's Only Pain " , which was written by Mike Batt . This was followed by the release of " Shy Boy " , also written by Batt . 
 = = = Pictures ( 2007 ) = = = 
 Melua 's third album , Pictures , was released in the UK on 1 October 2007 and was announced to be , at least temporarily , the last of her albums in collaboration with Mike Batt as lead writer and producer . It also features Melua 's friend Molly McQueen , the former frontwoman of The <unk> , as co @-@ writer of " Perfect Circle " . Melua also collaborated with Andrea McEwan on the album , who wrote the lyrics for " What I Miss About You " and " Dirty Dice " . The album also featured a cover of " In My Secret Life " by Leonard Cohen and Sharon Robinson . Melua said of the cover , " [ It ] completely got to me , about how we all have great ideals but in reality we end up conforming , following everyone else . " 
 Melua released four singles from the album : " If You Were a <unk> " , " Mary Pickford " , " If the Lights Go Out " , and " Ghost Town " . " Mary Pickford " , written by Mike Batt , was about the silent film star of the same name . " Ghost Town " was Melua 's first reggae @-@ sounding song . 
 The iTunes version of the album includes a cover of the Prince song " Under the Cherry Moon " as a bonus track . 
 = = = The House ( 2010 ) = = = 
 Melua 's fourth album , The House , was released on 24 May 2010 . Songwriters include Lauren Christy , Guy Chambers and Rick Nowels , with William Orbit producing . 
 = = = Secret Symphony ( 2012 ) = = = 
 Melua 's fifth studio album , Secret Symphony was released on 5 March 2012 . The album was recorded in collaboration with orchestrator and conductor Mike Batt . Melua said in a statement : " This album was going to be my ' singer 's album ' . I had always wanted to do this one day ; singing other people 's songs brings something out of you and your voice that isn 't perhaps where you would have gone vocally with your own material . " 
 = = = Ketevan ( 2013 ) = = = 
 Melua 's sixth studio album , Ketevan , was released on 16 September 2013 . Ketevan entered the UK charts at number 6 - Katie joined a very small group of female artists , which includes Madonna and Kate Bush , who have scored 6 consecutive UK top 10 studio albums . Ketevan also entered the top 10 in France , Poland , Denmark , Germany , the Netherlands and Switzerland in its first week of release . 
 = = Other work = = 
 = = = Acting and modelling = = = 
 Melua appeared in a segment of the 2007 film Grindhouse , written by Quentin Tarantino and Robert Rodriguez . The segment in which Melua appeared , entitled " Don 't " , was a faux trailer , directed by Edgar Wright and produced in the style of a 1970s ' Hammer House of Horror film trailer . 
 In 2009 , Melua was named as the new face of the leading French cashmere designer , Eric Bompard . 
 = = = World record holder = = = 
 On 2 October 2006 , Melua entered the Guinness Book of Records for playing the deepest underwater concert 303 metres below sea level on the Norwegian Statoil 's Troll A platform in the North Sea . Melua and her band underwent extensive medical tests and survival training in Norway before flying by helicopter to the rig . Melua later described achieving the record as " the most surreal gig I have ever done " . Melua 's concert is commemorated in the DVD release Concert Under the Sea , released in June 2007 . 
 = = = Charity work = = = 
 In November 2004 Melua was asked to take part in Band Aid 20 in which she joined a chorus of British and Irish pop singers to create a rendition of " Do They Know It 's Christmas ? " to raise money for famine relief in Africa . Then in March 2005 , Melua sang " Too Much Love Will Kill You " with Brian May at the 46664 concert in George , South Africa for Nelson Mandela 's HIV charity . Melua had been a fan of Queen since her childhood in Georgia when her uncles played the band 's music , so performing with May was a realisation of a childhood dream . Later in 2005 , through her role as a goodwill ambassador to the charity Save the Children , Melua went to Sri Lanka where she observed the work the charity was doing for children in the area after the civil war and Indian Ocean tsunami . In 2006 Melua donated all the proceeds from her single " Spider 's Web " to the charity . 
 On 7 July 2007 , Melua performed at the German leg of Live Earth in Hamburg and in December of that year , Melua released a cover of the Louis Armstrong song " What a Wonderful World " in which she sang with a recording of the late Eva Cassidy . All profits from the single , which entered the UK singles chart at No. 1 on 16 December 2007 , went to the Red Cross . 
 Melua has visited Oxfam charity shops for many years , using them frequently to buy her clothing . She has stated that this is related as much to her dislike of spending and glamour as it is to her support for the charity , and admits that she looks " like a tramp " and that her hairdresser playfully calls her look " the Romanian window cleaner " . 
 Katie is also patron of Fair Trees , the organisation that is trying to stop exploitation of cone pickers in <unk> , Georgia , by the European Christmas tree industry . The local people in this region of Georgia are paid a pittance to risk their lives climbing 30 m high fir trees to collect the cones from which the seeds are extracted and sent to Christmas tree nurseries in Europe . Until Fair Trees came along these cone pickers were given no safety equipment or training , no health insurance and very little pay ; every year people are injured and even killed doing this work . Fair Trees grow and sell the only fair trade Christmas trees in the world ( certified by the <unk> ) . 
 Katie is a patron of the Manx Cancer Help charity , which offers support to cancer sufferers and is based on the Isle of Man . She attended the 2013 fundraising ball for the charity . 
 = = = Musical tastes = = = 
 In April 2006 , for The Sun newspaper , Melua chose fourteen pieces of her favourite music that she enjoyed and had the biggest musical influence on her . The pieces she chose were Paul Simon 's " Hearts and Bones " , Jeff Buckley 's version of Leonard Cohen 's " Hallelujah " , Joni Mitchell 's " Marcie " , Bob Dylan 's " Masters of War " , James Taylor 's " How Sweet It Is ( To Be Loved by You ) " , Chuck Berry 's " No Particular Place to Go " , Portishead 's " Glory Box " , Björk 's " The Pleasure Is All Mine " , Camille 's " Au Port " , Rage Against the Machine 's " Killing in the Name " , Bobbie Gentry 's " Fancy " , Finley Quaye 's " Even After All " , Suzanne Vega 's " Caramel " and Babyshambles ' " Fuck Forever " . 
 Melua has said on numerous occasions how Queen were a huge influence on her as a child / teenager , with one of her memories of music being her uncle playing records by Queen and Led Zeppelin . She performed with Queen at the 46664 concert in South Africa in March 2005 . 
 Melua appeared on the BBC 's The Culture Show in November 2006 advocating Paul McCartney as her choice in the search for Britain 's greatest living icon . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Call Off the Search ( 2003 ) 
 Piece by Piece ( 2005 ) 
 Pictures ( 2007 ) 
 The House ( 2010 ) 
 Secret Symphony ( 2012 ) 
 Ketevan ( 2013 ) 
 = = = Appearances on soundtracks = = = 
 = = = Acting roles = = = 
 = = Honours and awards = = 
 Melua was the best @-@ selling UK female artist of 2004 and 2005 . 
 In 2006 , Melua had a tulip named after her . 
 According to VH1 , Call Off the Search is the 87th best @-@ selling British album in history . 
 = Skaugum Tunnel = 
 The Skaugum Tunnel ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a 3 @,@ 790 @-@ meter ( 12 @,@ 434 ft ) long railway tunnel in Asker , Norway , on the Asker Line . The tunnel runs between Asker Station and Solstad and was built as part of the first stage of the Asker Line , between Asker and Sandvika . Construction started in February 2002 and the tunnel opened on 27 August 2005 . The tunnel was built by Mika for the Norwegian National Rail Administration using the drilling and blasting method with one crosscut . During construction there was one blasting accident . Since the tunnel opened , there have been problems with leaks damaging the infrastructure . The tunnel has double track , is electrified and allows for a maximum speed of 160 kilometers per hour ( 99 mph ) . The cost to build the tunnel , excluding the infrastructure , was 450 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . The tunnel has accelerated intercity and regional traffic west of Oslo and freed up capacity for the Oslo Commuter Rail on the old Drammen Line . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The Skaugum Tunnel is a 3 @,@ 790 @-@ meter ( 12 @,@ 434 ft ) long tunnel with a cross @-@ section varying between 105 and 115 square meters ( 1 @,@ 130 and 1 @,@ 240 sq ft ) . It carries the double @-@ tracked Asker Line between Asker Station and Solstad . The tunnel runs mostly through Cambrian @-@ Silurian sedimentary slate , nodular limestone and shale , with local occurrences of Permian igneous rock . The line is electrified at 15 kV 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz AC and allows for maximum speeds of 160 kilometers per hour ( 99 mph ) . The tunnel has frost isolation 300 meters ( 980 ft ) into the tunnel from each end and frost fans which ensure that the air stays put in the middle of the tunnel to hinder cold air from reaching in past the frost isolation . 
 = = History = = 
 The Asker Line runs from Lysaker Station via Sandvika Station to Asker Station , in the municipalities of Bærum and Asker . The line was built to increase the traffic on the west corridor . Traditionally , the only railway west of Oslo was the Drammen Line , which has limited capacity , and a mix of local , regional , intercity and freight trains . This caused many delays and poor utilization of tracks , as some trains make many stops and others only a few . The Asker Line allows regional and intercity trains to by @-@ pass the local stations east of Asker , by running local trains and freight trains on the Drammen Line , while faster trains run on the new track . The Asker Line was built in two stages : the first from Asker to Sandvika was built from 2001 to 2005 , and the second stage , from Sandvika to Lysaker , between 2007 and 2011 . The other two tunnels on the Asker Line are the 3 @.@ 8 @-@ kilometer ( 2 @.@ 4 mi ) long Tanum Tunnel and the 5 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometer ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) long Bærum Tunnel . 
 Work on geological surveys in the area started prior to 2001 , with surveys being performed by the Geological Survey of Norway . The contract to build the tunnel and all other earthwork on the section from Solstad to <unk> was awarded to Mika , with the tunneling costing NOK 425 million . The tunnel was built using the drilling and blasting method using two points of entry , the entrance on the Asker side and from a crosscut at Skaugum . Work started in February 2002 and was concluded in May 2005 . Construction involved blasting 450 @,@ 000 cubic meters ( 16 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of earthwork and drilling 275 kilometers ( 171 mi ) of holes for pre @-@ injection . The construction used 14 @,@ 000 cubic meters ( 490 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of gunite , 14 @,@ 000 cubic meters ( 490 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of concrete , 24 @,@ 000 bolts , 35 @,@ 000 cubic meters ( 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of water- and frost protection , 25 @,@ 000 cubic meters ( 880 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of <unk> and frost isolation and 9 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 8 mi ) of cable conduit . Near the entrance at Asker , the tunnel is closest to the surface , and is between 2 and 3 meters ( 6 ft 7 in and 9 ft 10 in ) below the basements of residential houses . During the construction of this part , the construction was as slow as 8 to 10 meters ( 26 to 33 ft ) per week , of which half the time was used for injections to choke the tunnel . 
 During the construction there was an accident where a worker driving a wheeled loader was only 20 to 30 meters ( 70 to 100 ft ) from a blasting . He became disabled , but did not receive any compensation because he was working for the contractor as a sole proprietor , not as a wage earner . The Norwegian Labour Inspection Authority criticized Mika for improper safety routines and required them to improve them , but concluded that no criminal offenses had been committed . 
 A concern from people living along the tunnel was that they would be subject to low @-@ frequency noise . Originally the municipalities of Asker and Bærum had demanded that residents be subject to a maximum of 27 decibel A @-@ weighting ( dBA ) , but the National Rail Administration appealed the requirements and was permitted to allow up to 32 dBA . In March 2004 , a test was done in the tunnel to insure that the requirements would be met , as low @-@ frequency sound is difficult to predict . Measurements after the opening of the tunnel showed background noise of 30 dBA , that no @-@ one was subject to 32 dBA or higher , and that it was nearly impossible to measure the passing of trains . 
 Among the major concerns were leaks ; during the construction on the Romerike Tunnel , there was a one @-@ year delay and severe cost overruns due to improper construction methods . One of the main aims in the Skaugum Tunnel project was therefore to avoid similar leaks , and the criteria were set to 4 liters ( 0 @.@ 88 imp gal ; 1 @.@ 1 U.S. gal ) per minute per 100 meters ( 330 ft ) . This was achieved by using sufficient time for the pre @-@ injection , as well as continuous <unk> through the entire tunnel . However , water still dripped into the tunnel , which caused several types of damage . In some places , it dripped onto the track causing it to rust , while in other places it fell onto electrical equipment . There were also issues with water running down the walls and collecting in the cable conduit , and the limestone in the water mixing with the ballast . By 2011 , the emergency lighting system had to be replaced because of the high humidity . The National Rail Administration has stated that savings made by the specifications in the water and frost protection methods have caused high maintenance costs because the small leaks which are present have done a lot of harm . In addition , areas with leaks suffer from icing . This has been part of a trend where older tunnels are nearly maintenance @-@ free , while newer tunnels have incurred high maintenance costs . 
 Laying of tracks , signaling , power supply and other infrastructure was done by Baneservice . The cost for the entire section from Asker to Sandvika was NOK 70 million . The work was done in February and March 2005 . The opening of the tunnel and the rest of the section from Asker to Sandvika took place on 27 August 2005 . 
 = Acafellas = 
 " Acafellas " is the third episode of the American television series Glee . The episode premiered on the Fox network on September 16 , 2009 . It was directed by John Scott and written by series creator Ryan Murphy . The episode sees glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) form an all @-@ male a cappella group , the Acafellas , neglecting the club in favor of dedicating his time to the new endeavor . New Directions struggle with choreography , and resist attempts at sabotage by members of the cheer squad . Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) harbors romantic feelings for Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) , who comes out as homosexual . 
 Singer Josh Groban guest stars as himself , John Lloyd Young appears as wood shop teacher Henri St. Pierre , and Victor Garber and Debra Monk play Will 's parents . The episode features covers of seven songs , including the instrumental piece " La <unk> Negra " performed on guitar by Mark Salling . Studio recordings of two of the songs performed were released as singles , available for digital download , and two of the tracks also appear on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 1 . 
 The episode was watched by 6 @.@ 69 million US viewers and received mixed reviews from critics . Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack and the New York Times 's Mike Hale welcomed the return of Stephen Tobolowsky as Sandy Ryerson , while Ryan Brockington of the New York Post and Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal praised Riley 's cover of Jazmine Sullivan 's " Bust Your Windows " . However , Rachel Ray , reviewing the episode for The Independent , deemed it " overhyped [ ... ] uninspired , confusing and with a simple plot to boot . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) questions director Will Schuester 's choreography skills during a glee club rehearsal , he forms an all @-@ male a cappella group , the Acafellas , to build his confidence . The group originally consists of Will , football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) , woodshop teacher Henri St. Pierre ( John Lloyd Young ) and Howard Bamboo ( Kent Avenido ) , a co @-@ worker of Will 's wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) . After their first performance however , Henri and Howard drop out and Will replaces them with glee club member Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) , who was considering quitting glee club , and his fellow football player Puck ( Mark Salling ) . Former glee club director Sandy Ryerson ( Stephen Tobolowsky ) also joins the group , having arranged for singer Josh Groban to be at their next performance . Although the star compliments their rendition of " I Wanna Sex You Up " , he reveals that he only attended to make sure Sandy stopped stalking him . 
 In Will 's absence , the glee club hires Dakota Stanley ( Whit Hertford ) , the choreographer of a rival club , Vocal Adrenaline , to help coach them to a Nationals championship . Cheerleaders Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) , Santana ( Naya Rivera ) and Brittany ( Heather Morris ) hope that the notoriously harsh Stanley will prompt some members of the club to quit , furthering their plan to sabotage the club . Although Stanley is heavily critical of most of the group , Rachel convinces the members that their differences give them a unique edge , and fires the choreographer . The cheerleaders also lead Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) to believe that fellow club member Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) has feelings for her , leaving her hurt when he rejects her advances . He misleads her into believing he has feelings for Rachel , which angers Mercedes , and she breaks the windshield of his car and sings " Bust Your Windows " . Kurt later confesses to her that he is gay — the first time he has said it to anyone — and the two make up . 
 Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) is angry that the club is now stronger than ever , and punishes Quinn and Santana . Quinn retaliates by thanking Sue for helping her realize that believing in herself negates the need to bring other people down . Will realizes that his passion is teaching , not performing , and resolves to recommit to the glee club . 
 = = Production = = 
 Recurring cast members who appear in " Acafellas " are Stephen Tobolowsky as former glee club director Sandy Ryerson , Patrick Gallagher as football coach Ken Tanaka , Iqbal Theba as Principal Figgins , Kent Avenido as Sheets and Things employee Howard Bamboo , and Naya Rivera and Heather Morris as glee club members Santana Lopez and Brittany Pierce . Whit Hertford guest @-@ starred as choreographer Dakota Stanley . Cheyenne Jackson was originally supposed to play Dakota Stanley , but when he arrived in California he learned that he had the flu . John Lloyd Young played Henri , " a retired wood shop teacher with an excellent singing voice " , and Victor Garber and Debra Monk played Will 's parents . Morrison was " thrilled " by Garber 's casting , having been a longstanding fan of his . Josh Groban received special guest star billing , playing , in Colfer 's words , " himself as this ignorant asshole " . Morrison 's rapping in the episode was an already acquired skill , with Gilsig commenting : " He can do it . It didn 't look like a joke , it actually looked totally authentic , and he was fantastic . I think he has just an amazing musical range . People like that who have been singing their whole lives , they have such a command of that . " Riley deemed Kurt 's coming out in the episode " very emotional " and " one of [ her ] favorite scenes " . Colfer described the scene as " very respectful and very touching ... very , very real and serious . " 
 = = Music = = 
 The episode features cover versions of " For He 's a Jolly Good Fellow " , " This Is How We Do It " by Montell Jordan , " Poison " by Bell Biv DeVoe , " Mercy " by Duffy , " Bust Your Windows " by Jazmine Sullivan , " I Wanna Sex You Up " by Color Me Badd and an instrumental performance of " La <unk> Negra " by Juanes . Studio recordings of " Bust Your Windows " and " Mercy " were released as singles , available for digital download . " Bust Your Windows " is also featured on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 1 , with a studio recording of " I Wanna Sex You Up " included as a bonus track on discs purchased from Target . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Acafellas " was watched by 6 @.@ 69 million US viewers and attained a 3 @.@ 2 / 9 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . It was the tenth most watched show in Canada for the week , with 1 @.@ 44 million viewers . In the UK , the episode was shown straight after the pilot episode , and was watched by 1 @.@ 68 million viewers ( 1 @.@ 29 million on E4 , and 398 @,@ 000 on timeshift ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Tim Stack for Entertainment Weekly reviewed the episode positively , deeming it potentially even better than the season premiere . Stack wrote that the best aspect of the episode was the focus placed on previously more minor characters , such as Puck , Mercedes and Kurt . He praised Lynch as Sue and wrote , " Stephen Tobolowsky ’ s Sandy is also becoming one of the most reliable characters for great lines and laughs . " He was disappointed that Garber did not sing in his role as Will 's father , but hoped he would return for future episodes . Ryan Brockington for the New York Post stated that " the key to this show lies directly within the female leads " , praising Michele as Rachel , Agron as Quinn and Riley as Mercedes , noting that in " Acafellas " , Riley " finally got a chance to shine " . Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal praised Riley 's rendition of " Bust Your Windows " as " showstopping " , Vocal Adrenaline 's " Mercy " as " leg @-@ splits @-@ over @-@ shoulders exciting " , and deemed the Acafellas performance of " I Wanna Sex You Up " " corny " but noted : " this is about high school . Corny is de rigueur . " Shawna Malcom for the Los Angeles Times wrote that although " Bust Your Windows " was " over the top [ ... ] the emotion behind the whole thing felt appropriately real . " 
 Mike Hale of the New York Times was critical of the episode , discussing the show 's " increasingly rapid march toward Hallmark country . " He commented that while " Acafellas " did not match the standard of the pilot episode , it was funnier than " Showmance " , and praised the return of Stephen Tobolowsky as Sandy Ryerson . Hale called Groban 's cameo the " most fun of all " in the episode , but overall noted that : " The humor can ’ t make up for the lack of big production numbers [ ... ] The problem for this show is always going to be how to fill the gaps between songs . A lot of the current plot lines , like Will and his wife 's phantom baby , are already getting old , so it would behoove the producers to keep those gaps as short as possible . " Rachel Ray , reviewing the episode for The Independent deemed Glee " overhyped [ ... ] uninspired , confusing and with a simple plot to boot . " Ray wrote , Glee 's " upbeat message " was " overridden by the show 's attempt to be darker than the run @-@ of @-@ the mill high school drama . " As with Hale , Ray commented that : " Music should be the redeeming feature of Glee but it 's not , because the viewer never gets a satisfying taste of the cast members ' musical talents " . Shawna Malcom criticized Terri and Will 's characterization in the episode , deeming Terri " beyond annoying " , but wrote : " I have confidence that creator Ryan Murphy will flesh out Jessalyn Gilsig ’ s character over time . Her seemingly sincere apology to Will for not being more supportive of his boy band was a nice first step . " Of Will , Malcom posed the question : " didn ’ t it feel as though his commitment to the glee club melted away rather quickly ? [ ... ] How could he turn his back so easily ? " More positively , Malcom called Kurt 's coming out scene " lovely " . She wrote that Groban 's appearance was " laugh out loud " funny , while Stack commented : " It was a little random , but it 's all worth it for the scene when Groban was hitting on Will 's mom . " 
 = The Buzz on Maggie = 
 The Buzz on Maggie is an American / Canadian animated television series created by Dave Polsky for Disney Channel . The series centers on an ambitious and expressive tween fly named Maggie Pesky and her family and friends . The show is set in <unk> , a city for insects located in a dump . While conceptualizing the series , Polsky wanted it to contain a playful aspect at adolescence and director Dave Wasson formed the overall look of the characters , being heavily influenced by early Walt Disney cartoon shorts . The Buzz on Maggie was Disney 's first series to be fully animated in Adobe Flash , a process done by <unk> Entertainment and Future Thought Productions . 
 The Buzz on Maggie premiered on June 17 , 2005 and aired its final episode on May 27 , 2006 , concluding its only season . The series received positive reviews from television critics , many of whom praised its humor , voice acting and writing . The theme song " Just the Way I Am " , performed by Canadian singer Skye Sweetnam , was also met with critical praise and a Daytime Emmy Award nomination in 2006 . During its run , The Buzz on Maggie also received an Annie Award nomination for its character design . Reruns of the show aired until August 25 , 2008 and was replaced by Recess on it 's only timeslot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Buzz on Maggie follows Maggie Pesky ( Jessica DiCicco ) , an expressive tween fly and her family ; parents Chauncey ( Brian Doyle @-@ Murray ) and Frieda ( Susan <unk> ) ; brothers Aldrin ( David Kaufman ) and <unk> ( Thom <unk> ) ; and sister Bella ( Tara Strong ) , who is still a maggot . The family resides in an old milk carton in the suburban fly metropolis of <unk> , which is located in a dump . Maggie has an ambitious and adventurous personality and aspires to become a rock star . Her approach to life often suffers unexpected consequences that puts herself in jeopardy , as she often follows her own impulses although they go against the rules or her parents ' wishes . However , she ultimately learns her lesson , which was one of the core themes for the show 's conception . 
 Maggie attends a junior high school called <unk> Academy with her best friend <unk> <unk> ( Cree Summer ) and nemesis Dawn <unk> ( Strong ) . The school 's staff include the sneaky Principal <unk> ( Jeff Bennett ) , pompous Mr. <unk> ( Curtis Armstrong ) and gruff Mrs. <unk> ( Candi Milo ) . The Buzz on Maggie uses a slapstick comedy style and relies slightly on gross @-@ out humor . It also includes several insect aspects , such as flies ' appetite for spoiled and rotten food . The show features various references to pop culture and common themes , such as sibling rivalry and peer pressure , from a fly 's point of view . 
 = = Production = = 
 The concept of The Buzz on Maggie was created by Dave Polsky , a former writer on Scary Movie 2 and South Park . In an early interview for Animation World Network , he explained that the series utilizes a playful aspect at adolescence , naming it " individuality vs. conformity " . He said , " Maggie must learn how to pursue her agenda without alienating those she cares about . More often than not , Maggie learns that it is difficult to negotiate life on her terms without burning bridges . " Dave Wasson , the creator of the animated series Time Squad , served as the director , and executively produced the series with Polsky , while Laura Perkins Brittain was the co @-@ executive producer . 
 Wasson formed Maggie 's character design and supported the use of Adobe Flash for animating the series . He told Animation Magazine that he was convinced Flash was a " good way to go " as he had had previous experience with the program , such as commercials and short films . The series became Disney 's first to be fully animated in Flash . Following the cancellation of Kids ' WB 's ¡ Mucha Lucha ! , many animators from that series were hired on The Buzz on Maggie . For the character designs , Wasson was heavily influenced by early cartoon shorts by Tex Avery , Warner Bros. and Walt Disney . He noted that the characters in The Buzz on Maggie have " a lot of 1930s touches " and wear white gloves , which is a direct homage to the cartoon shorts . The characters also have anime @-@ inspired designs with oversized heads and large eyes . Wasson stated that the concept of Maggie living in a dump gave him a " lot of visual opportunities " . Jorge Gutierrez supervised the character design and Roman Laney supervised location and prop design in addition to background paint . The animation was done by <unk> Entertainment and Future Thought Productions . 
 The series ' theme song " Just the Way I Am " was composed by Bob Thiele Jr. and Dillon O 'Brian , and performed by Canadian singer Skye Sweetnam . The song is about pride , acceptance and empowerment . Adam Berry did the show 's score . Charlie Adler voice directed The Buzz on Maggie and helmed voice casting with Jamie Thomason . Newcomer Jessica DiCicco was cast as Maggie , her first main role on a television series , preceding her role on <unk> Unleashed , which premiered the same year . The rest of the main cast included David Kaufman , Thom <unk> , Cree Summer , Brian Doyle @-@ Murray and Susan <unk> . Tara Strong voiced Maggie 's nemesis Dawn , among other minor characters . The series had a few guest voice actors , such as Laraine Newman and Jon Polito . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Buzz on Maggie premiered on Disney Channel on Friday June 17 , 2005 , with two back @-@ to @-@ back episodes . The next week , it moved to its regular timeslot in the channel 's weekend block . Each half @-@ hour episode consists of two different segments . The Buzz on Maggie aired for one season , comprising 21 half @-@ hour episodes . The final episode , containing the segments " Synchronized Flying " and " Roach Hotel " , aired on May 27 , 2006 . In the fall of 2005 , The Buzz on Maggie was picked up by sister network ABC . The network began airing reruns of the show starting on September 17 , 2005 , on the Saturday morning block ABC Kids . According to Nielsen Media Research , the ABC premiere acquired a 1 @.@ 6 rating in the Kids 2 – 11 demographic , and a 1 @.@ 4 rating in Tweens 9 – 14 , as well as a 7 % share in both demographics . The premiere was that timeslot 's highest @-@ rated broadcast in nearly three months across the block 's three key demographics , Kids 2 – 11 , Kids 6 – 11 and Tweens 9 – 14 . During the ABC Kids broadcasts , the series carried an E / I designation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Buzz on Maggie received positive reviews from television critics . Jeff <unk> of Star @-@ News viewed it as " Miss Spider 's Sunny Patch Friends meets The Proud Family " and named it " by far the most entertaining of this summer 's new offerings " . Roger Catlin of Hartford Courant wrote that it stands out from other shows on Disney Channel by " being a little sassy and sharp , and a whole lot funnier than most of [ the channel 's ] stuff " . He wrote that the channel " gets back into the race dominated by Cartoon Network offerings ... and a Nickelodeon roster ... with an offering just as hip and well designed " . Catlin commended the voice acting and the " sharp " writing , stating that the former factor " hit [ s ] the humor home " . The Philadelphia Inquirer critic David Hiltbrand noted that although the show includes " a little " gross @-@ out humor , " it 's reasonably tasteful by adolescent standards " . He concluded , " The animation ... is a little substandard , but the premise is nicely maintained . " AllMovie 's Hal Erickson deemed the fly concept unoriginal , but said that the show " set [ s ] itself apart from such earlier endeavors " . Erickson regarded Maggie 's " strong , forceful attitude " a positive role model for kids . A critic for Observer @-@ Reporter deemed it " suitably silly " , and Robert Lloyd of Los Angeles Times called it " delightful " . 
 At the time of its premiere , Gail Pennington of St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch named the show one of the " Tops of the night " . Diana Dawson , writing for Spartanburg Herald @-@ Journal , considered it an " inspiring show for fun @-@ loving tweens " . Kevin McDonough of Lawrence Journal @-@ World wrote that The Buzz on Maggie " strikes a decent balance between cartoon anarchy and Disney 's you @-@ go @-@ girl sermonizing . " He praised the title character 's " bugged @-@ out status " , writing that it prevents the stories from being " too cute " . Jeanne <unk> of The Dallas Morning News graded The Buzz on Maggie with a B and regarded it as " perfect cartooning " for children . She wrote , " [ The show 's ] relatively simple plots , with equally simple resolutions and very clean dialogue , create fine cartoons for a <unk> 's late @-@ afternoon respite . " Similarly , the show 's theme song " Just the Way I Am " received positive reactions ; Hiltbrand called it " great " , and Dawson wrote that " every episode explodes with the dynamic theme song " . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 In 2005 , Jorge Gutierrez was nominated for the Best Character Design in an Animated Television Production award at the 33rd Annie Awards , for his work in the episode " Bella Con Carny " . However , he lost to Ernie Gilbert from The Fairly OddParents . The next year , Bob Thiele Jr. and Dillon O 'Brian received a nomination for Outstanding Original Song for the theme song " Just the Way I Am " at the 33rd Daytime Emmy Awards , but lost to the song " Sunshine " from The Young and the Restless . 
 = Mycena nidificata = 
 Mycena nidificata is a species of fungus in the Mycenaceae family of the Agaricales . First collected in 2000 and reported as a new species in 2007 , it is known only from Kanagawa , Japan , where it grows on the floor of oak forests . The dark brown irregularly wrinkled cap measures up to 25 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter . The cap is supported by a thin stem up to 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) long , which is covered at the base by a whitish hairlike growth , and attached to white , cord @-@ like rhizomorphs — aggregations of mycelium that resemble plant roots . The underside of the cap features thin , distantly spaced grayish gills that have distinct veins running between them . At a microscopic level , distinguishing characteristics include the inamyloid spores ( turning dark blue to black when stained with Melzer 's reagent ) , the club @-@ shaped cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edges ) with finger @-@ like appendages , the diverticulate cells in the outer layer of cap and stem , and the presence of clamp connections . 
 = = Taxonomy , naming , and classification = = 
 Mycena nidificata was first collected in 2000 by Japanese mycologist Haruki Takahashi , and reported as new along with seven other Mycenas in a 2007 publication . The specific epithet is derived from the Latin word nidificata , meaning " <unk> " — " to make a nest " . Its Japanese name is <unk> @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 According to Takahashi , the inamyloid spores , the diverticulate cap cuticle hyphae , and the dark pigment in the gill hyphae suggest that the fungus is best classified in the section <unk> of the genus Mycena . Because of its medium @-@ sized , partly <unk> fruit bodies ( i.e. , small to medium @-@ sized with white spore prints and convex caps , similar to species once placed in the genus Collybia ) , the white cord @-@ like rhizomorphs , and its distinctly intervenose gills , it has an isolated position within the section . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is initially conical to convex to bell @-@ shaped , then flattened in age , ultimately reaching 10 to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter . The center of the cap is irregularly wrinkled to pitted , but less so toward the grooved margin . It is hygrophanous ( changing color as it loses or absorbs water ) , dry , initially pruinose ( covered with what appears to be a fine white powder ) , but soon becomes smooth . The color is blackish @-@ brown at the center , dark brown to reddish @-@ brown farther outward , and becoming much paler at the margin ; sometimes the cap is evenly dark brown . The flesh is up to 1 mm thick and white , and does not have any distinctive taste and odor . The stem is 40 to 50 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) long by 1 @.@ 5 to 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 059 to 0 @.@ 079 in ) wide , cylindrical , slightly enlarged at the base , central , slender , and hollow . The stem surface is dry , pruinose over the entire length , and does not become smooth with age . It is pale brownish at the top , and gradually becomes dark brown toward the base . The base is covered with a white mycelial hairlike growth ( a tomentum ) that is attached to white cord @-@ like rhizomorphs on the substratum . The gills are fused to the stem , and distantly spaced , with between 15 and 18 gills reaching the stem . The gills are up to 2 @.@ 5 mm broad , thin , grayish , and have distinct veins running between them . The gill edges are the same color as the gill faces . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are roughly ellipsoid and measure 8 – 11 by 5 – 6 µm . They are smooth , colorless , inamyloid , and thin @-@ walled . The basidia ( the spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 28 – 35 by 7 – 8 µm , club @-@ shaped , and mostly four @-@ spored . The abundant cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are club @-@ shaped , measure 30 – 45 by 10 – 15 µm , and form a sterile gill edge . They have several irregularly cylindrical to knob @-@ like apical appendages measuring 3 – 11 by 2 – 5 µm , which are colorless and thin @-@ walled . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are absent in M. nidificata . The hymenophoral ( hymenium @-@ bearing ) tissue is made of smooth , thin @-@ walled hyphae that are 6 – 26 µm wide , cylindrical ( but often inflated ) , and contain brownish pigment in the cytoplasm . These hyphae are dextrinoid , meaning they will turn reddish to reddish @-@ brown in the presence of Melzer 's reagent . The cap cuticle is made of parallel , bent @-@ over hyphae that are 3 – 10 µm wide , cylindrical . The hyphae are smooth or covered with scattered , warty or finger @-@ like diverticulae . Under the cap cuticle is a layer of parallel hyphae containing cytoplasmic brownish pigment . The hyphae are dextrinoid , and contain short and inflated cells that are up to 40 µm wide . The stem cuticle is made of parallel , bent @-@ over hyphae 3 – 8 µm wide , which are similar in appearance to the hyphae of the cap cuticle . The caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stem ) are relatively sporadic ; they are cylindrical , diverticulate , colorless , thin @-@ walled , and measure 45 – 60 by 4 – 8 µm . The stem tissue is composed of longitudinally arranged , cylindrical hyphae that are 10 – 25 µm wide , dextrinoid , smooth , and have cytoplasmic brownish pigment . Clamp connections are present in the stem tissues , and at the septa at the bases of the basidia . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Mycena granulifera , a species originally described from Brazil , is comparable to M. nidificata in having inamyloid spores , club @-@ shaped cheilocystidia with finger @-@ like outgrowths , and diverticulate cap cuticle hyphae . M. granulifera differs in forming a whitish , wrinkled cap and club @-@ shaped to roughly spindle @-@ shaped pleurocystidia . Mycena nidificata also bears some resemblance to the European species M. flos @-@ <unk> , which is distinguished by having cylindrical , amyloid spores , gills without veins between them , and an absence of cord @-@ like rhizomorphs . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Mycena nidificata is known only from Kanagawa , Japan . The mushroom is found growing solitary or scattered , on dead fallen twigs in forests dominated by the oak species Quercus <unk> . Fruiting occurs from May to September . 
 = Development of The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion = 
 The development of The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion began in 2002 , immediately after its predecessor , The Elder Scrolls III : Morrowind , was published . Rumors of a sequel to Morrowind began circulating in June 2004 ; the sequel 's title was identified on September 10 , 2004 , the date of its official announcement . Oblivion was developed by Bethesda Game Studios , and the initial Xbox 360 and Personal computer ( PC ) releases were co @-@ published by Bethesda and Take @-@ Two Interactive 's subsidiary , 2K Games . According to interviews with Bethesda staff , the publisher @-@ developer relationship — one of the few independent relations in the industry — worked well , and Bethesda was not subject to excessive corporate guidance . Originally scheduled for a November 22 , 2005 release , in tandem with the Xbox 360 's launch , Oblivion was delayed to a March 21 , 2006 release for Windows PCs and the Xbox 360 . 
 Developers working on Oblivion focused on providing a tighter storyline , with fewer filler quests and more developed characters . The developers sought to make information in the game world more accessible to players , making the game easier to pick up and play . Oblivion features improved AI ( courtesy of Bethesda 's proprietary Radiant AI ) , improved physics ( courtesy of the Havok physics engine ) , and impressive graphics , taking advantage of advanced lighting and shader routines like high dynamic range rendering ( HDR ) and specular mapping . Bethesda developed and implemented procedural content creation tools in the creation of Oblivion 's terrain , leading to landscapes that are more complex and realistic than those of past titles , with less of a drain on Bethesda 's staff . 
 A PlayStation 3 version of Oblivion was released on March 20 , 2007 in North America , and April 27 , 2007 in Europe , following delays similar to those for the Xbox 360 release . The PlayStation 3 release was touted for its improvement over the graphics of the PC and Xbox 360 versions , although some of the improved shader routines optimized for the PlayStation 3 release were set to be ported over to the other releases through patches . A plan to distribute content through downloads paid by <unk> was initially met with criticism by customers due to its alleged low value , but later releases — at a reduced price , and with more content — proved more popular . 
 = = Business = = 
 = = = Rumors and official announcements = = = 
 The first rumors of another Elder Scrolls release after The Elder Scrolls III : Morrowind began to circulate in June 2004 , following Bethesda 's posting of an e @-@ mail searching for new staff . The new staff members were to participate on a team that would push " the bleeding @-@ edge of RPG development for the PC and future @-@ generation consoles " . For those considering the job , the e @-@ mail suggested that " knowledge of ... The Elder Scrolls [ is ] a plus " . At the time , a member of Bethesda 's staff played down the importance of the last comment , noting that Bethesda would " obviously " prefer applicants familiar with the company 's products . Rumors were confirmed on July 12 , 2004 , when it was announced that Fallout 3 and the next Elder Scrolls title would be published by Bethesda and produced by Todd Howard . The title of the release was listed on September 10 , 2004 , when Bethesda officially announced the identity of the game in question : The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion , followed by a feature in the October 2004 issue of Game Informer . At the time of the announcement , Bethesda had been working on Oblivion for two years ( since 2002 ) , just as Bethesda was completing work on Morrowind . 
 = = = Release delays = = = 
 Although preliminary reports from Reuters suggested an Oblivion release in tandem with the launch of the Xbox 360 on November 22 , 2005 , and the original announcement of the game set a release date of Winter 2005 , Take @-@ Two Interactive announced , during a conference call with analysts on October 31 , 2005 , that Oblivion 's release was to be delayed until the second quarter of Take @-@ Two 's fiscal year . The new schedule would put the release between February and April 2006 . The delay surprised many , especially online retailers , who had begun accepting pre @-@ orders for consoles bundled with Oblivion . News of the delay came at a time following a burst of bad news from the company , including a 60 % drop in expected earnings per share , the ongoing Hot Coffee minigame controversy , worse than average sales for the company 's flagship Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas , sudden drops in share prices , and delays for other company products . 
 Most commentators blamed Take @-@ Two 's corporate governance ; one analyst stated that the company 's troubles were more " company @-@ specific than market @-@ driven " , and another declared company CEO Paul Eibeler to be the " worst CEO of 2005 " , pointing to " setbacks on the rollouts of newer games " as evidence of his failure . Pete Hines , Vice President of PR and Marketing for Bethesda , and Todd Howard , Executive Producer for the game , gave an update about the delay on the weekend of November 6 , 2005 . They planned to give updates every subsequent weekend until the game 's release . A commentator from Joystiq complained of the vagueness of the updates : " they don 't get any more specific than to say , ' There is work that still needs to be done ' . In fact , they say this three times just to make sure we know how hard they are working .... While it 's nice to see the development team taking time out to update the fans , if the announcements continue to be as vague as this one , I 'd rather just see them spend the extra time on the actual game . " 
 = = = Product showings = = = 
 On May 16 , 2005 , Bethesda announced that they would be releasing Oblivion on Microsoft 's Xbox 360 , and that the game 's public debut would come at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in Los Angeles on May 18 , 2005 . The version shown at E3 was substantially finished ; most content was already in the game , lacking only the polish that the final months of development would bring . The game 's world , for example , had already been fully constructed but still needed to undergo a " clutter pass " , wherein minor game items — " books , weapons , and thousands of forks and plates " — are dropped into the game world . 
 Howard himself never took to the show . " It 's like a beauty pageant , " he told one reporter . " I have 20 minutes to give you a presentation on our games that by their nature are hard to demo in that time period , and then the person is going to check their watch and walk out and go see <unk> seating , and dim lighting — where attendees could comfortably watch . Howard agreed with the choice : " We 've always taken sort of the meeting room approach . We don 't have loud crazy booths . " 
 During Microsoft 's E3 pre @-@ show conference , a ten @-@ second preview of Oblivion was shown amid demo reels for other games . The preview consisted of a series of brief second @-@ long shots of the game . Later on , during E3 proper , Bethesda showed a longer 25 @-@ minute demo that showcased further clipped scenes : the opening dungeon , a procedurally rendered forest , one of the game 's towns , and other locales . Most viewers were impressed by Oblivion 's showing . In the words of one reporter , " The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion isn 't just one of the brightest gems in the Xbox 360 's upcoming launch lineup , but it 's also perhaps a perfect example of a next @-@ generation role @-@ playing game . " Oblivion won a number of " best of " awards from a variety of game journalists : GameSpy 's " RPG Game of Show " GameSpot 's " Best RPG " , IGN 's " Best PC RPG " , RPGFan 's " Best Overall Game of E3 2005 " , and , most <unk> , the " Best Role Playing Game " in the 2005 E3 Game Critics Awards . 
 A near @-@ final build of Oblivion would later be shown at Microsoft 's Consumer Electronics Show press tent — but not at its public Xbox 360 booth — in January 2006 , showcasing the game 's exteriors . A Joystiq reporter at the scene was not entirely impressed , finding the demo marred by long load times and slowdowns during combat . An Xbox representative reassured the reporter that all such issues would be worked out before the game 's retail release . In the months prior to release , anticipation for the game ran high , with critics describing Oblivion as " the first next @-@ gen game " only heightening attention . " People were expecting the game to cure blindness and heal the sick , " said Hines . 
 = = = Xbox 360 and PC release = = = 
 After an almost four @-@ month delay , Oblivion went gold on March 2 , 2006 and was released for Microsoft Windows and Xbox 360 on March 21 , 2006 . Early rumors notwithstanding , Oblivion shipped on a single DVD @-@ DL disc . One journalist voiced concern for the game 's release date , as it was set in the same week as that of EA 's The Godfather . Hines dismissed the suggestion , saying , " We tend to focus on what we can control and not worry about what we can 't control . Given the level of interest and the number of pre @-@ orders and so forth , we had a pretty good idea we 'd be just fine no matter what else was happening that week . " Oblivion was the first RPG title to be released for Microsoft 's Xbox 360 console . In addition to the standard release version , a Collector 's Edition was released for both Windows and Xbox 360 which includes the 112 @-@ page Pocket Guide to the Empire , a bonus DVD containing concept art , renders , and an approximately 45 @-@ minute long documentary on the making of Oblivion , and a coin replica of the in @-@ game currency of Tamriel . Its suggested release price of US $ 69 @.@ 99 brought back " memories of game prices circa the Nintendo 64 " for one Kotaku commentator . Some suggested that the included coin be used to create a " garish piece of jewelry " . 
 Oblivion was well received in the gaming press ; there was no critical disappointment , no " bump " in popular expectations , that might have been expected for such a highly anticipated game . Metacritic , an aggregate review site , gave the game a 94 % score ; IGN , GameSpot and GameSpy each gave the game their own individual " RPG of the Year " award . Oblivion also sold well , selling 1 @.@ 7 million copies by April 10 , 2006 . Additionally , 3 million copies were sold by January 18 , 2007 . Pete Hines was satisfied with the release : " I feel like we delivered on what people expected .... I think the scores and awards reflect that we delivered on people 's expectations . " 
 = = = PlayStation 3 release = = = 
 The PS3 version of the game was ported / developed by 4J Studios who have worked with Bethesda in other projects . In April 2006 , an inadvertently mailed version of Bethesda 's supposed forthcoming game release list began a series of unconfirmed rumors of Oblivion releases for the PlayStation 3 and the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) . The list suggested that Oblivion would be a PlayStation 3 launch title , and that the PSP version would be released in November . These rumors were confirmed on September 28 , 2006 , when Bethesda officially announced the titles , setting the PlayStation 3 version 's North American release date for November 2006 , European release date for March 2007 , and the PSP version for Spring 2007 . The two titles were set to be published by Bethesda alone in North America , and with Ubisoft as a co @-@ publisher in Europe . Hines was mum regarding the change in publishers : " Too much backroom stuff . " Ubisoft saw their first quarter sales for 2007 rise 90 @.@ 5 % , to 134 million Euros , exceeding previous forecasts by 14 million Euros . Ubisoft CEO Yves Guillemot attributed the rise to " new @-@ generation consoles and the impact of PlayStation 3 game sales , including Rainbow Six Vegas and Oblivion " . 
 Despite the title being included in Sony 's announced PlayStation 3 launch lineup at its annual Gamers ' Day event in San Francisco , online retailers <unk> and <unk> — two sites with a history of revealing the release dates of games before their publisher 's announcements — were found on November 8 , 2006 to have set Oblivion 's release date as January 1 , 2007 . Some few hours later , the delay was confirmed , as Pete Hines issued the statement that " Oblivion PS3 is now a Q1 2007 title " . Hines gave no reason for the delay , but the news stirred suspicions of development difficulties working with the PlayStation 3 , and that Bethesda was discouraged by the scarcity of PlayStation 3 consoles at launch . The North American PS3 release was later confirmed to be March 20 , 2007 , near the end of the first quarter window , with the European PS3 release set at April 27 , 2007 . Some reporters commented on a perceived parallelism between the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 delays and releases . 
 United Kingdom video games retailer GAME encountered distribution problems on release day in Europe . A branch on Oxford Street reported to Computer and Video Games ( CVG ) , a video games magazine , that no units were in stock on the afternoon of April 27 , 2007 , and that other stores were in the same predicament . Other reports suggested that the game was not available in any of GAME 's 400 UK and Ireland stores . GAME staff nonetheless told CVG reporters that copies would be available by next week , " possibly Monday " . An Ubisoft representative attributed the shortage to high demand for the product , and stated that copies were available online and at other High Street retailers . Other retailers , such as HMV and Virgin Megastore , reported no shortages . 
 = = Production and design = = 
 = = = Staff = = = 
 In 2002 , Bethesda 's Elder Scrolls team was split in two : half , mostly designers and artists , were sent to work on Morrowind 's expansions ; and the rest , mostly programmers , were sent to work on technology for Oblivion . Ken Rolston , a former designer for Morrowind , was signed on as the game 's Lead Designer . Code for the PC and Xbox 360 were somewhat interchangeable , owing to the similarity in system architecture between the consoles , but the team still had to divide its programming staff between the two . A number of staff with experience in developing for Sony platforms like the PlayStation 2 worked on optimizing the code for the subsequent PlayStation 3 release . The art and design staff were largely unaffected by the need to develop for multiple consoles . 
 = = = Publisher relations = = = 
 On February 3 , 2005 , Bethesda entered into an agreement with Take @-@ Two Interactive regarding the publication and release of Oblivion . Under the agreement , Bethesda would retain full control over Oblivion 's development and the rights to any possible sequels , and Take @-@ Two would agree to publish the game under its recently formed 2K Games sub brand . According to Producer Gavin Carter , the team 's experience was a rarity in the industry ; few independent developer @-@ publisher relationships still exist , and it was a surprise that Bethesda 's experience worked out as well as it did . Carter described Take @-@ Two 's role as one of minimal interference , and the company mostly left Bethesda 's development teams alone , trusting them to produce a " fantastic product " with minimal interference or " red tape " . The relationship was a rarity in the industry , according to Carter , where most developers are beholden to their publishers . Ashley Cheng , Oblivion 's senior producer , concurred . There was " complete freedom " at Bethesda to decide their own path , whatever market trends might say . Of the legal proceedings affecting Bethesda 's parent company ZeniMax during the initial stages of game development , when Bethesda founder Christopher Weaver sued the company for severance pay , Todd Howard said that he , as a producer , wasn 't involved with corporate affairs . " I just focus on the games . " 
 = = = Design goals = = = 
 The team 's goal then was , in the words of Todd Howard , to " create the quintessential RPG of the next generation " , with a focus on a " combination of freeform gameplay and cutting @-@ edge graphics . " Producing for next generation machines , rather than a cheap upgrade , gave Bethesda an additional four years of development . Howard describes this as an aspect of Bethesda 's greater goal of " Reinvention " , where the team 's goal is to make " a new game that stands on its own , that has its own identity " . Howard spoke of the need to avoid repetition , to avoid merely adding " some new features and content , and keep doing that " , describing that path as " a good way to drive your games into the ground . " Bethesda , Howard stated , would focus instead on recapturing what made its past titles exciting " in the first place " . 
 Keeping with the spirit of past games , Howard promised to keep with the spirit of " big @-@ world , do @-@ anything " -style games , feeling that a certain size and number of choices were needed to make role @-@ playing feel " meaningful " ; but now there was to be greater emphasis on keeping the game focused . Pete Hines saw the developments between games as less an issue of design focus and more as a " natural side effect of improving and refining how the game works " . If smart decisions were made , ease of play would naturally follow . Oblivion would include fewer NPCs and quests than Morrowind , and mindless filler , which Howard felt the team had been guilty of in the past , would be avoided . In exchange , Producer Gavin Carter later explained , there would be greater focus on length and depth in the quests , adding more " alternate paths " , more characters " to connect with , who actually have personalities " . Carter cast negative aspersions on aspects of gameplay too far removed from the game 's central plot . Carter stated that such material was not needed , preferring instead that the focus be on the plot , on " fighting these demon lords " , and that further material is " tertiary " and " takes away " . 
 The role of the player character in the main quest was to be changed as well . In contrast to past games , where the player character would play a type of " chosen one " , Oblivion would have the player character " find him , protect him , and help him . " Aside from that , in the opinion of Hines , " the main quest has similar themes and tones as in past Elder Scrolls games " , and should still feel " epic " , simply because of the way the <unk> is designed : with openness in mind . Improving that aspect of the experience , said Hines , came mostly in the form of improved information presentation . The system would not intrude on the experience when the player merely wishes to " walk around and explore the world and do whatever he / she wants " , but given the scenario where the player asks " ' OK , I 'm ready to do the next part of the main quest , where do I go ? ' " , the game would provide a ready answer , so as to avoid " confusion " and " downtime " . 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 The Xbox 360 was set as Oblivion 's base platform , being the " easiest to develop for " , in the words of Pete Hines ; the PC , being more like a " random amalgamation of graphics cards and RAM and processors " , and poorly " defined " . As they had done with previous games in the series , Bethesda threw out their old content and technology and began work anew . A new engine was envisioned , one which would take advantage of advanced lighting and shader routines , like high dynamic range rendering and specular mapping . The final product was shipped with an engine formed of a mixture of in @-@ house tech and Numerical Design Limited 's Gamebryo engine , " tricked out " in collaboration with Bethesda 's graphics programmers and NDL . Cheng has described the game as " pixel @-@ shader heavy " , taking advantage of the feature in rendering " metal , wood , stone , blood , skin , " in addition to water , which was the only use Morrowind made of the technology . In particular , Oblivion uses normal maps , diffuse maps , specular maps , and parallax maps , which Howard described as " kind of like displacement mapping " . Oblivion makes use of Radiant AI , a new artificial intelligence system that allows non @-@ player characters to dynamically react and interact with the world around them . General goals , such as " Eat at this city at 2pm " are given to NPCs , and NPCs are left to determine how to achieve them . The absence of individual scripting for each character allowed for the construction of a world on a much larger scale than other games had developed , and aided in the creation of what Todd Howard described as an " organic feel " for the game . 
 Features introduced for the new release that had been absent in Morrowind included " full facial animations , lip synching , and full speech for all dialogue " . Oblivion uses Havok as its physics engine , following in the footsteps of Half @-@ Life 2 . Havok is involved in modeling the game 's representations of telekinesis , theft , traps , tumbling , paralysis , area effect fireball explosions , and the contact between arrows and their targets . Arrows , in Oblivion , may lodge themselves in objects and thereby increase their mass . 
 The inclusion of procedural content tools allowed for the creation of realistic environments at much faster rates than was the case with Morrowind . Using Interactive Data Visualization , Inc . ( <unk> ) ' s SpeedTree technology , for example , Bethesda artists were able to " quickly generate complex and organic tree shapes with relative ease " . With its " parent / child hierarchies and iterative branch levels comprised of highly modifiable cylinder primitives " , Bethesda 's Noah Berry attests that " an entire tree shape can be created in a manner of minutes , just by adjusting numerical values and tweaking spline curve handles " . Instead of Morrowind 's artificially smoothed @-@ over terrain , erosion algorithms incorporated in the landscape generation tools allowed for the creation of " craggy mountain vistas " quickly and easily . 
 = = = PlayStation 3 = = = 
 The PS3 release featured a number of technical improvements over the Xbox 360 release ; load times were reduced , fewer framerate drops were experienced and several bugs were fixed . Draw distance was increased , and new shaders were included to render the foreground cleanly and sharply , leading to rocky landscapes with " craggy appearances " rather than " smooth , non @-@ distinct surfaces " . The new shader sets blended " near detail " and " far detail " onscreen , removing the harsh line that cut between them in previous releases . Bethesda decided against implementing <unk> motion support for the game , considering Oblivion not to be of a type well @-@ suited to such a feature . The Knights of the Nine content pack was included with the game , but other downloadable content releases were not . The latter release spawned a host of rumors across the Internet : a 1UP piece stated that the content was removed due to its negative effect on console performance , and other websites repeated the claim . Limitations of the PS3 's system memory were suspected as the potential cause of the performance drop . 
 In an article for IGN , Pete Hines challenged the statements , providing an alternate rationale for the content packages ' absence . Firstly , he stated , the expansions were removed to avoid giving a PS3 player an early advantage over other consoles ' players . Secondly , he stated , the game designers were unfamiliar with the PlayStation Network Store and Sony 's online content distribution systems , and had not yet determined the best method of releasing the packages . The suggestion that the PS3 's technical makeup determined the move could not be " farther from the truth " . Hines confirmed that the shader improvements for the PS3 would eventually migrate to the PC and Xbox 360 through further patches , but noted that some optimizations would remain exclusive to the PS3 . In the end , the Xbox 360 and the PS3 would be " very much on a par " in their graphical performance . 
 = = Downloadable content = = 
 = = = Background and Horse Armor = = = 
 From April 2006 onwards , Bethesda began releasing small , downloadable packages of content from their website and over the Xbox Live Marketplace , for prices equivalent to between one and three US dollars . The first package , a set of horse armor for Oblivion 's steeds , was released on April 3 , 2006 , costing 200 Marketplace points , equivalent to US $ 2 @.@ 50 or £ 1 @.@ 50 ; the corresponding PC release cost was US $ 1 @.@ 99 . Bethesda offered no rationale for the price discrepancy . These were not the first Oblivion @-@ related Marketplace releases ( the first was a series of dashboard themes and picture packs released prior to Oblivion 's publication , in February 2006 , for a nominal fee ) nor were they entirely unexpected : Bethesda had previously announced their desire to support the Xbox release with downloadable Marketplace content , and other publishers had already begun to release similar packages for their games , at similar prices . A November 2005 @-@ release of a " Winter Warrior Pack " for Kameo : Elements of Power was also priced at 200 Marketplace points , and similar content additions had been scheduled for Project Gotham Racing 3 and Perfect Dark Zero . Indeed , Marketplace content additions formed a significant part of a March 2006 Microsoft announcement regarding the future of Xbox Live . " Downloadable in @-@ game content is a main focus of Microsoft 's strategy heading into the next @-@ gen console war , " stated one GameSpot reporter . " With more consoles on their way to retail , 80 games available by June , and new content and experiences coming to Xbox Live all the time , there has never been a better time to own an Xbox 360 , " announced Peter Moore . Nonetheless , although Xbox Live Arcade games , picture packs , dashboards and profile themes continued to be a Marketplace success for Microsoft , the aforementioned in @-@ game content remained sparse . Pete Hines asserted , " We were the first ones to do downloadable content like that — some people had done similar things , but no one had really done additions where you add new stuff to your existing game . " There was no pressure from Microsoft to make the move . 
 = = = Later releases = = = 
 April 4 also saw the announcement of two new downloadable content packs for the coming weeks : an " Orrery " quest that would see gamers setting out to repair a Dwarven Orrery ; and a " Wizard 's Tower " that would offer a new home for player characters , complete with the capacity to grow herbs , summon <unk> , and make spells . 1UP predicted that , given Bethesda 's response to customer criticism , those releases would be somewhat more substantial than the " Horse Armor " release was . On April 7 , Bethesda priced the " Orrery " . Offering what GameSpot called " more bang for less buck " , Bethesda set the PC release price at US $ 1 @.@ 89 , and the Xbox 360 release price at 150 Marketplace points , equivalent to US $ 1 @.@ 88 . Joystiq offered their support — " ' Big ups ' " — to the company for the new price . " Although we passed on the $ 2 @.@ 50 horse armor this week , we 'll definitely be <unk> ' with that Orrery device when it hits the Marketplace . " The pack was eventually released on April 17 . Also on April 7 , EB Games and GameStop began offering a coupon promising one free download of the " Horse Armor " pack with every purchase of the PC edition of Oblivion . The " Wizard 's Tower " , called the " <unk> Spire " in @-@ game , was released on April 24 for the same price as the " Orrery " . 
 New releases continued into late 2006 . The " Thieves ' Den " , a <unk> download offering the chance to " <unk> a famous pirate 's lost ship and claim it for your own " , was released on May 22 for the Xbox 360 , priced at 150 Marketplace points , " roughly " equivalent to US $ 1 @.@ 89 . Explaining the add @-@ on , Ashley Cheng stated " Basically , it 's Goonies . " " Mehrunes ' Razor " , a quest revolving around a mage in search of the deadly Daedric artifact known as Mehrunes ' Razor , was released on June 14 . It became the most expensive download yet , at US $ 2 @.@ 99 for PC users and 250 Marketplace points , equivalent to US $ 3 @.@ 13 , for Xbox 360 owners . One 1UP.com reporter took the occasion to reflect on the increasing price of owning the " complete " Oblivion . With all the add @-@ ons included , he calculated , " That 's over $ 80 in game for the complete version of Oblivion , thus far . " Foreseeing eventual problems with the upcoming PS3 release , and a potential bundling of all the software for a cheaper price , he wondered : " will Xbox 360 and PC users feel slighted ? ... <unk> are sticky business . " Joystiq continued to comment on the " Horse Armor " add @-@ on in their notice of the quest 's release . " With a weapon like that , who needs horse armor ? " On July 13 , " The Vile Lair " , sporting a hidden crypt called " <unk> Hollow " for players bitten with Oblivion 's vampirism bug , was released . Like the " Orrery " and the " Wizard 's Tower " , Bethesda set " The Vile Lair " ' s PC release price at US $ 1 @.@ 89 , and the Xbox 360 release price at 150 Marketplace points , equivalent to US $ 1 @.@ 88 . Joystiq responded positively to the new price point . " What a bargain ! ... It 's good to see the folks at Oblivion have learned their lesson and aren 't offering relatively super expensive content not fit to see the light of day . " 
 On August 31 , " Spell Tomes " , adding books with " wondrous and powerful magic spells , " to the random loot of fallen foes , was released , for the price of US $ 1 @.@ 00 on both the Xbox 360 and the PC . Beginning on December 22 and continuing on until the end of the year , Bethesda offered their " Mehrunes Razor " package free of charge , as a sort of holiday gift . Oblivion 's final content pack , named " Fighter 's Stronghold " , was released October 15 , 2007 . It was free to download in the first week after its release . 
 = Scaly @-@ foot gastropod = 
 Chrysomallon squamiferum , common name the scaly @-@ foot gastropod , is a species of deep @-@ sea hydrothermal @-@ vent snail , a marine gastropod mollusc in the family Peltospiridae . This vent @-@ endemic gastropod is known only from deep @-@ sea hydrothermal vents in the Indian Ocean , where it has been found at depths of about 2 @,@ 400 – 2 @,@ 800 m ( 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 7 mi ) . Chrysomallon squamiferum differs greatly from other deep @-@ sea gastropods , even the closely related neomphalines . The shell is of a unique construction , with three layers ; the outer layer consists of iron sulfides , the middle layer is equivalent to the organic periostracum found in other gastropods , and the innermost layer is made of aragonite . The foot is also unusual , being armored with iron @-@ mineralised sclerites . 
 The snail 's oesophageal gland houses symbiotic gammaproteobacteria from which the snail appears to obtain its nourishment . This species is considered to be one of the most peculiar deep @-@ sea hydrothermal @-@ vent gastropods , and it is the only known extant animal that incorporates iron sulfide into its skeleton ( into both its sclerites and into its shell as an exoskeleton ) . Its heart is , proportionately speaking , unusually large for any animal : the heart comprises approximately 4 % of its body volume . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 This species was first discovered in April 2001 , and has been referred to as the " scaly @-@ foot " gastropod since 2001 . In terms of its scientific name , it has been referred as Chrysomallon squamiferum since 2003 , but it was not formally described in the sense of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature until Chen et al. named it in 2015 . Type specimens are stored in the Natural History Museum , London . During the time when the name was not yet formalized , an incorrect spelling variant was " <unk> squamiferum " . 
 Chrysomallon squamiferum is the type species and the sole species within the genus Chrysomallon . The generic name Chrysomallon is from the Ancient Greek language , and means " golden haired " , because pyrite ( a compound occurring in its shell ) is golden in color . The specific name squamiferum is from the Latin language and means " scale @-@ bearing " , because of its sclerites . At first it was not known to which family this species belonged . <unk> et al. classified this species in the family Peltospiridae , within the <unk> in 2003 . Molecular analyses based on sequences of cytochrome @-@ c oxidase I ( COI ) genes confirmed the placement of this species within the Peltospiridae . <unk> from two localities are dark ; a morphotype from a third locality is white ( see next section for explanation of localities ) . These different colored snails appear to be simply " varieties " of the same species , according to the results of genetic analysis . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The scaly @-@ foot gastropod is a vent @-@ endemic gastropod known only from the deep @-@ sea hydrothermal vents of the Indian Ocean , which are around 2 @,@ 780 metres ( 1 @.@ 73 mi ) in depth . The species was discovered in 2001 , living on the bases of black smokers in the Kairei hydrothermal vent field , 25 ° 19 @.@ 239 ′ S 70 ° 02 @.@ 429 ′ E , on the Central Indian Ridge , just north of the Rodrigues Triple Point . The species has subsequently also been found in the Solitaire field , 19 ° 33 @.@ 413 ′ S 65 ° 50 @.@ 888 ′ E , Central Indian Ridge , within the Exclusive Economic Zone of Mauritius and Longqi ( aka . Dragon ) field , 37 ° 47 @.@ 027 ′ S 49 ° 38 @.@ 963 ′ E , Southwest Indian Ridge . Longqi field was designated as the type locality ; all type material originated from this vent field . The distance between Kairei and Solitaire is about 700 km ( 430 mi ) . The distance between Solitaire and Longqi is about 2 @,@ 500 km ( 1 @,@ 600 mi ) . 
 Peltospiridae snails are mainly know to live in Eastern Pacific vent fields . Nakamura et al. hypothetized that the occurrence of scaly @-@ foot gastropods in the Indian Ocean suggests a relationship of the hydrothermal vent faunas between these two areas . 
 Research expeditions have included : 
 2000 – an expedition of the Japan Agency for Marine @-@ Earth Science and Technology using the ship RV Kairei and ROV Kaikō discovered the Kairei vent field , but scaly @-@ foot gastropods were not found at that time . This was the first vent field discovered in the Indian Ocean . 
 2001 – an expedition of the U.S. research vessel RV Knorr with ROV Jason discovered scaly @-@ foot gastropods in the Kairei vent field . 
 2007 – an expedition of RV Da Yang Yi Hao discovered the Longqi vent field . 
 2009 – an expedition of RV Yokosuka with DSV Shinkai 6500 discovered the Solitaire field and sampled scaly @-@ foot gastropods there . 
 2009 – an expedition of RV Da Yang Yi Hao visually observed scaly @-@ foot gastropods at Longqi vent field . 
 2011 – an expedition of the British Royal Research Ship RRS James Cook with ROV Kiel 6000 sampled the Longqi vent field . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In this species , the sides of the snail 's foot are extremely unusual , in that they are armoured with hundreds of iron @-@ mineralised sclerites ; these are composed of iron sulfides greigite and pyrite . Each sclerite has a soft epithelial tissue core , a conchiolin cover , and an uppermost layer containing pyrite and greigite . Prior to the discovery of the scaly @-@ foot gastropod , it was thought that the only extant molluscs possessing scale @-@ like structures were in the classes Caudofoveata , <unk> and Polyplacophora . However , sclerites are not homologous to a gastropod operculum . The sclerites of scaly @-@ foot gastropods are also not homologous to the sclerites found in chitons ( Polyplacophora ) . It has been hypothesized that the sclerites of Cambrian halwaxiids such as Halkieria may potentially be more analogous to the sclerites of this snail than are the sclerites of chitons or aplacophorans . However , as recently as 2015 , detailed morphological analysis for testing this hypothesis had not been carried out . 
 The sclerites of Chrysomallon squamiferum are mainly proteinaceous ( conchiolin is a complex protein ) ; in contrast , the sclerites of chitons are mainly calcareous . There are no visible growth lines of conchiolin in cross @-@ sections of sclerites . No other extant or extinct gastropods possess dermal sclerites , and no other extant animal is known to use iron sulfides in this way , either in its skeleton , or exoskeleton . 
 The size of each sclerite is about 1 × 5 mm in adults . The Solitaire population of snails has white sclerites instead of black ; this is due to a lack of iron in the sclerites . The sclerites are imbricated ( overlapped in a manner reminiscent of roof tiles ) . The purpose of sclerites has been speculated to be protection or detoxification . The sclerites may help protect the gastropod from the vent fluid , so that its bacteria can live close to the source of electron donors for chemosynthesis . Or alternatively , the sclerites may result from deposition of toxic sulfide waste from the endosymbionts , and therefore represent a novel solution for detoxification . But the true function of sclerites is , as yet , unknown . The sclerites of the Kairei population , which have a layer of iron sulphide , are ferrimagnetic . Surprisingly , the non @-@ iron @-@ sulfide @-@ mineralized sclerite from the Solitaire morphotype showed greater mechanical strength of the whole structure in the three @-@ point bending stress test ( 12 @.@ 06 MPa ) than did the sclerite from the Kairei morphotype ( 6 @.@ 54 MPa ) . 
 In life , the external surfaces of sclerites host a diverse array of epibionts : Epsilonproteobacteria and <unk> . These bacteria probably provide their mineralization . <unk> et al . ( 2004 ) hypothetized that the snail secretes some organic compounds that facilitate the attachment of the bacteria . 
 = = = Shell = = = 
 The shell of these species has three whorls . The shape of the shell is globose and the spire is compressed . The shell sculpture consists of ribs and fine growth lines . The shape of the aperture is elliptical . The apex of the shell is fragile and it is corroded in adults . 
 This is a very large peltospirid compared to the majority of other species , which are usually below 15 millimetres ( 3 ⁄ 5 in ) in shell length . The width of the shell is 9 @.@ 80 – 40 @.@ 02 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 1 @.@ 58 in ) The maximum with of the shell reaches 45 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 79 in ) . The average with of the shell of adult snails is 32 mm . The average shell width in the Solitaire population was slightly less than that in the Kairei population . The height of the shell is 7 @.@ 65 – 30 @.@ 87 mm ( 0 @.@ 30 – 1 @.@ 22 in ) . The width of the aperture is 7 @.@ 26 – 32 @.@ 52 mm ( 0 @.@ 29 – 1 @.@ 28 in ) . The height of the aperture is 6 @.@ 38 – 27 @.@ 29 mm ( 0 @.@ 25 – 1 @.@ 07 in ) . 
 The snail 's shell is also unusual . The shell structure consists of three layers . The outer layer is about 30 μm thick , black , and is made of iron sulfides , containing greigite <unk> . This feature makes this gastropod the only extant animal known so far that employs this material in its skeleton . The middle layer ( about 150 μm ) is equivalent to the organic periostracum which is also found in other gastropods . The periostracum is thick and brown . The innermost layer is made of aragonite ( about 250 μm thick ) , a form of calcium carbonate that is commonly found both in the shells of molluscs and in various corals . The color of the aragonite layer is milky white . 
 Each shell layer appears to contribute to the effectiveness of the snail 's defence in different ways . The middle organic layer appears to absorb mechanical strain and energy generated by a squeezing attack ( for example by the claws of a crab ) , making the shell much tougher . The organic layer also acts to dissipate heat . Features of this composite material are in focus of researchers for possible use in civilian and military protective applications . 
 = = = Operculum = = = 
 In this species , the shape of the operculum changes during growth , from a rounded shape in juveniles to a curved shape in adults . The relative size of the operculum decreases as individuals grow . About a half of all adult snails of this species possess an operculum among the sclerites at the rear of the animal . It seems likely that the sclerites gradually grow and fully cover the whole foot for protection , and the operculum loses its protective function as the animal grows . 
 = = = External anatomy = = = 
 The Scaly @-@ foot gastropod has a thick snout , which tapers distally to a blunt end . The mouth is a circular ring of muscles when contracted and closed . The two smooth cephalic tentacles are thick at the base and gradually taper to a fine point at their distal tips . This snail has no eyes . There is no specialised copulatory appendage . The foot is red and large , and the snail cannot withdraw the whole foot entirely into the shell . There is no pedal gland in the front part of the foot . There are also no <unk> tentacles . 
 = = = Internal anatomy = = = 
 In Chrysomallon squamiferum , the soft parts of the animal occupy approximately two whorls of the interior of the shell . The shell muscle is horseshoe @-@ shaped and large , divided in two parts on the left and right , and connected by a narrower attachment . The mantle edge is thick but simple without any distinctive features . The mantle cavity is deep and reaches the posterior edge of the shell . The medial to left side of the cavity is dominated by a very large bipectinate ctenidium . Ventral to the visceral mass , the body cavity is occupied by a huge esophageal gland , which extends to fill the ventral floor of the mantle cavity . 
 The digestive system is simple , and is reduced to less than 10 % of the typical volume in gastropods . The radula is " weak " , of the rhipidoglossan type , with a single pair of <unk> cartilages . The formula of the radula is ∼ 50 + 4 + 1 + 4 + ∼ 50 . The radula ribbon is 4 mm long , 0 @.@ 5 mm wide ; the width to length ratio is approximately 1 : 10 . There is no jaw , and no salivary glands . A part of the anterior oesophagus rapidly expands into a huge , hypertrophied , blind @-@ ended esophageal gland , which occupies much of the ventral face of the mantle cavity ( estimated 9 @.@ 3 % body volume ) . The oesophageal gland has a uniform texture , and is highly vascularised with fine blood vessels . The stomach has at least three ducts at its anterior right , connecting to the digestive gland . There are consolidated pellets in both the stomach and in the hindgut . These pellets are probably granules of sulfur produced by the endosymbiont as a way to detoxify hydrogen sulfide . The intestine is reduced , and only has a single loop . The extensive and unconsolidated digestive gland extends to the posterior , filling the shell apex of the shell . The rectum does not penetrate the heart , but passes ventral to it . The anus is located on the right side of the snail , above the genital opening . 
 In the excretory system , the nephridium is central , tending to the right side of the body , as a thin dark layer of glandular tissue . The nephridium is anterior and ventral of the digestive gland , and is in contact with the dorsal side of the foregut . 
 The respiratory system and circulatory system consist of a single left bipectinate ctenidium ( gill ) , which is very large ( 15 @.@ 5 % of the body volume ) , and is supported by extensive blood sinuses filled with haemocoel . On dissection , the blood sinuses and lumps of haemocoel material are a prominent feature throughout the body cavity . There are thin gill filaments on either side of the ctenidium . The bipectinate ctenidium extends far behind the heart into the upper shell whorls ; it is much larger than in <unk> . Although this species has a similar shell shape and general form to other <unk> , the ctenidium is proportional size to that of <unk> , which has the largest gill among peltospirid genera that have been investigated anatomically so far . 
 The ctenidium provides oxygen for the snail , but the circulatory system is enlarged beyond the scope of other similar vent gastropods . There are no endosymbionts in or on the gill of Chrysomallon squamiferum . The enlargement of the gill is probably to facilitate extracting oxygen in the low @-@ oxygen conditions that are typical of hydrothermal @-@ vent ecosystems . 
 At the posterior of the ctenidium is a remarkably large and well @-@ developed heart . The heart is unusually large for any animal proportionally . Based on the volume of the single auricle and ventricle , the heart complex represents approximately 4 % of the body volume ( for example , the heart of humans is 1 @.@ 3 % of the body volume ) . This proportionally giant heart primarily sucks blood through the ctenidium and supplies the highly vascularised oesophageal gland . In Chrysomallon squamiferum the endosymbionts are housed in an esophageal gland , where they are isolated from the vent fluid . The host is thus likely to play a major role in supplying the endosymbionts with necessary chemicals , leading to increased respiratory needs . Detailed investigation of the haemocoel of Chrysomallon squamiferum will reveal further information about its respiratory pigments . 
 The Scaly @-@ foot gastropod is a chemosymbiotic <unk> . It hosts <unk> ( sulfur @-@ oxidising ) <unk> endosymbionts in a much enlarged oesophageal gland , and appears to rely on these symbionts for nutrition . In this species , the size of the oesophageal gland is about two orders of magnitude larger than the usual size . There is a significant <unk> within the oesophageal gland , where the blood pressure likely decreases to almost zero . The elaborate cardiovascular system most likely evolved to oxygenate the endosymbionts in an oxygen @-@ poor environment , and / or to supply hydrogen sulfide to the endosymbionts . <unk> gammaproteobacteria have a full set of genes required for aerobic respiration , and are probably capable of switching between the more efficient aerobic respiration , and the less efficient anaerobic respiration , depending on oxygen availability . In 2014 , the endosymbiont of the scaly @-@ foot gastropod become the first endosymbiont of any gastropod for which the complete genome was known . Chrysomallon squamiferum was previously thought to be the only species of Peltospiridae that has an enlarged oesophageal gland , but later it was discovered that both species of Gigantopelta also have an enlarged oesophageal gland . 
 The nervous system is large , and the brain is a solid neural mass without ganglia . The nervous system is reduced in complexity and enlarged in size compared to other <unk> taxa . As is typical of gastropods , the nervous system is composed of an anterior oesophageal nerve ring and two pairs of longitudinal nerve cords , the ventral pair innervating the foot and the dorsal pair forming a twist via <unk> . The frontal part of the oesophageal nerve ring is large , connecting two lateral swellings . The huge fused neural mass is directly adjacent to , and passes through , the <unk> gland , where the bacteria are housed . There are large tentacular nerves projecting into the cephalic tentacles . The sensory organs of the scaly @-@ foot gastropod include statocysts surrounded by the oesophageal gland , each statocyst with a single statolith . There are also sensory ctenidial <unk> on the tip of the gill filaments ; these are known to be present in most <unk> , and are present some neomphalines . 
 The reproductive system has some unusual features . The gonads of adult snails are not inside the shell ; they are in the head @-@ foot region on the right side of the body . Adults possess both testis and ovary in different levels of development . The testis is placed ventrally ; the ovary is placed dorsally , and the nephridium lies between them . There is a " spermatophore packaging organ " next to the testis . <unk> from the testis and ovary are initially separate , but apparently fuse to a single duct , and emerge as a single genital opening on the right of the mantle cavity . The animal has no copulatory organ . 
 It is hypothetized that the derived strategy of housing endosymbiotic microbes in an oesophageal gland , has been the catalyst for anatomical innovations that serve primarily to improve the fitness of the bacteria , over and above the needs of the snail . The great enlargement of the oesophageal gland , the snail 's protective dermal sclerites , its highly enlarged respiratory and circulatory systems and its high fecundity are all considered to be adaptations which are beneficial to its endosymbiont microbes . These adaptations appear to be a result of specialisation to resolve energetic needs in an extreme chemosynthetic environment . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 This species inhabits the hydrothermal vent fields of the Indian Ocean . It lives adjacent to both acidic and reducing vent fluid , on the walls of black @-@ smoker chimneys , or directly on diffuse flow sites . 
 The depth of the Kairei field varies from 2 @,@ 415 to 2 @,@ 460 m ( 7 @,@ 923 to 8 @,@ 071 ft ) , and its dimensions are approximately 50 by 50 m ( 160 by 160 ft ) . The slope of the field is 10 ° to 30 ° . The substrate rock is troctolite and depleted mid @-@ ocean ridge basalt . The Kairei @-@ field scaly @-@ foot gastropods live in the low @-@ temperature diffuse fluids of a single chimney . The transitional zone , where these gastropods were found , is about 1 – 2 m ( 3 – 7 ft ) in width , with temperature of 2 – 10 ° C. The preferred water temperature for this species is about 5 ° C. These snails live in an environment which has high concentrations of hydrogen sulfide , and low concentrations of oxygen . 
 The abundance of scaly @-@ foot gastropods was lower in the Kairei field than in the Longqi field . The Kairei hydrothermal @-@ vent community consists of 35 taxa , including sea anemones Marianactis sp . , crustaceans Austinograea rodriguezensis , Rimicaris kairei , Mirocaris indica , Munidopsis sp . , Neolepadidae genus and sp . , Eochionelasmus sp . , bivalves Bathymodiolus marisindicus , gastropods Lepetodrilus sp . , <unk> sp . , Eulepetopsis sp . , Shinkailepas sp . , and Alviniconcha marisindica , Desbruyeresia marisindica , <unk> <unk> , Phymorhynchus sp . , <unk> sp . , Slit limpet sp . 1 , Slit limpet sp . 2 , <unk> <unk> , solenogastres <unk> ? sp . , annelids Amphisamytha sp . , Archinome jasoni , <unk> sp . 1 , <unk> sp . , Hesionoidae sp . 1 , Hesionoidae sp . 2 , Branchinotogluma sp . , <unk> sp . , <unk> ? sp . , <unk> ? sp . , <unk> sp . , unidentified Nemertea and unidentified Platyhelminthes . Scaly @-@ foot gastropods live in colonies with Alviniconcha marisindica snails , and there are colonies of Rimicaris kairei above them . 
 The Solitaire field is at a depth of 2 @,@ 606 m ( 8 @,@ 550 ft ) , and its dimensions are approximately 50 by 50 m ( 160 by 160 ft ) . The substrate rock is enriched mid @-@ ocean ridge basalt . Scaly @-@ foot gastropods live near the high @-@ temperature diffuse fluids of chimneys in the vent field . The abundance of scaly @-@ foot gastropods was lower than it was in the Longqi field . The Solitaire hydrothermal @-@ vent community comprises 22 taxa , including : sea anemones Marianactis sp . , crustaceans Austinograea rodriguezensis , Rimicaris kairei , Mirocaris indica , Munidopsis sp . , Neolepadidae gen et sp . , Eochionelasmus sp . , bivalves Bathymodiolus marisindicus , gastropods Lepetodrilus sp . , Eulepetopsis sp . , Shinkailepas sp . , Alviniconcha sp. type 3 , Desbruyeresia sp . , Phymorhynchus sp . , annelids <unk> genus and sp . , Archinome jasoni , Branchinotogluma sp . , echinoderm <unk> <unk> gen et sp . , fish <unk> genus and sp . , unidentified Nemertea , and unidentified Platyhelminthes . 
 The Longqi vent field is in a depth of 2 @,@ 780 m ( 9 @,@ 120 ft ) . Chrysomallon squamiferum was densely populated in the areas immediately surrounding the diffuse @-@ flow venting . The Longqi hydrothermal @-@ vent community include sea anemones , the gastropod Gigantopelta aegis , mussels , and stalked barnacles . Shrimps ( usually dominant in vent fields ) were not recorded in Longqi vent field . 
 = = = Feeding habits = = = 
 The scaly @-@ foot gastropod is probably not a filter @-@ feeder . The nutrition of the scaly @-@ foot gastropod throughout its entire post @-@ larval life probably depends on the <unk> of its endosymbiotic bacteria , which provide most of its nutrition . It is currently unclear whether or not this species uses other mechanisms for feeding ( for example it is not known if it uses its radula for eating any normal food ) . 
 For identification of trophic interactions in a habitat , where direct observation of feeding habits is complicated , there were measured carbon and nitrogen stable @-@ isotope compositions . There are depleted values of δ13C in the oesophageal gland ( relatively to photosynthetically derived organic carbon ) . Chemoautotrophic symbionts were presumed as a source of such carbon . Chemoautotrophic origin of the stable carbon isotope 13C was confirmed experimentally . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 This gastropod is a simultaneous hermaphrodite . It is the only species in the family <unk> that is so far known to be a simultaneous hermaphrodite . It has a high fecundity . It lays eggs that are probably of lecithotrophic type . Eggs of the scaly @-@ foot gastropods show negative buoyancy under atmospheric pressure . Neither the larvae nor the protoconch are known as of 2016 , but it is thought that the species has a planktonic dispersal stage . One of the smallest Chrysomallon squamiferum juvenile specimens ever collected had a shell length ca . 3 mm . The results of statistical analyses revealed no genetic differentiation between the two populations in the Kairei and Solitaire fields , suggesting potential connectivity between the two vent fields . The Kairei population represents a potential source population for the two populations in the Central Indian Ridge . These snails are difficult to keep alive in an artificial environment , however , they survived in aquaria at atmospheric pressure for more than three weeks . 
 = Granpa = 
 Granpa is a British family @-@ oriented animated film that adapts a picture book by John Burningham . Produced by TVS for Channel 4 Television in 1989 , it was released on VHS by Universal Studios in 1994 . 
 An expensive film to produce , Granpa is hand @-@ illustrated with coloured pencil , imitating Burningham 's style in the book . It was directed by Dianne Jackson , who had previously adapted The Snowman by Raymond Briggs ( 1978 ) , a wordless picture book , as an exceptionally successful family @-@ oriented animated film ( 1982 ) . Howard Blake , who wrote the music for the The Snowman , wrote the music and the script for Granpa , which is referred to as an " animated children 's opera " . The voices of Granpa and Emily are by Peter Ustinov and Emily Osborne . 
 Granpa won the Prix Jeunesse International award for excellence in children 's television programming in 1990 . 
 = = Book = = 
 The animated film is an adaptation of the children 's picture book Granpa , written and illustrated by John Burningham and published by Jonathan Cape in 1984 . Burningham won the Kurt Maschler Award , or " the Emil " , from Maschler publishers and <unk> , which annually recognised the author ( s ) of one " work of imagination for children , in which text and illustration are integrated so that each enhances and balances the other . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens with a photo album , showing Grandpa as a baby with his mother , him as a young boy , him as a young adult , dressed in WWII officers uniform beside a vintage car and his girlfriend , him being wedded with his wife , them having kids , them becoming an elderly couple , and finally with just grandpa with a baby Emily . 
 The entire theme for the film celebrates the relationship between a small girl named Emily ( voiced by Emily Osborne ) , and her kindly but ailing grandfather ( voiced by Peter Ustinov ) . Emily 's playful innocence is contrasted with Granpa 's increasing frailty . Aware that he will not be around for much longer , he shares his memories of adventures and days gone by . 
 These memories are vividly brought to life by her grandfather 's tales , beginning in the Spring a description of Granpa 's childhood and youth in the early part of the 20th Century , being part in a Noah 's Ark @-@ influenced story when it began to rain , remembering the days when Grandpa plaid the piano for the school 's choir , and enjoy ballroom dances with his wife . 
 In Summer , Grandpa and Emily traveled to the seaside to paddle in the sea , build <unk> , and whilst riding on the donkeys , had Grandpa imagine himself part of the military tattoo , whilst Emily a princess . As they went to the amusement park and went to the stalls , they rode on the rollercoaster that then climaxed with them flying in a Spitfire , reenacting Granpa 's services during the Battle of Britain . 
 In Autumn , Granpa and Emily went fishing , and imagined of catching a whale that <unk> them through the Thames and through London . At bedtime , Granpa tells Emily the story of The Three Knights , of which was imagined on a bed covers . Though as he reads , he begins to slow up as he begins to drop off . So he end it with his own version , just as Emily was finally going to sleep . 
 In Winter , snow has settled , and once more Grandpa 's childhood began to show as he and his friends plaid in the snow . When back indoors , Grandpa was feeling very unwell , and was being looked after by Emily , who asked of him to read another story from a book , this time of them being in the Jungles of India riding on an Elephant , in which monkeys then steal Granpa 's storybook , of which they managed to recover , but was then left intentionally incomplete with Granpa saying , ' I 'm just not quite quick enough ... <unk> 
 Throughout the seasons past , Granpa had began to grow <unk> , and eventually Emily is left alone with an empty chair and the old man 's loyal dog . She leaves the house with the dog and climbs a hill . As they travel , the ghost of his grandfather , now in his childhood again , joins them , along with the spirits of his childhood friends . 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1984 , following the success of the animated Christmas film The Snowman , Channel 4 commissioned another animation from TVC studios ; producer John Coates approached Dianne Jackson and composer Howard Blake , suggesting Burningham 's picture book Granpa . Blake was initially reluctant due to the book 's upsetting ending , but was convinced after witnessing his own daughter 's reaction to her grandfather 's death that year . 
 The film was entirely financed by Channel 4 and cost over one million pounds to make according to Coates . It was first broadcast on the channel on New Year 's Eve 1989 at 6.30pm. 
 = = Music = = 
 The musical score was written and composed by Howard Blake and is almost in the form of a miniature opera , with many of the tales within the animation sung by the lead characters , along with children from the Wroughton Middle School choir ( winners of BBC Choir of the Year ) and a forty @-@ piece orchestra ( the Sinfonia of London ) . 
 The end title song " Make Believe " is performed by Sarah Brightman and has the theme of " Auld Lang Syne " as a counter @-@ melody . The song was released as a single at the time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film won the Prix Jeunesse International award for excellence in children 's television programming in 1990 . The film review site Rotten Tomatoes has called the film " a sensitive and life @-@ affirming animated adaptation " . 
 Fiona Collins noted in Turning the Page : Children 's Literature in Performance and the Media that while Burningham 's book is open ended , with Emily ultimately left alone to contemplate her grandfather 's death , the film offers a less " stark " interpretation ; his death is explored through her implied remembrance of him in the final scene . Collins suggests that this was probably because the original offered an unremittingly bleak ending that would be difficult for its intended child audience . 
 The film has rarely been repeated , and has never been released on DVD , perhaps due to its subject matter . The " <unk> " review suggest that the film takes the tone of the ending of The Snowman even further , " exploring an aspect of life rarely approached in animated form . " Paul Madden , writing Dianne Jackson 's obituary in 1993 suggests that the film " was less of immediate popular appeal than The Snowman , but was perhaps more satisfying to her creatively , demanding a more subtle approach . " 
 = Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral = 
 Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral , officially known as the Metropolitan Cathedral of Christ the King , is the seat of the Archbishop of Liverpool and the mother church of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Liverpool in Liverpool , England . The Grade II * Metropolitan Cathedral is one of Liverpool 's many listed buildings . To distinguish it from the Anglican Liverpool Cathedral , locals call it the " Catholic Cathedral . " Nicknames for the building include " Paddy 's Wigwam " and " The Mersey Funnel . " 
 The cathedral 's architect , Frederick Gibberd , was the winner of a worldwide design competition . Construction began in 1962 and was completed in 1967 . Earlier designs for a cathedral were proposed in 1853 , 1933 , and 1953 , but none was completed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pugin 's design = = = 
 During the Great Irish Famine ( 1845 – 1852 ) the Catholic population of Liverpool increased dramatically . About half a million Irish , who were predominantly Catholic , fled to England to escape the famine ; many embarked from Liverpool to travel to North America while others remained in the city . Because of the increase in the Catholic population , the co @-@ <unk> Bishop of Liverpool , Alexander Goss ( 1814 – 1872 ) , saw the need for a cathedral . The location he chose was the grounds of St. Edward 's College on St. Domingo Road , Everton . 
 In 1853 Goss , then bishop , awarded the commission for the building of the new cathedral to Edward Welby Pugin ( 1833 – 1875 ) . By 1856 the Lady chapel of the new cathedral had been completed . Due to financial resources being diverted to the education of Catholic children , work on the building ceased at this point and the Lady chapel – now named Our Lady Immaculate – served as parish church to the local Catholic population until its demolition in the 1980s . 
 = = = Lutyens ' design = = = 
 Following the purchase of the present 9 @-@ acre ( 36 @,@ 000 m2 ) site at Brownlow Hill in 1930 , Sir Edwin Lutyens ( 1869 – 1944 ) was commissioned to provide a design which would be an appropriate response to the Giles Gilbert Scott @-@ designed Neo @-@ gothic Anglican cathedral then being built further along Hope Street . 
 Lutyens ' design was intended to create a massive structure that would have become the second @-@ largest church in the world . It would have had the world 's largest dome , with a diameter of 168 feet ( 51 m ) compared to the 137 @.@ 7 feet ( 42 @.@ 0 m ) diameter on St. Peter 's Basilica in Vatican City . Building work based on Lutyens ' design began on Whit Monday , 5 June 1933 , being paid for mostly by the contributions of working class Catholics of the burgeoning industrial port . In 1941 , the restrictions of World War II wartime and a rising cost from £ 3 million to £ 27 million ( £ 1 @.@ 21 billion in 2015 ) , forced construction to stop . In 1956 , work recommenced on the crypt , which was finished in 1958 . Thereafter , Lutyens ' design for the Cathedral was considered too costly and was abandoned with only the crypt complete . The restored architectural model of the Lutyens cathedral is on display at the Museum of Liverpool . 
 = = = Scott 's reduced design = = = 
 After the ambitious design by Lutyens fell through , Adrian Gilbert Scott , brother of Giles Gilbert Scott ( architect of the Anglican Cathedral ) , was commissioned in 1953 to work on a smaller cathedral design with a £ 4 million budget ( £ 101 million in 2015 ) . He proposed a scaled @-@ down version of Lutyens ' building , retaining the massive dome . Scott 's plans were criticised and the building did not go ahead . 
 = = = Gibberd 's design = = = 
 The present Cathedral was designed by Sir Frederick Gibberd ( 1908 – 84 ) . Construction began in October 1962 and less than five years later , on the Feast of Pentecost 14 May 1967 , the completed cathedral was consecrated . Soon after its opening , it began to exhibit architectural flaws . This led to the cathedral authorities suing Frederick Gibberd for £ 1 @.@ 3 million on five counts , the two most serious being leaks in the aluminium roof and defects in the mosaic tiles , which had begun to come away from the concrete ribs . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 The competition to design the Cathedral was held in 1959 . The requirement was first , for a congregation of 3 @,@ 000 ( which was later reduced to 2 @,@ 000 ) to be able to see the altar , in order that they could be more involved in the celebration of the Mass , and second , for the Lutyens crypt to be incorporated in the structure . Gibberd achieved these requirements by designing a circular building with the altar at its centre , and by transforming the roof of the crypt into an elevated platform , with the cathedral standing at one end . The construction contract was let to Taylor Woodrow . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The Cathedral is built in concrete with a Portland stone cladding and an aluminium covering to the roof . Its plan is circular , having a diameter of 195 feet ( 59 m ) , with 13 chapels around its perimeter . The shape of the Cathedral is conical , and it is surmounted by a tower in the shape of a truncated cone . The building is supported by 16 boomerang @-@ shaped concrete trusses which are held together by two ring beams , one at the bends of the trusses and the other at their tops . Flying buttresses are attached to the trusses , giving the cathedral its tent @-@ like appearance . Rising from the upper ring beam is a lantern tower , containing windows of stained glass , and at its peak is a crown of pinnacles . 
 The entrance is at the top of a wide flight of steps leading up from Hope Street . Above the entrance is a large wedge @-@ shaped structure . This acts as a bell tower , the four bells being mounted in rectangular orifices towards the top of the tower . Below these is a geometric relief sculpture , designed by William Mitchell , which includes three crosses . To the sides of the entrance doors are more reliefs in fibreglass by Mitchell , which represent the symbols of the Evangelists . The steps which lead up to the cathedral were only completed in 2003 , when a building which obstructed the stairway path was acquired and demolished by developers . 
 A much smaller version of the Cathedral , also designed by Sir Frederick Gibberd , was constructed in 1965 as a chapel for the former De La Salle College of Education , Middleton , Lancashire , a Catholic teacher @-@ training college . The site is now occupied by Hopwood Hall College , a further education college of the Borough of Rochdale and the chapel may still be seen . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The focus of the interior is the altar which faces the main entrance . It is made of white marble from Skopje , Macedonia , and is 10 feet ( 3 m ) long . The floor is also of marble in grey and white designed by David Atkins . The benches , concentric with the interior , were designed by Frank Knight . Above is the tower with large areas of stained glass designed by John Piper and Patrick <unk> in three colours , yellow , blue and red , representing the Trinity . The glass is 1 inch ( 3 cm ) thick , the pieces of glass being bonded with epoxy resin , in concrete frames . Around the perimeter is a series of chapels . Some of the chapels are open , some are closed by almost blank walls , and others consists of a low space under a balcony . Opposite the entrance is the Blessed Sacrament Chapel , above which is the organ . Other chapels include the Lady Chapel and the Chapel of Saint Joseph . To the right of the entrance is the Baptistry . 
 On the altar , the candlesticks are by R. Y. <unk> and the bronze crucifix is by Elisabeth Frink . Above the altar is a <unk> designed by Gibberd as a crown @-@ like structure composed of aluminium rods , which incorporates loudspeakers and lights . Around the interior are metal Stations of the Cross , designed by Sean Rice . Rice also designed the lectern , which includes two entwined eagles . In the Chapel of Reconciliation ( formerly the Chapel of Saint Paul of the Cross ) , the stained glass was designed by Margaret Traherne . Stephen Foster designed , carved and painted the panelling in the Chapel of St. Joseph . The Lady Chapel contains a statue of the Virgin and Child by Robert Brumby and stained glass by Margaret Traherne . In the Blessed Sacrament Chapel is a reredos and stained glass by Ceri Richards and a small statue of the Risen Christ by Arthur Dooley . In the Chapel of Unity ( formerly the Chapel of Saint Thomas Aquinas ) is a bronze stoup by Virginio <unk> , and a mosaic by Hungarian artist Georg ( George ) Mayer @-@ Marton of the Pentecost which was moved from the Church of the Holy Ghost , Netherton , when it was demolished in 1989 . The gates of the Baptistry were designed by David Atkins . 
 = = = Structural problems = = = 
 The Cathedral had been built quickly and economically , and this led to problems with the fabric of the building , including leaks . A programme of repairs was carried out during the 1990s . The building had been faced with mosaic tiles , but these were impossible to repair and were replaced with glass @-@ reinforced plastic , which gave it a thicker appearance . The aluminium in the lantern was replaced by stainless steel , and the slate paving of the platform was replaced with concrete flags . 
 = = Cathedral crypt = = 
 The crypt under Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral is the only part that was built according to Lutyens ' design before construction stopped due to World War II ; in 1962 Frederick Gibberd 's design was built upon the Lutyens crypt . Structurally the crypt is built of brick and granite from quarries in Penryn , Cornwall . Each year the crypt plays host to the Liverpool Beer Festival which attracts visitors , not only from all over Britain but also Continental Europe and places such as the United States and Australia . The crypt also hosts examinations for students at the University of Liverpool during exam periods . 
 = = = Refurbishment = = = 
 A £ 3 million refurbishment of the crypt was completed in 2009 and was officially re @-@ opened on 1 May that year by the Duke of Gloucester . The refurbishment included new east and west approaches , archive provision , rewiring and new lighting , catering facilities , a new chancel , new toilets and revamped exhibitions . 
 = = Organ = = 
 Built by J. W. Walker and Sons , the organ was completed only two days before the opening of the cathedral in 1967 . Made as an integral part of the new cathedral , the architect , Frederick Gibberd , saw the casework as part of his brief and so designed the striking front to the organ . Using decorative woodwork , Gibberd was inspired by the innovative use of the pipes at Coventry Cathedral and the Royal Festival Hall and so arranged the shiny zinc pipes and brass trumpets en <unk> to contrast strikingly with concrete pillars which surround the organ . 
 = = = Specifications = = = 
 The organ has four manuals , 88 speaking stops and <unk> pipes . It works by way of air pressure , controlled by an electric current and operated by the keys of the organ console ; this opens and closes valves within the wind chests , allowing the pipes to speak . This type of motion is called electro @-@ pneumatic action . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Jan Mazurkiewicz = 
 Jan Mazurkiewicz ( 27 August 1896 , Lwów – 4 May 1988 , Warsaw ) , nom de guerre Radosław , was a Polish soldier , veteran of World War I , and a colonel in the Polish anti @-@ Nazi resistance Armia Krajowa ( AK ) during World War II . He was one of the main commanders of the Warsaw Uprising , where he led the Radosław Group ( Polish : <unk> Radosław ) , part of Kedyw , which was one of the best armed and trained <unk> units in the Uprising . 
 After the war Mazurkiewicz was persecuted by the Soviet @-@ led communist authorities of the People 's Republic of Poland , kept for two years in pre @-@ trial jail , tortured and sentenced to life , despite the fact that he tried to cooperate with the new regime . He was rehabilitated after the end of the Stalinist period in 1956 and became active in the official veterans ' organization Society of Fighters for Freedom and Democracy ( <unk> ) . He was eventually promoted to the rank of general of the Armed Forces of the People 's Republic of Poland ( <unk> ) . He died shortly before the fall of communism in Eastern Europe . 
 = = Early life and World War I = = 
 Mazurkiewicz was born in a craftsman 's family in Lwów . His father died in a fire in 1905 . He spent his childhood in Złoczów and attended a gymnasium in Lwów . He was a member of <unk> and then of the Polish Legions in World War I. He was a private in Józef Piłsudski 's First Brigade and fought in the Battle of <unk> on 25 July 1914 , where he was wounded and taken into Russian captivity . He soon escaped and rejoined his unit . In 1918 , he took part in the Battle of Kaniów as a unit commander , while serving under General Józef Haller . 
 = = Second Polish Republic = = 
 During the interwar period of the Second Polish Republic , he was promoted to the rank of captain , but left active service between 1922 and 1927 . Right before the outbreak of World War II ( 1938 – 1939 ) , he served as an instructor at the Centrum <unk> <unk> w <unk> ( Center for Infantry Education in <unk> ) , where he taught military tactics to future company commanders . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In August 1939 , Mazurkiewicz was assigned to the Diversionary Operations ( Grupa <unk> <unk> ) of the Polish General Staff , which was involved in counter @-@ intelligence against Nazi Germany particularly in the Free City of Danzig . After the German Invasion of Poland and the imminent collapse of Polish defenses in mid @-@ September , following plans made before the outbreak of the war , he organized Tajna Organizacja Wojskowa ( Secret Military Organization , TOW ) , an underground group dedicated to sabotaging and resisting the German occupation . He journeyed to Paris , where he met with General Władysław Sikorski , the Polish prime minister in exile , who officially sanctioned the formation of TOW . In Hungary , Mazurkiewicz subsequently organized a cell whose purpose was to serve as a transit point for soldiers and couriers traveling between occupied Poland and France . He returned to Poland in June 1940 . 
 In March 1943 , TOW was officially merged with <unk> <unk> ( Directorate for Diversion ) , or Kedyw , which was the group within the general anti @-@ Nazi organization Armia Krajowa ( The Home Army , AK ) , charged with carrying out sabotage , propaganda , intelligence gathering and direct action against the Germans . Mazurkiewicz was the second in command of Kedyw ( its head was General Emil August <unk> ) until August 1944 and the outbreak of the Warsaw Uprising . 
 = = = Warsaw Uprising = = = 
 Shortly before the outbreak of the Warsaw Uprising in 1944 , Mazurkiewicz was made commander of the Radosław Group . This force was one of the largest , best trained and equipped Polish units in the uprising . After the initiation of the uprising , the unit seized major portions of the Wola suburbs , and subsequently defended it against German attacks carried out by troops under the command of SS Gruppenführer Heinz <unk> and Standartenführer Oskar Dirlewanger . One of the battalions of the group , Battalion <unk> , liberated the Gęsiówka concentration camp located within Warsaw , and freed 384 prisoners ( mainly Jews ) , most of whom then joined the unit . The Radosław Group fought its way to Stare Miasto ( Warsaw Old Town ) borough , when further defense in Wola became impossible . In the areas of Wola that <unk> 's and Dirlewanger 's troops recaptured from the insurgents , at least 40 @,@ 000 civilians and prisoners of war ( POWs ) were murdered in the Wola massacre . 
 Despite being severely wounded in the head and leg during his escape from Wola , after a short stay in a hospital , Mazurkiewicz was put back in charge of the Radosław Group . He led an unsuccessful attempt in early September to evacuate to Śródmieście ( City center , Warsaw ) after Stare Miasto was overrun by German troops . After this failed , his group managed to make its way to the <unk> suburb where it tried to contact the First Polish Army under Soviet command , stationed on the right bank of Vistula . Since no help was forthcoming from the Soviet @-@ controlled Poles , Mazurkiewicz and his unit made their way through Warsaw 's sewers to Mokotów , the last center of resistance in Warsaw , in late September . There , the remains of the decimated group , including the Parasol and <unk> 49 battalions , fought until the surrender of the Polish forces on 2 October . Shortly before the order was signed , Mazurkiewicz was officially promoted to the rank of colonel , by General Tadeusz Bór @-@ Komorowski , the commander of the uprising . 
 According to the capitulation agreement , the Polish Home Army soldiers were to be treated as regular POWs and the civilians of Warsaw evacuated . Mazurkiewicz disbanded his unit and together with his wife Anna , who was a member of the Radosław Group , escaped the city by posing as a civilian . 
 = = In communist Poland = = 
 In 1945 , he was arrested by Urząd Bezpieczeństwa , the Polish communist secret police . He decided to cooperate with communist authorities in order to protect former members of resistance and he called for ex @-@ AK soldiers who had joined the anti @-@ communist underground to lay down their arms in accordance with the amnesties of 1945 and 1947 . 
 In 1949 , Mazurkiewicz wrote a letter to Stanisław <unk> , head of the Ministry of Public Security , complaining of the continued persecution of former Home Army soldiers and he was arrested again . During a two @-@ year pre @-@ trial confinement , Mazurkiewicz was interrogated and tortured — he was beaten and his teeth and hair were forcibly pulled out . He was eventually sentenced to life imprisonment in a show trial , in which the prosecutor submitted a false confession allegedly made by Mazurkiewicz and no defense witnesses were allowed to appear . He remained imprisoned until the amnesty of 1956 . Eventually rehabilitated , he was active in organizations which sought to protect former veterans of anti @-@ Nazi resistance and served as vice @-@ president of the Society of Fighters for Freedom and Democracy , the Polish veterans association . In 1980 , during a brief liberalization associated with the first Solidarity period he was promoted to the rank of General . 
 He died in May 1988 , about a year and a half before the first postwar non @-@ communist government was elected in Poland , and was buried at Powązki Military Cemetery . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Gold Cross of the Order of Virtuti Militari , previously awarded the Silver Cross 
 Cross of Independence with Swords 
 Cross of Valour – eleven times 
 Warsaw Uprising Cross ( 1981 ) 
 = Katherine Ritvo = 
 Katherine " Kathy " Ritvo ( born February 13 , 1969 ) a race horse trainer who won the Breeders ' Cup Classic in 2013 with Mucho Macho Man after having finished a close second in the same race in 2012 . She is the first woman to have trained a winner of that race . She also was only the fifth woman trainer to win any Breeders ' Cup race , and was the 14th woman trainer to saddle a starter in the Kentucky Derby in the 137 years that race had been run by 2011 . 
 Born Kathy Petro , she grew up in a horse racing family from Massachusetts and married a fellow horseman , Tim Ritvo , in 1990 . Kathy and Tim ran a race horse training operation in Florida , and In 2010 she took it over solo when Tim became part of the management of Gulfstream Park race track . Her accomplishments came against the backdrop of having been diagnosed with cardiomyopathy in 2001 and receiving a heart transplant in 2008 . In spite of the medication regime and immunity issues that transplant recipients face , she lives a normal life as a horse trainer and shows no signs of organ rejection . 
 = = Background and early career = = 
 Ritvo was born February 13 , 1969 , to Peter and Mary Petro . Her family was involved in horse racing , and she was raised in Braintree , Massachusetts . Her parents owned race horses , and after other small business ventures , her father purchased a race track . Her three brothers all established horse racing careers : Michael became a race horse trainer and brothers Louis and Nick became jockeys . Ritvo herself is jockey @-@ sized , standing only 4 ' 11 " , and weighing under 100 pounds . She worked for her father as a teenager as a groom , hot walker and exercise rider . She became a licensed trainer when she was 18 . Her nephew , Nick Petro , Jr . , works for her today as an exercise rider . 
 She met Tim Ritvo in her teens when he was a jockey and they both worked at Suffolk Downs racetrack . Tim and Kathy married in 1990 and soon thereafter moved to Florida , which they viewed as a better place to make a living in the horse racing industry . Tim and Kathy became race horse trainers , and today Tim is the president of Gulfstream Park . Their permanent residence is now Davie , Florida , a suburb of Fort Lauderdale . The couple have two children , Dominique , born in 1992 , and Michael , now a jockey , born in 1994 . Between 1990 and 1998 , Kathy Ritvo trained 150 winning horses , including stakes winners . 
 = = Heart condition = = 
 Ritvo developed cardiomyopathy , which had killed her brother Louis at the age of 38 , as well as her father at age 73 . She had been plagued by unusual fatigue since 1998 , and her heart condition was formally diagnosed in January , 2001 . She began taking medication and trained on a limited basis from 2003 to 2005 , starting about 100 horses in that period , with 15 wins . However , her condition deteriorated . She started only one horse in 2005 and had no starters from 2006 until 2009 . In 2008 , at the age of 39 , she was placed on a waiting list for a heart transplant . After a seven @-@ month wait , an organ became available on November 13 , 2008 , and Ritvo received her new heart that day in an operation that lasted 17 hours . She had been hospitalized for most of the previous six months , and at the time of her surgery her doctors assessed her as having only about two weeks to live . She was discharged from the hospital seven days after her surgery . She later gave a letter to the hospital to pass on to the organ donor 's family , but has never heard from them . Ritvo has stated that she wants the donor 's family to know she is thankful for her new heart , but respects their privacy . 
 Since the transplant , Ritvo shows no signs of organ rejection , keeping to a regimen of over 30 pills a day but otherwise living a normal life . 
 = = Return to race horse training = = 
 Ritvo 's doctors advised her not to return to work in the horse racing industry because of the risks to her immune system posed by the dirt and dust that is part of the environment . Nonetheless , in spite of medical warnings , she returned to horse training within six months , and was credited for saddling four starters in 2009 . Though immunity is a concern for transplant recipients , Ritvo remains healthy even though surrounded by horses , dogs , and all of the conditions typical of horse stables . 
 In 2010 , starting horses in 53 races for the year , she also took over the training of then @-@ two @-@ year @-@ old Mucho Macho Man when her husband Tim stopped training horses because he began working as part of the management at Gulfstream Park . Working with owners Reeves Thoroughbred Racing , the horse ran in the 2011 Kentucky Derby . Ritvo was only the 14th woman to train a horse entered in the Kentucky Derby in the 137 years it had been run to that date , and the third @-@ place finish of the horse was the best for a woman trainer in the history of the race . She kept her perspective : " I 'm so proud to be in the Derby , but just to get up in the morning is amazing . " She next ran Mucho Macho Man in the other two legs of the Triple Crown , the 136th Preakness Stakes and the 143rd Belmont Stakes , where he finished sixth and seventh respectively . Only 13 women trainers had saddled a starter prior to the 2011 Preakness , and Ritvo was only the 10th woman trainer to start a horse in the Belmont . Mucho Macho Man had overcome his own health problems in order to race , including having appeared to be lifeless at birth . Comparing her own experiences to the horse , Ritvo stated , " From the moment I opened my eyes , I felt fantastic . He 's Mucho Macho Man and I 'm Macho Woman . " 
 She raced Mucho Macho Man in 2012 , when he won three graded stakes races . She ran horses in 48 races that year , hitting the board 19 times . Her highest profile race that year occurred when Mucho Macho Man was a close second by a half @-@ length in the 2012 Breeders ' Cup Classic . 
 In 2013 , Ritvo ran Mucho Macho Man in assorted races in the eastern U.S. , then moved him to Santa Anita Park in early September , almost two months before the Breeders ' Cup races , because she felt he " thrived " in California . She entered him in the late September Awesome Again Stakes , where he earned his first Grade I win and free entry fees for the Breeders ' Cup Classic . At the Classic in early November , going off as the second favorite , the horse won by a nose . With the win , Ritvo became the first woman trainer to win the Breeders ' Cup Classic , and was also only the fifth woman trainer to win any Breeders ' Cup race . Ritvo 's fellow trainers in the race included Americans D. Wayne Lukas , Todd Pletcher , Bill Mott , and Bob Baffert , as well as Irish trainer Aidan O 'Brien . In response to a reporter 's question about how it felt to beat several major trainers , she said , " It feels great , " but also credited the team behind the horse , and added , " I ’ m just blessed to be here . ” 
 At the end of 2013 , Ritvo was named as a recipient of the Lou Smith Memorial Award for Yearly Achievement , given by the New England Turf Writers Association , noting her Massachusetts roots . Mucho Macho Man was awarded the 2013 Secretariat Vox Populi Award , recognizing the struggles the horse had overcome in reaching success and acknowledging the accomplishments of his connections , including Ritvo 's own story of overcoming her health issues and going on to train him . The win in the Breeders ' Cup Classic was selected as the National Thoroughbred Racing Association Moment of the Year with participation in the online polling for that award up by more than 50 % from the previous year , believed to be largely due to the popularity of Mucho Macho Man and the people around him , including Ritvo . 
 ESPN noted the worldwide success of women horse trainers in 2013 , particularly owing to wins in three of the world 's major races within a one @-@ month period . In October , <unk> Head @-@ <unk> won the Prix de l 'Arc de Triomphe with Treve , the only woman trainer to win the Arc . Then , a few days after Ritvo 's horse won the Breeders ' Cup Classic , the Melbourne Cup was won by <unk> , a horse trained by Australian trainer Gai Waterhouse , who was only the second woman to train a winner in that race . 
 As of 2014 , Ritvo trains a stable of about a dozen horses , including all of the horses in race training owned by Reeves Thoroughbred Racing , the owners of Mucho Macho Man . Her son Michael became a jockey and won his first race in March 2014 in his second trip out as an apprentice rider . 
 = Run of the Mill ( George Harrison song ) = 
 " Run of the Mill " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released on his 1970 triple album All Things Must Pass . Harrison wrote the song shortly after the Beatles ' troubled Get Back sessions in early 1969 , during a period when his growth as a songwriter had inadvertently contributed to the dysfunction within the Beatles ' group dynamic . The lyrics reflect the toll that running their company Apple Corps had taken on relationships within the band , especially between Paul McCartney and the other three Beatles , as well as Harrison 's dismay at John Lennon 's emotional withdrawal from the band . Commentators recognise " Run of the Mill " as one of several Harrison compositions that provide an insight into events behind the Beatles ' break @-@ up , particularly the difficulties surrounding Apple . 
 The song 's release coincided with a falling out between Harrison and McCartney , which contributed to the latter taking legal action to dissolve the Beatles partnership . The musical arrangement for " Run of the Mill " bears the influence of the Band , with whom Harrison had spent time in Woodstock before starting work on the Get Back project . Co @-@ produced by Phil Spector , the recording features contributions from Gary Wright and former members of Delaney & Bonnie 's Friends band , including Jim Gordon , Jim Price and Bobby Whitlock . 
 Biographers and reviewers have variously described " Run of the Mill " as an essay on karma , a tale of lost friendship , and a love song to the Beatles . Olivia Harrison has named it among her favourites of all her late husband 's compositions . An alternative version of the song , performed solo by Harrison on acoustic guitar , appears on the 2012 compilation Early Takes : Volume 1 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Author Simon Leng has written of George Harrison experiencing an " incredible phase of creativity " throughout 1969 , following his time spent in Woodstock , New York with Bob Dylan and the Band in late 1968 . Commentators note that Harrison 's growth as a composer would have to happen almost in spite of the Beatles , given his customary junior status to bandmates John Lennon and Paul McCartney . The Beatles ' Get Back sessions in January 1969 inspired the Harrison songs " I Me Mine " and " Wah @-@ Wah " , both of which reflected the fractious situation within the band , and his return to their fold after walking out of these filmed rehearsals allowed him to dictate terms for their immediate future . McCartney and Lennon now looked at Harrison " with new respect " , author Alan Clayson suggests . Mersey Beat founding editor Bill Harry was another to notice a change in Harrison compared to earlier in the 1960s , writing : " He wasn 't under the domination of the others . He wasn 't a passenger any more . " An additional factor in Harrison 's assuredness was his introduction to the Hare Krishna movement , following a meeting with devotee Shyamasundar Das at Apple Corps headquarters in December 1968 . 
 The financial problems within the Beatles ' Apple business empire became another divisive issue at this time . From summer 1968 until the appointment of Allen Klein as business manager in March 1969 , McCartney was a regular presence at Apple 's central London headquarters , calling staff meetings and urging financial restraint . While noting that all the individual Beatles were demanding employers , Apple press officer Derek Taylor later described McCartney as " the <unk> of the bossy " ; according to Tony Bramwell , Apple Records ' head of promotions , Lennon and partner Yoko Ono inflicted " their own reign of terror " . On 18 January , Disc magazine published what author Peter Doggett describes as " a heroin @-@ fuelled monologue " by Lennon in which he said of Apple 's finances : " If it carries on like this , all of us will be broke in the next few months . " While McCartney sought to appoint his in @-@ laws , New York lawyers Lee and John Eastman , as the band 's business advisors , Lennon 's outburst attracted the attention of the less conservative Klein . The latter effectively became the Beatles ' manager when Harrison and Ringo Starr also chose to put their faith in his tough approach to business . Refusing to acknowledge Klein as his representative , McCartney later cited this division as the first " irreconcilable difference " among the four Beatles , leading to the band 's break @-@ up in April 1970 . 
 Although he was actively involved as a director of Apple Records , and remained committed to running the label until its winding down in 1973 , Harrison viewed the concept of Apple as Lennon and McCartney 's egos " running away with themselves or with each other " . Harrison 's relief from the tedium of business meetings through February and March 1969 was reflected in his composition " Here Comes the Sun " , which he wrote in Eric Clapton 's garden while " sag [ ging ] off " from Apple . Around the same time , Harrison wrote " Run of the Mill " , a song addressing the failure of friendships within the band – or as he put it , " the problem of partnerships " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song title was a play on " trouble at t <unk> " , a Northern English term for conflict at the local factory or workplace . Doggett suggests that " run of the mill " might also have been a condemnation of Harrison 's songwriting uttered by one of his bandmates during the fraught Get Back sessions at Twickenham Film Studios . 
 In his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine , Harrison describes the lyrics to " Run of the Mill " as " the first song I ever wrote that looked like a poem on paper " . The words run in a continuum , uninterrupted by instrumental breaks of any kind . The opening verse outlines what theologian Dale Allison terms " a statement of responsibility " : 
 Everyone has choice 
 When to or not to raise their voices 
 It 's you that decides ... 
 In I , Me , Mine , Harrison introduces these words with a reference to McCartney 's heavy @-@ handedness at Apple and likens the scene to a Monty Python comedy routine . In the lyrics to " Run of the Mill " , author Ian Inglis notes that , rather than " <unk> [ ing ] the poisonous atmosphere that hangs over the group , by merely adding to the endless stream of insults and <unk> " , Harrison shows " genuine regret " at what has transpired and " warns against trying to shift the blame " for one 's actions . Another biographer , Joshua Greene , suggests that partly through his association with the Hare Krishna movement , Harrison was now " too sure of his life 's higher purpose to waste any more time on petty squabbles " . 
 Inglis views part of the second verse as a reference to the " abuse and humiliation " that Harrison had received at Twickenham , echoing the sentiments of " Wah @-@ Wah " . In the verse @-@ two lines " Another day for you to realize me / Or send me down again " , Doggett similarly recognises Lennon 's " unfeeling " criticism of Harrison 's new songs , while author Andrew Grant Jackson views both Lennon and McCartney as the target of this sentiment . 
 The theme of " failed or betrayed friendship " , in Leng 's words , is most evident midway through the third verse , with the lines " You 've got me wondering how I lost your friendship / But I see it in your eyes " . Doggett interprets this statement as reflecting Harrison 's " decaying relationship " with McCartney at the time . Lennon too had been a friend of Harrison 's since school days , and Leng includes him as a source of Harrison 's " <unk> " at the Beatles ' impending demise . 
 In the song 's two bridge sections , Leng notes the " psychological stress " implied by Harrison switching from a minor chord to its major voicing on the final word of lines such as " Though I 'm beside you , I can 't carry the blame for you " . Leng writes of this song @-@ wide message : " It presents his realization that he has to walk away and carry on with his own life . George Harrison is not his Beatle brothers ' keeper . " 
 The final verse urges an awareness of the consequences of chasing personal success , echoing what Greene views as the underlying message behind Harrison 's temporary departure from the Beatles in January 1969 – that " [ character ] , not career , should govern their behavior " : 
 How high will you leap ? 
 Will you make enough for you to reap it ? 
 Only you arrive 
 At your own made end ... 
 Inglis writes that through Harrison 's repetition of " It 's you that decides " from earlier in the song , to serve here as his parting statement , " Run of the Mill " becomes " less of an accusation and more of a plea " . On " the most obvious level " , Inglis adds , the song " appears to be directed toward McCartney " , as well as the divisions within the Beatles that reflect Apple 's precarious position in 1969 . In a January 2001 interview with Guitar World magazine , Harrison remarked of this period : " At that point in time , Paul couldn 't see beyond himself . He was on a roll , but ... in his mind , everything that was going on around him was just there to accompany him . He wasn 't sensitive to stepping on other people 's egos or feelings . " 
 Along with " Wah @-@ Wah " , " Isn 't It a Pity " and " Apple Scruffs " , Leng cites " Run of the Mill " as contributing to its parent album 's status in the Beatles ' history – namely , that All Things Must Pass was " the first instalment of the inside story about being caught in that Kafkaesque chain of events " . Further Harrison compositions serving as episodes in what Leng calls " the Beatles soap opera " include " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " , " Who Can See It " and " Living in the Material World " . 
 = = Recording = = 
 McCartney 's refusal to have the release of his eponymous first solo album delayed to allow for the Beatles ' Let It Be album led to the band 's break @-@ up on 9 April 1970 . Late that month , Harrison visited Apple 's new offices at 1700 Broadway , New York , where he announced his intention to begin working with American producer Phil Spector on an album of his unused songs , some of which he had been stockpiling for up to four years . Noting the emotional disarray of Lennon , McCartney and Starr at this point , Doggett writes of their former bandmate : " Harrison retained a sense of objectivity . The youngest Beatle , he was now the group 's wisest spokesman . " In an interview for New York 's <unk> Radio , Harrison remarked of McCartney 's objections to Klein running Apple : " The reality is that he 's outvoted , and we 're a partnership ... [ L ] ike in any other business or group , you have a vote , and he was outvoted three to one ... " 
 Harrison taped a solo demo of " Run of the Mill " at London 's Abbey Road Studios on 20 May . Once the full sessions were under way , from 26 May , Harrison gave the song a musical arrangement that Leng has likened to the " minimalist tradition " of the Band 's work in 1968 – 69 , an influence that was apparent also in " All Things Must Pass " , " Behind That Locked Door " and other tracks on the album . The musicians accompanying Harrison on the session for " Run of the Mill " were all former members of Delaney & Bonnie and Friends , with whom he had toured briefly in December 1969 – Jim Gordon ( drums ) , Carl Radle ( bass ) and Bobby Whitlock ( harmonium ) . In addition , ex @-@ Spooky Tooth Gary Wright played piano . 
 According to Leng 's study of All Things Must Pass , and to Whitlock 's recollection , Harrison played all of the song 's acoustic guitar parts . On what author Bruce Spizer notes as a " delicate recording " , these guitar lines accentuate the melody 's tumbling descents . Aside from Wright 's piano , the most prominent instrumentation on the recording is the trumpet and saxophone motif that opens and closes the song . Harrison vocalised the melody for this motif in his guide vocal on the basic track , before two other former Delaney & Bonnie sidemen , Jim Price and Bobby Keys , overdubbed the brass parts . This same motif later inspired Harrison 's song " Soft Touch " , written in the Virgin Islands in 1976 and issued on the George Harrison album three years later . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Run of the Mill " was released in late November 1970 as the final track on disc one of All Things Must Pass , in its triple LP format . The song followed " Let It Down " , a track featuring Spector 's full Wall of Sound production treatment , and so provided " the perfect antidote to the barrage of sound " , according to authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter , who draw parallels with Harrison 's " Long , Long , Long " being sequenced to follow " Helter Skelter " on The Beatles ( 1968 ) . 
 Among Beatles biographers who have written of this period , Nicholas Schaffner described All Things Must Pass and Lennon 's concurrent Plastic Ono Band as having " more than compensated for the absence of the Beatles ' customary Yuletide offering " , while Robert Rodriguez refers to the end of 1970 as " the absolute nadir of Beatlemania " , with McCartney filing suit in Britain 's High Court to dissolve the band 's business partnership . Against this backdrop , Doggett writes , " Run of the Mill " provided " the most compelling testimony to the recent past " , on an album that offered listeners " a teasing glimpse into an intimate world that had previously been off limits to the public " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 On release , Ben Gerson of Rolling Stone praised " Run of the Mill " as a " vintage Beatle " song , a composition of " poignance and <unk> lyricism " , while Melody Maker 's Richard Williams acknowledged Harrison 's transformation from his previous , third @-@ Beatle status : " Harrison 's light has been hidden under the egos of McCartney and Lennon . From time to time there have been hints on several of their albums that he was more than he was being allowed to be . " Writing in 1977 , Nicholas Schaffner referred to " Run of the Mill " as " an essay on karma " and highlighted the message underpinning the song : " It 's you that decides ... your own made end " . 
 Simon Leng identifies a thematic link between it and other songs in the Harrison canon , notably " See Yourself " , from Thirty Three & 1 / 3 ( 1976 ) . Leng rates " Run of the Mill " " one of his most successful " compositions , through its acknowledgment that human relationships are " the other side of the coin " from the spiritual search represented in " My Sweet Lord " and " Hear Me Lord " . Ian Inglis writes that " Its rolling melody and warm vocals give it the texture of a love song , which , of course , it is : a love song to the Beatles . " In his book subtitled The Essential Songs of the Beatles ' Solo Careers , Andrew Grant Jackson concludes of " Run of the Mill " : " Such personal musings would be irrelevant to anyone but the biggest Beatle fans if Harrison hadn 't so artfully written the words to be open @-@ ended and applicable to anyone … A touching work of maturity by a little brother who saw more clearly than the others , realizing that he loved them but it was time to move on . " 
 Speaking in February 2001 during promotion for the 30th anniversary reissue of All Things Must Pass , Harrison named " Run of the Mill " first among his three favourite tracks on the album , followed by " Isn 't It a Pity " and " Awaiting on You All " . The song particularly resonates with its composer 's widow , Olivia Harrison . " George singing was always beguiling to me " , she writes in her introduction to the posthumous edition of I , Me , Mine , " and countless times I was his audience of one . Run of the Mill was a song I often asked him to play , the lyrics so wise , especially the reminder that , ' Tomorrow when you rise , another day for you to realise me ' ( ' me ' being God ) ... " Speaking to Mojo magazine in December 2011 , ten years after her husband 's death , Olivia Harrison named it as the song that most reminded her of Harrison . Music critic Tim Riley calls it " the best of the lot " on All Things Must Pass . 
 In his review of Harrison 's 2014 Apple reissues , Paul Trynka of Classic Rock cites " Run of the Mill " as " the perfect example " of how All Things Must Pass still " sounds fresh despite its familiarity " . Trynka continues : " Like many of Harrison 's songs , the opening and chords are sweet , reassuringly recognisable , but just as we settle down the melody skips away , aided by his trademark trick of a brief switch of time signature . It 's dazzling craftsmanship – yet sweet and unforced . " 
 = = Alternative version = = 
 The 1970 demo version of " Run of the Mill " appears briefly in Martin Scorsese 's George Harrison : Living in the Material World documentary ( 2011 ) , playing over a scene where Harrison takes to the stage for one of his 1974 Dark Horse Tour concerts , before cutting to him and his wife on an empty beach at sunset . Although available since the 1990s on bootleg collections such as Beware of ABKCO ! , this solo demo was only issued officially in the UK in November 2011 , with the deluxe edition DVD release of the film . Six months later , it received worldwide release on the Early Takes : Volume 1 compilation . Noting Harrison 's usual practice of perfecting his guitar parts , compilation producer Giles Martin commented : " While that 's a very valid practice , I think it can sometimes inhibit the spirit of the recording ... [ T ] he appeal of this version to me is that it 's very rough and edgy . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The musicians who performed on " Run of the Mill " are believed to be as follows : 
 George Harrison – vocals , acoustic guitars , backing vocals 
 Gary Wright – piano 
 Bobby Whitlock – harmonium 
 Carl Radle – bass 
 Jim Gordon – drums 
 Jim Price – trumpets , horn arrangement 
 Bobby Keys – saxophone 
 = Ariel Meredith = 
 Ariel Meredith ( born July 11 , 1986 ) is an American model who appeared in the 2009 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 and 2015 Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue . Born in Shreveport , Louisiana , she did some part @-@ time modeling starting in 1998 until she finished her schooling . 
 = = Background = = 
 A native of Shreveport , Louisiana , she was senior class parliamentarian and a senior senator on the student council of her 2001 – 2002 class at Huntington High School . After high school graduation , she moved to New York City . Meredith 's mother 's name is Marjorie Meredith and her father 's name is David Meredith . 
 = = Career = = 
 Although she was discovered at age 14 she did not pursue modeling as a full @-@ time career until after she completed her education in 2008 . In 1998 , she won a 500 @-@ contestant modeling competition in Dallas and signed with Ford Models in New York and Campbell Modeling Agency in Dallas . She got 32 call @-@ backs from the contest . As a teenager she appeared in Seventeen , Teen Cosmopolitan , Cosmopolitan , and Teen magazines . She began traveling domestically while still in school . In 2002 , she appeared on the MTV show Fashionably Loud . She started modeling regularly in 2005 . When one of her early modeling agencies demanded that she have breast reduction surgery , she refused and was dropped from the agency . 
 The New York Times mentioned her YouTube beauty secret video on using a toothbrush to <unk> one 's lips prior to applying lip gloss in 2007 . She debuted for Vera Wang 's Spring Show in New York in September 2008 . Her September 2008 New York Fashion week runway debut experience , where she also modeled for Nicole Miller , was chronicled in the USA Today . She appeared in shows for a total of eleven fashion designers including an opening performance for Junya Watanabe , which marked her rising stardom . After her shows in New York , she did eight shows in Milan . She has performed in runway shows for Baby Phat , Brioni , Clips , Diesel , D & G , Elie Saab , Junya Watanabe , La Perla , Milly , Vera Wang and many more . According to The Times @-@ Picayune , her September 2008 New York and Milan Fashion week performances led to her classification as a rising star in the modeling industry . 
 She is featured in the 2009 Spring / Summer Dolce & Gabbana advertising campaign , which was shot by Mario Testino . She has also posed for J.Crew , Ann Taylor Loft , H & M , David 's Bridal , Cover Girl eyewear , Fossil , Target , Garnier <unk> , Nine West , Roca Wear , Victoria 's Secret , The Limited , Sephora , Levi 's , and Gap . Meredith shot the 2009 Swimsuit issue at beaches , lagoons , cantinas and nature preserves near Tulum , Mexico on the Mayan Riviera . As of 2014 , she is currently represented by Supreme Management in New York City . 
 = Typhoon Hester ( 1971 ) = 
 Typhoon Hester of October 1971 was regarded as one of the most destructive storms to strike Vietnam since 1944 . Developing as a tropical depression on October 18 near Palau , Hester gradually intensified as it moved westward towards the Philippines . Across the Philippines , Hester was responsible for six deaths and ₱ 5 million in damage . After passing over Mindanao and the Visayas as a tropical storm between October 20 and 21 , the storm intensified into a typhoon before striking Palawan . Once over the South China Sea , Hester further strengthened and ultimately attained peak winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . On October 23 , the storm made landfall near Huế , South Vietnam . Once onshore , Hester rapidly weakened and dissipated on October 24 over Laos . 
 The most significant impact from Typhoon Hester was felt in South Vietnam , where winds in excess of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) caused extensive damage to several United States Army bases . The hardest hit base was in Chu Lai where three Americans were killed . At least 75 percent of the structures in the base sustained damage and 123 aircraft were damaged or destroyed . Newspaper reports indicated that 100 Vietnamese lost their lives due to the storm , including 33 following a plane crash near Quy Nhơn . In the wake of the storm , the South Vietnamese government provided the hardest hit areas with relief funds and supplies . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 18 , a tropical depression formed just west of Palau . Tracking westward , the system attained tropical storm @-@ force winds the following day and was assigned the name Hester . At this time , Hester was located approximately 400 km ( 250 mi ) east of northern Mindanao in the Philippines . Due to the cyclone 's proximity to the country , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration also monitored the storm and assigned it with the local name <unk> . Early on October 20 , Hester brushed northern Mindanao before crossing the Visayas . The storm passed approximately 75 km ( 45 mi ) south of Cebu City later that day before moving into the South China Sea . Early on October 21 , Hester intensified into a typhoon hours before crossing Palawan . 
 Once over the South China Sea , a strong ridge built over southern China resulting in Hester turning northwestward and accelerating . It reached a forward speed of 33 km / h ( 20 mph ) , twice the climatological average for typhoons in that region during October . Between October 22 and 23 , the storm developed an eye before reaching its peak intensity as a Category 2 @-@ equivalent typhoon . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center estimated peak winds to have reached 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) along with a central pressure of 967 mb ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 56 inHg ) . Hester subsequently made landfall near Huế , South Vietnam . Once onshore , the storm 's structure rapidly degraded as it weakened . The storm later dissipated over central Laos on October 24 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = South Vietnam = = = 
 Regarded as one of the most destructive storms to strike Vietnam since 1944 , Typhoon Hester caused considerable damage in the country and disrupted the Vietnam War . Making landfall directly over the United States military installation in Chu Lai , Hester damaged or destroyed 75 percent of the structures in the base . Sustained winds and gusts in the base were estimated to have reached 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) and 160 km / h ( 105 mph ) respectively . Four hangars collapsed in the Chu Lai airbase , with total aircraft losses amounting to 36 destroyed and 87 damaged . Losses from the destroyed helicopters exceeded $ 3 @.@ 6 million ( 1971 USD ) . Dozens of barracks were damaged in Chu Lai and communications were hampered . The 91st Evacuation Hospital was mostly destroyed and was forced to transfer patients to Quy Nhơn . Nearly 50 percent of the structures at the Marble Mountain Air Facility were damaged by the storm 's high winds . 
 Heavy rains accompanying the storm , peaking at 5 @.@ 44 in ( 138 mm ) at Camp Eagle , caused considerable flooding in the country . Approximately 370 km ( 230 mi ) of coastline between Quảng Trị and Đà Nẵng were inundated . About 90 percent of homes in Đà Nẵng were damaged . Flooding from the storm washed out a bridge between Fire Support Base Birmingham and Camp Eagle , temporarily isolating two units within the 94th Field Artillery Regiment . 
 Extensive losses to agriculture also took place , with major crop losses reported and 900 cattle killed . According to government officials , the entire banana , rice , and sugar cane crop was destroyed and harvests could not be made until the following spring . Offshore , nearly 500 vessels sank or were destroyed by the storm and the 1 @,@ 000 ton Union Pacific ran aground . 
 According to newspaper reports , 100 Vietnamese perished during Hester . Thirty @-@ three fatalities took place after a South Vietnamese air force transport crashed near Quy Nhơn . Thee Americans were killed due to flying debris during the storm and twenty @-@ one others were injured . On October 25 , thunderstorms associated with Hester were blamed on a helicopter crash Nha Trang that killed ten Americans . Roughly 550 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed across the country , leaving an estimated 200 @,@ 000 people homeless . 
 On October 25 , Premier Tran Thien Khiem toured some of the storm @-@ ravaged areas and made on @-@ the @-@ spot grants of $ 19 @,@ 000 to each province and $ 3 @,@ 500 to Đà Nẵng . He also promised that 50 @,@ 000 sheets of tin roofing would be sent to aid in reconstruction . Later that day , President Nguyen Van Thieu ordered $ 725 @,@ 000 be made available for disaster relief in the northern provinces following an emergency meeting . The Social Welfare Ministry estimated that $ 1 @.@ 5 million would be needed for civilian relief . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Tracking over the southern Philippines as a tropical storm , Hester caused some damage in the country . Winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) were reported in Cebu City as the storm passed by . A total of six people were killed while twenty @-@ two sustained injuries and another two were reported missing . Damage amounted to ₱ 5 million . In North Vietnam , the Viet Cong was reportedly taking " urgent measures " to cope with the aftermath of the typhoon . A Chinese news broadcast stated that 100 million piastres had been allocated for relief efforts . 
 = Balthier = 
 Balthier ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a 22 @-@ year @-@ old fictional character in the Final Fantasy series , and a protagonist in Final Fantasy XII . He was designed by Akihiko Yoshida , was voiced by Gideon Emery and Hiroaki Hirata in the English and Japanese versions respectively , and is one of the most positively received characters of the game , compared by some to the likes of James Bond and Han Solo . 
 In Final Fantasy XII , he is a sky pirate who is accompanied by a member of the fictional Viera species , Fran . While attempting to steal the " Goddess 's Magicite " , they encounter protagonist Vaan , who had already stolen it . This coincidence entangles them into the main plot of Final Fantasy XII . His birth name is Ffamran mied Bunansa , and he is the estranged son of Doctor Cid , one of the game 's primary antagonists . Balthier later appears in Final Fantasy XII : Revenant Wings and in a cameo appearance in Final Fantasy Tactics : War of the Lions . 
 = = Character design = = 
 Balthier was designed by Akihiko Yoshida , who has stated that the character is his favorite from Final Fantasy XII since the character is based on " someone I admire . " Balthier has been called a " completely original character " by Yoshida , having not used any previous Final Fantasy character as a reference . In an interview , Yoshida stated that all the characters of Final Fantasy XII were designed with a focus on creating an aesthetic found nowhere in the real world . The armor of the Judges , which Balthier had been , were designed as a combination of historical armor , mountain bike gear , and futuristic ideas . 
 = = = Attributes = = = 
 For Final Fantasy XII , Balthier was voiced by Gideon Emery in English and Hiroaki Hirata in Japanese . Emery commented that while voicing the character of Balthier , he developed a " small crush " on Fran , Balthier 's partner . He also commented that the biggest challenge of voicing Balthier was having to stay consistent , adding that he spent more than four hours in a small booth while doing the voice , which could cause him to " drift away from the character " if he goes on for too long . He also described him as being similar to the character . Emery auditioned for Balthier , seeing him after he did this and " instantly fell in love with the character " . He described him as a cross between Han Solo , James Bond , and Jack Sparrow , citing suave yet cocky attitude . He was thankful that he was not aware of Balthier 's popularity since his reveal , stating that he would have been " crippled by the fear of not delivering on what the fans expected " . He stated that he took no inspiration from anyone else for the role , wanting to ensure that he was unique . Instead , he cited the pictures and animation of the character as his inspiration . Emery cited Jack Fletcher , the voice director , as a great help in voicing the character and setting up the scene for him . To give Final Fantasy XII a Western feel , Balthier 's movements were recorded by a Western motion capture actor . 
 Balthier is a Hume sky pirate who pilots the Strahl , a small airship , around the skies of Ivalice . VideoGamer.com editor Greg <unk> made a similar comparison , calling him a " Han Solo @-@ like sky pirate " . 1UP.com editor Jeremy Parish compared Balthier to Albus , one of the characters from Castlevania : Order of Ecclesia , stating that they share a physical resemblance . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Final Fantasy XII = = = 
 Balthier and his companion , Fran , prefer to remain outside the war between the kingdoms of Ivalice . However , their attempt to steal the Goddess 's Magicite — later revealed to be the Dusk Shard — from the Dalmascan Royal Palace goes bad ; Vaan steals it first , and , caught in the fray of a rebel assault against the Imperial Palace , Balthier and Fran find themselves embroiled in the conflict against Archadia . Born as Ffamran mied Bunansa ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ ブナンザ , <unk> Mido Bunanza ) , he is the son of Dr. Cid ( Cidolfus Demen Bunansa ) , though he grew weary of his father 's madness and obsession with nethicite . Although Cid had made him an Imperial Judge , Ffamran eventually decided to cut his ties with his father and his role as a judge , becoming a sky pirate under a new name . With this new career change , Balthier amounted a sizable bounty on his head , attracting the attention of bounty hunters such as Ba 'Gamnan . Unfortunately for Balthier , it took him a while to realize he 'd been following his father in pursuing nethicite while he served in the resistance . Though he makes peace with his father prior to his death , Balthier goes with the group to destroy the Sky Fortress Bahamut as penance for his father 's deeds . Balthier claims to be the " leading man " of the story many times throughout the game , and insists that this status makes him invincible . After the Sky Fortress Bahamut crashes with him and Fran still in it , they remain out of contact until they retrieve the Strahl back from Vaan and Penelo a year later , leaving a note for the new Queen Ashe which held her wedding ring that she used to purchase his services . 
 = = = Other games = = = 
 Both he and Fran intend on finding the Cache of Glabados , which is resolved in Final Fantasy XII : Revenant Wings when it turns out to be tied to Eternal . Balthier was at first intent to take Lemures ' treasure , the Auracite , but knew the truth behind it and attempted to destroy the Auralith , eventually rejoining Vaan 's group to fight the Judge of Wings , letting Vaan be the " leading man " while he himself leaves the limelight . He makes a crossover appearance in Final Fantasy Tactics : The War of the Lions . He was the first cameo character they added to War of the Lions , with co @-@ producer Shingo <unk> stating that it was not a conscious decision to add continuity to the Ivalice story . He also appears in Itadaki Street Portable . Balthier also reprises his role from Final Fantasy XII in the manga adaptation by Gin Amou . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 A Balthier figurine was sold randomly in Japanese sets of Final Fantasy XII characters . Square Enix released a Sculpture Arts set of Balthier and Fran escaping the palace of Rabanastre in 2008 . A full @-@ colored action figure of Balthier has also been displayed in the Square Enix Japan merchandise page . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Since his appearance in Final Fantasy XII , Balthier has received mostly positive reception . When he was first revealed , the fan response was very positive . GameSpy 's Justin Speer described him as a " clever @-@ bastard type " , praising his wry delivery . GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin called Balthier the best character in the game , describing him as the " Auron of the cast " . 1UP.com editor Jeremy Parish called Final Fantasy XII protagonist Vaan annoying , placing the duo of Balthier and Fran above him . 1UP.com 's Andrew Pfister stated <unk> presence in Final Fantasy XII helped ease some fans dislike of the " angsty teen " behavior of the main character Vaan . PSX Extreme editor Cavin Smith commented that while Vaan is the main character , he usually takes a back seat , adding that Balthier is the closest thing to a male lead . For similar reasons , GameZone listed Balthier as the tenth best Final Fantasy character , emphasizing how Balthier becomes " as much the leading man as Vaan . " PALGN 's Phil Larsen commented that though a lofty prediction , he expected that the duo of Balthier and Fran would " go down in history as one of the greatest duos of modern narrative storytelling " . Balthier ranked ninth on IGN 's top 25 best Final Fantasy characters , ranking higher than any other character from Final Fantasy XII . Editor Dave Smith commented that he makes a " convincing case " that he is the main hero , upstaging fellow playable characters due to his " sharp looks and even sharper wit . " GamesRadar <unk> Glasser listed Balthier and Fran as one of her favourite Final Fantasy couples , describing theirs as being a well @-@ balanced relationship . Destructoid 's Aaron Linde noted that few video game characters had both his intelligence and his common sense , and wished more male characters in gaming could be like him . 
 Balthier has been compared to other characters in fiction . Simon Wigham of Console Obsession called Balthier his " favourite by quite a wide margin " , comparing him to James Bond due to his " humorous lines " . RPGFan editor Stephen Harris compared his voice to that of Ian Fleming 's depiction of Bond . 1UP.com editor Andrew Pfister compared the duo of Balthier and Fran to that of Han Solo and Chewbacca , two characters from the Star Wars franchise , adding that they are far more interesting than any other character in the " modern FF era " . 
 = Sean Bean = 
 Shaun Mark Bean ( born 17 April 1959 ) , known professionally as Sean Bean , is an English actor . After graduating from the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art , he made his professional debut in a theatre production of Romeo and Juliet in 1983 . Retaining his distinctive Yorkshire accent , he first found mainstream success for his portrayal of Richard Sharpe in the ITV series Sharpe . Bean has since garnered further recognition for his performance as Ned Stark in the HBO epic fantasy series Game of Thrones , as well as roles in the BBC anthology series Accused and the ITV historical drama series Henry VIII . His most prominent film role was Boromir in The Lord of the Rings trilogy ( 2001 – 03 ) . 
 Other roles include Alec Trevelyan in the James Bond film GoldenEye ( 1995 ) and Odysseus in Troy ( 2004 ) , as well as roles in Patriot Games ( 1992 ) , Ronin ( 1998 ) , National Treasure ( 2004 ) , North Country ( 2005 ) , The Island ( 2005 ) , Silent Hill ( 2006 ) , Black Death ( 2010 ) , Jupiter Ascending ( 2015 ) and The Martian ( 2015 ) . As a voice actor , Bean has been featured in the video game The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion and the drama The Canterbury Tales , among several others . He has received several awards during his career and won an International Emmy for Best Actor . He has also been nominated for a BAFTA and Saturn Award . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bean was born in Handsworth , a suburb of Sheffield , which was then part of West Riding of Yorkshire ( the County of South Yorkshire was created in 1974 ) . He is the son of Rita ( née <unk> ) and Brian Bean . He has a younger sister named Lorraine . His father owned a fabrication shop that employed 50 people , including Bean 's mother , who worked as a secretary . Despite becoming relatively wealthy , the family never moved away from the council estate as they preferred to remain close to friends and family . As a child , Bean smashed a glass door during an argument , which left a piece of glass embedded in his leg that briefly impeded his walking and left a large scar . This prevented him from pursuing his dream of playing football professionally . 
 In 1975 , Bean left Brook Comprehensive School with O Levels in Art and English . After a job at a supermarket and another for the local council , he started working for his father 's firm with a day release at Rotherham College of Arts and Technology to take a welding course . While there , he stumbled into an art class and decided to pursue his interest in art . After attending courses at two other colleges , one for half a day and the other for less than a week , he returned to Rotherham College , where he subsequently enrolled in a drama course . After some college plays and one at Rotherham Civic Theatre , he won a scholarship to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) , starting a seven @-@ term course in January 1981 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Bean graduated from RADA in 1983 , making his professional acting debut later that year as Tybalt in Romeo and Juliet at the Watermill Theatre in Newbury . His early career involved a mixture of stage and screen work . As an actor , he adopted the Irish spelling of his first name . His first national exposure came in an advert for non @-@ alcoholic lager . Between 1986 and 1988 , he was a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company , appearing in productions of Romeo and Juliet , The Fair Maid of the West , and A Midsummer Night 's Dream . He appeared in his first film , Derek Jarman 's Caravaggio ( 1986 ) , playing Ranuccio <unk> , followed in the same director 's War Requiem ( 1988 ) . In 1989 , he starred as the evil Dominic O 'Brien in The Fifteen Streets , where he gained a dedicated following . 
 During the late 1980s and early 1990s , Bean became an established actor on British television . He appeared in the BBC productions Clarissa and Lady Chatterley , and his role in the latter became noted for his sex scenes with Joely Richardson . In 1990 , Bean starred in Jim Sheridan 's adaption of the John B. Keane play The Field . Also in 1990 , his role as the journalist Anton in <unk> examined the difficult problems of apartheid in South Africa . In 1996 , he combined his love of football with his career to finally achieve his childhood dream of playing for Sheffield United , as Jimmy Muir in the film When Saturday Comes . Although the film was not critically acclaimed , Bean received credit for a good performance . In August 1997 , Bean appeared in what became a famous Sky Sports commercial for the upcoming 1997 @-@ 98 Premier League season . His football related work continued in 1998 when he narrated La Coupe de la Gloire , the official film of the 1998 FIFA World Cup held in France . 
 Bean 's critical successes in Caravaggio and Lady Chatterley contributed to his emerging image as a sex symbol , but he became most closely associated with the character of Richard Sharpe , the maverick Napoleonic Wars rifleman in the ITV television series Sharpe . The series was based on Bernard Cornwell 's novels about the Peninsular War , and the fictional experiences of a band of soldiers in the famed 95th Rifles . Starting with Sharpe 's Rifles , the series followed the fortunes and misfortunes of Richard Sharpe as he rose from the ranks as a Sergeant , promoted to Lieutenant in Portugal , to Lieutenant Colonel by the time of the Battle of Waterloo . 
 Bean was not the first actor to be chosen to play Sharpe . As Paul McGann was injured while playing football two days into filming , the producers initially tried to work around his injury , but it proved impossible and Bean replaced him . The series ran continuously from 1993 to 1997 , with three episodes produced each year . It was filmed under challenging conditions , first in Ukraine and later in Portugal . After several years of rumours , more episodes were produced : Sharpe 's Challenge , which aired in April 2006 , and Sharpe 's Peril , which aired in autumn 2008 and was later released on DVD . Both of these were released as two cinema @-@ length 90 minute episodes per series . With a role as enigmatic Lord Richard Fenton in the TV miniseries Scarlett , Bean made the transition to Hollywood feature films . His first notable Hollywood appearance was that of an Irish republican terrorist in the 1992 film adaptation of Patriot Games . While filming his death scene , Harrison Ford hit him with a boat hook , giving him a permanent scar . Bean 's rough @-@ cut looks made him a patent choice for a villain , and his role in Patriot Games was the first of several villains that he would portray , all of whom die in gruesome ways . 
 In the 1995 film GoldenEye , Bean portrayed James Bond 's nemesis Alec Trevelyan ( MI6 's 006 ) . He played the weak @-@ <unk> Spence in Ronin ( 1998 ) , a wife @-@ beating ex @-@ con in Essex Boys ( 2000 ) , and a malevolent kidnapper / jewel thief in Don 't Say a Word ( 2001 ) . He was also widely recognised as villainous treasure hunter Ian Howe in National Treasure , and played a villainous scientist in The Island ( 2005 ) . In the independent film Far North , he plays a Russian mercenary who gets lost in the tundra and is rescued by an Inuit woman and her daughter , whom he later pits against one another . 
 Bean 's most prominent role was as Boromir in Peter Jackson 's The Lord of the Rings trilogy . His major screen time occurs in the first installment , The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring . He appears briefly in flashbacks in The Lord of the Rings : The Two Towers and The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King , as well as in a scene from the extended edition of The Two Towers . Before casting finished , rumours circulated that Jackson had considered Bean for the role of Aragorn , but neither Bean nor Jackson confirmed this in subsequent interviews . Bean 's fear of flying in helicopters caused him difficulties in mountainous New Zealand , where the trilogy was filmed . After a particularly rough ride , he vowed not to fly to a location again ; in one instance , he chose to take a ski lift into the mountains while wearing his full costume ( complete with shield , armour , and sword ) and then hike the final few miles . 
 Other roles gave more scope for his acting abilities . In 1999 's Extremely Dangerous , his character walked a fine line between villain and hero . He became a repentant , poetry @-@ reading <unk> cleric who succumbs to his emotions in 2002 's Equilibrium , a quirky alien cowboy in 2003 's The Big Empty , and a sympathetic and cunning Odysseus in the 2004 film Troy . He appeared with other Hollywood stars in Moby 's music video " We Are All Made of Stars " in February 2002 . In the same year , he returned to the stage in London performing in Macbeth . Due to popular demand , the production ran until March 2003 . 
 Bean has done voice @-@ over work , mostly in the British advertising industry . He has featured in television adverts for O2 , Morrisons and <unk> as well as for <unk> and the Sci @-@ Fi Channel in the United States . He also does the voice over for the National Blood Service 's television and radio campaign . For the role playing video game , The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion , he voiced Martin Septim . Bean 's distinctive voice has also been used in the intro and outro segments of the BBC Formula 1 racing coverage for the 2011 and 2012 seasons . 
 Bean completed a one @-@ hour pilot , Faceless , for US television . He has also appeared in Outlaw , an independent British production , and a remake of 1986 horror film , The Hitcher ( released in January 2007 ) ; here he used an American accent again . In 2009 , he appeared in the Red Riding trilogy as the malevolent John Dawson . He also appeared in Percy Jackson & the Olympians : The Lightning Thief ( 2010 ) , playing the role of Zeus , the king of Mount Olympus and god of the sky , thunder , and lightning . Also that year , Bean starred in CA $ H , playing the lead role of Pyke <unk> , a dangerous man determined to recover his wealth in a bad economy . CA $ H explored the role money plays in today 's hard economic times . Bean also played the villain 's twin brother , Reese . 
 Bean starred in the first season of Game of Thrones , HBO 's adaptation of the A Song of Ice and Fire novels by George R.R. Martin , playing the part of Lord Eddard Stark . Bean and Peter Dinklage were the two actors whose inclusion show runners David Benioff and Dan Weiss considered necessary for the show to become a success , and for whose roles no other actors were considered . His nuanced portrayal of what could have been a stereotypical " noble leader " character won him critical praise ; as the A.V. Club 's reviewer put it , he " portrayed Ned as a man who knew he lived in the muck but hoped for better and assumed everyone else would come along for the ride . " HBO 's promotional efforts focused on Bean as the show 's leading man and best @-@ known actor . The photograph of him as Ned sitting on the Iron Throne holding his <unk> was used for promotional posters and on the cover of the first season 's DVD box set as well as the cover of a tie @-@ in <unk> of the novel A Game of Thrones . 
 In August 2012 , Bean appeared as cross @-@ dressing teacher Simon in the opening episode of the second season of UK television series Accused , a role which would earn him a Royal Television Society best actor award . He starred in Soldiers of Fortune and the 2012 film <unk> , in which he plays a secret service agent faced with the task of pursuing and eliminating a suicide bomber and his terrorist cell . 
 He appeared in Tarsem Singh 's Snow White film , Mirror Mirror , which was released in the U.S. in March 2012 . Bean reprised his role as Christopher Da Silva in the Silent Hill film sequel Silent Hill : Revelation 3D . He co @-@ starred in the ABC drama series Missing , which premiered in early 2012 . 
 Bean currently stars in the espionage television series Legends as Martin Odum , an FBI agent who takes on various fabricated identities to go undercover . An intensive viral marketing campaign was centred on the hashtag # <unk> , focusing on the various deaths of his past characters and promising his character in Legends would not suffer the same fate . The campaign culminated with a Funny or Die exclusive video featuring Bean filming a scene for the show where he 's become so accustomed to dying on screen that he expects his character to die a bizarrely gruesome death despite the simplicity of the scene . 
 = = Image = = 
 Often described as " down to earth " , Bean has retained his Yorkshire accent despite now living in London . Partly because of his role as Sharpe , he is also described as a sex symbol . He was voted the UK 's second sexiest man in 2004 , placing just behind his Lord of the Rings co @-@ star Orlando Bloom . He admits he does not mind being considered as a " bit of rough " by women . In addition to his image as a sex symbol and an admitted " bit of rough " , he has developed a reputation as a loner , a label he considers unfair . He has described himself instead as quiet , and interviewers confirm that he is a " man of few words " , with one interviewer calling him " surprisingly shy " . Although he admits he can be a workaholic , he relaxes with a book or listens to music in his spare time , and is a talented pianist . He is also a keen gardener , welder , and <unk> . 
 = = Acting style = = 
 Despite being professionally trained , Bean adopts an instinctive style of acting that some say makes him especially well @-@ suited to portraying his characters ' depths . He has said that the most difficult part is at the start of filming when trying to understand the character . After achieving this , he can snap in and out of character instantly . This ability to go from the quiet man on set to the warrior Boromir " amazed " Sean Astin during filming of The Fellowship of the Ring . Other fans include directors Mike Figgis and Wolfgang Petersen , who described working with Bean as a " beautiful thing " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bean has been married and divorced four times . He married his secondary school sweetheart Debra James on 11 April 1981 . The marriage ended in divorce in 1988 . Bean met actress Melanie Hill at RADA , and they married on 27 February 1990 . The couple 's first daughter was born in October 1987 ; their second was born in September 1991 . Bean and Hill 's marriage ended in divorce in August 1997 . During the filming of Sharpe , Bean met actress Abigail Cruttenden , and they married on 22 November 1997 . Their daughter was born in November 1998 . Bean and Cruttenden divorced in July 2000 . 
 Bean began dating actress Georgina Sutcliffe in 2006 . After cancelling their planned January 2008 wedding on the eve of the ceremony for " personal reasons " , he married Sutcliffe at the Marylebone Register Office in London on 19 February 2008 . During allegations that Bean physically abused Sutcliffe in 2009 , domestic disturbances resulted in the police being called to their home in Belsize Park on three occasions . Bean and Sutcliffe 's separation was announced on 6 August 2010 , and the divorce was finalised on 21 December 2010 . 
 Bean has been a fan of Sheffield United FC since he was eight years old , and has a tattoo on his left shoulder that reads " 100 % Blade " . He opened their hall of fame in 2001 and , after making a six @-@ figure contribution to the club 's finances , was on their board of directors between 2002 and 2007 to help raise the profile of the club . He stepped down in 2007 to " go back to being an ordinary supporter " where he feels at home . During his time there , he had some issues with Neil Warnock , former manager of Sheffield United , after Warnock claimed that Bean stormed into his office and shouted at him in front of his wife and daughter when the club had just been relegated from the Premier League . Bean denies it , calling Warnock " bitter " and " hypocritical " . He wrote the foreword and helped to promote a book of anecdotes called Sheffield United : The Biography . He also follows Yorkshire County Cricket Club . 
 Bean has a tattoo of the number nine on his shoulder , written using Tengwar , in reference to his involvement in the Lord of the Rings films and the fact that his character was one of the original nine companions of the Fellowship of the Ring . The other actors of " The Fellowship " ( Elijah Wood , Sean Astin , Orlando Bloom , Billy Boyd , Ian McKellen , Dominic Monaghan , and Viggo Mortensen ) have the same tattoo . John Rhys @-@ Davies , whose character was also one of the original nine companions , arranged for his stunt double to get the tattoo instead . 
 Bean often gets fan mail intended for Rowan Atkinson , who played Mr. Bean . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 In 2013 , Bean was named best actor at the Royal Television Society awards and won an International Emmy Award for his role in Accused . He received three separate awards in 2004 as part of the ensemble cast in The Return of the King from the Screen Actors Guild , the National Board of Review , and the Broadcast Film Critics Association . 
 In his home city of Sheffield , he has received several honours and acclaims , including an honorary doctorate from Sheffield Hallam University in 1997 and a Doctor of Letters in English Literature from the University of Sheffield in July 2007 . He was selected as one of the inaugural members of Sheffield Legends ( the Sheffield equivalent of the Hollywood Walk of Fame ) and a plaque in his honour has been placed in front of Sheffield Town Hall . Bean commented : " I did get a doctorate from Sheffield Hallam University about 11 or 12 years ago so now I 'm a double doctor . But this was wonderful , especially from my home city . " 
 = Pre @-@ Code crime films = 
 The era of American film production from the early sound era to the enforcement of the Hays Code in 1934 is denoted as Pre @-@ Code Hollywood . The era contained violence and crime in pictures which would not be seen again until decades later . Although the Hays office had specifically recommended removing profanity , the drug trade , and prostitution from pictures , it had never officially recommended against depictions of violence in any form in the 1920s . State censor boards , however , created their own guidelines , and New York in particular developed a list of violent material which had to be removed for a picture to be shown in the state . Two main types of crime films were released during the period : the gangster picture and the prison film . 
 A triumvirate of gangster pictures were released in the early 1930s — Little Caesar ( 1931 ) , The Public Enemy ( 1931 ) , and Scarface ( 1932 ) — which were built on the template created by the first gangster movie , 1927 's Underworld . All featured the rise and eventual fall of an organized criminal . As described by crime film scholar Jack <unk> the maxim became , " If the films insist that one can ’ t win , under that given it ’ s how you lose that counts . " Scarface was the most controversial and violent ; the film took nearly a year to reach theaters due to battles with censors . Obviously based on the life of Al Capone , Scarface and others like it outraged civic leaders who felt that movies were glorifying the lifestyles of criminals . 
 Stirred into action by the 1930 Ohio penitentiary fire , which resulted in 300 deaths when guards refused to let inmates out of their cells , Hollywood produced movies which depicted the harsh conditions in prisons at the time . The prototype of the prison genre was 1930 's The Big House . The picture features future genre staples such as solitary confinement , informers , riots , an escape , and the codes of prison life . Never box office hits , prison pictures failed to attract the female audiences they needed to achieve financial success . The chain gang films were produced in a similar response to the callous inhumanity of the chain gang system which was prevalent among states in the southern US . The 1932 film I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang is considered the seminal movie of the genre , and was based on the autobiography of Robert E. Burns who was himself a fugitive at the time of the picture 's release . 
 = = Early crime films = = 
 In the early 1900s America was still primarily a rural country , especially in terms of self @-@ identity . D. W. Griffith ’ s 1912 film The Musketeers of Pig Alley is one of the earliest American films to feature urban organized crime . Prohibition 's arrival in 1920 created an environment where anyone who wanted to drink had to interact with criminals , especially in urban areas . Nonetheless , the urban crime genre was ignored until 1927 when the film Underworld , which is recognized as the first gangster movie , became a surprise hit . According to the Encyclopedia of Hollywood 's entry on Underworld , " The film established the fundamental elements of the gangster movie : a hoodlum hero ; ominous , night @-@ shrouded city streets ; floozies ; and a blazing finale in which the cops cut down the protagonist . " Other gangster films such as Thunderbolt , Lights of New York , The Racket , and Doorway to Hell were released to capitalize on Underworld 's popularity , with Thunderbolt later described as " a virtual remake " of the film . Motivated by financial gain in an increasingly competitive film market , and motivated by the fact that provocative pictures sold tickets , these movies pushed the boundaries of film violence . Other late 1920s crime films depicted organized crime on Broadway , and investigated the connection between mobsters and Broadway productions in films such as 1929 's Tenderloin and Broadway . 
 The Hays Office had never recommended banning violence in any form in the 1920s — unlike profanity , the drug trade or prostitution — but advised that it be dealt with carefully . New York 's censor board was the most active board of any state , reviewing around all but 50 of the country 's 1 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 300 annual releases . In 1927 – 8 the violent scenes they most removed were all instances where the gun was pointed at the camera , some instances where guns were pointed " at or into the body of another character " , many shots where machine guns were featured , scenes where criminals shot at law enforcement officers , some scenes involving stabbing or knife brandishing ( stabbings were considered more disturbing than shootings by audiences ) , most whippings , several involving choking , torture , or electrocution , and scenes which could be considered educational in their depiction of crime methods . Sadistic violence , and reaction shots showing the faces of individuals on the receiving end of violence were considered especially sensitive areas . The Code later recommended against scenes showing " robbery " , " theft " , " safe @-@ cracking " , " arson " , " the use of firearms " , " dynamiting of trains , machines , and buildings " , and " brutal killings " on the basis that they would be rejected by local censors . 
 = = Birth of the Hollywood gangster = = 
 No motion picture genre of the Pre @-@ Code era was more incendiary than the gangster film ; neither preachment yarns nor vice films so outraged the moral guardians or unnerved the city fathers as the high caliber scenarios that made screen heroes out of stone killers . 
 In the early 1930s , several real life criminals became celebrities . Two in particular captured the American imagination ; Al Capone and John Dillinger . Gangsters like Capone had transformed the perception of entire towns . Capone gave Chicago its ... " reputation as the locus classicus of American <unk> , a cityscape where bullet @-@ proof roadsters with tommygun @-@ toting hoodlums on running boards careened around State Street spraying fusillades of slugs into flower shop windows and mowing down the competition in blood @-@ spattered garages . " Capone appeared on the cover of Time magazine in 1930 . He was even offered seven figure sums by two major Hollywood studios to appear in a film but declined . Dillinger became a national celebrity as a bank robber who eluded arrest and escaped confinement several times . He had become the most celebrated public outlaw since Jesse James . His father appeared in a popular series of newsreels giving police homespun advice on how to catch his son . Dillinger 's popularity rose so fast that Variety joked " if Dillinger remains at large much longer and more such interviews are obtained , there may be some petitions circulated to make him our president . " Hays wrote a cablegram to all the studios in March 1934 decreeing that Dillinger should not be portrayed in any motion picture . 
 In April 1931 , the same month as the release of The Public Enemy , Hays recruited former police chief August Vollmer to conduct a study on the effect gangster pictures had on children . After he had finished his work , Vollmer stated that gangster films were innocuous and actually too favorable in their depiction of the police . Although Hays used the results to defend the film industry , the New York State censorship board was not impressed and from 1930 to 1932 removed 2 @,@ 200 crime scenes from pictures . 
 One of the factors that made gangster pictures so subversive was that in the difficult economic times of the Depression there already existed the viewpoint that the only way to get financial success was through crime . Many were convinced they would lead to higher rates of juvenile delinquency . The Kansas City Times argued that while adults may not be affected by these films , they were " misleading , contaminating , and often demoralizing to children and youth . " Exacerbating the problem , local theater owners advertised gangster pictures with a singular irresponsibility . Theaters displayed tommy guns and <unk> and real @-@ life murders were tied into promotions . The situation reached such a nexus that the studios had to ask exhibitors to tone down the gimmickry in their promotions . 
 The genre entered a new level following the 1931 release of Little Caesar . The film featured Edward G. Robinson in a career defining performance as gangster Rico Bandello . Caesar , along with The Public Enemy starring James Cagney , and Scarface featuring Paul Muni , were incredibly violent films that created a new type of anti @-@ hero . Driven by the performance of one protagonist , they were considered " actors ' vehicles " . Nine gangster films were released in 1930 , 26 in 1931 , 28 in 1932 , and 15 in 1933 , when the genre 's popularity began to subside after the end of Prohibition . The backlash against gangster pictures was swift . In 1931 Jack L. Warner announced that his studio would stop making them , and that he had never let his 15 @-@ year @-@ old son see one . 
 = = = Little Caesar = = = 
 Warner Brothers 28 ‑ year ‑ old head of production Darryl F. Zanuck decided to make a gangster picture in 1930 after one of his close friends was killed by a bootlegger . He purchased the rights to the novel Little Caesar by Chicago reporter W. R. Burnett for $ 15 @,@ 000 . Burnett had penned the gangster story after seeing the aftermath of the Capone ordered Saint Valentine 's Day massacre . Generally considered the grandfather of gangster films , in Caesar , Robinson as Rico , and his close friend Joe Massara ( played by Douglas Fairbanks , Jr . ) , move to Chicago . Joe wants to go straight and meets a woman . Rico , however , seeks a life of crime and joins the gang of Sam Vettori , rising to the rank of boss in the crime family . After becoming concerned his friend will betray him , he threatens him , at which point Joe 's girlfriend goes to the police . Unable to bring himself to kill Joe and thus eliminate the witness against him , Rico goes into hiding . He is coaxed out by the police who publish that he is a coward to the press , and Rico is shot and killed by the police . As he is dying , he says " Mother of mercy , is this the end of Rico ? " The film is characterized by its tight , lean narrative , and runs at a brisk pace for its 79 minutes . The Rico character is not portrayed as admirable , and is shown to possess little intelligence . The picture has a simple , obvious storyline and is filmed in brighter images during Rico 's triumphant rise , and at night and darkly shot during his fall . Among later film critics , Robinson 's performances is frequently cited as the film 's saving grace . The role typecast Robinson and led to caricatures from comedians , comic impressionists , and animated Looney Tunes characters . Originally Robinson was cast in a small role but convinced the film 's producer to let him play the lead . Wingate told Hays that he was flooded with complaints from people who saw kids in theaters nationwide " applaud the gang leader as a hero . " Joy and Wingate disagreed over whether the film should have been released as it was ; Joy argued that " the more ghastly , the more ruthless , the criminal acts , the stronger will be the audience reaction against men of this kind , and organized crime in general . " Despite a personal letter from Joy pleading the film 's case , Wingate , then head of the New York censor board , extensively edited the film , as did Pennsylvania 's board . 
 Caesar 's success inspired MGM 's The Secret Six and Fox 's Quick Millions , and Paramount 's City Streets , but the next big Hollywood gangster came from another Warner Brothers picture . 
 = = = The Public Enemy = = = 
 William Wellman 's The Public Enemy was released by Warner Brothers the following year and features another career defining performance , this time by James Cagney . It was adapted from the unpublished novelette Beer and Blood written by John Bright , and adapted for the screen by <unk> <unk> and Bright . Enemy takes place from 1909 until 1920 . The film is similar to the template set in Caesar in that it follows Tom Powers ( Cagney ) from his rise to his eventual fall in the world of crime . Cagney 's character contrasts his puritanical brother who wants him to go straight and their mother , who is at the center of the conflict between her two sons . Tom Powers is egotistical , amoral , heartless , and extremely violent . The most famous scene in the picture is referred to as the " grapefruit scene " ; when Cagney is eating breakfast , his girlfriend angers him , so he cruelly shoves half of a grapefruit in her face . The scene became so famous that for the rest of his life when Cagney dined at a restaurant , other patrons would send his table a grapefruit . Cagney was even more violent towards women in his 1933 gangster film Picture Snatcher , where he knocks out an amorous woman he is not interested in and violently throws her into the back seat of his car . Enemy was based in part on the Irish gangster Dean O 'Banion , and a scene in which Cagney kills a horse that caused the death of a friend was inspired by a similar real life event where O 'Banion underling Louis " Two Guns " <unk> and others shot a horse . The film 's trailer featured no scenes from the movie ; it merely contained a warning of the picture 's intensity and showcased a gun being fired at the camera . Zanuck also produced Enemy , and was heavily involved in the film 's production . He aimed for a movie where the characters were not just immoral , but free of morals , and devoid of conscience . When he showed the film to MGM 's Irving Thalberg , Thalberg remarked " that 's not a motion picture . It 's beyond a motion picture . " While Wingate conceded that the film " was a story that needed to be told " , other states were less convinced . Maryland and Ohio cut the grapefruit scene . All states cut a scene where Powers sleeps with a gang den mother while drunk , then slaps her when he wakes up and realizes she took advantage of him . 
 Public Enemy was a massive box office success , and helped the financial fortunes of Warner Brothers which was still operating in the red at the time . This embarrassed Hays who had remarked at the film 's opening that " the greatest of all censors — the American public — is beginning to vote thumbs down on the " hard @-@ boiled " realism in literature and on the stage which marked the post @-@ war period . " 
 = = = Scarface = = = 
 The most violent and controversial Pre @-@ Code gangster film was undoubtedly Scarface . Directed by Howard Hawks and starring Paul Muni as Tony Camonte , the film is based on the life of Al Capone . When the film begins , Camonte works for Johnny Lovo but is unhappy being a subordinate , and is attracted to Lovo 's girlfriend Poppy . He has a deep love for his promiscuous sister , who he expects to remain chaste , which has often been deemed incestuous . Lovo warns Camonte to leave the North Side alone as it is controlled by a rival mob . Camonte ignores this warning and begins a series of executions and extortions that result in a war with the North side gang . Camonte then takes the gang over from Lovo , at which point Lovo tries to kill him but fails . Camonte murders Lovo and Poppy becomes his girl . When Camonte finds his missing sister in a hotel room with his closest friend , the coin flipping gangster <unk> Rinaldo ( played by George Raft ) , he goes into a rage and kills Rinaldo . After he finds out that they had become married and wanted to surprise Camonte he becomes despondent . The film ends with first Camonte sister then Camonte being gunned down by police at his home . 
 The production of Scarface was troubled from the start . The Hays office warned Howard Hughes , the film 's producer , not to make the film . He ignored their pleas telling Hawks : " Screw the Hays Office . Start the picture and make it as realistic , as exciting , as grisly as possible . " When the film was completed in late 1931 , the Hays office demanded numerous changes , including a conclusion where Camonte was captured , tried , convicted , and hung , and demanded the film carry the subtitle Shame of a Nation . Hughes sent the picture to numerous state censorship boards , saying that he hoped to show the film was made to combat the " gangster menace " . After failing to get the film past the New York State censor board ( then headed by Wingate ) even after the changes , Hughes decided to release the movie in a version close to its original form . When other local censors refused to release the edited version , the Hays Office sent Jason Joy around to ensure them that the cycle of gangster films of this nature was coming to an end . 
 Scarface provoked outrage mainly due to its unprecedented violence , but also because of its shifts of tone from serious to comedic . Dave Kehr , writing in the Chicago Reader , said that the film blends " comedy and horror in a manner that suggests Chico Marx let loose with a live machine gun . " In one scene , Camonte is inside a cafe while a torrent of machine gun fire from the car of a rival gang is headed his way . His bumbling assistant , following orders from Camonte , keeps trying to answer the phone instead of ducking even after the gangsters make several passes by the cafe . After the barrage is over , Camonte picks up a tommy gun one of the mobsters dropped , and exhibits child like wonder and unrestrained excitement over the new toy . Civic leaders became furious that gangsters like Capone ( who was also the blatant inspiration for Little Caesar ) were being applauded in movie houses all across America . Some of the biographical details that were used for Muni 's character in Scarface were so obviously taken from Capone , and the detail so close , that it was impossible not to draw the parallels . Capone sent several members of his gang to threaten screenwriter Ben Hecht , but Hecht was able to convince them the picture was based on other gangsters . When Scarface was released however , Capone adored the film , and purchased a personal copy . The film remained out of circulation , until Hughes 's death in 1976 . Universal then re @-@ released the picture , but some scenes from the film 's original cut are lost . 
 = = Prison films = = 
 In contrast to the crumbling social system outside their walls , the prison film portrayed a universe where the state was all powerful and orderly . Sparked by the Ohio penitentiary fire on April 21 , 1930 in which guards refused to release prisoners from their cells causing 300 deaths , the films depicted the inhumane conditions in prisons in the early 1930s . The genre was composed of two archetypes : the prison film and the chain gang film . In the prison film , large hordes of men move about in identical uniforms , resigned to their fate , they live by a well defined code . In the chain gang film , Southern prisoners were subjected to a <unk> system in the blazing outdoors where they were treated terribly by their ruthless captors . The prototype of the prison genre was 1930 's The Big House . 1932 's I am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang is considered the seminal film of the chain gang genre . Although the chain gang film Hell 's Highway had beaten Fugitive to the screen two months earlier , it exerted nowhere the influence . 
 In The Big House Robert Montgomery plays a squirmy inmate who is sentences to six years after committing vehicular manslaughter while under the influence . His cell mates are a murderer played by Wallace Beery and a forger played by Chester Morris . The picture features future staples of the prison genre such as solitary confinement , informers , riots , visitations , an escape , and the codes of prison life . The protagonist , Montgomery , ends up being a loathsome character , a coward who will sell anyone in the prison out to get an early release . The film was banned in Ohio , the site of the deadly prison riots that inspired it . Numbered Men , The Criminal Code , Shadow of the Law , Convict 's Code , and others , from no less than seven studios , followed . However , prison films only appealed to men , and had weak box office performances as a result . Studios also produced children 's prison films which addressed the juvenile delinquency problems of America in the Depression . The Mayor of Hell for instance , featured kids killing a murderously abusive reform school overseer without retribution . 
 = = = Chain gang films = = = 
 I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang , which is based on the true story of Robert . E. Burns , is by far the most famous of the early 1930s chain gang films . In the first half of 1931 , True Detective Mysteries magazine had published Burns ' work over six issues , and it was released as a book in January 1932 . Decorated veteran James Allen ( Paul Muni ) returns from World War I a changed man , and seeks an alternative to the tedious job that he left behind . He travels the country looking for construction work . His ultimate goal is to become involved in construction planning . Allen follows a hobo he met at a homeless shelter into a cafe , taking him up on his offer of a free meal . When the hobo attempts to rob the eatery , Allen is charged as an accessory , convicted of stealing a few dollars , and sentenced to ten years in a chain gang . The men are chained together and transported to a quarry to break rocks every day . Even when unchained from each other , shackles remain around their ankles at all times . Allen convinces a large black prisoner who has particularly good aim to hit the shackles on his ankles with a sledgehammer to bend them . He removes his feet from the bent shackles , and in a famous sequence , escapes through the woods while being chased by bloodhounds . On the outside he develops a new identity and becomes a respected developer in Chicago . He is blackmailed into marriage by a woman he does not love who finds out his secret . When he threatens to leave her for a young woman he has fallen in love with , she turns him in . His case becomes a cause célèbre , and he agrees to turn himself in under the agreement that he will serve 90 days and then be released . He is tricked however , and not freed at the agreed upon time . This forces him to escape again , and he seeks out the young woman , telling her that they cannot be together because he will always be hunted . The films end with her asking him how he survives , and his ominous reply from the darkness ; " I Steal " . 
 Although based on reality , Chain Gang changes the facts slightly to appeal to Depression era audiences by making Allen 's return home one to a country that is struggling economically , even though Burns returned to the roaring twenties . The film 's bleak , anti @-@ establishment ending shocked audiences . Laughter in Hell , a 1933 film directed by Edward L. Cahn and starring Pat O 'Brien , was inspired in part by I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang . O 'Brien plays a railroad engineer who kills his wife and her lover in a jealous rage , and is sent to prison . The dead man 's brother ends up being the warden of the prison and torments O 'Brien 's character . O 'Brien and several others revolt , killing the warden and escaping . The film , which is lost , drew controversy for its lynching scene in which several black men were hung . Reports vary if the blacks were hung alongside other white men , or by themselves . The New Age ( an African American weekly newspaper ) film critic praised the filmmakers for being courageous enough to depict the atrocities that were occurring in some southern states . 
 = Firewalker ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Firewalker " is the ninth episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on November 18 , 1994 . It was written by Howard Gordon , directed by David Nutter , and featured guest appearances by Bradley Whitford , Leland Orser and Shawnee Smith . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a death in a remote research base and discover that a new silicon @-@ based fungus found in the area may be affecting and killing the researchers . 
 The plot of the episode was inspired by NASA 's Project Dante . " Firewalker " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 , being watched by 8 @.@ 6 million households in its initial broadcast . The episode received poor reviews from critics , being noted as repeating material already familiar to the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dr. Adam Pierce , a scientist at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena , intercepts a visual transmission from Firewalker , a mobile robot sent by a volcanic research project on Mount Avalon near Bend , Oregon . Firewalker is broadcasting from inside a volcanic cave , where Pierce glimpses the dead body of the chief seismologist , Phil Erickson . He also sees a shadow moving in the cave , an impossibility due to the extremely high temperatures . The figure in the cave then destroys Firewalker 's camera , ending the transmission . 
 Pierce goes to Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , showing them a TV interview of the project 's leader , Daniel Trepkos ( Bradley Whitford ) ; Pierce was with the project until he and Trepkos had a falling out . The agents take the case , but Mulder is reluctant to let Scully come along because of her recent abduction ; Scully , however , insists that she is ready . Upon arriving at Mount Avalon , Pierce goes out in the woods to inspect the project 's equipment while the agents search the laboratory . They meet the seemingly traumatized team : robotics engineer Jason Ludwig ( Leland Orser ) , systems analyst Peter Tanaka ( Hiro Kanagawa ) , and graduate student Jessie O 'Neil ( Shawnee Smith ) . They claim that Trepkos destroyed their lab and disappeared after Firewalker 's first descent . Meanwhile , outside , Trepkos strangles Pierce . 
 After the team finds and stores Pierce 's body , Mulder reviews Trepkos ' fragmented notes . He finds references to a new silicon @-@ based organism existing inside Mount Avalon ; Scully , however , doubts his conclusions because of his mental state . Tanaka breaks into convulsions and displays a high fever , but refuses any help from Mulder or Scully . When he is put on a stretcher for a medivac pickup , Mulder notices a throbbing bulge in his neck . Tanaka flees into the woods and dies when a tentacle bursts out of his throat . An autopsy by Scully finds sand in his lungs , indicating the existence of a silicon @-@ based spore ; she theorizes that when exposed , the spore infects the nearest hosts or otherwise dies . Mulder contacts the CDC to have them quarantine the site . 
 Mulder and Ludwig venture into the volcanic caves to find Trepkos . When they find Firewalker , Trepkos shoots Ludwig in the back with a flare gun , killing him . He then burns Ludwig 's body , as he was infected with the spore as well . Trepkos tells Mulder that after Firewalker returned from its first descent , Erickson pulverized a rock in one of its samples , resulting in his death and the infection of all the scientists immediately surrounding him . Trepkos says that the spore is parasitic in nature , making its hosts pass itself on to others . Meanwhile , in the lab , an infected O 'Neil handcuffs herself to Scully to expose her to the spore , but Scully protects herself by throwing O 'Neil into a sealed chamber and closing the door . A protrusion bursts out of O 'Neil 's throat , killing her without spreading the spore to Scully . 
 Mulder and Trepkos arrive on the scene . Mulder radios the evacuation team but — knowing that Trepkos will refuse to go — reports that only he and Scully have survived the ordeal . The agents enter a month @-@ long quarantine while the Chemical Corps confiscates the lab and cordons off Mount Avalon . Firewalker is salvaged , but is too damaged to yield sufficient data . Trepkos and O 'Neil are officially unaccounted for and presumed dead ; Trepkos is last seen carrying O 'Neil 's body as he disappears into the volcano . 
 = = Production = = 
 Howard Gordon was inspired to write the episode after seeing two news reports about Project Dante , a robotic explorer created by NASA that had been sent into a volcano . Chris Carter said of the episode , " I think that 's the first time in our second season that we were telling what 's one of our serial stories rather than our mythological stories . In other words , it was an X @-@ File rather than one of the cosmology shows that explore the characters " . However , Gordon felt that the episode allowed him to explore the possible results of Mulder 's search for the truth , echoing this in the mindset of Daniel Trepkos and the interactions between the two characters . Gordon noted that " the natural endpoint of this quest for the truth is madness " , comparing Mulder 's treatment of Trepkos with the events of the novel Heart of Darkness . 
 The episode shared themes with previous episodes from the first season such as " Ice " and " Darkness Falls " , which both featured the agents finding new lifeforms in remote locations . James Wong was somewhat negative concerning the episode 's similarities to " Ice " , saying , " If the show starts to cannibalize itself , there 's going to be trouble " . Gordon stated , however , " I know there are some similarities with ' Ice ' , but I think once you get beyond the similarities of a group of people in a confined space going up against a creature , there are enough differences to separate the two " . 
 As the mountains of the Cascade Range were too far from Vancouver to serve as a location , the film crew settled on a nearby forest that had a partial view of the mountains . The set used for the exterior of the field base camp was later sold to the production company responsible for the TV series The Sentinel , while in the interior was shot inside a British Columbia hydro sub station . A set was built to represent the interior of the volcano , and footage filmed there was achieved through the use of a crane . Hiro Kanagawa , who portrays the character Peter Tanaka , would make two further appearances , in the fourth season episode " Synchrony " and tenth season episode " My Struggle " , as well as making appearances both in the spin @-@ off series The Lone Gunmen and The X @-@ Files ' sister show Millennium . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Firewalker " premiered on the Fox network on November 18 , 1994 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on October 23 , 1995 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 8 @.@ 6 million households watched this episode during its original airing . 
 In a retrospective of the second season in Entertainment Weekly , the episode was rated a D- . The review described it as " insultingly bad , " noting that it seemed to be " ripping off " both the first season episode " Ice " and the 1979 film Alien . Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen felt that " Firewalker " represented a " back to basics " approach to the series , following from the previous story arc relating to Scully 's abduction . Handlen noted that the episode would have been " a total waste of time " elsewhere in the season 's schedule , but served as a " competent enough " means of reuniting the main characters . Howard Gordon was <unk> of physical effects supervisor Toby Lindala 's work on this episode , quipping that Lindala 's effects " won the gross @-@ out award " . Gordon also praised Nutter 's job in directing the episode . Carter said that " Firewalker " was a very successful episode . David Nutter added a nice directorial touch ; the guest appearances were very good " . 
 = Brave Fencer Musashi = 
 Brave Fencer Musashi ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> Musashiden , lit . " Brave Fencer : The Legend of Musashi " ) is an action role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square in 1998 for the PlayStation home console . The game involves real @-@ time sword @-@ based combat in a 3D environment ; it also features segments of voiced over dialogue and role @-@ playing game elements such as a day @-@ night cycle and resting to restore energy . 
 The story follows Musashi , a young swordsman who is summoned to a parallel world to defend <unk> Kingdom from the Thirstquencher Empire . He searches for the Five Scrolls , which can enhance the powers of his sword , while interacting with people from <unk> and a nearby village . 
 Development began in early 1997 , and was directed by Yoichi Yoshimoto , produced by Yusuke Hirata , and scored by Tsuyoshi Sekito . The game was a departure from Square 's previous role @-@ playing games , which brought the team several difficulties during development . The game received positive critical response ; reviewers praised the graphics in comparison to other similar games of the time , and found the gameplay , especially the action elements , very compelling . Musashi received a sequel in 2005 for the PlayStation 2 under the name of Musashi : Samurai Legend . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Musashi is an action role @-@ playing game , in which the player fights against enemies with a sword in action @-@ based combat , with some role @-@ playing elements . The player controls Musashi , who fights a variety of enemies using his swords Fusion and Lumina and searches for five scrolls which will increase Lumina 's strength and grant him new abilities . There are also several minigames and puzzles scattered throughout which must be completed to advance the plot . The two swords he uses have varied abilities and uses . Fusion , which resembles a katana , is used to chain rapid combo hits together and can also be used to absorb <unk> energy , which is a type of magical point system that controls how many spells a player can cast and how quickly , or absorb an enemies ' skill . The other sword is Lumina , which cannot be effectively used in combos by itself ; instead , it can be imbued with elemental properties from Scrolls . Lumina is primarily offensive but in combination with the five elemental scrolls , it gains new skills . The two swords are often used in conjunction with certain techniques which are granted by various rescued townsfolk . 
 The game features an in @-@ game clock and day @-@ night system that affects the townsfolk and some of the creatures in the field ( namely , the <unk> - creatures from whom Musashi can obtain berries to increase his overall health stat ) , as well as forcing the player to pay attention to Musashi 's fatigue rating that goes up over time with lack of sleep , which as the name implies will have a deteriorating effect on his combative ability . 
 The player can either go to an inn to recover Musashi 's health or make Musashi sleep outdoors without a full recovery and with danger he may be attacked by enemies . To pass time , the player may also opt to collect the various action figures <unk> resemble more detailed models of nearly all the characters and <unk> available at the town toy store which stocks new items at the start of every chapter . Along the way , Musashi obtains parts from the Legendary Armor which allow him to perform actions such as climbing or performing double jumps . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A boy known as Musashi , reincarnated from the legendary Brave Fencer Musashi who saved the Allucaneet Kingdom from a monster called the Wizard of Darkness 150 years before , is summoned to Allucaneet by its ruler Princess Fillet to save it from the invading Thirstquencher Empire . Musashi is given the blade Fusion , and is charged with the task of obtaining Brave Fencer Musashi 's sword — Lumina , the Sword of Luminescence — before the Thirstquencher Army does . Although Musashi has no intention of saving the kingdom , he agrees to do so in order to return to his homeland . After Musashi recovers Lumina , he finds that most of the people from the Allucaneet kingdom , including Fillet , have been kidnapped by the Thirstquencher Empire . In order to rescue all the residents from Allucaneet and defeat the Empire , Musashi starts searching for the Five Scrolls ; each one holding an elemental power able to greatly augment the sword Lumina 's powers . 
 With help from the treasure hunter Jon , Musashi finds the Earth Scroll and defeats its crest guardian . After its defeat , half @-@ vampire and half @-@ zombie creatures known as Vambees appear in the nearby village . While searching for a way to stop the Vambees , Musashi finds the Water Scroll and defeats its crest guardian in the basement where the Vambees originate . While Musashi searches for the Fire Scroll , Musashi 's rival , Kojiro , kidnaps Princess Fillet and uses her as a hostage to force a battle with Musashi . Kojiro is defeated and Fillet is then rescued . Musashi then searches for thieves from the Thirstquencher Empire and makes his way to the next crest guardian . It is then revealed that Princess Fillet is actually one of Thirstquencher 's thieves disguised and that the real Fillet is still in their hands . Musashi then continues his journey , finds the Wind Scroll , and defeats its crest guardian in an ants ' nest . 
 After finding the fifth and final Scroll , the Sky Scroll , Musashi discovers Thirstquencher 's base , a floating ship known as the Soda Fountain . Musashi attacks the base and defeats the Sky Guardian . Thirstquencher 's leader , <unk> , forces Musashi to give him Lumina in exchange for the Princess , and frees the Sky Crest . However , this unleashes the Wizard of Darkness , who was sealed within Brave Fencer Musashi 's sword Lumina the entire time . It is also revealed by Jon that the original Brave Fencer Musashi sealed The Dark Wizard within the sword . Furthermore , it was Brave Fencer Musashi who entrusted the crests to the crest guardians to prevent The Dark Wizard 's seal within Lumina from being broken . In effect , the present Musashi 's quest merely aided The Dark Wizard 's revival . Musashi recovers Lumina and uses it to defeat The Dark Wizard . After returning the Princess to Allucaneet Kingdom , Musashi takes Lumina to the place where he found it . 
 = = Development = = 
 Executive producer Hironobu Sakaguchi stated that the idea for the game first came up in February 1997 . The original idea for Brave Fencer Musashi was having Miyamoto Musashi fighting in an alternate world from where he belonged . While the game conceptualized as an action oriented , Musashi was originally meant to be a wanderer . However , he was later changed to an itinerant Samaritan in order to have him interacting and helping other characters . During development , the team used an action base which was crucial to the game 's fighting mechanics . Director Yoichi Yoshimoto was focused on the game 's fully polygonal aspects that were a departure from Square 's previous works . The development team prioritized the movement of polygons in real time and how light affected their appearance . 
 When developing the characters for the game , Sakaguchi did not have a positive opinion of how popular would the game become . However , after the staff designed the graphics and the gameplay , he was surprised by the work , commenting that it was more interesting . The characters were designed by Koji Matsuoka and illustrated by Tetsuya Nomura . When the game was localized for an English release , translators had to change alcohol @-@ based names with soda @-@ pop names due to problems with rating boards . This resulted in several jokes being lost in translation . The game 's English title was changed from " Brave Fencer Musashiden " to " Brave Fencer Musashi " in order to avoid confusing non @-@ Japanese players about the titular character 's name , as " Musashiden " means Musashi 's story . 
 The game 's musical score was composed and produced by Tsuyoshi Sekito , who had never previously worked with Square . The Brave Fencer Musashiden : Original Soundtrack was released by DigiCube in Japan on July 23 , 1998 ; it consists of 78 tracks spanning two compact discs in a boxset . 
