 Lactarius blennius has a flattened convex cap that is 4 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 4 in ) across that later becomes depressed in the centre . In colour , it is pale olive to a greenish grey , sometimes a dull green or pale grey @-@ sepia , and has blotches of darker colouration in concentric bands , though the colour can vary greatly . Heavily spotted specimens are also known , and a very brown specimen similar to Lactarius <unk> was recorded in Scotland . The cap is very slimy when moist and has a margin that is curved inwards . The stem is a paler colour than the cap , but also very slimy , and measures from 4 – 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 2 in ) tall by 1 – 1 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 7 in ) thick , tapering a little towards the bottom . The flesh is whitish , similar in colour to the gills , which later become a creamy or pale buff colour . The gills turn a brownish @-@ grey colour when wounded , and are crowded . In shape , they are slightly decurrent or adnate , meaning that they run a small way down the stem in attachment , or that they are attached to the stem by the whole depth of the gills . The milk is white and dries grey , and is very plentiful . L. blennius spores leave a creamy print , and are elliptic with low warts joined by ridges with a small number of cross @-@ connections , measuring from 6 – 9 by 5 @.@ 5 – 7 µm . 
 = = Distribution , habitat and ecology = = 
 Lactarius blennius is very common and is found in broad @-@ leaved woodland , favouring beech ; it is most associated with Fagus sylvatica , the European Beech , though it has also been observed growing in association with species of oak . It forms an ectomycorrhizal association with trees , and can grow on a wide variety of subsoil types , but is more typical of acidic soil . It is found between late summer and late autumn , and is native to Europe . The distribution of the mushroom coincides with the distribution of beech . In the British Isles , the species is one of the one hundred most common mushrooms . Other areas in which it has been recorded include Sweden , France , Italy , and Poland . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Mycologist Roger Phillips claims that L. blennius is edible when cooked , but not recommended , while others describe it as inedible or even poisonous . The milk tastes very hot and acrid . 
 L. blennius has been the subject of some research in chemistry . <unk> derivatives ( known as " <unk> " ) have been acquired from the mushroom , including the lactone blennin D , and blennin A , which was first isolated from this species . <unk> are chemicals so named because of their occurrence in Lactarius species . <unk> have been shown to be potentially <unk> blennin A , for instance ( a lactarane @-@ type sesquiterpene ) has been shown to be an anti @-@ inflammatory , having a strong <unk> affect against leukotriene C4 biosynthesis . L. blennius can also be refined to create a green pigment , known as <unk> . 
 = Warwick Castle = 
 Warwick Castle ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ ik ) is a medieval castle developed from an original built by William the Conqueror in 1068 . Warwick is the county town of Warwickshire , England , situated on a bend of the River Avon . The original wooden motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle was rebuilt in stone in the 12th century . During the Hundred Years War , the facade opposite the town was refortified , resulting in one of the most recognisable examples of 14th century military architecture . It was used as a stronghold until the early 17th century , when it was granted to Sir Fulke Greville by James I in 1604 . Greville converted it to a country house and it was owned by the Greville family , who became Earls of Warwick in 1759 , until 1978 when it was bought by the Tussauds Group . In 2007 , the Tussauds Group merged with Merlin Entertainments , which is the current owner of Warwick Castle . 
 = = Location = = 
 Warwick Castle is situated in the town of Warwick , on a sandstone bluff at a bend of the River Avon . The river , which runs below the castle on the east side , has eroded the rock the castle stands on , forming a cliff . The river and cliff form natural defences . When construction began in 1068 , four houses belonging to the Abbot of Coventry were demolished to provide room . The castle 's position made it strategically important in safeguarding the Midlands against rebellion . During the 12th century , King Henry I was suspicious of Roger de Beaumont , 2nd Earl of Warwick . To counter the earl 's influence , Henry bestowed Geoffrey de Clinton with a position of power rivalling that of the earl . The lands he was given included Kenilworth – a castle of comparable size , cost , and importance , founded by Clinton – which is about 8 kilometres ( 5 mi ) to the north . Warwick Castle is about 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 1 mi ) from Warwick railway station and less than 3 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) from junction 15 of the M40 motorway ; it is also close to Birmingham Airport . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 An Anglo @-@ Saxon burh was established on the site in 914 ; with fortifications instigated by Ethelfleda , daughter of Alfred the Great . The burh she established was one of ten which defended Mercia against the marauding Danes . Its position allowed it to dominate the Fosse Way , as well as the river valley and the crossing over the River Avon . Though the motte to the south @-@ west of the present castle is now called " Ethelfleda 's Mound " , it is in fact part of the later Norman fortifications , and not of Anglo @-@ Saxon origin . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 After the Norman conquest of England , William the Conqueror established a motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle at Warwick in 1068 to maintain control of the Midlands as he advanced northwards . Building a castle in a pre @-@ existing settlement could require demolishing properties on the intended site . In the case of Warwick , the least recorded of the 11 urban castles in the 1086 survey , four houses were torn down to make way for the castle . A motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle consists of a mound – on which usually stands a keep or tower – and a bailey , which is an enclosed courtyard . William appointed Henry de Beaumont , the son of a powerful Norman family , as constable of the castle . In 1088 , Henry de Beaumont was made the first Earl of Warwick . He founded the Church of All Saints within the castle walls by 1119 ; the Bishop of Worcester , believing that a castle was an inappropriate location for a church , removed it in 1127 – 28 . 
 In 1153 , the wife of Roger de Beaumont , 2nd Earl of Warwick , was tricked into believing that her husband was dead , and surrendered control of the castle to the invading army of Henry of Anjou , later King Henry II . According to the Gesta Regis Stephani , a 12th @-@ century historical text , Roger de Beaumont died on hearing the news that his wife had handed over the castle . Henry later returned the castle to the Earls of Warwick as they had been supporters of his mother , Empress Matilda , in The Anarchy of 1135 – 54 . 
 During the reign of King Henry II ( 1154 – 89 ) , the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey was replaced with a stone castle . This new phase took the form of a shell keep with all the buildings constructed against the curtain wall . During the barons ' rebellion of 1173 – 74 , the Earl of Warwick remained loyal to King Henry II , and the castle was used to store provisions . The castle and the lands associated with the earldom passed down in the Beaumont family until 1242 . When Thomas de Beaumont , 6th Earl of Warwick died , the castle and lands passed to his sister , Lady Margery , Countess of Warwick in her own right . Her husband died soon after , and while she looked for a suitable husband , the castle was in the ownership of King Henry III . When she married John du Plessis in December 1242 , the castle was returned to her . During the Second Barons ' War of 1264 – 67 , William Maudit , 8th Earl of Warwick , was a supporter of King Henry III . The castle was taken in a surprise attack by the forces of Simon de Montfort , 6th Earl of Leicester , from Kenilworth Castle in 1264 . According to 15th @-@ century chronicler John Rous , the walls along the northeastern side of Warwick Castle were slighted , so " that it should be no strength to the king " . Maudit and his countess were taken to Kenilworth Castle and held until a ransom was paid . After the death of William Maudit in 1267 , the title and castle passed to his nephew William de Beauchamp , 9th Earl of Warwick . Following William 's death , Warwick Castle passed through seven generations of the Beauchamp family , who over the next 180 years were responsible for most of the additions made to the castle . In 1312 , Piers Gaveston , 1st Earl of Cornwall , was captured by Guy de Beauchamp , 10th Earl of Warwick , and imprisoned in Warwick Castle until his execution on 9 June 1312 . A group of magnates led by the Earl of Warwick and Thomas , 2nd Earl of Lancaster , accused Gaveston of stealing the royal treasure . 
 Under Thomas de Beauchamp , 11th Earl , the castle defences were significantly enhanced in 1330 – 60 on the north eastern side by the addition of a gatehouse , a barbican ( a form of fortified gateway ) , and a tower on either side of the reconstructed wall , named Caesar 's Tower and Guy 's Tower . The Watergate Tower also dates from this period . 
 Caesar 's and Guy 's Towers are residential and may have been inspired by French models ( for example <unk> ) . Both towers are machicolated and Caesar 's Tower features a unique double parapet . The two towers are also vaulted in stone on every storey . Caesar 's Tower contained a " grim " basement dungeon ; according to local legend dating back to at least 1644 it is also known as Poitiers Tower , either because prisoners from the Battle of Poitiers in 1356 may have been imprisoned there , or because the ransoms raised from the battle helped to pay for its construction . The gatehouse features murder holes , two drawbridges , a gate , and portcullises – gates made from wood or metal . The towers of the gatehouse were machicolated . 
 The facade overlooking the river was designed as a symbol of the power and wealth of the Beauchamp earls and would have been " of minimal defensive value " ; this followed a trend of 14th @-@ century castles being more statements of power than designed exclusively for military use . 
 = = = 15th and 16th centuries = = = 
 The line of Beauchamps Earls ended in 1449 when Anne de Beauchamp , 15th Countess of Warwick , died . Richard Neville became the next Earl of Warwick through his wife 's inheritance of the title . During the summer of 1469 , Neville rebelled against King Edward IV and imprisoned him in Warwick Castle . Neville attempted to rule in the king 's name ; however , constant protests by the king 's supporters forced the Earl to release the king . Neville was subsequently killed in the Battle of Barnet , fighting against King Edward IV in 1471 during the Wars of the Roses . Warwick Castle then passed from Neville to his son @-@ in @-@ law , George Plantagenet , 1st Duke of Clarence . George Plantagenet was executed in 1478 and his lands passed onto Edward Plantagenet , 17th Earl of Warwick ; however , Edward Plantagenet was only two when his father died so his lands were taken in the custody of The Crown . He was placed under attainder , and so could not inherit the throne , by Henry VII , being held by Henry for fourteen years in the Tower of London until he was executed for high treason in 1499 , supposedly for conspiring to escape with the ' pretender ' Perkin Warbeck . Edward was the last Earl of Warwick of the title 's first creation . 
 In the early 1480s King Richard III instigated the construction of two gun towers , Bear and Clarence Towers , which were left unfinished on his death in 1485 ; with their own well and ovens , the towers were an independent stronghold from the rest of the castle , possibly in case of mutiny by the garrison . With the advent of gunpowder the position of Keeper of the Artillery was created in 1486 . 
 When antiquary John Leland visited the castle some time between 1535 and 1543 , he noted that : 
 ... the dungeon now in ruin standeth in the west @-@ north @-@ west part of the castle . There is also a tower west @-@ north @-@ west , and through it a postern @-@ gate of iron . All the principal lodgings of the castle with the hall and chapel lie on the south side of the castle , and here the king doth much cost in making foundations in the rocks to sustain that side of the castle , for great pieces fell out of the rocks that sustain it . 
 While in the care of The Crown , Warwick Castle underwent repairs and renovations using about 500 loads of stone . The castle , as well as lands associated with the earldom , was in Crown care from 1478 until 1547 , when they were granted to John Dudley with the second creation of the title the Earl of Warwick . When making his appeal for ownership of the castle Dudley said of the castle 's condition : " ... the castle of its self is not able to lodge a good baron with his train , for all the one side of the said castle with also the dungeon tower is clearly ruinated and down to the ground " . 
 Warwick Castle had fallen into decay due to its age and neglect , and despite his remarks Dudley did not initiate any repairs to the castle . Queen Elizabeth I visited the castle in 1566 during a tour of the country , and again in 1572 for four nights . A timber building was erected in the castle for her to stay in , and Ambrose Dudley , 3rd Earl of Warwick , left the castle to the Queen during her visits . When Ambrose Dudley died in 1590 the title of Earl of Warwick became extinct for the second time . A survey from 1590 recorded that the castle was still in a state of disrepair , noting that lead had been stolen from the roofs of some of the castle 's buildings , including the chapel . In 1601 Sir Fulke Greville remarked that " the little stone building there was , mightily in decay ... so as in very short time there will be nothing left but a name of Warwick " . Greville was granted Warwick Castle by King James I in 1604 . 
 In the 17th century the grounds were turned into a garden . The castle 's defences were enhanced in the 1640s to prepare the castle for action in the English Civil War . Robert Greville , 2nd Baron Brooke , was a Parliamentarian , and Royalist forces laid siege to the castle . Warwick Castle withstood the siege and was later used to hold prisoners taken by the Parliamentarians . 
 = = = 17th @-@ century country house = = = 
 The conversion of the castle coincided with a period of decline in the use of castles during the 15th and 16th centuries ; many were either being abandoned or converted into comfortable residences for the gentry . In the early 17th century , Robert <unk> was commissioned to draw a plan of the castle before any changes were made . In 1604 , the ruinous castle was given to Sir Fulke Greville by King James I and was converted into a country house . Whilst the castle was undergoing repairs , it was peripherally involved in the Gunpowder Plot of 1605 . The conspirators involved awaited news of their plot in Dunchurch in Warwickshire . When they discovered the plot had failed they stole cavalry horses from the stables at Warwick Castle to help in their escape . When the title of Earl of Warwick was created for the third time in 1618 , the Greville family were still in possession of Warwick Castle . Fulke Greville spent over £ 20 @,@ 000 ( £ 3 million as of 2016 ) . renovating the castle ; according to William Dugdale , a 17th @-@ century antiquary , this made it " a place not only of great strength but extraordinary delight , with most pleasant gardens , walks and thickets , such as this part of England can hardly parallel " . On 1 September 1628 Fulke Greville was murdered in Holborn by his manservant : Ralph Haywood — a " gentleman " — who stabbed the baron twice after discovering he had been left only £ 8 @,@ 000 in Greville 's will . Greville died from his wounds four weeks later . 
 Under Robert Greville , 2nd Baron Brooke , Warwick Castle 's defences were enhanced from January to May 1642 in preparation for attack during the First English Civil War . The garden walls were raised , bulwarks — barricades of beams and soil to mount artillery — were constructed and gunpowder and wheels for two cannons were obtained . Robert Greville was a Parliamentarian , and on 7 August 1642 a Royalist force laid siege to the castle . Greville was not in the castle at the time and the garrison was under the command of Sir Edward Peyto . Spencer Compton , 2nd Earl of Northampton , Lord Lieutenant of Warwickshire commanded the Royalist force . William Dugdale , acting as a herald , called for the garrison commander to surrender the castle , but he was refused . The besieging army opened fire on the castle , to little effect . According to Richard <unk> : 
 ... our endeavours for taking it were to little purpose , for we had only two small pieces of cannon which were brought from Compton House , belonging to the Earl of Northampton , and those were drawn up to the top of the church steeple , and were discharged at the castle , to which they could do no hurt , but only frightened them within the castle , who shot into the street , and killed several of our men . 
 The siege was lifted on 23 August 1642 when the garrison was relieved by the forces of Robert Devereux , 3rd Earl of Essex , and the Royalists were forced to retreat to Worcester . After the Battle of Edgehill in 1642 – the first pitched battle of the English Civil War – prisoners were held in Caesar 's and Guy 's Towers . During the Second English Civil War prisoners were again held at the castle , including those from the Battle of Worcester in 1651 . A garrison was maintained in the castle complete with artillery and supplies from 1643 to 1660 , at its strongest it numbered 302 soldiers . In 1660 the English Council of State ordered the castle governor to disband the garrison and hand over the castle to Robert Greville , 4th Baron Brooke . The state apartments were found to be outmoded and in poor repair . Under Roger and William <unk> , master carpenters of Warwick , extensive modernization of the interiors was undertaken , 1669 – 78 . To ensure that they would be in the latest taste , William was sent down to Dorset to make careful notes of the interiors recently finished at Kingston Lacy for Sir Ralph Bankes to designs by Sir Roger Pratt . On 4 November 1695 the castle was in sufficient state to host a visit by King William III . 
 Francis Greville , 8th Baron Brooke , undertook a renewed programme of improvements to Warwick Castle and its grounds . The 8th Baron Brooke was also bestowed with the title Earl of Warwick in 1759 , the fourth creation of the title . With the recreation of the title , the castle was back in the ownership of the earls of Warwick . Daniel Garrett 's work at Warwick is documented in 1748 ; Howard Colvin attributed to him the Gothick interior of the Chapel . Lancelot " Capability " Brown had been on hand since 1749 . Brown , who was still head gardener at Stowe at the time and had yet to make his reputation as the main exponent of the English landscape garden , was called in by Lord Brooke to give Warwick Castle a more " natural " connection to its river . Brown simplified the long narrow stretch by sweeping it into a lawn that dropped right to the riverbank , stopped at each end by bold clumps of native trees . A serpentine drive gave an impression of greater distance between the front gates and the castle entrance . 
 Horace Walpole saw Brown 's maturing scheme in 1751 and remarked in a letter : " The castle is enchanting . The view pleased me more than I can express ; the river Avon tumbled down a cascade at the foot of it . It is well laid out by one Brown who has set up on a few ideas of Kent and Mr Southcote . " 
 In 1754 the poet Thomas Gray , a member of Walpole 's <unk> circle , commented disdainfully on the activity at the castle : 
 ... he [ Francis Greville ] has sash 'd the great apartment ... and being since told , that square sash windows were not Gothic , he has put certain <unk> <unk> the glass , which appearing through are to look like fretwork . Then he has scooped out a little <unk> in the massy walls of the place for his little self and his children , which is hung with paper and printed <unk> , and carved chimney @-@ pieces , in the exact manner of Berkley @-@ square or Argyle Buildings . 
 Gray 's mention of Argyle Buildings , Westminster , London , elicited a connotation of an inappropriately modern Georgian urban development , for the buildings in Argyll Street were a speculation to designs of James Gibbs , 1736 – 40 . 
 Greville commissioned Italian painter Antonio Canaletto to paint Warwick Castle in 1747 , while the castle grounds and gardens were undergoing landscaping by Brown . Five paintings and three drawings of the castle by Canaletto are known , making it the artist 's most often represented building in Britain . Canaletto 's work on Warwick Castle has been described as " unique in the history of art as a series of views of an English house by a major continental master " . As well as the gardens , Greville commissioned Brown to rebuild the exterior entrance porch and stairway to the Great Hall . Brown also contributed Gothick designs for a wooden bridge over the Avon ( 1758 ) . He was still at work on Warwick Castle in 1760 . Timothy <unk> was responsible for the porch being extended and extra rooms added adjacent to it in 1763 – 69 @.@ and during the same years William Lindley provided a new Dining Room and other interior alterations . In 1786 – 88 the local builder William <unk> was commissioned to build the new greenhouse conservatory , with as its principal ornament the Warwick Vase , recently purchased in Rome . 
 In 1802 George Greville , 2nd Earl of Warwick of the new creation , had debts amounting to £ 115 @,@ 000 ( £ 9 million as of 2016 ) . The earl 's estates , including Warwick Castle , were given to the Earl of Galloway and John <unk> , 2nd Earl of Upper Ossory , in 1806 , but the castle was returned to the earls of Warwick in 1813 . The Great Hall was reroofed and repaired in Gothic taste in 1830 – 31 by Ambrose Poynter . Anthony Salvin was responsible for restoring the Watergate Tower in 1861 – 63 . The castle was extensively damaged by a fire in 1871 that started to the east of the Great Hall . Although the Great Hall was gutted , the overall structure was unharmed . Restoration and reparations carried out by Salvin during 1872 – 75 were subsidised by donations from the public , which raised a total of £ 9 @,@ 651 ( £ 820 thousand as of 2016 ) . 
 = = Advent of tourism = = 
 Individuals had been visiting the castle since the end of the 17th century and this grew in importance through the 19th century . In 1858 Queen Victoria visited the 4th earl with great local celebrations . However , by 1885 it would appear the visitors were becoming a nuisance as the earl closed the castle to visitors , causing consternation in the town . A local report stated , ' One day last week eight American visitors who were staying at one of the principal hotels left somewhat hurriedly in consequence of their being unable to gain admission to the castle ' . It soon re @-@ opened again and by 1900 had a ticket office and was employing a permanent guide . By 1936 Arthur Mee was enthusing not just that " these walls have seen something of the splendour of every generation of our [ English ] story " , with rooms " rich in treasure beyond the dreams of avarice " but also that " their rooms are open to all who will " . The collection of armoury on display at Warwick Castle is regarded as second only to that of the Tower of London . 
 Through the 20th century successive earls expanded its tourism potential until , in 1978 , after 374 years in the Greville family , it was sold to a media and entertainment company , the Tussauds Group for £ 1 @.@ 3 million , who opened it as a tourist attraction . Tussauds performed extensive restorations to the castle and grounds . In 2001 , Warwick Castle was named one of Britain 's " Top 10 historic houses and monuments " by the British Tourist Authority ; the list included Tower of London , Stonehenge , and Edinburgh Castle . Warwick Castle was recognised as Britain 's best castle by the Good Britain Guide 2003 . Around this time it was getting in excess of half a million visitors a year . 
 = = = Heritage protection = = = 
 The castle is protected against unauthorised change as a Scheduled Ancient Monument in recognition of its status as a " nationally important " archaeological site or historic building , and is a Grade I listed building together with its boundary walls , stables , conservatory , mill and lodge . 
 In May 2007 Tussauds was purchased by Merlin Entertainments who continue to operate the castle on a lease , having sold the freehold to Nick <unk> 's Prestbury Group on 17 July 2007 . 
 On 23 June 2006 , a £ 20 @,@ 000 stained glass window was damaged by teenage vandals and a ceremonial sword stolen , recovered soon after . 
 = = = The Warwick trebuchet = = = 
 In June 2005 , Warwick Castle became home to one of the world 's largest working siege engines . The trebuchet is 18 metres ( 59 ft ) tall , made from over 300 pieces of oak and weighs 22 tonnes ( 24 short tons ) . 
 The machine was built with drawings from the Danish museum <unk> , who were the first to recreate a fully functioning trebuchet in 1989 . It was built in Wiltshire with expertise from the Danish Museum and is now situated on the riverbank below the castle . 
 The trebuchet takes eight men half an hour to load and release , the process involves four men running in 4 metres ( 13 ft ) tall wheels to lift the counterweight , weighing 6 tonnes ( 7 short tons ) into the air . It is designed to be capable of hurling projectiles distances of up to 300 metres ( 980 ft ) and as high as 25 metres ( 82 ft ) and can throw projectiles weighing up to 150 kilograms ( 330 lb ) . 
 On 21 August 2006 , the trebuchet claimed the record as the most powerful siege engine of its type when it sent a projectile weighing 13 kilograms ( 29 lb ) a distance of 249 metres ( 817 ft ) at a speed of 260 kilometres per hour ( 160 mph ) , beating the previous record held by the trebuchet at <unk> in Denmark . 
 On 10 April 2015 a thatched boathouse caught fire shortly after a burning cannonball was fired by the trebuchet . It was reported that a spark from the cannonball had started the blaze although a castle spokeswoman said the cause had not yet been established . Hundreds of tourists were evacuated from the castle , but the spokeswoman said they were not at any risk . The Daily Telegraph described the boathouse as " historic " , " medieval " and dating to 1896 , when the 5th Earl had it built to house an electric boat . 
 = = = Seasonal exhibits = = = 
 Other tourist attractions include " Flight of the Eagles ' " ( a bird show , featuring bald eagles , vultures , and sea eagles ) , archery displays , <unk> , " The Trebuchet Show " and " The Sword in the Stone Show " . The Castle is also home to " The Castle Dungeon " , a live actor experience similar to that of " London Dungeons " . Warwick Castle is the subject of many ghost stories . One such instance is that of Fulke Greville who is said to haunt the Watergate Tower despite having been murdered in Holborn . The castle 's reputation for being haunted is used as a tourist attraction with events such as " Warwick Ghosts Alive " , a live @-@ action show telling the story of Fulke Greville 's murder . Musical events at the castle have included carolling , with performances by bands such as the Royal Spa Brass . 
 = = Layout = = 
 The current castle , built in stone during the reign of King Henry II , is on the same site as the earlier Norman motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle . A keep used to stand on the motte which is on the south west of the site , although most of the structure now dates from the post @-@ medieval period . In the 17th century the motte was landscaped with the addition of a path . The bailey was incorporated into the new castle and is surrounded by stone curtain walls . 
 When Warwick Castle was rebuilt in the reign of King Henry II it had a new layout with the buildings against the curtain walls . The castle is surrounded by a dry moat on the northern side where there is no protection from the river or the old motte ; the perimeter of the walls is 130 metres ( 140 yd ) long by 82 metres ( 90 yd ) wide . The two entrances to castle are in the north and west walls . There was originally a drawbridge over the moat in the north east . In the centre of the north west wall is a gateway with Clarence and Bears towers on either side ; this is a 15th @-@ century addition to the fortifications of the castle . The residential buildings line the eastern side of the castle , facing the River Avon . These buildings include the great hall , the library , bedrooms , and the chapel . 
 = = Owners = = 
 Over its 950 years of history Warwick Castle has been owned by 36 different individuals , plus four periods as crown property under seven different monarchs . It was the family seat of three separate creations of the Earls of Warwick , and has been a family home for members of the Beaumont , Beauchamp , Neville , Plantagenet , Dudley and Greville families . The first creation of the Earldom specifically included the right of inheritance through the female line , so the castle three times had a woman ( or girl ) as the owner . Eleven of the owners were under 20 when they inherited , including a girl aged two and a boy aged three . At least three owners died in battle , two were executed and one murdered . Every century except the 21st has seen major building work or adaptations at the castle . 
 = = Grounds and park = = 
 Formal gardens belonging to Warwick Castle were first recorded in 1534 . Landscaping in the 17th century added spiral paths to the castle motte during Fulke Greville 's programme of restoration . Francis Greville commissioned Lancelot Brown to re @-@ landscape the castle grounds ; he began working on the grounds and park in 1749 and had completed his work by 1757 , having spent about £ 2 @,@ 293 ( £ 280 thousand as of 2016 ) . on the project . The gardens cover 2 @.@ 8 square kilometres ( 690 acres ) . Robert Marnock created formal gardens in the castle 's grounds in 1868 – 69 . Started in 1743 and originally known as Temple Park , Castle Park is located to the south of the castle . Its original name derived from the Knights Templar , who used to own a manor in Warwick . Houses around the perimeter of the park were demolished and the land they stood on incorporated into the park . Attempts to make profits from the park in the late 18th century included leasing it for grazing , growing wheat , and keeping sheep . 
 A water @-@ powered mill in the castle grounds was probably built under Henry de Beaumont , 1st Earl of Warwick . By 1398 the mill had been relocated to just outside the eastern castle walls , on the west bank of the River Avon . Both mills were subject to flooding . By 1644 , an engine house had been added to the mill . The mill was reused as an electricity generating plant after it had stopped being used to grind , but once Warwick Castle was fitted with mains electricity in 1940 , the mill was no longer required and was dismantled in 1954 . Adjacent to the mill is The Mill Garden which is privately owned but open to the public . Interesting views of the castle can be seen from this garden . 
 = De Iniusta Vexacione Willelmi Episcopi Primi = 
 De Iniusta Vexacione Willelmi Episcopi Primi or Of the Unjust Persecution of the Bishop William I ( sometimes translated as The Unjust Harassment of the First Bishop William ) is a late 11th @-@ century historical work detailing the trial of William de St @-@ Calais , a medieval Norman Bishop of Durham from 1081 to 1096 . It is the first surviving detailed account of an English trial before the king , and as such is an important source for historians . 
 The work consists of three sections , an introduction , a central section that details the trial itself , and a conclusion . The introduction and conclusion summarise St @-@ Calais ' career before and after the trial . Although the authenticity of the main account has been challenged in the past , most historians consider it a contemporary record of the trial . Six manuscripts containing the work survive , and it was first printed in 1655 , with other editions , including translations , appearing after that . 
 = = Background = = 
 The trial De Iniusta details took place at Salisbury in November 1088 , and concerned St @-@ Calais ' equivocal actions in the revolt against King William II 's rule that had taken place earlier in the year . The work is one of the primary sources for the early part of King William II 's reign , and was probably compiled from notes taken by the bishop 's subordinates and then worked into a tractate that was designed to present the bishop 's case in the best light . It was probably composed during the 1090s when St @-@ Calais was engaged in an effort to regain the favour of King William after his return from the sentence of exile he received at the trial . 
 This work is the earliest surviving detailed contemporary report of an English state @-@ trial . As such , it is an important source for how the English kings ' curia regis , or king 's court , functioned when it dealt with legal cases . 
 = = Trial = = 
 De Iniusta states that St @-@ Calais was brought before the king and royal court for trial on 2 November 1088 , at Salisbury , the king having confiscated the bishop 's lands before the trial . At the trial St @-@ Calais held that as a bishop he could not be tried in a secular court , and he refused to answer the accusations . Lanfranc , Archbishop of Canterbury , presented the king 's case , declaring that the confiscated lands had been held as fiefs , and thus St @-@ Calais could be tried as a vassal , not as a bishop . St @-@ Calais objected , and continued to refuse to answer the allegations . After numerous conferences and discussions , the court held that St @-@ Calais could be tried as a vassal in a feudal court . St @-@ Calais then appealed to Rome , but his request was rejected by the king and the judges . Those judging the case held that because St @-@ Calais never answered the formal accusation , and because he appealed to Rome , his fief , or the lands he held as a bishop , was forfeit . 
 During the course of the trial , Lanfranc is said to have stated that the court was " trying you not in your capacity as bishop , but in regard to your fief ; and in this way we judged the bishop of Bayeux in regard to his fief before the present king 's father , and that king did not summon him to that plea as bishop but as brother and earl . " Unlike the later case of Thomas Becket , St @-@ Calais received little sympathy from his fellow bishops . Most of the bishops and barons that judged the case seem to have felt that the appeal to Rome was made to avoid having to answer an accusation that St @-@ Calais knew was true . The final judgement was only reached after the king lost his temper and exclaimed : " Believe me , bishop , you 're not going back to Durham , and your men aren 't going to stay at Durham , and you 're not going to go free , until you release the castle . " 
 = = Contents and authenticity = = 
 De Iniusta is actually a composite work . The account of the trial itself , often termed the Libellus , is the central part of the work , and is probably the original account . To the Libellus was added an introduction which summarises St @-@ Calais ' career prior to the trial . A conclusion which relates the bishop 's life after the trial is appended to the end of the work . The introduction and conclusion are often referred to as the Vita , or Life . 
 The historian H. S. Offler in 1951 felt that the Libellus was not a contemporary account of the trial , and instead dated from the second quarter of the 12th century and was produced at Durham . More recent scholars , including W. M. Aird , Frank Barlow , and Emma Mason have concluded that the work is indeed a contemporary record of the trial . Barlow bases his belief in the authenticity on the level of detail and the fact that the account lacks all knowledge of events outside the court , and explains that Offler 's concerns can be explained by the late date for all the manuscripts , which allowed scribal errors to creep in . 
 One of the reasons the account 's authenticity has been questioned is the fact that it claims St @-@ Calais was knowledgeable in canon law . Offler doubted that canon law had penetrated to England to any great degree in 1088 . The historian Mark Philpott , however , argues that St @-@ Calais was knowledgeable in canon law , since he owned a copy of one of the basis of canon law , the False Decretals . The bishop 's manuscript of the Decretals still survives . 
 Historians are agreed that the introduction and conclusion were added by a different author than that of the Libellus . Who that was , however , is open to debate . The historian C. W. David felt that it was based on the work of the chronicler Symeon of Durham , which thus made a credible date for the creation sometime between 1109 and 1129 . David also felt that the Vita was used by a later work of Symeon 's , the Historia Regum . Offler , however , felt that although Symeon knew of the Libellus , there was no evidence that he used the Vita , which would leave the author of the Vita unclear . 
 = = Manuscripts and printed editions = = 
 In manuscripts , the De Iniusta normally appears alongside Symeon of Durham 's Historiae Ecclesiae Dunelmensis . There are at least six manuscripts of the De Iniusta , with the earliest being Bodleian MS Fairfax 6 , probably dating from about 1375 . The others are Bodleian MS Laud <unk> . 700 folios 66 – <unk> , Hales MS 114 folios 63 – <unk> ( although this is missing the introduction and part of the conclusion ) , Cotton MS Claudius D IV folios 48 – 54 ( likewise missing the introduction and parts of the conclusion ) , Harleian MS <unk> folios 224 – 231 , and Durham Bishop <unk> Library MS V ii 6 folio 88 – 98 . 
 The first printed edition of the De Iniusta appeared in the first volume of William Dugdale 's Monasticon Anglicanum published between 1655 . It has also been published as part of the collected works of Symeon of Durham , edited by Thomas Arnold in two volumes of the Rolls Series published in 1882 – 1885 . A translation of the work appeared in Joseph Stevenson 's The Church Historians of England , published between 1853 and 1858 ; specifically in volume iii , part ii . A more recent translation appeared in the English Historical Documents series , volume ii . 
 = Saints Row 2 ( mobile ) = 
 Saints Row 2 is a mobile tie @-@ in action game developed by G5 Entertainment and published by THQ Wireless to accompany the Saints Row 2 console game . It was released in October 2008 . The game follows the story of the series where the player returns from jail and fights to protect and expand his gang 's territory . The player can steal , carjack , mug , shoot , stab , and kill computer players . There are special minigames for robbing , stealing , and carjacking . Completing missions earns money to be spent towards replenished supplies and player upgrades . Reviewers contended that the game was too large for the small screen , which exacerbated difficult driving controls . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game 's story mimics that of the console game : the player @-@ character returns to the city of Stilwater following a bid in prison and must restore the atrophied influence of their gang , the Saints . The player can kill , threaten , rob , carjack , and otherwise force other gangs out of Saints territory . For example , player objectives in the tutorial mission include hijacking a car , killing a policeman , driving to a " Forgive & Forget " location to lose the police pursuit , and mugging a pedestrian . Locations throughout the city help the player , such as fast food restaurants that restore health , gun stores for firepower , and spray paint shops to decoy the player when pursued by the police . An on @-@ screen minimap displays nearby locations , and there is a larger citywide map on the pause screen that does not show detailed locations . The city is split into zones , and the game 's mission objectives largely consist of driving to locations and shooting things . Mission examples include assassinations , bomb @-@ planting , and robbery . 
 The player can fight with a knife received early in the game and later with firearms that feature auto @-@ aim . There are also sequences where the player can snipe enemies with a sniper rifle . Enemies do not hide due to a lack of a cover system . The player can earn money by finishing missions and robbing pedestrians , which can then be used to buy food , weaponry , spray paint , and accessories for the character 's home . The mobile game features minigames for robbing pedestrians , stealing , and hijacking vehicles . While robbing , the player taps happy and angry face icons to terrorize the victim into giving more money . When stealing , a Tetris clone lets the player fit more items into the truck , and the carjacking minigame lets the player earn more money for scaring the captive passenger by driving at high speeds . 
 When driving , control options include " directional steering " where " left " and " right " controls the vehicle in that direction ( like a steering wheel ) and " up " accelerates , and another option where the player presses a button corresponding to the desired direction . The player targets enemies by pressing the pound key and then pressing " 5 " repeatedly , which also leaves the character vulnerable . Players can run faster than the cars can drive . 
 = = Development = = 
 Saints Row 2 is a mobile tie @-@ in action game modeled after the Saints Row 2 console game . It was developed by G5 Entertainment , where it was known as " Project Sienna " in development , and published by THQ Wireless on the Java 2 Micro Edition ( <unk> ) platform . The game was built on their proprietary Talisman engine , which G5 Senior Producer Mike Zakharov said in 2008 enabled the game to have a big environment with many things to do as " one of the most complex modern mobile games " . As compared with its preceding mobile tie @-@ in game ( associated with the original Saints Row ) , the Saints Row 2 mobile game fixed issues of small sprites and too much traffic . Additionally , the developers changed the camera perspective from directly overhead to a slight angle . Saints Row 2 for mobile devices was first announced in June 2008 and released in October . It is compatible with the Nokia <unk> and Nokia <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 IGN 's Levi Buchanan described the game as somewhere between a traditional tie @-@ in game and a cash grab , and " ambitious " but limited by the confines of the mobile platform . He added the game appeared forced onto the platform despite its inability to support open world gameplay . Keith Andrew of Pocket Gamer felt similarly , and Rob Hearn of the same outlet also complained of how the large sprites restricted screen space and made driving slower . IGN 's Buchanan felt that the screen was too small to fit so much action , especially due to the size of the minimap , and though the city " looks alive " , it became " a painful obstacle course " . He found driving difficult between its controls and his inability to plan for the offscreen unknown . Pocket Gamer 's Andrew also found both driving controls complicated and found himself accidentally killing pedestrians and thus getting into police chases . On the other hand , Andrew Podolsky of 1UP.com enjoyed driving through the destructible environments . 
 IGN 's Buchanan found the enemy artificial intelligence weak . Since no one takes cover , " they just stand there to be shot . " He added that the game was sufficiently long past the player 's interest to continue , and that the game 's sound was " unimpressive " . 1UP.com 's Podolsky called the game a " worthwhile download " and while noting that violent mobile games were rare , said the game looked " nearly identical " to the 2007 mobile tie @-@ in game for American Gangster , though Saints Row was more violent . He added that the game 's story was not interesting . 
 Keith Andrew of Pocket Gamer wrote that the mobile game was " like ... no other " since the player could " watch life flow by " without providing input . He added that the game 's primary task was staying alive since almost everyone other than the pedestrians and teammates are against the Saints . Andrew acknowledged the limitations of the top @-@ down view on mobile and thought that the developers did the best job possible considering their platform 's limitations , but asked , " Is a game like Saints Row really made for your mobile ? " 
 = Grandaddy = 
 Grandaddy is an American indie rock band from Modesto , California , formed in 1992 . The band consists of Jason Lytle ( vocals , guitar , keyboards ) , Kevin Garcia ( bass guitar ) , Aaron Burtch ( drums ) , Jim Fairchild ( guitar ) and Tim Dryden ( keyboards ) . 
 After several self @-@ released records and cassettes , the band signed to Will Records in the US and later the V2 subsidiary Big Cat Records in the UK , going on to sign an exclusive deal with V2 . The bulk of the band 's recorded output was the work of Lytle , who worked primarily in home studios . The band released four studio albums before splitting in 2006 , with band members going on to solo careers and other projects . Grandaddy reformed in 2012 and have since made a number of live appearances . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early releases = = = 
 Grandaddy was formed in 1992 by singer , guitarist and keyboardist Jason Lytle , bassist Kevin Garcia and drummer Aaron Burtch . The group was initially influenced by US punk bands such as Suicidal Tendencies and Bad Brains . Lytle was a former professional skateboarder , who had turned to music after a knee injury forced him to stop skating , working at a sewage treatment works to fund the purchase of equipment , and several of the band 's early live performances were at skateboarding competitions . 
 The band members constructed a studio at the Lytle family home , and the band 's first release was the self @-@ produced cassette Complex Party Come Along Theories in April 1994 . Singles " Could This Be Love " and " <unk> " followed later that year . In 1995 , guitarist Jim Fairchild ( another ex @-@ pro @-@ skater who had guested with the band before ) and keyboardist Tim Dryden joined the band . A second cassette , Don 't Sock the <unk> was withdrawn , with the band instead releasing debut mini @-@ album A Pretty Mess by This One Band in April 1996 on the Seattle @-@ based Will label . 
 In 1997 they released their debut full @-@ length album Under the Western Freeway , and with the help of Howe Gelb , signed a UK deal with Big Cat Records ( by then a subsidiary of V2 ) , who reissued the album the following year . The album included the single " A.M. 180 " , which was featured during a sequence in the 2002 British film 28 Days Later , and is also used as the theme song for the BBC Four television series Charlie Brooker 's Screenwipe , and for an advertisement for Colin Murray 's BBC Radio 1 show . " A.M. 180 " was also used in television commercials for the Dodge Journey automobile . One of the album 's singles , " Summer Here Kids " , was awarded ' Single of the Week ' by the NME . " Summer Here Kids " is also used as the theme music for another Charlie Brooker @-@ fronted show , BBC Radio 4 's So Wrong It 's Right . The album led to an increase in the band 's popularity in Europe , and a main stage performance at the Reading Festival in 1998 , although it was only a success in the US when later reissued by V2 . With the band busy touring in 1999 , their next release was the compilation The Broken Down Comforter Collection . 
 = = = V2 record deal = = = 
 Unhappy with the efforts of Will Records , the band signed a worldwide deal with Richard Branson 's V2 Records in 1999 , their first release on the label being the Signal to Snow Ratio EP in September that year . In May 2000 , they released their second album , The Sophtware Slump , to critical acclaim , with popular British music magazine NME later placing it number 34 in their " Top 100 Greatest Albums of the Decade " list , and The Independent describing it as " easily the equal of OK Computer " . The album reached number 36 on the UK Albums Chart , and the band 's fanbase increased , including celebrities such as David Bowie , Kate Moss and Liv Tyler . By early 2001 the album had sold 80 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . " The Crystal Lake " , although not a hit when released as the first single from the album , gave the band their first UK top 40 single when reissued in 2001 . 
 Around the time that The Sophtware Slump was released , Grandaddy was invited to open for Elliott Smith on his tour for Figure 8 . On some nights , Smith would join Grandaddy onstage and sing lead vocals on portions of " He 's Simple , He 's Dumb , He 's the Pilot " . The band later opened for Coldplay on their US tour in mid @-@ 2001 . Also in 2001 , the band 's version of The Beatles ' " Revolution " was used in the film I Am Sam . 
 Their third album , Sumday , recorded in Lytle 's home studio , was released in 2003 . The band promoted it with a pre @-@ release US tour with Pete Yorn followed by a three @-@ week European tour ( including a performance at the Glastonbury Festival ) and a larger US tour . Lytle described the album as " Grandaddy influenced by Grandaddy ... the ultimate Grandaddy record " . 
 In 2004 and 2005 , Lytle recorded what would be the last Grandaddy album , Just Like the Fambly Cat , although by the time of its release the band had decided to split up . The title is a reference to Lytle 's desire to leave Modesto , a town which he complained " sucks out people 's souls " . The album was largely the work of Lytle , who created the album over a year and a half in his home studio in Modesto , fuelled by alcohol , painkillers and recreational drugs , with only Burtch from the remainder of the band playing on it . It was preceded by the band 's final release while together , the Excerpts From the Diary of Todd Zilla EP . 
 = = = Split and post @-@ Grandaddy activities ( 2006 – 2012 ) = = = 
 In January 2006 , after a meeting the previous month , Lytle announced that the band had decided to split up , citing the lack of financial income from being in the group as a reason . Just Like the Fambly Cat was released later that year as a farewell album . Lytle spoke to the NME : 
 It was inevitable ... On one hand our stubbornness has paid off , but on the other hand refusing to buy into the way things are traditionally supposed to be done has made things worse for us ... The realistic part is it hasn 't proved to be a huge money @-@ making venture for a lot of guys in the band . 
 Lytle had called the meeting in a hotel in Modesto , the first time the band had been in a room together for two years . The feeling at the meeting was described by Lytle as the result of a breakdown in communication among the band members . According to Lytle the decision was not a surprise : 
 Everybody knew , but we needed to make it formal , we needed to make it official . We needed to pay some respects to what we 've done , just make it real . 
 Lytle also stated that he was " burnt out on touring " and cited his fears over his drug and alcohol problems as a factor in the band 's split , and in 2009 he expressed his preference for being solo , saying that he was " a bit of a loner " , and , referring to his former bandmates , stated : " The main thing is not having four girlfriends to lug around with me all the time . " 
 The band did not tour after the release of Just Like the Fambly Cat , though Lytle continued to make music , embarking on a couple of small solo tours , and working with M. Ward on Hold Time . In 2009 Lytle moved from Modesto to Montana , and released his first solo album Yours Truly , the Commuter . In late 2009 Lytle formed the band Admiral Radley with former Grandaddy drummer Aaron Burtch , alongside Aaron Espinoza and Ariana Murray of <unk> . Admiral Radley 's debut album I Heart California was released on July 13 , 2010 via Espinoza 's label The Ship . In June 2011 , Burtch was also reported as being a member of a band called The Good Luck Thrift Store Outfit . Lytle 's second solo album , Dept. of Disappearance , was released in 2012 . 
 Jim Fairchild 's first solo album , Ten Readings of a Warning , was released in April 2007 on Dangerbird Records , under the name All Smiles . A second All Smiles album , Oh for the Getting and Not Letting Go , was released on June 30 , 2009 . In 2010 , he was selected to lead a project at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art , and in 2011 he released his third All Smiles album , <unk> and Mighty . Fairchild has also played for the bands Giant Sand , Great Northern , <unk> and Modest Mouse , having first played guitar with the latter in 2005 . He currently lives and works in San Francisco , California . 
 = = = Reunion and new album in the works ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 In March 2012 , it was announced that Grandaddy had reformed and were to play a limited number of shows , including London on September 4 , and headlining the End of the Road Festival in the UK . Grandaddy also played San Francisco 's Outside Lands Music and Arts Festival and Paris 's Rock en Seine Festival in August 2012 . On August 7 , 2012 , to kick off their reunion tour , they played two small , " secret " shows to a crowd of roughly 250 friends , family and fans at the Partisan in Merced , California . They were billed as " Arm of Roger " . 
 Regarding the band 's reunion , Jason Lytle noted , " The bargain I made myself regarding the ' brief reunion and couple of shows ' situation was that I wasn 't gonna talk too much about it . I was just gonna stew on it , and then do it . That 's the good thing about festivals . No need for me to sell anything here . Get in , rock out , get paid , get out . There are just going to be a few shows . Festival @-@ type <unk> . Perhaps the odd ' warm up gig ' in someone 's hair salon or something . Money was a motivating factor ( resurfacing my indoor tennis court , oil change for my 4 × 4 Ferrari ) but the idea of playing and hanging out with each other is something all of the guys are pretty stoked about . " 
 Lytle later noted , " It was actually Jim [ Fairchild ] ' s fault . He suggested that we consider playing some shows , and I went , ' no ' , [ but ] he convinced me it might be a good idea . We talked about it for a little while . I didn 't think anyone else in the band would be into it , [ and ] he checked around and it turns out they were all enthusiastic . I think I was the last one to say yes . [ ... ] I was actually blown away that they even wanted to . Once I found that out , I said ' OK , let 's start doing the work , figure out how to play the songs . ' The weird moment was when he had the first rehearsal ; I had no idea how it was going to turn out . After five days of playing together it actually sounded really good . It was too easy , and we were actually really having a good time together . " 
 Lytle also noted that he is likely to record a new Grandaddy album , stating , " It 's probably going to happen . [ ... ] If anyone knows anything about Grandaddy , they realise that my [ solo ] music and Grandaddy 's music is slightly interchangeable . I think if I were to focus on making a Grandaddy record [ it would be ] a full @-@ blown Grandaddy record , and I like the idea of that . I 'd like to give it a shot . " In early 2013 , Lytle elaborated : " I love the idea of making another Grandaddy record , but I wouldn 't want it hanging over my head like ' Okay , you made this record , now are you guys going to get out there and tour in support of it ? ' [ ... ] I 'm hoping for this dream scenario where I can make Grandaddy records every so often and not have all this messy stuff that goes along with it . I already did that and it 's just not appealing to me anymore . " 
 In 2014 Grandaddy collaborated with Band of Horses for the single " Hang an Ornament " . 
 In September 2015 Lytle tweeted that the band is working on a " new GD LP " , which was interpreted by the media and fans as confirmation that a new Grandaddy album is being recorded . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Much of the band 's music is characterized by Lytle 's analog synthesizer and the fuzzy guitar , bass and drums of the rest of the band . The band has variously been described as " bittersweet indie space rock " , " neo @-@ psychedelic , blissed @-@ out indie rock " , " dreamy , spacey psychedelic pop " , and " an uneasy combination of warm , tactile guitars and <unk> electronics " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times described the band 's songs as " stately anthems orchestrated with full late @-@ psychedelic pomp : fuzz @-@ toned guitar strumming , rippling keyboards , brawny drumbeats " . 
 While the band have sometimes been described as ' alt country ' , in Lytle 's view it is the sentiment of country music that the band embraced rather than the musical style . In their early days , the band 's lo @-@ fi sound was compared to Pavement . The band has also been compared to Radiohead ( even described as " the next Radiohead " in 2001 ) , Weezer , The Flaming Lips and Elliott Smith . With Sumday , the band were compared to the Electric Light Orchestra and The Alan Parsons Project . 
 Lytle has cited both The Beatles and <unk> as influences , stating in 2003 : " I 'm completely in tune with <unk> and Jeff Lynne – I know that guy like the back of my hand . " He stated in 2009 : " I think the majority of my musical influences were set in stone when I was five or six years old . " Lytle 's vocals have drawn comparisons with Neil Young . 
 = = = Lyrical themes = = = 
 Common lyrical themes include technology and a resistance to change . Adrien Begrand , writing for PopMatters , described the lyrics on The Sophtware Slump as " one 's attempt to transcend the glut of technology in today 's urban lifestyle , in search of something more real , more natural , more pastoral " . Ben Sisario of The New York Times stated that the band " provided the soundtrack to dot @-@ com @-@ era alienation , singing in a cracked yet still innocent voice of life spent staring into a computer screen " . Ross Raihala , reviewing Sumday for Spin , identified what he called Lytle 's " geeky identification with technology " . On The Sophtware Slump , CMJ writer Richard A. Martin commented on Lytle 's " sympathy for the lost souls and machines of the high @-@ tech dot @-@ com landscape " . Lytle described his empathy with machines in 2003 , stating " I find it easier dealing with certain things by living through inanimate objects " and how the song " I 'm on Standby " is about Lytle relating to a mobile phone : " I was spending so much time learning the art of turning off , while still being ' on ' " . 
 Lytle said of the tracks on Excerpts from the Diary of Todd Zilla : " For some reason , they are tied together by the idea of being fed up with your environment . " He stated in 2001 : " I have a growing appreciation for that which is simple and natural . I get that from the outdoors , and seeing the accumulation of clutter and waste and not being too happy about it . " 
 There is also much humor in Lytle 's songwriting , including the band 's promotional Christmas single released in 2000 , " Alan Parsons in a Winter Wonderland " , which was also included on the charity compilation It 's a Cool Cool Christmas , described by AllMusic 's Tim DiGravina as possibly " the funniest song from 2000 " . 
 = = Recording techniques = = 
 The band 's releases were generally recorded and mixed in makeshift studios based in homes , garages and warehouses , although the last two albums were mixed in a dedicated facility . Although live performances used a full band , much of the recordings were done by Lytle alone using analog recorders and Pro Tools . He recorded basic drum tracks in a soundproofed room and overdubbed cymbals and tom toms . He recorded his vocals close to the strings of a piano for what he described as a " ghostly effect " . 
 Lytle described how the Grandaddy recordings became more of a solo effort and the right conditions for recording : 
 Earlier on I tried to include people as much as possible . Then I realised the magic is me really prying stuff out of my head and getting it on to tape , and that stuff doesn 't happen unless I 'm completely alone . Sometimes it 's about the right amount of blood sugar , just slightly hungover . And I 'm really affected by the weather . If it 's too nice outside it 's insane for me , the concept of being inside . Everybody talks about this whole technology versus nature thing and if it 's anything that is it : look who my best friends are , a bunch of plastic and circuitry and electricity , when I should be running around getting chased by bumblebees . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Under the Western Freeway ( 1997 ) 
 The Sophtware Slump ( 2000 ) 
 Sumday ( 2003 ) 
 Just Like the Fambly Cat ( 2006 ) 
 = The Hungry Saw = 
 The Hungry Saw is the seventh studio album by British alternative band Tindersticks , released on 28 April 2008 by Beggars Banquet Records . Following the release of the band 's sixth album , Waiting for the Moon in 2003 , Tindersticks had entered an extended hiatus before reconvening to perform at the Don 't Look Back event in September 2006 . This concert marked the final performance of the original line @-@ up of the band , and three members left the group shortly afterwards . The remaining members of Tindersticks felt reinvigorated by the performance , and relocated to France to begin working on new material in the summer of 2007 , recording and producing the album at their own Le Chien Chanceaux studio in Limousin . The Hungry Saw was the first new Tindersticks material in five years . 
 Two songs from the album , " The Hungry Saw " and " Boobar Come Back to Me " , were released as singles . Critics noted that the album stayed close to the soul @-@ influenced sound that Tindersticks had been exploring since their 1999 album Simple Pleasure , and praised the band for their consistency . The Hungry Saw was met with generally positive reviews . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Musical differences had come to a head during the recording of Tindersticks ' previous album Waiting for the Moon in 2003 , and the band entered an extended hiatus . Island Records issued remastered and expanded versions of the band 's first four studio albums and the <unk> et Boni soundtrack , along with a compilation album that documented Tindersticks time with Island entitled Working for the Man , in 2004 . Singer Stuart Staples started the Lucky Dog record label and released his debut solo album , Lucky Dog Recordings 03 – 04 , in 2005 and the Leaving Songs album in 2006 , while violinist Dickon Hinchcliffe recorded the score to the 2005 Ira Sachs film Forty Shades of Blue . The original six members of Tindersticks reconvened for one final time in September 2006 to play their second album Tindersticks in its entirety for the Don 't Look Back series of concerts , after which three band members left the group . 
 The remaining three members , Staples , guitarist Neil Fraser , and multi @-@ instrumentalist David Boulter , felt reinvigorated by the concert and were keen to continue as Tindersticks . In 2006 Staples and his family had relocated to Limousin in France , and during the first half of 2007 the band built their own studio , Le Chien Chanceaux , in a barn in his garden . Most of the recording for The Hungry Saw , the first new Tindersticks material in five years , took place over an eight @-@ day period in June 2007 in the new studio . Dan McKinna and Thomas <unk> , who later became full @-@ time members of the group , were recruited to play bass and drums respectively , and long @-@ time collaborators Ian Caple , Terry Edwards , Lucy Wilkins and Calina de la Mare helped with the recording and the arrangements . Following further recording sessions at Eastcote Studios and Olympic Studios in London , the album was produced and mixed at Le Chien Chanceaux by Stuart Staples . 
 = = Musical content = = 
 The Hungry Saw contains twelve tracks with a total running time of forty @-@ six minutes . Critics noted that the music on the album was a continuation of the sound that Tindersticks had been exploring since 1999 's soul @-@ influenced Simple Pleasure , with PopMatters stating that " the revamped band sound ( s ) much like it has since 1999 , when they gave up on grandiosity ... the paired @-@ down sound of The Hungry Saw is really nothing new . " Reviews for The Hungry Saw described the album as containing " foreboding , compelling soul " , and " blue @-@ eyed / black @-@ lung balladry with classic soul <unk> warm Hammond organ tones , tambourine @-@ rattled rhythms , female back @-@ up singers " that were " remarkably in tune with contemporary British pop music 's neo @-@ soul slant " . 
 Tiny Mix Tapes described the album as " a quiet , subtle record " , while the BBC noticed that the simple sound of the record resulted in a " stripped @-@ bare , unfussy take on proceedings . " PopMatters remarked that " ornamental instrumentation is used quite sparingly " , while other critics noted the " smoky , solitary atmosphere and muted string arrangements " and " restrained " brass accompaniment . AllMusic said that Tindersticks " retain every last aspect of what made the band special ( the inventive arrangements , the cinematic sweep of the songs , Stuart Staples ' distinctive vocals ) " and noted that " the arrangements ... are given extra care " , describing the horns as " superb " and remarking that " the strings sound rich and suitably dramatic on the heavy ballads and breezy on the light ones . " Dusted magazine also commended the arrangements , remarking that they carried " poignant depth , cinematic sweep and enviable perfectionism " , while Drowned in Sound described them as " immaculate . " 
 The pace of The Hungry Saw 's music was described by Uncut as " funereal " , while Tiny Mix Tapes remarked upon the album 's " low @-@ down grooves " and " slow tempos " . Magnet magazine stated that the band 's " grand balladry is more stately and slow @-@ boiled than ever " , and Dusted described the album 's ballads as " fragile " , saying that they " linger like half @-@ forgotten dreams , deeply romantic yet always tinged with regret . " Pitchfork noted that " with their smoky , solitary atmosphere and muted string arrangements , " The Other Side of the World " and " All the Love " are textbook Tindersticks ballads " . " All the Love " was also described as " typically downbeat " , " lovely and harrowing " and " uncommonly spare , even for a T @-@ sticks ballad " , but it was mentioned that Suzanne Osbourne 's backing vocals provided " a welcome touch of sunshine " to the track . 
 Despite the " heavily maudlin " sound of the album , " The Flicker of a Little Girl " was described as a " sprightly " , " breezy piano @-@ rolled folk lullaby " that " owes a debt to Lee Hazlewood . " The influence of Hazlewood on the record was also noted by other critics . The " almost poppy " song " Boobar Come Back to Me " , which employs a call and response vocal pattern , was described as " one of The Hungry Saw 's undisputed highlights " that " suggests another solitary Staples serenade about lost love , before slowly blossoming into a wonderful <unk> finale . " 
 = = Artwork and release = = 
 The album features artwork by Stuart Staples and his artist wife , Suzanne Osborne . The front cover is a photograph of a carving of heart and a saw , and the back cover photograph shows the album track listing , also carved . Staples had used a screwdriver to make the carvings into the wall of his kitchen at home in Limousin , " to make it stay there . To properly mark our new start . " 
 Tindersticks announced The Hungry Saw in February 2008 , with " The Flicker of a Little Girl " being made available as a free digital download from the band 's <unk> page . Prior to the release of the album , title track " The Hungry Saw " was released as a single available as a digital download and on seven @-@ inch vinyl . The Hungry Saw album was released on vinyl and CD formats on 28 April 2008 by Beggars Banquet Records in the UK & Europe , and the band played a series of live dates in Copenhagen , Brussels , London and Paris to promote the album 's release . 
 A second single , " Boobar Come Back to Me " , was released on seven @-@ inch in September 2008 on the band 's own Lucky Dog label , and The Hungry Saw received a North American release on 16 September 2008 by Constellation Records . After performing at some music festivals in the summer of 2008 , more European dates followed in November and December , before Tindersticks undertook a tour of North America in February and March 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Hungry Saw was met with some critical acclaim . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 to reviews and ratings from mainstream critics , the album received a metascore of 79 , based on 20 reviews , indicating " generally favourable reviews . " In his review for AllMusic , Tim Sendra described the album as " classic Tindersticks " , remarking that " the band retain every last aspect of what made [ them ] special " , but also that the band managed to sound " rejuvenated and fresh at the same time " . Reviewing The Hungry Saw for The A.V. Club , Vadim <unk> noted that while the " strings and brass remain constant " and " Tindersticks remains a champion at feel @-@ bad soul strings , " the music on the album was " pared down " and represented " a new sound . " Drowned in Sound 's Billy Hamilton offered the opinion that while " there ’ s very little here that couldn ’ t slot seamlessly into any of the group ’ s output " , The Hungry Saw was " something that can be unequivocally relied upon to produce the goods . " This consistency was also noticed by Campbell Stevenson of The Observer , who opined that " it 's an eternal 3am in their songs , and they haven 't messed with the losers ' formula . " 
 Pitchfork writer Stuart Berman stated that " The Hungry Saw 's temperate approach feels like the work of a band who are grateful for a new lease on life , but not sure exactly what to do with it , " noting how " the record turns increasingly more restrained , as it reconciles the band 's well @-@ established soul affinities with a more pastoral presentation " while praising its " beautifully rendered " ballads . In his review for PopMatters , Michael Keefe opined that while " all of The Hungry Saw finds Tindersticks trekking through fairly familiar territory ... they find new diversions along the way . " Writing for Record Collector , Jake Kennedy said that " The Hungry Saw marks a wonderful coming of age for Tindersticks ... this is the sound of pure rejuvenation . " In a less complementary review , Shannon Zimmerman of Spin found that " the first half of Tindersticks ' latest is a can 't @-@ miss proposition " but that " the disc 's second half descends into a morass of half @-@ finished , melancholic curios that mostly go nowhere slowly . " Uncut critic Sam Richards was similarly unimpressed , offering that " Tindersticks have returned refreshed , but some of the old dissolute glamour is gone . " This opinion was not shared by Tiny Mix Tapes , whose reviewing writer said that " ultimately , it ’ s another Tindersticks record , and they ’ re still good after all these years . It ’ s not an incredibly remarkable record , but when a band is this consistent for this long , it ’ s hard to fault it . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Introduction " ( David Boulter ) – 3 : 32 
 " Yesterdays <unk> " ( Boulter / Stuart Staples ) – 3 : 49 
 " The Flicker of a Little Girl " ( Staples ) – 3 : 30 
 " Come Feel the Sun " ( Boulter / Staples ) – 2 : 28 
 " E @-@ Type " ( Boulter ) – 2 : 54 
 " The Other Side of the World " ( Staples ) – 4 : 12 
 " The Organist <unk> " ( Boulter ) – 2 : 33 
 " The Hungry Saw " ( Staples ) – 3 : 46 
 " Mother Dear " ( Staples ) – 4 : 19 
 " Boobar Come Back to Me " ( Staples ) – 3 : 58 
 " All the Love " ( Staples ) – 4 : 53 
 " The Turns We Took " ( Boulter / Staples ) – 5 : 29 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Thomas E. Bramlette = 
 Thomas Elliott Bramlette ( January 3 , 1817 – January 12 , 1875 ) was the 23rd Governor of Kentucky . He was elected in 1863 and guided the state through the latter part of the Civil War and the beginning of Reconstruction . At the outbreak of the war , Bramlette put his promising political career on hold and enlisted in the Union Army , raising and commanding the 3rd Kentucky Infantry . In 1862 , President Abraham Lincoln appointed him district attorney for Kentucky . A year later , he was the Union Democrats ' nominee for governor . Election interference by the Union Army gave him a landslide victory over his opponent , Charles A. Wickliffe . Within a year , however , federal policies such as recruiting Kentucky Negroes for the Union Army and suspending the writ of habeas corpus for Kentucky citizens caused Bramlette to abandon his support of the Lincoln administration and declare that he would " bloodily baptize the state into the Confederacy " . 
 After the war , Bramlette issued a general pardon for most ex @-@ Confederates in the state . He opposed ratification of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments and the establishment of the Freedmen 's Bureau in Kentucky . Among his accomplishments not related to the war and its aftermath were the reduction of the state 's debt and the establishment of the Kentucky Agricultural and Mechanical College ( now the University of Kentucky ) . Following his term as governor , Bramlette returned to his legal practice in Louisville . He died January 12 , 1875 and was buried in Cave Hill Cemetery . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas E. Bramlette was born on January 3 , 1817 , at Elliott 's Cross Roads in Cumberland ( now Clinton ) County , Kentucky . He was the son of Colonel Ambrose S. and Sarah ( Elliott ) Bramlette . His father served two terms in the Kentucky Senate and several terms in the Kentucky House of Representatives . 
 Bramlette studied law , was admitted to the bar in 1837 at the age of 20 , and began practicing in Louisville , Kentucky . In September of that year , Bramlette married Sallie Travis , the first of his two wives . The couple had two children , Thomas and Corinne . 
 Bramlette 's political career began in 1841 , when he was elected to represent Clinton County in the General Assembly . In 1848 , Governor John J. Crittenden appointed Bramlette Commonwealth 's Attorney . He resigned the position in 1850 to continue his legal practice , relocating to Columbia , Kentucky in 1852 . He was the Whig nominee for his district 's seat in the House of Representatives in 1853 , but was defeated by Democrat James Chrisman . In 1856 , he was elected as a judge in Kentucky 's 6th Judicial District , serving with distinction for five years . 
 = = Military service = = 
 Bramlette resigned his judgeship and accepted a commission as a colonel in the Union Army on August 7 , 1861 . In violation of Kentucky 's agreement to remain neutral in the Civil War , he raised and commanded the 3rd Kentucky Infantry . On September 19 , the 3rd Kentucky marched on Lexington to forestall a peace conference scheduled there on September 21 and to arrest the state 's junior Senator , John C. Breckinridge . A delay allowed Breckinridge to escape before the arrest was made , and he enlisted in the Confederate Army shortly thereafter . 
 Bramlette resigned his military commission on July 13 , 1862 at <unk> , Tennessee . He returned to Louisville to accept President Abraham Lincoln 's offer to become United States District Attorney for Kentucky . During his tenure in this position , he vigorously enforced Kentucky 's wartime laws against Confederates and Confederate sympathizers . 
 = = Governor of Kentucky = = 
 Union Democrats chose Joshua Fry Bell as their candidate for governor of Kentucky in 1863 , but Bell was skeptical of Kentucky 's future with the Union and withdrew his name from consideration . The party 's central committee chose Bramlette to replace Bell , and Bramlette declined a commission as a brigadier general in the Union Army to make the race . During the election , Union forces intimidated and jailed supporters of Bramlette 's opponent , former governor Charles A. Wickliffe . As a result , Bramlette carried the election by a margin of nearly 4 @-@ to @-@ 1 . During his term , he turned down an offered seat in the U.S. House of Representatives as well as a nomination to become the Democratic candidate for Vice @-@ President in 1864 . 
 = = = Civil War = = = 
 In December 1863 , Bramlette addressed the General Assembly , declaring that the state had fulfilled its quota of soldiers for the Union army . January 4 of the following year , he proclaimed that rebel sympathizers would be held responsible for all guerrilla raids in the state , and specified stiff fines and imprisonment for anyone found to be aiding the guerrillas . 
 Although Bramlette assumed the governorship as a staunch supporter of the Union cause , within a year he issued a proclamation that he would " bloodily baptize the state into the Confederacy " . The reasons for Bramlette 's reversal were many . He took issue with General Stephen Burbridge 's decision to enlist Negroes from Kentucky for military service , asking that this measure only be taken if Kentucky failed to meet her quota . The situation worsened when on July 5 , 1864 , President Lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus for citizens of the Commonwealth . Burbridge continually menaced Kentucky 's citizens , interfering with the presidential election of 1864 , and banishing Lieutenant Governor Richard T. Jacob from the state . When the General Assembly re @-@ convened in January 1865 , Bramlette continued to voice his opposition to the Union 's tactics . Nevertheless , he urged passage of the Thirteenth Amendment , maintaining that the institution of slavery was " irrevocably doomed " . 
 = = = Reconstruction era = = = 
 Despite his disagreements with the Lincoln administration , Bramlette proclaimed a day of fasting and prayer upon receiving news of Lincoln 's assassination . The General Assembly petitioned new president Andrew Johnson to call an end to martial law in the state . The tension between the state and federal governments remained , however . Bramlette announced that every " white male citizen " twenty @-@ one years of age who had resided in the Commonwealth for at least two years would be eligible to vote . Spurred on by the Democratic governor 's actions , Kentucky gave control of both houses of the General Assembly and five of its nine congressional seats to Democrats . President Johnson received the message , ending martial law and restoring habeas corpus in Kentucky . 
 When the General Assembly convened in December 1865 , Bramlette sought to restore harmony in the state by issuing pardons to most ex @-@ Confederates . He and the majority of the General Assembly opposed passage of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth amendments , and Bramlette protested the establishment of the Freedmen 's Bureau in the Commonwealth . 
 Bramlette was very proud of those of his accomplishments not related to the Civil War , including the reduction of the state 's debt and the establishment of the Agricultural and Mechanical College ( later , the University of Kentucky ) . He supported the construction of turnpikes financed by government bonds , the development of natural resources , and encouraged immigration to obtain adequate labor to support reconstruction efforts . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Following his term as governor , Bramlette conducted a failed campaign to become a U.S. Senator . He married Mary E. Graham Adams in 1874 , two years after the death of his first wife . He returned to his law practice in Louisville , and became a patron of many charitable organizations . 
 Bramlette died in Louisville on January 12 , 1875 following a brief illness . He is buried at Cave Hill Cemetery in Louisville . 
 = Hurricane Bob ( 1985 ) = 
 Hurricane Bob was a hurricane that affected the southeast United States in July 1985 . The second tropical storm and first hurricane of the 1985 Atlantic hurricane season , the system developed from a tropical wave on July 21 in the eastern Gulf of Mexico . Bob began moving east , striking southwestern Florida as a weak tropical storm . The storm then turned to the north and quickly intensified to hurricane status on July 24 . The next day , it made landfall near Beaufort , South Carolina , becoming one of a record @-@ tying six hurricanes to hit the United States during a single season . Bob quickly weakened over land , and was absorbed by a frontal trough over eastern West Virginia on July 26 . 
 Bob caused $ 20 million in damage as well as five indirect deaths . In Florida , the storm produced heavy rainfall , peaking at over 20 inches ( 508 mm ) in Everglades City . In most areas , the rainfall was beneficial due to dry conditions that had persisted throughout the year . Damage was minimal in South Carolina , where the hurricane made its final landfall . In Virginia , the storm spawned three tornadoes , one of which destroyed two houses . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The remnants of a tropical wave entered the eastern Gulf of Mexico on July 20 . An area of low pressure formed and developed into a tropical depression on July 21 . Under weak steering currents , the tropical depression drifted southeast , then turned northeast and later east . Based on reports from Hurricane Hunters , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Bob late on July 22 . Bob failed to organize significantly as it tracked east through the Gulf , and made landfall between Naples and Fort Myers , Florida on July 23 as a 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) tropical storm . At the time , most of the convection was concentrated south and east of the center . 
 While moving across Florida , Bob turned to the northeast , then to the north . It subsequently left the peninsula , entering the Atlantic Ocean near Vero Beach early on July 24 . As it moved over the warm waters of the Gulf Stream , it quickly organized and intensified into a Category 1 hurricane while 70 mi ( 115 km ) east of Jacksonville , Florida . Because it was embedded within the western extension of the subtropical ridge , Bob retained higher @-@ than @-@ average atmospheric pressures throughout its lifespan . The hurricane continued north , and made landfall near Beaufort , South Carolina early on July 25 while maintaining winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Bob quickly weakened over land , decaying into a tropical storm three hours after landfall . About 12 hours later , it degenerated into a tropical depression near the North Carolina – Virginia border . Bob 's remnants turned north @-@ northeast , and were absorbed by a frontal trough over eastern West Virginia on July 26 . An associated area of disturbed weather remained separate from the trough , and continued northeast through the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 When Bob was designated a tropical storm , the National Hurricane Center issued gale warnings for the Florida Keys west of Craig Key , and from Flamingo to Venice . Gale warnings were later posted for the Atlantic coast of Florida northward through St. Augustine . Small craft south of St. Augustine were advised to remain in port . While the storm was situated off the east @-@ central coast of Florida , the National Hurricane Center issued a gale warning and a hurricane watch from Savannah , Georgia to Little River , South Carolina . The hurricane watch was upgraded to a hurricane warning after Bob 's intensification to Category 1 status . 
 Thousands of residents evacuated coastal areas of South Carolina , many of whom stayed at inland hotels ; 850 people sought protection in shelters , including 500 at an elementary school in Horry County and 240 in a shelter in the Grand Strand . In Beaufort County , city and county offices were closed early and businesses were advised to send their workers home prematurely . Officials in Chatham County , Georgia evacuated nursing homes on Tybee Island , and encouraged others to leave due to the potential for high tides to isolate the island by cutting off U.S. Route 80 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Bob inflicted $ 20 million in damages and caused five indirect deaths . Damage from the storm was not severe enough to justify retirement of the name " Bob " , and as such it was re @-@ used during the 1991 season . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 In southern Florida , the heaviest rainfall remained to the south and east of the storm 's center ; 21 @.@ 5 inches ( 546 mm ) of precipitation was recorded in Everglades City . Northern parts of the state reported trace amounts to several inches of precipitation . At Naples , sustained winds reached 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , with a peak gust of 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) . Rough surf and above @-@ average tides caused moderate to severe beach erosion in portions of coastal Manatee , Sarasota , and Charlotte counties . Before landfall , Tropical Storm Bob spawned an F0 tornado in Brevard County that caused $ 2 @,@ 500 in damage ( 1985 USD , $ 4 @,@ 700 2006 USD ) along its 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) path . 
 Tropical Storm Bob flooded roads and downed trees in Florida . Rough seas broke over sea walls in southwestern parts of the state , and the combination of high tides and heavy rain caused forced the closure of causeways to Sanibel Island and Marco Island , leaving the islands temporarily isolated . They were re @-@ opened when the waters receded , though the causeway to Sanibel Island sustained some damage . Florida Power & Light Co. reported that 1 @,@ 200 to 1 @,@ 500 residences were without power on July 23 . In Palm Beach County , rainfall from the storm caused agricultural damage . 
 Overall damage was minimal and primarily confined to minor property near the coast . The storm 's rainfall was beneficial in areas that had suffered dry conditions . In northeastern Florida and Georgia , beach erosion occurred along the coast . Bob was one of four July tropical cyclones to affect Palm Beach County since 1878 . 
 = = = Carolinas = = = 
 The strongest winds from Hurricane Bob were confined to areas east of its center when it came ashore around 1 am Eastern Standard Time ( EST ) . Along the barrier islands off the coast of Charleston , windows were broken and power lines knocked down . Further inland , the lack of damage in spite of high winds was described as " almost unbelievable " . Georgetown , South Carolina , 105 miles ( 170 km ) northeast of where the storm made landfall , recorded sustained winds of 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) , and a spiral rainband produced a peak wind gust of 83 mph ( 134 km / h ) in Holden Beach . Upon moving ashore , the hurricane produced an estimated storm tide of 2 @.@ 6 feet ( 0 @.@ 79 m ) in Edisto Beach . Rainfall in the Carolinas was moderate ; portions of coastal South Carolina received over 5 inches ( 127 mm ) of precipitation . Myrtle Beach reported a statewide peak of 7 @.@ 79 inches ( 198 mm ) . Hurricane @-@ force wind gusts downed trees and power lines , leaving over 32 @,@ 000 people without power , including more than 25 @,@ 000 in the Charleston area . Near the coast , high winds shattered windows . 
 Strong waves broke over sea walls in Charleston , spilling floodwaters onto coastal streets and homes . Damage in the state was relatively light , and no serious injuries were reported . However , a gas station in Folly Beach was torn apart by the winds , and some structures along the coast sustained roof damage . In the Charleston Harbor , an empty tanker was forced aground on a sandbar by the winds . Throughout most areas , the storm was insignificant ; a police sergeant in Summerville commented , " All we 've had were some trees blown over , hardly enough to make it worth staying up so late . " 
 Much of North Carolina received over 1 inch ( 25 @.@ 4 mm ) of rain ; as much as 7 inches ( 178 mm ) fell in Beaufort County . The storm caused one traffic @-@ related fatality in the state . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England = = = 
 In Virginia , a large band of thunderstorms associated with the hurricane brought strong winds and spawned three tornadoes . A funnel cloud formed in Albemarle County evolved into an F3 tornado after crossing into Greene County . It destroyed two houses and uprooted several trees , inflicting $ 250 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1985 USD , $ 470 @,@ 000 2006 USD ) . F0 tornadoes were also generated in Goochland County and Hanover County ; the two tornadoes damaged a total of ten houses . Funnel clouds were sighted throughout the Baltimore @-@ Washington Metropolitan Area . 
 Heavy precipitation and high winds disrupted the 1985 Boy Scouts of America National Scout Jamboree at Fort A. P. Hill near Fredericksburg , Virginia , knocking over hundreds of tents and fifty portable toilets . One scout was struck by a falling gateway and several others sustained minor cuts and bruises . The storm produced winds of 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) at the Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport , and about 30 @,@ 000 people near Washington , D.C. and 125 @,@ 000 in Baltimore were left without power . Moderate winds downed a sea plane near Hains Point in the Washington Channel . Rough seas capsized a few boats along the Potomac River , and rainfall from Bob 's remnants forced the cancellation of a Richmond Braves game. and collapsed a house under construction in Great Falls , Maryland . A dam in Northeastern Virginia sustained storm @-@ related damage . Slick roads led to several traffic accidents ; one person in Washington , D.C. and three in Maryland were killed . High winds in the Washington , DC area also flipped over a pontoon @-@ equipped Cessna 210 airplane near Hains Point , holding a five @-@ man television crew . The crew , who worked for the television series Lime Street had been preparing to film a chase scene for the television drama . All five escaped the plane safely with the aid of the Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia harbor patrol . 
 Rainfall in the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England states was around 1 inch ( 25 @.@ 4 mm ) , with isolated reports of over 3 inches ( 76 mm ) . About 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 13 mm ) of precipitation fell in Atlantic City , New Jersey within a period of 10 minutes . In Maryland , the rainfall helped to relieve persistent dry conditions . 
 = Ambrosden = 
 Ambrosden is a village and civil parish in Cherwell , Oxfordshire , England , 3 miles ( 5 km ) southwest of Bicester to which it is linked by the A41 road , and 13 miles ( 21 km ) from Oxford . The 2011 Census recorded the parish 's population as 2 @,@ 248 . The parish is bounded by the River Ray to the south , its tributary the River Bure to the west , the outskirts of Bicester to the north and field boundaries to the east . 
 The village is 2 miles ( 3 km ) east of Alchester Roman Town . Ambrosden has a Church of England parish church and a public house . Since the Second World War Ambrosden has housed British Army personnel stationed at St. George 's Barracks , which is at Arncott about 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) south of Ambrosden . The Ministry of Defence had many new houses built at Ambrosden in the early 1950s . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Ambrosden is about 3 miles ( 5 km ) southwest of Bicester ( the nearest railway station ) , connected by the A41 road . The site of Alchester Roman Town is about 2 miles ( 3 km ) west of the village , and the village of Arncott is about 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) to the south . 
 In 1932 Langford , <unk> , and Middle <unk> Farms , which were formerly part of the Bicester Market End township , were added to Ambrosden . The townships of Blackthorn and Arncott were part of Arncott but in the 20th century were detached to form separate parishes . The present Ambrosden parish is about 2 miles ( 3 km ) wide both north – south and east – west . 
 Two bridges cross the River Ray in the parish : Heath Bridge and Arncott Bridge , and Blackthorn Bridge . Arncott Bridge is on the road between Arncott and Ambrosden and is a five @-@ arched bridge built in the 18th century . 
 The land is relatively level , about 200 feet ( 61 m ) above sea level , apart from Graven Hill north @-@ west of the village , which is 372 feet ( 113 m ) high . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 In the 19th century it was believed that the toponym " Ambrosden " came from a diminutive derivative of the name Ambrosius <unk> , a 5th @-@ century British commander of Roman descent , and that the commander had encamped close the present site of Ambrosden to help the neighbouring military garrison at Alchester in conflicts with the Anglo @-@ Saxons . The word don or den , an Old English word meaning " a place on a hill or ascent " , was added as a suffix . Thus , a Roman name and a British syllable may have been combined as " Ambrosden " . 
 This interpretation , however , has been rejected by historians who believe the toponym was derived not from Ambrosius , but from the Old English for " <unk> 's hill " . The forms <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> were all recorded in the Middle Ages . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
 The course of Akeman Street Roman road , which linked Watling Street with the Fosse Way , passes through the parish less than 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 800 m ) north of the village . Roman pottery has been found in the area . When the scholar and antiquarian White Kennett was Vicar of Ambrosden ( from 1685 to 1708 ) , ancient Danish remains were found in the parish . 
 = = Manor = = 
 During the reign of King Edward the Confessor a lady called <unk> ( probably a Latin rendering of the Old English name Ælfgifu ) , held the manor of Ambrosden . The Domesday Book records that by 1086 she had been replaced by Hugh d 'Ivry , butler of William the Conqueror and brother of Roger d 'Ivry , who owned several manors in Oxfordshire . Hugh 's nephew Roger II d 'Ivry inherited Ambrosden and by 1194 it was part of the Honour of St. Valery . Ambrosden thus passed to Edmund , 2nd Earl of Cornwall , who in 1288 gave the manor to Ashridge Priory of the Augustinian order of the Brothers of Penitence . Ashridge Priory retained Ambrosden until the priory was dissolved in 1539 in the Dissolution of the Monasteries . 
 In 1542 , the Crown granted Ambrosden to John Denton of Blackthorn , who was lord of the manor of one of the manors of Bicester . Ambrosden remained in the hands of the Denton family until 1604 , when Edward Denton and his son @-@ in @-@ law Edward Smyth of Stoke Prior , Worcestershire sold the manor to Margaret <unk> of London . Margaret married Sir Thomas Mildmay of Chelmsford , whose family were recusants . Their grandson Francis Mildmay was a Royalist in the English Civil War , so in 1648 Parliament sequestered his estates . During the Commonwealth of England , the Treason Trustees twice sold Ambrosden to wealthy Londoners : to John Warre in 1653 and to William Drax and Alexander Jackson in 1657 . Francis Mildmay recovered Ambrosden but in 1658 mortgaged it to Sir James Drax , also of London and in 1660 sold 100 acres ( 40 hectares ) of the estate to various yeoman farmers . 
 In 1673 , Francis Mildmay 's widow Mary and son , Walter Mildmay , sold the remainder of the manor to Sir William Glynne , 1st Baronet , of Bicester . Sir William rebuilt the manor house shortly afterwards . Ambrosden remained with the Glynne family until Sir Stephen Glynne , 3rd Baronet sold it in 1729 . 
 During the English Civil War , the area was occupied in June 1643 , when part of the King 's forces were at Bicester and guarded Blackthorn Bridge . 
 = = = Page @-@ Turner baronets = = = 
 In 1729 the manor was bought by Edward Turner , who had already bought one of the manors of Bicester from Sir Stephen in 1728 . In 1733 , Turner was made the first of the Turner and Page @-@ Turner baronets of Ambrosden . In around 1740 , Sir Edward Turner , 2nd Baronet replaced the <unk> ' manor house with a large square house of eleven bays . In its construction , the house reused stone from the manor house , mixed with local limestone from the Stone Pitts quarry at Blackthorn , Oxfordshire and Cotswold stone from <unk> in Gloucestershire . The architect was Sanderson Miller , who also designed ornamental buildings in the grounds . 
 A landscaped park with lakes and statues was laid out around the house , and the drive to the house was along a semicircular avenue of trees . Sir Edward died in 1766 . Sir Gregory Page @-@ Turner , 3rd Baronet considered the house too large , so in 1767 he sought to demolish part of it to create a smaller house . This proved impossible so in 1768 he had the entire house demolished . 
 Ambrosden remained with the Turner ( later Page @-@ Turner ) baronets until 1874 when Sir Edward Henry Page @-@ Turner , 6th Baronet died childless . The 6th Baronet left all his estates to his nephew , Frederick Augustus Blaydes . The Blaydes took the Page @-@ Turner name and coat of arms in 1903 , but sold the estate in 1930 . 
 = = Parish church = = 
 The earliest part of the Church of England parish church of St Mary the Virgin is the 12th @-@ century Norman north doorway . The Early English Gothic west tower was built slightly later . The south aisle was added in the 14th century and the chancel was rebuilt in the 15th century with Perpendicular Gothic traceried windows . 
 The church plan , as existed and as chronicled in 1823 records , and in possession of John Wayland , <unk> of <unk> , had a large courtyard entered through two elegant gates with a cross fixed at the northern part . The southern end of courtyard also had a cemetery . The main church building comprised : 
 ... an embattled tower of two stories , with a vane at each angle ; a nave , a chancel , and a south aisle ; the latter crowned with a parapet , pierced with trefoils and supported by three handsome buttresses , ornamented with niches , once containing statues of saints . 
 — ( John Dunkin , 1823 ) 
 The south porch leads to an aisle that is lit by four two @-@ light windows . Between the aisle and the nave is a four @-@ bay arcade . The nave has three clerestory windows similar to those in the north wall of the church . The nave pews are 17th @-@ century . The pulpit and reading desk are late 17th @-@ century , added in the reign of James II . The pulpit was refurbished in 1819 with cushion and cloth given by Lady Turner , bearing insignia of the Turner family . The nave had a west gallery where there was a painting of the Resurrection of Jesus . According to inscriptions it was given by the parishioners . 
 The church is a Grade II * listed building . 
 The bell tower has a ring of eight bells . The third bell was cast by Richard Keene of Woodstock in 1697 . The fourth was cast by Henry III Bagley of <unk> , Northamptonshire in 1716 . Bagley had more than one bell @-@ foundry , but the nearest was at Witney . The fifth was cast by Edward <unk> of Bicester in 1743 . St Mary 's has a bell cast by W. & J. Taylor in 1840 , presumably at their then Oxford foundry . In 1928 Taylors cast the treble , second and tenor bells , but at their Loughborough foundry St Mary 's also has a small Sanctus bell cast by Peter de Weston of London in about 1336 . 
 The ecclesiastical parish of Ambrosden is now part of the Benefice of the Ray Valley , and St Mary 's also serves as the British Army garrison chapel . 
 The nearby vicarage dates from 1638 . The Reverend White Kennett ( 1660 – 1728 ) was vicar of Ambrosden from 1685 until 1708 . During his incumbency , Kennett became tutor and vice @-@ principal at St Edmund Hall , Oxford and published a number of scholarly works . Kennett was also Rector of St Botolph 's Aldgate in London from 1700 , Archdeacon of Huntingdon from 1701 and Dean of Peterborough from 1707 . It therefore seems likely that Kennett may have been largely absent from Ambrosden in the latter years of his tenure . He relinquished the living of Ambrosden in 1708 . Kennett was consecrated Bishop of Peterborough in 1718 . 
 = = Economic and social history = = 
 There is a record of a windmill at Ambrosden in 1300 . A document of 1633 records a Windmill Field and Windmill Way . Ambrosden was farmed by an open field system until at least the 17th century . By 1623 there had been several small Enclosures of agricultural land in the parish and by 1685 some common lands were reported to have been enclosed , with further enclosures reported between 1702 and 1785 . By 1809 Ambrosden 's field system was described as being completely enclosed . 
 In 1741 Sir Edward Turner , 2nd Baronet constructed a new road between Ambrosden and Merton . He intended the road to eventually connect to Oxford , but the remainder of the project was never completed . The road was reputed to cost a guinea a yard . The road includes a completely straight stretch of about 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) and generally runs across level ground , although its course undulates at regular intervals , intended to use gravity to help draught animals pull vehicles . 
 In January 1764 one barge experimentally carried one load of coal from the Thames at Oxford up the River Cherwell to Islip and thence up the old course of the River Ray to Arncott . The coal was landed at Arncott Bridge and delivered thence by wheelbarrows to Sir Edward Turner , 2nd Baronet at Ambrosden House . However , the experiment seems not to have been repeated and did not establish a regular freight trade on the river . 
 In 1811 the village had only 140 inhabitants and in 1815 the annual estate value was assessed as £ 1 @,@ 240 . The parish then included three townships : Ambrosden , Arncott and Blackthorn . 
 Ambrosden Old Park , where Ambrosden House had been demolished , was sometimes used for horse @-@ racing . In 1829 Jackson 's Oxford Journal complained that a race meeting in the park attracted a thousand " idlers " characterized by " dullness and stupidity " and was marred by " brutal and disgraceful fighting " despite the presence of several members of the gentry . 
 A parish school was opened in Ambrosden in 1818 but seems to have ceased operating by 1854 . A temporary school existed in the village in 1868 and a permanent parish school building in a Gothic Revival style was completed and opened in 1876 . In 1952 the primary school had an attendance of 194 pupils , including children from the War Department housing estate . In the latter part of the 20th century the school was moved to new premises and was renamed Five Acres Primary School . The 1876 school building is now the village hall . 
 The Buckinghamshire Railway 's Oxford and Bletchley line was built through the northwest corner of the parish and opened in 1851 . Its nearest station to Ambrosden is Bicester Town , 2 miles ( 3 km ) north of the village . The London and North Western Railway worked the Buckinghamshire Railway from its opening and absorbed the company in 1879 . This part of the Buckinghamshire Railway is now the Oxford to Bicester Line , currently operated by Chiltern Railways . 
 Mains electricity was introduced to Ambrosden in 1935 . The Bicester Military Railway between Bicester and Piddington was built through Ambrosden in 1941 and remains in use to this day . In 1951 – 52 the Ministry of Defence and the Central Ordnance Depot had a new housing estate of some 200 houses built in the village . The Government bought a significant area of land from most of the farms in the parish . There are three types of house , all designed by the architect R. Potter of Salisbury , all built of brick and roofed with tiles , and many sited around a green . 
 The British Army , which has personnel at St. George 's Barracks in nearby Arncott , has been in the village since the Second World War . Also , the military depot ( considered an industrial installation related to support of military operations ) was sited in Bicester during the war . This affected Ambrosden village , which adjoins the northern side of the garrison . In Ambrosden village , extensive buildings as housing accommodation and amenities were built for the military . 
 = = Amenities = = 
 Ambrosden 's amenities include the parish church , the Turner Arms pub , a post office , a village hall ( the former school ) and the current primary school . The village has also a hair salon , a car dealer and garage and a craft shop . 
 The Army provides its personnel and their families with a community centre that includes a library , a gymnasium , a careers centre and an indoor swimming pool . 
 = Chuck Versus the Family Volkoff = 
 " Chuck Versus the Family Volkoff " is the 20th episode of the fourth season of Chuck , and the 74th overall episode of the series . The episode was directed by Robert Duncan McNeill and written by Nicholas Wootton and Amanda Kate Shuman . It originally aired April 11 , 2011 . 
 The episode has several unrelated sub @-@ plots . In the episode , Sarah Walker ( Yvonne Strahovski ) throws Chuck Bartowski ( Zachary Levi ) a surprising relationship curveball as the CIA orders Vivian Volkoff ( Lauren Cohan ) assassinated . In order to prove Vivian 's innocence , Chuck must put his trust in a dangerous ally – Vivian 's father Alexei ( Timothy Dalton ) . Meanwhile , Ellie Bartowski @-@ Woodcomb ( Sarah Lancaster ) suspects that her mother Mary ( Linda Hamilton ) is interfering with the search into her father Stephen 's past . 
 " Chuck Versus the Family Volkoff " received positive reviews from critics . However , the episode continued Chuck 's steady decline in viewership , drawing 4 @.@ 03 million viewers , a series low . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it had a 2 @.@ 5 / 4 share among all households and 1 @.@ 3 / 4 share among those aged 18 – 49 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Ellie Bartowski @-@ Woodcomb ( Sarah Lancaster ) unlocks files about " Agent X " on her father 's laptop , she begins reading about the Intersect . Ellie later discovers that her mother Mary ( Linda Hamilton ) has deleted a file . Ellie and Devon Woodcomb ( Ryan McPartlin ) spy on Mary and witness her deleting more files . It is then revealed that Mary has extracted the files for General Diane Beckman ( Bonita Friedericy ) . Mary urges Chuck to stop lying to Ellie and tell her the truth about his place in the CIA . 
 Meanwhile , Sarah Walker presents Chuck with a prenuptial agreement . Advised by John Casey ( Adam Baldwin ) and Morgan Grimes ( Joshua Gomez ) to " be cool " , Chuck signs the agreement , worrying Sarah , who had expected an emotional reaction . 
 Morgan receives an invitation to go to Alex McHugh 's ( Mekenna Melvin ) graduation . To hide the fact that Casey is still alive from her mother , Alex arranges to meet Casey between the ceremony and dinner with her mother . 
 In the episode 's main plot , the CIA orders Vivian Volkoff ( Lauren Cohan ) assassinated for the murders in " Chuck Versus the <unk> " , but Chuck negotiates a meet to determine if Vivian is really guilty . As a sign of good faith , Vivian gives them a weapon from the Volkoff Industries arsenal . Suddenly , a sniper shoots Vivian in the arm , causing her to flee . Chuck and Sarah meet Vivian 's father Alexei Volkoff ( Timothy Dalton ) in prison , and he confirms that the weapon is one of three components of the " Norseman " , a DNA tracker that could instantly kill a target . Volkoff asserts that he is a changed man . In exchange for a meeting with his daughter , Volkoff agrees to lead the team to the missing components . 
 The team travels to Mogadishu , Somalia , and acquires the targeting device from pirate Ellyas <unk> ( Kevin Daniels ) . They then travel to the Swiss Alps to obtain the killing agent , thorium . Volkoff manages to access the vault by winning a game of computer chess before a timer expires and triggers several turrets . Outside , Sarah and Casey detect Russian chatter and rush to Chuck 's aid , only to become trapped by Vivian , who is not injured . When Volkoff asks his daughter to release him , she refuses , feeling deceived and abandoned by him . She takes the thorium and leaves everyone in the vault with armed plasma bombs which Volkoff deactivates with a portable EMP generator . At Castle , Volkoff says goodbye to Mary before being returned to custody . 
 As Casey grows increasingly uncomfortable with Alex lying to her mother , he considers revealing himself to her mother . It is revealed that Sarah has money saved up in case her father is arrested again , and she tears the prenuptial agreement . Chuck later brings his own document , requiring that Sarah never suggest divorce , which she gladly signs . Chuck takes Mary 's advice to tell Ellie the truth about his place in the CIA . However , when he goes to confess and first mentions their father 's computer , Ellie lies to his face . At Volkoff Industries , Vivian is determined to find and kill " Agent X " , the only person her father ever feared . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Chuck Versus the Family Volkoff " was directed by producer Robert Duncan McNeill , and was written by Nicholas Wootton and Amanda Kate Shuman . The episode is Shuman 's first writing credit , as she had previously been only a writer 's assistant . It originally aired in the United States on April 11 , 2011 , on NBC as the twentieth episode of Chuck 's fourth season and the 74th episode overall . In the episode , guest stars Linda Hamilton , Timothy Dalton , Lauren Cohan , and Mekenna Melvin reprise their recurring roles of Alexei Volkoff , Mary Elizabeth Bartowski , Vivian Volkoff , and Alex McHugh , respectively . The episode also features Kevin Daniels as Ellyas <unk> . 
 In their respective reviews of the episode , HitFix Senior Editor Alan Sepinwall and Ryan McGee of The A.V. Club wrote of various ideas the episode 's writers introduced . Sepinwall noted several developments in the relationships between characters of the series . Sepinwall wrote that after becoming roommates , Casey and Morgan have become " an old married couple " , drinking orange juice in unison and bickering with mouths full of cereal . In an " emotional role reversal " from previous points in their relationship , Chuck tries to be " cool " about Sarah 's prenuptial agreement , while Sarah panics at Chuck 's lack of an emotional reaction . Casey 's relationship with his daughter also develops to the point that he considers revealing himself to her mother . Both Sepinwall and McGee wrote that Vivian was designed to be Chuck 's counterpart . The episode also marks the beginning of Alexei 's path to redemption . IGN writer Eric Goldman criticized the scene where Chuck and Sarah meet with Vivian for its frequent use of quick zooms to increase tension , writing that it " just didn 't feel like it was natural to this show 's style . " 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 This episodes maintains the series ' tendency to reference popular culture . While reading a volume of A Song of Ice and Fire , Chuck notes , " Eddard , you don 't let your kids keep a direwolf . That 's a terrible idea . " This episode aired the same week as Game of Thrones first premiered on HBO . Chuck and Ellyas later play Uno for the thorium . Volkoff jokes that to mine said thorium , he had to wage war with natives and destroy their Hometree , only to reveal that he and the other prisoners had recently watched Avatar . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Chuck Versus the Family Volkoff " continued Chuck 's steady decline in viewership , drawing 4 @.@ 028 million viewers , a series low . It also had a 2 @.@ 5 / 4 share among all households and 1 @.@ 3 / 4 share among those aged 18 – 49 . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from critics . HitFix Senior Editor Alan Sepinwall wrote that " Timothy Dalton was everything we had come to expect from him in the part : scary and dangerous and then so much the funnier for the way he kept trying to work the steps and turn over a new leaf . The episode left [ Alexei ] ' s sincerity up in the air for most of the hour - was he really serious about making amends , or just trying to distract Chuck from his latest evil plan ? - but Volkoff is such a well @-@ drawn character , and Dalton so talented and versatile , that the comedy worked either way ... Vivian , on the other hand ? I 'd been iffy on her in her most recent appearance , and putting her on camera with [ Alexei ] , even briefly , was just a reminder of how much less she brings to the table . " Ryan McGee of The A.V. Club gave the episode a A- . Though he praised Dalton 's performance , McGee wrote , " The direct parallels between Chuck and Vivian haven 't really panned out in the way the show initially envisioned it . Let 's face it : These two aren 't exactly Buffy and Faith in terms of being foils for one another . The show has never painted Chuck as ever potentially going to the dark side . It has used Casey and occasionally Sarah to serve that function at times , but never Chuck . At this point , he 's as set in his moral code as possible . Had the Vivian storyline happened at the outset of his Intersect 2 @.@ 0 days , perhaps the taste of power could have gone to his head , with Vivian as an example of the road not taken . As such , Vivian 's existence largely serves to connect her to the larger spy world of the show , not draw a direct parallel to the support system that helped Chuck overcome any potential temptations . " Eric Goldman of IGN gave this episode a score of 8 out of 10 , writing , " This Chuck got off to a shaky start . I don 't know how to put my finger on it exactly , but the pacing felt off in the first third or so of the episode ... Thankfully , things picked up considerably as the episode went along – I 'd say the turning point was the scene in which Chuck was sent in to meet with the pirates . The way Chuck 's big announcement that he worked for Alexei Volkoff immediately led to a bunch of guns pulled on him was funny , as was not only Chuck asking to play Uno ( for his life ) , but that the pirate did indeed have the game . " Carl Cortez of Assignment X , however , gave the episode a negative review , calling it " a painfully nonsense driven episode that 's now grasping at straws in an attempt to round out the last part of the season with an adequate storyline . " 
 = Pennsylvania Route 73 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 73 ( PA 73 ) is a 62 @.@ 32 @-@ mile ( 100 @.@ 29 km ) long east – west state highway in southeastern Pennsylvania . It runs from PA 61 in Leesport southeast to the New Jersey state line on the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge over the Delaware River in Philadelphia , where it continues as New Jersey Route 73 . The route passes through rural areas of Berks County , crossing U.S. Route 222 ( US 222 ) in Maiden Creek before continuing southeast through Oley and Boyertown . PA 73 continues into Montgomery County and intersects PA 100 in <unk> and PA 29 in Schwenksville before it continues into the northwest suburbs of Philadelphia . The route passes through Skippack and intersects US 202 in Center Square , PA 309 in Springfield Township , and PA 611 near Jenkintown . PA 73 continues through Northeast Philadelphia on Cottman Avenue , crossing US 1 ( Roosevelt Boulevard ) and US 13 ( Frankford Avenue ) before coming to an interchange with Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) near the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge . 
 Predating the Interstate and U.S. Highway Systems , the Skippack Pike , a modern section of the route , served as the primary connector between Philadelphia and the northwest suburbs . The Skippack Pike dates back to 1713 and was completed as a turnpike in 1855 . Legislative Route 197 connected Reading to Philadelphia along the PA 73 corridor in 1911 . PA 73 was designated in 1928 to run from PA 23 near Blue Ball to US 1 in Philadelphia , heading north to Reading and northeast to Oley before heading southeast to Philadelphia . The route was extended east to the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge after it opened in 1929 . The portion of route between Leesport and Maiden Creek became the eastern part of PA 383 by 1930 . PA 73 was shifted to its current alignment in eastern Montgomery County in the 1950s . The western terminus of PA 73 was realigned to Leesport by 1966 , with the route between Blue Ball and Reading becoming PA 625 with most of the remainder between Reading and Oley now unnumbered . PA 73 was realigned to its current routing to Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge in the 1960s , having previously followed Frankford Avenue and Robbins and Levick streets on a one @-@ way pair . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Berks County = = = 
 PA 73 begins at an intersection with PA 61 in Ontelaunee Township , Berks County to the north of Reading and the southeast of Leesport . From this intersection , the route heads northeast on two @-@ lane undivided Lake Shore Drive past a mix of farm fields and development . The road heads east into wooded areas and runs along the south shore of Lake Ontelaunee , where it crosses Maiden Creek . Past the lake , PA 73 crosses into <unk> Township and comes to a bridge over Norfolk Southern 's Evansville Industrial Track as it enters agricultural areas with some homes . The route heads east @-@ southeast and crosses US 222 in the community of Maiden Creek . PA 73 continues along Main Street and runs through residential areas in the community of Blandon , where it crosses Norfolk Southern 's Reading Line at @-@ grade . Past Blandon , the road curves south into forested mountain areas and enters Ruscombmanor Township as Blandon Road . The route turns southeast through wooded areas with some residential and commercial development and intersects PA 12 in Breezy Corner . PA 73 continues east through rural land to Oley Township , where it reaches a junction with PA 662 . 
 At this point , PA 662 joins PA 73 for a concurrency , and the two routes follow Memorial Highway through farms and woods before running past a few businesses in the community of Oley . At the east end of Oley , PA 662 splits to the southeast and PA 73 continues east on West Philadelphia Avenue past residential development . The route heads into a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes , curving southeast and passing through the community of Pleasantville . The road enters Earl Township and runs through forested areas with some fields and residences , passing through <unk> . PA 73 heads east and crosses into Colebrookdale Township , where it makes a turn to the south . The route runs through more rural areas with some homes and curves southeast near <unk> . The road continues east into the borough of Boyertown and becomes lined with homes . PA 73 heads southeast into the commercial downtown and <unk> ts the eastern terminus of PA 562 , at which point it becomes East Philadelphia Avenue . The route crosses the Colebrookdale Railroad and continues past more residences in the eastern part of Boyertown . 
 = = = Montgomery County = = = 
 PA 73 crosses into Douglass Township in Montgomery County and continues along East Philadelphia Avenue into commercial areas , widening into a four @-@ lane divided highway as it reaches an interchange with PA 100 . Past this interchange , the route becomes a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane and passes a mix of homes and businesses in the community of <unk> . PA 73 narrows to two lanes and continues to an intersection with Swamp Pike , at which point it turns east onto Big Road and runs past residential subdivisions . The road enters New Hanover Township and passes through a mix of fields and woods with some development . In the community of Layfield , the route intersects PA 663 , with that route joining for a short concurrency before it heads northeast . Following this , PA 73 runs southeast through farmland with some trees and homes , passing through New Hanover Square . The road heads into Upper Frederick Township , where it heads through rural land with residences and runs through Frederick and Obelisk . The route continues into Lower Frederick Township and passes through farmland with some development before it reaches a roundabout at PA 29 in the community of <unk> . Here , PA 73 turns southeast to join PA 29 on Gravel Pike , running through wooded areas with some homes and crossing Swamp Creek . The road becomes Main Street and heads south on the border between the borough of Schwenksville to the west and Lower Frederick Township to the east , running between wooded neighborhoods to the west and the Perkiomen Creek and Perkiomen Trail to the east . PA 29 / PA 73 fully enters Schwenksville and runs past homes and businesses , turning to the southeast . 
 At the south end of the borough , PA 73 splits from PA 29 by turning northeast onto Skippack Pike and immediately crossing the Perkiomen Creek into Perkiomen Township . The road turns southeast through wooded areas on the east bank of the creek and crosses the East Branch Perkiomen Creek into Skippack Township . The route curves east away from the Perkiomen Creek and runs through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes to the north of <unk> Prison , curving southeast . PA 73 comes to an intersection with PA 113 in a commercial area and continues through the community of Skippack , where it is lined with homes and businesses . The road passes through wooded areas and fields within <unk> State Park , where it crosses Skippack Creek . The route continues past suburban residential development with some woods and fields as it enters Worcester Township and comes to an intersection with PA 363 in the community of Worcester . Past this intersection , PA 73 runs through a mix of fields , woods , and homes and comes to a bridge under I @-@ 476 ( Pennsylvania Turnpike Northeast Extension ) immediately before it crosses North Wales Road into <unk> Township in the community of Belfry . The road crosses CSX 's Stony Creek Branch and passes residential neighborhoods as it comes to a junction with US 202 in the community of Center Square . The route continues through suburban residential areas with some businesses and runs through Blue Bell . PA 73 crosses into Whitemarsh Township at the Butler Pike intersection and runs through a mix of fields and woods with some homes , passing under the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( I @-@ 276 ) . The road crosses the Wissahickon Creek in Fort Washington State Park before it comes to Bethlehem Pike in the community of Whitemarsh . 
 PA 73 follows Bethlehem Pike south under Norfolk Southern 's Morrisville Line and widens to a four @-@ lane road . The route splits from Bethlehem Pike by heading southeast onto two @-@ lane undivided Church Road , passing suburban neighborhoods and entering Springfield Township . The road widens into a divided highway briefly as it has an interchange with the PA 309 freeway . PA 73 continues past homes as a two @-@ lane undivided road and enters Cheltenham Township , where it runs to the northeast of Westminster Theological Seminary and a cemetery . The route passes to the northeast of Arcadia University before it comes to an intersection with PA 152 and passes under Easton Road near Glenside . The route continues southeast through wooded residential neighborhoods in Wyncote and comes to an intersection with Washington Lane . At this point , PA 73 turns northeast onto four @-@ lane Washington Lane and passes near more homes before coming to a bridge over SEPTA 's Main Line . At the southern tip of the borough of Jenkintown , the route turns southeast onto four @-@ lane Township Line Road and forms the border between Abington Township to the northeast and Cheltenham Township to the southwest , passing multifamily residential development as it comes to an intersection with PA 611 ( Old York Road ) . The road narrows to two lanes and continues past wooded residential development in Elkins Park . PA 73 passes some businesses before it runs near more homes . The route gains a center left @-@ turn lane and runs past residential and commercial development , passing to the northeast of Einstein Medical Center Elkins Park . 
 = = = Philadelphia = = = 
 At the Laurel Avenue intersection , PA 73 becomes Cottman Avenue and becomes a three @-@ lane road with one eastbound lane and two westbound lane that forms the border between the city of Philadelphia to the northeast and Cheltenham Township , Montgomery County to the southwest . The route passes between Burholme Park in Philadelphia and homes in Cheltenham Township . The road passes more homes and fully enters Philadelphia upon passing under SEPTA 's Fox Chase Line near the <unk> station in the <unk> neighborhood . PA 73 heads into Northeast Philadelphia and becomes a four @-@ lane road as it runs through commercial areas , reaching a bridge over CSX 's Trenton Subdivision . The route intersects PA 232 ( Oxford Avenue ) at an intersection locally known as Five Points . The road heads past a mix of homes and businesses , running between the Burholme neighborhood to the northeast and the Lawncrest neighborhood to the southwest . PA 73 gains a center left @-@ turn lane and crosses Castor Avenue near the <unk> neighborhood . The route continues past several shopping centers and intersects Bustleton Avenue , at which point it passes southwest of Roosevelt Mall . PA 73 comes to an interchange with US 1 ( Roosevelt Boulevard ) , intersecting the local lanes at @-@ grade and passing over the express lanes . 
 Following this , the road continues into the residential Mayfair neighborhood as a four @-@ lane undivided road . The route enters business areas and comes to an intersection with US 13 ( Frankford Avenue ) . Past this , PA 73 continues southeast past more dense residential areas to the southwest of the <unk> neighborhood . The road heads into the Tacony neighborhood and passes more homes and businesses . At the <unk> Avenue intersection , the route narrows to three lanes , with one eastbound lane and two westbound lanes . PA 73 enters industrial areas and crosses under Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor . The route splits from Cottman Avenue by turning southwest onto State Road , which has two eastbound lanes and one westbound lanes . At this intersection , Cottman Avenue has access from a ramp leading from northbound I @-@ 95 . PA 73 passes near urban homes and commercial development and comes to a ramp to northbound I @-@ 95 at the Princeton Avenue intersection . The route turns south onto New State Road , with State Road continuing southwest to provide access to I @-@ 95 , and passes under I @-@ 95 before it curves southwest to parallel the interstate as a four @-@ lane road through industrial areas . PA 73 reaches an interchange at Levick Street and the approach to the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge , at which point the route heads southeast onto the bridge over the Delaware River . PA 73 ends on the bridge at the New Jersey border , at which point Route 73 continues into Palmyra , New Jersey . 
 = = History = = 
 The Skippack Pike , a portion of PA 73 between Skippack and Bethlehem Pike in Whitemarsh , dates back to 1713 , when settlers in Skippack petitioned Philadelphia officials for a road to their community for purposes of hauling grain to the mill in Whitemarsh . During the American Revolutionary War , George Washington 's army suffered a defeat at the Battle of Germantown on October 4 , 1777 and had to encamp along the Skippack Pike until October 8 . The Americans later marched east on the road while preparing for a counterattack at the Battle of White Marsh . The Skippack Turnpike Company was incorporated in 1845 to construct a turnpike from Whitemarsh to Skippack but the project was abandoned after several efforts . In 1853 , a second charter was granted and the turnpike was completed in 1855 near Worcester Township . 
 When the state began maintenance over roads via the Sproul Road Bill that was signed on May 31 , 1911 , the system did not include the direct Reading – Philadelphia routes that PA 73 and US 422 are today . PA 73 was adopted as Legislative Route 197 , the main route that connected Philadelphia and its northwest suburbs . Legislative Routes paved the way for Pennsylvania 's first Traffic Routes in 1924 and a new set of routes , including PA 73 , that were added in the late 1920s . 
 In the original 1928 routing , PA 73 ran between PA 23 near Blue Ball and US 1 ( Roosevelt Boulevard ) in Philadelphia . The route followed the New Holland Road north through Bowmansville and <unk> to Reading , where it passed through the city along US 222 ( Lancaster Avenue ) , Bingaman Street , Chestnut Street , and US 422 ( Perkiomen Avenue ) . From Reading , PA 73 split from US 422 in Mount Penn and followed <unk> Avenue and <unk> Road to Oley , where it picked up its current routing to Cheltenham Township . Here , PA 73 continued east along Church Road , Township Line Road , and Cottman Avenue to US 1 . Upon being designated , PA 73 was paved between south of Reading and Schwenksville and between Skippack and Philadelphia . After the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge was built in 1929 , the eastern terminus was moved to its current location on the bridge at the New Jersey state line . It followed Cottman Avenue , US 13 ( Frankford Avenue ) , and US 422 ( Levick Street ) to the bridge . 
 By 1930 , PA 73 was paved in the Bowmansville area and from south of Reading to south of Angelica ; the remainder of the route between Blue Ball and Reading was under construction at this time . The route was also paved between Schwenksville and Skippack . Also , the current route between US 120 ( now PA 61 ) in Leesport and US 22 ( now US 222 ) in Maiden Creek became a paved extension of PA 383 , which continued west from Leesport to PA 83 ( now PA 183 ) near <unk> . In the 1930s , PA 383 was realigned off the present @-@ day route west of <unk> Drive , having been rerouted to head north on Ontelaunee Drive . By 1940 , the entire length of PA 73 was paved . The route was realigned to follow Greenwood Avenue from Church Road to Jenkintown , where it turned southeast onto Township Line Road . Also in the 1930s , US 422 / PA 73 was shifted to follow Mineral Spring Road between Reading and Mount Penn . In 1950 , PA 73 was moved to a straighter alignment to the east of Oley . 
 In the 1950s , PA 73 was routed onto the one @-@ way pair of Robbins Street eastbound and Levick Street westbound between US 13 ( Frankford Avenue ) and the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge ; the US 422 concurrency was removed as well . Also , the route was realigned to use Washington Lane between Church Road and Township Line Road . Between Reading and Mount Penn , US 422 / PA 73 was shifted to the one @-@ way pair of Perkiomen Avenue eastbound and Mineral Spring Road westbound while PA 73 was designated concurrent with westbound US 422 Alt. on Chestnut Street between Bingaman Street and US 422 in Reading . By 1966 , PA 73 was realigned at Oley to follow its current alignment west to PA 61 in Leesport , replacing a portion of PA 383 between east of Leesport and Maiden Creek . The former alignment of PA 73 became PA 625 between PA 23 in Blue Ball and US 222 ( now US 222 Bus . ) in Reading with most of the remainder between Reading and Oley becoming unnumbered except along the concurrencies with US 222 and US 422 Bus . In the 1960s , PA 73 was rerouted at US 13 ( Frankford Avenue ) to follow Cottman Avenue , the one @-@ way pair of Princeton Avenue eastbound and Cottman Avenue westbound past <unk> Avenue , State Road , and New State Road to the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = PA 73 Alternate Truck = = 
 Pennsylvania Route 73 Alternate Truck are truck routes of PA 73 that bypass a weight @-@ restricted bridge over a branch of the Wissahickon Creek at the PA 309 interchange in <unk> , on which trucks over 36 tons and combination loads over 40 tons are prohibited . The eastbound alternate truck route follows PA 309 and Paper Mill Road . The westbound alternate truck route follows Paper Mill Road and Bethlehem Pike . There is also a PA 73 Alt . Truck for traffic from northbound PA 309 to access westbound PA 73 , following PA 309 north from PA 73 to the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( I @-@ 276 ) interchange , where it utilizes the cloverleaf ramps to return to southbound PA 309 and head south to the PA 73 exit . PA 73 Alt . Truck was signed in 2013 . 
 = Hurricane Elida ( 2002 ) = 
 Hurricane Elida was the first hurricane of the 2002 Pacific hurricane season to reach Category 5 strength on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Forming on July 23 from a tropical wave , the storm rapidly intensified from a tropical depression into a Category 5 in two days and lasted for only six hours at that intensity before weakening . It was one of only sixteen known hurricanes in the East Pacific east of the International Date Line to have reached such an intensity . Although heavy waves were able to reach the Mexican coastline , no damages or casualties were reported in relation to the hurricane . 
 The hurricane moved westward due to a high pressure ridge while undergoing two eyewall replacement cycles : the first was around peak intensity and was completed when the hurricane moved over cooler waters , and the second was a brief cycle shortly after the hurricane began to weaken . The last advisory was issued while the hurricane was west of Mexico , but it was not until the remnants were west of Los Angeles , California that they finally dissipated . Elida 's rapid intensification and unsteady weakening after reaching its peak intensity caused large errors in the intensity forecasting of the hurricane . Although the intensity forecasts were off , the track forecasts were better than usual compared to the ten @-@ year period prior to that year . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Elida formed from a tropical wave that left the coast of Africa on July 13 . The wave moved uneventfully through the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean Sea , emerging over the Pacific Ocean on July 21 . The wave began organizing the next day , becoming Tropical Depression Six @-@ E on July 23 while 350 mi ( 560 km ) south @-@ southeast of Puerto Escondido , Mexico . The depression was predicted to move westward due to the presence of a ridge of high pressure which was also controlling the movement of Hurricane Douglas . Due to low shear and warm ocean waters , it was predicted that the depression would reach hurricane strength in 48 hours . The depression began rapid intensification while moving westward , and only six hours after being recognized as a depression , the system was upgraded to Tropical Storm Elida while displaying banding features and a central dense overcast . The forecast was revised , now predicting the storm to attain hurricane strength the next day . 
 The storm continued to rapidly intensify and gradually developed a banding eye feature and infrared satellite images showed a possible eyewall in the central dense overcast . After six more hours , a small eye had formed and Elida was upgraded to a high @-@ end Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale with 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) winds on July 24 , only eighteen hours after having first been initiated as a 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) tropical depression . Elida continued to rapidly strengthen , breaking the Dvorak estimates and reaching 135 mph ( 217 km / h ) six hours afterward , making it a Category 4 hurricane and resulting in a rare forecast for the hurricane to reach Category 5 . The hurricane , moving at 16 mph ( 26 km / h ) , proceeded to make a west @-@ northwestward turn while displaying an eye with an estimated diameter of 11 mi ( 18 km ) . On July 25 , Elida reached the highest winds of a Category 4 at 155 mph ( 249 km / h ) , though the possibility that Elida was briefly a Category 5 just prior to the advisory issuance was indicated . Even though a later discussion mentioned that Elida had Category 5 status , it was not until the Tropical Cyclone Report that it was finally analyzed that Elida had Category 5 strength for only six hours . At this time , Elida was observed to have formed concentric eyewalls , but it was not until the hurricane moved over cooler waters that the eyewall replacement cycle was completed . 
 Afterward , the hurricane began to weaken in an irregular fashion . After the inner eyewall dissolved , the intensity of the hurricane decreased to a low @-@ level Category 3 with winds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . By this time , Elida had reached the edge of the ridge that kept the cyclone from turning northwest , and a turn to the northwest was beginning . The hurricane proceeded to undergo another eyewall replacement cycle , lowering its intensity to Category 2 . Late on July 26 , the eye disappeared from satellite . The weakening trend continued , and Elida weakened to a tropical storm on July 27 . At this time , a weakness in the subtropical ridge allowed the storm to make a turn towards the north . Early on July 28 , Elida began redeveloping , regaining moderate convection and possibly reintensifying , but eventually , the storm weakened back into a depression early on July 29 , and the last advisory was issued while an area of convection was north of the center with 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) seas in the area . The center was 805 mi ( 1 @,@ 296 km ) from Punta Eugenia , Mexico when the last advisory was issued . The remnant low from Elida moved northeast and eventually dissipated 535 mi ( 861 km ) west of Los Angeles , California . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Although the winds and rains associated with the storm remained far offshore , the Tropical Cyclone Report issued by the National Hurricane Center mentioned the likeliness that Elida caused swells and waves to hit the Mexican shore , but no reports of damage or casualties linked to Elida were ever received and no land advisories were ever needed for the hurricane . The only report anywhere near the storm came from the " New Century 1 " vehicle carrier ship ( call sign " <unk> " ) , which was 230 mi ( 370 km ) from the center of the hurricane . The ship reported winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) and a pressure of 1008 @.@ 5 . 
 While the track errors associated with forecasting the hurricane were lower than the errors in the period between 1992 and 2001 , Elida 's intensity proved to be hard to predict , leading to large errors in NHC forecasts . The errors in the forecast period except for the 72 ‑ hour period were worse than the long @-@ term average . The large errors in intensity forecasts were blamed on the rapid intensification of the hurricane to 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) winds and the unsteady weakening after reaching peak intensity . 
 When the <unk> sensor aboard the European Space Agency 's satellite Envisat observed and recorded Hurricane Elida at peak intensity , it was the first time that the sensor had observed a hurricane . The sensor was originally designed primarily for recording oceanic biology and water quality as well as land vegetation , clouds , and water vapor . 
 = William de Blois ( bishop of Lincoln ) = 
 William de Blois ( or William of Blois ; died 1206 ) was a medieval Bishop of Lincoln . He first served in the household of Hugh du Puiset , the Bishop of Durham , then later served the household of Hugh of Avalon , Bishop of Lincoln . After Hugh 's death and a two @-@ year vacancy in the see , or bishopric , Blois was elected to succeed Hugh in 1203 . Little is known about his episcopate , although 86 of his documents survive from that time period . He died in 1206 and was buried in his cathedral . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Possibly related to Hugh de Puiset the bishop of Durham , who he went on to serve later in life , Blois probably came from Blois in France . His relationship with Puiset reinforces the likelihood of his origins being in Blois , as Puiset was a nephew of King Stephen of England and Stephen 's brother Henry of Blois , the Bishop of Winchester , both of whom came from Blois . Nothing else is known of Blois ' origins . He was titled magister , implying that he attended a university and was well @-@ educated . He taught at the school of Paris for a while , where at one point a <unk> tried to seduce him , resulting in the medieval writer Gerald of Wales later recounting the humorous story of how Blois resisted the lady 's advances . 
 Blois was frequently a witness to Puiset 's charters , and was named as rector of a parish church in the city of Durham , appointed by Puiset . By the late 1180s , Blois had moved to the household of Hugh of Avalon , the Bishop of Lincoln . Blois was a subdean , an ecclesiastical official , of the diocese of Lincoln by 22 March 1194 , probably from about 1189 . He was a frequent witness to Hugh 's charters in the late 1180s . Although he was now serving Hugh , Blois did not entirely quit the service of Puiset , and was present at Puiset 's deathbed in 1195 . He was named precentor of Lincoln in 1197 , in succession to the medieval writer Walter Map . Besides Hugh and Puiset , he also served Pope Innocent III . He may be the Master William of Blois who is a witness to some Scottish charters . 
 = = Bishop of Lincoln = = 
 Hugh of Avalon died on 16 November 1200 , but no new bishop was elected for over two years . King John first tried to impose his own appointee , but was unable to force his choice on the cathedral chapter , who were responsible for electing a new bishop . John then left the see vacant , and some contemporaries accused the king of doing so to secure the revenues of the see for himself because of the <unk> right English kings had to receive all the income from a vacant bishopric . Eventually the cathedral chapter was allowed to perform an election , and Blois was elected about 6 July 1203 and consecrated on 24 August 1203 at Canterbury . The consecration was performed by William of Sainte @-@ Mère @-@ Eglise , the Bishop of London , because Hubert Walter , the Archbishop of Canterbury was ill and unable to perform the service which would normally have been his right . 
 Most of what is known about Blois ' episcopate comes from his acta , or records ; 86 of them survive . There is an early 14th century reference to Blois ' <unk> , which can mean register , list , or list of students , but given the distance in time from when it was recorded to Blois ' episcopate , it is unclear what exactly was meant by this . Nor has any such document survived . Blois ' acta show him to have been an active and diligent administrator , especially concerned with the establishment of vicarages and with parish care . He also spent time mediating disputes , including one in 1204 over a church at <unk> that was disputed between <unk> de Quincy , the canons of Newnham Priory and monks of St <unk> 's Priory . Most of his clerks and household members appear to have been non @-@ relatives , with only another William de Blois , appointed Archdeacon of Buckingham by the bishop before becoming Bishop of Worcester in 1218 , being a relative . 
 Blois died on 10 May 1206 , and was buried in Lincoln Cathedral . In the early fourteenth century , he was still remembered well by the cathedral chapter and was described as learned and kindly by the 14th century writer John <unk> , who wrote a work on the lives of the bishops of Lincoln . Besides his kinsman William de Blois , another known relative was a nephew , William de <unk> . <unk> succeeded his uncle as rector in Durham . He was once identified with another William of Blois , who was a poet and the brother of Peter of Blois , but there is no evidence supports that identification . 
 = G3 battlecruiser = 
 The G3 battlecruisers were a class of battlecruisers planned by the Royal Navy after the end of World War I in response to naval expansion programs by the United States and Japan . The four ships of this class would have been larger , faster and more heavily armed than any existing battleship ( although several projected foreign ships would be larger ) . The G3s have been considered to be proper " fast battleships " since they were well @-@ balanced designs with adequate protection . Nonetheless the class was officially designated as a " battlecruiser " due to their higher speed and lesser firepower and armour relative to the planned N3 class battleship design . The G3s carried nine 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) guns and were expected to achieve 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) , while the N3s would carry nine 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) guns on the same displacement at the expense of a slower speed . 
 The G3 design was approved by the Board of Admiralty on 12 August 1921 . Orders were placed in October — November , but were suspended later in November with the beginning of the Washington Naval Conference which limited battleship numbers . The orders were cancelled in February 1922 with the ratification of the Washington Naval Treaty which limited construction to ships of no more than 35 @,@ 000 long tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) displacement . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1916 the US had declared its intention to create a Navy " second to none " ; the United States Congress had authorized the building of a large number of battleships and battlecruisers . In the aftermath of the First World War , the Japanese government were also embarking on a large programme of warship building . Meanwhile , in Great Britain , the needs of the First World War had led to the pre @-@ war Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships being followed by the slower and cheaper Revenge class . Two improved Revenge @-@ class hulls were converted during construction into the two Renown @-@ class battlecruisers as emergency builds during the war . The only new capital ships laid down in the war were the Admiral @-@ class battlecruisers . Their design had been called into question after the Battle of Jutland in 1916 . Three of this class were cancelled , leaving only Hood to be completed to an altered design . 
 The US plan had been delayed by the wartime need to build smaller vessels . Nevertheless , estimates by the Admiralty were that by the early 1920s the UK would be behind in ships . The British did have access to German technology through ships such as the battleship Baden which had been saved from the scuttling of the interned German High Seas Fleet in Scapa Flow and the experiences of the war . A committee concluded that any new ship should be able to match the speed of the new US Lexington @-@ class battlecruisers , expected to make 32 knots . Consequently , a series of designs was prepared of ships with displacements ranging from 53 @,@ 100 to 44 @,@ 500 long tons ( 54 @,@ 000 to 45 @,@ 200 t ) , the only limitations being the ability to use British dockyards and passage through the Suez Canal . These designs were given letters of the alphabet running backwards from K to G. The related battleship designs under consideration at the same time had design letters from L upwards . 
 The first two design proposals , ' K2 ' and ' K3 ' , had a general layout similar to Hood , but were armed with either eight or nine 18 @-@ inch guns , in four twin or three triple gun turrets , respectively . The numeral in the designation came from the number of guns in each turret . These ships were very large , displacing 52 @,@ 000 to 53 @,@ 100 long tons ( 52 @,@ 800 to 54 @,@ 000 t ) , could only reach 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) , and could only be docked in a single ex @-@ German floating dock and one dock , Gladstone Dock , in Liverpool . ' <unk> ' , the next proposal , saved nearly 10 @,@ 000 long tons ( 10 @,@ 000 t ) by reducing the main armament to nine 50 @-@ calibre 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) guns and the main deck armour to 4 inches ( 102 mm ) . This reduction in size allowed the ship to dock anywhere that Hood could dock and to pass through the Suez and Panama Canals . ' I3 ' took another route in saving weight and concentrated the main armament amidships with ' X ' turret placed between the forward superstructure and the funnels . The consequent weight savings were negated by additional hull and machinery weights and the ship displaced only slightly less than ' K3 ' . It had the advantage , however , that it could be docked in Rosyth and Portsmouth and pass through both canals , once the Suez Canal had been deepened . The primary drawback was that the main armament had a blind spot towards the rear of the ship of no less than 40 ° . Several variations were evaluated of the ' H3 ' design with the number of turrets reduced . In ' <unk> ' both turrets were forward of the superstructure while in ' H3b ' one was forward and the other was aft of the forward superstructure . ' <unk> ' retained the layout of ' H3b ' , but lowered the turrets by one deck and saved 1 @,@ 250 long tons ( 1 @,@ 270 t ) over the 45 @,@ 000 long tons ( 46 @,@ 000 t ) of ' H3b ' . All three ' H3 ' designs had a maximum speed of 33 knots ( 61 km / h ; 38 mph ) , but the reduced number of main guns was disliked so the ' G3 ' was proposed with the three triple turrets , armed with 16 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 419 mm ) guns to save weight . 
 This design was accepted at the end of 1920 , but changes were made as the design was finalized in early 1921 , including the reduction of the ship 's horsepower from 180 @,@ 000 to 160 @,@ 000 and the reduction of the main armament from 16 @.@ 5 inches to 16 inches ( 406 mm ) . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The G3s incorporated several novel features for dreadnought @-@ era capital ships , or at least for British designs of this type . Most immediately noticeable was the concentration of the main battery forward of the bridge and engineering spaces , giving the ships a tanker @-@ like appearance . Since the G3s were to use existing dockyard facilities , this layout allowed designers to keep the length of the ships , as well as the weight of armour , to a minimum . The resulting loss of heavy fire astern was considered justifiable since the ships were intended to fight on the broadside . A related feature of the G3 and N3 designs was their tower bridge structure behind the first two gun turrets . This provided a better and more stable foundation for fire @-@ control equipment , greatly improved accommodation and protection from the weather . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The G3 battlecruisers were significantly larger than their predecessors of the Admiral class . They had an overall length of 856 feet ( 260 @.@ 9 m ) , a beam of 106 feet ( 32 @.@ 3 m ) , and a draught of 36 feet ( 11 @.@ 0 m ) at deep load . They would have displaced 48 @,@ 400 long tons ( 49 @,@ 200 t ) normally and 53 @,@ 909 long tons ( 54 @,@ 774 t ) at deep load , over 8 @,@ 000 long tons ( 8 @,@ 100 t ) more than the older ships . They had a metacentric height of 7 @.@ 786 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) at deep load as well as a complete double bottom . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The G3 battlecruisers would have had four geared steam turbine sets , each of which drove one propeller shaft . They were arranged in three engine rooms . The forward engine room held the two turbines for the wing shafts , the middle compartment housed the turbine for the port inner shaft and the aft engine room contained the turbine for the starboard inner shaft . The turbines were powered by 20 Yarrow small @-@ tube boilers divided between nine boiler rooms . They were designed to produce a total of 160 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 120 @,@ 000 kW ) at a working pressure of 200 psi ( 1 @,@ 379 kPa ) and temperature of 200 ° C ( 392 ° F ) with superheat . Maximum speed would have been 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) . 
 The ships had a maximum capacity of 5 @,@ 000 long tons ( 5 @,@ 100 t ) of fuel oil . Using the 22 @,@ 000 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 16 @,@ 000 kW ) cruising turbines , they had an estimated maximum range of 7 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 000 km ; 8 @,@ 100 mi ) at 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . They had six turbo @-@ driven 250 @-@ kilowatt ( 335 hp ) dynamos and two 300 @-@ kilowatt ( 402 hp ) Diesel generators . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Housing the main armament in triple turrets was new to the Royal Navy though British companies had been involved in the production of triple gun turret designs for other navies . The choice of a high muzzle velocity with a relatively lighter shell was taken from the German practice ; it ran counter to previous British guns such as the BL 15 @-@ inch Mark I gun of 42 @-@ calibre length which were lower @-@ muzzle @-@ velocity weapons firing heavy shells . 
 The G3 design mounted nine BL 16 @-@ inch Mark I 45 @-@ calibre guns in three triple hydraulically powered Mark I gun turrets , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , and ' X ' from front to rear . The guns could be depressed to − 3 ° and elevated to 40 ° . The ships ' maximum stowage was 116 shells per gun . They fired 2 @,@ 048 @-@ pound ( 929 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 670 ft / s ( 810 m / s ) . Their maximum range was about 38 @,@ 000 yards ( 35 @,@ 000 m ) at maximum elevation . The G3s carried a secondary armament of sixteen BL 6 @-@ inch Mark XXII guns in superfiring twin turrets instead of casemates — the first time in a British capital ship since the Lord Nelson class of 1904 . Four turrets were sited around the forward superstructure and four at the stern . The forward turrets were provided with 150 rounds per gun and the rear turrets with 110 rounds per gun . The guns could elevate between – 5 ° and + 60 ° . They fired 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 945 ft / s ( 898 m / s ) . Their maximum range was 25 @,@ 800 yd ( 23 @,@ 600 m ) at 45 ° elevation . Their rate of fire was five rounds per minute . 
 An anti @-@ aircraft battery of six QF 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mark VIII guns was included . They had a maximum depression of -5 ° and a maximum elevation of 90 ° . They fired a 50 @-@ pound ( 23 kg ) high explosive shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 457 ft / s ( 749 m / s ) at a rate of eight to twelve rounds per minute . The guns had a maximum ceiling of 32 @,@ 000 ft ( 9 @,@ 800 m ) , but an effective range of much less . A maximum of 256 rounds per gun could be carried . The ships were intended to carry four 8 @-@ barreled mountings for the 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mark VIII gun ( commonly known as a pom @-@ pom ) , two abaft the funnels and two at the stern . Each barrel was provided with 1300 rounds of ammunition . The gun fired a 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) 2 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 91 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 920 ft / s ( 590 m / s ) to a distance of 3 @,@ 800 yards ( 3 @,@ 500 m ) . The gun 's rate of fire was approximately 96 – 98 rounds per minute . 
 Like previous classes of British battlecruisers , a pair of submerged , broadside @-@ firing torpedo tubes were planned for these ships . Their compartment was located just forward of the ' A ' shell room on the platform deck . Six 24 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 620 mm ) torpedoes per tube were to be carried in peace @-@ time , but this would increase to eight in wartime . These Mark I torpedoes had a warhead of 743 pounds ( 337 kg ) of TNT and were powered by oxygen @-@ enriched air . They had two speed settings which governed their range : either 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 13 @,@ 716 m ) at 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) , or 20 @,@ 000 yards ( 18 @,@ 288 m ) at 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) . 
 = = = Fire @-@ control = = = 
 The main guns of the G3 battlecruisers could be controlled from any of the three director @-@ control towers ( DCT ) . The primary DCT was mounted at the top of the forward superstructure . Another was mounted on the roof of the conning tower in an armoured hood and the third was aft . Each main gun turret was provided with a 41 @-@ foot ( 12 @.@ 5 m ) coincidence rangefinder in an armoured housing on the turret roof . The secondary armament was primarily controlled by three DCTs . Two mounted on each side of the bridge and the third was aft . The anti @-@ aircraft guns were controlled by a high @-@ angle control system mounted on the very top of the forward superstructure . Each pom @-@ pom mount had its own director and there was also a height @-@ finder aft . Two 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) torpedo rangefinders were located on the sides of the funnels . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 A first for any British dreadnought was the use of the all or nothing protection scheme in the G3s . Medium @-@ thickness armour had proven to be useless in stopping heavy @-@ calibre shells during World War I so the vital areas of the ship were protected by the thickest possible armour and the rest of the ship was left unarmoured . Use of this system was pioneered by contemporary U.S. Navy battleship designs starting with the Nevada class . However , this system of protection required that the armoured citadel should have enough reserve buoyancy to keep the ship stable even if the rest of the hull was riddled by gunfire . 
 The waterline belt of the G3 had a maximum thickness of 14 inches ( 356 mm ) with the top of the armour angled 18 ° outwards . This angle increased the armor 's relative thickness to horizontal , close @-@ range fire , albeit at the cost of reducing its relative height which increased the chance of plunging shellfire going over or under it . It ran some 522 feet ( 159 @.@ 1 m ) , from the forward edge of ' A ' barbette to the rear of the after 6 @-@ inch magazine . The belt had a height of 14 feet 3 inches ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) , of which 4 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) was below the designed waterline . Only the forward 259 feet ( 78 @.@ 9 m ) of the belt had the maximum thickness , it thinned to 12 inches ( 305 mm ) for the rest of its length . The lower edge of the belt abreast the magazines was continued down another 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) by a 4 inches ( 100 mm ) thickness of high @-@ tensile steel inclined at 36 ° to prevent a shell from reaching the magazines via a wave trough at high speed . The forward and rear ends of the belt terminated in 12 @-@ inch and 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) transverse bulkheads respectively . The waterline belt extended forward 46 feet ( 14 @.@ 0 m ) at a thickness of 6 inches that reduced to 2 @.@ 25 inches ( 57 mm ) in two steps . 
 The funnel and boiler room ventilation shafts were surrounded by an armoured box 116 feet ( 35 @.@ 4 m ) long intended to prevent shells fired from behind the ship reaching ' X ' magazine . The box narrowed at an angle of 21 ° as it rose and had a maximum thickness of 12 inches nearest to the magazine . Aft it reduced in a series of steps to 9 inches ( 229 mm ) , 6 inches , 5 inches ( 127 mm ) and 4 inches ( 102 mm ) . The armoured deck matched the length of the waterline belt and sloped down 2 @.@ 5 ° to meet the upper edge of the belt . It had a maximum thickness of 8 inches ( 203 mm ) from the ' A ' barbette to partway over the mid @-@ boiler rooms and thinned to a minimum of 4 inches over the rear engine and boiler rooms . The deck 's thickness increased to 7 inches ( 180 mm ) partway over the rear engine room and covered the aft 6 @-@ inch magazines . The armoured deck extended forward 46 feet over the torpedo compartment with a maximum thickness of 8 inches , thinning to 6 inches . The armoured deck 's rear extension was 106 feet 9 inches ( 32 @.@ 5 m ) long and was 5 inches thick until the last 27 feet 4 inches ( 8 @.@ 3 m ) when it thinned to 3 inches ( 76 mm ) . 
 The turret faces were 17 @.@ 5 inches ( 444 mm ) thick while their sides ranged from 9 to 13 inches ( 229 to 330 mm ) in thickness , and the roof was 8 inches thick . The armour of the barbettes ranged from 11 to 14 inches ( 279 to 356 mm ) in thickness and it was carefully arranged to minimize the likely risk . The conning tower armour was 9 to 12 inches thick and its communications tube to the upper deck was 8 inches thick . The fire @-@ control director atop the conning tower was protected by an armoured hood 3 to 5 inches thick . 
 The anti @-@ torpedo bulges of the G3 battlecruisers were intended to withstand the explosion of a 750 @-@ pound ( 340 kg ) torpedo warhead . They consisted of an outer air space , an inner buoyancy space and the torpedo bulkhead that consisted of two layers of .875 @-@ inch ( 22 mm ) high @-@ tensile steel . The bulkhead was situated some 13 @.@ 5 feet ( 4 @.@ 1 m ) inboard from the side of the ship . Postwar tests done on a replica of this system showed that filling the buoyancy space with water rather than the sealed steel crushing tubes as used in Hood was just as effective and weighed less . A compressed air system was fitted to blow the water out of the buoyancy spaces and bring the ship upright in 15 minutes after two torpedo hits . The ship 's double bottom ranged from 5 – 7 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 1 m ) in depth . 
 = = Orders and cancellation = = 
 The four G3 battlecruisers were ordered in October – November 1921 , without names , from Swan Hunter , William Beardmore , Fairfield , and John Brown . The Washington Naval Treaty , an arms limitation treaty under negotiation at the time , however , led to the suspension of building on 18 November 1921 and outright cancellation in February 1922 because the treaty forbade construction of any ship larger than 35 @,@ 000 long tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) . Although the ships were ordered , none were actually laid down . 
 Many of the aspects of their design ultimately were incorporated into the two Nelson class , and they are often described as being a cut @-@ down G3 . Indeed , the Nelsons received the design designation ' O3 ' , marking them as next in the design sequence from the ' N3 ' battleship design although they used the guns intended for the G3 class for cost reasons and to comply with the Treaty 's 16 @-@ inch limitation on main armament . 
 = Mitch Daniels = 
 Mitchell Elias " Mitch " Daniels , Jr . ( born April 7 , 1949 ) is an academic administrator and former politician who was Governor of Indiana from 2005 to 2013 . He is a member of the Republican Party . Since 2013 , Daniels has been president of Purdue University . 
 Born in Monongahela , Pennsylvania , Daniels is a graduate of Princeton University , and received his Juris Doctor from Georgetown University Law Center after studying briefly at the Indiana University Robert H. McKinney School of Law . Daniels began his career working as an assistant to Richard Lugar , working as his chief of staff in the Senate from 1977 to 1982 , and was appointed executive director of the National Republican Senatorial Committee when Lugar was chairman from 1983 to 1984 . He worked as a chief political adviser and as a liaison to President Ronald Reagan in 1985 , before he was appointed president of the conservative think tank , the Hudson Institute . Daniels moved back to Indiana , joining Eli Lilly and Company , working as president of North American Pharmaceutical Operations from 1993 to 1997 , and senior vice president of corporate strategy and policy from 1997 to 2001 . In January 2001 , Daniels was appointed by President George W. Bush as the director of the U.S. Office of Management and Budget , where he served until June 2003 . 
 Daniels announced his intention to run in Indiana 's 2004 gubernatorial election after leaving the Bush administration . He won the Republican primary with 67 % of the vote , and defeated Democratic incumbent Governor Joe Kernan in the general election . Daniels was reelected to a second term , defeating former U.S. Representative and US Department of Agriculture undersecretary Jill Long Thompson , on November 4 , 2008 . During his tenure as governor , Daniels cut the state government workforce by 18 % , cut and capped state property taxes , and balanced the state budget through budget austerity measures and increasing spending by less than the inflation rate . In his second term , Daniels saw protest by labor unions and Democrats in the state legislature over his policies regarding Indiana 's school voucher program and the Indiana House of Representatives attempt to pass right to work legislation , leading to the 2011 Indiana legislative walkouts . During the legislature 's last session under Daniels , he signed the right @-@ to @-@ work law ; with Indiana becoming the 23rd state in the nation to do so . 
 It was widely speculated that Daniels would be a candidate in the 2012 presidential election , but he chose not to run . He is the author of the best selling book Keeping the Republic : Saving America by Trusting Americans . Daniels was selected to be president of Purdue University after his term as governor ended on January 14 , 2013 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and education = = = 
 Mitchell Elias Daniels , Jr . , was born on April 7 , 1949 in Monongahela , Pennsylvania , the son of Dorothy Mae ( née Wilkes ) and Mitchell Elias Daniels , Sr. His father 's parents were immigrants from Syria , of Antiochian Greek Orthodox descent . Daniels has been honored by the Arab @-@ American Institute with the 2011 Najeeb Halaby Award for Public Service . His mother 's ancestry was mostly English ( where three of his great @-@ grandparents were born ) . Daniels spent his early childhood years in Pennsylvania , Tennessee , and Georgia . 
 The Daniels family moved to Indiana from Pennsylvania in 1959 when his father accepted a job at the Indianapolis headquarters of the pharmaceutical company Pittman @-@ Moore . Then 11 @-@ year @-@ old Daniels was accustomed to the mountains , and he at first disliked the flatland of central Indiana . He was still in grade school at the time of the move and first attended Delaware Trail Elementary , <unk> Junior High School , and North Central High School . In high school he was student body president . After graduation in 1967 , Daniels was named one of Indiana 's Presidential Scholars — the state 's top male high school graduate that year — by President Lyndon B. Johnson . 
 In 1971 , Daniels earned a Bachelor 's degree from the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University . While there , he was a member of the American Whig – Cliosophic Society , where he overlapped with future Supreme Court Justice Samuel Alito , who was a year below . He initially studied law at the Indiana McKinney School of Law in Indianapolis . After accepting a job with newly elected Senator Richard Lugar , he transferred to the Georgetown University Law Center , from which he earned a Juris Doctor . 
 In 1970 , while an undergraduate student at Princeton , a grand jury indicted Daniels for marijuana possession and for maintaining a common nuisance . The charges were eventually dropped and Daniels pleaded guilty to " a disorderly person charge " based on a confession that he had used marijuana . He spent two nights in jail and paid a $ 350 fine . According to Daniels ' roommate at the time , police obtained a warrant to search the room based on the activity of another student who used to live in the room . The roommate told the Daily Princetonian that " Unbeknownst to [ Daniels and the other current roommates ] … [ the former roommate ] was coming back there and using the room when we 're not there and was involved with drugs much worse than pot . " Daniels told The Daily Princetonian in 2011 that " justice was served , " and has disclosed the arrest on job applications , and spoken about the incident in columns in The Indianapolis Star and The Washington Post . 
 In February 2013 , Princeton honored Daniels with the Woodrow Wilson Award , which recognizes an alumnus whose career embodies the call to duty in Wilson 's famous speech , " Princeton in the Nation 's Service . " The award was presented during Alumni Day activities on February 23 , 2013 . 
 = = = Early political career = = = 
 Daniels had his first experience in politics while still a teenager when , in 1968 , he worked on the unsuccessful campaign of fellow Hoosier and Princeton alumnus William Ruckelshaus , who was running for the U.S. Senate against incumbent Democrat Birch Bayh . After the campaign Ruckelshaus helped Daniels secure an internship in the office of then @-@ Indianapolis mayor Richard Lugar . Daniels worked on Lugar 's re @-@ election campaign in 1971 , and later , in 1974 , he worked on Lugar 's first campaign for Senate via L. Keith <unk> 's Campaign Communicators , Inc , a political consultancy where Daniels served as vice president . Daniels joined Lugar 's mayoral staff in December , 1974 . Within three years , he became Lugar 's principal assistant . After Lugar was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1976 , Daniels followed him to Washington , D.C. as his Chief of Staff . 
 Daniels served as Chief of Staff during Lugar 's first term ( 1977 – 82 ) ; and , during this time , he met Cheri Herman , who was working for the National Park Service . The two married in 1978 and had four daughters . They divorced in 1993 and Cheri married again ; Cheri later divorced her second husband and remarried Daniels in 1997 . 
 In 1983 , when Lugar was elected chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee , Daniels was appointed its executive director . Serving in that position ( 1983 – 84 ) , he played a major role in keeping the GOP in control of the Senate . Daniels was also manager of three successful re @-@ election campaigns for Lugar . In August 1985 , Daniels became chief political advisor and liaison to President Ronald Reagan . 
 In 1987 , Daniels returned to Indiana as president and CEO of the Hudson Institute , a conservative think tank . In 1988 , Dan Quayle was elected Vice President of the United States , and Governor of Indiana Robert D. Orr offered to appoint Daniels to Quayle 's vacant Senate seat . Daniels declined the offer , saying it would force him to spend too much time away from his family . 
 = = = Eli Lilly = = = 
 In 1990 , Daniels left the Hudson Institute to accept a position at Eli Lilly and Company , the largest corporation headquartered in Indiana at that time . He was first promoted to President of North American Operations ( 1993 – 97 ) and then to Senior Vice President for Corporate Strategy and Policy ( 1997 – 2001 ) . During his time at Lilly , Daniels managed a successful strategy to deflect attacks on Lilly 's Prozac product by a public relations campaign against the drug being waged by the Church of Scientology . In one interview in 1992 , Daniels said of the organization that " it is no church , " and that people on Prozac were less likely to become victims of the organization . The Church of Scientology responded by suing Daniels in a libel suit for $ 20 million . A judge dismissed the case . 
 Eli Lilly experienced dramatic growth during Daniels ' tenure at the company . Prozac sales made up 30 – 40 % of Lilly 's income during the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1990s , and Lilly doubled its assets to $ 12 @.@ 8 billion and doubled its revenue to $ 10 billion during the same period . When Daniels later became Governor of Indiana , he drew heavily on his former Lilly colleagues to serve as advisers and agency managers . 
 During the same period , Daniels also served on the board of directors of the Indianapolis Power & Light ( IPL ) . He resigned from the IPL Board in 2001 to join the federal government , and sold his IPL stock for $ 1 @.@ 45 million . Later that year the value declined when Virginia @-@ based AES Corporation bought IPL . The Indiana Securities Division subsequently investigated the sale and found no wrongdoing , but opponents brought up the sale and questioned it during his later election campaign . 
 Daniels has said his time in the private sector at Eli Lilly was the experience that most helped him to serve as an effective governor . " I probably learned more there , " Daniels said in 2015 . " I ’ ll say this , I ’ ve enjoyed each opportunity , but frequently I was asked later , ' What previous experiences helped most to be an effective governor ? , ' that sort of thing . People would always expect me to name something from public life , but probably the experience in business , trying to manage for results , trying to get large numbers of people aligned and headed in a common direction , these were probably the most valuable days I spent . " 
 = = Office of Management and Budget = = 
 In January 2001 , Daniels accepted President George W. Bush 's invitation to serve as director of the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) . He served as Director from January 2001 through June 2003 . In this role he was also a member of the National Security Council and the Homeland Security Council . 
 During his time as the director of the OMB , Bush referred to him as " the Blade , " for his noted acumen at budget cutting . The $ 2 @.@ 13 trillion budget Daniels submitted to Congress in 2001 would have made deep cuts in many agencies to accommodate the tax cuts being made , but few of the spending cuts were actually approved by Congress . During Daniels ' 29 @-@ month tenure in the position , the projected federal budget surplus of $ 236 billion declined to a $ 400 billion deficit , due to an economic downturn , and failure to enact spending cuts to offset the tax reductions . 
 Shortly after the invasion of Afghanistan , Daniels gave a speech to the National Press Club in which he challenged the view of those who wanted to continue typical spending while the nation was at war . “ The idea of reallocating assets from less important to more important things , especially in a time of genuine emergency , makes common sense and is applied everywhere else in life , ” he said . 
 Conservative columnist Ross Douthat stated in a column about Daniels time at OMB that Daniels " carried water , as director of the Office of Management and Budget , for some of the Bush administration ’ s more egregious budgets . " But Douthat , while calling Daniels “ America ’ s Best Governor , ” defended Daniels against accusations that Daniels inaccurately assessed the costs of the Iraq war . 
 In the final days of 2002 , when an invasion of Iraq was still a hypothetical question , Daniels told the New York Times that the cost of war with Iraq “ could be ” in the range of $ 50 to $ 60 billion . It was not clear whether Daniels was referring to the cost of a short invasion or a longer war , but he did indicate the administration was budgeting for both . He also described the “ back @-@ of @-@ the @-@ envelope ” estimate by Bush Economic Advisor Lawrence B. Lindsey that it would cost $ 100 to $ 200 billion as much too high . Two days later , after the New Years Holiday , an OMB spokesperson clarified Daniels ’ remarks , adding that the $ 50 to $ 60 billion figure was not a hard White House estimate and “ it is impossible to know what any military campaign would ultimately cost . The only cost estimate we know of in this arena is the Persian Gulf War and that was a $ 60 billion event " . 
 Three months later , on March 25 , 2003 , five days after the start of the invasion , President Bush requested $ 53 billion through an emergency supplemental appropriation to cover operational expenses in Iraq until September 30 of that year . According to the Congressional Budget Office , Military operations in Iraq for 2003 cost $ 46 Billion , less than the amount projected by Daniels and OMB . Douthat and other Daniel ’ s defenders accuse Daniels ' critics of <unk> the six @-@ month supplemental appropriation as a request to fund the entire war . 
 Between September 2001 and October 2012 , lawmakers appropriated about $ 1 @.@ 4 trillion for operations in both the war in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
 = = Governor = = 
 = = = Election campaign = = = 
 Daniels ' decision to run for Governor of Indiana led to most of the rest of Republican field of candidates to drop out of the race . The only challenger who did not do so was conservative activist and lobbyist Eric Miller . Miller worked for the Phoenix Group , a Christian rights defense group . Daniels ' campaign platform centered on cutting the state budget and privatizing public agencies . He won the primary with 67 % of the vote . 
 While campaigning in the general election , Daniels visited all 92 counties at least three times . He traveled in a donated white RV nicknamed " RV @-@ 1 " and covered with signatures of supporters and his campaign slogan , " My Man Mitch . " " My Man Mitch " was a reference to a phrase once used by President George W. Bush to refer to Daniels . Bush campaigned with Daniels on two occasions , as Daniels hoped that Bush 's popularity would help him secure a win . In his many public stops , he frequently used the phrase " every garden needs weeding every sixteen years or so " ; it had been 16 years since Indiana had had a Republican governor . His opponent in the general election was the incumbent , Joe Kernan , who had succeeded to the office upon the death of Frank O 'Bannon . Campaign ads by Kernan and the Democratic Party attempted to tie Daniels to number of issues — his jail time for marijuana use ; a stock sale leading to speculations of insider trading ; and , because of his role at Eli Lilly , the high cost of prescription drugs . The 2004 election was the costliest in Indiana history , up until that time , with the candidates spending a combined US $ 23 million . Daniels won the election , garnering about 53 % of the vote compared to Kernan 's 46 % . Kernan was the first incumbent governor to lose an election in Indiana since 1892 . 
 = = = First term = = = 
 On his first day in office , Daniels created Indiana 's first Office of Management and Budget to look for inefficiencies and cost savings throughout state government . The same day , he decertified all government employee unions by executive order , removing the requirement that state employees pay union dues by rescinding a mandate created by Governor Evan Bayh in a 1989 executive order . Dues @-@ paying union membership subsequently dropped 90 % among state employees . 
 = = = = Budgetary measures = = = = 
 In his first State of the State address on January 18 , 2005 , Daniels put forward his agenda to improve the State 's fiscal situation . Indiana has a biennial budget , and had a projected two @-@ year deficit of $ 800 million . Daniels called for strict controls on all spending increases , and reducing the annual growth rate of the budget . He also proposed a one @-@ year 1 % tax increase on all individuals and entities earning over $ 100 @,@ 000 . The taxing proposal was controversial and the Republican Speaker of the House , Brian <unk> , criticized Daniels and refused to allow the proposal to be debated . 
 The General Assembly approved $ 250 million in spending cuts and Daniels renegotiated 30 different state contracts for a savings of $ 190 million , resulting in a budget of $ 23 billion . Annual spending growth for future budgets was cut to 2 @.@ 8 % from the 5 @.@ 9 % that had been standard for many years . Increase in revenues , coupled with the spending reductions , led to a $ 300 million budget surplus . Indiana is not permitted to take loans , as borrowing was prohibited in its constitution following the 1837 state bankruptcy . The state , therefore , had financed its deficit spending by reallocating $ 760 million in revenue that belonged to local government and school districts over the course of many years . The funds were gradually and fully restored to the municipal governments using the surplus money , and the state reserve fund was grown to $ 1 @.@ 3 billion . 
 Two of Daniels ' other tax proposals were approved : a tax on liquor and beverages to fund the construction of the Lucas Oil Stadium and a tax on rental cars to expand the Indiana Convention Center . The new source of funding resulted in a state take @-@ over of a project initially started by the City of Indianapolis and led to a bitter feud between Daniels and the city leadership over who should have ownership of the project . The state ultimately won and took ownership of the facilities from the city . 
 In 2006 , Daniels continued his effort to reduce state operating costs by signing into law a bill privatizing the enrollment service for the state 's welfare programs . Indiana 's welfare enrollment facilities were replaced with call centers operated by IBM . In mid @-@ 2009 , after complaints of poor service , Daniels canceled the contract and returned the enrollment service to the public sector . 
 = = = = Daylight Saving Time = = = = 
 One of the most controversial measures Daniels successfully pushed through was the state adoption of Daylight Saving Time , which Daniels argued would save the state money on energy costs . Although the state is in the Eastern Time Zone , Indiana 's counties had adopted their own time zone practices , and in practice the state effectively observed two different times , and the central part of the state maintained a single time — Eastern Standard — year round . Interests for both EST and CST time zones had prevented the official adoption of daylight saving since the 1930s , and had led to decades of debate . Daniels pressed for the entire state to switch to Central Time , but the General Assembly could not come to terms . Ultimately after a long debate , they adopted Eastern Daylight Saving Time in April 2005 , the measure passing by one vote , putting all but northwestern and southwestern Indiana on the same time for the first time . 
 = = = = Highways = = = = 
 A controversial plan , known as the Major Moves plan , was passed in 2006 . The Indiana Toll Road was leased to Statewide Mobility Partners , a joint venture company owned by Spanish firm Cintra and Australia 's Macquarie Infrastructure Group for 75 years in exchange for a one time payment of $ 3 @.@ 85 billion . The measure was opposed by most Democrats , who began an advertising campaign accusing Daniels of selling the road to foreign nations . The income from the lease was used to finance a backlog of public transportation projects and create a $ 500 million trust fund to generate revenue for the maintenance of the highway system . 
 Daniels ' support for such controversial legislation led to a rapid drop in his approval rating ; in May 2005 , a poll showed an 18 @-@ point drop in support and that only 42 % of Hoosiers approved of the way he was doing his job . In the following months , many of his reforms began to have a positive effect ; and his ratings began to improve , and his approval rebounded . 
 = = = = Economic development = = = = 
 When Daniels was elected , he stated his number one priority was job creation . To achieve that goal , he created the public @-@ private Indiana Economic Development Corporation ( IEDC ) , became chairman of its board , and ordered it to “ act at the speed of business , not the speed of government , ” to attract new jobs . During its first year , the IEDC closed more transactions than similar efforts had during the previous two years combined . Between 2005 and 2008 , 485 businesses committed to creating more than 60 @,@ 000 new jobs and invest $ 14 @.@ 5 billion into the Indiana economy . By the end of the administration , IEDC claimed to have closed on almost 1 @,@ 500 deals to create a projected 169 @,@ 000 new jobs since 2005 . 
 During a 12 @-@ day trade mission in Asia , Daniels visited Indiana soldiers serving on the border of the Korean Demilitarized Zone . On the 56th anniversary of the start of the Korean War , he laid a bouquet of white flowers at the base of a plaque listing 900 soldiers from Indiana who died in the war . During the visit he met with Asian auto executives and successfully promoted the expansion of facilities in Indiana . 
 In 2006 , the IEDC topped its 2005 results . It landed three high @-@ profile automotive investments from Toyota , Honda , and Cummins . In 2007 , the IEDC announced its third consecutive record @-@ breaking year for new investment and job commitments in Indiana with its largest deal being made with BP to construct $ 3 @.@ 2 billion in facilities to assist in recovery of fuel from the Canadian tar sands . 
 In March 2010 , <unk> Indianapolis News published a story claiming that as of that date , up to 40 % of the jobs the corporation reported to have helped create had not come to fruition . The IEDC revised the numbers in response to the report , claiming that just 13 % of the job commitments they had received had not come to fruition as of 2010 . 
 = = = = Healthy Indiana Plan = = = = 
 In 2007 , Daniels signed the Healthy Indiana Plan , which provided 132 @,@ 000 uninsured Indiana workers with coverage . The program works by helping its beneficiaries purchase a private health insurance policy with a subsidy from the state . The plan promotes health screenings , early prevention services , and smoking cessation . It also provides tax credits for small businesses that create qualified wellness and Section 125 plans . The plan was paid for by an increase in the state ’ s tax on cigarettes and the reallocation of federal <unk> funds through a special <unk> granted by the federal government . In a September 15 , 2007 Wall Street Journal column , Daniels was quoted as saying about the Healthy Indiana Plan and cigarette tax increase saying , “ A consumption tax on a product you 'd just as soon have less of doesn 't violate the rules I learned under Ronald Reagan . " 
 The plan allows low to moderate income households where the members have no access to employer provided healthcare to apply for coverage . The fee for coverage is calculated using a formula that results in a charge between 2 % – 5 % of a person 's income . A $ 1 @,@ 100 annual deductible is standard on all policies and allows applicants to qualify for a health savings account . The plan pays a maximum of $ 300 @,@ 000 in annual benefits . 
 = = = = WGU Indiana = = = = 
 Western Governors University of Indiana is the eighth university in Indiana and was formed with the support of Gov. Mitch Daniels in 2010 . The purpose of the new on @-@ line university is to increase education opportunities for working adults across Indiana . In December 2012 WGU Indiana celebrated its 500th graduate . 
 = = = = Property tax reform = = = = 
 In 2008 , Daniels proposed a property tax ceiling of one percent on residential properties , two percent for rental properties and three percent for businesses . The plan was approved by the Indiana General Assembly on March 14 , 2008 and signed by Daniels on March 19 , 2008 . In 2008 , Indiana homeowners had an average property tax cut of more than 30 percent ; a total of $ 870 million in tax cuts . Most money collected through property taxes funds local schools and county government . To offset the loss in revenues to the municipal bodies , the state raised the sales tax from 6 % to 7 % effective April 1 , 2008 . 
 Fearing a future government may overturn the statute enforcing property tax rate caps , Daniels and other state Republican leaders pressed for an amendment to add the new tax limits to the state constitution . The proposed amendment was placed on the 2010 General election ballot and was a major focus of Daniels ' reelection campaign . In November 2010 , voters elected to adopt the tax caps into the Indiana Constitution . 
 Daniels ' successes at balancing the state budget began to be recognized nationally near the end of his first term . Daniels was named on the 2008 " Public Officials of the Year " by the Governing magazine . The same year , he received the 2008 Urban Innovator Award from the Manhattan Institute for his ideas for dealing with the state 's fiscal and urban problems . 
 = = = = Voter registration = = = = 
 In the 2005 session of the General Assembly , Daniels and Republicans , with some Democratic support , successfully enacted a voter registration law that required voters to show a government issued photo ID before they could be permitted to vote . The law was the first of its kind in the United States , and many civil rights organizations , like the ACLU , opposed the bill saying it would unfairly impact minorities , poor , and elderly voters who may be unable to afford an ID or may be physically unable to apply for an ID . To partially address those concerns , the state passed another law authorizing state license branches to offer free state photo ID cards to individuals who did not already possess another type of state ID . 
 A coalition of civil rights groups began a court challenge of the bill in Indiana state courts , and the Daniels ' administration defended the government in the case . The Indiana Supreme Court ruled in favor of the state in late 2007 . The petitioners appealed the bill to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit , and that body upheld the State Supreme Court decision in the case of Crawford v. Marion County Election Board . Upon appeal the United States Supreme Court also ruled in favor of the state in April 2008 , setting a legal precedent . Several other states subsequently enacted similar laws in the years following . 
 = = = Reelection campaign = = = 
 Daniels entered the 2008 election year with a 51 % approval rate , and 28 % disapproval rate . Daniels ' reelection campaign focused on the states unemployment rate , which had lowered during his time in office , the proposed property tax reform amendment , and the successful balancing of the state budget during his first term . 
 On November 4 , 2008 , Daniels defeated Democratic candidate Jill Long Thompson and was elected to a second term as governor with 57 @.@ 8 % of votes . He was <unk> on January 12 , 2009 . Washington Post blogger Chris Cillizza named the Daniels reelection campaign " The Best Gubernatorial Campaign of 2008 " and noted that some Republicans were already <unk> about his name for the 2012 presidential election . Daniels garnered 20 percent of the African American vote and 37 percent of Latinos in his 2008 re @-@ election campaign . He won with more votes than any candidate in the state 's history . 
 On July 14 , 2010 at the Indianapolis Museum of Art , Daniels was on hand to help announce the return of IndyCar Series chassis manufacturing to the state of Indiana . Dallara Automobili will build a new technology center in Speedway , Indiana and the state of Indiana will subsidize the sale of the first 28 IndyCar chassis with a $ 150 @,@ 000 discount . 
 Daniels has been recognized for his commitment to fiscal discipline . He is a recent recipient of the Herman Kahn Award from the conservative think tank the Hudson Institute , of which he is a former president and CEO , and was one of the first to receive the <unk> award for fiscal discipline . A November 2010 poll gave Daniels a 75 % approval rate . 
 = = = Second term = = = 
 Democrats won a majority in the Indiana House of Representatives in the 2006 and 2008 elections . This caused Indiana to have a divided government , with Democrats controlling the Indiana House of Representatives and the Republicans controlling the governor 's office and the Indiana Senate . This also lead to a stalemate in the budget debate , which caused Mitch Daniels call a special session of the Indiana General Assembly . The state was faced with a $ 1 billion shortfall in revenue for the 2009 – 11 budget years . Daniels proposed a range of spending cuts and cost @-@ saving measures in his budget proposal . The General Assembly approved some of his proposals , but relied heavily on the state 's reserve funds to pay for the budget shortfall . Daniels signed the $ 27 billion two @-@ year budget into law . 
 = = = = 2011 legislative walkout = = = = 
 In the 2010 mid @-@ term elections , Republican super @-@ majorities regained control of the House , and took control of the Senate , giving the party full control of General Assembly for the first time in Daniels ' tenure as governor . The 2011 Indiana General Assembly 's regular legislative session began in January and the large Republicans majorities attempted to implement a wide @-@ ranging conservative agenda largely backed by Daniels . Most of the agenda had been " dormant " since Daniels ' election due to divided control of the assembly . In February , Republican legislators attempted to pass a right to work bill in the Indiana House of Representatives . The bill would have made it illegal for employees to be required to join a workers ' union . Republicans argued that it would help the state attract new employers . Unable to prevent the measure from passing , Democratic legislators fled the state to deny the body quorum while several hundred protesters staged demonstrations at the capital . Minority walkouts are somewhat common in the state , occurring as recently as 2005 . 
 While Daniels supported the legislation , he believed the Republican lawmakers should drop the bill because it was not part of their election platform and deserved a period of public debate . Republicans subsequently dropped the bill , but the Democratic lawmakers still refused to return to the capital , demanding additional bills be tabled , including a bill to create a statewide school voucher program . Their refusal to return left the Indiana General Assembly unable to pass any legislation , until three of the twelve bills they objected to were dropped from the agenda on March 28 . The minority subsequently returned to the statehouse to resume their duties . 
 Daniels was interviewed in February 2011 about the similar 2011 Wisconsin budget protests in Madison . While supporting the Wisconsin Republicans , he said that in Indiana " we 're not in quite the same position or advocating quite the same things they are up in Madison . " 
 = = = = Education = = = = 
 Following the legislative walkouts , the assembly began passing most of the agenda and Daniels signed the bills into law . Written in collaboration with Indiana Superintendent of Public Instruction Tony Bennett , a series of education reform laws made a variety of major changes to statewide public schools . A statewide school voucher program was enacted . Children in homes with an income under $ 41 @,@ 000 could receive vouchers equal to 90 % of the cost of their public school tuition and use that money to attend a private school . It provides lesser benefits to households with income over $ 41 @,@ 000 . The program will be gradually phased in over a three @-@ year period and would be available to all state residents by 2014 . 
 Other funds were redirected to creating and expanding charter schools , and expanding college scholarship programs . The law also created a merit pay system to give better performing teachers higher wages , and gave broader authority to school superintendents to terminate the employment of teachers and restricts the collective bargaining rights of teachers . 
 WGU Indiana was established through an executive order on June 14 , 2010 by Daniels , as a partnership between the state and Western Governors University in an effort to expand access to higher education for Indiana residents and increase the percentage of the state ’ s adult population with education beyond high school . 
 = = = = = Curriculum and funding = = = = = 
 In July 2013 , the Associated Press obtained emails under Indiana open record laws in which Daniels asked for assurances that a textbook , " The People 's History of the United States , " written by historian Howard Zinn " is not in use anywhere in Indiana . " Daniels wrote in 2010 , " This crap should not be accepted for any credit by the state . " Daniels ' e @-@ mails were addressed to Scott Jenkins , his education adviser , and David Shane , a top fundraiser and state school board member . Daniels and his aides came to agreement and the governor wrote to them , “ Go for it . <unk> propaganda .... " Part of Shane 's input was that a statewide review “ would force to daylight a lot of excrement . ” Though Teresa Lubbers , the state commissioner of higher education , was mentioned in the e @-@ mails regarding the statewide review of courses , she later said that she " was never asked to conduct the survey of courses described in the e @-@ mail exchanges , and that her office did not conduct such a survey " . 
 In one of the emails , Daniels expressed contempt for Zinn upon his death : 
 This terrible anti @-@ American academic has finally passed away ... The obits and commentaries mentioned his book , ‘ A People ’ s History of the United States , ’ is the ‘ textbook of choice in high schools and colleges around the country . ’ It is a truly execrable , anti @-@ factual piece of disinformation that <unk> American history on every page . Can someone assure me that it is not in use anywhere in Indiana ? If it is , how do we get rid of it before more young people are force @-@ fed a totally false version of our history ? 
 Three years later , in the wake of the revelations , 90 of Purdue 's roughly 1 @,@ 800 professors issued an open letter expressing their concern over Daniels ' commitment to academic freedom . Daniels responded by saying that if Zinn were alive and a member of the Purdue faculty , he would defend his free speech rights and right to publish . In a letter responding to the professors , Daniels wrote , " In truth , my emails infringed on no one 's academic freedom and proposed absolutely no censorship of any person or viewpoint . " 
 In a separate and unrelated round of emails composed in 2009 , Indiana Education officials shared concerns with Daniels about the lobbying resources and activities of the Indiana Urban Schools Association . Daniels asked that the administration " examine cutting them out , at least of the [ funding ] ' surge ' we are planning for the next couple yrs . " The executive director of <unk> is Charles Little , an Indiana University @-@ Purdue University Indianapolis professor of education , who had criticized him . It wasn ’ t immediately clear if the audit went through . Daniels said he had never heard of Charles Little . 
 = = = = Abortion = = = = 
 On April 27 , 2011 , the Indiana legislature passed a bill authored by State Rep. Eric Turner that prohibited taxpayer dollars from supporting organizations that performed abortions . The legislation also prohibited abortions for women more than 20 weeks pregnant , four weeks sooner than the previous law . Although Daniels would later say he supported the bill from the outset , it was not part of his legislative agenda and he did not indicate whether he would sign or veto the law until after it passed the General Assembly . Daniels signed the bill on May 10 , 2011 . 
 Planned Parenthood and the ACLU subsequently brought a lawsuit against the state alleging it was being targeted unfairly , that the state law violated federal <unk> laws , and that their Fourteenth Amendment rights were violated . A May 11 ruling allowing the case to move forward , but denied the request from the petitioners to grant a temporary injunction to restore the funding ; however , a June 24 ruling prohibited the state from enforcing the law . 
 = = = = Immigration = = = = 
 On May 10 Daniels signed into law two immigration bills ; one denying in @-@ state tuition prices to illegal immigrants and another creating fines for employers that employed illegal immigrants . Several protestors , at least five of whom were illegal immigrants , were arrested while protesting the law at the statehouse when they broke into Daniels ' office after being denied a meeting . Student leaders called for their release , while some state legislators called for their deportation . 
 State Democratic Party leaders accused Daniels and the Republicans of passing controversial legislation only to enhance Daniels ' image so he could seek the presidency . Daniels , however , denied the charges , saying he would have enacted the same agenda years earlier had the then @-@ Democratic majority permitted him to do so . 
 = = = = Budget cuts = = = = 
 The state forecast continued revenue declines in 2010 that would result in a $ 1 @.@ 7 billion budget shortfall if the state budget grew at its normal rate . Daniels submitted a two @-@ year $ 27 @.@ 5 billion spending plan to the General Assembly which would result in a $ 500 million surplus that would be used to rebuild the state reserve funds to $ 1 billion . He proposed a wide range of budget austerity measures , including employee <unk> , spending reductions , freezing state hiring , freezing state employee wages , and a host of administrative changes for state agencies . The state had already been gradually reducing its workforce by similar freezes , and by 2011 , Indiana had the fewest state employees per capita than any other state — a figure Daniels touted to say Indiana had the nation 's smallest government . 
 Daniels backed the creation of additional toll roads , expanding on his 2006 overhaul of the Indiana Toll Road system ( known as " Major Moves " ) , in an attempt to secure an additional source of revenue for the state . But opposition from within his own party led to the bill being withdrawn by its Republican sponsor , Sen. Tom Wyss , which resulted in Daniels 's only significant legislative defeat during the 2011 session . 
 The legislative walkouts delayed progress on the budget passage for nearly two months , but the House of Representatives was able to begin working on it in committee in April . The body made several alterations to the bill , including a reapportionment of education funding based more heavily on the number of students at a school , and removing some public school funding to finance the new voucher system and charter schools . 
 = = = = Energy = = = = 
 Daniels announced in October 2006 that a substitute natural gas company intended to build a facility in southern Indiana that would produce pipeline quality substitute natural gas ( <unk> ) . The lead investor was Leucadia National , which proposed a $ 2 @.@ 6 billion plant in Rockport , Indiana . Under the terms of the deal endorsed by Daniels , the state would buy almost all the Rockport gas and resell it on the open market throughout the country . If the plant made money from the sale , excess profits would be split between Leucadia National 's Indiana subsidiary , Indiana <unk> , and the state . If it lost money from the sale , then 100 % of the losses would be passed onto Indiana consumers . Leucadia agreed to reimburse the state for any losses , up to $ 150 million over 30 years . Gas from the plant would make up about 17 percent of the state 's supply . Critics feared that if gas prices fell over the next 30 years , the costs of the lost profits would be passed onto the bills of residents once the $ 150 million guarantee by Leucadia was used up . The deal also received criticism due to government intrusion in the energy markets . Questions were also raised due to Leucadia National hiring Mark Lubbers to promote the deal . Lubbers is a former aide and close friend of Daniels . The Daniels administration maintained that the plant would create jobs in an economically depressed part of the state and offer environmental benefits through an in @-@ state energy source . The project was ultimately panned by the state legislature in 2013 . 
 = = = = Right to Work = = = = 
 Indiana became the first state in a decade to adopt Right to Work legislation . Indiana is home to many manufacturing jobs . The Indiana Economic Development Corp. has reported that 90 firms said the new law was an important factor in deciding to move to Indiana . Gov. Daniels signed the legislation on Feb 1 , 2012 without much fanfare in the hopes of dispersing labor protesters before the Super Bowl in Indianapolis . 
 = = 2012 presidential speculation = = 
 Although Daniels had claimed to be reluctant to seek higher office , many media outlets , including Politico , The Weekly Standard , Forbes , The Washington Post , CNN , The Economist , and The Indianapolis Star began to speculate that Daniels may intend to seek the Republican nomination for president in 2012 after he joined the national debate on cap and trade legislation by penning a response in The Wall Street Journal to policies espoused by the Democratic @-@ majority Congress and the White House in August 2010 . The speculation has included Daniels ' record of reforming government , reducing taxes , balancing the budget , and connecting with voters in Indiana . Despite his signing into law of bills that toughened drug enforcement , regulated abortion , and a defense of marriage act , he has angered some conservatives because of his call for a " truce " on social issues so the party can focus on fiscal issues . His " willingness to consider tax increases to rectify a budget deficit " has been another source of contention . 
 In August 2010 , The Economist praised Daniels ' " reverence for restraint and efficacy " and concluded that " he is , in short , just the kind of man to relish fixing a broken state — or country . " Nick Gillespie of Reason called Daniels " a smart and effective leader who is a serious thinker about history , politics , and policy , " and wrote that " Daniels , like former New Mexico Gov. Gary Johnson , is a Republican who knows how to govern and can do it well . " In February 2011 , David Brooks of The New York Times described Daniels as the " Party 's strongest [ would be ] candidate " , predicting that he " couldn 't match Obama in grace and elegance , but he could on substance . " 
 On December 12 , 2010 , Daniels suggested in a local interview that he would decide on a White House run before May 2011 . 
 Different groups and individuals pressured Daniels to run for office . In response to early speculation , Daniels dismissed a presidential run in June 2009 , saying " I 've only ever run for or held one office . It 's the last one I 'm going to hold . " However , in February 2010 he told a Washington Post reporter that he was open to the idea of running in 2012 . 
 On March 6 , 2011 , Daniels was the winner of an Oregon ( Republican Party ) straw poll . Daniels drew 29 @.@ 33 % of the vote , besting second place finisher Mitt Romney ( 22 @.@ 66 % ) and third place finisher Sarah Palin ( 18 @.@ 22 % ) , and was the winner of a similar straw poll in the state of Washington . On May 5 , 2011 , Daniels told an interviewer that he would announce " within weeks " his decision of whether or not to run for the Republican presidential nomination . He said he felt he was not prepared to debate on all the national issues , like foreign policy , and needed time to better understand the issues and put together formal positions . Later in May , as the Republican field began to resolve with announcements and withdrawals of other candidates , Time said , " Even setting aside his somewhat unusual family situation , Daniels would need to hurry to put together an organization " and raise enough money if he intended to run . 
 Daniels announced he would not seek the Republican nomination for the presidency on the night of May 21 , 2011 , via an email to the press , citing family constraints and the loss of privacy the family would experience should he become a candidate . 
 = = 2016 presidential speculation = = 
 In January 2014 , the Republican National Committee sent an email to subscribers , asking them to pick their top three presidential choices . The poll included thirty two potential candidates including Daniels . In March 2015 , Fortune Magazine named Daniels No. 41 on its list of the world 's 50 greatest leaders , generating a new round of calls for Daniels to consider his options in 2016 . Daniels was the only American university president and the only national political figure ( excluding Detroit Mayor Mike Duggan , ) to make the global list . 
 = = Purdue University = = 
 = = = Selection = = = 
 The Purdue University Board of Trustees unanimously elected Mitch Daniels president of Purdue University on June 21 , 2012 . As governor , Daniels had appointed 8 of the 10 Board members and had reappointed the other two , which critics claimed was a conflict of interest . A state investigation released in October 2012 found that the circumstances did not violate the Indiana Code of Ethics . Other critics of his selection pointed out that unlike previous Purdue presidents , he lacked a background in academia . His term as president began upon completion of his term as governor in January 2013 . In preparation for his term as President of Purdue University , Daniels stopped participating in partisan political activity during the 2012 election cycle and focused instead on issues related to higher education and fiscal matters . 
 In order to avoid the financial cost of a formal inauguration , Daniels instead wrote an " Open Letter to the People of Purdue " in which he documented the challenges facing higher education and outlined his initial priorities such as affordability , academic excellence and academic freedom . Daniels has continued this practice , opting to send Open Letters to the Purdue community instead of giving a formal State of the University speech , as is more common in higher education . 
 = = = Student interactions = = = 
 Daniels works out daily at the student gym and eats frequently with students in student dining facilities . In March 2013 , he joined forces with a group of engineering students to create a viral music video promoting engineering and Purdue University . Within 24 hours , the video had received over 50 @,@ 000 views . 
 Purdue home football games feature a segment entitled " Where 's Mitch ? " , in which , the stadium video board shows the camera panning the crowd and eventually finding Daniels sitting among the fans , sometimes in the student section . Former Purdue presidents rarely left their suite in the press @-@ box structure . 
 = = = Tuition freezes and cost reductions = = = 
 The total cost of attending Purdue has fallen since Daniels assumed Purdue ’ s presidency , despite a trend at Big Ten institutions of rising costs . Total loan debt among the student body has also fallen 23 % or $ 50 million . Tuition at Purdue , prior to Daniels ’ arrival had increased every year since 1976 . Two months after Daniels assumed his role as president , Purdue announced it would freeze tuition for two years , eventually extending the freeze for four years . As a result , four @-@ year graduates from the class of 2016 will become the first in at least 40 years to leave Purdue having never experienced a tuition increase . 
 Daniels committed to freezing tuition before the state had determined Purdue 's funding for the next biennium . Amidst questions about the timing , Daniels argued that he didn 't need to wait because " it doesn 't matter what the General Assembly does . This is the right thing to do and we are going to do it ... the same way families do ; the same way some governments do and all businesses do . We are going to adjust our spending to what we believe is the available and in this case the fair amount of revenue . I know often with good reason there has been an opportunity in higher education to adjust tuition to match what the place wanted to spend , and I just think we 've reached the point where we ought to break that pattern . " The first tuition freeze required the university to find $ 40 million in savings or new revenue . In order to make up for the lost revenue from tuition freezes , Daniels and the Purdue Board of Trustees focused on finding operating efficiencies such as consolidating information technology data centers , investing cash reserves and switching to a consumer @-@ driven health plan for employees . 
 Daniels also reduced meal plan rates for students by 10 percent , froze housing costs and cut the university 's cooperative education fees which had increased every year prior on record . In fall 2014 , Daniels announced a deal with Amazon to save students on textbooks and provide students , faculty and staff with free one day shipping to locations on campus . Daniels has stated that the Amazon partnership saves students more than $ 550 @,@ 000 a semester and has provided Purdue with $ 400 @,@ 000 in new scholarship funds . 
 = = = Agenda = = = 
 In September 2013 , Daniels announced the major priorities of his administration , known as " Purdue Moves . " The plan continued Daniels ’ focus on affordability but also called for new investments such as the hiring of 165 new faculty in STEM , disciplines , expansion of flipped classrooms , growing summer enrollment , investments in plant science and drug discovery research , and the creation of Competency @-@ based degree programs and some 3 @-@ year degree options . 
 Daniels also has emphasized commercialization of research . Under Daniels leadership , Purdue increased the number of affiliated start @-@ up companies by more than 400 percent and broke the university record for patents . 
 In 2015 , Daniels announced plans to start the Purdue Polytechnic Indianapolis high school , designed to be a bridge for inner @-@ city students to Purdue by admitting graduates directly to Purdue . Daniels described the high school as an attempt to increase the number of low @-@ income , first @-@ generation and minority students who are prepared for Purdue . The high school will not open until 2017 , but Purdue reported record levels of minority and underrepresented students in the Fall 2015 semester . 
 = = = Compensation = = = 
 When Daniels was hired by Purdue he requested that his salary be less than his predecessors maximum salary and that 30 percent of his take home be based on the results of biannual performance reviews . Daniel ’ s base salary of $ 420 @,@ 000 is $ 135 @,@ 000 less than the prior president ’ s salary . Under the contract , his salary can grow to a maximum of $ 546 @,@ 000 based on the results of a performance @-@ bonus system — still less than his predecessor and the 3rd lowest in the 12 @-@ member Big Ten . In November 2014 , Daniels earned 88 percent of his at risk pay , receiving the grade of a B + from the Trustees . 
 = = Board service = = 
 In February 2013 , Daniels was asked to co @-@ chair a National Research Council committee to review and make recommendations on the future of the U.S. human spaceflight program . Daniels also co @-@ chairs a Council on Foreign Relations Task Force on <unk> diseases . In March 2013 , Daniels was elected to the board of Energy Systems Network ( <unk> ) , Indiana ’ s industry @-@ driven clean technology initiative . 
 In June 2015 , Daniels was elected to serve on the board of directors for Indiana Software company Interactive Intelligence ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = = Authorship = = 
 Daniels , Mitch ( 2012 ) , Aiming Higher : Words That Changed a State , <unk> Book Publishing , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 86 @-@ 6 
 Daniels , Mitch ( 2011 ) , Keeping the Republic : Saving America by Trusting Americans , Sentinel , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 080 @-@ 5 
 Daniels , Mitch ( 2004 ) , Notes from the Road : 16 months of towns , tales and <unk> , Mitch Daniels Transition Team , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 6 
 = Gabriel Fauré = 
 Gabriel Urbain Fauré ( French : [ <unk> <unk> ̃ <unk> ] ; 12 May 1845 – 4 November 1924 ) was a French composer , organist , pianist and teacher . He was one of the foremost French composers of his generation , and his musical style influenced many 20th @-@ century composers . Among his best @-@ known works are his Pavane , Requiem , nocturnes for piano and the songs " Après un rêve " and " Clair de lune " . Although his best @-@ known and most accessible compositions are generally his earlier ones , Fauré composed many of his most highly regarded works in his later years , in a more harmonically and melodically complex style . 
 Fauré was born into a cultured but not especially musical family . His talent became clear when he was a small boy . At the age of nine , he was sent to a music college in Paris , where he was trained to be a church organist and choirmaster . Among his teachers was Camille Saint @-@ Saëns , who became a lifelong friend . After graduating from the college in 1865 , Fauré earned a modest living as an organist and teacher , leaving him little time for composition . When he became successful in his middle age , holding the important posts of organist of the Église de la Madeleine and director of the Paris Conservatoire , he still lacked time for composing ; he retreated to the countryside in the summer holidays to concentrate on composition . By his last years , Fauré was recognised in France as the leading French composer of his day . An unprecedented national musical tribute was held for him in Paris in 1922 , headed by the president of the French Republic . Outside France , Fauré 's music took decades to become widely accepted , except in Britain , where he had many admirers during his lifetime . 
 Fauré 's music has been described as linking the end of Romanticism with the modernism of the second quarter of the 20th century . When he was born , Chopin was still composing , and by the time of Fauré 's death , jazz and the atonal music of the Second Viennese School were being heard . The Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , which describes him as the most advanced composer of his generation in France , notes that his harmonic and melodic innovations influenced the teaching of harmony for later generations . During the last twenty years of his life , he suffered from increasing deafness . In contrast with the charm of his earlier music , his works from this period are sometimes elusive and withdrawn in character , and at other times turbulent and impassioned . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Fauré was born in Pamiers , Ariège , Midi @-@ Pyrénées , in the south of France , the fifth son and youngest of six children of Toussaint @-@ Honoré Fauré ( 1810 – 85 ) and Marie @-@ Antoinette @-@ Hélène <unk> @-@ Laprade ( 1809 – 87 ) . According to the biographer Jean @-@ Michel Nectoux , the Fauré family ( pronounced " <unk> " in the <unk> local dialect ) dates to the 13th century in that part of France . The family had at one time been substantial landowners , but by the 19th century its means were reduced . The composer 's paternal grandfather , Gabriel , was a butcher whose son became a schoolmaster . In 1829 Fauré 's parents married . His mother was the daughter of a minor member of the nobility . He was the only one of the six children to display musical talent ; his four brothers pursued careers in journalism , politics , the army and the civil service , and his sister had a traditional life as the wife of a public servant . 
 The young Fauré was sent to live with a foster mother until he was four years old . When his father was appointed director of the École Normale d <unk> , a teacher training college , at <unk> , near Foix , in 1849 , Fauré returned to live with his family . There was a chapel attached to the school , which Fauré recalled in the last year of his life : 
 I grew up , a rather quiet well @-@ behaved child , in an area of great beauty . ... But the only thing I remember really clearly is the harmonium in that little chapel . Every time I could get away I ran there – and I regaled myself . ... I played atrociously ... no method at all , quite without technique , but I do remember that I was happy ; and if that is what it means to have a vocation , then it is a very pleasant thing . 
 An old blind woman , who came to listen and give the boy advice , told his father of Fauré 's gift for music . In 1853 Simon @-@ Lucien <unk> de <unk> , of the National Assembly , heard Fauré play and advised Toussaint @-@ Honoré to send him to the École de Musique Classique et Religieuse ( School of Classical and Religious Music ) , which Louis Niedermeyer was setting up in Paris . After reflecting for a year , Fauré 's father agreed and took the nine @-@ year @-@ old boy to Paris in October 1854 . 
 Helped by a scholarship from the bishop of his home diocese , Fauré boarded at the school for 11 years . The régime was austere , the rooms gloomy , the food mediocre , and the required uniform elaborate . The musical tuition , however , was excellent . Niedermeyer , whose goal was to produce qualified organists and choirmasters , focused on church music . Fauré 's tutors were Clément Loret for organ , Louis <unk> for harmony , Xavier <unk> for counterpoint and fugue , and Niedermeyer for piano , plainsong and composition . 
 When Niedermeyer died in March 1861 , Camille Saint @-@ Saëns took charge of piano studies and introduced contemporary music , including that of Schumann , Liszt and Wagner . Fauré recalled in old age , " After allowing the lessons to run over , he would go to the piano and reveal to us those works of the masters from which the rigorous classical nature of our programme of study kept us at a distance and who , moreover , in those far @-@ off years , were scarcely known . ... At the time I was 15 or 16 , and from this time dates the almost filial attachment ... the immense admiration , the unceasing gratitude I [ have ] had for him , throughout my life . " 
 Saint @-@ Saëns took great pleasure in his pupil 's progress , which he helped whenever he could ; Nectoux comments that at each step in Fauré 's career " Saint @-@ Saëns 's shadow can effectively be taken for granted . " The close friendship between them lasted until Saint @-@ Saëns died sixty years later . Fauré won many prizes while at the school , including a premier prix in composition for the Cantique de Jean Racine , Op. 11 , the earliest of his choral works to enter the regular repertory . He left the school in July 1865 , as a <unk> in organ , piano , harmony and composition , with a Maître de Chapelle diploma . 
 = = = Organist and composer = = = 
 On leaving the École Niedermeyer , Fauré was appointed organist at the Church of Saint @-@ Sauveur , at Rennes in Brittany . He took up the post in January 1866 . During his four years at Rennes he supplemented his income by taking private pupils , giving " countless piano lessons " . At Saint @-@ Saëns 's regular prompting he continued to compose , but none of his works from this period survive . He was bored at Rennes and had an uneasy relationship with the parish priest , who correctly doubted Fauré 's religious conviction . Fauré was regularly seen stealing out during the sermon for a cigarette , and in early 1870 , when he turned up to play at Mass one Sunday still in his evening clothes , having been out all night at a ball , he was asked to resign . Almost immediately , with the discreet aid of Saint @-@ Saëns , he secured the post of assistant organist at the church of Notre @-@ Dame de <unk> , in the north of Paris . He remained there for only a few months . On the outbreak of the Franco @-@ Prussian War in 1870 he volunteered for military service . He took part in the action to raise the Siege of Paris , and saw action at Le Bourget , <unk> and Créteil . He was awarded a Croix de Guerre . 
 After France 's defeat by Prussia , there was a brief , bloody conflict within Paris from March to May 1871 during the Commune . Fauré escaped to Rambouillet where one of his brothers lived , and then travelled to Switzerland , where he took up a teaching post at the École Niedermeyer , which had temporarily relocated there to avoid the violence in Paris . His first pupil at the school was André Messager , who became a lifelong friend and occasional collaborator . Fauré 's compositions from this period did not overtly reflect the turmoil and bloodshed . Some of his colleagues , including Saint @-@ Saëns , Gounod and Franck produced elegies and patriotic odes . Fauré did not , but according to his biographer Jessica Duchen , his music acquired " a new <unk> , a dark @-@ hued sense of tragedy ... evident mainly in his songs of this period including L <unk> , <unk> ! and La Chanson du <unk> . " 
 When Fauré returned to Paris in October 1871 , he was appointed choirmaster at the Église Saint @-@ Sulpice under the composer and organist Charles @-@ Marie Widor . In the course of his duties , he wrote several canticles and motets , few of which have survived . During some services , Widor and Fauré improvised simultaneously at the church 's two organs , trying to catch each other out with sudden changes of key . Fauré regularly attended Saint @-@ Saëns 's musical salons and those of Pauline Viardot , to whom Saint @-@ Saëns introduced him . 
 Fauré was a founding member of the Société Nationale de Musique , formed in February 1871 under the joint chairmanship of Romain Bussine and Saint @-@ Saëns , to promote new French music . Other members included Georges Bizet , Emmanuel Chabrier , Vincent d 'Indy , Henri Duparc , César Franck , Édouard Lalo and Jules Massenet . Fauré became secretary of the society in 1874 . Many of his works were first presented at the society 's concerts . 
 In 1874 Fauré moved from Saint @-@ Sulpice to the Église de la Madeleine , acting as deputy for the principal organist , Saint @-@ Saëns , during the latter 's many absences on tour . Some admirers of Fauré 's music have expressed regret that although he played the organ professionally for four decades , he left no solo compositions for the instrument . He was renowned for his improvisations , and Saint @-@ Saëns said of him that he was " a first class organist when he wanted to be " . Fauré preferred the piano to the organ , which he played only because it gave him a regular income . Duchen speculates that he positively disliked the organ , possibly because " for a composer of such delicacy of nuance , and such sensuality , the organ was simply not subtle enough . " 
 The year 1877 was significant for Fauré , both professionally and personally . In January his first violin sonata was performed at a Société Nationale concert with great success , marking a turning @-@ point in his composing career at the age of 31 . Nectoux counts the work as the composer 's first great masterpiece . In March , Saint @-@ Saëns retired from the Madeleine , succeeded as organist by Théodore Dubois , his choirmaster ; Fauré was appointed to take over from Dubois . In July Fauré became engaged to Pauline Viardot 's daughter Marianne , with whom he was deeply in love . To his great sorrow , she broke off the engagement in November 1877 , for reasons that are not clear . To distract Fauré , Saint @-@ Saëns took him to Weimar and introduced him to Franz Liszt . This visit gave Fauré a liking for foreign travel , which he indulged for the rest of his life . From 1878 , he and Messager made trips abroad to see Wagner operas . They saw Das Rheingold and Die Walküre at the Cologne Opera ; the complete Ring cycle at the Hofoper in Munich and at Her Majesty 's Theatre in London ; and Die Meistersinger in Munich and at Bayreuth , where they also saw Parsifal . They frequently performed as a party piece their joint composition , the irreverent Souvenirs de Bayreuth . This short , up @-@ tempo piano work for four hands sends up themes from The Ring . Fauré admired Wagner and had a detailed knowledge of his music , but he was one of the few composers of his generation not to come under Wagner 's musical influence . 
 = = = Middle years = = = 
 In 1883 Fauré married Marie Fremiet , the daughter of a leading sculptor , Emmanuel Fremiet . The marriage was affectionate , but Marie became resentful of Fauré 's frequent absences , his dislike of domestic life – " <unk> du domicile " – and his love affairs , while she remained at home . Though Fauré valued Marie as a friend and confidante , writing to her often – sometimes daily – when away from home , she did not share his passionate nature , which found fulfilment elsewhere . Fauré and his wife had two sons . The first , born in 1883 , Emmanuel Fauré @-@ Fremiet ( Marie insisted on combining her family name with Fauré 's ) , became a biologist of international reputation . The second son , Philippe , born in 1889 , became a writer ; his works included histories , plays , and biographies of his father and grandfather . 
 Contemporary accounts agree that Fauré was extremely attractive to women ; in Duchen 's phrase , " his conquests were legion in the Paris salons . " After a romantic attachment to the singer Emma Bardac from around 1892 , followed by another to the composer Adela Maddison , in 1900 , Fauré met the pianist Marguerite <unk> , the daughter of Alphonse <unk> . This led to a relationship which lasted for the rest of Fauré 's life . He maintained her in a Paris apartment , and she acted openly as his companion . 
 To support his family , Fauré spent most of his time in running the daily services at the Madeleine and giving piano and harmony lessons . His compositions earned him a negligible amount , because his publisher bought them outright , paying him an average of 60 francs for a song , and Fauré received no royalties . During this period , he wrote several large @-@ scale works , in addition to many piano pieces and songs , but he destroyed most of them after a few performances , only retaining a few movements in order to re @-@ use motifs . Among the works surviving from this period is the Requiem , begun in 1887 and revised and expanded , over the years , until its final version dating from 1901 . After its first performance , in 1888 , the priest in charge told the composer , " We don 't need these novelties : the Madeleine 's repertoire is quite rich enough . " 
 As a young man Fauré had been very cheerful ; a friend wrote of his " youthful , even somewhat child @-@ like , mirth . " From his thirties he suffered bouts of depression , which he described as " spleen " , possibly first caused by his broken engagement and his lack of success as a composer . In 1890 a prestigious and remunerative commission to write an opera with lyrics by Paul Verlaine was aborted by the poet 's drunken inability to deliver a libretto . Fauré was plunged into so deep a depression that his friends were seriously concerned about his health . <unk> de Scey @-@ Montbéliard , always a good friend to Fauré , invited him to Venice , where she had a palazzo on the Grand Canal . He recovered his spirits and began to compose again , writing the first of his five <unk> de Venise , to words by Verlaine , whose poetry he continued to admire despite the operatic debacle . 
 About this time , or shortly afterwards , Fauré 's liaison with Emma Bardac began ; in Duchen 's words , " for the first time , in his late forties , he experienced a fulfilling , passionate relationship which extended over several years " . His principal biographers all agree that this affair inspired a burst of creativity and a new originality in his music , exemplified in the song cycle La bonne chanson . Fauré wrote the Dolly Suite for piano duet between 1894 and 1897 and dedicated it to Bardac 's daughter Hélène , known as " Dolly " . Some people suspected that Fauré was Dolly 's father , but biographers including Nectoux and Duchen think it unlikely . Fauré 's affair with Emma Bardac is thought to have begun after Dolly was born , though there is no conclusive evidence either way . 
 During the 1890s Fauré 's fortunes improved . When Ernest Guiraud , professor of composition at the Paris Conservatoire , died in 1892 , Saint @-@ Saëns encouraged Fauré to apply for the vacant post . The faculty of the Conservatoire regarded Fauré as dangerously modern , and its head , Ambroise Thomas , blocked the appointment , declaring , " Fauré ? Never ! If he 's appointed , I resign . " However , Fauré was appointed to another of Guiraud 's posts , inspector of the music conservatories in the French provinces . He disliked the prolonged travelling around the country that the work entailed , but the post gave him a steady income and enabled him to give up teaching amateur pupils . 
 In 1896 Ambroise Thomas died , and Théodore Dubois took over as head of the Conservatoire . Fauré succeeded Dubois as chief organist of the Madeleine . Dubois ' move had further repercussions : Massenet , professor of composition at the Conservatoire , had expected to succeed Thomas , but had overplayed his hand by insisting on being appointed for life . He was turned down , and when Dubois was appointed instead , Massenet resigned his professorship in fury . Fauré was appointed in his place . He taught many young composers , including Maurice Ravel , Florent Schmitt , Charles Koechlin , Louis Aubert , Jean Roger @-@ Ducasse , George Enescu , Paul Ladmirault , Alfredo Casella and Nadia Boulanger . In Fauré 's view , his students needed a firm grounding in the basic skills , which he was happy to delegate to his capable assistant André <unk> . His own part came in helping them make use of these skills in the way that suited each student 's talents . Roger @-@ Ducasse later wrote , " Taking up whatever the pupils were working on , he would evoke the rules of the form at hand ... and refer to examples , always drawn from the masters . " Ravel always remembered Fauré 's open @-@ mindedness as a teacher . Having received Ravel 's String Quartet with less than his usual enthusiasm , Fauré asked to see the manuscript again a few days later , saying , " I could have been wrong " . The musicologist Henry <unk> wrote , " What Fauré developed among his pupils was taste , harmonic sensibility , the love of pure lines , of unexpected and colorful modulations ; but he never gave them [ recipes ] for composing according to his style and that is why they all sought and found their own paths in many different , and often opposed , directions . " 
 Fauré 's works of the last years of the century include incidental music for the English premiere of Maurice Maeterlinck 's Pelléas et Mélisande ( 1898 ) and Prométhée , a lyric tragedy composed for the amphitheatre at Béziers . Written for outdoor performance , the work is scored for huge instrumental and vocal forces . Its premiere in August 1900 was a great success , and it was revived at Béziers the following year and in Paris in 1907 . A version with orchestration for normal opera house @-@ sized forces was given at the Paris Opéra in May 1917 and received more than forty performances in Paris thereafter . From 1903 to 1921 , Fauré regularly wrote music criticism for Le Figaro , a role in which he was not at ease . Nectoux writes that Fauré 's natural kindness and broad @-@ mindedness predisposed him to emphasise the positive aspects of a work . 
 = = = Head of Paris Conservatoire = = = 
 In 1905 a scandal erupted in French musical circles over the country 's top musical prize , the Prix de Rome . Fauré 's pupil Ravel had been eliminated prematurely in his sixth attempt for this award , and many believed that reactionary elements within the Conservatoire had played a part in it . Dubois , who became the subject of much censure , brought forward his retirement and stepped down at once . Appointed in his place , and with the support of the French government , Fauré radically changed the administration and curriculum . He appointed independent external judges to decide on admissions , examinations and competitions , a move which enraged faculty members who had given preferential treatment to their private pupils ; feeling themselves deprived of a considerable extra income , many of them resigned . Fauré was dubbed " Robespierre " by disaffected members of the old guard as he modernised and broadened the range of music taught at the Conservatoire . As Nectoux puts it , " where Auber , Halévy and especially Meyerbeer had reigned supreme ... it was now possible to sing an aria by Rameau or even some Wagner – up to now a forbidden name within the Conservatoire 's walls " . The curriculum was broadened to range from Renaissance polyphony to the works of Debussy . 
 Fauré 's new position left him better off financially . However , while he also became much more widely known as a composer , running the Conservatoire left him with no more time for composition than when he was struggling to earn a living as an organist and piano teacher . As soon as the working year was over , in the last days of July , he would leave Paris and spend the two months until early October in a hotel , usually by one of the Swiss lakes , to concentrate on composition . His works from this period include his lyric opera , Pénélope ( 1913 ) , and some of his most characteristic later songs ( e.g. , the cycle La chanson d 'Ève , Op. 95 , completed in 1910 ) and piano pieces ( Nocturnes Nos. 9 – 11 ; Barcarolles Nos. 7 – 11 , written between 1906 and 1914 ) . 
 Fauré was elected to the Institut de France in 1909 , after his father @-@ in @-@ law and Saint @-@ Saëns , both long @-@ established members , had canvassed strongly on his behalf . He won the ballot by a narrow margin , with 18 votes against 16 for the other candidate , Widor . In the same year a group of young composers led by Ravel and Koechlin broke with the Société Nationale de Musique , which under the presidency of Vincent d 'Indy had become a reactionary organisation , and formed a new group , the Société Musicale <unk> . While Fauré accepted the presidency of this society , he also remained a member of the older one and continued on the best of terms with d 'Indy ; his sole concern was the fostering of new music . In 1911 he oversaw the Conservatoire 's move to new premises in the rue de Madrid . During this time , Fauré developed serious problems with his hearing . Not only did he start to go deaf , but sounds became distorted , so that high and low notes sounded painfully out of tune to him . 
 The turn of the 20th century saw a rise in the popularity of Fauré 's music in Britain , and to a lesser extent in Germany , Spain and Russia . He visited England frequently , and an invitation to play at Buckingham Palace in 1908 opened many other doors in London and beyond . He attended the London premiere of Elgar 's First Symphony , in 1908 , and dined with the composer afterwards . Elgar later wrote to their mutual friend Frank Schuster that Fauré " was such a real gentleman – the highest kind of Frenchman and I admired him greatly . " Elgar tried to get Fauré 's Requiem put on at the Three Choirs Festival , but it did not finally have its English premiere until 1937 , nearly fifty years after its first performance in France . Composers from other countries also loved and admired Fauré . In the 1880s Tchaikovsky had thought him " adorable " ; Albéniz and Fauré were friends and correspondents until the former 's early death in 1909 ; Richard Strauss sought his advice ; and in Fauré 's last years , the young American , Aaron Copland was a devoted admirer . 
 The outbreak of the First World War almost stranded Fauré in Germany , where he had gone for his annual composing retreat . He managed to get from Germany into Switzerland , and thence to Paris . He remained in France for the duration of the war . When a group of French musicians led by Saint @-@ Saëns tried to organise a boycott of German music , Fauré and Messager dissociated themselves from the idea , though the disagreement did not affect their friendship with Saint @-@ Saëns . Fauré did not recognise nationalism in music , seeing in his art " a language belonging to a country so far above all others that it is dragged down when it has to express feelings or individual traits that belong to any particular nation . " Nonetheless , he was aware that his own music was respected rather than loved in Germany . In January 1905 , visiting Frankfurt and Cologne for concerts of his music , he had written , " The criticisms of my music have been that it 's a bit cold and too well brought up ! There 's no question about it , French and German are two different things . " 
 = = = Last years and legacy = = = 
 In 1920 , at the age of 75 , Fauré retired from the Conservatoire because of his increasing deafness and frailty . In that year he received the Grand @-@ Croix of the Légion d 'honneur , an honour rare for a musician . In 1922 the president of the republic , Alexandre Millerand , led a public tribute to Fauré , a national <unk> , described in The Musical Times as " a splendid celebration at the Sorbonne , in which the most illustrious French artists participated , [ which ] brought him great joy . It was a poignant spectacle , indeed : that of a man present at a concert of his own works and able to hear not a single note . He sat gazing before him pensively , and , in spite of everything , grateful and content . " 
 Fauré suffered from poor health in his later years , brought on in part by heavy smoking . Despite this , he remained available to young composers , including members of Les Six , most of whom were devoted to him . Nectoux writes , " In old age he attained a kind of serenity , without losing any of his remarkable spiritual vitality , but rather removed from the sensualism and the passion of the works he wrote between 1875 and 1895 . " 
 In his last months , Fauré struggled to complete a string quartet . Twenty years earlier he had been the dedicatee of Ravel 's String Quartet . Ravel and others urged Fauré to compose one of his own . He refused for many years , on the grounds that it was too difficult . When he finally decided to write it , he did so in trepidation , telling his wife , " I 've started a Quartet for strings , without piano . This is a genre which Beethoven in particular made famous , and causes all those who are not Beethoven to be terrified of it . " He worked on the piece for a year , finishing it on 11 September 1924 , less than two months before he died , working long hours towards the end to complete it . The quartet was premiered after his death ; he declined an offer to have it performed privately for him in his last days , as his hearing had deteriorated to the point where musical sounds were horribly distorted in his ear . 
 Fauré died in Paris from pneumonia on 4 November 1924 at the age of 79 . He was given a state funeral at the Église de la Madeleine and is buried in the Passy Cemetery in Paris . 
 After Fauré 's death , the Conservatoire abandoned his radicalism and became resistant to new trends in music , with Fauré 's own harmonic practice being held up as the farthest limit of modernity , beyond which students should not go . His successor , Henri Rabaud , director of the Conservatoire from 1922 to 1941 , declared " modernism is the enemy " . The generation of students born between the wars rejected this outdated premise , turning for inspiration to Bartók , the Second Viennese School , and the latest works of Stravinsky . 
 In a centenary tribute in 1945 , the musicologist Leslie <unk> wrote in The Musical Times , " ' More profound than Saint @-@ Saëns , more varied than Lalo , more spontaneous than d 'Indy , more classic than Debussy , Gabriel Fauré is the master par excellence of French music , the perfect mirror of our musical genius . ' Perhaps , when English musicians get to know his work better , these words of Roger @-@ Ducasse will seem , not over @-@ praise , but no more than his due . " 
 = = Music = = 
 Aaron Copland wrote that although Fauré 's works can be divided into the usual " early " , " middle " and " late " periods , there is no such radical difference between his first and last manners as is evident with many other composers . Copland found premonitions of late Fauré in even the earliest works , and traces of the early Fauré in the works of his old age : " The themes , harmonies , form , have remained essentially the same , but with each new work they have all become more fresh , more personal , more profound . " When Fauré was born , Berlioz and Chopin were still composing ; the latter was among his early influences . In his later years Fauré developed compositional techniques that foreshadowed the atonal music of Schoenberg , and , later still , drew discreetly on the techniques of jazz . Duchen writes that early works such as the Cantique de Jean Racine are in the tradition of French nineteenth @-@ century romanticism , yet his late works are as modern as any of the works of his pupils . 
 Influences on Fauré , particularly in his early work , included not only Chopin but Mozart and Schumann . The authors of The Record Guide ( 1955 ) , Sackville @-@ West and Shawe @-@ Taylor , wrote that Fauré learnt restraint and beauty of surface from Mozart , tonal freedom and long melodic lines from Chopin , " and from Schumann , the sudden felicities in which his development sections abound , and those codas in which whole movements are briefly but magically illuminated . " His work was based on the strong understanding of harmonic structures that he gained at the École Niedermeyer from Niedermeyer 's successor Gustave Lefèvre . Lefèvre wrote the book Traité d <unk> ( Paris , 1889 ) , in which he sets out a harmonic theory that differs significantly from the classical theory of Rameau , no longer outlawing certain chords as " dissonant " . By using unresolved mild discords and colouristic effects , Fauré anticipated the techniques of Impressionist composers . 
 In contrast with his harmonic and melodic style , which pushed the bounds for his time , Fauré 's rhythmic motives tended to be subtle and repetitive , with little to break the flow of the line , although he used discreet syncopations , similar to those found in Brahms 's works . Copland referred to him as " the Brahms of France " . The music critic Jerry <unk> suggests that Fauré " represents the link between the late German Romanticism of Brahms ... and the French Impressionism of Debussy . " 
 To Sackville @-@ West and Shawe @-@ Taylor , Fauré 's later works do not display the easy charm of his earlier music : " the luscious romantic harmony which had always been firmly supported by a single tonality , later gave way to a severely monochrome style , full of enharmonic shifts , and creating the impression of several tonal centres simultaneously employed . " 
 = = = Vocal music = = = 
 Fauré is regarded as one of the masters of the French art song , or mélodie . Ravel wrote in 1922 that Fauré had saved French music from the dominance of the German Lied . Two years later the critic Samuel Langford wrote of Fauré , " More surely almost than any writer in the world he commanded the faculty to create a song all of a piece , and with a sustained intensity of mood which made it like a single thought " . In a 2011 article the pianist and writer Roy Howat and the musicologist Emily Kilpatrick wrote : 
 His devotion to the mélodie spans his career , from the ever @-@ fresh " Le papillon et la fleur " of 1861 to the masterly cycle L 'horizon <unk> , composed sixty years and more than a hundred songs later . Fauré 's songs are now core repertoire for students and professionals , sung in conservatories and recital halls throughout the world . 
 In Copland 's view the early songs were written in the 1860s and 1870s under the influence of Gounod , and except for isolated songs such as " Après un rêve " or " Au bord de l 'eau " there is little sign of the artist to come . With the second volume of the sixty collected songs written during the next two decades , Copland judged , came the first mature examples of " the real Fauré " . He instanced " Les <unk> " , " Les roses d <unk> " and especially " Clair de lune " as " so beautiful , so perfect , that they have even penetrated to America " , and drew attention to less well known mélodies such as " Le secret " , " Nocturne " , and " Les <unk> " . Fauré also composed a number of song cycles . Cinq mélodies " de Venise " , Op. 58 ( 1891 ) , was described by Fauré as a novel kind of song suite , in its use of musical themes recurring over the cycle . For the later cycle La bonne chanson , Op. 61 ( 1894 ) , there were five such themes , according to Fauré . He also wrote that La bonne chanson was his most spontaneous composition , with Emma Bardac singing back to him each day 's newly written material . 
 The Requiem , Op. 48 , was not composed to the memory of a specific person but , in Fauré 's words , " for the pleasure of it . " It was first performed in 1888 . It has been described as " a lullaby of death " because of its predominantly gentle tone . Fauré omitted the Dies Irae , though reference to the day of judgment appears in the Libera me , which , like Verdi , he added to the normal liturgical text . Fauré revised the Requiem over the years , and a number of different performing versions are now in use , from the earliest , for small forces , to the final revision with full orchestra . 
 Fauré 's operas have not found a place in the regular repertoire . Prométhée is the more neglected of the two , with only a handful of performances in more than a century . Copland considered Pénélope ( 1913 ) a fascinating work , and one of the best operas written since Wagner ; he noted , however , that the music is , as a whole , " distinctly non @-@ theatrical . " The work uses leitmotifs , and the two main roles call for voices of heroic quality , but these are the only ways in which the work is Wagnerian . In Fauré 's late style , " tonality is stretched hard , without breaking . " On the rare occasions when the piece has been staged , critical opinion has generally praised the musical quality of the score , but has varied as to the dramatic effectiveness of the work . When the opera was first presented in London in 1970 , in a student production by the Royal Academy of Music , Peter Heyworth wrote , " A score that offers rich rewards to an attentive ear can none the less fail to cut much ice in the theatre . ... Most of the music is too recessive to be theatrically effective . " However , after a 2006 production at the Wexford Festival , Ian Fox wrote , " Fauré 's Pénélope is a true rarity , and , although some lovely music was anticipated , it was a surprise how sure the composer 's theatrical touch was . " 
 = = = Piano works = = = 
 Fauré 's major sets of piano works are thirteen nocturnes , thirteen barcarolles , six impromptus , and four valses @-@ caprices . These sets were composed across the decades of his career , and display the change in his style from uncomplicated youthful charm to a final enigmatic , but sometimes fiery introspection , by way of a turbulent period in his middle years . His other notable piano pieces , including shorter works , or collections composed or published as a set , are Romances sans paroles , Ballade in F ♯ major , Mazurka in B ♭ major , Thème et variations in C ♯ major , and <unk> pièces brèves . For piano duet , Fauré composed the Dolly Suite and , together with his friend and former pupil André Messager , an exuberant parody of Wagner in the short suite Souvenirs de Bayreuth . 
 The piano works often use arpeggiated figures , with the melody interspersed between the two hands , and include finger substitutions natural for organists . These aspects make them daunting for some pianists . Even a virtuoso like Liszt said that he found Fauré 's music hard to play . The early piano works are clearly influenced by Chopin . An even greater influence was Schumann , whose piano music Fauré loved more than any other . In Copland 's view , it was with the sixth Nocturne that Fauré fully emerged from any predecessor 's shadow . The pianist Alfred Cortot said , " There are few pages in all music comparable to these . " The critic Bryce Morrison has noted that pianists frequently prefer to play the charming earlier piano works , such as the Impromptu No. 2 , rather than the later piano works , which express " such private passion and isolation , such alternating anger and resignation " that listeners are left uneasy . In his piano music , as in most of his works , Fauré shunned virtuosity in favour of the classical lucidity often associated with the French . He was unimpressed by purely virtuoso pianists , saying , " the greater they are , the worse they play me . " 
 = = = Orchestral and chamber works = = = 
 Fauré was not greatly interested in orchestration , and on occasion asked his former students such as Jean Roger @-@ Ducasse and Charles Koechlin to orchestrate his concert and theatre works . In Nectoux 's words , Fauré 's generally sober orchestral style reflects " a definite aesthetic attitude ... The idea of timbre was not a determining one in Fauré 's musical thinking " . He was not attracted by flamboyant combinations of tone @-@ colours , which he thought either self @-@ indulgent or a disguise for lack of real musical invention . He told his students that it should be possible to produce an orchestration without resorting to glockenspiels , <unk> , xylophones , bells or electrical instruments . Debussy admired the <unk> of Fauré 's orchestration , finding in it the transparency he strove for in his own 1913 ballet Jeux ; Poulenc , by contrast , described Fauré 's orchestration as " a leaden overcoat ... instrumental mud " . Fauré 's best @-@ known orchestral works are the suites Masques et bergamasques ( based on music for a dramatic entertainment , or divertissement comique ) , which he orchestrated himself , Dolly , orchestrated by Henri Rabaud , and Pelléas et Mélisande drawing on incidental music for Maeterlinck 's play ; the stage version was orchestrated by Koechlin , but Fauré himself reworked the orchestration for the published suite . 
 In the chamber repertoire , his two piano quartets , particularly the first , are among Fauré 's better @-@ known works . His other chamber music includes two piano quintets , two cello sonatas , two violin sonatas , a piano trio and a string quartet . Copland ( writing in 1924 before the string quartet was finished ) held the second quintet to be Fauré 's masterpiece : " ... a pure well of spirituality ... extremely classic , as far removed as possible from the romantic temperament . " Other critics have taken a less favourable view : The Record Guide commented , " The ceaseless flow and restricted colour scheme of Fauré 's last manner , as exemplified in this Quintet , need very careful management , if they are not to become tedious . " Fauré 's last work , the String Quartet , has been described by critics in Gramophone magazine as an intimate meditation on the last things , and " an extraordinary work by any standards , ethereal and other @-@ worldly with themes that seem constantly to be drawn skywards . " 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 Fauré made piano rolls of his music for several companies between 1905 and 1913 . Well over a hundred recordings of Fauré 's music were made between 1898 and 1905 , mostly of songs , with a few short chamber works , by performers including the singers Jean <unk> and Pol <unk> and players such as Jacques Thibaud and Alfred Cortot . By the 1920s a range of Fauré 's more popular songs were on record , including " Après un rêve " sung by Olga Haley , and " <unk> " and " Clair de lune " sung by Ninon <unk> . In the 1930s better @-@ known performers recorded Fauré pieces , including Georges Thill ( " En <unk> " ) , and Jacques Thibaud and Alfred Cortot ( Violin Sonata No. 1 and Berceuse ) . The <unk> from Pelléas et Mélisande was recorded in 1938 . 
 By the 1940s there were a few more Fauré works in the catalogues . A survey by John Culshaw in December 1945 singled out recordings of piano works played by Kathleen Long ( including the Nocturne No. 6 , Barcarolle No. 2 , the Thème et Variations , Op. 73 , and the Ballade Op. 19 in its orchestral version conducted by Boyd Neel ) , the Requiem conducted by Ernest <unk> , and seven songs sung by Maggie Teyte . Fauré 's music began to appear more frequently in the record companies ' releases in the 1950s . The Record Guide , 1955 , listed the Piano Quartet No. 1 , Piano Quintet No. 2 , the String Quartet , both Violin Sonatas , the Cello Sonata No. 2 , two new recordings of the Requiem , and the complete song cycles La bonne chanson and La chanson d 'Ève . 
 In the LP and particularly the CD era , the record companies have built up a substantial catalogue of Fauré 's music , performed by French and non @-@ French musicians . Several modern recordings of Fauré 's music have come to public notice as prize @-@ winners in annual awards organised by Gramophone and the BBC . Sets of his major orchestral works have been recorded under conductors including Michel <unk> ( 1981 ) and Yan Pascal Tortelier ( 1996 ) . Fauré 's main chamber works have all been recorded , with players including the Ysaÿe Quartet , Domus , Paul Tortelier , Arthur <unk> , and Joshua Bell . The complete piano works have been recorded by Kathryn Stott ( 1995 ) , and Paul Crossley ( 1984 – 85 ) , with substantial sets of the major piano works from Jean @-@ Philippe Collard ( 1982 – 84 ) , Pascal Rogé ( 1990 ) , and Kun @-@ Woo Paik ( 2002 ) . Fauré 's songs have all been recorded for CD , including a complete set ( 2005 ) , anchored by the accompanist Graham Johnson , with soloists Jean @-@ Paul <unk> , Felicity Lott , John Mark Ainsley and Jennifer Smith , among others . The Requiem and the shorter choral works are also well represented on disc . Pénélope has been recorded twice , with casts headed by Régine Crespin in 1956 , and Jessye Norman in 1981 , conducted respectively by Désiré @-@ Émile <unk> and Charles Dutoit . Prométhée has not been recorded in full , but extensive excerpts were recorded under Roger Norrington ( 1980 ) . 
 = = = Modern assessment = = = 
 A 2001 article on Fauré in Baker 's Biographical Dictionary of Musicians concludes thus : 
 Fauré 's stature as a composer is undiminished by the passage of time . He developed a musical idiom all his own ; by subtle application of old modes , he evoked the aura of eternally fresh art ; by using unresolved mild discords and special coloristic effects , he anticipated procedures of Impressionism ; in his piano works , he shunned virtuosity in favor of the Classical lucidity of the French masters of the <unk> ; the precisely articulated melodic line of his songs is in the finest tradition of French vocal music . His great Requiem and his <unk> for Cello and Piano have entered the general repertoire . 
 Fauré 's biographer Nectoux writes in the Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians that Fauré is widely regarded as the greatest master of French song , and that alongside the mélodies , the chamber works rank as " Fauré 's most important contribution to music " . The critic Robert Orledge writes , " His genius was one of synthesis : he reconciled such opposing elements as modality and tonality , anguish and serenity , seduction and force within a single non @-@ eclectic style , as in the Pelléas et Mélisande suite , his symphonic masterpiece . The quality of constant renewal within an apparently limited range ... is a remarkable facet of his genius , and the spare , elliptical style of his single String Quartet suggests that his intensely self @-@ disciplined style was still developing at the time of his death " . 
 = Tropical Storm Emilia ( 2006 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Emilia was a rare tropical cyclone that affected the Baja California peninsula in July 2006 . The sixth tropical depression and fifth tropical storm of the 2006 Pacific hurricane season , it developed on July 21 about 400 miles ( 650 km ) off the coast of Mexico . It moved northward toward the coast , reaching peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) before turning westward and encountering unfavorable conditions . Emilia later turned to the north , passing near Baja California as a strong tropical storm . Subsequently the storm moved further away from the coast , and on July 27 it dissipated . 
 The storm brought tropical storm force winds and precipitation to the southwestern Mexican coastline . Later , Emilia produced similar conditions in the southern portion of the Baja California peninsula , where its passage caused minor damage and flooding . Moisture from Emilia reached the southwestern United States , producing thunderstorms and flash flooding in Arizona , as well as beneficial rainfall in southern California . No deaths were reported in association with Emilia . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Emilia can be traced to a tropical wave that crossed northern Central America into the eastern Pacific Ocean on July 16 . The system moved westward , developing a well @-@ defined low pressure area about 525 miles ( 850 km ) southwest of Acapulco by July 19 . The next day , its forward motion had shifted to a slow north @-@ northwest track , and with its convection continuing to organize around the low , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) remarked on the potential for tropical cyclogenesis . Early on July 21 , its thunderstorm activity organized enough for the NHC to classify it as Tropical Depression Six @-@ E , located to the southwest of Acapulco . 
 Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression existed in an area of weak steering currents , though a general motion to the north @-@ northwest was influenced by a large subtropical ridge over the southwest United States . The circulation was initially located east of the main convection , due to the presence of wind shear . Convection increased near the center despite the shear , and on July 22 the depression attained tropical storm status about 400 mi ( 650 km ) south of Manzanillo , Colima ; it was named Emilia by the NHC . Around the same time , the storm was developing better @-@ defined rainbands , and with favorable conditions expected , Emilia was forecast to attain hurricane status ; the NHC noted the potential for rapid deepening as the storm passed near southwestern Mexico . 
 Early on July 23 , the storm briefly became disorganized , with the low @-@ level circulation becoming ill @-@ defined . Around the same time , Emilia passed about 175 mi ( 280 km ) southwest of Manzanillo , which was its closest approach to southwestern Mexico ; it is believed to have caused tropical storm force wind gusts along the coastline . Later that day , after turning west @-@ northwestward , the convection increased markedly as an eyewall began to form . Operationally , it was estimated to have reached winds of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) , and it was forecast to continue strengthening to attain Category 2 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . However , the NHC later re @-@ assessed Emilia as reaching peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , since the eye feature was temporary and not well @-@ defined . 
 Shortly after reaching peak intensity , a sharp increase in wind shear caused Emilia to weaken quickly to winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Operationally , the NHC initially continued to assess the storm as with winds of 70 mph ( 115 m / h ) , with hurricane status predicted . However , the decrease in strength became evident on July 24 , when dry air became entrained in the circulation ; at the same time , the convection became limited to the southern semicircle of the storm . On July 25 , the wind shear decreased as the storm turned toward the Baja California peninsula , despite that tropical cyclones affecting the Baja California peninsula in the month of July are rare . Convection increased in coverage , and an eye feature re @-@ appeared early on July 26 as it again attained peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . 
 Emilia maintained peak winds for about 18 hours , during which it passed about 60 mi ( 95 km ) southwest of Cabo San Lazaro , which is a cape located southwest of Ciudad Constitución on the southwestern coast of the Baja California peninsula . After brushing the peninsula with its outer rainbands , Emilia turned away from the coast into cooler waters , and subsequently began to weaken rapidly . On July 27 it deteriorated into a tropical depression , and the next day Emilia degenerated into a convective @-@ less remnant low . The low continued westward until turning northward on July 30 , and on July 31 the remnants of Emilia dissipated about 495 mi ( 800 km ) west @-@ southwest of San Diego , California . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 As Emilia first approached the southwest coast of Mexico , officials issued a tropical storm watch from Manzanillo to Cabo Corrientes , Jalisco ; the watch was discontinued 30 hours after it was issued . The storm passed the region on July 22 , and is believed to have produced tropical storm force wind gusts along the coastline . A ship recorded 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) winds while Emilia was just off the coast . Further up the coast , in Mazatlán , strong waves from the storm caused beaches to close , while the outer fringes of the storm dropped 4 @.@ 68 inches ( 119 mm ) of precipitation . Inland , the interaction between Emilia and a tropical wave brought increased moisture and precipitation to southeastern and central Mexico . 
 When Emilia began turning toward the Baja California peninsula , the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm watch from Buena Vista along the Gulf of California to Bahía Magdalena along the Pacific coast . The watch was replaced with a tropical storm warning about 12 hours prior to the closest approach of the storm , and additional warnings were issued along the Pacific coastline as the storm passed . All watches and warnings were discontinued by July 27 . Officials prepared two schools as emergency shelters in Cabo San Lucas , where 100 people stayed during the storm . In the area , the threat of the storm resulted in the closure of several bars and restaurants . 
 Across the southern portion of the Baja California peninsula , the storm dropped moderate rainfall , with a total of about 5 inches ( 125 mm ) reported in Cabo San Lucas ; the NHC remarked that higher amounts likely occurred in higher elevations . The rainfall caused minor flooding in and around Cabo San Lucas . Along the southern coast of the peninsula , Emilia produced tropical storm force winds ; two stations reported sustained winds of 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) , with one of those reporting wind gusts to 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) . The storm caused minor damage to buildings and utility lines . Waves from the storm left minor damage at several marinas in the region , with several being closed for two days . 
 The effects of Emilia reached the southwestern United States . In southern Arizona , a surge of moisture from the storm produced scattered thunderstorms , including one severe thunderstorm in Santa Cruz County . The cell dropped heavy rainfall and large hailstones in a short amount of time ; one location reported hail of 1 @.@ 75 inches ( 44 @.@ 5 mm ) in diameter . The rainfall , which totaled several inches in some areas , caused flash flooding , with 8 inches ( 205 mm ) of floodwater reported at one location along Interstate 19 . Thunderstorms in Graham County produced a wind gust of 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) at the airport in Safford . Unsettled conditions persisted across Arizona for about a week . In southern California , the storm dropped light rainfall , which assisted firefighters in containing a wildfire . 
 = Gus Mancuso = 
 August Rodney ( Gus ) Mancuso ( December 5 , 1905 – October 26 , 1984 ) , nicknamed " Blackie " , was an American professional baseball player , coach , scout and radio sports commentator . He played as a catcher in Major League Baseball with the St. Louis Cardinals ( 1928 , 1930 – 32 , 1941 – 42 ) , New York Giants ( 1933 – 38 , 1942 – 44 ) , Chicago Cubs ( 1939 ) , Brooklyn Dodgers ( 1940 ) and Philadelphia Phillies ( 1945 ) . 
 Mancuso was known for his capable handling of pitching staffs and for his on @-@ field leadership abilities . He was a member of five National League pennant @-@ winning teams , and played as the catcher for five pitchers who were eventually inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame . Mancuso was regarded as one of the top defensive catchers of the 1930s . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 Mancuso was born in Galveston , Texas to the son of a Sicilian immigrant and the daughter of German immigrants . His father died in his forties and his mother continued to support the family by working as a midwife . Mancuso first began to play baseball as a nine @-@ year @-@ old . After graduating from high school , he went to work as a teller at a bank although , he was hired more for his talent as a baseball player than as a teller , playing as a member of the bank 's baseball team . He eventually caught the attention of the President of the Houston Buffaloes of the Texas League , and began his professional baseball career with them in 1925 . In 1927 , he hit for a .372 batting average for the Syracuse Stars in the International League . He made his Major League debut with the St. Louis Cardinals at the age of 22 on April 30 , 1928 , and stayed with them until July , when he was sent to the Minneapolis Millers in the American Association . He spent 1929 with St. Louis 's American Association farm club , the Rochester Red Wings and with Houston . 
 The Cardinals returned Mancuso to the major leagues in 1930 , primarily because of a contract dispute with Branch Rickey that made Baseball Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis void Mancuso 's minor league contract . He served as a reserve catcher to Jimmie Wilson who Mancuso considered one of the best catchers of the era . Although they competed for the same job , the veteran Wilson provided Mancuso with valuable help in learning the intricacies of catching in the major leagues . Mancuso became a student of the game , learning to study the daily box scores to learn the strengths and weaknesses of opposing teams . On September 12 , Wilson sprained his ankle and would not play for the rest of the season . Mancuso rose to the occasion , ending the season with a .366 batting average during a hitters ' year when the league average was above .300 for the first and only time . The Cardinals won the National League pennant but , eventually lost to Connie Mack 's Philadelphia Athletics in the 1930 World Series . In 1931 Mancuso was once again the reserve catcher to Wilson , leading the league with a 54 @.@ 3 % caught stealing percentage as the Cardinals won their second consecutive National League pennant . The 1931 World Series was a rematch with the Athletics as the Cardinals were victorious in a seven @-@ game series . Mancuso only had one plate appearance during the series as a late @-@ inning pinch hitter . During the 1932 season , Wilson turned 32 years old and shared the catching duties with Mancuso who caught 82 games to Wilson 's 75 and hit for a .284 average . 
 Mancuso was traded to the New York Giants before the 1933 season where new manager Bill Terry was rebuilding the team after the resignation of longtime manager John McGraw . Terry wanted to build his team around speed , defense and pitching . He replaced the slow @-@ footed Shanty Hogan and installed the agile Mancuso as the Giants ' starting catcher . Terry allowed Mancuso to be in charge of the Giants ' pitching staff that included ; Carl Hubbell 's sharp @-@ breaking screwball , Hal Schumacher 's diving sinker ball , Freddie Fitzsimmons ' knuckleball and Roy Parmelee who threw a variety of different pitches . Under Mancuso 's guidance , the Giants ' pitching staff led the National League in earned run average as the team won their first pennant in nine years . 
 Although Mancuso led National League catchers in errors and passed balls , he also led in games played , baserunners caught stealing , putouts and , finished second in assists and in range factor . The Giants went on to defeat the Washington Senators in the 1933 World Series . Terry credited Mancuso as a major factor in moving the Giants from sixth place in 1932 to World Series champions in 1933 . In an Associated Press poll of sportswriters , Mancuso finished second to the Yankees ' Bill Dickey as the majors league 's all @-@ star catcher based on his ability to handle pitchers so skillfully . Mancuso ranked sixth in voting for the 1933 National League Most Valuable Player Award . 
 In 1934 , the Giants finished in second place , two games behind the eventual world champion St. Louis Cardinals , as Mancuso had an off @-@ year with his batting average dropping almost twenty points along with 10 fewer runs batted in . In 1935 Mancuso improved to hit for a .298 batting average with five home runs , and 56 runs batted in . He also earned a spot as a reserve for the National League team in the 1935 All @-@ Star Game . He had his best season in 1936 , hitting for a .301 batting average with career @-@ highs of nine home runs and 63 runs batted in as the Giants once again claimed the National League pennant . He led the league 's catchers in putouts , baserunners caught stealing , finished second in assists and , once again guided the Giants ' pitching staff to the lowest earned run average in the league . The Giants would go down in defeat against the powerful New York Yankees in the 1936 World Series . Mancuso finished the year ranked eighth in voting for the 1936 National League Most Valuable Player Award . 
 In 1937 , Mancuso was hitting for a .283 average at mid @-@ season to earn his second berth as a reserve for the National League team in the 1937 All @-@ Star Game . A few days after the All @-@ Star Game , a foul tip broke the ring finger on Mancuso 's right hand . Harry Danning replaced him and played well enough that , when Mancuso was healthy again , the two shared the catching duties for the rest of the season . The Giants clinched their second consecutive National League pennant and , once again faced the New York Yankees in the 1937 World Series . Mancuso started the first two World Series games but , when he went hitless , Danning took over as the Yankees went on to win the series in five games . Danning took over as the Giants ' starting catcher for the 1938 season with Mancuso hitting a respectable .348 with a .411 on @-@ base percentage in 52 games . 
 The Giants traded Mancuso to the Chicago Cubs before the 1939 season where he shared catching duties with 38 @-@ year @-@ old player @-@ manager Gabby Hartnett . He ended the season with a .231 batting average with only two home runs and 17 runs batted in . With the shortage of major league players due to the Second World War , Mancuso saw his career extended for another four years . He played the 1940 season with the Brooklyn Dodgers before the Cardinals brought him back to St. Louis for the 1941 season . Mancuso helped develop the Cardinals ' rookie catcher and future star , Walker Cooper but , when Cooper was injured , Mancuso caught the majority of the Cardinals ' games in 1941 . He was credited with helping the Cardinals to a second @-@ place finish due to his work with rookie pitchers Ernie White ( 17 @-@ 7 ) and Howie Krist ( 10 @-@ 0 ) , but only managed to post a .229 batting average . 
 Mancuso returned to the Giants in 1942 as a backup catcher and pitching coach . When Harry Danning was drafted into the United States Army , Mancuso became the club 's starting catcher at age 37 , sharing the job with 35 @-@ year @-@ old future Hall of Fame member , Ernie Lombardi for the 1943 and 1944 seasons . At the end of the 1944 season , one month before his 39th birthday , he was released by the Giants . Former teammate Freddie Fitzsimmons was managing the Philadelphia Phillies in 1945 and , convinced Mancuso to play one more season as a catcher and full @-@ time pitching coach . He caught 70 games while sharing catching duties with Andy Seminick but , when Fitzsimmons was fired , Mancuso left the club before the end of the season , playing his final game on September 11 at the age of 40 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 In a 17 @-@ year major league career , Mancuso played in 1 @,@ 460 games , accumulating 1 @,@ 194 hits in 4 @,@ 505 at bats for a .265 career batting average along with 53 home runs , 543 runs batted in and an on @-@ base percentage of .328 . He retired with a <unk> fielding percentage . A two @-@ time All @-@ Star , he led National League catchers three times in putouts , and twice in baserunners caught stealing and in range factor . His 49 @.@ 33 % career caught stealing percentage ranks 16th all @-@ time among major league catchers . Mancuso was a member of five pennant @-@ winning teams . He caught for five pitchers who were inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame ( Carl Hubbell , Grover Cleveland Alexander , Dizzy Dean , Burleigh Grimes and Jesse Haines ) . In his book , The Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract , baseball historian Bill James ranked Mancuso 74th all @-@ time among major league catchers . 
 = = Coaching and broadcasting career = = 
 In 1946 , Mancuso became the player @-@ manager of the minor league Tulsa Oilers and in 1948 he took over as manager of the San Antonio Missions . In 1950 , he was hired as the pitching coach for the Cincinnati Reds . 
 Mancuso began a career as a broadcaster in 1951 with his hometown Houston team in the Texas League . He later moved to St. Louis where he worked with play @-@ by @-@ play announcer Harry Caray on the Cardinals ' radio network until 1954 . He then served as a scout for the St. Louis Cardinals and the Houston Colt .45s. His younger brother , Frank Mancuso , also was a major league catcher in the mid @-@ 1940s . In 1962 Mancuso was seriously injured in a traffic accident which killed his wife , Lorena Mancuso . 
 Mancuso was inducted into the Texas Sports Hall of Fame in 1981 and was elected to the National Italian American Sports Hall of Fame in 1984 . Mancuso contracted emphysema and died in 1984 at the age of 78 in Houston , Texas . 
 = = Related links = = 
 List of athletes on Wheaties boxes 
 List of members of the Italian American Sports Hall of Fame 
 = Atic Atac = 
 Atic Atac is an arcade @-@ adventure video game developed and published by Ultimate Play The Game , released for the ZX Spectrum and the BBC Micro in 1983 . The game takes place within a castle in which the player must seek out the " Golden Key of ACG " through unlocking doors and avoiding enemies . It was Ultimate 's second game to require 48K of RAM ; most of their previous games for the Spectrum ran on unexpanded 16K models . 
 The game was written by Tim Stamper and graphics were designed by Chris Stamper . Atic Atac received praise from critics upon release , mostly for its graphics and isometric gameplay . It was later included in Rare 's 2015 Xbox One retrospective compilation , Rare Replay . The game served as inspiration for the critically acclaimed adventure game show Knightmare . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is presented in a top @-@ down perspective and is set inside a labyrinth of a complex castle . The player has been trapped inside and needs to collect three pieces of the " Golden Key of ACG " in order to escape . They can choose from three different characters ; a Wizard , Knight or Serf . Each character has access to a secret passage unique to them , meaning that navigating the castle is different for each one . 
 There are a number of items scattered around the castle , of which the player may carry up to three at a time . Some of these are always in the same place at the start of the game , whereas others are distributed randomly . Items include differently @-@ coloured keys which will unlock their respective doors , the three pieces of the ACG key , and other items that affect certain enemies or are mere red herrings . Common enemies appear in each room upon entering and will attack the player on sight . Collision with these enemies destroys them but drains a portion of the player 's health . There are also stationary poisonous fungi which will drain health constantly if the player is in contact with them , and enemies that require special items in order to either distract , repel or kill them , otherwise they remain invulnerable to conventional attacks . Bosses guard pieces of the ACG key , and contact with them will rapidly drain away the player 's health . 
 The player has a number of lives upon starting the game , and should they die a gravestone will appear at their location and stay in place as long as the player has lives left . Health can be replenished by collecting food scattered throughout the castle , however it will constantly drop the more the player moves , thus the player may eventually die from starvation if they have not escaped the castle in time . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ashby Computers and Graphics was founded by brothers Tim and Chris Stamper , along with Tim 's wife , Carol , from their headquarters in Ashby @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Zouch in 1982 . Under the trading name of Ultimate Play The Game , they began producing multiple video games for the ZX Spectrum throughout the early 1980s . Prior to founding Ultimate , the Stamper brothers had backgrounds in designing arcade machines , but no marketing experience in the video game sector . 
 The operations of Ultimate were secretive and the Stamper brothers rarely gave interviews . Computer and Video Games noted that during development of Atic Atac , staff would work in " separate teams " to ensure quality control ; one team would work on graphics whilst the other would oversee gameplay or sound . The Stamper brothers worked seven days a week with little sleep in order to devote more time into developing video games , and would frequently re @-@ use the same mechanics of their earlier games into newer ZX Spectrum games . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The game received a positive critical reception upon release . Micro Adventurer mainly praised Ultimate 's capabilities of developing high quality games , saying that Atic Atac was " bound to fix their name firmly into the minds of adventurers " , further recommending the game " without reservation " . Crash enjoyed the game 's colourful graphics , heralding the detail and objects of the game to be " marvellous " . However , they criticised the difficult joystick control and vague instructions , adding that the entire game is a " learning experience " . Computer and Video Games stated that the game was " the best yet from Ultimate " , and later in 1984 described it as " the favourite arcade adventure amongst computer <unk> " . Personal Computer Games wrote that it was " another blockbuster game " , while Sinclair User praised both the depth of plot and the advanced graphics , citing them both as " superb " . 
 In 1991 , Atic Atac was ranked as the 79th best ZX Spectrum game of all time by Your Sinclair , and was voted the 8th best game of all time by the readers of Retro Gamer Magazine for an article that was scheduled to be in a special Your Sinclair Tribute issue . In 2007 , Eurogamer described it as a prime example of " what passion can do when properly digitised " . The game was Ultimate 's third consecutive number one in the UK Spectrum sales chart , following the first two Jetman games . In 2015 , the game was included in Rare Replay , a collection of 30 Rare @-@ designed games released for the Xbox One gaming console . 
 The game was a major inspiration for the critically acclaimed CITV game show Knightmare , with producer Tim Child realising that if a ZX Spectrum could run a compelling adventure game , then a television programme with pre @-@ rendered graphics could revolutionise the genre . Sabre Wulf , which was released for the ZX Spectrum by Ultimate Play The Game later in 1984 , was often criticised for having similar gameplay to Atic Atac , including its similar themes of a continuous maze . In a retrospective interview with Retro Gamer , Rare designer Greg Mayles asserted that their 2003 game Grabbed by the Ghoulies was not inspired by Atic Atac , despite their similar themes of a haunted mansion . 
 = Otro Día Más Sin Verte = 
 Otro Día Más Sin Verte ( English : Just Another Day ) , also called Sentir in Spain , is the Spanish @-@ language debut album by Cuban singer Jon Secada . It was released on October 6 , 1992 by EMI Latin to coincide with his English @-@ language self @-@ titled debut album , which was released in April 1992 . The idea to release an all Spanish @-@ language album was pitched by Secada 's music mentor Emilio Estefan , after realizing that SBK Records have yet released such an album . Estefan presented Secada 's proposal for a Spanish @-@ language recording to the head of Capitol EMI Records Charles Koppelman and then president of EMI Latin Jose Behar . Koppelman accepted the proposal after Behar stated that he could see " market potential " for Secada . With the help of Emilio 's wife , Gloria Estefan , Secada translated selected compositions from his English @-@ language debut album for Otro Día Más Sin Verte . 
 The album spawned five singles ; its title track , " Angel " , " Cree En Nuestro Amor " , " Sentir " , and " Tiempo Al Tiempo " . The first four singles peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart , becoming the first Latin artist to do so . Secada held the record for most number ones from a single album , until Spanish Latin pop singer Enrique Iglesias broke the record in 1997 . Secada became the first Hispanic artist of color to have a number one song on the Hot Latin Tracks chart . The album peaked at number four on the US Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart and number eight on the US Billboard Top Latin Albums chart . Otro Día Más Sin Verte helped Secada to win Male Artist of the Year and New Artist of the Year at the 1993 Premio Lo Nuestro Awards . The album won the Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Album in 1993 . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jon Secada was a backup vocalist for Cuban singer Gloria Estefan in 1989 . He became close friends with Gloria and her husband , Emilio Estefan who helped guide Secada into the music business . Secada released his self @-@ titled debut album in 1992 with SBK Records . The recording was made up of English @-@ language compositions and two Spanish @-@ language tracks . It was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of three million copies . His popularity as a singer grew with the release of his debut album . While on tour for the album , Secada remarked on how Emilio began coining the idea of releasing a full @-@ length Spanish @-@ language recording . Emilio had the idea after realizing that SBK Records never released a Spanish @-@ language album . According to Secada , writing in his autobiography , Emilio pitched his ideas to EMI Latin , a subsidiary of Capitol EMI Records . Secada explained that Emilio went " full throttle " and wanted Secada to be a crossover artist with " major international appeal . " 
 After Secada 's debut album was a commercial success , Emilio met the executives at EMI Records . Emilio explained to the executives about Secada 's background and that an album in Spanish by Secada wouldn 't cost them anything because " he can do it himself . " Jose Behar , then @-@ president of EMI Latin , told Emilio that he quickly " recognized the market potential " for Secada . Behar suggested to the head of EMI Records , Charles Koppelman , that Secada should record his first Spanish @-@ language album ; Koppelman accepted the proposal . 
 During the recording sessions , Secada confirmed that Gloria helped translate his English @-@ language recordings into Spanish . He said that she told him to record songs that he would be comfortable with singing throughout his career as a singer . She later told Secada and Emilio to not " translate everything literally " but to " keep the same theme of the song in play . " Secada wrote in his autobiography that he was " grateful " that he and Gloria grew up in Miami , Florida and spoke two languages . Secada said that recording in Spanish was " instinctively more passionate " when compared to his recordings in English , he also explained that it gave him " a different connection to the music as well . " However , Chris Morris of Billboard , said that Secada lacked the emotional range that was present in his English @-@ language debut album . Two of the songs " Angel " and the title track were originally on the English @-@ language album as Spanish tracks . Four of the songs , including " Como En Un Sueño " , " Tu Amor Es Mi Libertad " , " Cree En Nuestro Amor " , and " Sentir " , were translated into Spanish from Secada 's debut album . 
 = = Release and singles = = 
 Once translation of the selected recordings were complete , Secada recorded them and released the album six months after his debut album Jon Secada was released on October 6 , 1992 . Otro Día Más Sin Verte peaked at number four on the US Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart in 1992 and number eight on the US Billboard Top Latin Albums chart the following year . The album 's lead single " Otro Dia Mas Sin Verte " peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot Latin Tracks on the week ending July 4 , 1992 . The second single released from the album , " Angel " , peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart on the week ending October 31 , 1992 . " Angel " was written about a woman Secada met in Amsterdam . He wrote in his autobiography that " writing those songs crystallized for me the fact that I was missing out on a deep emotional connection . " John Lannert of Billboard called " Angel " a " dramatic love ode " , the song remained atop the Hot Latin Tracks chart for two consecutive weeks . " Cree En Nuestro Amor " , released as the third single from the album on August 15 , 1992 , also peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot Latin Tracks on February 27 , 1993 . 
 The fourth single released from the recording , " Sentir " , peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart on the week ending July 3 , 1993 . By placing four singles atop the Hot Latin Tracks chart , Secada became the first Latin artist to accomplish this feat . Spanish Latin pop singer Enrique Iglesias broke Secada 's record with five number one singles from his self @-@ titled album in 1997 . When the album 's lead single " Otro Día Más Sin Verte " peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart , Secada became the first Hispanic artist of color to do so . Secada released his fifth single from his album , " Tiempo Al Tiempo " , debuted at number 33 on the US Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart on the week ending August 14 , 1993 , it later peaked at number nine . Otro Día Más Sin Verte was re @-@ released digitally on March 3 , 2003 . It was re @-@ released on compact disc on July 19 , 2005 . 
 = = Legacy and reception = = 
 Cordelia Candelaria wrote in her book Encyclopedia of Latino Popular Culture ( 2004 ) that Otro Día Más Sin Verte helped Secada " [ infiltrate ] the Latin music culture " . Carlos Bolívar Ramírez called the singles " Otro Día Más Sin Verte " and " Angel " rock ballads in his book La <unk> : <unk> universal ( 2001 ) . The album was a commercial success in Spain where Secada was named " Best Adult Contemporary Artist of the early 1990s " by Humberto López Morales in his book El español en el mundo : <unk> del Instituto Cervantes ( 2008 ) . Chuck Taylor of Billboard called Secada 's new Spanish offerings as having a " tailored , uptempo Latin vibe . " Taylor called Secada 's transition from recording songs in English to Spanish as " positioning [ Secada ] as more of a romantic Latin idol than his mainstream American image as a passionate pop singer . " 
 Otro Día Más Sin Verte was a commercial and critical success . The album won Best Latin Pop Album at the 35th Grammy Awards in 1993 . The titular single became the fourth best @-@ performing song of 1992 . Secada was nominated for Top New Artist , Top Male Artist , and Best Director at the 1992 Billboard Music Awards . He also won BMI 's Latin Song of the Year for the title track . The title track became the first song by a Latin artist to peak within the top five of the Hot 100 , Hot Adult Contemporary , and the Hot Latin Tracks chart simultaneously , since Gloria 's 1989 single " Don 't Wanna Lose You " / " Si Voy a <unk> " . 
 Secada became the first Cuban @-@ born recording artist to place a single atop the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks since Franco 's 1988 single " María " . Otro Día Más Sin Verte led Secada a nomination at the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) Awards for Songwriter of the Year ( for " Cree En Nuestro Amor " ) and Latin Pop Songs of the year ( for " Sentir " ) in 1993 . The album led Secada to win Male Artist of the Year and New Artist of the Year at the 1993 Lo Nuestro Awards . The recording 's single , " Angel " , was nominated for Pop Song of the Year , while the title track was nominated for Video of the Year at the same event . The album itself was nominated Pop Album of the Year at the 1994 Lo Nuestro Awards , but lost to Aries by Luis Miguel . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 Credits are taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 Jon Secada — vocals , composer , producer 
 Jorge Casas — music producer 
 Emilio Estefan Jr . — producer 
 Clay Ostwald — producer 
 Gloria Estefan — composer 
 Willy Pérez Feria — composer 
 Miguel <unk> — composer 
 Joseph Stefano — composer 
 Maria Teresa Vera — composer 
 Henry Marquez — cover designer , graphic designer 
 Carla Leighton — designer 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = Shunzhi Emperor = 
 The Shunzhi Emperor ( 15 March 1638 – 5 February 1661 ) , formerly romanized as the Shun @-@ chih Emperor , was the third emperor of the Qing dynasty and the first Qing emperor to rule over China , from 1644 to 1661 . A committee of Manchu princes chose him to succeed his father , Hong Taiji ( 1592 – 1643 ) , in September 1643 , when he was five years old . The princes also appointed two co @-@ regents : Dorgon ( 1612 – 1650 ) , the 14th son of the Qing dynasty 's founder Nurhaci ( 1559 – 1626 ) , and Jirgalang ( 1599 – 1655 ) , one of Nurhaci 's nephews , both of whom were members of the Qing imperial clan . 
 From 1643 to 1650 , political power lay mostly in the hands of Dorgon . Under his leadership , the Qing Empire conquered most of the territory of the fallen Ming dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) , chased Ming loyalist regimes deep into the southwestern provinces , and established the basis of Qing rule over China despite highly unpopular policies such as the " hair cutting command " of 1645 , which forced Qing subjects to shave their forehead and braid their remaining hair into a queue resembling that of the Manchus . After Dorgon 's death on the last day of 1650 , the young Shunzhi Emperor started to rule personally . He tried , with mixed success , to fight corruption and to reduce the political influence of the Manchu nobility . In the 1650s , he faced a resurgence of Ming loyalist resistance , but by 1661 his armies had defeated the Qing Empire 's last enemies , seafarer Koxinga ( 1624 – 1662 ) and the Prince of Gui ( 1623 – 1662 ) of the Southern Ming dynasty , both of whom would succumb the following year . The Shunzhi Emperor died at the age of 22 of smallpox , a highly contagious disease that was endemic in China , but against which the Manchus had no immunity . He was succeeded by his third son Xuanye , who had already survived smallpox , and who reigned for sixty years under the era name " Kangxi " ( hence he was known as the Kangxi Emperor ) . Because fewer documents have survived from the Shunzhi era than from later eras of the Qing dynasty , the Shunzhi era is a relatively little @-@ known period of Qing history . 
 " Shunzhi " was the name of this ruler 's reign period in Chinese . This title had equivalents in Manchu and Mongolian because the Qing imperial family was Manchu , and ruled over many Mongol tribes that helped the Qing to conquer China . The emperor 's personal name was Fulin , and the posthumous name by which he was worshipped at the Imperial Ancestral Temple was <unk> ( Wade – Giles : Shih @-@ tsu ; Chinese : <unk> ) . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 In the 1580s , when China was ruled by the Ming dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) , a number of Jurchen tribes lived northeast of Ming territory in the region that is now known as China 's Northeast , or " Manchuria . " In a series of campaigns from the 1580s to the 1610s , Nurhaci ( 1559 – 1626 ) , the leader of the Jianzhou Jurchens , unified most Jurchen tribes under his rule . One of his most important reforms was to integrate Jurchen clans under flags of four different colors — yellow , white , red , and blue — each further subdivided into two to form an encompassing social and military system known as the Eight Banners . Nurhaci gave control of these Banners to his sons and grandsons . Around 1612 , Nurhaci renamed his clan Aisin Gioro ( " golden Gioro " ) , both to distinguish his family from other Gioro lines and to allude to an earlier dynasty that had been founded by Jurchens , the Jin ( " golden " ) dynasty that had ruled northern China from 1115 to 1234 . In 1616 Nurhaci formally announced the foundation of the " Later Jin " dynasty , effectively declaring his independence from the Ming . Over the next few years he wrested most major cities in Liaodong from Ming control . His string of victories ended in February 1626 at the siege of <unk> , where Ming commander Yuan <unk> defeated him with the help of recently acquired Portuguese cannon . Probably hurt during the battle , Nurhaci died a few months later . 
 Nurhaci 's son and successor Hong Taiji ( 1592 – 1643 ) continued his father 's state @-@ building efforts : he concentrated power into his own hands , modeled the Later Jin 's government institutions on Chinese ones , and integrated Mongol allies and surrendered Chinese troops into the Eight Banners . In 1629 he led an incursion to the outskirts of Beijing , during which he captured Chinese craftsmen who knew how to cast Portuguese cannon . In 1635 Hong Taiji renamed the Jurchens the " Manchus , " and in 1636 changed the name of his polity from " Later Jin " to " Qing . " After capturing the last remaining Ming cities in Liaodong , by 1643 the Qing was preparing to seize upon the struggling Ming dynasty , which was crumbling under the combined weight of financial bankruptcy , devastating epidemics , and large @-@ scale bandit uprisings fed by widespread starvation . 
 = = Becoming emperor = = 
 When Hong Taiji died on 21 September 1643 without having named a successor , the fledgling Qing state faced a possibly serious crisis . Several contenders — namely Nurhaci 's second and eldest surviving son <unk> , Nurhaci 's fourteenth and fifteenth sons Dorgon and Dodo ( both born to the same mother ) , and Hong Taiji 's eldest son Hooge — started to vie for the throne . With his brothers Dodo and <unk> , Dorgon ( 31 years old ) controlled the Plain and Bordered White Banners , <unk> ( 60 ) was in charge of the two Red Banners , whereas Hooge ( 34 ) had the loyalty of his father 's two Yellow Banners . 
 The decision about who would become the new Qing emperor fell to the Deliberative Council of Princes and Ministers , which was the Manchus ' main policymaking body until the emergence of the Grand Council in the 1720s . Many Manchu princes advocated that Dorgon , a proven military leader , should become the new emperor , but Dorgon refused and insisted that one of Hong Taiji 's sons should succeed his father . To recognize Dorgon 's authority while keeping the throne in Hong Taiji 's descent line , the members of the council named Hong Taiji 's ninth son , Fulin , as the new Emperor , but decided that Dorgon and Jirgalang ( a nephew of Nurhaci who controlled the Bordered Blue Banner ) would act as the five @-@ year @-@ old child 's regents . Fulin was officially crowned Emperor of the Qing dynasty on 8 October 1643 ; it was decided that he would reign under the era name " Shunzhi . " Because the Shunzhi reign is not well documented , it constitutes a relatively little @-@ known period of Qing history . 
