 Chris Martin – vocals , piano , synthesizer 
 Jonny Buckland – electric guitar 
 Guy Berryman – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Will Champion – drums , backing vocals 
 = = Track listing = = 
 UK CD <unk> , 7 " <unk> , 12 " <unk> , 10 " <unk> 
 Australia CD 872 <unk> released 23 May 2005 by Capitol Records 
 Japan CD <unk> @-@ <unk> released 11 May 2005 by Toshiba @-@ EMI 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Third Transjordan attack = 
 The Third Transjordan attack by Chaytor 's Force , part of the British Empire 's Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) , took place between 21 and 25 September 1918 , against the Ottoman Empire 's Fourth Army and other Yildirim Army Group units . These operations took place during the Battle of Nablus , part of the Battle of Megiddo which began on 19 September in the final months of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign of World War I. Fought on the right flank and subsidiary to the Battle of Nablus , the Third Transjordan attack began northwards , with the assault on Kh Fasail . The following day a section of Chaytor 's Force , attacked and captured the Ottoman Empire 's 53rd Division ( Seventh Army ) on the main eastwards line of retreat out of the Judean Hills across the Jordan River . Retreating columns of the Yildirim Army Group were attacked during the battle for the Jisr ed Damieh bridge , and several fords to the south were also captured , closing this line of retreat . Leaving detachments to hold the captured bridge and fords , Chaytor 's Force began their eastwards advance by attacking and capturing the Fourth Army garrison at Shunet Nimrin on their way to capture Es Salt for a third time . With the Fourth Army 's VIII Corps in retreat , Chaytor 's Force continued their advance to attack and capture Amman on 25 September during the Second Battle of Amman . Several days later , to the south of Amman , the Fourth Army 's II Corps which had garrisoned the southern Hejaz Railway , surrendered to Chaytor 's Force at Ziza , effectively ending military operations in the area . 
 The British Empire victories during the Third Transjordan attack resulted in the occupation of many miles of Ottoman territory and the capture of the equivalent of one Ottoman corps . Meanwhile , the remnants of the Fourth Army were forced to retreat in disarray north to Damascus , along with the remnants of the Seventh and Eighth Armies after the EEF victories during the Battle of Sharon and Battle of Nablus . Fighting extended from the Mediterranean Sea during these seven days of battle , resulting in the capture of many thousands of prisoners , and extensive territory . After several days pursuing remnant columns , Desert Mounted Corps captured Damascus on 1 October . The surviving remnants of Yildirim Army Group which escaped Damascus were pursued north during the Pursuit to Haritan when Homs was occupied and Aleppo was captured by Prince Feisal 's Sherifial Army Force . Soon after , on 30 October , the Armistice of Mudros was signed between the Allies and the Ottoman Empire , ending the Sinai and Palestine campaign . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the victory at the Battle of Jerusalem at the end of 1917 , and the Capture of Jericho in February 1918 , the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) crossed the Jordan River , establishing bridgeheads in March prior to the First Transjordan attack on Amman . These bridgeheads remained after the Second Transjordan attacks on Shunet Nimrin and Es Salt when a second withdrawal back to the Jordan Valley took place from 3 to 5 May . This marked the end of major operations in the area until September 1918 . General Edmund Allenby , the commander of the EEF , decided to occupy the Jordan Valley during the summer of 1918 for a number of reasons . A retreat out of the valley would further enhance the morale of the German and Ottoman forces , and their standing among the peoples living in the region , following their two Transjordan victories . So important did Allenby consider the support of the Hedjaz Arabs to the defence of his right flank , that they were substantially subsidised : 
 I think we shall manage the subsidy required as well as the extra £ 50 @,@ 000 you require for Northern Operations ... I am urging for another £ 500 @,@ 000 additional to the £ 400 @,@ 000 en route from Australia and I am sure you will do what you can , through the WO to represent the importance of not risking a delay again in the payment of our Arab subsidy . 
 The road from the Hedjaz railway station at Amman to Shunet Nimrin remained a serious threat to the occupation of the Jordan Valley , as a large German and Ottoman force could quickly be moved along this line of communication from Amman to Shunet Nimrin , from where they could mount a major attack into the Jordan Valley . As Allenby explains , 
 I am not strong enough to make holding attacks on both flanks , and the Turks can transfer their reserves from flank to flank as required . The Turks have more of these , the VII Army have 2400 , and the VIII Army 5800 in Reserve . I must maintain my hold on the bridges of the Jordan , and my control of the Dead Sea . This will cause the Turks to keep a considerable force watching me , and ease pressure on Feisal and his forces . It is absolutely essential to me that he should continue to be active . He is a sensible , well – informed man ; and he is fully alive to the limitations imposed on me . I keep in close touch with him , through Lawrence . I have now in the valley two Mounted Divisions and an Indian Infantry Brigade . I cannot lessen this number yet . 
 By July , Allenby was " very anxious to make a move in September , " when he aimed to capture Tulkarm , Nablus and the Jisr ed Damieh bridge across the Jordan River . He stated , " The possession by the Turks of the road Nablus – Jisr ed <unk> – Es Salt is of great advantage to them ; and , until I get it , I can 't occupy Es Salt with my troops or the Arabs . " He hoped the capture of this important Ottoman line of communication from Nablus along the Wadi Fara to the Jordan River at Jisr ed Damieh and on to Es Salt would also " encourage both my own new Indian troops and my Arab Allies . " 
 = = = EEF front line = = = 
 From the departure of the Australian Mounted Division in August steps were taken to make it appear the valley was still fully garrisoned . On 11 September the 10th Cavalry Brigade , which included the Scinde Horse , left the Jordan Valley . They marched via Jericho , 19 miles ( 31 km ) to Talaat de Dumm , then a further 20 miles ( 32 km ) to <unk> , reaching Ramleh on 17 September in preparation for the beginning of the Battle of Megiddo . 
 Chaytor 's Force held the right flank from their junction with the XX Corps in the Judean Hills 8 miles ( 13 km ) north west of Jericho , across the Jordan Valley , and then southwards through the <unk> and Auja bridgeheads to the Dead Sea . This area was overlooked by well sited Ottoman or German long range guns and an observation post on El Haud . 
 = = = Ottoman front line = = = 
 The Ottoman front line had been strengthened after the Second Transjordan attack . It began in the south , where Ottoman cavalry guarded tracks to Madaba before continuing with strongly wired entrenchments . In front of these , advanced posts extended from the foothills opposite the ford across the Jordan River at Makhadet <unk> to about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of the Jericho to Es Salt road . The road had been cut at the <unk> Bridge before the First Transjordan attack , in the vicinity of Shunet Nimrin . The front line was strengthened by advanced posts which were also wired on the left flank at Qabr Said , Kh. el <unk> and Qabr Mujahid . From their right flank in the foothills a wired line of redoubts and trenches facing south ran from 8 @,@ 000 yards ( 7 @,@ 300 m ) north of Shunet Nimrin , across the Jordan Valley to the Jordan River , 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) south of the Umm esh Shert ford . This line was continued west of the river by a series of individual " wired @-@ in redoubts with good fields of fire , " then as a series of trenches and redoubts along the northern or left bank of the Wadi Mellaha . These were followed by a " series of trenches and redoubts towards Bakr Ridge which were entrenched but not wired . A strong advanced position of well built <unk> and [ sic ] [ which were ] wired in was held at Baghalat . " Bakr Ridge in the Judean Hills was situated to the west of the salient at El <unk> which was held by the EEF . The Ottoman front line was supported by entrenched positions on Red Hill beside the Jordan River , which was also the site of their main artillery observation point . 
 = = = Battle of Megiddo 19 to 20 September = = = 
 During the first 36 hours of the Battle of Megiddo , between 04 : 30 on 19 September and 17 : 00 on 20 September , the German and Ottoman front line had been cut by infantry of the EEF 's XXI Corps . This allowed the cavalry of the Desert Mounted Corps to pass through the gap and begin their ride towards their objectives at Afulah , Nazareth , and Beisan . The two Ottoman armies were left without effective communications , and so could not organize any combined action against the continuing onslaught by the British Empire infantry in the Judean Hills . The Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies were forced to withdraw northwards along the main roads and railways from Tulkarm and Nablus , which converged to run through the Dothan Pass to Jenin on the Esdrealon Plain . There , retreating columns from these two Ottoman armies would be captured during the evening of 20 September by the 3rd Light Horse Brigade , who already occupied the town . 
 = = = Liman von Sanders escapes = = = 
 Otto Liman von Sanders , the commander of the Yildirim Army Group , was forced out of his headquarters at Nazareth during the Battle of Nazareth on the morning of 20 September by elements of the 5th Cavalry Division . He drove via Tiberias and Samakh where he alerted the garrisons , to arrive at Deraa on the morning of 21 September , on his way to Damascus . At Deraa , Liman von Sanders received a report from the Fourth Army , which he ordered to withdraw to the Deraa to Irbid line without waiting for the troops which garrisoned the southern Hejaz . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Chaytor 's Force = = = 
 While the Battles of Sharon and Nablus were taking place , it was necessary to deploy a strong force , to defend the right flank of the Desert Mounted Corps , the XXI and the XX Corps fighting from the Mediterranean coast and into the Judean Hills . Their right flank in Jordan Valley was protected by Chaytor 's Force from the threat of a flanking attack by the Ottoman Fourth Army . This composite force commanded by Major General Edward Chaytor has been described by Bou as " nearly equivalent to two divisions , " being a reinforced mounted infantry division of 11 @,@ 000 men . By the end of operations on 30 September Chaytor 's Force consisted of " 8 @,@ 000 British , 3 @,@ 000 Indian , 500 Egyptian Camel Transport Corps troops . " 
 = = = = Medical support = = = = 
 In addition to the Anzac Mounted Division 's medical units , the 1 / 1st Welsh and the 157th Indian Field Ambulances , the Anzac Field Laboratory , and a new operating unit formed from personnel of the 14th Australian General and the 2nd Stationary Hospitals , were attached to Chaytor 's Force . 
 A receiving station was formed from the immobile sections of light horse and mounted rifle brigades ' field ambulances , a section from the 1 / 1st Welsh and the 157th Indian Field Ambulances with an operating unit , the Anzac Field Laboratory , and a detachment from an Egyptian hospital . This Receiving Station took over the site near Jericho , occupied by the main dressing station during the two Transjordan attacks , which could accommodate 200 patients in mud huts , 400 patients in tents , and 700 patients in the abandoned Desert Mounted Corps headquarters . 
 = = = = Air support = = = = 
 The Royal Air Force 's ( RAF ) ' s 5th ( Corps ) Wing , headquartered at Ramle , deployed one flight of the No. 142 Squadron RAF on 18 September to Chaytor 's Force . The flight was based at Jerusalem , with responsibility for cooperation with artillery , contact patrols , and tactical reconnaissance up to 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) in advance of Chaytor 's Force . 
 No. 1 Squadron , Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) , operating Bristol Fighters , was to carry out bombing and strategic reconnaissance missions , provide a general oversight of the whole Megiddo battlefield , and report all developments . Meanwhile , Nos. 111 and 145 Squadrons , which were equipped with <unk> aircraft , were to constantly patrol over Jenin aerodrome throughout the day to bomb and machine gun all targets in the area , and prevent any aircraft from taking off . Airco DH.9 aircraft from No. 144 Squadron were to bomb the Afulah telephone exchange and railway station , the Messudieh Junction railway lines , and the Ottoman Seventh Army headquarters and telephone exchange at Nablus . The newly arrived Handley Page bomber , armed with 16 112 @-@ pound ( 51 kg ) bombs and piloted by the Australian Ross Smith , was to support No. 144 Squadron 's bombing of Afulah . 
 = = = = Jordan Valley deployments = = = = 
 Chaytor took command of the Jordan Valley garrison on 5 September 1918 . The right sector , under the command of Brigadier General G. de L. Ryrie , was held by the 2nd Light Horse Brigade and the 20th Indian Brigade . The left sector , under the command of Brigadier @-@ General W. Meldrum , was held by the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , the 38th Battalion Royal Fusiliers , and the 1st and 2nd Battalions British West Indies Regiment , supported by a field artillery battery and an Indian mountain battery . The 39th Battalion Royal Fusiliers formed the sector reserve , while the 1st Light Horse Brigade was in force reserve . 
 While the Ottoman Fourth Army continued to hold the eastern side of the Jordan Valley , Es Salt , Amman and the Hejaz railway , Chaytor 's smaller force was to continue the EEF 's occupation of the Jordan Valley . As soon as possible , Chaytor 's Force was to advance northwards to capture the Jisr ed Damieh bridge , which would cut a main line of retreat for the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies . This was also a main line of communication between the two armies west of the Jordan River in the Judean Hills with the Fourth Army in the east . The expectation was that , the attacks on the Eighth Army by the XXI and Desert Mounted Corps , and the start of the Battle of Nablus attacks on the Seventh Army , would force the Fourth Army to withdraw northwards along the Hejaz railway to conform with the withdrawals of the Seventh and Eighth Armies . 
 = = = = Preliminary operations = = = = 
 Lieutenant General Harry Chauvel , the Australian commander of Desert Mounted Corps , instructed Chaytor to hold his ground " for the present , " but to closely watch the Ottoman forces during around @-@ the @-@ clock patrolling , and to immediately occupy any abandoned enemy positions . From 16 September , the Ottoman front line was closely monitored , while the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade and the British West Indies Regiment 's infantry battalions carried out demonstrations to the north on the western side of the Jordan River . <unk> Force was prepared to exploit all withdrawals by the Fourth Ottoman Army , including a third Occupation of Es Salt and a Second Battle of Amman . 
 In addition to the close patrol work , demonstrations against Ottoman defences were made during the nights of 17 and 18 September , by the 1st Light Horse Brigade and a regiment of 2nd Light Horse Brigade , which rode out from the bridgeheads in the Jordan Valley . The Ottoman " heavy high @-@ velocity gun " retaliated , firing shells on Jericho , and to the north of town on Chaytor 's headquarters in the Wadi <unk> . 
 = = = Yildirim Army Group = = = 
 The Yildirim Army Group commanded by von Sanders consisted of 40 @,@ 598 front line infantrymen armed with 19 @,@ 819 rifles , 273 light machine guns and 696 heavy machine guns in August 1918 . The high number of machine guns reflected the Ottoman Army 's new tables of organization and the machine gun component of the German Asia Corps . The infantry were organised into 12 divisions and deployed along the 90 kilometres ( 56 mi ) of front line from the Mediterranean to the Dead Sea : the Eighth Army from the coast into the Judean Hills , the Seventh Army in the Judean Hills and towards the Jordan , with the Fourth Army east of the Jordan River . 
 An operational reserve was formed from the 2nd Caucasian Cavalry Division in the Eighth Army area and the 3rd Cavalry Division in the Fourth Army area . 
 = = = = Fourth Army = = = = 
 The Ottoman Fourth Army consisting of 6 @,@ 000 infantry and 2 @,@ 000 cavalry supported by 74 guns was commanded by General Mohammed <unk> Pasha . The army was headquartered at Amman . This army was composed of the VIII Corps ' 48th Infantry Division , the Composite Division of a German battalion group , the Caucasus Cavalry Brigade , the division @-@ sized <unk> Group , the 24th and 62nd Infantry Divisions , with the 3rd Cavalry Division in reserve . There were 6 @,@ 000 Ottoman soldiers with 30 guns in the II Corps , known as the Seria Group or Jordan Group , which garrisoned the Hejaz railway along the line from Ma 'an southwards towards Mecca . 
 Deployment 
 The Seventh and Fourth Armies touched at Baghalat , 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) west north west of Umm esh Shert . Both sides of the Jordan River were defended by the 24th Infantry Division and the 3rd Cavalry Division , and both sides of the Ghoraniyeh to Es Salt Road were held by the VIII Corps 's 48th Division . The Composite Division was on their left , while the Caucasus Cavalry Brigade and the Mule @-@ Mounted Infantry Regiment held outposts extending southwards towards the Dead Sea . The II Corps was responsible for some 200 miles ( 320 km ) of the Hejaz Railway , a strong detachment of about seven battalions was at Ma 'an and about eight battalions were deployed between Ma 'an and Amman . The Fourth Army 's reserve was formed by the German 146th Regiment , the 3rd Cavalry Division and part of the 12th Regiment at Es Salt . 
 The Fourth Army strongly garrisoned Shunet Nimrin , the entrenched area in the foothills which had repulsed an attack by Chetwode on 18 April and a second attack at the end of April during the Second Transjordan attack . The Fourth Army also held substantial forces at Amman , and guarding tunnels and viaducts along the Hejaz railway near Amman . 
 = = Battle of Nablus eastern flank 19 to 21 September = = 
 Chaytor 's Force continued to vigorously patrol the eastern flank as the Battles of Sharon and Nablus developed . They were opposed on the western side of the Jordan River by the Ottoman 53rd Division ( Seventh Army ) to the west of Baghalat and units of the Fourth Army , which held the Ottoman front line to east of Baghalat . The Auckland Mounted Rifle and Wellington Mounted Rifle Regiments carried out patrols north from the Wadi Aujah and west of Baghalat before dawn on 19 September , but were " compelled to withdraw " due to heavy artillery and machine gun fire . Progress made by the 160th Brigade ( 53rd Division , XX Corps ) , in the Judean Hills enabled one of its mountain batteries to direct fire at the Ottoman front line position on the Bakr Ridge during the afternoon . Three companies of the 2nd Battalion British West Indies Regiment , ( Chaytor 's Force ) supported by the 160th Brigade 's battery , " drove in " Ottoman outposts and captured a ridge to the south of Bakr Ridge at 15 : 25 , despite intense enemy artillery and machine gun fire . Although heavily shelled , they dug in and held their position . The British West Indies Regiment advances towards Bakr Ridge were consolidated , and continued at dawn on 20 September , when their 2nd Battalion captured Bakr Ridge . An attack by the 38th Battalion Royal Fusiliers ( Chaytor 's Force ) at Mellaha opposed by machine gun and rifle fire , was less successful . An advance by the 1st and 2nd Battalions , British West Indies Regiment had by 7 : 00 captured Grant Ridge , Baghalat and Chalk Ridge . A large Ottoman force was seen south of Kh . Fusail in the late morning on the western side of the Jordan River . By 19 : 00 the New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigade had begun its advance towards Tel sh edh <unk> . Jericho was shelled again in the mid @-@ afternoon . 
 The 2nd Light Horse Brigade and Patiala Infantry , ( Chaytor 's Force ) advanced on 20 September eastwards across the Jordan Valley toward the strongly entrenched Shunet Nimrin position , and <unk> on the Ottoman left flank . The 6th Light Horse and 7th Light Horse Regiments , with a company of Patiala Infantry , were shelled by guns from El Haud in the foothills of Moab as they moved across the valley . Positions east of the Jordan River , including Mellaha , continued to be strongly held by Fourth Army units . 
 Aircraft reconnaissance , during a second dawn patrol on 20 September reported the whole area quiet , from Jisr ed Damieh bridge north to Beisan and from the bridge east across the Jordan Valley to Es Salt . Bristol Fighters attacked 200 vehicles at the Wadi Fara elbow , seen withdrawing from Nablus towards Khurbet <unk> . The last aerial reconnaissance of the day reported seeing a brigade of Desert Mounted Corps ' cavalry entering Beisan on the Esdrealon Plain . They also reported that three large fires were burning at Nablus railway station , while fires were also reported at the Balata dumps , and the whole Ottoman line from El Lubban to the Jordan appeared to be " alarmed " , according to Cutlack . 
 Only the Fourth Army remained intact by 21 September after the successful attacks during the Battle of Sharon and the Battle of Nablus . Allenby 's next priority became the destruction of the Fourth Army , which had begun to move to conform with the withdrawals of the Seventh and Eighth Armies . Chaytor 's Force was to advance eastwards to capture Es Salt and Amman , and to intercept and capture the 4 @,@ 600 @-@ strong southern Hejaz garrison . During the first days of the Battle of Megiddo , the Fourth Army had remained in position , while Chaytor 's Force carried out demonstrations against it . 
 = = = Asia Corps retreat = = = 
 Liman von Sanders had been out of contact with his three armies until he reached Samakh on the afternoon of 20 September . As soon as he was able , he placed the 16th and 19th Infantry Divisions of the Asia Corps ( Eighth Army ) under his direct orders . These two divisions made contact with Asia Corps commander von Oppen to the west of Nablus during the morning of 21 September , when Asia Corps was being reorganised ; remnants of the 702nd and 703rd Battalions ( Asia Corps ) were amalgamated into one battalion , while the 701st Battalion remained intact . At 10 : 00 that morning , von Oppen was informed that the EEF was approaching Nablus and that the Wadi Fara road was blocked . He attempted to retreat down to the Jordan at the Jisr ed Damieh bridge via Beit Dejan , 7 miles ( 11 km ) east south east of Nablus , but found this way blocked by Chaytor 's Force . He then ordered a retreat via Mount Ebal , leaving behind all guns and baggage . Asia Corps bivouacked at Tammun with the 16th and 19th Divisions at Tubas on the evening of 21 September , unaware that Desert Mounted Corps had already occupied Beisan . 
 = = = Capture of Kh Fasail on 21 September = = = 
 The Seventh and Fourth Armies had begun to withdraw , and before dawn on 21 September Chaytor ordered the Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment to advance and capture Kh Fasail , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Baghalat on the road to the Jisr ed Damieh bridge . The regiment , supported by one section of their brigade 's machine gun squadron and two guns from 29th Indian Mountain Battery , advanced along an old Roman road on the western bank of the Jordan River , with patrols pushed towards Jisr ed Damieh and Umm esh Shert . They captured Kh Fusail and Tel es edh <unk> , along with 26 prisoners and two machine guns . Shortly afterwards the regiment discovered an Ottoman defensive line stretching from the ford at Mafid Jozele on the Jordan River to El <unk> 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) to the north west , defending the Jisr ed Damieh bridge . Units of the Seventh Army were seen withdrawing along the Wadi el Fara road from Nablus towards the Jisr ed Damieh bridge . This Ottoman defensive line was reported at 08 : 05 to be strongly held , but movement in the rear was detected and at 16 : 15 the Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment reported they were withdrawing from Mafid Jozele . 
 Meldrum 's Force , commanded by Brigadier @-@ General W. Meldrum , was formed at 20 : 30 from the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade and their machine gun squadron , mounted sections of the 1st and 2nd Battalions British West Indies Regiment , the 29th Indian Mountain Battery , and the Ayrshire ( or Inverness ) Battery RHA . This force concentrated half an hour later east of Musallabeh , to begin their advance to Kh . Fusail where they arrived just before midnight . At the same time , the Commander Royal Artillery ( CRA ) pushed guns forward into Mellaha to attack Ottoman guns on Red Hill on the eastern bank of the Jordan River , while the 1st Light Horse Brigade took over the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade position at <unk> . 
 Kh . Fusail was about half way to the Jisr ed Damieh bridge , and after waiting for the dismounted sections of Meldrum 's Force to arrive , the consolidated force advanced to attack Jisr ed Damieh . The 2nd Battalion , British West Indies Regiment remained to garrison Kh . Fusail , occupying a position at Talat Armah to protect Meldrum 's right flank and rear , and if necessary to block the track from Mafid Jozele . Aerial reconnaissance flights during the evening of 21 September , confirmed that Shunet Nimrin in the rear of Meldrum 's Force was still strongly garrisoned , and that the roads and tracks running west from Amman were carrying normal traffic . 
 = = Battle for Jordan River crossings 22 September = = 
 = = = Jisr ed Damieh = = = 
 Chaytor ordered Meldrum to cut the Wadi el Fara road from Nablus to Es Salt west of the Jordan River , occupy the headquarters of the Ottoman 53rd Division at El Makhruk , and capture the Jisr ed Damieh on the Wadi el Fara road over the Jordan River . Meldrum 's Force left Kh Fusail at midnight on 22 September with the Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment as vanguard , followed by the 1st Battalion British West Indies Regiment , which dumped their kits and blankets to move " at once " towards the bridge . 
 The Auckland and Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiments advanced north along a Roman road , across a narrow plain between the Judean Hills to the west , but exposed to artillery fire on the eastern side across the Jordan River . The Auckland Mounted Rifle Regiment 's objective was to capture the Damieh crossing from the north east , while the Wellington Mounted Rifle Regiment 's objectives were to make a frontal attack on El Makhruk , capture the headquarters of the Ottoman 53rd Division , and cut the Nablus road . 
 The Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiment , with one section of machine gun squadron attached , reached the Nablus to Jisr ed Damieh road early on the morning of 22 September and captured their objectives . Meanwhile the Auckland and Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiments , supported by the 1st Battalion , British West Indies Regiment , advanced to attack the Ottoman garrison holding Jisr ed Damieh . After a " hot fight " by the infantry and mounted riflemen , they forced the defenders to withdraw in disorder , and the bridge was captured intact . 
 = = = Umm esh Shert and Mafid Jozele fords = = = 
 To the south of Jisr ed Damieh , the Umm esh Shert ford was captured by the 38th Battalion Royal Fusiliers ( Chaytor 's Force ) . At 03 : 00 on 22 September they took advantage of the absence of Ottoman defenders at Mellaha , to advance to occupy trenches overlooking the ford at Umm esh Shert , which was captured shortly afterwards . 
 The Mafid <unk> ford was captured by the 2nd Battalion British West Indies Regiment , reinforced by the 3rd Light Horse Regiment , 1st Light Horse Brigade . Despite encountering strong resistance at <unk> umm <unk> , this force attacked and " drove in " the rearguard defending the ford and an Ottoman column withdrawing across the ford . Mafid Jozele was captured by 05 : 50 on 23 September , along with 37 prisoners , but the bridge had been destroyed at the ford . The last remaining Ottoman defences on the western bank of the Jordan south of the Jisr ed Damieh bridge had thus been captured , although most of the Ottoman defenders of these two fords managed to escape . Captures included 105 prisoners , 4 machine guns , 4 automatic rifles , transport , horses and stores . 
 = = = Air support on 22 September = = = 
 No. 1 Squadron ( AFC ) patrols found the Shunet Nimrin garrison still in place on the morning of 22 September , but Rujm el <unk> camp ( to the east of Jericho , half way between the Jordan River and the Hedjaz railway ) had been broken up , and fires burned west of the Amman railway station . Ain es Sir camp ( south east of Es Salt , half way between the Jordan River and Amman ) was found to be full of Ottoman troops , but at about midday the Ottoman garrison at Es Salt was hastily packing . Australian airmen reported the whole area east of the Jordan to be on the move towards Amman by between 15 : 00 and 18 : 00 , when two Bristol Fighters bombed a mass of traffic at <unk> , half @-@ way between Es Salt and Amman , and fired nearly 1 @,@ 000 machine @-@ gun rounds . 
 = = = Asia Corps withdrawal continues = = = 
 Von Oppen 's battalions and about 700 German and 1 @,@ 300 Ottoman soldiers in the 16th and 19th Infantry Divisions were moving north towards Beisan on 22 September when they learned it had already been captured . He planned to continue his withdrawal north to Samakh during the night of 22 September , where he correctly guessed that Liman von Sanders would order a strong rearguard action . However , Jevad , the commander of the Eighth Army which included Asia Corps , ordered von Oppen to move eastwards across the Jordan River . Von Oppen got all the German and some of his Ottoman soldiers across the Jordan River before the 11th Cavalry Brigade attacked and closed that line of retreat during fighting to close the Jordan River gaps . All those who had not crossed the river were captured . 
 = = = Fourth Army withdrawal = = = 
 While at Deraa on 21 September during his withdrawal from Nazareth to Damascus , Liman von Sanders ordered the Fourth Army to withdraw . They were to move without waiting for the II Corps / Southern Force , which had also begun to withdraw north from Ma 'an and the southern Hejaz railway . The army was in general moving northwards from Amman along the railway towards Deraa by 22 September , where they were ordered to form a rearguard line from Deraa to Irbid . Aerial reconnaissance aircraft spotted the Ottoman army withdrawal from Amman towards Deraa . Ottoman units in the hills to the south west , and a column of all arms , were seen moving from the Es Salt area towards Amman . The aircraft bombed and machine gunned this column , then flew back to report at Ramleh . 
 = = Advance to Es Salt 23 September = = 
 Chaytor 's Force issued orders at midnight for attacks on Shunet Nimrin , <unk> Mujahid and Tel er <unk> when the retreat of the Fourth Army became apparent at 23 : 35 on 22 / 23 September . These attacks were to be carried out by the 2nd Light Horse Brigade and the mobile sections of the 20th Indian Brigade , armed with 1 @,@ 500 rifles and supported by three sections of machine guns and 40 Lewis guns . This force moved eastwards along the main road from Jericho , across the Jordan River at <unk> to Es Salt towards Shunet Nimrin , while the immobile section remained in defence in the right sector of the occupied Jordan Valley . The CRA was to support this advance by targeting Shunet Nimrin . Before Haifa on the Mediterranean coast , was captured by the 14th Cavalry Brigade during the Battle of Sharon , Chaytor 's Force had crossed the Jordan River on 23 September to climb to the Plateau of Moab and Gilead on their way to capture Es Salt that evening . ( See Gullett 's Map 35 . ) 
 Chaytor 's Force entered the hills of Moab on a front stretching from north to south of almost 15 miles ( 24 km ) . The New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , the northernmost , left one squadron and the 1st Battalion British West Indies Regiment to hold the Jisr ed Damieh bridge . The brigade then advanced south east along the road from the bridge 8 miles ( 13 km ) across the Jordan Valley to the foothills of Moab , with patrols to the east and north , to make the 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) climb to Es Salt . The 1st Light Horse Brigade in the centre , advanced across the Jordan River at the Umm esh Shert ford at 09 : 10 . They met no opposition as they rode up the <unk> track ( also known as the Wadi Abu <unk> track ) to arrive at Es Salt at midnight . To the south , the 2nd Light Horse Brigade moved round the southern flank of the Shunet Nimrin position , captured <unk> <unk> at 04 : 45 , before climbing to Es Salt via the village of Ain es Sir . All wheeled transport vehicles moved along the Shunet Nimrin road to Es Salt . 
 Chaytor 's Anzac Mounted Division headquarters moved at 14 : 25 to the Ghoraniyeh crossing of the Jordan River on the main road to Es Salt from Jericho . By 18 : 15 in the evening , the 20th Indian Brigade had reached Shunet Nimrin with a squadron of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade as advance guard . Here they found the 150 @-@ mm long @-@ range naval gun " Jericho Jane " , also known as " Nimrin Nellie " , abandoned on its side in a gully beside the road . Patterson 's Column , which had been formed at 15 : 00 on 22 September by the 38th and 39th Battalions Royal Fusiliers ( Chaytor 's Force ) under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Patterson , concentrated at the Auja bridgehead just across the Jordan River to the north of Ghoraniyeh , ready to follow the 20th Indian Brigade to Shunet Nimrin . 
 = = = Capture of Es Salt = = = 
 The New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade ' advanced guard was opposed by a line of outposts and a strongly wired Ottoman redoubt located across the main Jisr ed Damieh to Es Salt road 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of Es Salt . This extensive rearguard position was attacked and outflanked by the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade advanced guard consisting of the Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiment . The Ottoman redoubt had been defended by nine officers and 150 other ranks armed with rifles and machine guns . All defenders were captured , and at 16 : 20 on 23 September , Es Salt was occupied by the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade . After establishing outpost lines and searching for prisoners and intelligence , the brigade bivouacked at Suweileh for the night , to the east of Ain Hummar on the north western road to Amman . Total captures for the day were 538 prisoners , four machine guns , two automatic rifles , two 4 @.@ 2 @-@ inch howitzers , one 77 @-@ mm gun , and supplies of stores and ammunition . The brigade was reinforced by the 1st Light Horse Brigade , which reached Es Salt at 24 : 00 , while Patterson 's Column , less the 38th Royal Fusiliers , moved towards Shunet Nimrin . 
 This was the third time Es Salt had been captured by the EEF in six months . The 3rd Light Horse Regiment ( 1st Light Horse Brigade ) had captured Es Salt on 25 March , and the 8th Light Horse Regiment ( 3rd Light Horse Brigade ) had captured Es Salt on 30 April . 
 = = = Air support on 23 September = = = 
 At dawn on 23 September , aircraft " observed a column of fairly orderly traffic of all arms streaming down the road from Es Salt to Amman , " which was subsequently bombed and machine gunned . Groups of retreating Ottoman soldiers were seen moving from the hills to the south @-@ west towards Amman . Bombing formations attacked these columns with 48 bombs and 7 @,@ 000 machine gun rounds shortly after 07 : 00 . Eight direct hits on lorries and wagons blocked the road , and the retreat became a disorderly rout . At about the same time , airmen reported that camps at Samakh and Deraa were burning and long trains " with steam up [ were ] facing east " and north , but " would never arrive anywhere " because the railway lines were cut . Retreating German and Ottoman forces from Nablus were seen approaching Deraa . " And this was the refuge towards which the Fourth Army from Amman was making in headlong retreat ! " 
 = = = Consolidation of Chaytor 's Force at Es Salt = = = 
 During the night of 23 / 24 September , Allenby 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) instructed Chaytor 's Force to continue harassment of the Fourth Army , cut off their retreat north from Amman , gain touch with the Arab Army , and maintain the detachment guarding the Jisr ed Damieh bridge . 
 The main road from Jericho to Es Salt , along which all wheeled transport and supplies for Chaytor 's Force travelled , had been severely damaged by the retreating Fourth Army . The 20th Indian Brigade , which had been marching up this road , was ordered to provide working parties to unblock it . This was completed by 08 : 50 on 24 September , when the 20th Indian Brigade continued their march to Es Salt , where they took over garrison duties from the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade . 
 The 2nd Light Horse Brigade continued their advance to Es Salt up the Wadi Jeria and Wadi Sir , reaching Ain es Sir at 10 : 30 , with forward patrols to the cross roads and north east of the village . During this advance the brigade was fired on by two Ottoman 77 mm guns located near <unk> . These guns fired 16 shells , then withdrew as the light horse patrols approached . The brigade bivouacked for the night on the road from Ain es Sir to Ain Hummar when a strong picquet line was maintained throughout the night . ( See Falls Sketch Map 24 Amman detail ) Most of the land to the west of Amman was cleared of enemy forces during the afternoon of 24 September , and by that evening Chaytor 's Force , less the 2nd Light Horse Brigade , the 38th Royal Fusiliers at Shunet Nimrin and the Jisr ed Damieh detachment , was concentrated at Es Salt with mounted troops at Suweileh . 
 = = = Raid on Hejaz railway = = = 
 Four officers and 100 men from the Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment carried out a successful raid from Suweileh on the Hejaz railway line north of Amman during the night of 24 / 25 September . This force , carrying nothing but tools and weapons , advanced 12 miles ( 19 km ) to the railway , where they destroyed part of the Hejaz railway line 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north of Amman near Kalaat ez Zerka station . They " returned next morning without the loss of a man " to rejoin their regiment eleven hours and 20 miles ( 32 km ) later . 
 = = = Allenby 's assessment of the battle = = = 
 The Turks East of Jordan are retreating North ; and I am sending all available troops from the Jordan Valley after them , via Es Salt . I 've been going round hospitals today . All the sick and wounded are very cheerful and content . I 've told them that they 've done the biggest thing in the war – having totally destroyed two Armies in 36 hours ! The VII and VIII Armies , now non – existent , were the best troops in the Turkish Empire ; and were strongly backed by Germans and Austrians ... I have just heard that my cavalry have taken Haifa and Acre , today . They had a bit of a fight , at Haifa ; but I have no details yet . I think my Jordan troops will probably reach Es Salt tomorrow ; but they won 't catch many Turks there . However , my aeroplanes have been pulverising the retreating Turks in that locality . 
 = = Battle of Amman 25 September = = 
 Amman was an important city on the Ottoman lines of communication . All of the supplies and reinforcements for the Ottoman army force defending the line on the eastern edge of the Jordan Valley had passed through it . Now the city was on the main line of retreat . 
 The defences at Amman had been greatly strengthened since the First Transjordan attack on Amman , with the construction of a series of redoubts that were defended by machine guns . However , the boggy ground which had limited movement during the first attack in March , was by the early autumn , firm and now favoured a rapid mounted attack . 
 Orders were issued for the New Zealand Mounted Rifles and the 2nd Light Horse Brigades to advance at 06 : 00 on 25 September to capture Amman followed by the 1st Light Horse Brigade who left at 06 : 30 . They were to strongly assault the defenders , if the town was lightly held . If Amman was found to be held in strength the assault on the town was to be deferred until infantry could reinforce the mounted infantry . Only the outlying or forward trenches were to be attacked , artillery was to fire on the town , all lines of retreat northwards were to be cut . Aerial bombing of Amman was requested . The 1st Battalion British West Indies Regiment arrived at Suweileh at 07 : 00 to take over garrison duties from the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade . 
 Within two hours the light horse and mounted rifle brigades were in sight of Amman and the attack had begun . The movement of Ottoman units were seen behind Amman , on Hill 3039 . Two batteries of small guns and a number of machine guns opened fire . Several Ottoman posts 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from Amman were attacked and captured by the 2nd Light Horse Brigade along with 106 prisoners and four machine guns . One regiment of the 1st Light Horse Brigade was sent at 10 : 00 to reinforce the left flank of the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade and came under Meldrum 's command . The Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment advanced half an hour later , on the right of the Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiment , with the 2nd Light Horse Brigade on their left . They eventually forced the Ottoman front line defenders to retire back to the main line of defence , which was also strongly supported by machine guns . At noon the Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiment advanced towards " the main entrance to Amman , " but they were stopped by fire from concealed machine guns . However , by 13 : 30 , fighting in the streets of the town was underway , when the Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment continued their steady advance , and the 5th Light Horse Regiment entered the southern part of the town . At 14 : 30 , a second regiment of 1st Light Horse Brigade was ordered to reinforce the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade 's left . The Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiment advanced to a position from which they were able to enfilade the defenders in the Citadel , and shortly afterwards the 10th Squadron , with a troop of the 8th Squadron , attacked and " stormed " the Citadel . By 15 : 00 the Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiment was in Amman and , with the 5th Light Horse Regiment , were " hunting out snipers and capturing prisoners . " 
 By 16 : 30 on 25 September the Anzac Mounted Division , captured Amman along with between 2 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 563 prisoners , 300 sick , ten guns ( three of which were heavy ) , and 25 machine guns . The mounted infantry method of systematically " galloping to points of vantage and bringing fire to bear on the flanks of such machine gun nests , " combined with quick outflanking of machine guns eventually won all obstacles , and the opposition was broken . 
 During the Third Transjordan attack , Chaytor 's Force suffered 139 casualties , consisting of 27 killed , 7 missing and 105 wounded . Of these the Anzac Mounted Division suffered 16 men killed and 56 wounded , while the 2nd Battalion British West Indies Regiment suffered 41 casualties . Historian Earl Wavell notes that " the Anzac Mounted Division here ended a very fine fighting record . It had taken a gallant part in practically every engagement since the EEF had set out from the Canal two and a half years previously . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By the evening of 25 September , the 1st Light Horse Brigade held the Amman railway station area , the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade held the area to the south , while the 2nd Light Horse Brigade bivouaced on the western slope of Hill 3039 . A squadron from the Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment was sent to <unk> where they captured a number of prisoners and a very large amount of grain . Emergency rations were supplemented by food bought from the inhabitants . The 20th Indian Brigade along with the <unk> RHA Brigade and 1st Battalion British West Indies Regiment were ordered to march to Amman , leaving the 39th Royal Fusiliers at Suweileh to take over the defence of Es Salt . 
 Allenby wrote to Henry Wilson , Chief of the Imperial General Staff at the War Office regarding his plans for the Anzac Mounted Division : " I shall leave one cavalry division in the Amman area to operate against and cut off the enemy retreating Northwards from Ma 'an , and thereafter it will proceed to Damascus and rejoin Desert Mounted Corps . " 
 = = = Pursuit of Fourth Army north of Amman = = = 
 Only a rearguard of the Fourth Army was captured at Amman . The remainder of the garrison was already retreating northwards , following orders received from Liman von Sanders on 21 September , four days before Chaytor 's attack . Those who had escaped by train , before the line was cut by Chaytor 's Force during the night of 24 / 25 September , were forced to <unk> south of Deraa . Here they found the railway line cut by Arab Sherifial forces . A retreating column of 3 @,@ 000 infantry and cavalry , 300 horse transport and guns , and 600 camels was seen at Mafrak , withdrawing northwards from Amman in the early morning of 25 September . Ten Australian aircraft bombed Mafrak between 06 : 00 and 08 : 00 . The railway station , a long train and several dumps were destroyed , and the railway was completely blocked . A number of trains continued to arrive at Mafrak from Amman during the day , but each was attacked by aircraft . No. 1 Squadron AFC bombed the area three times , dropping four tons of bombs and firing almost 20 @,@ 000 machine gun rounds . The survivors were forced to abandon their wheeled @-@ transport , and only a few thousand managed to escape on foot or horse towards Deraa and Damascus . 
 The 1st Light Horse Brigade was ordered to capture the nearest water in the Wadi el Hamman 10 miles ( 16 km ) north of Amman , to deny it to the retreating columns . A regiment of the brigade captured Kalaat ez Zerka railway station , 12 miles ( 19 km ) north east of Amman . Here , " after a short action " on 26 September , they captured 105 prisoners and one gun . Aircraft guided the 1st Light Horse Brigade to the location of an Ottoman force on 27 September , which the aircraft then machine gunned . Subsequently the light horsemen captured 300 prisoners and two machine guns . By evening , they had captured the water at Wadi el Hamman , while one regiment occupied Kalaat ez Zerka . The next day the 1st Light Horse Regiment advanced to Qalat el <unk> , 30 miles ( 48 km ) north north east of Amman . Here they captured several trains , one Red Crescent train full of wounded , along with 10 officers and 70 other ranks found sick at Kh es Samra . Woodward claims the Red Crescent train at Qalat el <unk> had been looted and all the sick and wounded killed . 
 A total of 6 @,@ 000 or 7 @,@ 000 retreating soldiers from the three Ottoman armies , mostly from the Fourth Army , escaped the combined encirclement by the XX Corps , the XXI Corps , the Desert Mounted Corps and Chaytor 's Force , to retreat towards Damascus . 
 = = = Capture of Fourth Army units south of Amman = = = 
 Chaytor 's Force blocked the road and railway at Amman and prepared to intercept the Ottoman II Corps of the Fourth Army , which was retreating north from Ma 'an . This large Ottoman force which had garrisoned the towns and railway stations on the southern Hejaz Railway , was reported to be 30 miles ( 48 km ) south of Amman on the evening of 25 September , advancing quickly north towards Chaytor 's Force . 
 Consisting of Ottoman , Arab and Circassian soldiers , the II Corps had three options : to pass to the east of Amman along the Darb el Haj direct to Damascus , although water would be a problem in that desert region , to attack Chaytor 's Force at Amman , or to move westwards , to try to get to the Jordan Valley . Patterson 's Column was ordered to entrench Shunet Nimrin , Es Salt and Suweileh in case they moved westwards . On the Royal Fusiliers ' right the 2nd Light Horse Brigade closely guarded the country to the south , in particular the Madaba to <unk> to Ain Hummar road across the plateau , with a strong detachment occupying Ain es Sir . The New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade sent a detachment at about midday on 26 September to investigate a report of Ottoman and German soldiers with guns at Er <unk> , but none were found . They subsequently sent a second detachment east of Amman to watch the Darb el Haj . The 20th Indian Brigade of infantry arrived after dark on 26 September to take over garrison duties at Amman . 
 The 2nd Light Horse Brigade was ordered to blow up the railway line as far to the south as they could , in order to obstruct and delay the northward movement of the Ottoman II Corps . They cut the railway line just north of Ziza Station . By 08 : 30 on 27 September , they had captured some Ottoman soldiers south of <unk> Station , 12 miles ( 19 km ) to the south of Amman . One of the prisoners said the advanced guard of a 6 @,@ 000 strong retreating column had reached <unk> , 15 miles ( 24 km ) south of Amman . Aircraft located the Ottoman Southern Force at 06 : 55 on 28 September at Ziza , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) south of Amman , where three trains were in the station . A message dropped at 15 : 15 called on them to surrender . They were warned that all water north of <unk> was in EEF hands , and that they would be bombed the next day , if they refused to surrender . No answer had been received by 08 : 45 on 29 September , and arrangements were made for the bombing to be carried out in the afternoon . 
 The 5th Light Horse Regiment ( 2nd Light Horse Brigade ) , meanwhile had reached 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of Ziza at 10 : 30 , where an Ottoman officer delivered a letter from the commander of the II Corps . The 5th Light Horse regimental commander was informed at 11 : 40 by 2nd Light Horse Brigade headquarters that , unless the Ottoman force surrendered , they would be bombed at 15 : 00 . Negotiations for a surrender began at 11 : 45 , and the 5th Light Horse Regiment moved across the railway to within 700 yards ( 640 m ) of the Ottoman force , which was surrounded by Bedouin . Reports were received by 12 : 45 that the Ottoman force at Ziza would surrender , and the bombing raid was cancelled . The remainder of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade was ordered to " make a forced march " from Amman to Ziza , and the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade was ordered to follow at dawn the next day . The 7th Light Horse Regiment ( 2nd Light Horse Brigade ) arrived at Ziza late in the afternoon . The remainder of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade , less details and patrols , left Amman at 13 : 45 . They moved slowly at first , through hilly and stony country between Amman and <unk> , then trotted to Ziza , where they arrived at 17 : 20 . The Bedouin force which surrounded the Ottoman II Corps were Beni Sakhr Bedouin Arabs . They demanded that the Ottoman force be handed over to them . This was refused , and after the arrival of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade , the Beni Sakhr force became openly hostile . 
 Chaytor arrived at about 17 : 00 , and informed the Ottoman commander that his soldiers were to " be prepared to defend " themselves for the coming night . The Ottoman commander Colonel <unk> Ali Bey <unk> agreed to be a hostage in exchange for the cooperation of his men with Chaytor 's Force , and left for Amman with Chaytor at 17 : 30 . The 5th and 7th Light Horse Regiments galloped through the encircling Arabs into the Ottoman position , and placed troops in position at intervals in the Ottoman line , where they remained until the morning . Two small clashes between Beni Sakhr Arabs and Ottomans occurred before dark , but a cordon was put round the Ottoman force after the arrival of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade . The Beni Sakhr were warned to keep back , though they attempted to raid the hospital . During the night , several attacks by the Beni Sakhr Arab force were driven off by Ottoman machine gun fire and light horse rifles . 
 The New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade arrived at 05 : 30 on 30 September to take over the position and the care of the 534 sick , as well as collecting the 14 guns , 35 machine guns , two automatic rifles , three railway engines , 25 railway trucks , lorries and large amounts of ammunition and stores . After assurances by Brigadier General Ryrie commanding the 2nd Light Horse Brigade , that the sick and wounded Ottoman soldiers would be cared for , the Ottoman force concentrated at dawn near Ziza railway station while the light horsemen took the bolts from the Ottoman rifles . Two Anatolian battalions remained armed in case the Beni Sakhr attacked during the march . The 5th Light Horse Regiment marched between 4 @,@ 068 and 4 @,@ 082 prisoners , including walking wounded , north to Amman . They were followed by 502 sick . 
 All prisoners were mustered . Walking sick cases were collected under shelter of the station buildings , and cot cases were transferred to 2nd Light Horse Field Ambulance cacolets . The prisoners escorted by 5th Light Horse Regiment , less one squadron at Amman with one squadron 7th Light Horse attached , moved off to Amman at 07 : 15 . All arms and equipment were collected and put in railway trucks . This task was finished by 15 : 30 . The Canterbury Mounted Rifles Regiment remained to guard the sick until transport was organised . One hundred sick walking cases were sent on to Amman in New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigade transport wagons and the 2nd Light Horse Brigade commenced its return journey to Amman . They arrived at 21 : 00 , while the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade remained in charge at Ziza . 
 Chaytor 's Force 's total captures from the beginning of operations to 30 September were 10 @,@ 322 prisoners , 57 guns including one 5 @.@ 9 @-@ inch gun , three 5 @.@ 9 @-@ inch howitzers , one anti aircraft gun , ten 10 cm guns , 32 77 mm guns , six 75 mm guns , two 3 @-@ inch guns and two 13 pounder HAC guns , 147 machine guns , 13 automatic rifles including one Hotchkiss rifle and one Lewis gun , two wireless sets , 11 railway engines , 106 railway rolling @-@ stock , 142 vehicles and large quantities of artillery shells , small arms ammunition ( SAA ) and other material . 
 = = = Medical establishments and evacuations = = = 
 The mobile sections of the field ambulances followed their brigades to Es Salt with their camel transport . They travelled up the Umm esh Shert and Jisr ed Damieh tracks , while their wheeled transport followed by the Shunet <unk> road . A divisional collecting station was established at Suweileh , during the Second Battle of Amman , by the immobile section of the 1st Light Horse Field Ambulance and the Anzac ( No. 7 ) Sanitary Section . Both of these units arrived from Jerusalem early on 25 September , following the wheeled supply vehicles along the Shunet Nimrin road . Subsequently a dressing @-@ station was opened in the ruins of the Roman amphitheatre at Amman . There , 268 sick and wounded light horsemen were admitted up to 30 September and evacuated from Amman by motor ambulance wagons . Two Ottoman hospitals in the town were found to hold 480 patients , a number which quickly grew to more than 1 @,@ 000 . These patients and the Ottoman medical staff were evacuated to Jerusalem by motor lorries . There were also 1 @,@ 269 British and Indian sick evacuated from Amman in the ten days between 30 September and 9 October . 
 These large numbers of evacuations to Jericho , eight to ten hours away , travelled mostly in motor lorries . Motor ambulances were reserved for the most severe cases . The trip was broken about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of Es Salt , where the Welsh Field Ambulance fed the patients and rested them for two hours before they resumed their journey . One group of motor ambulances drove between Amman and the Welsh Field Ambulance , and a second group drove from the Welsh Field Ambulance to Jericho . Motor lorries and some cars of No. 35 Motor Ambulance Convoy evacuated the sick from the Anzac Mounted Division receiving station near Jericho to the casualty clearing station at Jerusalem . 
 = = = Sick = = = 
 Many of the troops at Amman had garrisoned the malarial Jordan Valley for over six months , during the summer . The hot , humid Jordan Valley sits at about 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) below sea level , while the troops at Amman were now some 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) above sea level in a climate where the nights were cold . With malaria dormant in their blood , the change of climate caused many cases of attacks of malaria fever . Before the returning 2nd Light Horse and New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigades reached Jerusalem on their way back to Deiran , they , along with the 1st Light Horse Brigade still the Amman area , were struck by a heavy outbreak of disease . " Between 19 September and 3 November , <unk> men in Chaytor 's Force were listed as sick . In the Anzac division , 1088 men were sick in September ; the number trebled in the following month ... In some regiments , riderless horses were let loose and herded down into the valley like a mob of cattle . " 
 The Anzac Mounted Division evacuated more than 3 @,@ 000 sick in the last three weeks of September 2700 of which were cases of malignant malaria . The divisional collecting station was brought forward from Suweileh on 30 September , and at one time treated as many as 246 cases , the majority of which were seriously ill . The 1st Light Horse Brigade evacuated 126 cases during the seven days following 28 September , and 239 cases by 10 October . The New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade evacuated 316 cases and the 2nd Light Horse Brigade had 57 cases , many of whom suffered a high fever of 105 ° to 106 ° F. More than 700 cases of mostly malignant malaria were reported during the first 12 days of October , and the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade lost about one third of its strength . Of the approximately 5 @,@ 000 New Zealanders , about 3 @,@ 000 were either in hospital or in convalescent depots , mostly with malaria . 
 On 21 September 1 Light Horse and the New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigades accompanied by the 1st and 2nd Battalions British West Indies Regiment advanced to the Jisr ed Damieh . The surrounding area was swampy ground where no mosquito management had been carried out . " The air was full of hordes of peculiarly aggressive and blood – thirsty mosquitoes , laden with as subsequent events proved the parasites of malignant malaria . " While the other units advanced to Es Salt and Amman , the 2nd Battalion remained to guard the bridge and was subsequently virtually the whole unit was infected with malaria . By 19 October 726 soldiers from this unit , had been evacuated with malignant malaria . Within the units of Chaytor 's Force which moved to Es Salt and Amman cases of malignant malaria began to appear in much smaller numbers on 28 September and up to 10 October 2 Light Horse Brigade which had not been in the Jisr ed Damieh area evacuated 57 soldiers compared with 239 from the 1st Light Horse Brigade and 316 from the New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigade . 
 To people accustomed to ordinary benign tertian malaria the serious and dramatic nature of the malignant type was most alarming . The men attacked were suddenly prostrated in high fever , 105 ° and 106 ° F ( 41 ° C ) . being frequently reported , they were often delirious and occasionally maniacal . Unless treated immediately and efficiently with quinine the mortality was high . 
 Of the many hundreds sent to hospital with malaria , many died , many recovered in hospital but later suffered a relapse and went to hospital again , many men were invalided home as a result of malaria , with their health badly undermined . 
 = = = = Care of horses = = = = 
 With so many men sick , it became common to see one man in charge of eight horses . At this time , the horses were fed newly threshed barley , which resulted in the death of 15 horses and 160 seriously ill horses in Chaytor 's Force . 
 = = = Return to Richon le Zion = = = 
 The New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade returned from Ziza to Amman between 1 and 2 October , then continued on to Ain es Sir on 3 October and returned to the Jordan Valley the next day . At Ain es Sir , the Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiment captured a number of Circassians " suspected of involvement in the May attack and escorted them to Jerusalem for trial . " 
 The brigade left the Jordan Valley after three days at Jericho , bivouacking at <unk> ed Dumm on 8 October . They paused at midday on 9 October at the Mount of Olives , near Bethany , then " rode down into the Valley of <unk> for the last time , past the Garden of Gethsemane , up round the old walls and then through the streets of Jerusalem , past the Jaffa Gate , on to the Hebron road . " The New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade rested for a few days near Jerusalem , then returned to Richon le Zion on 14 October to rest and recuperate . 
 = French battleship Vergniaud = 
 Vergniaud was one of the six Danton class semi @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the French Navy in the late 1900s . When World War I began in August 1914 , she unsuccessfully searched for the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben and the light cruiser SMS Breslau in the Western Mediterranean and escorted convoys . Later that month , the ship participated in the Battle of Antivari in the Adriatic Sea and helped to sink an Austro @-@ Hungarian protected cruiser . Vergniaud spent most of the rest of the war blockading the Straits of Otranto and the Dardanelles to prevent German , Austro @-@ Hungarian and Turkish warships from breaking out into the Mediterranean . 
 She briefly participated in the occupation of Constantinople after the end of the war and was deployed in the Black Sea in early 1919 during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War . The ship 's crew mutinied after one of its members was killed when a protest against intervention against the Bolsheviks was bloodily suppressed . Vergniaud returned to France and was later placed in reserve after a brief deployment in the Eastern Mediterranean . She was condemned in 1921 and used as a target ship until 1926 . The ship was sold for scrap two years later . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Although the Danton @-@ class battleships were a significant improvement from the preceding Liberté class , they were outclassed by the advent of the dreadnought well before they were completed . This , combined with other poor traits , including the great weight in coal they had to carry , made them rather unsuccessful ships , though their numerous rapid @-@ firing guns were of some use in the Mediterranean . 
 Vergniaud was 146 @.@ 6 meters ( 481 ft 0 in ) long overall and had a beam of 25 @.@ 8 meters ( 84 ft 8 in ) and a full @-@ load draft of 9 @.@ 2 meters ( 30 ft 2 in ) . She displaced 19 @,@ 736 metric tons ( 19 @,@ 424 long tons ) at deep load and had a crew of 681 officers and enlisted men . The ship was powered by four Parsons steam turbines using steam generated by twenty @-@ six Niclausse boilers . The turbines were rated at 22 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 16 @,@ 800 kW ) and provided a top speed of around 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Vergniaud reached a top speed of 19 @.@ 7 knots ( 36 @.@ 5 km / h ; 22 @.@ 7 mph ) on her sea trials . She carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 027 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 995 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 3 @,@ 370 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 240 km ; 3 @,@ 880 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Vergniaud 's main battery consisted of four 305mm / 45 Modèle 1906 guns mounted in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The secondary battery consisted of twelve 240mm / 50 Modèle 1902 guns in twin turrets , three on each side of the ship . A number of smaller guns were carried for defense against torpedo boats . These included sixteen 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) L / 65 guns and ten 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns . The ship was also armed with two submerged 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . The ship 's waterline armor belt was 270 mm ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick and the main battery was protected by up to 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) of armor . The conning tower also had 300 mm thick sides . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 During the war 75 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns were installed on the roofs of the ship 's two forward 240 mm gun turrets . During 1918 , the mainmast was shortened to allow the ship to fly a captive kite balloon and the elevation of the 240 mm guns was increased which extended their range to 18 @,@ 000 meters ( 20 @,@ 000 yd ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 Construction of Vergniaud was begun on 26 December 1906 by Forges et Chantiers de la Gironde in Bordeaux and the ship was laid down on November 1907 . She was launched on 12 April 1909 and was completed on 18 December 1911 at cost of 55 @,@ 247 @,@ 307 francs . The ship was assigned to the First Division of the First Squadron ( escadre ) of the Mediterranean Fleet when she was commissioned . The ship participated in combined fleet maneuvers between Provence and Tunisia in May – June 1913 and the subsequent naval review conducted by the President of France , Raymond Poincaré on 7 June 1913 . Afterwards , Vergniaud joined her squadron in its tour of the Eastern Mediterranean in October – December 1913 and participated in the grand fleet exercise in the Mediterranean in May 1914 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 At the beginning of the war , the ship , together with her sister Condorcet and the dreadnought Courbet , unsuccessfully searched for the German battlecruiser Goeben and the light cruiser Breslau in the Balearic Islands . She later escorted troop convoys from North Africa to France before she joined her sisters at Malta . On 16 August 1914 the combined Anglo @-@ French Fleet under Admiral Auguste Boué de Lapeyrère , including Vergniaud , made a sweep of the Adriatic Sea . The Allied ships encountered the Austro @-@ Hungarian cruiser SMS Zenta , escorted by the destroyer SMS Ulan , blockading the coast of Montenegro . There were too many ships for Zenta to escape , so she remained behind to allow Ulan to get away and was sunk by gunfire during the Battle of Antivari off the coast of Bar , Montenegro . Vergniaud was one of the ships that bombarded Cattaro on 1 September and blockaded the Strait of Otranto for the rest of the year and through August 1915 . She was based at Malta and Bizerte until February 1916 when she sailed to Toulon . 
 Vergniaud was transferred to the Second Squadron on 27 March 1916 and resumed her former duties of blockading the Strait of Otranto from bases in Argostoli and Corfu for most of the rest of the war . The ship transferred some of her men to her sister Mirabeau that participated in the Allied attempt to ensure Greek acquiescence to Allied operations in Macedonia in Athens on 1 December 1916 . The lieutenant in charge of her landing party was killed as were several other men during the incident . She was given a short refit at Toulon from 9 November 1917 to January 1918 and returned to Corfu . Vergniaud was transferred to Mudros in May to prevent Goeben from breaking out into the Mediterranean . A boiler burst on 14 September , killing four men and wounding nine others . After the Armistice of Mudros was signed on 30 October between the Allies and the Ottoman Empire , the ship participated in the early stage of the occupation of Constantinople . She returned to Toulon on 17 December for a short refit . 
 = = = Postwar career = = = 
 In early 1919 , Vergniaud was among the ships stationed off Sevastopol as an Allied deterrent to Soviet forces who were encroaching on the city during the Russian civil war . Despite Allied support , the city 's White Russian forces were in a seemingly hopeless position , and in April 1919 the French naval high command ordered the ships to evacuate . Rejecting this , the commander of the Second Squadron , Vice @-@ Admiral ( vice @-@ amiral ) Jean @-@ Françoise @-@ Charles Amet , attempted to have his forces intervene in the fighting , only to have a mutiny erupt on several of his ships . War @-@ weary sailors demanded to return home and the ensuing standoff culminated in a mass shooting of sailor demonstrators . Fifteen people were wounded , but only one died , a sailor from Vergniaud . The battleship 's crew had thus far remained neutral in the conflict but quickly joined the ranks of the most radical mutineers , unfurling red banners in support of the Bolshevik forces . The four @-@ day stalemate ended in a victory for the sailors : the ships withdrew from the Black Sea and Vergniaud returned to France . The ship departed on 29 April , towing the merchant ship SS Jerusalem to Constantinople . 
 Vergniaud was based in Beirut from May to August 1919 to monitor Turkish activities off the coasts of Palestine , Lebanon and Syria . She arrived in Toulon on 6 September and was placed in special reserve on 1 October . This ship was later found to be in poor shape , decommissioned in June 1921 and condemned on 27 October . She was disarmed in 1922 and her 240mm guns handed over for coastal defence , nine being installed around Dakar , some still existing there . 
 Vergniaud became a target ship and was used to evaluate the effects of poison gases and bombs until 1926 . She was listed for disposal on 5 May 1927 and was sold for breaking up on 27 November 1928 for the price of 5 @,@ 623 @,@ 123 francs . A monument to the French mutineers of 1919 was erected by the Soviets in Sevastopol , at <unk> Square where Vergniaud 's sailor was killed . 
 = Al Pollard = 
 Alfred Lee Pollard ( September 7 , 1928 – March 3 , 2002 ) was a professional football fullback and halfback . After a brief stint at Loyola University , he decided to transfer to the United States Military Academy ( Army ) in the spring of 1949 where he played under the renowned Vince Lombardi as his backfield coach . In his 1950 season , he was Army 's statistical leader in scoring and rushing , resigned from the school after being involved in an all sports wide cribbing scandal which decimated the ranks of Army 's Sports teams . He was drafted by the New York Yanks in the 21st round of the 1951 NFL Draft , and Pollard played a total of 30 games in the NFL with the Yanks and the Philadelphia Eagles , scoring one career touchdown . In 1954 , he left the Eagles for opportunity and played in the Western Interprovincial Football Union , later known as the Canadian Football League , for the BC Lions , achieving " All Canadian " status . After retiring from football in 1957 , he pursued a number of business ventures in Canada including a beverage distributorship and a well regarded Steakhouse restaurant . He move back to Pennsylvania and became a color commentator on Eagles broadcasts , first with CBS television from 1961 – 1964 , and then on WIP radio , where he worked with play @-@ by @-@ play man Charlie Swift from 1969 @-@ 1976 . Pollard also anchored a postgame Eagles program for WCAU @-@ TV . During his broadcasting years , he worked as a regional sales manager with a large commercial printing company and developed an ice skating and tennis court facility in Berwyn , Pa . He died of lymphoma on March 3 , 2002 . 
 = = Early life and high school = = 
 Pollard was born in Glendale , California , on September 7 , 1928 . His mother was Phyllis Pollard . He starred as a halfback at Loyola High School , where he excelled at executing T formations . In 1946 , his senior year , he scored 23 touchdowns and gained a total of 1 @,@ 772 yards from scrimmage . These achievements earned him his second consecutive " Player of the Year " award for Southern California high school football players by the Helms Athletic Foundation . 
 = = College = = 
 = = = Loyola = = = 
 Not heavily recruited by major colleges , Pollard decided to attend Loyola University , now known as Loyola Marymount , where high school coach William H. Sargent would be coaching . His 1947 recruiting class was known as the " Golden Boys " , and the Los Angeles Times said he was the most glamorous of them . Injuries plagued his redshirt freshman campaign , and he dropped out of Loyola on February 18 , 1949 . This decision surprised Loyola officials ; Pollard said he simply needed rest . 
 = = = Army = = = 
 Pollard transferred to the United States Military Academy on March 22 , where he played under coach Red Blaik . Vince Lombardi was their backfield coach . Due to transfer rules , Pollard was forced to sit out the 1949 season , and he enrolled at Rutherford Preparatory School to pass West Point 's entrance exam . While at Army , he was known to focus his attention mainly on football , and not care much for academics . Gil Reich , his roommate at West Point , noted that he and several other friends of Pollard frequently helped each other so as to not see anyone drop out . 
 In his only season on the football team ( 1950 ) , he was Army 's statistical leader in rushing , averaging 7 @.@ 3 yards per carry , and in scoring , with 83 total points . Prior to Army 's game with Penn , a scout for the latter team said Pollard was the best fullback in college football . In December , the Helms Athletic Foundation named him to their 1950 All @-@ American team , along with fellow Army cadet Dan <unk> . He was also named to the Associated Press and United Press All @-@ East teams . The Associated Press praised his running capabilities , commenting that " any time he lugs the ball he 's liable to go all the way . " 
 Following the end of that season , he was one of the 90 cadets , also including coach Blaik 's son , who were forced to resign from the academy because of a cribbing scandal . The scandal was chronicled in the ESPN original film Code Breakers . According to Pollard in a 1951 interview with the Philadelphia Inquirer , the whole fiasco " broke [ his ] heart . " Following the scandal , he received scholarship offers from five major schools and a number of smaller ones . Pollard called Moose Krause , athletic director at Notre Dame , about transferring and playing for their football program , but was informed the Notre Dame Fighting Irish had not accepted transfers for six years . Although he was technically a sophomore , Pollard 's class had graduated and he declared himself eligible for the 1951 NFL Draft . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = National Football League = = = 
 Paul <unk> of USA Today named Pollard the fifth best player from Army to play in the NFL . Pollard was selected by the New York Yanks as the eighth pick in the 21st round of the 1951 NFL Draft and 251st overall . In his third practice with New York , Pollard tore a ligament . He played six games with the Yanks , where he rushed for two yards and received 18 . In addition , he returned three punts and five kickoffs for 34 and 134 yards , respectively . The Yanks , who offered him a salary of $ 7 @,@ 000 , waived him in November , and he was signed to the Philadelphia Eagles for $ 100 . 
 Finishing the last six games of the 1951 season , he carried the ball 24 times and in the process gained 119 yards . He also <unk> two fumbles , returned 15 punts for 114 yards , and returned 14 kickoffs for 326 yards . Pollard 's best season statistically was in 1952 , when , in 12 games , he rushed for 186 yards and his sole touchdown in the NFL , received eight passes for 59 yards , recovered three fumbles , and returned 28 kickoffs for 528 yards . In 1953 he played in 12 games which saw him rush for 44 yards and receive for 33 , recover three fumbles , gain 106 yards in 20 punt returns , and gain 150 yards in 13 kickoff returns . 
 Pollard was at the center of a small brawl with the San Francisco 49ers in their game on September 28 , 1953 . The brawl erupted in the fourth quarter , when San Francisco 's Charley Powell squared off against Pollard . The Eagles ended up losing 31 @-@ 21 , and Pollard received no disciplinary action , although Powell was ejected . 
 = = = Western Interprovincial Football Union = = = 
 In September 1954 , he heard his minutes would be slashed , and after the second exhibition game , Pollard retired from the Eagles . As he was under contract , Pollard was threatened with legal action from General Manager Vince McNally . He avoided the legal tangle by never officially signing with another team again , thus voiding the reserve clause on his contract . Pollard explained his rationale in a 1954 interview with the Philadelphia Inquirer : " I just got fed up ... I knew they wouldn 't give me much of a chance to play ... I carried the ball only 23 times in 12 games last year , so something had to be wrong . " 
 When considering joining the Western Interprovincial Football Union ( now Canadian Football League ) , Pollard reported being given a good deal of propaganda to turn him away . He was picked up by the British Columbia Lions of the WIFU , with whom he played for until 1956 . Pollard then played a single season for the Calgary Stampeders in 1957 . He did not see much action with the Stampeders and ended his career due to health problems . 
 = = Later life and broadcasting career = = 
 While in Canada , Pollard opened a beverage store and a restaurant . He became sports director of <unk> radio station in Vancouver . After moving back to Pennsylvania , Pollard was a color commentator on broadcasts of Eagles games for WIP radio and worked with Charlie Swift , the play @-@ by @-@ play man , from 1969 to 1976 . The former anchored a postgame Eagles program for WCAU @-@ TV and occasionally commented for CBS television . His voice and knowledge of sports was praised by Eagles publicist Jim Gallagher . 
 Between 1976 until the mid @-@ 1980s , upon retiring from broadcasting , Pollard owned and managed an ice skating rink and tennis court facility in Valley Forge , Pennsylvania . He also was regional sales manager for a large commercial web printing company and participated in organizations such as Eagles Alumni . In addition , he chaired the committee which ran the Liberty Bowl . 
 = = Death = = 
 On March 2 , 2002 , Pollard died at his home in Devon , Pennsylvania , at the age of 73 . The stated cause of death was lymphoma . Patricia , his wife of 47 years ; children John , Kurt ( 1962 – 2007 ) , and Melissa Mozer ; and eight grandchildren survived him in death . He was buried on March 7 at SS . Peter and Paul Cemetery in Marple Township , Pennsylvania . 
 = Edward II of England = 
 Edward II ( 25 April 1284 – 21 September 1327 ) , also called Edward of Caernarfon , was King of England from 1307 until he was deposed in January 1327 . The fourth son of Edward I , Edward became the heir to the throne following the death of his older brother Alphonso . Beginning in 1300 , Edward accompanied his father on campaigns to pacify Scotland , and in 1306 he was knighted in a grand ceremony at Westminster Abbey . Edward succeeded to the throne in 1307 , following his father 's death . In 1308 , he married Isabella of France , the daughter of the powerful King Philip IV , as part of a long @-@ running effort to resolve the tensions between the English and French crowns . 
 Edward had a close and controversial relationship with Piers Gaveston , who had joined his household in 1300 . The precise nature of Edward and Gaveston 's relationship is uncertain ; they may have been friends , lovers or sworn brothers . Gaveston 's arrogance and power as Edward 's favourite provoked discontent both among the barons and the French royal family , and Edward was forced to exile him . On Gaveston 's return , the barons pressured the King into agreeing to wide @-@ ranging reforms called the Ordinances of 1311 . The newly empowered barons banished Gaveston , to which Edward responded by revoking the reforms and recalling his favourite . Led by Edward 's cousin , the Earl of Lancaster , a group of the barons seized and executed Gaveston in 1312 , beginning several years of armed confrontation . English forces were pushed back in Scotland , where Edward was decisively defeated by Robert the Bruce at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 . Widespread famine followed , and criticism of the King 's reign mounted . 
 The Despenser family , in particular Hugh Despenser the Younger , became close friends and advisers to Edward , but in 1321 Lancaster and many of the barons seized the Despensers ' lands and forced the King to exile them . In response , Edward led a short military campaign , capturing and executing Lancaster . Edward and the Despensers strengthened their grip on power , revoking the 1311 reforms , executing their enemies and confiscating estates . Unable to make progress in Scotland , Edward finally signed a truce with Robert . Opposition to the regime grew , and when Isabella was sent to France to negotiate a peace treaty in 1325 , she turned against Edward and refused to return . Isabella allied herself with the exiled Roger Mortimer , and invaded England with a small army in 1326 . Edward 's regime collapsed and he fled into Wales , where he was captured in November . Edward was forced to relinquish his crown in January 1327 in favour of his fourteen @-@ year @-@ old son , Edward III , and he died in Berkeley Castle on 21 September , probably murdered on the orders of the new regime . 
 Edward 's relationship with Gaveston inspired Christopher Marlowe 's 1592 play Edward II , along with other plays , films , novels and media . Many of these have focused on the possible sexual relationship between the two men . Edward 's contemporaries criticised his performance as a king , noting his failures in Scotland and the oppressive regime of his later years , although 19th @-@ century academics later argued that the growth of parliamentary institutions during his reign was a positive development for England over the longer term . Debate has continued into the 21st century as to whether Edward was a lazy and incompetent king , or simply a reluctant and ultimately unsuccessful ruler . 
 = = Background = = 
 Edward II was the fourth son of Edward I and his first wife , Eleanor of Castile . His father was the King of England , and had also inherited Gascony in south @-@ western France , which he held as the feudal vassal of the King of France , and the Lordship of Ireland . His mother was from the Castilian royal family , and held the County of Ponthieu in northern France . Edward I proved to be a successful military leader , leading the suppression of the baronial revolts in the 1260s , and joining the Ninth Crusade . During the 1280s he conquered North Wales , removing the native Welsh princes from power , and in the 1290s he intervened in Scotland 's civil war , claiming suzerainty over the country . He was considered an extremely successful ruler by his contemporaries , largely able to control the powerful earls that formed the senior ranks of the English nobility . The historian Michael Prestwich describes Edward I as " a king to inspire fear and respect " , while John Gillingham characterises him as an efficient bully . 
 Despite his successes , when Edward I died in 1307 he left a range of challenges for his son to resolve . One of the most critical was the problem of English rule in Scotland , where Edward 's long but ultimately inconclusive military campaign was ongoing when he died . Edward 's control of Gascony created tension with the French kings . They insisted that the English kings should give homage to them for the lands ; the English kings saw this demand as insulting to their honour , and the issue remained unresolved . Edward I also faced increasing opposition from his barons over the taxation and requisitions required to resource his wars , and left his son debts of around £ 200 @,@ 000 on his death . 
 = = Early life ( 1284 – 1307 ) = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 Edward II was born in Caernarfon Castle in North Wales on 25 April 1284 , less than a year after Edward I had conquered the region , and as a result is sometimes called Edward of Caernarfon . The King probably deliberately chose the castle as the location for Edward 's birth , as it was an important symbolic location for the native Welsh , associated with Roman imperial history , and it formed the centre of the new royal administration of North Wales . Edward 's birth brought with it predictions of greatness from contemporary prophets who believed that the Last Days of the world were imminent , declaring him to be a new King Arthur , who would lead England to glory . David Powel , a 16th @-@ century clergyman , suggested that the baby was offered to the Welsh as a prince " that was borne in Wales and could speake never a word of English " , but there is no evidence to support this account . 
 Edward 's name was English in origin , linking him to the Anglo @-@ Saxon saint Edward the Confessor , and was chosen by his father instead of the more traditional Norman and Castilian names selected for Edward 's brothers : Edward had three elder brothers : John and Henry who had died before Edward was born , and Alphonso , who died in August 1284 , leaving Edward as the heir to the throne . Although Edward was a relatively healthy child , there were enduring concerns throughout his early years that he too might die and leave his father without a male heir . After his birth , Edward was looked after by a wet @-@ nurse called Mariota or Mary Maunsel for a few months until she fell ill , when Alice de <unk> became his foster mother . He would have barely known his natural mother Eleanor , who was in Gascony with his father during his earliest years . An official household complete with staff was created for the new baby , under the direction of a clerk , Giles of Oudenarde . 
 = = = Childhood , personality and appearance = = = 
 Spending on Edward 's personal household increased as he grew older , and in 1293 William of <unk> took over as its administrator . Edward was probably given a religious education by the Dominican friars , whom his mother invited into his household in 1290 . He was assigned one of his grandmother 's followers , Guy Ferre , as his magister , who was responsible for his discipline , training him in riding and military skills . It is uncertain how well educated Edward was ; there is little evidence for his ability to read and write , although his mother was keen that her other children were well educated , and Ferre was himself a relatively learned man for the period . Edward likely mainly spoke Anglo @-@ Norman French in his daily life , in addition to some English and possibly Latin . 
 Edward had a normal upbringing for a member of a royal family . The prince was interested in horses and <unk> , and became a good rider ; he also liked dogs , in particular greyhounds . In his letters , he shows a quirky sense of humour , joking about sending unsatisfactory animals to his friends , such as horses who disliked carrying their riders , or lazy hunting dogs too slow to catch rabbits . He was not particularly interested in hunting or falconry , both popular activities in the 14th century . He enjoyed music , including Welsh music and the newly invented <unk> instrument , as well as musical organs . He did not take part in jousting , either because he lacked the aptitude or because he had been banned from participating for his personal safety , but he was certainly supportive of the sport . 
 Edward grew up to be tall and muscular , and was considered good looking by the standards of the period . He had a reputation as a competent public speaker and was known for his generosity to his household staff . Unusually , he enjoyed rowing , as well as hedging and ditching , and enjoyed associating with labourers and other lower @-@ class workers . This behaviour was not considered normal for the nobility of the period and attracted criticism from contemporaries . 
 In 1290 , Edward 's father had confirmed the Treaty of Birgham , in which he promised to marry his six @-@ year @-@ old son to the young Margaret of Norway , who had a potential claim to the crown of Scotland . Margaret died later that year , bringing an end to the plan . Edward 's mother , Eleanor , died shortly afterwards , followed by his grandmother , Eleanor of Provence . Edward I was distraught at his wife 's death and held a huge funeral for her ; his son inherited the County of Ponthieu from Eleanor on her death . Next , a French marriage was considered for the young Edward , to help secure a lasting peace with France , but war broke out in 1294 . The idea was replaced with the proposal of a marriage to a daughter of the Count of Flanders , but this too failed after it was blocked by King Philip IV of France . 
 = = = Early campaigns in Scotland = = = 
 Between 1297 and 1298 , Edward was left as regent in charge of England while the King campaigned in Flanders against Philip IV , who had occupied part of the English King 's lands in Gascony . On his return , Edward I signed a peace treaty , under which he took Philip 's sister , Margaret , as his wife and agreed that Prince Edward would in due course marry Philip 's daughter , Isabella , who was then only two years old . In theory , this marriage would mean that the disputed Duchy of Gascony would be inherited by a descendant of both Edward and Philip , providing a possible end to the long @-@ running tensions . The young Edward seems to have got on well with his new stepmother , who gave birth to Edward 's two half @-@ brothers , Thomas of Brotherton and Edmund of Woodstock , in 1300 and 1301 . As king , Edward later provided his brothers with financial support and titles . 
 Edward I returned to Scotland once again in 1300 , and this time took his son with him , making him the commander of the rearguard at the siege of Caerlaverock . In the spring of 1301 , the King declared Edward the Prince of Wales , granting him the earldom of Chester and lands across North Wales ; he seems to have hoped that this would help pacify the region , and that it would give his son some financial independence . Edward received homage from his Welsh subjects and then joined his father for the 1301 Scottish campaign ; he took an army of around 300 soldiers north with him and captured Turnberry Castle . Prince Edward also took part in the 1303 campaign during which he besieged Brechin Castle , deploying his own siege engine in the operation . In the spring of 1304 , Edward conducted negotiations with the rebel Scottish leaders on the King 's behalf and , when these failed , he joined his father for the siege of Stirling Castle . 
 In 1305 , Edward and his father quarrelled , probably over the issue of money . The Prince had an altercation with Bishop Walter Langton , who served as the royal treasurer , apparently over the amount of financial support Edward received from the Crown . Edward I defended his treasurer , and banished his son and his companions from his court , cutting off their financial support . After some negotiations involving family members and friends , the two men were reconciled . 
 The Scottish conflict flared up once again in 1306 , when Robert the Bruce killed his rival John Comyn and declared himself the King of the Scots . Edward I mobilised a fresh army , but decided that this time his son would be formally in charge of the expedition . Prince Edward was made the Duke of Aquitaine and then , along with many other young men , he was knighted in a lavish ceremony at Westminster Abbey called the Feast of the Swans . Amid a huge feast in the neighbouring hall , reminiscent of Arthurian legends and crusading events , the assembly took a collective oath to defeat Bruce . It is unclear what role Prince Edward 's forces played in the campaign that summer , which , under the orders of Edward I , saw a punitive , brutal retaliation against Bruce 's faction in Scotland . Edward returned to England in September , where diplomatic negotiations to finalise a date for his wedding to Isabella continued . 
 = = = Piers Gaveston and sexuality = = = 
 During this time , Edward became close to Piers Gaveston . Gaveston was the son of one of the King 's household knights whose lands lay adjacent to Gascony , and had himself joined Prince Edward 's household in 1300 , possibly on Edward I 's instruction . The two got on well ; Gaveston became a squire and was soon being referred to as a close companion of Edward , before being knighted by the King during the Feast of Swans in 1306 . The King then exiled Gaveston to Gascony in 1307 for reasons that remain unclear . According to one chronicler , Edward had asked his father to allow him to give Gaveston the County of Ponthieu , and the King responded furiously , pulling his son 's hair out in great handfuls , before exiling Gaveston . The official court records , however , show Gaveston being only temporarily exiled , supported by a comfortable stipend ; no reason is given for the order , suggesting that it may have been an act aimed at punishing the prince in some way . 
 The possibility that Edward had a sexual relationship with Gaveston or his later favourites has been extensively discussed by historians , complicated by the paucity of surviving evidence to determine for certain the details of their relationships . Homosexuality was fiercely condemned by the Church in 14th @-@ century England , equating it with heresy , but engaging in sex with another man did not necessarily define an individual 's personal identity in the same way that it might in the 21st century . Edward and Gaveston both had sexual relationships with their wives , who bore them children ; Edward also had an illegitimate son , and may also have had an affair with his niece , Eleanor de Clare . 
 The contemporary evidence supporting their homosexual relationship comes primarily from an anonymous chronicler in the 1320s who described how Edward " felt such love " for Gaveston that " he entered into a covenant of constancy , and bound himself with him before all other mortals with a bond of indissoluble love , firmly drawn up and fastened with a knot " . The first specific suggestion that Edward engaged in sex with men was recorded in 1334 , when Adam Orleton , the Bishop of Winchester , was accused of having stated in 1326 that Edward was a " sodomite " , although Orleton defended himself by arguing that he had meant that Edward 's advisor , Hugh Despenser the Younger , was a sodomite , rather than the late King . The Meaux Chronicle from the 1390s simply notes that Edward gave himself " too much to the vice of sodomy . " 
 Alternatively , Edward and Gaveston may have simply been friends with a close working relationship . Contemporary chronicler comments are vaguely worded ; Orleton 's allegations were at least in part politically motivated , and are very similar to the highly politicised sodomy allegations made against Pope Boniface VIII and the Knights Templar in 1303 and 1308 respectively . Later accounts by chroniclers of Edward 's activities may trace back to Orleton 's original allegations , and were certainly adversely coloured by the events at the end of Edward 's reign . Such historians as Michael Prestwich and Seymour Phillips have argued that the public nature of the English royal court would have made it unlikely that any homosexual affairs would have remained discreet ; neither the contemporary Church , Edward 's father nor his father @-@ in @-@ law appear to have made any adverse comments about Edward 's sexual behaviour . 
 A more recent theory , proposed by the historian Pierre Chaplais , suggests that Edward and Gaveston entered into a bond of adoptive brotherhood . <unk> of adoptive brotherhood , in which the participants pledged to support each other in a form of " brotherhood @-@ in @-@ arms " , were not unknown between close male friends in the Middle Ages . Many chroniclers described Edward and Gaveston 's relationship as one of brotherhood , and one explicitly noted that Edward had taken Gaveston as his adopted brother . Chaplais argues that the pair may have made a formal compact in either 1300 or 1301 , and that they would have seen any later promises they made to separate or to leave each other as having been made under duress , and therefore invalid . Such a compact , however , might not have excluded their relationship from having a sexual dimension as well . 
 = = Early reign ( 1307 – 11 ) = = 
 = = = Coronation and marriage = = = 
 Edward I mobilised another army for the Scottish campaign in 1307 , which Prince Edward was due to join that summer , but the elderly King had been increasingly unwell and died on 7 July at Burgh by Sands . Edward travelled from London immediately after the news reached him , and on 20 July he was proclaimed king . He continued north into Scotland and on 4 August received homage from his Scottish supporters at Dumfries , before abandoning the campaign and returning south . Edward promptly recalled Piers Gaveston , who was then in exile , and appointed him as the Earl of Cornwall , before arranging his marriage to the wealthy Margaret de Clare . Edward also arrested his old adversary Bishop Langton , and dismissed him from his post as treasurer . Edward I 's body was kept at Waltham Abbey for several months before being taken for burial to Westminster , where Edward erected a simple marble tomb for his father . 
 In 1308 , Edward 's marriage to Isabella of France proceeded . Edward crossed the English Channel to France in January , leaving Gaveston as his custos regni in charge of the kingdom in his absence . This arrangement was unusual , and involved unprecedented powers being delegated to Gaveston , backed by a specially engraved Great Seal . Edward probably hoped that the marriage would strengthen his position in Gascony and bring him much needed funds . The final negotiations , however , proved challenging : Edward and Philip IV did not like each other , and the French King drove a hard bargain over the size of Isabella 's dower and the details of the administration of Edward 's lands in France . As part of the agreement , Edward gave homage to Philip for the Duchy of Aquitaine and agreed to a commission to complete the implementation of the 1303 Treaty of Paris . 
 The pair were married in Boulogne on 25 January . Edward gave Isabella a psalter as a wedding gift , and her father gave her gifts worth over 21 @,@ 000 livres and a fragment of the True Cross . The pair returned to England in February , where Edward had ordered Westminster Palace to be lavishly restored in readiness for their coronation and wedding feast , complete with marble tables , forty ovens and a fountain that produced wine and <unk> , a spiced medieval drink . After some delays , the ceremony went ahead on 25 February , under the guidance of Robert Winchelsey , the Archbishop of Canterbury . As part of the coronation , Edward swore to uphold " the rightful laws and customs which the community of the realm shall have chosen " . It is uncertain what this meant : it might have been intended to force Edward to accept future legislation , it may have been inserted to prevent him from overturning any future vows he might take , or it may have been an attempt by the King to ingratiate himself with the barons . The event was marred by the large crowds of eager spectators who surged into the palace , knocking down a wall and forcing Edward to flee by the back door . 
 Isabella was only 12 years old at the time of her wedding , young by the standards of the period , and Edward probably had sexual relations with mistresses during their first few years together . During this time Edward fathered an illegitimate son , Adam , who was born possibly as early as 1307 . Edward and Isabella 's first son , the future Edward III , was born in 1312 amid great celebrations , and three more children followed : John in 1316 , Eleanor in 1318 and Joan in 1321 . 
 = = = Tensions over Gaveston = = = 
 Gaveston 's return from exile in 1307 was initially accepted by the barons , but opposition quickly grew . He appeared to have an excessive influence on royal policy , leading to complaints from one chronicler that there were " two kings reigning in one kingdom , the one in name and the other in deed " . Accusations , probably untrue , were levelled at Gaveston that he had stolen royal funds and had purloined Isabella 's wedding presents . Gaveston had played a key role at Edward 's coronation , provoking fury from both the English and French contingents about the earl 's ceremonial precedence and magnificent clothes , and about Edward 's apparent preference for Gaveston 's company over that of Isabella 's at the feast . 
 Parliament met in February 1308 in a heated atmosphere . Edward was eager to discuss the potential for governmental reform , but the barons were unwilling to begin any such debate until the problem of Gaveston had been resolved . Violence seemed likely , but the situation was resolved through the mediation of the moderate Henry de Lacy , the Earl of Lincoln , who convinced the barons to back down . A fresh parliament was held in April , where the barons once again criticised Gaveston , demanding his exile , this time supported by Isabella and the French monarchy . Edward resisted , but finally acquiesced , agreeing to send Gaveston to Aquitaine , under threat of excommunication by the Archbishop of Canterbury should he return . At the last moment , Edward changed his mind and instead sent Gaveston to Dublin , appointing him as the Lieutenant of Ireland . 
 Edward called for a fresh military campaign for Scotland , but this idea was quietly abandoned , and instead the King and the barons met in August 1308 to discuss reform . Behind the scenes , Edward started negotiations to convince both Pope Clement V and Philip IV to allow Gaveston to return to England , offering in exchange to suppress the Knights Templar in England , and to release Bishop Langton from prison . Edward called a new meeting of members of the Church and key barons in January 1309 , and the leading earls then gathered in March and April , possibly under the leadership of Thomas , the Earl of Lancaster . Another parliament followed , which refused to allow Gaveston to return to England , but offered to grant Edward additional taxes if he agreed to a programme of reform . 
 Edward sent assurances to the Pope that the conflict surrounding Gaveston 's role was at an end . On the basis of these promises , and procedural concerns about the how the original decision had been taken , the Pope agreed to annul the Archbishop 's threat to excommunicate Gaveston , thus opening the possibility of Gaveston 's return . Gaveston arrived back in England in June , where he was met by Edward . At the parliament the next month , Edward made a range of concessions to placate those opposed to Gaveston , including agreeing to limit the powers of the royal steward and the marshal of the royal household , to regulate the Crown 's unpopular powers of purveyance and to abandon recently enacted customs legislation ; in return , the parliament agreed to fresh taxes for the war in Scotland . Temporarily , at least , Edward and the barons appeared to have come to a successful compromise . 
 = = = Ordinances of 1311 = = = 
 Following his return , Gaveston 's relationship with the major barons became increasingly difficult . He was considered arrogant , and he took to referring to the earls by offensive names , including calling one of their more powerful members the " dog of Warwick " . The Earl of Lancaster and Gaveston 's enemies refused to attend parliament in 1310 because Gaveston would be present . Edward was facing increasing financial problems , owing £ 22 @,@ 000 to his Frescobaldi Italian bankers , and facing protests about how he was using his right of prises to acquire supplies for the war in Scotland . His attempts to raise an army for Scotland collapsed and the earls suspended the collection of the new taxes . 
 The King and parliament met again in February 1310 , and the proposed discussions of Scottish policy were replaced by debate of domestic problems . Edward was petitioned to abandon Gaveston as his counsellor and instead adopt the advice of 21 elected barons , termed Ordainers , who would carry out a widespread reform of both the government and the royal household . Under huge pressure , Edward agreed to the proposal and the Ordainers were elected , broadly evenly split between reformers and conservatives . While the Ordainers began their plans for reform , Edward and Gaveston took a new army of around 4 @,@ 700 men to Scotland , where the military situation had continued to deteriorate . Robert the Bruce declined to give battle and the campaign progressed ineffectually over the winter until supplies and money ran out in 1311 , forcing Edward to return south . 
 By now the Ordainers had drawn up their Ordinances for reform and Edward had little political choice but to give way and accept them in October . The Ordinances of 1311 contained clauses limiting the King 's right to go to war or to grant land without parliament 's approval , giving parliament control over the royal administration , abolishing the system of prises , excluding the Frescobaldi bankers , and introducing a system to monitor the adherence to the Ordinances . In addition , the Ordinances exiled Gaveston once again , this time with instructions that he should not be allowed to live anywhere within Edward 's lands , including Gascony and Ireland , and that he should be stripped of his titles . Edward retreated to his estates at Windsor and Kings Langley ; Gaveston left England , possibly for northern France or Flanders . 
 = = Mid @-@ reign ( 1311 – 21 ) = = 
 = = = Death of Gaveston = = = 
 Tensions between Edward and the barons remained high , and the earls opposed to the King kept their personal armies mobilised late into 1311 . By now Edward had become estranged from his cousin , the Earl of Lancaster , who held the earldoms of Lancaster , Leicester , Lincoln , Salisbury and Derby , with an income of around £ 11 @,@ 000 a year from his lands , almost double that of the next wealthiest baron . Backed by the earls of Arundel , Gloucester , Hereford , Pembroke and Warwick , Lancaster led a powerful faction in England , but he was not personally interested in practical administration , nor was he a particularly imaginative or effective politician . 
 Edward responded to the baronial threat by revoking the Ordinances and recalling Gaveston to England , being reunited with him at York in January 1312 . The barons were furious and met in London , where Gaveston was excommunicated by the Archbishop of Canterbury and plans were put in place to capture Gaveston and prevent him from fleeing to Scotland . Edward , Isabella and Gaveston left for Newcastle , pursued by Lancaster and his followers . Abandoning many of their belongings , the royal party fled by ship and landed at Scarborough , where Gaveston stayed while Edward and Isabella returned to York . After a short siege , Gaveston surrendered to the earls of Pembroke and Surrey , on the promise that he would not be harmed . He had with him a huge collection of gold , silver and gems , probably part of the royal treasury , which he was later accused of having stolen from Edward . 
 On the way back from the north , Pembroke stopped in the village of Deddington in the Midlands , putting Gaveston under guard there while he went to visit his wife . The Earl of Warwick took this opportunity to seize Gaveston , taking him to Warwick Castle , where Lancaster and the rest of his faction assembled on 18 June . At a brief trial , Gaveston was declared guilty of being a traitor under the terms of the Ordinances ; he was executed on Blacklow Hill the following day , under the authority of the Earl of Lancaster . Gaveston 's body was not buried until 1315 , when his funeral was held in King 's Langley Priory . 
 = = = Tensions with Lancaster and France = = = 
 Reactions to the death of Gaveston varied considerably . Edward was furious and deeply upset over what he saw as the murder of Gaveston ; he made provisions for Gaveston 's family , and intended to take revenge on the barons involved . The earls of Pembroke and Surrey were embarrassed and angry about Warwick 's actions , and shifted their support to Edward in the aftermath . To Lancaster and his core of supporters , the execution had been both legal and necessary to preserve the stability of the kingdom . Civil war again appeared likely , but in December , the Earl of Pembroke negotiated a potential peace treaty between the two sides , which would pardon the opposition barons for the killing of Gaveston , in exchange for their support for a fresh campaign in Scotland . Lancaster and Warwick , however , did not give the treaty their immediate approval , and further negotiations continued through most of 1313 . 
 Meanwhile , the Earl of Pembroke had been negotiating with France to resolve the long @-@ standing disagreements over the administration of Gascony , and as part of this Edward and Isabella agreed to travel to Paris in June 1313 to meet with Philip IV . Edward probably hoped both to resolve the problems in the south of France and to win Philip 's support in the dispute with the barons ; for Philip it was an opportunity to impress his son @-@ in @-@ law with his power and wealth . It proved a spectacular visit , including a grand ceremony in which the two kings knighted Philip 's sons and 200 other men in Notre Dame , large banquets along the River Seine , and a public declaration that both kings and their queens would join a crusade to the Levant . Philip gave lenient terms for settling the problems in Gascony , and the event was spoiled only by a serious fire in Edward 's quarters . 
 On his return from France , Edward found his political position greatly strengthened . After intense negotiation , the earls , including Lancaster and Warwick , came to a compromise in October 1313 , fundamentally very similar to the draft agreement of the previous December . Edward 's finances improved , thanks to parliament agreeing to the raising of taxes , a loan of 160 @,@ 000 florins ( £ 25 @,@ 000 ) from the Pope , £ 33 @,@ 000 that he borrowed from Philip , and further loans organised by Edward 's new Italian banker , Antonio Pessagno . For the first time in his reign , Edward 's government was well @-@ funded . 
 = = = Battle of Bannockburn = = = 
 By 1314 , Robert the Bruce had recaptured most of the castles in Scotland once held by Edward , pushing raiding parties into northern England as far as Carlisle . In response , Edward planned a major military campaign with the support of Lancaster and the barons , mustering a large army between 15 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 strong . Meanwhile , Robert had besieged Stirling Castle , a key fortification in Scotland ; its English commander had stated that unless Edward arrived by 24 June , he would surrender . News of this reached the King in late May , and he decided to speed up his march north from Berwick to relieve the castle . Robert , with between 5 @,@ 500 and 6 @,@ 500 troops , predominantly spearmen , prepared to prevent Edward 's forces from reaching Stirling . 
 The battle began on 23 June as the English army attempted to force its way across the high ground of the Bannock Burn , which was surrounded by marshland . Skirmishing between the two sides broke out , resulting in the death of Sir Henry de Bohun , whom Robert killed in personal combat . Edward continued his advance the following day , and encountered the bulk of the Scottish army as they emerged from the woods of New Park . Edward appears not to have expected the Scots to give battle here , and as a result had kept his forces in marching , rather than battle , order , with the archers − who would usually have been used to break up enemy spear formations − at the back of his army , rather than the front . His cavalry found it hard to operate in the cramped terrain and were crushed by Robert 's spearmen . The English army was overwhelmed and its leaders were unable to regain control . 
 Edward stayed behind to fight , but it became obvious to the Earl of Pembroke that the battle was lost and he dragged the King away from the battlefield , hotly pursued by the Scottish forces . Edward only just escaped the heavy fighting , making a vow to found a Carmelite religious house at Oxford if he survived . The historian Roy Haines describes the defeat as a " calamity of stunning proportions " for the English , whose losses in the battle were huge . In the aftermath of the defeat , Edward retreated to Dunbar , then travelled by ship to Berwick , and then back to York ; in his absence , Stirling Castle quickly fell . 
 = = = Famine and criticism = = = 
 After the fiasco of Bannockburn , the earls of Lancaster and Warwick saw their political influence increase , and they pressured Edward to re @-@ implement the Ordinances of 1311 . Lancaster became the head of the royal council in 1316 , promising to take forward the Ordinances through a new reform commission , but he appears to have abandoned this role soon afterwards , partially because of disagreements with the other barons , and possibly because of ill @-@ health . Lancaster refused to meet with Edward in parliament for the next two years , bringing effective governance to a standstill . This stymied any hopes for a fresh campaign into Scotland and raised fears of civil war . After much negotiation , once again involving the Earl of Pembroke , Edward and Lancaster finally agreed to the Treaty of Leake in August 1318 , which pardoned Lancaster and his faction and established a new royal council , temporarily averting conflict . 
 Edward 's difficulties were exacerbated by prolonged problems in English agriculture , part of a wider phenomenon in northern Europe known as the Great Famine . It began with torrential rains in late 1314 , followed by a very cold winter and heavy rains the following spring that killed many sheep and cattle . The bad weather continued , almost unabated , into 1321 , resulting in a string of bad harvests . Revenues from the exports of wool plummeted and the price of food rose , despite attempts by Edward II 's government to control prices . Edward called for hoarders to release food , and tried to encourage both internal trade and the importation of grain , but with little success . The requisitioning of provisions for the royal court during the famine years only added to tensions . 
 Meanwhile , Robert the Bruce exploited his victory at Bannockburn to raid northern England , initially attacking Carlisle and Berwick , and then reaching further south into Lancashire and Yorkshire , even threatening York itself . Edward undertook an expensive but unsuccessful campaign to stem the advance in 1319 , but the famine made it increasingly difficult to keep his garrisons supplied with food . Meanwhile , a Scottish expedition led by Robert 's brother successfully invaded Ireland in 1315 , where Edward Bruce declared himself the King of Ireland . He was finally defeated in 1318 by Edward II 's Irish justiciar , Edmund Butler , at the Battle of <unk> , and Edward Bruce 's decapitated head was sent back to the King . Revolts also broke out in Lancashire and Bristol in 1315 , and in Glamorgan in Wales in 1316 , but were suppressed . 
 The famine and the Scottish policy were felt to be a punishment from God , and complaints about Edward multiplied , one contemporary poem describing the " Evil Times of Edward II " . Many criticised Edward 's " improper " and ignoble interest in rural pursuits . In 1318 , a mentally ill man named John of <unk> appeared in Oxford , claiming that he was the real Edward II , and that Edward was a changeling , swapped at birth . John was duly executed , but his claims resonated with those criticising Edward for his lack of regal behaviour and steady leadership . Opposition also grew around Edward 's treatment of his royal favourites . 
 He had managed to retain some of his previous advisers , despite attempts by the Ordainers to remove them , and divided the extensive de Clare inheritance among two of his new favourites , the former household knights Hugh Audley and Roger Damory , instantly making them extremely rich . Many of the moderates who had helped deliver the peaceful compromise in 1318 now began to turn against Edward , making violence ever more likely . 
 = = Later reign ( 1321 – 26 ) = = 
 = = = The Despenser War = = = 
 The long @-@ threatened civil war finally broke out in England in 1321 , triggered by the tension between many of the barons and the royal favourites , the Despenser family . Hugh Despenser the Elder had served both Edward and his father , while Hugh Despenser the Younger had married into the wealthy de Clare family , become the King 's chamberlain , and acquired Glamorgan in the Welsh Marches in 1317 . Hugh the Younger subsequently expanded his holdings and power across Wales , mainly at the expense of the other Marcher Lords . The Earl of Lancaster and the Despensers were fierce enemies , and Lancaster 's antipathy was shared by most of the Despensers ' neighbours , including the Earl of Hereford , the Mortimer family and the recently elevated Hugh Audley and Roger Damory . Edward , however , increasingly relied on the Despensers for advice and support , and he was particularly close to Hugh the Younger , whom one chronicler noted he " loved ... dearly with all his heart and mind " . 
 In early 1321 , Lancaster mobilised a coalition of the Despensers ' enemies across the Marcher territories . Edward and Hugh the Younger became aware of these plans in March and headed west , hoping that negotiations led by the moderate Earl of Pembroke would defuse the crisis . This time , Pembroke made his excuses and declined to intervene , and war broke out in May . The Despensers ' lands were quickly seized by a coalition of the Marcher Lords and the local gentry , and Lancaster held a high @-@ level gathering of the barons and clergy in June which condemned the Despensers for having broken the Ordinances . Edward attempted reconciliation , but in July the opposition occupied London and called for the permanent removal of the Despensers . Fearing that he might be deposed if he refused , Edward agreed to exile the Despensers and pardoned the Marcher Lords for their actions . 
 Edward began to plan his revenge . With the help of Pembroke , the King formed a small coalition of his half @-@ brothers , a few of the earls and some of the senior clergy , and prepared for war . Edward started with Bartholomew of Badlesmere , and Isabella was sent to Bartholomew 's stronghold , Leeds Castle , to deliberately create a casus belli . Bartholomew 's wife , Margaret , took the bait and her men killed several of Isabella 's retinue , giving Edward an excuse to intervene . Lancaster refused to help Bartholomew , who was his personal enemy , and Edward quickly regained control of south @-@ east England . Alarmed , Lancaster now mobilised his own army in the north of England , and Edward mustered his own forces in the south @-@ west . The Despensers returned from exile and were pardoned by the royal council . 
 In December , Edward led his army across the River Severn and advanced into the Welsh Marches , where the opposition forces had gathered . The coalition of Marcher Lords crumbled and the Mortimers surrendered to the King , but Damory , Audley and the Earl of Hereford marched north in January to join Lancaster , who had laid siege the King 's castle at Tickhill . Bolstered by fresh reinforcements from the Marcher Lords , Edward pursued them , meeting Lancaster 's army on 10 March at Burton @-@ on @-@ Trent . Lancaster , outnumbered , retreated without a fight , fleeing north . Andrew Harclay cornered Lancaster at the Battle of Boroughbridge , and captured the Earl . Edward and Hugh the Younger met Lancaster at Pontefract , where , after a summary trial , the earl was found guilty of treason and beheaded . 
 = = = Edward and the Despensers = = = 
 Edward punished Lancaster 's supporters through a system of special courts across the country , with the judges instructed in advance how to sentence the accused , who were not allowed to speak in their own defence . Many of these so @-@ called " <unk> " were simply executed , and others were imprisoned or fined , with their lands seized and their surviving relatives detained . The Earl of Pembroke , whom Edward now mistrusted , was arrested and only released after pledging all of his possessions as collateral for his own loyalty . Edward was able to reward his loyal supporters , especially the Despenser family , with the confiscated estates and new titles . The fines and confiscations made Edward rich : almost £ 15 @,@ 000 was brought in during the first few months , and by 1326 , Edward 's treasury contained £ 62 @,@ 000 . A parliament was held at York in March 1322 at which the Ordinances were formally revoked through the Statute of York , and fresh taxes agreed for a new campaign against the Scots . 
 The English campaign against Scotland was planned on a massive scale , with a force of around 23 @,@ 350 men . Edward advanced through Lothian towards Edinburgh , but Robert the Bruce declined to meet him in battle , drawing Edward further into Scotland . Plans to resupply the campaign by sea failed , and the large army rapidly ran out of food . Edward was forced to retreat south of the border , pursued by Scottish raiding parties . Edward 's illegitimate son , Adam , died during the campaign , and the raiding parties almost captured Isabella , who was staying at Tynemouth and was forced to flee by sea . The King planned a fresh campaign , backed by a round of further taxes , but confidence in Edward 's Scottish policy was diminishing . Andrew Harclay , instrumental in securing Edward 's victories the previous year and recently made the Earl of Carlisle , independently negotiated a peace treaty with Robert the Bruce , proposing that Edward would recognise Robert as the King of Scotland and that , in return , Robert would cease to interfere in England . Edward was furious and immediately executed Harclay , but agreed to a thirteen @-@ year truce with Robert . 
 Hugh Despenser the Younger lived and ruled in grand style , playing a leading role in Edward 's government , and executing policy through a wide network of family retainers . Supported by Robert Baldock and Walter Stapledon , Edward 's chancellor and lord treasurer , the Despensers accumulated land and wealth , using their position in government to provide superficial cover for what historian Seymour Phillips describes as " the reality of fraud , threats of violence and abuse of legal procedure " . Meanwhile , Edward faced growing opposition . Miracles were reported around the late Earl of Lancaster 's tomb , and at the gallows used to execute members of the opposition in Bristol . Law and order began to break down , encouraged by the chaos caused by the seizure of lands . The old opposition consisting of Marcher Lords ' associates attempted to free the prisoners Edward held in Wallingford Castle , and Roger Mortimer , one of the most prominent of the imprisoned Marcher Lords , escaped from the Tower of London and fled to France . 
 = = = War with France = = = 
 The disagreements between Edward and the French Crown over the Duchy of Gascony led to the War of Saint @-@ Sardos in 1324 . Charles , Edward 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , had become King of France in 1322 , and was more aggressive than his predecessors . In 1323 , he insisted that Edward come to Paris to give homage for Gascony , and demanded that Edward 's administrators in Gascony allow French officials there to carry out orders given in Paris . Matters came to a head in October when a group of Edward 's soldiers hanged a French sergeant for attempting to build a new fortified town in the Agenais , a contested section of the Gascon border . Edward denied any responsibility for this incident , but relations between Edward and Charles soured . In 1324 , Edward dispatched the Earl of Pembroke to Paris to broker a solution , but the earl died suddenly of an illness along the way . Charles mobilised his army and ordered the invasion of Gascony . 
 Edward 's forces in Gascony were around 4 @,@ 400 strong , but the French army , commanded by Charles of Valois , numbered 7 @,@ 000 . Valois took the Agenais and then advanced further and cut off the main city of Bordeaux . In response , Edward ordered the arrest of any French persons in England and seized Isabella 's lands , on the basis that she was of French origin . In November 1324 he met with the earls and the English Church , who recommended that Edward should lead a force of 11 @,@ 000 men to Gascony . Edward decided not to go personally , sending instead the Earl of Surrey . Meanwhile , Edward opened up fresh negotiations with the French king . Charles advanced various proposals , the most tempting of which was the suggestion that if Isabella and Prince Edward were to travel to Paris , and the Prince was to give homage to the French King for Gascony , he would terminate the war and return the Agenais . Edward and his advisers had concerns about sending the prince to France , but agreed to send Isabella on her own as an envoy in March 1325 . 
 = = Fall from power ( 1326 – 27 ) = = 
 = = = Rift with Isabella = = = 
 Isabella , with Edward 's envoys , carried out negotiations with the French in late March . The negotiations proved difficult , and they arrived at a settlement only after Isabella personally intervened with her brother , Charles . The terms favoured the French crown : in particular , Edward would give homage in person to Charles for Gascony . Concerned about the consequences of war breaking out once again , Edward agreed to the treaty but decided to give Gascony to his son , Edward , and sent the prince to give homage in Paris . The young Prince Edward crossed the English Channel and completed the bargain in September . 
 Edward now expected Isabella and their son to return to England , but instead she remained in France and showed no intention of making her way back . Until 1322 , Edward and Isabella 's marriage appears to have been successful , but by the time the Queen left for France in 1325 , it had deteriorated . Isabella appears to have disliked Hugh Despenser the Younger intensely , not least because of his abuse of high @-@ status women . Isabella was embarrassed that she had fled from Scottish armies three times during her marriage to Edward , and she blamed Hugh for the final occurrence in 1322 . When Edward had negotiated the recent truce with Robert the Bruce , he had severely disadvantaged a range of noble families who owned land in Scotland , including the Beaumonts , close friends of Isabella 's . She was also angry about the arrest of her household and seizure of her lands in 1324 . Finally , Edward had taken away her children and given the custody of them to Hugh Despenser 's wife . 
 By February 1326 , it was clear that Isabella was involved in a relationship with the exiled Marcher Lord , Roger Mortimer . It is unclear when Isabella first met Mortimer or when their relationship began , but they both wanted to see Edward and the Despensers removed from power . The King appealed for his son to return , and for Charles to intervene on his behalf , but this had no effect . 
 Edward 's opponents began to gather around Isabella and Mortimer in Paris , and Edward became increasingly anxious about the possibility that Mortimer might invade England . Isabella and Mortimer turned to William , the Count of Hainaut , and proposed a marriage between Prince Edward and William 's daughter , Philippa . In return for the advantageous alliance with the English heir to the throne , and a sizeable dower for the bride , William offered 132 transport vessels and 8 warships to assist in the invasion of England . Prince Edward and Philippa were betrothed on 27 August , and Isabella and Mortimer prepared for their campaign . 
 = = = Invasion = = = 
 During August and September 1326 , Edward mobilised his defences along the coasts of England to protect against the possibility of an invasion either by France or by Roger Mortimer . Fleets were gathered at the ports of Portsmouth in the south and Orwell on the east coast , and a raiding force of 1 @,@ 600 men was sent across the English Channel into Normandy as a diversionary attack . Edward issued a nationalistic appeal for his subjects to defend the kingdom , but with little impact . The regime 's hold on power at the local level was fragile , the Despensers were widely disliked , and many of those Edward entrusted with the defence of the kingdom proved incompetent , or promptly turned against the regime . Some 2 @,@ 000 men were ordered to gather at Orwell to repel any invasion , but only 55 appear to have actually arrived . 
 Roger Mortimer , Isabella , and thirteen @-@ year @-@ old Prince Edward , accompanied by King Edward 's half @-@ brother Edmund of Woodstock , landed in Orwell on 24 September with a small force of men and met with no resistance . Instead , enemies of the Despensers moved rapidly to join them , including Edward 's other half @-@ brother , Thomas of Brotherton ; Henry of Lancaster , who had inherited the earldom from his brother Thomas ; and a range of senior clergy . <unk> in the residence halls of the fortified and secure Tower of London , Edward attempted to garner support from within the capital . The city of London rose against his government , and on 2 October the King left London , taking the Despensers with him . London descended into anarchy , as mobs attacked Edward 's remaining officials and associates , killing his former treasurer Walter Stapledon in St Paul 's Cathedral , and taking the Tower and releasing the prisoners inside . 
 Edward continued west up the Thames Valley , reaching Gloucester between 9 and 12 October ; he hoped to reach Wales and from there mobilise an army against the invaders . Mortimer and Isabella were not far behind . Proclamations condemned the Despensers ' recent regime . Day @-@ by @-@ day they gathered new supporters Edward and the younger Despenser crossed over the border and set sail from Chepstow , probably aiming first for Lundy and then for Ireland , where the King hoped to receive refuge and raise a fresh army . Bad weather drove them back , though , and they landed at Cardiff . Edward retreated to Caerphilly Castle and attempted to rally his remaining forces . 
 Edward 's authority collapsed in England where , in the King 's absence , Isabella 's faction took over the administration with the support of the Church . Her forces surrounded Bristol , where Hugh Despenser the Elder had taken shelter ; he surrendered and was promptly executed . Edward and Hugh the Younger fled their castle around 2 November , leaving behind jewellery , considerable supplies and at least £ 13 @,@ 000 in cash , possibly once again hoping to reach Ireland , but on 16 November they were betrayed and captured by a search party north of Caerphilly . Edward was escorted first to Monmouth Castle , and from there back into England , where he was held at Henry of Lancaster 's fortress at Kenilworth . The King 's final remaining forces , by now besieged in Caerphilly Castle , surrendered after five months in April 1327 . 
 = = = Abdication = = = 
 Isabella and Mortimer rapidly took revenge on the former regime . Hugh Despenser the Younger was put on trial , declared a traitor and sentenced to be drawn , disembowelled , castrated and quartered ; he was duly executed on 24 November 1326 . Edward 's former chancellor , Robert Baldock , died in Fleet Prison ; the Earl of Arundel was beheaded . Edward 's position , however , was problematic ; he was still married to Isabella and , in principle , he remained the king , but most of the new administration had a lot to lose were he to be released and potentially regain power . 
 There was no established procedure for removing an English king . Adam Orleton , the Bishop of Hereford , made a series of public allegations about Edward 's conduct as king , and in January 1327 a parliament convened at Westminster at which the question of Edward 's future was raised ; Edward refused to attend the gathering . Parliament , initially ambivalent , responded to the London crowds that called for Prince Edward to take the throne . On 12 January the leading barons and clergy agreed that Edward II should be removed and replaced by his son . The following day it was presented to an assembly of the barons , where it was argued that Edward 's weak leadership and personal faults had led the kingdom into disaster , and that he was incompetent to lead the country . 
 Shortly after this , a representative delegation of barons , clergy and knights was sent to Kenilworth to speak to the King . On 20 January 1327 , Henry of Lancaster and the bishops of Winchester and Lincoln met privately with Edward in the castle . They informed Edward that if he were to resign as monarch , his son Prince Edward would succeed him , but if he failed to do so , his son might be disinherited as well , and the crown given to an alternative candidate . In tears , Edward agreed to abdicate , and on 21 January , Sir William Trussell , representing the kingdom as a whole , withdrew his homage and formally ended Edward 's reign . A proclamation was sent to London , announcing that Edward , now known just as Edward of Caernarvon , had freely resigned his kingdom and that Prince Edward would succeed him . The coronation took place at Westminster Abbey on 2 February 1327 . 
 = = Death ( 1327 ) = = 
 = = = Death and aftermath = = = 
 Those opposed to the new government began to make plans to free Edward , and Roger Mortimer decided to move Edward to the more secure location of Berkeley Castle in Gloucestershire , where the former King arrived around 5 April 1327 . Once at the castle , Edward was kept in the custody of Mortimer 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Thomas Berkeley , and John Maltravers , who were given £ 5 a day for Edward 's maintenance . It is unclear how well cared for Edward was ; the records show luxury goods being bought on his behalf , but some chroniclers suggest that he was often mistreated . A poem , the Lament of Edward II , was once thought to have been written by Edward during his imprisonment , although modern scholarship has cast doubt on this . 
 Concerns continued to be raised over fresh plots to liberate Edward , some involving the Dominican order and former household knights , and one such attempt got at least as far as breaking into the prison within the castle . As a result of these threats , Edward was moved around to other locations in secret for a period , before returning to permanent custody at the castle in the late summer of 1327 . The political situation remained unstable , and new plots appear to have been formed to free him . 
 On 23 September Edward III was informed that his father had died at Berkeley Castle during the night of 21 September . Most historians agree that Edward II did die at Berkeley on that date , although there is a minority view , described below , that he died much later . Edward 's death was , as Mark Ormrod notes , " suspiciously timely " , as it simplified Mortimer 's political problems considerably , and most historians believe that Edward probably was murdered on the orders of the new regime , although it is impossible to be certain . Several of the individuals suspected of involvement in the death , including Sir Thomas Gurney , Maltravers and William Ockley , later fled . If Edward did die from natural causes , his death may have been hastened by depression following his imprisonment . 
 The rule of Isabella and Mortimer did not last long after the announcement of Edward 's death . They made peace with the Scots in the Treaty of Northampton , but this move was highly unpopular . Isabella and Mortimer both amassed , and spent , great wealth , and criticism of them mounted . Relations between Mortimer and the young Edward III became strained and in 1330 the King conducted a coup d 'état at Nottingham Castle . He arrested Mortimer and then executed him on fourteen charges of treason , including the murder of Edward II . Edward III 's government sought to blame Mortimer for all of the recent problems , effectively politically rehabilitating the late King . The King spared Isabella , giving her a generous allowance , and she soon returned to public life . 
 = = = Burial and cult = = = 
 Edward 's body was embalmed at Berkeley Castle , where it was viewed by local leaders from Bristol and Gloucester . It was then taken to Gloucester Abbey on 21 October , and on 20 December Edward was buried by the high altar , the funeral having probably been delayed to allow Edward III to attend in person . Gloucester was probably chosen because other abbeys had refused or been forbidden to take the King 's body , and because it was close to Berkeley . The funeral was a grand affair and cost £ 351 in total , complete with gilt lions , standards painted with gold leaf and oak barriers to manage the anticipated crowds . Edward III 's government probably hoped to put a veneer of normality over the recent political events , increasing the legitimacy of the young King 's own reign . 
 A temporary wooden effigy with a copper crown was made for the funeral ; this is the first known use of a funeral effigy in England , and was probably necessary because of the condition of the King 's body , which had been dead for three months . Edward 's heart was removed , placed in a silver container , and later buried with Isabella at Newgate Church in London . His tomb includes a very early example of an English alabaster effigy , with a tomb @-@ chest and a canopy made of oolite and Purbeck stone . Edward was buried in the shirt , coif and gloves from his coronation , and his effigy depicts him as king , holding a sceptre and orb , and wearing a strawberry @-@ leaf crown . The effigy features a pronounced lower lip , and may be a close likeness of Edward . 
 The King 's tomb rapidly became a popular site for visitors , probably encouraged by the local monks , who lacked an existing pilgrimage attraction . Visitors donated extensively to the abbey , allowing the monks to rebuild much of the surrounding church in the 1330s . Miracles reportedly took place at the tomb , and modifications had to be made to enable visitors to walk around it in larger numbers . The chronicler Geoffrey de Baker depicted Edward as a saintly , tortured martyr , and Richard II gave royal support for an unsuccessful bid to have Edward canonised in 1395 . The tomb was opened by officials in 1855 , uncovering a wooden coffin , still in good condition , and a sealed lead coffin inside it . The tomb remains in what is now Gloucester Cathedral , and was extensively restored between 2007 and 2008 at a cost of over £ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 Controversy rapidly surrounded Edward 's death . With Mortimer 's execution in 1330 , rumours began to circulate that Edward had been murdered at Berkeley Castle . Accounts that he had been killed by the insertion of a red @-@ hot iron or poker into his anus slowly began to circulate , possibly as a result of deliberate propaganda ; chroniclers in the mid @-@ 1330s and 1340s spread this account further , supported in later years by Geoffrey le Baker 's colourful account of the killing . It became incorporated into most later histories of Edward , typically being linked to his possible homosexuality . Most historians now dismiss this account of Edward 's death , querying the logic in Edward 's captors murdering him in such an easily detectable fashion . 
 Another set of theories surround the possibility that Edward did not really die in 1327 . These theories typically involve the " Fieschi Letter " , sent to Edward III by an Italian priest called Manuel Fieschi , who claimed that Edward escaped Berkeley Castle in 1327 with the help of a servant , and ultimately retired to become a hermit in the Holy Roman Empire . The body buried at Gloucester Cathedral was said to be that of the porter of Berkeley Castle , killed by the assassins and presented by them to Isabella as Edward 's corpse to avoid punishment . The letter is often linked to an account of Edward III meeting with a man called William the Welshman in Antwerp in 1338 , who claimed to be Edward II . 
 Some parts of the letter 's content are considered broadly accurate by historians , although other aspects of its account have been criticised as implausible . A few historians have supported versions of its narrative . Paul Doherty questions the veracity of the letter and the identity of William the Welshman , but nonetheless has suspicions that Edward may have survived his imprisonment . The popular historian Alison Weir believes the events in the letter to be essentially true , using the letter to argue that Isabella was innocent of murdering Edward . The historian Ian Mortimer suggests that the story in Fieschi 's letter is broadly accurate , but argues that it was in fact Mortimer and Isabella who had Edward secretly released , and who then faked his death , a fiction later maintained by Edward III when he came to power . Ian Mortimer 's account was criticised by most scholars when it was first published , in particular by historian David Carpenter . 
 = = Edward as king = = 
 = = = Kingship , government and law = = = 
 Edward was ultimately a failure as a king ; the historian Michael Prestwich observes that he " was lazy and incompetent , liable to outbursts of temper over unimportant issues , yet indecisive when it came to major issues " , echoed by Roy Haines ' description of Edward as " incompetent and vicious " , and as " no man of business " . Edward did not just delegate routine government to his subordinates , but also higher level decision making , and Pierre Chaplais argues that he " was not so much an incompetent king as a reluctant one " , preferring to rule through a powerful deputy , such as Piers Gaveston or Hugh Despenser the Younger . Edward 's willingness to promote his favourites had serious political consequences , although he also attempted to buy the loyalty of a wider grouping of nobles through grants of money and fees . Edward could take a keen interest in the minutiae of administration , however , and on occasion engaged in the details of a wide range of issues across England and his wider domains . 
 One of Edward 's persistent challenges through most of his reign was a shortage of money ; of the debts he inherited from his father , around £ 60 @,@ 000 was still owing in the 1320s . The King worked his way through many treasurers and other financial officials , few of whom stayed long , raising revenues through often unpopular taxes , and requisitioning goods using his right of prise . He also took out many loans , first through the Frescobaldi family , and then through his banker Antonio Pessagno . Edward took a strong interest in financial matters towards the end of his reign , distrusting his own officials and attempting to increase revenues directly by cutting back on the expenses of his own household . 
 Edward was responsible for implementing royal justice through his network of judges and officials . It is uncertain to what extent Edward took a personal interest in dispensing justice , but he appears to have involved himself to some degree during the first part of his reign , and to have increasingly intervened in person after 1322 . Edward made extensive use of Roman civil law during his reign when arguing in defence of his causes and favourites , which may have attracted criticism from those who perceived this as abandoning the established principles of the English Common Law . Edward was also criticised by contemporaries for allowing the Despensers to exploit the royal justice system for their own ends ; the Despensers certainly appear to have abused the system , although just how widely they did so is unclear . Amid the political turbulence , armed gangs and violence spread across England under Edward 's reign , destabilising the position of many of the local gentry ; much of Ireland similarly disintegrated into anarchy . 
 Under Edward 's rule , parliament 's importance grew as a means of making political decisions and answering petitions , although as the historian Claire Valente notes , the gatherings were " still as much an event as an institution " . After 1311 , parliament began to include , in addition to the barons , the representatives of the knights and burgesses , who in later years would constitute the " commons " . Although parliament often opposed raising fresh taxes , active opposition to Edward came largely from the barons , rather than parliament itself , although the barons did seek to use the parliamentary meetings as a way of giving legitimacy to their long @-@ standing political demands . After resisting it for many years , Edward began intervening in parliament in the second half of his reign to achieve his own political aims . It remains unclear whether Edward was deposed in 1327 by a formal gathering of parliament or simply a gathering of the political classes alongside an existing parliament . 
 = = = Court = = = 
 Edward 's royal court was itinerant , travelling around the country with the King . When housed in Westminster Palace , the court occupied a complex of two halls , seven chambers and three chapels , along with other smaller rooms , but , due to the Scottish conflict , the court spent much of its time in Yorkshire and Northumbria . At the heart of the court was Edward 's royal household , in turn divided into the " hall " and the " chamber " ; the size of the household varied over time , but in 1317 was around 500 strong , including household knights , squires , kitchen and transport staff . The household was surrounded by a wider group of courtiers , and appears to have also attracted a circle of prostitutes and criminal elements . 
 Music and minstrels were very popular at Edward 's court , but hunting appears to have been a much less important activity , and there was little emphasis on chivalric events . Edward was interested in buildings and paintings , but less so in literary works , which were not extensively sponsored at court . There was an extensive use of gold and silver plates , jewels and enamelling at court , which would have been richly decorated . Edward kept a camel as a pet and , as a young man , took a lion with him on campaign to Scotland . The court could be entertained in exotic ways : by an Italian snake @-@ charmer in 1312 , and the following year by 54 nude French dancers . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Edward 's approach to religion was normal for the period , and the historian Michael Prestwich describes him as " a man of wholly conventional religious attitudes " . There were daily chapel services and alms @-@ giving at his court , and Edward blessed the sick , although he did this less often than his predecessors . Edward remained close to the Dominican Order , who had helped to educate him , and followed their advice in asking for papal permission to be anointed with the Holy Oil of St Thomas of Canterbury in 1319 ; this request was refused , causing the King some embarrassment . Edward supported the expansion of the universities during his reign , establishing King 's Hall in Cambridge to promote training in religious and civil law , Oriel College in Oxford and a short @-@ lived university in Dublin . 
 Edward enjoyed a good relationship with Pope Clement V , despite the King 's repeated intervention in the operation of the English Church , including punishing bishops with whom he disagreed . With Clement 's support , Edward attempted to gain the financial support of the English Church for his military campaigns in Scotland , including taxation and borrowing money against the funds gathered for the crusades . The English Church did relatively little to influence or moderate Edward 's behaviour during his reign , possibly because of the bishops ' self @-@ interest and concern for their own protection . 
 Pope John XXII , elected in 1316 , sought Edward 's support for a new crusade , and was also inclined to support him politically . In 1317 , in exchange for papal support in his war with Scotland , Edward agreed to recommence paying the annual Papal tribute , which had been first agreed by King John in 1213 ; Edward soon ceased the payments , however , and the King never offered his homage , another part of the 1213 agreement . In 1325 Edward asked Pope John to instruct the Irish Church to openly preach in favour of his right to rule the island , and to threaten to excommunicate any contrary voices . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 No chronicler for this period is entirely trustworthy or unbiased , often because their accounts were written to support a particular cause , but it is clear that most contemporary chroniclers were highly critical of Edward . The Polychronicon , Vita Edwardi Secundi , Vita et Mors Edwardi Secundi and the Gesta Edwardi de Carnarvon for example all condemned the King 's personality , habits and choice of companions . Other records from his reign show criticism of Edward by his contemporaries , including the Church and members of his own household . Political songs were written about him , complaining about his failure in war and his oppressive government . Later in the 14th century , some chroniclers , such as Geoffrey le Baker and Thomas <unk> , rehabilitated Edward , presenting him as a martyr and a potential saint , although this tradition died out in later years . 
 Historians in the 16th and 17th centuries focused on Edward 's relationship with Gaveston , drawing comparisons between Edward 's reign and the events surrounding the relationship of the Duc d <unk> and Henry III of France , and between the Duke of Buckingham and Charles I. In the first half of the 19th century , popular historians such as Charles Dickens and Charles Knight popularised Edward 's life with the Victorian public , focusing on the King 's relationship with his favourites and , increasingly , alluding to his possible homosexuality . From the 1870s onwards , however , open academic discussion of Edward 's sexuality was circumscribed by changing English values . By the start of the 20th century , English schools were being advised by the government to avoid overt discussion of Edward 's personal relationships in history lessons . Views on Edward 's sexuality have continued to develop over the years . 
 By the end of the 19th century , more administrative records from the period had become available to historians such as William Stubbs , Thomas Tout and J. C. Davies , who focused on the development of the English constitutional and governmental system during his reign . Although critical of what they regarded as Edward 's inadequacies as a king , they also emphasised the growth of the role of parliament and the reduction in personal royal authority under Edward II , which they perceived as positive developments . During the 1970s the historiography of Edward 's reign shifted away from this model , supported by the further publishing of records from the period in the last quarter of the 20th century . The work of Jeffrey Denton , Jeffrey Hamilton , John Maddicott and Seymour Phillips re @-@ focused attention on the role of the individual leaders in the conflicts . With the exceptions of Hilda Johnstone 's work on Edward 's early years , and Natalie <unk> 's study of Edward 's final years , the focus of the major historical studies for several years was on the leading magnates rather than Edward himself , until substantial biographies of the King were published by Roy Haines and Seymour Phillips in 2003 and 2011 . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 Several plays have shaped Edward 's contemporary image . Christopher Marlowe 's play Edward II was first performed around 1592 , and focuses on Edward 's relationship with Piers Gaveston , reflecting 16th @-@ century concerns about the relationships between monarchs and their favourites . Marlowe presents Edward 's death as a murder , drawing parallels between the killing and martyrdom ; although Marlowe does not describe the actual nature of Edward 's murder in the script , it has usually been performed following the tradition that Edward was killed with a red @-@ hot poker . The character of Edward in the play , who has been likened to Marlowe 's contemporaries James VI of Scotland and Henry III of France , may have influenced William Shakespeare 's portrayal of Richard II . In the 17th century , the playwright Ben Jonson picked up the same theme for his unfinished work , Mortimer His Fall . 
 The filmmaker Derek Jarman adapted the Marlowe play into a film in 1991 , creating a postmodern pastiche of the original , depicting Edward as a strong , explicitly homosexual leader , ultimately overcome by powerful enemies . In Jarman 's version , Edward finally escapes captivity , following the tradition in the Fieschi letter . Edward 's current popular image was also shaped by his contrasting appearance in Mel Gibson 's 1995 film Braveheart , where he is portrayed as weak and implicitly homosexual , wearing silk clothes and heavy makeup , shunning the company of women and incapable of dealing militarily with the Scots . The film received extensive criticism , both for its historical inaccuracies and for its negative portrayal of homosexuality . 
 Edward 's life has also been used in a wide variety of other media . The director David <unk> used Marlowe 's play as the basis for the ballet Edward II , first performed in 1995 ; the music from the ballet forms a part of composer John McCabe 's symphony Edward II , produced in 2000 . Novels such as John Penford 's 1984 The Gascon and Chris Hunt 's 1992 Gaveston have focused on the sexual aspects of Edward and Gaveston 's relationship , while Stephanie Merritt 's 2002 Gaveston transports the story into the 20th century . Marcus Stone 's painting Edward II and Piers Gaveston strongly hinted at a homosexual relationship between the pair , while avoiding making this aspect explicit ; it was initially shown at the Royal Academy in 1872 , but was marginalised in later decades as the issue of homosexuality became more sensitive . 
 = = Issue = = 
 Edward II had four children with Isabella : 
 Edward III of England ( 13 November 1312 – 21 June 1377 ) . Married Philippa of Hainault on 24 January 1328 and had issue . 
 John of Eltham ( 15 August 1316 – 13 September 1336 ) . Never married . No issue . 
 Eleanor of Woodstock ( 18 June 1318 – 22 April 1355 ) . Married <unk> II of Guelders in May 1332 and had issue . 
 Joan of The Tower ( 5 July 1321 – 7 September 1362 ) . Married David II of Scotland on 17 July 1328 and became Queen of Scots , but had no issue . 
 Edward also fathered the illegitimate Adam FitzRoy ( c . 1307 – 1322 ) , who accompanied his father in the Scottish campaigns of 1322 and died shortly afterwards . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Mycena californiensis = 
 Mycena californiensis is a species of fungus in the Mycenaceae family . It is a common and abundant species in the coastal oak woodlands of California , where it grows <unk> , feeding on the fallen leaves and acorns of various oak species . First described in 1860 by Berkeley and Curtis , the species was collected four years earlier during an exploring and surveying expedition . It was subsequently considered a doubtful species by later Mycena researchers , until a 1999 publication validated the taxon . Mycena elegantula is considered a synonym . 
 Making their appearance in late autumn to early winter , the small and fragile fruit bodies are characterized by reddish @-@ brown tones in the cap , stem , and the edges of the gills . If cut , the mushroom tissue will " bleed " a deep reddish to orangish latex . As is typical of the genus Mycena , caps of M. californiensis are bluntly conical , becoming bell @-@ shaped to convex , and eventually flatten out when old . They measure up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter , and are attached to thin , hollow stems that are up to 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) long . 
 = = History and taxonomy = = 
 The species was originally collected for science purposes by the American botanist Charles Wright during the North Pacific Exploring and Surveying Expedition of 1853 – 56 . The single collection was found growing on fallen oak leaves at Mare Island Naval Shipyard , in Solano County , California in January 1856 . The specimen was sent by American mycologist Moses Ashley Curtis to his British colleague Miles Joseph Berkeley , who published a brief description of the species in 1860 , calling it Agaricus californiensis , in what was then the subgenus Mycena . Berkeley and Curtis noted that it differed from A. <unk> @-@ marginatus ( known today as Mycena aurantiomarginata ) in the nature of the gills , and they called it " a more graceful species . " In his 1887 Sylloge Fungorum , Pier Andrea Saccardo raised the subgenus Mycena to generic status , so the species became known as Mycena californiensis . 
 In his 1947 monograph of North American Mycena , Alexander H. Smith included it as an " excluded or doubtful species " , saying that the species " cannot be recognized until the microscopic characters of the type are known . " Researching his 1982 monograph of Mycena , Maas Geesteranus examined the holotype material — the particular specimen designated by Berkeley and Curtis to represent the type of the species . Because of its deteriorated condition , however , he was unable to corroborate the distinguishing features proposed by Berkeley and Curtis , and he agreed with Smith 's assessment of the species . 
 In the late 1990s , as part of his studies on the Mycena of California , Brian Perry noted that a common species in California , usually referred to as Mycena elegantula or M. sanguinolenta , presented characteristics not congruent with either ( in particular , M. elegantula had not previously been reported to contain latex ) . He compared isotype material ( material collected at the same time and place as the holotype ) of M. californiensis with Californian specimens and the type of M. elegantula and found all of them to represent the same species , publishing the results with Dennis Desjardin in their 1999 Mycotaxon article " Mycena californiensis resurrected " . Part of the confusion , they noted , was apparently due to Smith 's concept of M. elegantula not agreeing with the species ' type ( something also noticed by Geesteranus ) . 
 Because M. californiensis is the earlier name ( published in 1860 vs. 1895 for Mycena elegantula ) , it has priority over the later name M. elegantula , according to the rules of botanical nomenclature . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of M. californiensis is initially conic or bell @-@ shaped , but flattens out in maturity , and typically reaches dimensions of up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) . The cap margins ( edges ) are curved inwards when young , but as they age they become wavy or crenate ( with rounded scallops ) , develop striations ( radial grooves ) and may even split . The surface of the cap is dull and smooth . Its color ranges from reddish @-@ brown to brownish @-@ orange in young specimens , with the color fading as the mushroom matures ; the center of the cap is usually darker than the margins . The flesh is thin , and either the same color as the cap or <unk> ; it may stain a dark red color when bruised . 
 The gills have an adnate attachment to the stem — broadly attached slightly above the bottom of the gill , with most of the gill fused to the stem . They are not closely spaced together , and there are about 15 – 20 of them . Some of the gills do not extend the full distance from the edge of the cap to the stem . These short gills , called lamellulae , form one to two groups of roughly equal length . All of the gills have a white to pinkish @-@ buff color , with the gill edges ranging from reddish @-@ orange to reddish @-@ brown to brownish @-@ orange . The hollow stem is 29 – 130 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 – 5 @.@ 1 in ) long by 1 – 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 – 0 @.@ 12 in ) thick , and roughly the same thickness throughout . The top of the stem may be either pruinose ( appearing to be covered with a very fine whitish powder on a surface ) or smooth , while the stem base is covered with " hairs " that may be strigose ( large , coarse , and bristle @-@ like ) to downy ( soft and fuzzy ) . The stem is some shade of brown . The mushroom tissue will " bleed " a brownish @-@ range to reddish brown latex when it is cut . The edibility of M. californiensis is unknown . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 In deposit , such as with a spore print , the spores appear white . Further details are revealed with a light microscope : the spores are ellipsoid to almond @-@ shaped , smooth , thin @-@ walled , and measure 8 – 12 by 4 – 6 µm . The basidia ( the spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , and typically have dimensions of 26 – 37 @.@ 5 by 7 – 10 @.@ 5 µm . M. californiensis has cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edges ) that measure 16 – 50 by 6 @.@ 5 – 20 µm . These cells have irregular projections that can range in size from 1 @.@ 5 – 18 @.@ 8 by 1 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 5 µm and are variously shaped , from knob @-@ like to cylindrical . The cells contain brownish contents that will stain darkly with Melzer 's reagent , a common chemical reagent used in mushroom identification . With the exception of the medullary hyphae of the stem ( longitudinally @-@ arranged hyphae making up the stem surface ) , all hyphae contain clamp connections . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Mycena californiensis may be distinguished from the closely related M. <unk> by its smaller size and the purplish tint to the edge of the gills , and from M. purpureofusca by its differently shaped , longer spores . Another Mycena commonly confused with M. californiensis is M. sanguinolenta , a species that also exudes reddish latex . It can be distinguished from M. californiensis by the fusiform ( tapering at each end ) cheilocystidia that do not have outgrowths . An additional difference between the two is that M. sanguinolenta is associated with conifer wood and debris . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies grow in clusters or scattered on the decomposing leaves and acorns of oak trees , such as Coast Live Oak , Valley Oak and Black Oak . It is common in the coastal oak woodlands of California , where it appears from late autumn to early winter . 
 = Nokota horse = 
 The Nokota horse is a feral and semi @-@ feral horse breed located in the badlands of southwestern North Dakota in the United States . The breed developed in the 19th century from foundation bloodstock consisting of ranch @-@ bred horses produced from the horses of local Native Americans mixed with Spanish horses , Thoroughbreds , harness horses and related breeds . The Nokota was almost wiped out during the early 20th century when ranchers , in cooperation with state and federal agencies , worked together to reduce competition for livestock grazing . However , when Theodore Roosevelt National Park was created in the 1940s , a few bands were inadvertently trapped inside , and thus were preserved . 
 In 1986 , the park sold off a large number of horses , including herd stallions , and released several stallions with outside bloodlines into the herds . At this point , brothers Leo and Frank Kuntz began purchasing the horses with the aim of preserving the breed , and in 1999 started the Nokota Horse Conservancy , later beginning a breed registry through the same organization . Later , a second , short @-@ lived , registry was begun by another organization in Minnesota . In 2009 , the North Dakota Badlands Horse Registry was created , which registers the slightly different type of horses which have been removed from the park in recent years . Today , the park conducts regular thinning of the herd to keep numbers between 70 and 110 , and the excess horses are sold off . 
 The Nokota horse has an angular frame , is commonly blue roan in color , and often exhibits an ambling gait called the " Indian shuffle " . The breed is generally separated into two sections , the traditional and the ranch type , which differ slightly in conformation and height . They are used in many events , including endurance riding , western riding and English disciplines . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 The Nokota horse has an angular frame with prominent withers , a sloped croup , and a low set tail . Members of the breed are often blue roan , which is a color rare in other breeds , although black and gray are also common . Other , less common , colors include red roan , bay , chestnut , dun , grullo and palomino . Pinto patterns such as overo and sabino occur occasionally . There are two general types of the Nokota horse . The first is the traditional Nokota , known by the registry as the National Park Traditional . They tend to be smaller , more refined , and closer in type to the Colonial Spanish Horse , and generally stand between 14 and 14 @.@ 3 hands ( 56 and 59 inches , 142 and 150 cm ) high . The second type is known as the ranch @-@ type or National Park Ranch , more closely resemble early " foundation type " Quarter Horses , and generally stand from 14 @.@ 2 to 17 hands ( 58 to 68 inches , 147 to 173 cm ) . Members of the breed often exhibit an ambling gait , once known as the " Indian shuffle . " Nokota horses are described as versatile and intelligent . Members of the breed have been used in endurance racing and western riding , and a few have been used in events such as fox hunting , dressage , three @-@ day eventing and show jumping . Sources vary on the etymology of the breed 's name , with one source stating that the Nokota derives its name from the Nakota people who inhabited North and South Dakota , while another says that the name was a combination of North Dakota created by the Kuntz brothers . 
 = = History = = 
 The Nokota horse developed in the southwestern corner of North Dakota , in the Little Missouri River Badlands . Feral horses were first encountered by ranchers in the 19th century , and horses from domestic herds mingled with the original feral herds . Ranchers often crossbred local Indian ponies , Spanish horses from the southwest , and various draft , harness , Thoroughbred and stock horses to make hardy , useful ranch horses . Theodore Roosevelt , who <unk> in the Little Missouri area between 1883 and 1886 , wrote : 
 In a great many — indeed in most — localities there are wild horses to be found , which , although invariably of domestic descent , being either themselves runaways from some ranch or Indian outfit , or else claiming such for their sires and dams , yet are quite as wild as the antelope on whose domain they have intruded . 
 In 1884 , the HT Ranch , located near Medora , North Dakota , bought 60 mares from a herd of 250 Native American @-@ bred horses originally confiscated from the Lakota leader Sitting Bull and sold at Fort Buford , North Dakota in 1881 . Some of these mares were bred to the Thoroughbred racing stallion Lexington , also owned by the HT Ranch . 
 By the early 20th century , the feral horse herds became the target of local ranchers looking to limit grazing competition for their livestock . Many horses were rounded up , and either used as ranch horses , sold for slaughter or shot . From the 1930s through the 1950s , federal and state agencies worked with ranchers to remove horses from western North Dakota . However , when Theodore Roosevelt National Park was established in the 1940s , during construction , a few bands of horses were accidentally enclosed within the Park fence , and by 1960 these bands were the last remaining feral horses in North Dakota . Nonetheless , the park sought to eliminate these horses . The National Park Service was declared exempt from the Wild and Free @-@ Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971 that covered free @-@ roaming horses and burros on other federal lands . This allowed them to view the herds as nuisances and deal with them as such , including sending many to slaughter . 
 In the late 1970s , growing public opposition to the removal of feral horses prompted management strategy changes , and today the herds within the Theodore Roosevelt National Park are managed for the purposes of historical demonstration . However , in 1986 the park added outside bloodlines with the aim of modifying the appearance of the Nokota . Park management felt that the horses created with the outside bloodlines would sell better at subsequent auctions . The dominant herd stallions were removed and replaced with two feral stallions from Bureau of Land Management Mustang herds , a crossbred Shire stallion , a Quarter Horse stallion and an Arabian stallion . At the same time that the stallion replacements took place , a large number of horses from the park were rounded up and sold at auction . At the 1986 auction , concerned about the welfare of the Nokota horse , Leo and Frank Kuntz purchased 54 horses , including the dominant stallion , a blue roan . This was in addition to smaller numbers of horses purchased in 1981 , 1991 and 1997 . After researching the history of the breed , the <unk> stated that they had found evidence that the horses in the park were probably related to the remaining horses from the band of 250 Sitting Bull horses , who had been range @-@ bred by the Marquis de Mores , who founded the town of Medora . However , the short @-@ lived Nokota Horse Association claimed that there was no evidence for this claim . 
 = = = 1990s to today = = = 
 By 1993 , the Kuntz brothers had a herd of 150 horses , including those purchased from the park over the course of several auctions and their descendants . They used the horses mainly for ranching and endurance races . In 1993 , the Nokota was declared the Honorary State Equine of the state of North Dakota . In 1994 , researchers conducted a study of the horses in the park and on the Kuntz 's ranch , and discovered that none of the horses in the park , and only about 20 on the ranch , had characteristics consistent with the Colonial Spanish Horse . Since then , the horses on the Kuntz ranch have been bred to maintain and improve their Spanish characteristics . In 1999 , the Kuntz brothers founded the Nokota Horse Conservancy to protect and conserve the Nokota horse . The Nokota Horse Conservancy tracks around 1 @,@ 000 living and dead horses , and Nokota horses can be found throughout the United States . 
 Theodore Roosevelt National Park has continued thinning the herd , with several roundups conducted throughout the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century . In 2000 , the last horses to be considered of " traditional " Nokota type was removed from the wild , with some being purchased by supporters of the Nokota Horse Conservancy . The National Park Service currently maintains a herd of 70 to 110 horses . In 2006 , the breed was chosen to be the beneficiary of Breyer Animal Creations ' annual " Benefit Horse " Campaign for the following year ; a Breyer model was created , manufactured , and marketed in 2007 , with a portion of the proceeds going to the Nokota Horse Conservancy . As of 2006 , the Kuntz family owned approximately 500 Nokota horses , with the Nokota Horse Conservancy owning an additional 40 . At that point , there were less than 1 @,@ 000 living <unk> in the world . 
 The Nokota Horse Registry is the breed registry , organized by the Nokota Horse Conservancy . There was briefly a second registry : a Minnesota @-@ based organization called the Nokota Horse Association . In October 2009 , the two registries disputed which had the right to the Nokota breed name , with the Association claiming that they own the legal trademark to the name . The Registry sued , contending that they created the name and had a longer history with the breed . A US District Court ordered that the Association cease registering horses until the matter was settled , and the association disappeared from public view soon after . In the fall of 2009 , another organization , the North Dakota Badlands Horse Registry , was created . This organization registers horses that have been removed from the park in recent years , stating that these horses are not accepted by the Nokota Horse Registry . As of March 2011 , approximately 40 horses had been registered . These horses tend to be of a slightly different phenotype and genotype than the horses registered by the Nokota Horse Registry due to the additional blood from different breeds released into the park . 
 = Confessions Tour = 
 Confessions Tour was the seventh concert tour by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . It supported her tenth studio album , Confessions on a Dance Floor . Madonna confirmed the possibility of going out on a tour as early as November 2005 . Jamie King , Madonna 's longtime collaborator , was then hired on to direct . The set list consisted of mainly songs from the supporting studio album and rehearsals started during 2006 . As with many of her prior tours , the Confessions Tour did not go to Australia , prompting Madonna to release an apology statement on her website . 
 The concert was divided into four parts : Equestrian , Bedouin , Glam – Punk , and Disco . Equestrian had horse @-@ themed , <unk> performances , Bedouin had performances accompanied by messages , Glam @-@ Punk performances had Madonna playing guitars and the final Disco segment consisted of dancing in general . The tour garnered positive appreciation from contemporary critics and commercial success . Tickets were completely sold as soon as dates and venues for the tour were announced , prompting the organizers to add more dates . After its ending , the Confessions Tour was dubbed as the highest grossing tour ever for a female artist , grossing over US $ 194 @.@ 7 million ( $ 228 @,@ 542 @,@ 703 @.@ 86 in 2016 dollars ) from 60 shows with 1 @.@ 2 million spectators . It is also recognized as the highest @-@ grossing music tour per concert in the 2007 edition of the Guinness World Records . Confessions Tour received the " Most Creative Stage Production " at the Pollstar Concert Industry Awards as well as " Top Boxscore " from the Billboard Touring Awards . 
 Madonna 's performance of the song " Live to Tell " while hanging on a giant mirrored cross wearing a crown of thorns was met with strong negative reaction from religious groups . The performance at Rome 's Stadio Olimpico was condemned as an act of hostility toward the Roman Catholic Church by religious leaders . Madonna responded saying that her main intention with the performance was to bring attention to the millions of children dying in Africa from hunger and poverty . The tour was recorded and broadcast on such channels as NBC in the United States and Channel 4 in the United Kingdom . A CD + DVD recording titled The Confessions Tour was also released . 
 = = Background = = 
 In November 2005 , during an interview with The Guardian , Madonna confirmed that she was going out on tour in 2006 and it would likely be named either the Confessions Tour or the Confess Your Sins Tour . Jamie King was next hired on as the director of the tour . During an interview with MTV in February 2006 , Madonna explained that she wanted to play first at small venues like Roseland Ballroom in New York or the Wiltern Theatre in Los Angeles , then move out to perform at stadiums and arenas . That way she deduced that she would not feel bored during her performances . King clarified , 
 " A typical Madonna show is quite produced , [ ... ] She likes things large , she likes things theatrical , but this time , being that Confessions on a Dance Floor is an intimate album , we want to try to make people have an intimate experience as well as a big produced theatrical experience . So look for us doing some small venues , some smaller venues . [ ... ] I would like to put her as close to her people — her fans , her dancers , her fellow supporters — as possible , " 
 King also confirmed that the set list for the tour consisted mainly of songs from the supporting album , with few of Madonna 's old hits making the cut . Some of the dancers from the music videos of " Hung Up " and " Sorry " , both singles from Confessions on a Dance Floor , were signed to perform on the tour as well . In March 2006 , Madonna , along with her then @-@ husband Guy Ritchie and with their kids , moved to Los Angeles , to begin rehearsing for the tour . In the summer of 2006 , Madonna 's manager Guy Oseary announced that her Australian leg to the tour had been dropped . Her official website released the following statement : 
 To my fans in Australia , 
 Please forgive me . I really did hope and expect to come to Australia during the Confessions Tour and asked my managers to try to include some shows there . I have fond memories from previous tours . Unfortunately , the logistics just didn 't work out this time around . We looked into going from Japan to Australia and ending the show there but I have to get my kids back into school in England and they are , as you can understand , my most important priority . The important thing to remember is that I 'm not retiring anytime soon and I am gonna get to Australia as soon as I can . You remain in my heart and Thank you for your continued love & support . — Love , Madonna 
 = = Development = = 
 The stage and associated props took twenty @-@ four semi @-@ trailer trucks to transport . The setup consisted of a main stage with three elevators and a turntable ( which rose and lowered ) , a central runway with LED and strobe lights connected to a central stage with a LED view screen in the construction and an elevator . The two secondary runways were raised up into the stands and also had view screens inside the construction . Two projection screens were raised above the audience so those who couldn 't get a clear view of the stage could still see the performance . There were also 3 LED screens that moved around during the performance , including one semicircular transparent screen lowered onto the stage during the video interludes . 
 Among the various props present for the tour , was a $ 2 million disco ball embellished with a further of $ 2 million worth of Swarovski crystals , bringing it to a weight of two tons . The ball was lowered onto the stage at the end of the runway during the opening number , and then opened to reveal Madonna . The ball contained hydraulic tubing to hold it open , two sets of stairs , and hundreds of LED lights . Other props include the turntable @-@ pummel horse used during " Like a Virgin " , a set of jungle gym @-@ like metal bars used during " Jump " , the steel cage used for " Isaac " and " Sorry " , and the boom box used during " Hung Up " . The promotional poster for the tour featured one of the photographs of Madonna taken by Steven Klein during the performances at G @-@ A @-@ Y club in London , as part of the promotional tour of the Confessions on a Dance Floor album . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The concert was divided into four parts : Equestrian , Bedouin , Glam – Punk and Disco . The Equestrian segment of the show began with images of Madonna , riding crop in hand , and horses <unk> across windswept plains on the big screens . A giant disco ball was then lowered onstage , and opened like a flower bud to reveal Madonna inside . As she took her dancers ' reins , she performed " Future Lovers / I Feel Love " . This was followed by " Get Together " backed by her dancers in horse reins . She rode a carousel horse @-@ like <unk> during " Like a Virgin " . The backdrops displayed the X @-@ Ray of Madonna 's broken bones , which she had during a previous accident . " Jump " followed this performance , where the dancers displayed the physical discipline parkour . After Madonna disappeared backstage , three of her dancers then revealed personal tragedies during an interlude called " Confessions " . The second segment titled Bedouin started with Madonna appearing on a mirrored crucifix to sing " Live to Tell " as a death toll of African AIDS victims counted down onscreen above her . She stepped down off the cross to perform " Forbidden Love " where two male dancers intertwined each other while displaying religious symbolism on the screens like blood corpuscles connecting to form symbols of hope and unity . Madonna brought a guest vocalist from her Confessions on a Dance Floor album onstage for " Isaac " , when a female dancer in an oversized Middle @-@ Eastern burka danced within a cage with the backdrops displaying sand dunes . Madonna then recreated the dance @-@ off scene from her " Sorry " music video live with her troupe for her performance of the song . The performance was followed by the song " Like It Or Not " where burlesque @-@ style dancing was performed by Madonna with the help of a chair as a prop . After the performance , her dancers performed <unk> dancing for a remix interlude of " Sorry " as social , political , and ecological images flashed <unk> . 
 Madonna returned for the Glam @-@ Punk segment of the show and strapped on a guitar for rocked @-@ out versions of " I Love New York " and " Ray of Light " . The backdrop during the performances displayed the New York skyline sliding off and stars respectively . " Ray of Light " was accompanied by her dancers in new wave style dance , while wearing black clothes and white ties . An energetic rendition of " Let It Will Be " followed before she sat down for some minutes to talk with her audience . She later started singing " Drowned World / Substitute for Love " without any choreography or backdrop video , only sitting on the floor , and then recalled co @-@ singer Yitzhak Sinwani out for an acoustic version of " Paradise ( Not for Me ) " . The final segment Disco started after a brief radio @-@ style mini @-@ mix of old hits . Madonna emerged in a butterfly @-@ collared suit influenced by John Travolta in Saturday Night Fever for a mash @-@ up of " Music " and The Trammps ' 1976 single " Disco Inferno " This also included a sample of her 1986 song " Where 's The Party " at the beginning of the song while dancers <unk> circles around her . Stuart Price 's remixed dance version of " Erotica " , which sampled the song 's original demo " You Thrill Me " , is performed . The next song was a Tropical @-@ Dance version of " La Isla Bonita " , where the screens displayed clips of different beautiful islands , the sea and its fauna . This is followed by " Lucky Star " ; this dance re @-@ invention of the song shared the same musical arrangement than the following and final song of the evening " Hung Up " , which is accompanied by a sing @-@ along with the audience and confetti and golden balloons falling from above . The show ended as the phrase " Have you confessed ? " appeared onscreen . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The Confessions Tour received positive critical response . Steve Baltin of Rolling Stone wrote : " Madonna had played many roles in the first night of her Confessions tour – but confessor was not one of them . Apparently , in all the pomp and circumstance , there was no room for warmth , or even the attitude that made her recent Coachella festival performance so memorable . " Don <unk> of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune commented that Madonna 's previous tours , Drowned World Tour ( 2001 ) and Re @-@ Invention World Tour ( 2004 ) , " were excellent concerts ... but she stepped it up a few notches " for the Confessions Tour . Ben Wener of The Orange County Register reported that " No one – but no one – stages elaborate eye @-@ candy productions like Madonna , whose highly impressive Confessions Tour opened Sunday night at a packed Forum so sweltering it seemed as though it were being prepped for the world 's largest Bikram yoga session . " Lina Das from the Daily Mail complimented the show , saying that Madonna still had the ability to grab the headlines with her shock tactics . Thomas Inskeep from Stylus Magazine complimented the finale of the tour saying , " There 's not a better way the Confessions Tour could ’ ve closed . " Tom Young from the BBC called the show " a big fat neon light of a pop @-@ dance explosion . There 's a party going on , and unless you were there in the first place , you ’ re not invited . Whistles and whoops rarely cease and applause ripples throughout building into regular raptures for a consistently first @-@ class performer . It 's almost enough to make those who weren ’ t there jealous . Almost . " 
 Jim Harrington of the ANG Newspapers commented that fans were " certainly happy " with the tour , though , Terry Armour of the Chicago Tribune noted from a report from The Arizona Republic that fans were " hot and bothered " over Madonna 's alleged requests that the air conditioning be turned down in venues during her tour . It was reported that the result of this was due to Madonna wanting to preserve her voice . In one article , it was said that the air conditioning concerns " are nothing new in the entertainment business " in which voice problems " can cost performers millions in lost revenue . " Another story said that Madonna does not like the air conditioning on during her performance because it dries out her throat . Ed Gonzalez of Slant Magazine stated that the tour was a " reminder that Madonna 's music need not be motivated by sex or politics to be good as long as it displays a smidgen of heart and soul . [ ... ] Her Confessions Tour , though spotty and compromised but often breathtaking , is something of a coup after the fierce but icy theatrics of her Drowned World Tour and the shrill aggression of her Re @-@ Invention Tour . " Bill Lamb of About.com noted that the " highest points of the Confessions Tour prove [ d ] that a combination of great songs , riveting staging , and accomplished choreography always amount to a brilliant concert experience . " Christian John Wikane of PopMatters commented that " even the most rabid anti @-@ Madonna listener or cynical music lover would find elements of the Confessions Tour impressive . " 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 Tickets for the tour sold out within minutes of going on sale at many venues in North America and Europe , and new dates were immediately announced – included five new dates at Wembley Arena and new dates in New York , Chicago , Paris and Los Angeles . Madonna rang up eight sellouts at Wembley Arena beginning August 1 , 2006 , notching the highest Billboard gross of 2006 in the process . She grossed $ 80 million ( $ 93 @,@ 905 @,@ 579 in 2016 dollars ) for the US shows alone throughout the summer , and it instantly became the highest grossing summer tour of the year 2006 . In particular , NRJ reported that the two French dates sold out within 15 minutes of going on sale , resulting in two shows being added . The two original dates in London sold out almost instantly , and five new shows at Wembley Arena were announced . On April 8 , 2006 , Madonna sold 30 @,@ 000 tickets in under 40 minutes in Montreal , breaking a record previously held by U2 . On July 9 , 2006 , 50 @,@ 000 tickets went on sale for Madonna 's Osaka and Tokyo shows . The tickets were sold out in a record breaking five minutes . It was Madonna 's first time touring Japan in 13 years , and an additional date was added , September 21 , 2006 , at the Tokyo Dome , to meet high demand . On August 8 , 2006 , more than 35 @,@ 000 tickets for the first ever Madonna concert in Moscow went on sale and , as claimed by show organizers , all were sold out in four days , which could be a new record in that country as all other artists had taken more than two weeks to sell out the tickets in the region . However , after many problems with the concert including venue uncertainty , rescheduling , ticket exchange and huge amount of tickets in the hands of speculators , tickets were on sale at their nominal values until the last minute . 
 According to Billboard and tour producer Arthur Fogel , the tour grossed over US $ 194 @.@ 7 million ( $ 228 @,@ 542 @,@ 704 in 2016 dollars ) from 60 shows and 1 @.@ 2 million audience , becoming highest grossing tour ever for a female artist and breaking the record previously held by Cher for her Living Proof : The Farewell Tour ( 2002 – 2005 ) . Madonna broke her own record in 2008 , with her Sticky & Sweet Tour , which became the highest grossing tour by a solo artist , earning US $ 408 million ( $ 450 @,@ 021 @,@ 405 in 2016 dollars ) . Confessions Tour is also recognized as the highest @-@ grossing music tour per concert in the 2007 edition of the Guinness World Records , with $ 3 @.@ 2 million ( $ 3 @,@ 756 @,@ 223 in 2016 dollars ) grossed per concert . It received the " Most Creative Stage Production " at the Pollstar Concert Industry Awards , as well as , " Top Boxscore " from the Billboard Touring Awards . 
 = = Reaction to the performance of " Live to Tell " = = 
 Madonna 's performance of " Live to Tell " faced strong reaction from religious groups . The performance included Madonna being raised from the floor hanging on a mirrored cross wearing a red blouse and velvet pants , with a crown of thorns on her head . During the performance , the number 12 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 flashed above her on the stage 's backdrop screens , along with images of African children . This was intended to detail the estimated number of children who have been orphaned by the AIDS pandemic in Africa . 
 German prosecutors in Düsseldorf threatened to sue her for blasphemy , and Protestant bishop Margot <unk> said that " maybe the only way an aging superstar can attract attention is to offend people 's religious sentiments . " The Russian Orthodox Church and the Federation of Jewish Communities of Russia ( <unk> ) described Madonna 's performance as amoral , and urged all members to boycott her upcoming concert in Moscow . The performance at Rome 's Olympic Stadium — located near the Vatican — was condemned as an act of hostility toward the Roman Catholic Church by religious leaders . Italian cardinal <unk> <unk> called the concert " a blasphemous challenge to the faith " and a " profanation of the cross " , also calling for Madonna to be excommunicated . Reverend Manfredo Leone described it as " disrespectful , in bad taste and provocative " . 
 Muslim and Jewish leaders also criticized the performance . Mario <unk> , the head of Italy 's Muslim League commented " I think her idea is in the worst taste and she 'd do better to go home . " Riccardo <unk> , the spokesman for Rome 's Jewish community said " It 's a disrespectful act , and to do it in Rome is even worse . " Madonna released a statement about the controversy : 
 " I am very grateful that my show was so well received all over the world . But there seems to be many misinterpretations about my appearance on the cross and I wanted to explain it myself once and for all . There is a segment in my show where three of my dancers ' confess ' or share harrowing experiences from their childhood that they ultimately overcame . My ' confession ' follows and takes place on a Crucifix that I ultimately come down from . This is not a mocking of the church . It is no different than a person wearing a Cross or ' Taking Up the Cross ' as it says in the Bible . My performance is neither anti @-@ Christian , sacrilegious or blasphemous . Rather , it is my plea to the audience to encourage mankind to help one another and to see the world as a unified whole . I believe in my heart that if Jesus were alive today he would be doing the same thing . 
 My specific intent is to bring attention to the millions of children in Africa who are dying every day , and are living without care , without medicine and without hope . I am asking people to open their hearts and minds to get involved in whatever way they can . The song ends with a quote from the Bible 's Book of Matthew : ' For I was hungry and you gave me food . I was naked and you gave me clothing . I was sick and you took care of me and God replied , ' Whatever you did for the least of my brothers ... you did it to me.' 
 Please do not pass judgment without seeing my show . " 
 = = Broadcasts and recordings = = 
 The show was filmed at the Wembley Arena , in London on August 15 and 16 , 2006 . After plans failed with HBO , The Confessions Tour – Live from London aired on November 22 , 2006 on NBC . The television version omitted the performances of the " Sorry " video interlude , " Drowned World / Substitute for Love " , " Paradise ( Not For Me ) " and " Lucky Star " . In the United States , the performance of " Live to Tell " was censored , the broadcast displayed the video backdrop shown on the tour instead of Madonna performing on the mirrored cross . She does not appear until she has come down from it . Outside of the US , the performance was not censored . In the UK it was broadcast on Channel 4 and later on E4 . 
 In January 2007 , Warner Bros. Records released The Confessions Tour CD + DVD package . After its release , the album reached the top of the official charts in a number of European nations while reaching the top ten in United Kingdom and Canada . It reached a peak of fifteen on the Billboard 200 albums chart in United States . At the 2008 Grammy Awards held on February 10 , 2008 at Staples Center in Los Angeles , the album won an award for Best Long Form Music Video . 
 A photography book by Guy Oseary , titled Madonna : Confessions was released in October 2008 during Madonna 's Sticky & Sweet Tour . It contains over 250 never @-@ before @-@ seen images from the 2006 Confessions Tour with photographs from backstage and during the show . All author proceeds from the book will be donated to Raising Malawi . On January 13 , 2013 , MTV broadcast a high definition version of The Confessions Tour – Live from London special for the very first time at 00 : 00 AM ( CET time ) with more scheduled broadcasts at 7 AM and 10 AM CET the following days . 
 = = Set list = = 
 " Future Lovers / I Feel Love " 
 " Get Together " 
 " Like a Virgin " 
 " Jump " 
 " Confessions " ( Dancers Interlude ) ( contains elements from " Live to Tell " ) 
 " Live to Tell " 
 " Forbidden Love " 
 " Isaac " 
 " Sorry " ( Pet Shop Boys Remix ) 
 " Like It or Not " 
 " Sorry " ( Remix ) ( Video Interlude ) 
 " I Love New York " 
 " Ray of Light " 
 " Let It Will Be " ( Paper Faces Remix ) 
 " Drowned World / Substitute for Love " 
 " Paradise ( Not for Me ) " ( performed with Yitzhak Sinwani ) 
 " The Duke Mixes the Hits " ( Video Interlude ) ( contains excerpts from " Borderline " , " Erotica " , " Dress You Up " , " Holiday " and " Disco Inferno " ) 
 " Music Inferno " ( contains elements from " Disco Inferno " , with excerpts from " Where 's the Party " ) 
 " Erotica " ( contains excerpts from " You Thrill Me " ) 
 " La Isla Bonita " 
 " Lucky Star " ( contains elements from " Gimme ! Gimme ! Gimme ! ( A Man After Midnight ) " along with excerpts from " Hung Up " ) 
 " Hung Up " ( contains elements from " Lucky Star " ) 
 Source : 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel adapted as per the Confessions Tour booklet and DVD . 
 = Lockheed Martin VH @-@ 71 Kestrel = 
 The Lockheed Martin VH @-@ 71 Kestrel is a variant of the AgustaWestland AW101 ( formerly EH101 ) built to replace the United States Marine Corps ' Marine One U.S. Presidential transport fleet . It was developed and built by the Lockheed Martin – led " US101 Team " of Lockheed Martin Systems Integration – Owego ( LMSI ) , AgustaWestland and Bell Helicopter . 
 In February 2009 , President Barack Obama asked Secretary of Defense Robert Gates about placing the project on hold or canceling it because of its high cost : over $ 13 billion for the planned 28 helicopters . In June 2009 , the U.S. Navy terminated the contract after spending about $ 4 @.@ 4 billion and taking delivery of nine VH @-@ 71s . 
 The helicopters were then sold to Canada for $ 164 million for use as spare parts for its fleet of AgustaWestland CH @-@ 149 Cormorant search @-@ and @-@ rescue helicopters . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = US101 and VXX competition = = = 
 The AgustaWestland AW101 , first designated as EH101 , was originally developed and produced by EH Industries , a joint venture between the British Westland Helicopters and Italian Agusta companies ; Westland merged with Agusta in 2001 . On 23 July 2002 , Lockheed Martin and AgustaWestland signed a 10 @-@ year agreement to jointly market , produce and support a medium @-@ lift helicopter , an AW101 derivative designated US101 , in the United States . The companies envisaged the aircraft performing three major roles ; U.S. Air Force combat search and rescue , U.S. Coast Guard search and rescue , and U.S. Marine Corps executive transport . 
 On 15 May 2003 , AgustaWestland signed an agreement with Bell Helicopter to undertake final assembly of the US101 in the U.S. Under the pact , AgustaWestland would produce the main rotor blades and main fuselage sections at its Yeovil , UK , facility . The company would produce other components , including the gearbox , at its Cascina Costa , Italy facility . This represents a work share of 36 % . The remaining 64 % work share is split between Lockheed Martin ( 31 % ) and Bell Helicopter ( 27 % ) and others ( 6 % ) . 
 On 18 December 2003 , the United States Department of Defense issued a Request for Proposals ( RFP ) to supply 23 helicopters to replace the 11 VH @-@ 3Ds and 8 VH @-@ <unk> of the Marine Corps ' HMX @-@ 1 squadron , which performs the role of Presidential helicopter transportation . This requirement was given the designation of VXX , or the Presidential Helicopter Replacement Program . Two companies , AgustaWestland and Sikorsky Aircraft responded to the VXX RFP . 
 Sikorsky had proposed the VH @-@ 92 , a variant of the H @-@ 92 <unk> , in partnership with <unk> International , L @-@ 3 Communications , Northrop Grumman , Rockwell Collins , Vought Aircraft Industries , and GE @-@ Aviation . On 28 January 2005 , the Department of Defense announced that it had selected the US101 as the winner . It has been speculated that the US101 's three engines had been a decisive factor over the rivaling twin @-@ engined VH @-@ 92 . The US101 team was awarded a US $ 1 @.@ 7 billion contract for the System Development and Demonstration phase . In July 2005 , the US101 was given the designation VH @-@ 71 Kestrel . 
 = = = Program problems and delays = = = 
 Delays and engineering issues plagued the VH @-@ 71 's development . By 2007 , the estimated cost of developing and modifying the aircraft had risen by 40 % to $ 2 @.@ 4 billion and had passed the $ 4 @.@ 2 billion expected for the production of the fleet . In March 2008 , the program cost had risen and was projected to cost a total $ 11 @.@ 2 billion , or about $ 400 million per helicopter . 
 During dialogue over the CSAR @-@ X ( in which the EH101 was LMSI 's offering ) , the Air Force Source Selection Authority ( SSA ) stated the program 's performance had been " unsatisfactory " . In March 2007 , a Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) report , upholding Sikorsky and Lockheed 's protests against Boeing 's HH @-@ 47 , mentioned " LMSI had received a little confidence rating for past performance due to unsatisfactory performance under its current contract for the VH @-@ 71 Presidential helicopter , which was evaluated as the most highly relevant to this procurement . " The SSA stated that LMSI had " show [ n ] that it could not reliably meet important schedule requirements and had difficulty in systems engineering flow @-@ downs to their subcontractors . " Lockheed responded that government insistence on extensive modifications , unanticipated in the RFP , as the source of cost overruns . A GAO report in 2011 concluded that the VH @-@ 71 's development was not allowed flexibility or trade @-@ offs considered by the customer . 
 In December 2007 , DoD officials met with the White House Military Office to discuss the program 's future ; the Pentagon had apparently wanted to terminate the VH @-@ 71 due to setbacks , budget issues , and design problems . The White House overruled a decision to cancel ; the program was effectively placed on hold while options were considered . In July 2008 , the VH @-@ 71A ( also called Increment 1 ) was to reach operating capability in 2010 . The second phase of the development , VH @-@ <unk> ( Increment 2 ) was expected to start entering service in 2017 . 
 In October 2008 , while commenting on defense programs likely to be cut following the change in government , John Young , the Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition , Technology and Logistics , stated that the VH @-@ 71 " is very high on that list " . The rising cost of VH @-@ 71 program contrasted poorly with President Barack Obama 's stance on curbing government spending ; during a White House gathering in February 2009 President Obama commented that the procurement process had " gone amok and we are going to have to fix it . " He additionally stated that " The helicopter I have now seems perfectly adequate to me . " In March 2009 the projected total cost for the planned 28 VH @-@ 71s was over $ 13 billion . On 6 April 2009 the proposed Defense budget announced by Defense Secretary Robert Gates had not included funding for the VH @-@ 71 . On 1 June 2009 , the U.S. Navy announced that the contract was officially canceled , and that remaining funds were to be reinvested in upgrades to the existing fleet of VH @-@ 3D and VH @-@ <unk> helicopters . Nine VH @-@ 71s had been completed at time of the cancellation . 
 The aircraft 's cancellation provoked commentators to speak out about its impact on future acquisition contracts with European businesses . The failure by the U.S. Department of Defense acquisition process as demonstrated by the VH @-@ 71 may scare away potential partners . Around March 2009 , a coalition of lawmakers encouraged the Administration to continue a variation of the VH @-@ 71 program . A letter issued by several members of Congress urged the President to support a VH @-@ 71 program . On 22 July 2009 , the House Appropriations Committee approved $ 485 million to make five VH @-@ <unk> operational . 
 = = = Options and restructuring = = = 
 The Congressional Research Service ( CRS ) estimated that shutting down VH @-@ 71 production , upgrading the existing fleet , and later implementing a successor program would cost $ 14 – $ 21 billion . It was reported not only that a new fleet would not be available until 2024 ( at which point the existing helicopters would have remained in service while being over 50 years old ) , but that terminating the existing program would waste more than $ 3 billion in sunk VH @-@ 71 costs . Following the President ’ s decision to terminate the program a variety of law makers , think tanks and media outlets publicly concluded it would be more cost effective and less time consuming to continue with a variation of the existing VH @-@ 71 program . 
 In 2009 , the CRS proposed four options : Option 1 was to continue the VH @-@ 71 program with Increment I and II versions ; the additional cost was estimated at $ 10 billion and the entry into service date was 2019 . Option 2 was to restructure the program to provide 23 Increment I aircraft ; at an additional cost of $ 6 @.@ 4 billion and would be operational by 2012 . Option 3 was a restructure to provide 19 Increment I aircraft to replace the current fleet ; the additional cost for this option was estimated at $ 5 @.@ 6 billion and the entry into service by 2012 . The last option was to upgrade and extend life of current fleet at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 4 billion ; however this would not meet the standards required for future presidential helicopters , and would require replacement sooner . 
 In addition to the cost of a new procurement program , industry officials stated that to merely extend the operating life of the current fleet is a risky choice because it is both less secure and costly to maintain . Lawmakers from both sides of the aisle , including Senator Chuck Schumer ( D @-@ NY ) and Representative Roscoe Bartlett ( R @-@ MD ) have been outspoken critics of the Pentagon in the matter — Bartlett recently claiming that " they had this conversation outside the partnership and we regret that . " Loren Thompson , an analyst for the Lexington Institute , stated " I do not believe that the story of VH @-@ 71 is over ... Secretary Gates has not made a convincing case for terminating the program , and there is no alternative helicopter that can satisfy range and payload requirements while still landing on the White House lawn . " 
 On 19 December 2009 , President Obama signed a joint House and Senate Defense Appropriation Bill for FY 2010 , which includes $ 130 million funding for the Marine One program : $ 100 million to recoup technologies developed under the VH @-@ 71 Kestrel program , and $ 30 million for the Navy 's initial studies on a new VH @-@ XX program . In February 2010 , the Navy issued a request for information to the aviation industry . In April 2010 , Lockheed Martin announced they would team with Sikorsky in offering the Sikorsky S @-@ 92 instead of the VH @-@ 71 . In June 2010 , Boeing announced it was considering a U.S.-built licensed version of the AgustaWestland AW101 for the renewed VXX program as well as the Bell @-@ Boeing V @-@ 22 Osprey and Boeing CH @-@ 47 Chinook . 
 In June 2011 , nine VH @-@ 71s were purchased for $ 164 million by Canada for use as spare parts for its fleet of AgustaWestland CH @-@ 149 Cormorant search and rescue helicopter , which is also based upon the AW101 . The transferred VH @-@ 71s were stripped of sensitive parts , a total of seven remained in an airworthy condition . In 2013 , media reports stated Canada is studying whether up to four of the VH @-@ 71s can be certified for operational use ; manufacturer AgustaWestland has openly stated their support for the regeneration initiative . 
 = = Testing = = 
 The first test VH @-@ 71A , Test Vehicle # 2 ( TV @-@ 2 ) , made its initial flight on 3 July 2007 at AgustaWestland 's facility in Yeovil in the UK . Lockheed Martin also used an EH101 , designated TV @-@ 1 , for initial testing in the United States ; these tests included landing on the lawn of the White House . 
 The first production VH @-@ 71A , Pilot Production # 1 ( PP @-@ 1 ) , made its maiden flight on 22 September 2008 from Yeovil . The US Air Force transported the helicopter in a C @-@ 17 Globemaster III to Naval Air Station Patuxent River , Maryland for further testing . The first production VH @-@ 71 joined the test program at NAS Patuxent River , beginning ground testing in early December 2008 . 
 = = Variants = = 
 VH @-@ 71A 
 The initial production VH @-@ 71 aircraft or Increment one of the presidential helicopter replacement program , designed to meet an urgent need for new helicopters . 
 VH @-@ <unk> 
 Increment two was to provide 23 operational helicopters with increased range , and upgraded navigation and communications systems that fulfill White House requirements to maintain continuity of government and allow the president to carry out the duties of the office . 
 = = = Other competitions = = = 
 The US101 is also competing for two USAF contracts , the 141 @-@ aircraft Combat Search and Rescue Replacement ( CSAR @-@ X ) project ( originally won by the Boeing HH @-@ 47 on 10 November 2006 , but now subject to a second procurement competition ) , and the 70 @-@ aircraft Common Vertical Lift Support Program ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United States of America 
 United States Marine Corps ( proposed ) 
 HMX @-@ 1 's Marine One fleet 
 = = Specifications ( VH @-@ 71 ) = = 
 Specifications with an asterisk ( * ) next to them are specifically for the VH @-@ 71 . All others are for AW101 . 
 Data from Jane 's All The World 's Aircraft 2003 – 2004 , others 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 4 
 Capacity : 14 seated troops * 
 Length : 64 ft 1 in ( 19 @.@ 53 m ) 
 Rotor diameter : 61 ft ( 18 @.@ 59 m ) 
 Height : 21 ft 8 ¾ in ( 6 @.@ 62 m ) 
 Disc area : 2 @,@ 992 @.@ 5 ft ² ( 271 @.@ 51 m ² ) 
 Empty weight : 23 @,@ 149 lb ( 10 @,@ 500 kg ) 
 Max takeoff weight : 34 @,@ 392 lb ( 15 @,@ 600 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 3 × General Electric <unk> @-@ 8E turboshafts , 2 @,@ 520 shp ( 1 @,@ 879 kW ) ( take @-@ off power ) each 
 Performance 
 Never exceed speed : 167 knots ( 192 mph , 309 km / h ) 
 Cruise speed : 150 knots ( 167 mph , 278 km / h ) 
 Range : 863 mi ( 1 @,@ 389 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 15 @,@ 010 ft ( 4 @,@ 575 m ) 
 Rate of climb : 2 @,@ 010 ft / min ( 10 @.@ 2 m / s ) 
 Disc loading : 11 @.@ 0 lb / ft ² ( 53 @.@ 8 kg / m ² ) 
 Power / mass : 0 @.@ 174 shp / lb ( 0 @.@ <unk> kW / kg ) 
 = Light in August = 
 Light in August is a 1932 novel by the Southern American author William Faulkner . It belongs to the Southern gothic and modernist literary genres . 
 Set in the author 's present day , the interwar period , the novel centers on two strangers who arrive at different times in Jefferson , Yoknapatawpha County , Mississippi , a fictional county based on Faulkner 's home , Lafayette County , Mississippi . The plot first focuses on Lena Grove , a young pregnant white woman from Alabama looking for the father of her unborn child , and then shifts to explore the life of Joe Christmas , a man who has settled in Jefferson and passes as white , but who secretly believes he has some black ancestry . After a series of flashbacks narrating Christmas 's early life , the plot resumes with his living and working with Lucas Burch , the father of Lena 's child , who fled to Jefferson and changed his name when he found out that Lena was pregnant . The woman on whose property Christmas and Burch have been living , Joanna Burden , a descendant of Yankee abolitionists hated by the citizens of Jefferson , is murdered . Burch is caught at the scene of the crime and reveals that Christmas had been romantically involved with her and is part black , thus implying that he is guilty of her murder . While Burch sits in jail awaiting his reward for turning in Christmas , Lena is assisted by Byron Bunch , a shy , mild @-@ mannered bachelor who falls in love with her . Bunch seeks the aid of another outcast in the town , the disgraced former minister Gail Hightower , to help Lena give birth and protect Christmas from being lynched . Though Hightower refuses the latter , Christmas escapes to his house and is shot and castrated by a state guardsman . Burch leaves town without his reward , and the novel ends with an anonymous man recounting a story to his wife about some hitchhikers he picked up on the road to Tennessee — a woman with a child and a man who was not the father of the child , both looking for the woman 's husband . 
 In a loose , unstructured modernist narrative style that draws from Christian allegory and oral storytelling , Faulkner explores themes of race , sex , class and religion in the American South . By focusing on characters that are misfits , outcasts , or are otherwise marginalized in their community , he portrays the clash of alienated individuals against a Puritanical , prejudiced rural society . Early reception of the novel was mixed , with some reviewers critical of Faulkner 's style and subject matter . However , over time , the novel has come to be considered one of the most important literary works by Faulkner and one of the best English @-@ language novels of the 20th century . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The novel is set in the American South in the 1930s , during the time of Prohibition and Jim Crow laws that legalized racial segregation in the South . It begins with the journey of Lena Grove , a young pregnant white woman from Doane 's Mill , Alabama , who is trying to find Lucas Burch , the father of her unborn child . He has been fired from his job at Doane 's Mill and moved to Mississippi , promising to send word to her when he has a new job . Not hearing from Burch and harassed by her older brother for her illegitimate pregnancy , Lena walks and hitchhikes to Jefferson , Mississippi , a town in Faulkner 's fictional Yoknapatawpha County . There she expects to find Lucas working at another planing mill , ready to marry her . Those who help her along her four @-@ week trek are skeptical that Lucas Burch will be found , or that he will keep his promise when she catches up with him . When she arrives in Jefferson , Lucas is there , but he has changed his name to Joe Brown . Looking for Lucas , sweet , trusting Lena meets shy , mild @-@ mannered Byron Bunch , who falls in love with Lena but feels honor @-@ bound to help her find Joe Brown . Thoughtful and quietly religious , Byron is superior to Brown in every way but his shyness prevents him from revealing his feelings to Lena . 
 The novel then switches to the second plot strand , the story of Lucas Burch / Joe Brown 's partner Joe Christmas . The surly , psychopathic Christmas has been on the run for years , ever since killing his strict Methodist adopted father . Although he has light skin , Christmas suspects that he is of African American ancestry . Consumed with rage , he is a bitter outcast who wanders between black and white society , constantly provoking fights with blacks and whites alike . Christmas comes to Jefferson three years prior to the central events of the novel and gets a job at the mill where Byron , and later Joe Brown , works . The job at the mill is a cover for Christmas 's bootlegging operation , which is illegal under Prohibition . He has a sexual relationship with Joanna Burden , an older woman who descended from a formerly powerful abolitionist family whom the town despises as carpetbaggers . Though their relationship is passionate at first , Joanna begins menopause and turns to religion , which frustrates and angers Christmas . At the end of her relationship with Christmas , Joanna tries to force him , at gunpoint , to kneel and pray . Joanna is murdered soon after : her throat is slit and she is nearly decapitated . 
 The novel leaves readers uncertain whether Joe Christmas or Joe Brown is the murderer . Brown is Christmas ' business partner in bootlegging and is leaving Joanna 's burning house when a passing farmer stops to investigate and pull Joanna 's body from the fire . The sheriff at first suspects Joe Brown , but initiates a manhunt for Christmas after Brown claims that Christmas is black . The manhunt is fruitless until Christmas arrives undisguised in <unk> , a neighboring town ; he is on his way back to Jefferson , no longer running . In <unk> , he is arrested and jailed , then moved to Jefferson . His grandparents arrive in town and visit Gail Hightower , the disgraced former minister of the town and friend of Byron Bunch . Bunch tries to convince Hightower to give the imprisoned Joe Christmas an alibi , but Hightower initially refuses . Though his grandfather wants Christmas lynched , his grandmother visits him in the Jefferson jail and advises him to seek help from Hightower . As police escort him to the local court , Christmas breaks free and runs to Hightower 's house . A childishly cruel white vigilante , Percy Grimm , follows him there and , over Hightower 's protest , shoots and castrates Christmas . Having redeemed himself at last , Hightower is then depicted as falling into a deathlike swoon , his whole life flashing before his eyes , including the past adventures of his Confederate grandfather , who was killed while stealing chickens from a farmer 's shed . 
 Before Christmas ' escape attempt , Hightower delivers Lena 's child in the cabin where Brown and Christmas had been staying before the murder , and Byron arranges for Brown / Burch to come and see her . Brown deserts Lena once again , but Byron follows him and challenges him to a fight . Brown beats the braver , smaller Bunch , then skilfully hops a moving train and disappears . At the end of the story , an anonymous man is talking to his wife about two strangers he picked up on a trip to Tennessee , recounting that the woman had a child and the man was not the father . This was Lena and Byron , who were conducting a half @-@ hearted search for Brown , and they are eventually dropped off in Tennessee . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Major characters = = = 
 Lena Grove – a young pregnant woman from Alabama who has traveled to Jefferson while looking for Lucas Burch , the father of her unborn child . 
 Byron Bunch – a bachelor who works at the planing mill in Jefferson , who meets and falls in love with Lena when she arrives in town . She has been told that a man named Bunch works at the mill and assumes it is Lucas , because the name sounds similar . 
 Gail Hightower – the former minister of Jefferson , forced to retire after his wife was discovered to be having an affair in Memphis and committed suicide . He is a friend and mentor to Byron . 
 Lucas Burch / Joe Brown – the young man who fathered Lena 's child in Alabama and ran away when she told him she was pregnant . He has been living in Jefferson with Joe Christmas in a cabin on Joanna Burden 's property under the name Joe Brown and working with Christmas and Byron at the planing mill . He is also a bootlegger . 
 Joe Christmas – a man who came to Jefferson three years prior to the events in the novel . He lives in a cabin on the property of Joanna Burden and has a secret sexual relationship with her . Although he has light skin and is an orphan with no knowledge of his family background , he believes that one of his parents are of African @-@ American ancestry , and this secret has caused him to be a habitual wanderer . He is employed at the planing mill until he begins to make a profit as a bootlegger . 
 Joanna Burden – the sole survivor in Jefferson of a family of abolitionists from New England who came to Jefferson after the Civil War . She is unmarried , lives alone in a manor house outside of Jefferson , and is secretly engaged in a sexual relationship with Joe Christmas . She is murdered , presumably by Christmas , at the start of the novel , and her house is burned down . 
 = = = Secondary characters = = = 
 <unk> " Doc " Hines – the grandfather of Joe Christmas . He hates Christmas and gives him away to an orphanage when he is born , staying on as a janitor there in order to monitor the boy . Later , when he hears that Christmas is being held on suspicion of murdering Joanna Burden , he travels to Jefferson with his wife and begins to incite a lynch mob to kill Christmas . 
 Mrs. Hines – the grandmother of Joe Christmas . She has never seen Christmas after the night of his birth and travels to Jefferson to ensure that her husband does not successfully have him lynched , because she wants to see him again once more before he is tried for murder . 
 Milly Hines – the teenage mother of Joe Christmas . She conceives after a tryst with a member of a traveling circus , whom she claims is Mexican . She dies in childbirth after <unk> Hines refuses to call a doctor for her . 
 Mr. McEachern – the adoptive father of Joe Christmas . He is a devout Presbyterian and tries to instill religion in the young orphan he has adopted . He disapproves of Christmas 's growing disobedience and is killed by his adopted son when the boy is 18 . 
 Mrs. McEachern – the adoptive mother of Joe Christmas . She tries to protect Christmas , though he hates her and pulls away from her attempts to be kind to him . 
 The dietitian – a woman who worked at the orphanage where Joe Christmas was raised . After he accidentally sees her with a man in her room , she tries unsuccessfully to have him transferred to an all @-@ black orphanage . 
 Mr. Armstid – a man who picks up Lena on her way to Jefferson , lets her spend the night at his house , and then gives her a ride to the city on his wagon . 
 Mrs. Armstid – Armstid 's wife , who gives Lena money in spite of her disdain for the young woman . 
 Bobbie – a waitress at a restaurant in Memphis whom the adolescent Joe Christmas falls in love with and proposes to on the night that he kills his father at a local dance . She scorns him and leaves him . 
 Gavin Stevens – an educated man and district attorney who lives in Jefferson and offers commentary on some of the events at the end of the novel . 
 Percy Grimm – the captain of the State National Guard who kills Joe Christmas and castrates him . 
 = = Style and structure = = 
 Due to its naturalistic , violent subject matter and obsession with the ghosts of the past , Light in August is characterized as a Southern gothic novel , a genre also exemplified by the works of Faulkner 's contemporary Carson McCullers , and by later Southern writers like Flannery O 'Connor , and Truman Capote . However , critics like Diane Roberts and David R. <unk> view Faulkner 's use of Southern gothic genre tropes , such as the dilapidated plantation house and the focus on mystery and horror , as self @-@ conscious modernist commentary on man 's " warped relationship with the past " and the impossibility of determining true identity . 
 According to Daniel Joseph Singal , Faulkner 's literary style gradually developed from 19th century Victorian to modernist , with Light in August more firmly grounded in the tradition of the latter . The novel is characteristic of the modernist fascination with polarities — light and dark , good and evil — the burden of history on the present , and the splintering of personal identity . The plot is also divided into dual currents , one focusing on Lena Grove and the other on Joe Christmas , a technique that Faulkner continued to use in other works . The narrative is not structured in any particular order , as it is often interrupted by lengthy flashbacks and constantly shifts from one character to another . This lack of organization and narrative continuity was viewed negatively by some critics . As in his other novels , Faulkner employs elements of oral storytelling , allowing different characters to lend voice to the narrative in their own distinct Southern idiom . Unlike some of the other Yoknapatawpha County novels , notably The Sound and the Fury , Light in August does not rely solely on stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness narration , but also incorporates dialogue and an omniscient third @-@ person narrator that develop the story . 
 = = = Title = = = 
 The title refers to the fire of the house that is at the center of the story . The whole novel revolves around one event , the fire , which is visible for miles around , and happens in August . 
 Some critics have speculated that the meaning of the title derives from a colloquial use of the word " light " to mean giving birth — typically used to describe when a cow will give birth and be " light " again — and connect this to Lena 's pregnancy . Speaking of his choice of title , Faulkner denied this interpretation and stated , 
 . . <unk> August in Mississippi there ’ s a few days somewhere about the middle of the month when suddenly there ’ s a foretaste of fall , it ’ s cool , there ’ s a <unk> , a soft , a luminous quality to the light , as though it came not from just today but from back in the old classic times . It might have fauns and satyrs and the gods and — from Greece , from Olympus in it somewhere . It lasts just for a day or two , then it ’ s gone . . <unk> title reminded me of that time , of a luminosity older than our Christian civilization . " 
 Within the novel itself , the title is alluded to when Gail Hightower sits at his study window waiting for his recurring vision of his grandfather 's last raid . The vision always occurs in " that instant when all light has failed out of the sky and it would be night save for that faint light which <unk> leaf and grass blade reluctant <unk> , making still a little light on earth though night itself has come . " The story that would eventually become the novel , started by Faulkner in 1931 , was originally titled " Dark House " and began with Hightower sitting at a dark window in his home . However , after a casual remark by his wife Estelle on the quality of the light in August , Faulkner changed the title . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Alienation = = = 
 All of the protagonists in the novel are misfits and social outcasts surrounded by an impersonal and largely antagonistic rural community , which is represented metonymically through minor or anonymous characters . Joanna Burden and Reverend Hightower are hounded by the people of Jefferson for years , in a failed effort to make them leave town . Byron Bunch , though more accepted in Jefferson , is still viewed as a mystery or simply overlooked . Both Joe Christmas and Lena Grove are orphans , strangers in town , and social outcasts , though the former draws anger and violence from the community , while the latter is looked down upon but receives generous assistance in her travels . According to Cleanth Brooks , this opposition between Joe and Lena is a pastoral reflection of the full spectrum of social alienation in modern society . 
 = = = Christian allegory = = = 
 There are a variety of parallels with Christian scripture in the novel . The life and death of Joe Christmas is reminiscent of the passion of Christ , Lena and her fatherless child parallel Mary and Christ , and Byron Bunch acts as a Joseph figure . Christian imagery such as the urn , the wheel , and the shadow , can be found throughout . 
 Light in August has 21 chapters , as does the Gospel of St. John . As Virginia V. James <unk> points out , each chapter in Faulkner corresponds to themes in John . For example , echoing John 's famous , " In the beginning was the Word , and the Word was with God " , is Lena 's insistent faith in the " word " of Lucas , who is , after all , the father . John 5 , the healing of the lame man by immersion , is echoed by Christmas 's repeatedly being immersed in liquids . The teaching in the temple in John 7 is echoed by McEachern 's attempts to teach Christmas his catechism . The crucifixion occurs in John 19 , the same chapter in which Christmas is slain and castrated . However , the Christian references are dark and disturbing — Lena is obviously not a virgin , Christmas is an enraged murderer — and may be more appropriately viewed as pagan idols mistakenly worshipped as saints . 
 = = = Race and sex = = = 
 Faulkner is considered one of the foremost American writers on race in the United States , and his novels , including Light in August , often explore the persistent obsession with blood and race in the South that have carried over from the antebellum era to the 21st century . Christmas has light skin but is viewed as a foreigner by the people he meets , and the children in the orphanage in which he was raised call him " nigger . " Because of this , he is fixated on the idea that he has some African American blood , which Faulkner never confirms , and views his parentage as an original sin that has tainted his body and actions since birth . Because of his obsessive struggle with his twin identities , black and white , Christmas lives his life always on the road . The secret of his blackness is one that he abhors as well as cherishes ; he often willingly tells white people that he is black in order to see their extreme reactions and becomes violent when one white Northern woman reacts nonchalantly . Though Christmas is guilty of violent crimes , Faulkner emphasizes that he is under the sway of social and psychological forces that are beyond his control and force him to reenact the part of the mythical black murderer and rapist from Southern history . 
 Christmas exemplifies how existing outside of categorization , being neither black nor white , is perceived as a threat by society that can only be reconciled with violence . He is also perceived as neither male nor female , just as Joanna Burden , whom Faulkner portrays as " masculinized , " is also neither male nor female and is rejected by her community . Because of this , an early critic concluded that blackness and women were the " ' twin Furies of the <unk> deep Southern Waste Land ' " and reflected Faulkner 's animosity toward life . 
 However , while women and minorities are both viewed as " subversive " and are restricted by the patriarchal society depicted in the novel , Lena Grove is able to travel safely and be cared for by people who hate and mistrust her , because she plays on the conventional rule that men are responsible for a woman 's wellbeing . Thus , she is the only stranger who is not alienated and destroyed by the people of Jefferson , because the community recognizes her as the embodiment of nature and life . This romantic view of women in the novel posits that men have lost their innocent connection to the natural world , while women instinctively possess it . 
 = = = Class and religion = = = 
 In Light in August , as in most of the other novels set in Yoknapatawpha County , Faulkner focuses mainly on poor white Southerners , both from the upper and lower classes , who struggle to survive in the ruined post @-@ war economy of the South . The characters in Light in August — who are mostly from the lower classes , with the exception of Reverend Hightower and Joanna Burden — are united by poverty and Puritanical values that cause them to regard an unwed mother like Lena Grove with disdain . Faulkner shows the <unk> and aggression of their Puritanical zeal , which has caused them to become " deformed " in their struggle against nature . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When it was first published in 1932 , the novel was moderately successful ; 11 @,@ 000 copies were initially printed , with a total of four printings by the end of the year , although a significant number of copies from the fourth printing had not been sold by 1936 . In 1935 , Maurice <unk> translated the novel into French . In the same year , it was translated into German along with several other novels and short stories by Faulkner . These works initially met with approval from the Nazi censors and received much attention from German literary critics , because they assumed that Faulkner was a conservative agrarian positively depicting the struggle for racial purity ; soon after , however , Faulkner 's works were banned by the Nazis , and post @-@ war German criticism reappraised him as an optimistic Christian humanist . 
 According to Michael Millgate , though it is not typically considered Faulkner 's best novel , Light in August was recognized early on as being " a major text , central to any understanding or evaluation of his career as a whole . " He argues that many of the early American critics , most of whom were urban Northerners who viewed the South as backward and reactionary , focused on Faulkner 's technical innovation in the field of narrative but missed or ignored the regional details and interconnectedness of the characters and setting to other works by the author . Some reviewers saw Faulkner 's narrative techniques not as innovations but as errors , offering Faulkner recommendations on how to improve his style and admonishing him for his European modernist " ' tricks ' " . Critics were also displeased with the violence depicted in the novel , pejoratively labeling it " gothic fantasy , " despite the fact that lynching was a reality in the South . In spite of these complaints , the novel came to be viewed positively because of its violence and dark themes , as this was a contrast to the sentimental , romantic Southern literature of the time . 
 In 1998 , the Modern Library ranked Light in August 54th on its list of the 100 best English @-@ language novels of the 20th century . Additionally , Time magazine included the novel in its TIME 100 Best English @-@ language Novels from 1923 to 2005 . 
 = Polish Underground State = 
 The Polish Underground State ( Polish : Polskie <unk> <unk> , also known as the Polish Secret State ) is a collective term for the underground resistance organizations in Poland during World War II , both military and civilian , that were loyal to the Government of the Republic of Poland in exile in London . The first elements of the Underground State were established in the final days of the German invasion of Poland that began in September 1939 . The Underground State was perceived by supporters as a legal continuation of the pre @-@ war Republic of Poland ( and its institutions ) that waged an armed struggle against the country 's occupying powers : Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union . The Underground State encompassed not only military resistance , one of the largest in the world , but also civilian structures , such as education , culture and social services . 
 Although the Underground State enjoyed broad support throughout much of the war , it was not supported or recognized by the far left ( communists ) . The nationalists from the National Radical Camp <unk> and National Radical Camp ABC opposed the German occupation of Poland and the two movements were quickly replaced by the <unk> Narodu , a part of the Polish Underground State which also included most members of the pre @-@ war far @-@ right . Influence of the communists eventually declined amid military reversals ( most notably , the failure of the Warsaw Uprising ) and the growing hostility of the USSR . The Soviet Union had created an alternative , puppet government in 1944 ( the Polish Committee of National Liberation ) and ensured it formed the basis of the post @-@ war government in Poland . During the Soviet @-@ backed communist takeover of Poland at the end of the war , many Underground State members were prosecuted as alleged traitors and died in captivity . Abandoned by the Western Allies , finding it impossible to negotiate with the Soviets , and wishing to avoid a civil war , the key institutions of the Underground State dissolved themselves in the first half of 1945 . 
 Ultimately , hundreds of thousands of people were directly involved with various agencies of the Underground State ( the estimates for membership in Armia Krajowa alone are often given at approaching half a million people ) , and they were quietly supported by millions of Polish citizens . The rationale behind the creation of the secret civilian authority drew on the fact that the German and Soviet occupation of Poland was illegal . Hence , all institutions created by the occupying powers were considered illegal , and parallel Polish underground institutions were set up in accordance with Polish law . The scale of the Underground State was also inadvertently aided by the actions of the occupiers , whose attempts to destroy the Polish state , nation , and its culture , including most importantly genocidal policies that targeted Polish citizens , fuelled popular support for the Polish resistance movement and its development . 
 During the Cold War era , research on the Underground State was curtailed by Polish communist officials , who instead emphasized the role that communist partisans played in the anti @-@ Nazi resistance . Hence , until recently , the bulk of research done on this topic was carried out by Polish scholars living in exile . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1939 – 1940 : Formation = = = 
 In many respects , the history of the Polish Underground State mirrors that of the Polish non @-@ communist resistance in general . The Underground State traces its origins to the Service for Poland 's Victory ( Służba <unk> Polski , SZP ) organization , which was founded on 27 September 1939 , one day before the surrender of the Polish capital of Warsaw , at a time when the Polish defeat in the German invasion of Poland ( accompanied by the Soviet one ) appeared inevitable . SZP founder General Michał Karaszewicz @-@ Tokarzewski received orders from Polish Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Marshal Edward Rydz @-@ Śmigły to organize and carry out the struggle in occupied Poland . Karaszewicz @-@ Tokarzewski decided that the organization he was creating needed to move beyond a strictly military format ; and in line with the traditions of the underground 19th @-@ century Polish National Government and World War I @-@ era Polish Military Organization , it would need to encompass various aspects of civilian life . Hence , the SZP , in contact with ( and subordinate to ) the Polish Government in Exile , envisioned itself not only as an armed resistance organization , but also as a vehicle through which the Polish state continued to administer its occupied territories . 
 Following the Polish Constitution , President Ignacy Mościcki , interned in Romania after the Polish government evacuated itself from Poland on 17 September , resigned and appointed General Bolesław Wieniawa @-@ Długoszowski as his successor ; unpopular with the French government , Wieniawa @-@ Długoszowski was replaced by Władysław Raczkiewicz on 29 September . General Władysław Sikorski , a long @-@ term opponent of the Sanacja regime who resided in France and had the support of the French government , would become the Polish Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief ( on 28 September ) and Poland 's Prime Minister ( on 30 September ) . This government was quickly recognized by France and the United Kingdom . Raczkiewicz , described as " weak and indecisive " , held relatively little influence compared to charismatic Sikorski . 
 Due to political differences among factions in the Polish exile government , and in particular , SZP ties to the Sanacja regime which dominated the Polish government since mid @-@ 1920s , the SZP was reorganized into the Union of Armed Struggle ( Związek Walki Zbrojnej , ZWZ ) on 13 November 1939 . Karaszewicz @-@ Tokarzewski supported that move , aiming to include parties marginalized by the Sanacja regime , and supported the formation of the Main Political Council ( <unk> Rada <unk> , GRP ) . Sikorski named General Kazimierz Sosnkowski the head of the ZWZ and Colonel Stefan Rowecki was appointed the commander of the ZWZ German occupation zone . Karaszewicz @-@ Tokarzewski became the commander of the ZWZ Soviet zone , but was arrested in March 1940 by the Soviets when attempting to cross the new German @-@ Soviet border . In June Sikorski appointed Rowecki as the commander of both zones . 
 Given that the ZWZ focused on military aspects of the struggle , its civilian dimension was less clearly defined and developed more slowly — a situation exacerbated by the complex political discussions that were then unfolding between politicians in occupied Poland and the government in exile ( first located in Paris , and after the fall of France , in London ) . Sikorski 's government opted for a much more democratic procedure then the less democratic prewar Sanacja regime . The National Council ( Rada Narodowa ) was formed by the government in exile in December 1939 , including representatives from different Polish political factions . Meanwhile , in occupied Poland , a major step toward the development of the organization 's civilian structure was taken in late February 1940 , when the ZWZ established its local version of the National Council , the Political Consultative Committee ( <unk> Komitet <unk> , PKP ) . The structures in occupied Poland maintained close communication with the government in exile , through radio communications and " hundreds , if not thousands " of couriers , such as Jan Karski . One of the most significant developments of 1940 was the creation of the office of Government Delegation for Poland ( <unk> <unk> na <unk> ) , with <unk> <unk> ( nominated on 3 December ) as the first Delegate ; this event marked the official beginning of the Underground State ( <unk> would be followed by Jan <unk> , Jan Stanisław Jankowski and Stefan <unk> ) . The post of the Delegate could be seen as equivalent to that of a Deputy Prime Minister ( particularly since the legislation of 1944 ) . Unlike the GRP and PKP , which operated alongside the military structures but had no influence over them , the Delegation had budgetary control over the military . The Delegation was to oversee the military , and recreate the civilian administration . 
 As early as 1940 , the Underground State 's civilian arm was actively supporting underground education ; it then set out to develop social security , information ( propaganda ) and justice networks . 
 = = = 1941 – 1943 : Growth = = = 
 By 1942 , most of the differences between politicians in occupied Poland and those in exile had been positively settled . By 1943 , the PKP had evolved into the Home Political Representation ( Krajowa <unk> <unk> , KRP ) , which served as the basis of the Council of National Unity ( Rada Jedności Narodowej , <unk> ) , created on 9 January 1944 . The Council , headed by Kazimierz <unk> , was seen as the Underground State 's parliament . Meanwhile , the military arm of the Underground State expanded dramatically , and the ZWZ was transformed into Armia Krajowa ( AK , or the Home Army ) in 1942 . ZWZ @-@ AK commanders included Stefan Rowecki , Tadeusz Komorowski and Leopold <unk> . 
 In August 1943 and March 1944 , the Polish Underground State announced its long @-@ term plan , which was partly designed to undercut the attractiveness of some of the communists ' proposals . The communists , in their increasingly radical What We Fight For declarations ( from March and November 1943 ) , were proposing the creation of a heavily socialist or even communist state , denouncing capitalism , which they equated to slavery . They demanded nationalization of most if not all of the economy , introduction of central planning , The Underground State 's declaration What the Polish Nation is Fighting For declared the reconstruction of Poland as a democratic parliamentary state as its goal , guaranteeing full equality to the minorities , as well as full freedom of speech , freedom of religion , and freedom of political activity . The plan also called for the creation of a Central European federal union , without domination by any single state . In the economic sector , planned economy would be endorsed , by embracing the socialist and Christian Democrat principles , such as income redistribution , aiming at a reduction of economic inequality . The plan promised land reform , nationalization of the industrial base , demands for territorial compensation from Germany , and re @-@ establishment of the country 's pre @-@ 1939 eastern border . According to the plan , the country 's Eastern borders , as delineated by the 1921 Treaty of Riga , would be kept while in the north and west compensation would be sought from German territories . Thus , the main differences between the Underground State and the communists , in terms of politics , were not rooted in radical economic and social reforms , which both sides advocated , but rather in their divergent positions on such issues as national sovereignty , borders , and Polish @-@ Soviet relations . The program was criticized by the nationalist factions , for being too socialist , and not " Christian " enough . 
 The Underground State achieved its zenith of influence in early 1944 . In April , the Polish government in exile recognized the administrative structure of the Delegate 's Office as the Temporary Governmental Administration . This was when the Delegate officially became recognized as the Deputy Prime Minister , and the Council of Ministers at Home ( Krajowa Rada <unk> , <unk> ) was created . The Underground State however declined sharply in the aftermath of the nationwide uprising , Operation Tempest , initiated in the Spring of 1944 . In addition to the costly and eventually unsuccessful Warsaw Uprising part of the Operation Tempest , the hostile attitude of the Soviet Union and its puppet Polish government , the Polish Committee of National Liberation ( Polski Komitet <unk> Narodowego , PKWN ) towards the non @-@ communist resistance loyal to the Polish government in exile proved to be disastrous . The Underground State assumed that the Polish resistance would aid the advancing Soviet forces , and AK commanders and representatives of the administrative authority would assume the role of legitimate hosts . Instead , the Soviets commonly surrounded , disarmed and arrested the Underground 's military authority members and its civilian representatives , instituting their own administrative structures instead . In early July 1944 , even as the AK resistance continued its struggle against the Germans , the Underground State was forced to order the AK and its administrative structure to remain in hiding from the Soviets , due to continued arrests and reprisals experienced by those who revealed themselves . 
 = = = 1944 – 1945 : Decline and dissolution = = = 
 Events taking place in 1943 significantly weakened the Polish government in exile . A rift developed between Poland and the Soviet Union , an increasingly important ally for the West , particularly after the revelation of the Katyn massacre in 1943 ( on 13 April ) , followed by the breaking @-@ off of diplomatic relations with Poland by the Soviets ( on 21 April ) . The subsequent death ( on 4 July ) of the charismatic General Sikorski , succeeded by less influential Stanisław Mikołajczyk as the Prime Minister , and General Sosnkowski as the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , contributed to the decline . No representative of the Polish government was invited to the Tehran Conference ( 28 November 28 – 1 December 1943 ) or the Yalta Conference ( 4 – 11 February 1945 ) , the two crucial events in which the Western Allies and the Soviet Union discussed the shape of the post @-@ war world and decided on the fate of Poland , assigning it to the Soviet sphere of influence . In Teheran , neither Churchill nor Roosevelt objected to Stalin 's suggestion that the Polish government in exile in London was not representing Polish interests ; as historian Anita <unk> noted , " this spelled the end of that government 's tenuous influence and raison d 'être . " After the Teheran Conference , Stalin decided to create his own puppet government for Poland , and the PKWN was proclaimed in 1944 . PKWN was recognized by the Soviet Government as the only legitimate authority in Poland , while Mikołajczyk ’ s Government in London , was termed by the Soviets an " illegal and self @-@ styled authority . " Mikołajczyk would serve in the Prime Minister 's role until 24 November 1944 , when , realizing the increasing powerlessness of the government in exile , he resigned and was succeeded by Tomasz Arciszewski , " whose obscurity " , in the words of historian Mieczysław B. <unk> , " signaled the arrival of the government in exile at total inconsequentiality . " 
 The communists refused to deal with the Underground State just like they refused to deal with the government in exile ; its leaders and soldiers in " liberated " Polish territories were persecuted . A number of prominent leaders of the Underground State , including the Government Delegate , Jan Stanisław Jankowski and the last AK Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , General Leopold <unk> , who decided to reveal themselves and upon the Soviet invitation begun open negotiations with the communist authorities , were arrested and sentenced by the Soviets in Moscow in the infamous Trial of the Sixteen ( arrests were carried out in March 1945 , and the trial itself took place in June that year ) . On 27 June 1945 the Council of National Unity held its last session , issuing a 12 @-@ point declaration demanding that the Soviet army leave Poland and the repression of the non @-@ communist political parties cease . The Government Delegate 's Office at Home , restructured after the arrests of its leadership and headed by the last Delegate , Stefan <unk> , disbanded on 1 July , after the creation in Moscow of the Provisional Government of National Unity ( Tymczasowy Rząd Jedności Narodowej , TRJN ) on 28 June 1945 . The disbanding of those structures marked the end of the Underground State . 
 The TRJN was composed primarily of communist representatives from the PKWN , with a token representation of the opposition as a gesture towards the Western Allies . With the establishment of the TRJN , the government in exile stopped being recognized by the Western Allies ( France withdrew its recognition on 29 June , followed by United Kingdom and the United States on 5 July ) , who decided to support the Soviet @-@ backed and increasingly communist TRJN body . Seeing this as a " Western betrayal " , the government in exile protested that decision and continued to operate till the fall of communism in 1989 , when it recognized the post @-@ communist Polish government . The rigged Polish legislative election of 1947 marked the onset of undisguised Communist rule in Poland ; few independent politicians like Mikołajczyk who attempted to form an opposition were threatened with arrests , retired or emigrated . 
 The Underground State 's military arm , Armia Krajowa , officially disbanded on 19 January 1945 to avoid armed conflict with the Soviets and a civil war . Over the next few years the communists solidified their hold on Poland , falsifying elections , persecuting the opposition and eliminating it as a political power . Remnants of the armed resistance ( NIE , Armed Forces Delegation for Poland , Freedom and Independence ) that refused to lay down their weapons and surrender to the communist regime continued to hold out for several years as the cursed soldiers , fighting the Soviet @-@ backed communist forces until eradicated . 
 = = Political representation = = 
 The Underground State represented most , though not all , political factions of the Second Polish Republic . The Political Consultative Committee ( PKP ) represented four major Polish parties : the Socialist Party ( PPS @-@ WRN ) , the People 's Party ( SL ) , the SN , and the Labor Party ( SP ) . The SP joined the PKP in June 1940 , four months after the PKP was created ; and the PPS @-@ WRN withdrew from the PKP between October 1941 and March 1943 . Those parties , known as the Big Four , were also represented in the Home Political Representation ( KRP ) . Compared to PKP and KRP , the Council of National Unity was much more representative , and included representatives of several smaller political groupings . Several other groups lacked significant representation in PKP and KRP , but nonetheless had supported the Underground State . Non @-@ Polish ethnic minorities , primarily the Ukrainians and the Belarusians , were not represented in the Underground State ; however the Jews were . 
 The most important groups that lacked representation in the Underground State included the communist ( Polish Workers Party ( PPR ) and its military arm , the Gwardia Ludowa ) , and the far right ( Group <unk> and its military arm , the Military Organization Lizard Union ) . Both the extreme left ( the communists ) and the extreme right ( the nationalists ) saw themselves in opposition to the Underground State . Only the PPR , however , opposed to Polish independence and supporting full inclusion of Poland in the Soviet Union , was seen as completely outside the framework of the State ; the other groups were seen as a legitimate opposition . In 1944 PPR would become part of the PKWN Soviet puppet government . 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = Civilian = = = 
 The government in exile , located first in France and later in the United Kingdom , with the President , Prime Minister and the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Polish Army was the top military and civilian authority , recognized by the authorities of the Underground State as their commanders . The government in exile was represented in the occupied Poland by the Government Delegation for Poland , headed by the Government Delegate for Poland . 
 The main role of the civilian branch of the Underground State was to preserve the continuity of the Polish state as a whole , including its institutions . These institutions included the police , the courts , and schools . This branch of the state was intended to prepare cadres and institutions to resume power after the German defeat in World War II . By the final years of the war , the civilian structure of the Underground State included an underground parliament , administration , judiciary ( courts and police ) , secondary and higher level education , and supported various cultural activities such as publishing of newspapers and books , underground theatres , lectures , exhibitions , concerts and safeguarded various works of art . It also dealt with providing social services , including to the destitute Jewish population ( through the Council to Aid Jews , or Żegota ) . Through the Directorate of Civil Resistance ( 1941 – 1943 ) the civil arm was also involved in lesser acts of resistance , such as minor sabotage , although in 1943 this department was merged with the Directorate of Covert Resistance , forming the Directorate of Underground Resistance , subordinate to AK . 
 The departments can be seen as loosely corresponding to ministries . Three departments were dedicated to war @-@ related issues : the Department for Elimination of the Consequences of War , the Department for Public Works and Reconstruction , and the Department for Information and the Press ; the other departments mirrored pre @-@ war Polish ministries ( e.g. , Department of Post Offices and Telegraphs , or Department of the Treasury ) . The Delegate 's Office was divided into departments , 14 of which existed toward the end of the war ; the full list included : the Presidential Department , the Department of Internal Affairs , Justice Department , Employment and Social Welfare Department , Agriculture Department , Treasury Department , Trade and Industry Department , Postal and Telegraph Services Department , the Department for Elimination of the Consequences of War , Transport Department , Information and the Press , Department of Public Works and Reconstruction , Department of Education and Culture and the Department of National Defence . 
 On the geographical division level , the Delegation had local offices , dividing Polish territories into 16 voivodeships , each under an underground voivode , further divided into <unk> headed by <unk> , and with separate municipal bodies . In early 1944 , the Delegation employed some 15 @,@ 000 people in its administration ; those were primarily older people , as the younger ones were recruited for the military side of the operations . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 The military arm of the Polish Underground State consisted primarily of various branches of the Armia Krajowa ( AK ) and , until 1942 , the Union of Armed Struggle . This arm of the state was designed to prepare the Polish society for a future fight for the country 's liberation . Apart from armed resistance , sabotage , intelligence , training , and propaganda , the state 's military arm was responsible for maintaining communication with the London @-@ based government in exile , and for protecting the civilian arm of the state . 
 The Armia Krajowa 's primary resistance operations were the sabotage of German activities , including transports headed for the Eastern Front in the Soviet Union . The sabotage of German rail and road transports to the Eastern Front was so extensive it is estimated that one eighth of all German transports to the Eastern Front were destroyed or significantly delayed due to AK 's activities . 
 The AK also fought several full @-@ scale battles against the Germans , particularly in 1943 and 1944 during Operation Tempest . They tied down significant German forces , worth at least several divisions ( upper estimates suggest about 930 @,@ 000 troops ) , diverting much @-@ needed supplies , while trying to support the Soviet military . Polish intelligence operatives supplied valuable intelligence information to the Allies ; 43 percent of all reports received by British secret services from continental Europe in 1939 – 45 came from Polish sources . At its height , AK numbered over 400 @,@ 000 and was recognized as one of the three largest , or even the largest , resistance movement of the war . Axis fatalities due to the actions of the Polish underground , of which AK formed the bulk , are estimated at up to 150 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Definition , historiography and remembrance = = 
 For decades , research on the Polish Underground State was restricted , largely because the communist People 's Republic of Poland did not wish to fully acknowledge the role of the non @-@ communist resistance . During the first postwar Stalinist years , efforts to explore this topic were regarded as dangerous , bordering on illegal . Research into the events occurring in the Soviet @-@ annexed territories in the 1939 – 1941 period was particularly difficult . The limited research devoted to the Underground State that did take place was done mainly by Polish émigré historians living in the West . The communist state downplayed the importance of the non @-@ communist resistance movements , while the communist movement ( Armia Ludowa ) was emphasized as being of primary importance ; in fact , the opposite was true . The absence of research by Polish scholars , along with obstacles presented to foreign scholars seeking access to source material in communist Poland , contributed to a situation in which there was virtually no discussion by Western scholars of one of Europe 's largest resistance movements — the non @-@ communist Polish resistance movement . The bulk of Western research centred on the much smaller French Resistance ( la Résistance ) . 
 With the fall of communism , Poland regained full independence and Polish scholars could begin unrestricted research into all aspects of Polish history . Scholars who chose to investigate the Underground State were also confronted with the issue of its uniqueness ( no country or nation has ever created a similar institution ) , and hence , the problem of defining it . Polish historian Stanisław <unk> , discussing the historiography of the Polish Underground State , defined it as a " collection of state @-@ legal , organizational and citizenship structures , which were to ensure constitutional continuation of Polish statehood on its own territory " . <unk> concluded that " This constitutional continuity , real performance of the state 's functions on its past territory and the loyalty of a great majority of Polish society were the most significant elements of its existence . " 
 The Underground State also became officially recognized by the Polish government , local authorities and the community , with most major cities in Poland erecting various memorials to the Underground State affiliated resistance . In Poznań , there is a dedicated Polish Underground State Monument , erected in 2007 . On 11 September 1998 the Sejm ( parliament ) of Poland declared the day of 27 September ( anniversary of the founding of the Service for Poland 's Victory organization ) to be the Day of the Polish Underground State . 
 = Green iguana = 
 The green iguana ( Iguana iguana ) , also known as common iguana or American iguana , is a large , arboreal , mostly herbivorous species of lizard of the genus Iguana native to Central , South America , and the Caribbean . Usually , this animal is simply called the iguana . The green iguana ranges over a large geographic area , from southern Brazil and Paraguay as far north as Mexico and the Caribbean Islands . They have been introduced from South America to Puerto Rico and are very common throughout the island , where they are colloquially known as " <unk> de palo " and considered an invasive species ; in the United States feral populations also exist in South Florida ( including the Florida Keys ) , Hawaii , the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Rio Grande Valley of Texas . 
 An herbivore , it has adapted significantly with regard to locomotion and osmoregulation as a result of its diet . It grows to 1 @.@ 5 meters ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in length from head to tail , although a few specimens have grown more than 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) with <unk> upward of 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) . 
 Commonly found in captivity as a pet due to its calm disposition and bright colors , it can be very demanding to care for properly . Space requirements and the need for special lighting and heat can prove challenging to an amateur hobbyist . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The species was first officially described by Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 . In the two centuries since then , numerous subspecies have been identified , but later classified as merely regional variants of the same species . 
 Using nuclear and mitochondrial DNA @-@ sequence data to explore the phylogenic history of the green iguana , scientists from Utah Valley State College studied animals collected from 17 different countries . The topology of phylogeny indicated that the species originated in South America and eventually radiated through Central America and the Caribbean . The study revealed no unique mitochondrial DNA haplotypes for subspecific status but did indicate the deep lineage divergence between Central and South American populations . 
 The word iguana is derived from a Spanish form of the Taíno name for the species : <unk> . In some Spanish speaking countries , males of the species are referred to as <unk> or ministro and juveniles are called <unk> or <unk> . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The native range of the green iguana extends from southern Mexico to central Brazil , Dominican Republic , Paraguay , and Bolivia and the Caribbean ; specifically Grenada , Curaçao , Trinidad and Tobago , St. Lucia , St. Vincent , and Útila . They have been introduced to Grand Cayman , Puerto Rico , Texas , Florida , Hawaii , and the United States Virgin Islands ; and colonised the island of Anguilla in 1995 after being washed ashore following a hurricane . Though the species is not native to Martinique , a small wild colony of released or escaped green iguanas endures at historic Fort Saint Louis . 
 Green iguanas are diurnal , arboreal , and are often found near water . Agile climbers , Iguana iguana can fall up to 50 feet ( 15 m ) and land unhurt ( iguanas use their hind leg claws to clasp leaves and branches to break a fall ) . During cold , wet weather , green iguanas prefer to stay on the ground for greater warmth . When swimming , an iguana remains submerged , letting its four legs hang limply against its side . They propel through the water with powerful tail strokes . 
 In South and Central America , where the green iguana is native , it is an endangered species in some countries because people have been hunting and eating this “ chicken of the trees ” for a long time . 
 = = Anatomy and morphologies = = 
 Despite their name , green iguanas can come in different colors . In southern countries of their range , such as Peru , green iguanas appear bluish in color with bold blue markings . On islands such as Bonaire , Curaçao , Aruba , and Grenada , a green iguana 's color may range from green to lavender , black , and even pink . Green iguanas from the western region of Costa Rica are red and animals of the northern ranges , such as Mexico , appear orange . Juvenile green iguanas from El Salvador are often bright blue as babies , however they lose this color as they get older . 
 Adult iguanas found on most of St Lucia , mainly on the north east coast ; <unk> and Grand Anse , have many differences compared to all other green iguana populations . They are light green with predominant black stripes . Instead of the typical orange dewlap , the iguanas of St. Lucia have a black dewlap . When compared to the common green iguana , females lay about half the amount of eggs , 25 instead of 50 . Scales to the back of their head , near the jawbone , are smaller . Their iris is white or cream . Other green iguanas have yellow eyes . 
 Green iguanas possess a row of spines along their backs and along their tails , which helps to protect them from predators . Their whip @-@ like tails can be used to deliver painful strikes and like many other lizards , when grabbed by the tail , the iguana can allow it to break , so it can escape and eventually regenerate a new one . In addition , iguanas have a well developed dewlap , which helps regulate their body temperature . This dewlap is used in courtships and territorial displays . 
 Green iguanas have excellent vision , enabling them to detect shapes and motions at long distances . As green iguanas have only a few rod cells , they have poor vision in low @-@ light conditions . At the same time , they have cells called “ double cone cells ” that give them sharp color vision and enable them to see ultraviolet wavelengths . This ability is highly useful when basking so the animal can ensure that it absorbs enough sunlight in the forms of UVA and UVB to produce vitamin D. 
 Green iguanas have a white photosensory organ on the top of their heads called the parietal eye ( also called third eye , pineal eye or pineal gland ) , in contrast to most other lizards that have lost this primitive feature . This " eye " has only a rudimentary retina and lens and cannot form images , but is sensitive to changes in light and dark and can detect movement . This helps the iguana detect predators stalking it from above . 
 Green iguanas have very sharp teeth that are capable of shredding leaves and even human skin . These teeth are shaped like a leaf , broad and flat , with serrations on the edge . The similarity of these teeth to those of one of the first dinosaurs discovered led to the dinosaur being named Iguanodon , meaning " iguana @-@ tooth " , and the incorrect assumption that it had resembled a gigantic iguana . The teeth are situated on the inner sides of the jawbones , which is why they are hard to see in smaller specimens . 
 Primarily herbivorous , green iguanas are presented with a special problem for osmoregulation ; plant matter contains more potassium and as it has less nutritional content per gram , more must be eaten to meet metabolic needs . As green iguanas are not capable of creating liquid urine more concentrated than their bodily fluids , like birds they excrete nitrogenous wastes as urate salts through a salt gland . As a result , green iguanas have developed a lateral nasal gland to supplement renal salt secretion by expelling excess potassium and sodium chloride . 
 Green iguanas from Guatemala and southern Mexico predominantly have small horns on their snouts between their eyes and their nostrils , whereas others do not . Naturalists once classified these iguanas as a separate subspecies ( Iguana iguana <unk> ) ; however , this classification has been found to be invalid based on mitochondrial DNA and iguanas with similar nose projections appear randomly in other populations and interbreed freely with those that do not share this trait . 
 The green iguana is a large lizard and is probably the largest species in the iguana family , though a few in the Cyclura genus may match or exceed it in weight . Adults typically grow to 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 7 m ( 3 @.@ 9 to 5 @.@ 6 ft ) in length from head to tail . As in all iguanas , the tail comprises much of this length , and the snout @-@ to @-@ vent length of most green iguanas is 30 to 42 cm ( 12 to 17 in ) . An average adult male will weigh around 4 kg ( 8 @.@ 8 lb ) while the smaller adult female will typically weigh 1 @.@ 2 to 3 kg ( 2 @.@ 6 to 6 @.@ 6 lb ) . A few large males can reach or exceed 6 to 8 kg ( 13 to 18 lb ) in weight and 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long . Some specimens have even reportedly been measured at a body weight of greater than 20 lb ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) . 
 = = Reproductive biology = = 
 Male green iguanas have highly developed femoral pores on the underside of their thighs which secrete a scent ( females have femoral pores , but they are smaller in comparison to those of the males ) . In addition , the dorsal spines that run along a green iguana 's back are noticeably longer and thicker in males than they are in females , making the animals somewhat sexually dimorphic . 
 Male green iguanas tend to display more dominant behaviors , such as head bobbing and tail whipping . They also tend to develop a taller dorsal crest than females , as well as taller dorsal spines ( or spikes ) . Large , round , very pronounced jowls are generally a male characteristic . Jowls are located under the jaw and are protected by the <unk> plate , which is a large , green , circular @-@ shaped scale . 
 Green iguanas are oviparous with females laying clutches of 20 to 71 eggs once per year during a synchronized nesting period . The female green iguana gives no parental protection after egg laying , apart from defending the nesting burrow during excavation . In Panama , the green iguana has been observed sharing nest sites with American crocodiles and in Honduras with spectacled caimans . 
 The hatchlings emerge from the nest after 10 – 15 weeks of incubation . Once hatched , the young iguanas look similar to the adults in color and shape , resembling adult females more so than males and lacking dorsal spines . 
 Juveniles stay in familial groups for the first year of their lives . Male green iguanas in these groups often use their own bodies to shield and protect females from predators and it appears to be the only species of reptile which does this . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 When frightened by a predator , green iguanas will attempt to flee , and if near a body of water , they dive into it and swim away . If cornered by a threat , the green iguana will extend and display the dewlap under its neck , stiffen and puff up its body , hiss , and bob its head at the aggressor . If threat persists the iguana can lash with its tail , bite and use its claws in defense . The wounded are more inclined to fight than uninjured prey . 
 Green iguanas use " head bobs " and <unk> in a variety of ways in social interactions , such as greeting another iguana or to court a possible mate . The frequency and number of head bobs have particular meanings to other iguanas . 
 Green iguanas are hunted by predatory birds and their fear of these is exploited as a ploy to catch them in the wild . The sound of a hawk 's whistle or scream makes the iguana freeze and it becomes easier to capture . 
 = = Diet = = 
 Green Iguanas are primarily herbivores , with captives feeding on leaves such as turnip greens , mustard greens , dandelion greens , flowers , fruit , and growing shoots of upwards of 100 different species of plant . In Panama one of the green iguana 's favorite foods is wild plum , <unk> <unk> . 
 Although they will consume a wide variety of foods if offered , green iguanas are naturally herbivorous and require a precise ratio of minerals ( 2 to 1 calcium to phosphorus ) in their diet . It is important for captive iguanas to have a variety of leafy greens along with fruits and vegetables such as turnip greens , <unk> , butternut squash , acorn squash , mango , and parsnip . Juvenile iguanas often eat feces from adults in order to acquire the essential microflora to digest their low @-@ quality and hard to process vegetarian only diet . 
 There is some debate as to whether captive green Iguanas should be fed animal protein . There is evidence of wild iguanas eating grasshoppers and tree snails , usually as a byproduct of eating plant material . Wild adult green iguanas have been observed eating bird 's eggs . Zoologists , such as Adam Britton , believe that such a diet containing protein is unhealthy for the animal 's digestive system resulting in severe long @-@ term health damage including kidney failure and leading to premature death . On the other side of the argument is that green iguanas at the Miami Seaquarium in Key Biscayne , Florida , have been observed eating dead fish and individuals kept in captivity have been known to eat mice without any ill effects . De <unk> writes that captive animals have been known to survive and thrive on eating nothing but whole rodent block , or monkey chow , and one instance of romaine lettuce with vitamin and calcium supplements . However , it is only recommended that captive iguanas are not fed lettuce or meat , and instead receive the vitamins and minerals they need via a purely herbivore diet . 
 = = Captivity = = 
 The American pet trade has put a great demand on the green iguana ; 800 @,@ 000 iguanas were imported into the U.S. in 1995 alone , primarily originating from captive farming operations based in their native countries ( Honduras , El Salvador , Colombia , and Panama ) . However , these animals are demanding to care for properly over their lifetime , and many die within a few years of acquisition . 
 Although green iguanas in captivity will eat meat if presented with it , excessive consumption of animal protein results in severe kidney problems and possible premature death . <unk> pet owners tend to feed iguanas iceberg lettuce , which provides iguanas with water but has no other nutritional value . A captive Green Iguana 's diet should consist of fresh leafy vegetables such as mustard greens , collard greens , dandelion , arugula , or kale and access to fresh water . 
 Green iguanas will thrive only in temperatures of 79 ° F ( 26 ° C ) to 95 ° F ( 35 ° C ) and must have appropriate sources of UVB and UVA lighting , or else their bodies cannot produce vitamin D that promotes calcium absorption , which can result in a metabolic bone disease that can be fatal . In some locales ( New York City and Hawaii ) , iguanas are considered exotic pets , and are prohibited from ownership . Due to the potential impact of an introduced species on Hawaii 's ecosystem , the state has strict regulations regarding the import and possession of green iguanas ; violators can spend three years in jail and be fined up to $ 200 @,@ 000 . 
 = = As an invasive species = = 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 In the aftermath of Hurricane Luis and Hurricane Marilyn in 1995 , a raft of uprooted trees carrying fifteen or more green iguanas landed on the east side of Anguilla – an island where green iguanas have never been recorded before . The new iguanas had apparently been accidentally caught on the trees and rafted two hundred miles across the ocean from Guadeloupe , where green iguanas are indigenous . Examination of the weather patterns and ocean currents indicated that the iguanas had probably spent three weeks at sea before arriving on Anguilla . This colony began breeding on the new island within two years of its arrival . 
 In February 2012 , the government of Puerto Rico proposed that the islands ' iguanas , which were said to have a population of four million and considered to be a non @-@ native nuisance , be eradicated and sold for meat . 
 = = = Fiji = = = 
 The green iguana is present as an invasive species on some of the islands of Fiji , where it is known as the American iguana . They pose a threat to the native iguanas through the potential spread of disease and to humans by spreading salmonella . They were initially brought to <unk> in 2000 by an American who wanted them to eat the numerous insects on the island , although they are primarily vegetarian . They are now on the islands of <unk> , <unk> and Taveuni . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The green iguana is established on Oahu and Maui , Hawaii as a feral species ( despite strict legislation banning the importation of any reptiles ) and the Rio Grande Valley of Texas . As most reptiles carry salmonella , this is a concern and a reason legislation has been sought to regulate the trade in green iguanas . 
 Due to a combination of events , the green iguana is considered an invasive species in South Florida and is found along the gulf coast of Florida from Key West to Pinellas County . The original small populations in the Florida Keys were stowaways on ships carrying fruit from South America . Over the years , other iguanas were introduced into the wild , mostly originating through the pet trade . Some escaped and some were intentionally released by their owners ; these iguanas survived and then thrived in their new habitat . They commonly hide in the attics of houses and on beaches . They often destroy gardens and landscaping . They seem to be fond of eating a native endangered plant , Cordia globosa and feeding on <unk> ( <unk> ) a primary food plant of the endangered Miami blue butterfly ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ; additionally on Marco Island , green iguanas have been observed using the burrows of the Florida burrowing owl , a species of special concern , all of which can make them more of a serious threat to Florida 's ecosystem than originally believed . 
 In January 2008 , large numbers of iguanas established in Florida dropped from the trees in which they lived , due to uncommonly cold nights that put them in a state of torpor and caused them to lose their grip on the tree branches . Though no specific numbers were provided by local wildlife officials , local media described the phenomenon as a " frozen iguana shower " in which dozens " littered " local bike paths . Upon the return of daytime warmth many ( but not all ) of the iguanas " woke up " and resumed their normal activities . This occurred again in January 2010 after a prolonged cold front once again hit southern Florida . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped animals and often depicted Green Iguanas in their art . The Green iguana and its relative the Black iguana ( Ctenosaura similis ) have been used as a food source in Central and South America for the past 7 @,@ 000 years . It is possible that some of the populations in the Caribbean were translocated there from the mainland by various tribes as a food source . In Central and South America , Green Iguanas are still used as a source of meat and are often referred to as <unk> de palo , " bamboo chicken " or " chicken of the trees , " because they are said to taste like chicken . 
 = Frank Berryman = 
 Lieutenant General Sir Frank Horton Berryman , KCVO , CB , CBE , DSO ( 11 April 1894 – 28 May 1981 ) was an Australian Army officer who served as a general during the Second World War . The son of an engine driver , he entered Duntroon in 1913 . His class graduated early after the First World War broke out , and he served on the Western Front with the field artillery . After the war , he spent nearly twenty years as a major . 
 Berryman joined the Second Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) on 4 April 1940 with the rank of full colonel , and became General Staff Officer Grade 1 ( GSO1 ) of the 6th Division . He was responsible for the staff work for the attacks on Bardia and Tobruk . In January 1941 , Berryman became Commander , Royal Artillery , 7th Division , and was promoted to brigadier . During the Syria @-@ Lebanon campaign , he commanded " Berryforce " . He returned to Australia in 1942 , becoming Major General , General Staff , of the First Army . Later that year , he became Deputy Chief of the General Staff under the Commander in Chief , General Sir Thomas Blamey , who brought him up to Port Moresby to simultaneously act as chief of staff of New Guinea Force . Berryman was intimately involved with the planning and execution of the Salamaua @-@ Lae campaign and the Huon Peninsula campaign . In November 1943 he became acting commander of II Corps , which he led in the Battle of Sio . In the final part of the war , he was Blamey 's representative at General of the Army Douglas MacArthur 's headquarters and the Australian Army representative at the Japanese surrender in Tokyo Bay . 
 After the war , Berryman commanded Eastern Command . He directed the military response to the 1949 Australian coal strike . Berryman hoped to become Chief of the General Staff but was passed over as he was seen as a " Blamey man " by Prime Minister Ben Chifley . He retired and became the Director General of the Royal Tour of Queen Elizabeth II in 1954 . He was Chief Executive Officer of the Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales from 1954 to 1961 . 
 = = Education and early life = = 
 Frank Horton Berryman was born in Geelong , Victoria , on 11 April 1894 , the fourth of six children and the eldest of three sons of William Lee Berryman , a Victorian Railways engine driver , and his wife , Annie Jane , née Horton . William Berryman joined in the 1903 Victorian Railways strike and , when it failed , was reinstated with a 14 per cent pay cut , only regaining his 1903 pay level in 1916 . Frank was educated at Melbourne High School , where he served in the school Cadet Unit , and won the Rix prize for academic excellence . On graduation , he took a job with the Victorian railways as a junior draughtsman . 
 In 1913 , Berryman entered the Royal Military College , Duntroon , having ranked first among the 154 candidates on the entrance examination . Of the 33 members in his class , nine died in the First World War , and six later became generals : Leslie Beavis , Berryman , William Bridgeford , John Chapman , Edward Milford and Alan Vasey . Berryman rose to fifth in order of merit before his class graduated early , in June 1915 , because of the outbreak of the First World War . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Berryman 's Duntroon class had not yet completed its military training . Major General William Throsby Bridges decided that regimental duty would rectify that deficiency , so he assigned the Duntroon cadets as regimental officers of the First Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) , rather than as staff officers . Cadets were given the choice of service in the infantry or light horse . One cadet , Lawrence Wackett , protested that he wished to serve in the technical services . When asked if they would prefer the technical services , twelve cadets , including Berryman , Beavis , Clowes , Vasey , and Wackett stepped forward . Berryman was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Permanent Military Forces ( PMF ) on 29 June 1915 and again in the First AIF on 1 July 1915 . He was posted to Lieutenant Colonel Harold <unk> 's 4th Field Artillery Brigade of the 2nd Division Artillery , along with Vasey and Milford . Berryman embarked for Egypt with the 4th Field Artillery Brigade on the transport Wiltshire on 17 November 1915 . In Egypt , Berryman briefly commanded the 4th Brigade Ammunition Column before it was absorbed into the 2nd Division Ammunition Column . 
 The 2nd Division moved to France in March 1916 . Berryman became a temporary captain on 1 April 1916 , a rank which became substantive on 10 June 1916 . In January 1917 , he was posted to the 7th Infantry Brigade as a trainee staff captain . During the Second Battle of Bullecourt he served with 2nd Division headquarters . He was appointed to command the 18th Field Artillery Battery , and became a temporary major on 1 September 1917 , which became substantive on 10 September 1917 . This was as far as he could go , for Duntroon graduates could not be promoted above major in the AIF . This policy was aimed at giving them a broad range of experience , which would benefit the Army , while not allowing them to outnumber the available post @-@ war positions . 
 While commanding the 18th Field Battery , he saw action at the Battle of Passchendaele . For his service as a battery commander in this battle , he received a Mention in Despatches : 
 This officer has commanded the Battery during the whole of the period under review and did particularly good and effective work during the operations in September , October and November in the Hooge area [ in Belgium ] . He showed great initiative in reconnoitring Battery positions often under heavy fire ; in keeping touch with the Infantry Companies in the front line area and in observing and reporting on hostile movements rendering many useful reports . In particular he did a very fine piece of work on 14th September in moving his Battery forward behind Clapham Junction in the dusk under very heavy shelling over a very difficult road . He subsequently during the very heavy German counter attacks on 16th September succeeded in registering his Battery and using it in the operation notwithstanding the heavy hostile fire . The Battery suffered many casualties both in personnel and materiel but it fought with splendid determination and the men who had never previously been under the command of this officer in action throughout the operations before Hooge were kept in the most excellent fighting spirit by his determination , lead and strong personality . He has shewn himself to be an officer of remarkable judgement and great technical ability . 
 In September 1918 , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order . His citation , signed by Major General Charles Rosenthal , read : 
 This officer has commanded the 14th Battery from 8th May 1918 to the present date [ September 1918 ] . During the recent operations on the Somme he has shown conspicuous activity and ability and as Group liaison with Infantry Brigades has earned great praise from Infantry Brigade commanders for his conscientious and untiring work . The work and appearance of his Battery both when in and out of the line , has been excellent , and his sound judgement and technical ability have been of the greatest assistance to his Brigade . 
 Berryman was later nominated for a bar to his Distinguished Service Order for the September 1918 fighting , but this was subsequently downgraded to a second Mention in Despatches . He was wounded in the right eye in September 1918 while he was commanding the 14th Field Artillery Battery . Although his wound was serious enough to warrant hospitalisation , there was no permanent damage to his vision . However , it was the end of his career as a battery commander , as the Army took the opportunity to transfer him to a staff post . From 28 October 1918 to 1 July 1919 , he was Brigade Major of the 7th Infantry Brigade . With the war over , he returned to Australia in October 1919 . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Berryman was appointed to the Staff Corps on 1 October 1920 . Although he was entitled to keep his AIF rank of major as an honorary rank , his substantive rank — and pay grade — was still lieutenant . Promotion was painfully slow . He was promoted to captain and brevet major on 1 March 1923 , but was not promoted to the substantive rank of major until 1 March 1935 . 
 Berryman attended the Royal Military Academy , Woolwich , from 1920 to 1923 . On returning to Australia , he became an inspecting ordnance officer at the 2nd Military District . From its headquarters at Victoria Barracks , Sydney , the 2nd Military District administered the Army in most of New South Wales . He enrolled in a Bachelor of Science program at the University of Sydney . On 30 November 1925 , he married Muriel Whipp . They eventually had a daughter and a son . 
 Berryman discontinued his university studies to prepare for the entrance examination for Staff College , Camberley . Eighteen Australian Army officers sat the exam that year , but only Berryman and one other officer passed . Only two Australian officers were accepted into staff college each year , so Berryman 's attendance from 1926 to 1928 marked him out as one of the Australian Army 's rising talents . It also allowed him to forge useful contacts with the British Army . Berryman later recalled , " The advantage of this was that in war we had the same doctrine of tactics and administration , which was essential if we had to work together . More than that , the officers who had to carry out their duties in cooperation knew each other personally . " After graduation he was posted to the High Commission of Australia , London , from 1929 to 1932 , where he served under the Military Liaison Officer , Major General Julius Bruche . 
 After nearly twenty years as a major , Berryman was promoted to brevet lieutenant colonel on 12 May 1935 . Promotion to substantive rank , which carried the rank 's pay as well as status , occurred on 1 July 1938 , when he became Assistant Director of Military Operations at Army Headquarters . From December 1938 to April 1940 he was General Staff Officer Grade 1 ( GSO1 ) of the 3rd Division . The slow rate of promotion of regular officers in the inter @-@ war years fostered a sense of injustice and frustration among officers with good war records who found themselves outranked by Militia officers who had enjoyed faster promotion . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Libya = = = 
 The final straw for many regular officers was Prime Minister Robert Menzies ' announcement that all commands in the Second AIF would go to Militia officers , which Berryman considered " a damn insult to the professional soldier , calculated to split the Army down the centre . We were to be the hewers of wood and the drawers of water . We , the only people who really knew the job , were to assist these Militia fellows . " 
 Berryman joined the Second AIF on 4 April 1940 with the rank of full colonel , receiving the AIF serial number of <unk> , and became General Staff Officer Grade 1 ( GSO1 ) of Major General Iven Mackay 's 6th Division , in succession to Sydney Rowell who stepped up to become chief of staff of I Corps . Berryman soon established a good working relationship with Mackay . Despite the friction between Militia and Staff Corps officers , Berryman chose to assess officers on performance . This meant that while Berryman viewed some Militia officers , like Brigadier Stanley Savige of the 17th Infantry Brigade , with disdain , he maintained good relations with others . There were also personal and professional rivalries with other Staff Corps officers , such as Alan Vasey . Yet even those who disliked Berryman personally for his lack of patience and tact and referred to him as " Berry the Bastard " respected his abilities as a staff officer . 
 Mackay and Berryman were determined that the Battle of Bardia would not be a repeat of the disastrous landing at Anzac Cove in 1915 . Berryman 's talent for operational staff work came to the fore . From studies of aerial photographs , he selected a spot for the attack where the terrain was most favourable . His plan provided for the coordination of infantry , armour and artillery . While at times he proved secretive and hard to deal with , during the battle his forceful personality provided a good foil to the sometimes indecisive Mackay . Later that month Berryman planned the equally successful Battle of Tobruk . For his services in this campaign , he was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) . 
 = = = Syria = = = 
 In January 1941 , Berryman became Commander , Royal Artillery , in Arthur " Tubby " Allen 's 7th Division , and was promoted to brigadier . During the Syria @-@ Lebanon campaign , Berryman demonstrated that he was a thrusting commander who led from the front and repeatedly demonstrated his coolness under fire . When his headquarters came under shell fire for the first time , Berryman sat calmly eating his breakfast " among the flying brick dust and bursting shells " , simply telling the men to shut the door , " so they can eat breakfast without being covered in dust " . 
 During the Vichy French counterattack , Berryman was given command of the Australian forces in the centre of the position around Merdjayoun . This scratch force became known as " Berryforce " . His mission was to check the enemy advance in the Merdjayoun area . Berryman decided that the best way to do this would be to recapture Merdjayoun . This presented considerable difficulty , for although his force contained two infantry battalions , the 2 / 25th and 2 / 33rd , and a pioneer battalion , the 2 / 2nd , his headquarters was not equipped to control a battle in the manner of an infantry brigade , as it lacked appropriate staff and communications . Moreover , while he was supported by mechanised cavalry and 22 artillery pieces , the opposing French forces had tanks . 
 For the next two weeks , the outnumbered Berryforce attempted to retake the strategically important town in the Battle of Merdjayoun . His first attempt was a failure . After carrying out a personal reconnaissance on 18 June , Berryman tried again . This time his attack was halted by staunch defence by the French Foreign Legion and tanks . Berryman then tried a different approach . Instead of attempting to capture the town , he seized high ground overlooking the French supply lines . Faced with being cut off , the French withdrew from the town . Berryforce was then dissolved and Berryman returned to his role as commander of the 7th Division artillery . 
 The 7th Division was now concentrated in the coastal sector . Berryman clashed with Brigadier Jack Stevens of the 21st Infantry Brigade over the siting of Berryman 's artillery observation posts , which were forward of the infantry 's front lines . Berryman wanted Stevens ' positions advanced so as to obtain effective observation of the enemy 's lines for Berryman 's gunners . Stevens refused , hampering Berryman 's efforts to support him in the Battle of Damour . Despite this , Berryman implemented an effective artillery plan . In the final stage of the battle , Berryman , without authority , ordered Lieutenant Colonel Denzil MacArthur @-@ Onslow of the 2 / 6th Cavalry Regiment to pursue the retreating French forces , but was overruled by Savige and Allen . For his part in the campaign , Berryman received a third Mention in Despatches . 
 = = = Papua = = = 
 On 3 August 1941 , Berryman became Brigadier , General Staff ( chief of staff ) of I Corps under Lieutenant General John Lavarack , again in succession to Rowell , who became Deputy Chief of the General Staff ( DCGS ) . Berryman arrived in Jakarta by air with the advanced party of the I Corps headquarters staff on 26 January 1942 to plan its defence . Berryman reconnoitred Java and prepared an appreciation of the situation . Berryman also attempted to find out as much as possible about Japanese tactics through interviewing Colonel Ian <unk> Stewart . This information found its way into papers circulated throughout the Army in Australia . It soon became apparent that the situation was hopeless and any troops committed to the defence of Java would be lost . 
 Berryman returned to Australia , where he was promoted to major general on 6 April 1942 , when he became Major General , General Staff ( chief of staff ) of Lavarack 's First Army . On 14 September 1942 , Berryman became DCGS under the Commander in Chief , General Sir Sir Thomas Blamey , in succession to Vasey . When New Guinea Force split into a rear headquarters under Blamey and an advanced headquarters under Lieutenant General Edmund Herring , so the latter could go forward to direct the Battle of Buna @-@ Gona , Blamey brought Berryman up from Advanced LHQ in Brisbane to simultaneously act as chief of staff of New Guinea Force from 11 December 1942 . Berryman formed a very close professional and personal relationship with Blamey , and henceforth Berryman would be Blamey 's chief of staff and head of operational planning , which made him " one of the most important officers in the Australian Army in its struggle against the Japanese . " 
 = = = New Guinea = = = 
 Blamey and Berryman remained close for the rest of the war , and Blamey came to rely heavily on Berryman for advice . It was Berryman who was sent to Wau to investigate the difficulties that Savige was having , and it was Berryman who exonerated Savige . " I reported the situation [ to Blamey and Herring ] , " Berryman record in his diary , " and said Savige had done well and we had misjudged him . " Berryman was intimately involved with the planning of the Salamaua @-@ Lae campaign , working closely with Brigadier General Stephen J. Chamberlin at General Douglas MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) in Brisbane . Berryman established good working relations with the Americans , even though their staff practices were quite different from those of the Australian Army . 
 Berryman was also involved in the plan 's execution , once more becoming chief of staff at New Guinea Force under Blamey in August 1943 . Berryman was frustrated at the failure of Vasey 's 7th Division to destroy the Japanese retreating from Lae , and personally annoyed by the way that Vasey forwarded compliments to Major General Ennis Whitehead while leaving any complaints about air support to be taken up by Berryman . Berryman was next involved with the planning for the landing at Finschhafen , brokering a compromise landing plan between Rear Admiral Daniel E. Barbey and Lieutenant General Sir Edmund Herring . When Berryman discovered that the United States Seventh Fleet did not intend to reinforce the 9th Division he immediately went to Blamey , who took the matter up with MacArthur . However , it was Berryman who brokered a compromise deal with Vice Admiral Arthur S. Carpender to reinforce Finschhafen with a battalion in APDs . 
 On 7 November 1943 , Berryman became acting commander of II Corps , a post which became permanent on 20 January 1944 , superseding Vasey , whose 7th Division was diplomatically placed directly under Lieutenant General Sir Leslie Morshead 's New Guinea Force . II Corps was left with the 5th and 9th Divisions . Berryman was promoted to lieutenant general on 20 January 1944 . As in Syria , Berryman proved a hard @-@ driving commander . In December 1943 , II Corps broke out of the position around Finschhafen and began a pursuit along the coast . Whenever the Japanese Army attempted to make a stand , Berryman attacked with 25 @-@ pounder artillery barrages and Matilda tanks . Berryman was aware that seasonal changes were making the surf rougher and making it ever harder to operate the US Army landing craft ( LCMs ) and Australian Army amphibious trucks ( DUKWs ) that he depended on for the logistical support of his troops , but he realised that the Japanese Army 's supply difficulties were greater than his own , and he gambled that if he pushed hard enough the Japanese would be unable to regroup and organise a successful defence . 
 In the first phase of the Battle of Sio , the advance from Finschhafen to Sio , 3 @,@ 099 Japanese dead were counted and 38 prisoners taken , at a cost of 8 Australians killed and 48 wounded . In the 5th Division 's subsequent drive from Sio to link up with the US 32nd Infantry Division at Saidor , 734 Japanese were killed and 1 @,@ 775 found dead , while 48 prisoners were taken . Australian casualties came to 4 killed and 6 wounded . MacArthur considered Berryman 's performance " quite brilliant " . For his part in the campaign , Berryman was made a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) on 8 March 1945 . 
 = = = Borneo = = = 
 II Corps was renumbered I Corps on 13 April 1944 and returned to Australia , where Blamey gave Berryman his next assignment . In preparation for the Philippines Campaign , General MacArthur moved the advanced element of GHQ to Hollandia in Dutch West Papua , where it opened in late August 1944 . To maintain contact with GHQ , Blamey formed a new headquarters , Forward Echelon LHQ , which opened at Hollandia on 7 September under Berryman , who became Blamey 's personal representative at GHQ . Forward Echelon LHQ subsequently moved with GHQ to Leyte in February 1945 , and Manila in April 1945 . Berryman 's role was to " safeguard Australian interests " at GHQ , but he also defended GHQ against criticism from the Australian Army . As well as liaising with GHQ , Forward Echelon LHQ became responsible for planning operations involving Australian troops . It worked on plans for operations on Luzon and Mindanao before it was finally decided that Borneo would be the Australian Army 's next objective . In all of this <unk> kept in close contact with Blamey , and the two were Australian Army representatives at the Japanese surrender in Tokyo Bay in September 1945 . For his services in the final campaigns , Berryman received a fourth and final Mention in Despatches on 6 March 1947 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the war , Berryman took charge of Eastern Command , an appointment he held from March 1946 until his retirement at age 60 in April 1954 . Berryman became known for his involvement in charitable organisations such as the War Widows Association , and as head of the Remembrance Drive Project . For this and his commitment to beautifying the Army barracks , Berryman became colloquially known in the Army as " Frank the <unk> " . 
 In June 1949 , the country was rocked by the 1949 Australian coal strike . The strike began when stocks of coal were already low , especially in New South Wales , and rationing was introduced . Prime Minister Ben Chifley turned to the Army to get the troops to mine coal . This became possible when the transport unions agreed to transport coal that was mined . Responsibility for planning and organising the effort fell to Berryman . Soldiers began mining at Muswellbrook and Lithgow on 1 August , and by 15 August , when the strike ended , some 4 @,@ 000 soldiers and airmen were employed . They continued work until production was fully restored . 
 Berryman hoped to become Chief of the General Staff in succession to Lieutenant General Vernon Sturdee but he was seen as a " Blamey man " by Chifley and his Labor government colleagues , who disliked the former Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . The job was instead given to Rowell . The United States government awarded Berryman the Medal of Freedom with Silver Palm in 1948 . Following the change of government in 1949 , Berryman lobbied Sir Eric Harrison , the Liberal Minister for Defence Production , for the job on the retirement of Rowell in 1954 , but he was now considered too old for the job . 
 Berryman became the Director General of the Royal Tour of Queen Elizabeth II in 1954 , for which he was made a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order ( KCVO ) . He was Chief Executive Officer of the Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales from 1954 to 1961 . He died on 28 May 1981 at Rose Bay , New South Wales , and was cremated with full military honours . At the time of his funeral the Ambassador for Lebanon , Raymond <unk> , wrote in the Canberra Times : " The inhabitants of Jezzine will never forget General Berryman , who liberated their town from the forces of the Vichy French in collaboration with the Italian and German forces . He was for them not only a great general but also a great benefactor who provided them with food supplies and medical care . In fact he was the example of humanitarianism " . 
 = College of All Saints , Maidstone = 
 The College of All Saints was an ecclesiastical college in Maidstone , Kent , England , founded in 1395 by Archbishop Courtenay . It was part of the establishment of the nearby Archbishop 's Palace , but was closed in 1546 . The College church was the neighbouring Church of All Saints . Following its closure , the College estate was sold . The buildings and land passed through the ownership of three aristocratic families , being farmed until the late 19th century . A number of the College 's buildings survive and all are listed buildings . Additionally , the whole site of the College is protected as a scheduled monument . 
