 = = History = = 
 The College was founded by Archbishop of Canterbury William Courtenay in 1395 . Courtenay died in 1396 and the College and church were completed by his successor , Thomas Arundel . Richard II endowed the College with land and income from the Hospital of St Peter and St Paul in Maidstone and from the parishes of Linton , Farleigh , Sutton and <unk> . The College was also granted the advowsons for the parishes . To cover the cost of building the College , Courtenay obtained a bull to levy a charge of fourpence in the pound on all ecclesiastical revenue raised in his archbishopric . For most of its existence , the college had an establishment of a master and six chaplains . 
 Masters of the College between its founding and its dissolution were : 
 When the College was closed in 1546 following the passing of the Chantries Act , its annual income was valued at £ 208 6s 2d ( equivalent to £ 111 @,@ 590 in 2015 ) . The church and the College were separated ; the church became the parish church for the whole of Maidstone and the College and its lands were sold . Sixteen members of the College 's establishment were granted pensions totalling £ 100 17s . In 1549 , the College estate was granted to George Brooke , Baron Cobham for the sum of £ 1081 18s 1d ( equivalent to £ 468 @,@ 540 in 2015 ) . Plate and other valuables belonging to the College were sold for £ 200 ( equivalent to £ 86 @,@ 610 in 2015 ) . 
 Much of the Cobham family 's estate was forfeited to the Crown in 1603 when his grandson , Henry Brooke , the 11th Baron Cobham , was charged with high treason for his part in the Main Plot against James I. The College was granted for life to the 11th Baron 's wife after which it reverted to Robert Cecil , 1st Earl of Salisbury , husband of Baron Cobham 's sister . The College remained in the ownership of the Cecil family until 1697 when it was sold to Sir Robert Marsham of Mote House . The College estate was subsequently owned by Marsham 's heirs , the Earls of Romney . 
 The College buildings were used as a farm into the 19th century , until the expansion of Maidstone led to their demolition as the neighbouring area was developed . Part of the site was developed in the late 19th century for the <unk> Almshouses , a collection of grade II listed buildings . The buildings are currently owned by Maidstone Borough Council having been donated to the borough by Sir Garrard Tyrwhitt @-@ Drake , mayor of the borough in 1949 – 50 . A plaque commemorating the presentation is fixed inside the archway of the Gatehouse . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 The College , like the Church of All Saints , is constructed of Kentish rag @-@ stone in the Perpendicular style . The main building , a two @-@ storey structure with attic , was mostly built in the 14th century and served originally as the Master 's house . Some later 18th century alterations have been made and later windows added . The building contains a collar beam roof and a 16th @-@ century staircase , moulded ceiling and aumbry cupboard . Poste records in his 1847 history of the College that some of the rooms retained traces of decorative wall painting . 
 The College Gateway to the north of the site is a three @-@ storey rectangular tower with a two @-@ storey stone @-@ ribbed vaulted archway through it with an exterior opening 8 feet 11 inches ( 2 @.@ 72 m ) wide with a pedestrian opening 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) wide alongside . The ground floor room to the east of the archway was the College bakehouse where evidence existed prior to the 1845 alterations of a large bakery oven . The room on the west side of the archway housed the porter . The roof of the gateway tower is hipped , projecting above a crenellated parapet . A small turret is located in the south @-@ west corner . Adjacent to the tower on the west side is a two @-@ storey building that contained the College refectory , kitchen and scullery on the ground floor with a dormitory and infirmary on the first floor . Poste records that restoration and alterations carried out in 1845 included the removal of part of a range of rooms and cloisters attached to the main building as well as separate farm buildings including oast houses . On the north @-@ west corner of this building is a small three @-@ storey tower known as the River Tower or Muniment Tower . Poste records that around 1847 a peaked roof on the river tower was removed and replaced with a lower roof not visible above the parapet . 
 The two @-@ storey Master 's Tower was the original access to the College from the river . A single @-@ storey structure is attached to the south side . The ruined gateway stands to the south separated from the other structures by the almshouses . Poste records that in 1847 it stood between two barns , neither of which now remain . It consists of a pointed arch for carriages in a roughly coursed rag @-@ stone wall flanked by buttress walls on each side . 
 The Gateway and refectory are listed Grade I , the Master 's house is listed Grade II * and the Master 's Tower and the ruined gateway are listed Grade II . The College site is also a scheduled monument with the protection covering the ruined gateway and buried remains of demolished buildings . 
 = Battle of Salamis ( 306 BC ) = 
 The naval Battle of Salamis in 306 BC took place near Salamis , Cyprus between the fleets of Ptolemy I of Egypt and Antigonus I <unk> , two of the Diadochi , the generals who , after the death of Alexander the Great , fought each other for control of his empire . Antigonus ' fleet was led by his son Demetrius , who had invaded Cyprus and was besieging Ptolemy 's brother Menelaus at Salamis . The battle was a complete victory for Demetrius , and resulted in the surrender of Menelaus and his capture of Cyprus . As a result , Antigonus assumed the royal title that had been vacant since the murder of Alexander 's underage son , followed by the other Diadochi soon after . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the wars of the Diadochi that followed the death of Alexander the Great , Ptolemy , who had seized control of Egypt , had taken over the island of Cyprus and used it as a base of operations against his rival Antigonus I <unk> . From Cyprus , Ptolemy 's forces were able to raid the coasts of Syria and Asia Minor . In early 306 BC , Antigonus resolved to remove this threat , and ordered his son , Demetrius , to capture the island . Demetrius at the time was in Greece , where he had in the previous year overthrown the garrison installed in Athens by the ruler of Macedon , Cassander . The city , along with neighbouring Megara , was restored to democratic rule , and allied itself with Demetrius . As a result , when Demetrius sailed from Athens in spring 306 to capture Cyprus , he was accompanied by 30 Athenian quadriremes . 
 Crossing the Aegean , Demetrius made for the coast of Caria , whence he called upon the Rhodians to join him , per their alliance with his father . The Rhodians , however , who maintained good relations with Ptolemy , refused . Going on to Cilicia , where he was reinforced with more troops , Demetrius then crossed over to Cyprus with an army of 15 @,@ 000 infantry and 500 cavalry . This was accompanied by a fleet numbering 53 heavy ships — 7 <unk> , 10 <unk> , 20 quinqueremes — and upwards of 110 lighter vessels — triremes and quadriremes — although the exact numbers are somewhat unclear . He was opposed by Ptolemy 's brother , Menelaus , who disposed of 12 @,@ 000 infantry , 800 cavalry , and 60 ships . 
 Demetrius landed on the <unk> Peninsula on the northeast of the island and captured the towns of <unk> and Urania . Leaving his fleet there , he then marched on land against the city of Salamis . Menelaus confronted Demetrius in battle some five miles from the city , but was defeated with heavy loss ( 1 @,@ 000 dead and 3 @,@ 000 captured ) and had to retreat behind its walls . Demetrius then brought his fleet and siege train into action and laid siege to the city . This was the first of the sieges that would earn Demetrius his later nickname of " <unk> " ( " the <unk> " ) , featuring for the first time a nine @-@ story siege tower or <unk> . Demetrius ' machines opened a breach in the wall and his subsequent assault nearly proved decisive , but Menelaus was able to repel the attack and burn down the siege machines . In the meantime , in response to his brother 's appeals , Ptolemy himself had arrived at <unk> at the head of 140 warships ( all quadriremes and quinqueremes ) and over 10 @,@ 000 men on 200 transports . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Ptolemy decided to try to make a night dash from Citium , round Cape <unk> , to Salamis , hoping to surprise Demetrius and combine his fleet with his brother ’ s sixty ships so they could then outnumber Demetrius . Demetrius , however , informed of Ptolemy 's arrival , took steps just in order to prevent this from happening : he equipped his ships with missile @-@ throwers , brought aboard his best troops as marines , and sailed his fleet to anchor just outside the harbour of the city , bottling up Menelaus in the harbour and interposing himself between the two enemy fleets . This meant that Demetrius took a calculated risk that he would be able to defeat Ptolemy before Menelaus could sail out of the harbour and attack him in the rear . 
 As Ptolemy 's fleet came into view of the city right after dawn on the day of the battle , they found Demetrius ' fleet deployed and waiting for them . His fleet augmented to some 180 vessels with ships captured in Cyprus , Demetrius concentrated the bulk against Ptolemy , leaving only 10 quinqueremes under Antisthenes to blockade the narrow exit of the harbour of Salamis and prevent or at least delay Menelaus ' intervention . Demetrius had gathered his best ships — the 7 Phoenician <unk> , the Athenian squadron , and behind them 10 <unk> and 10 <unk> — on the left , under command of the admiral Medius of Larissa . Medius was apparently the actual overall commander of the fleet , although Demetrius himself was also present on the left wing on his flagship , a <unk> . His centre comprised the lightest vessels in his fleet , under the command of <unk> of Samos and Marsyas of Pella , while the right was entrusted to Hegesippus of Halicarnassus and <unk> of Cos , the chief pilot ( <unk> , the second @-@ in @-@ command after Medius ) of the fleet . Ptolemy quickly matched his fleet to mirror his opponent 's dispositions : he ordered the transports carrying his army to fall back , and massed the largest ships of his fleet on his own left , which he commanded in person . As the historian Richard <unk> writes , " the battle was in effect a race to see which of the two dynasts could first defeat the enemy 's right wing and turn to attack the enemy 's center " , with the " added question of whether or not Menelaus would succeed in breaking out of Salamis in time to intervene " . 
 According to Diodorus Siculus , who provides the fullest , and probably most reliable , account of the battle , when the two fleets were about three stadia apart , both Demetrius and Ptolemy raised the signal to attack ( a gilded shield ) , and the two fleets charged each other . Diodorus describes the ramming and boarding actions , as well as the missile exchanges , that dominated the fight : 
 [ U ] sing their bows and their ballistae at first , then their javelins in a shower , the men wounded those who were within range ; then when the ships had come close together and the encounter was about to take place with violence , the soldiers on the decks crouched down and the oarsmen , spurred on by the signalmen , bent more desperately to their oars . As the ships drove together with force and violence , in some cases they swept off each other 's oars so that the ships became useless for flight or pursuit , and the men who were on board , though eager for a fight , were prevented from joining in the battle ; but where the ships had met prow to prow with their rams , they drew back for another charge , and the soldiers on board shot at each other with effect since the mark was close at hand for each party . Some of the men , when their captains had delivered a broadside blow and the rams had become firmly fixed , leaped aboard the ships of the enemy , receiving and giving severe wounds ; for certain of them , after grasping the rail of a ship that was drawing near , missed their footing , fell into the sea , and at once were killed with spears by those who stood above them ; and others , making good their intent , slew some of the enemy and , forcing others along the narrow deck , drove them into the sea . As a whole the fighting was varied and full of surprises : many times those who were weaker got the upper hand because of the height of their ships , and those who were stronger were foiled by inferiority of position and by the irregularity with which things happen in fighting of this kind . 
 Demetrius himself won distinction for his bravery when Ptolemy 's men boarded his flagship , " by hurling his javelins at some of them and by striking others at close range with his spear " , despite being himself subject to " many missiles of all sorts " . Of his three bodyguards , who tried to protect him with their shields , one was killed and the others severely wounded . The Athenians also fought with distinction , as Demetrius awarded 1 @,@ 200 suits of armour to Athens from the spoils taken . In the end , both left wings proved victorious , but it was Demetrius who won the race : by the time Ptolemy turned to attack Demetrius ' centre , he found the rest of his fleet already defeated and in flight . Menelaus ' 60 ships meanwhile , under the command of <unk> , managed to break through Demetrius ' blockade , only to find the battle already lost . Demetrius tasked Neon and <unk> with pursuing the defeated enemy and picking up the men from the sea , and returned in triumph to his camp . His fleet had only lost 20 damaged ships , all of which returned to service after repairs , while Ptolemy 's fleet had lost 80 ships . More importantly , Demetrius ' forces had captured fully 40 of Ptolemy 's warships intact with their crews , as well as over a hundred of the transports with some 8 @,@ 000 troops aboard . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following this defeat , Ptolemy retreated to Egypt , and Menelaus was forced to surrender Salamis and its garrison , further increasing Demetrius ' strength . Demetrius then moved to take over the rest of Cyprus , taking over the garrisons , some 16 @,@ 000 infantry and 800 cavalry , into his own army as well . Menelaus and other relatives and friends of Ptolemy , however , who had been captured , were soon sent back to Egypt with their personal possessions . 
 The victory at Salamis was used by Antigonus as a suitable pretext for his own royal proclamation , the Macedonian throne having lain vacant since the murder of Alexander IV of Macedon by Cassander in 309 BC . At the same time , Demetrius was raised to co @-@ king alongside his father . Antigonus ' assumption of the royal title was followed by an attempt to eliminate Ptolemy for good in a massive , but failed , invasion of Egypt in autumn 306 , and then by the celebrated , but equally unsuccessful , Siege of Rhodes by Demetrius in 305 – 304 BC . Finally , in 302 BC the remaining dynasts — Ptolemy , Cassander , Seleucus , and Lysimachus — having in turn assumed the royal title themselves , allied against Antigonus and defeated him in the Battle of <unk> in 301 BC . Antigonus was killed , and his realm was broken up and divided among the victors . 
 The Battle of Salamis is proposed by modern scholars as one of three possible naval battles — along with the Battle of <unk> ( 322 BC ) and the Battle of Cos ( 261 / 255 BC ) — that provided the occasion for the erection of the statue of the Nike of Samothrace . 
 = Best Mistake = 
 " Best Mistake " is a song by American recording artist Ariana Grande that features American hip hop recording artist Big Sean . The song served as a promotional single from Grande 's second studio album , My Everything ( 2014 ) , and was released at midnight on August 12 , 2014 . Written by <unk> " Blu June " Andrews , Brittany Coney , Grande , Big Sean , and produced by Key Wane , the song is a ballad with piano , string , and drum machine instrumentation that lyrically deals with a couple trying to decide on what their future , troubled relationship is going to be like . Grande has claimed it is her favorite track off My Everything . 
 " Best Mistake " has earned positive reviews from critics , who have praised the song 's production and Grande 's talent . However , response to Big Sean 's verse on the track has been mixed . It peaked on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 49 , and within the top 50 on other record charts in North America , Europe , and Oceania . On the US Digital Songs chart , it debuted at number six , making Grande the first act since Michael Jackson , and also the first female artist , to have three songs in the top ten on that chart the same week , with the other two songs being " Bang Bang " ( with Jessie J and Nicki Minaj ) and " Break Free " ( featuring Zedd ) . Grande and Big Sean have performed the song live , including at the iHeartRadio theater in Los Angeles . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " Best Mistake " was written by <unk> " Blu June " Andrews , Brittany Coney , Ariana Grande , Big Sean , Corey Jackson Carter , and with production , programming and instruments done by Key Wane . The vocals were produced by Curtis " Sauce " Wilson , with Gregg <unk> engineering Big Sean 's vocals . Serban Ghenea handled the mixing of the track , which was engineered by John Hanes , and finally the mix was mastered by Aya Merrill and Tom Coyne . It is a minimal hip @-@ hop piano ballad lament that utilizes instrumentation from strings and a drum machine . It is about a couple trying to " make up their minds about the future of their relationship , with deep affection buried underneath their problems . " Grande revealed that " Best Mistake " was her favorite track on My Everything : " I just think the world of [ Big Sean ] and I 'm obsessed with his writing on this song in particular . I 'm a huge fan of his in general but I feel like his writing on this song is so , so fantastic , it like strikes a chord in my heart . I love it so much . " 
 = = Release and commercial performance = = 
 Grande first confirmed the title of " Best Mistake " on June 28 , 2014 , the same day that she confirmed the name of her second studio album , My Everything . On July 8 , 2014 , Grande released a 15 @-@ second snippet of " Best Mistake " onto her Instagram profile . The song finally came out on August 12 , and the release added more speculation to the relationship rumors between Grande and Big Sean . 
 In the United States , shortly after its release , the song reached number two on the weekly Billboard Twitter Real @-@ Time chart and topped the iTunes singles chart . It sold 104 @,@ 000 units in its first week , landing at number six on the Digital Songs chart . This made Grande the first female to have three songs in the top ten on that chart , the other two being " Bang Bang " and " Break Free . " The last artist to do this was Michael Jackson , shortly after his death , on the issue dated July 18 , 2009 . The sales of " Best Mistake " also helped it land at number 49 on the Hot 100 . On the Canadian Hot 100 , it appeared at number 39 . 
 In European nations , " Best Mistake " debuted at number 49 and 10 on the Flanders Ultratop 50 and Urban chart respectively , number 29 on the Danish Tracklisten chart , 23 on the Finnish Singles Chart , 103 on the French SNEP chart , 5 on the Billboard Greek Digital chart , 67 on the Netherlands Mega Single Top 100 , 35 on the Spain PROMUSICAE chart , and number 154 on the UK Singles Chart . In Oceania , it reached number 45 and 19 on the Australian ARIA pop and urban songs chart respectively , and 29 on the Official New Zealand Music Chart . On the Japan Hot 100 , it peaked at the 74th spot . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Best Mistake " received acclaim from critics . Evan Sawdey , a Popmatters interview Editor , called it the second best song from My Everything , coming close to " Love Me Harder " , and Bustle writer Kadeen Griffiths called it " one of Grande 's best love songs so far . " <unk> 's Caitlin Beck said it was " sure to be another hit ! " Carolyn Menyes of the Music Times applauded Grande for her calming vocals and transition into a more mature sound of music . Billboard 's Jason Lipshutz called the production " impressive " and said the song " rows stickier upon each listen " . Digital Spy writer Lewis Corner and Entertainmentwise 's Shaun Kitchener noted the song showed her R & B roots , the latter stating that it " wouldn 't have sounded out of place on Kelly Rowland 's under @-@ rated last album [ Talk a Good Game ] . " The Official Charts Company critic Rob Copsey felt it was " like an extension of Yours Truly , albeit moodier and more grown up . " Brennan Carley of Spin called it " classic Grande , <unk> any of the bells and whistles that she 's fond of , instead focusing entirely on her carefully sung vocals and the quiet piano line in the song 's background . " Newsday critic Glenn Gamboa described " Best Mistake " as a " gorgeous hip @-@ hop " song that " showcases her wide @-@ ranging voice , without focusing on the upper notes too much . " Sydney Gore of The 405 called it an improvement of the two 's previous collaboration " Right There " , writing that " the singer and rapper serenade us on the grounds that sneaking around with each other was the best mistake they ever made . " 
 There were , however , some mixed reviews of " Best Mistake " . Idolator 's Kathy Iandoli described it as " the average looking cousin of their previous duet " Right There " " . Reviewing for Slant Magazine , Andrew Chan said it " makes the mistake of hemming her into her frail middle register , where she has a habit of delivering every word as if it were a pout . " Big Sean 's appearance on " Best Mistake " also got varied reception . Pitchfork Media 's Meaghan Garvey said his rap on the track made " a mockery of the song 's serious tone with hysterically awful lines like " How can we keep the feelings fresh / How do we <unk> it ? " " Lipshutz found his verse " unnecessary , yet [ it ] has morphed into an interesting confessional now that the dating rumors are on . " Sawdey called it a " pretty outstanding verse , " with " his own voice never overpowering the sparse atmosphere , his rhymes measured and metered in a way that fits the song perfectly " , while James Shotwell of Under the Gun Review said " Grande is a treat , but I think it 's Big Sean who steals the show . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In 2014 , Grande and Big Sean performed " Best Mistake " on the Honda Stage at the iHeartRadio Theater in Los Angeles . They also performed " Best Mistake " at A Very Grammy Christmas on November 18 , 2014 . Grande also performed the song during The Honeymoon Tour . Big Sean performed the song with her at the tour 's stop in Detroit . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of My Everything . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Sales = = 
 = Thomas Cranmer = 
 Thomas Cranmer ( 2 July 1489 – 21 March 1556 ) was a leader of the English Reformation and Archbishop of Canterbury during the reigns of Henry VIII , Edward VI and , for a short time , Mary I. He helped build the case for the annulment of Henry 's marriage to Catherine of Aragon , which was one of the causes of the separation of the English Church from union with the Holy See . Along with Thomas Cromwell , he supported the principle of Royal Supremacy , in which the king was considered sovereign over the Church within his realm . 
 During Cranmer 's tenure as Archbishop of Canterbury , he was responsible for establishing the first doctrinal and liturgical structures of the reformed Church of England . Under Henry 's rule , Cranmer did not make many radical changes in the Church , due to power struggles between religious conservatives and reformers . However , he succeeded in publishing the first officially authorised vernacular service , the Exhortation and Litany . 
 When Edward came to the throne , Cranmer was able to promote major reforms . He wrote and compiled the first two editions of the Book of Common Prayer , a complete liturgy for the English Church . With the assistance of several Continental reformers to whom he gave refuge , he changed doctrine in areas such as the Eucharist , clerical celibacy , the role of images in places of worship , and the veneration of saints . Cranmer promulgated the new doctrines through the Prayer Book , the Homilies and other publications . 
 After the accession of the Roman Catholic Mary I , Cranmer was put on trial for treason and heresy . Imprisoned for over two years and under pressure from Church authorities , he made several recantations and apparently reconciled himself with the Roman Catholic Church . However , on the day of his execution , he withdrew his recantations , to die a heretic to Roman Catholics and a martyr for the principles of the English Reformation . Cranmer 's death was immortalised in Foxe 's Book of Martyrs and his legacy lives on within the Church of England through the Book of Common Prayer and the Thirty @-@ Nine Articles , an Anglican statement of faith derived from his work . 
 = = Early years ( 1489 – 1527 ) = = 
 Cranmer was born in 1489 in <unk> in Nottinghamshire , England . His parents , Thomas and Agnes ( née Hatfield ) Cranmer , were of modest wealth and were not members of the aristocracy . Their oldest son , John , inherited the family estate , whereas Thomas and his younger brother Edmund were placed on the path to a clerical career . Today historians know nothing definite about Cranmer ’ s early schooling . He probably attended a grammar school in his village . At the age of fourteen , two years after the death of his father , he was sent to the newly created Jesus College , Cambridge . It took him a surprisingly long eight years to reach his Bachelor of Arts degree following a curriculum of logic , classical literature and philosophy . During this time , he began to collect medieval scholastic books , which he preserved faithfully throughout his life . For his master 's degree he took a different course of study , concentrating on the humanists , Jacques Lefèvre d <unk> and Erasmus . This time he progressed with no special delay , finishing the course in three years . Shortly after receiving his Master of Arts degree in 1515 , he was elected to a Fellowship of Jesus College . 
 Sometime after Cranmer took his MA , he married a woman named Joan . Although he was not yet a priest , he was forced to forfeit his fellowship , resulting in the loss of his residence at Jesus College . To support himself and his wife , he took a job as a reader at Buckingham Hall ( later reformed as Magdalene College ) . When Joan died during her first childbirth , Jesus College showed its regard for Cranmer by reinstating his fellowship . He began studying theology and by 1520 he had been ordained , the university already having named him as one of their preachers . He received his Doctor of Divinity degree in 1526 . 
 Not much is known about Cranmer ’ s thoughts and experiences during his three decades at Cambridge . Traditionally , he has been portrayed as a humanist whose enthusiasm for biblical scholarship prepared him for the adoption of Lutheran ideas , which were spreading during the 1520s . However , a study of his marginalia reveals an early antipathy to Martin Luther and an admiration for Erasmus . When Cardinal Wolsey , the king 's Lord Chancellor , selected several Cambridge scholars , including Edward Lee , Stephen Gardiner and Richard Sampson , to be diplomats throughout Europe , Cranmer was chosen to take a minor role in the English embassy in Spain . Two recently discovered letters written by Cranmer describe an early encounter with the king , Henry VIII of England : upon Cranmer 's return from Spain , in June 1527 , the king personally interviewed Cranmer for half an hour . Cranmer described the king as " the kindest of princes " . 
 = = In the service of Henry VIII ( 1527 – 1532 ) = = 
 Henry VIII 's first marriage had its origins in 1502 when his elder brother , Arthur , died . Their father , Henry VII , then betrothed Arthur 's widow , Catherine of Aragon , to the future king . The betrothal immediately raised questions related to the biblical prohibition ( in Leviticus 18 and 20 ) against marriage to a brother ’ s wife . The couple married in 1509 and after a series of miscarriages , a daughter , Mary , was born in 1516 . By the 1520s , Henry still did not have a son to name as heir and he took this as a sure sign of God ’ s anger and made overtures to the Vatican about an annulment . He gave Cardinal Wolsey the task of prosecuting his case ; Wolsey began by consulting university experts . From 1527 , in addition to his duties as a Cambridge don , Cranmer assisted with the annulment proceedings . 
 In the summer of 1529 , Cranmer stayed with relatives in Waltham Holy Cross to avoid an outbreak of the plague in Cambridge . Two of his Cambridge associates , Stephen Gardiner and Edward Foxe , joined him . The three discussed the annulment issue and Cranmer suggested putting aside the legal case in Rome in favour of a general canvassing of opinions from university theologians throughout Europe . Henry showed much interest in the idea when Gardiner and Foxe presented him this plan . It is not known whether the king or his Lord Chancellor , Thomas More , explicitly approved the plan . Eventually it was implemented and Cranmer was requested to join the royal team in Rome to gather opinions from the universities . Edward Foxe coordinated the research effort and the team produced the Collectanea <unk> <unk> ( " The Sufficiently Abundant Collections " ) and The Determinations , historical and theological support for the argument that the king exercised supreme jurisdiction within his realm . 
 Cranmer ’ s first contact with a Continental reformer was with Simon Grynaeus , a humanist based in Basel , Switzerland , and a follower of the Swiss reformers , Huldrych Zwingli and Johannes Oecolampadius . In the summer of 1531 , Grynaeus took an extended visit to England to offer himself as an intermediary between the king and the Continental reformers . He struck up a friendship with Cranmer and after his return to Basel , he wrote about Cranmer to the German reformer Martin Bucer in Strasbourg . Grynaeus ' early contacts initiated Cranmer ’ s eventual relationship with the Strasbourg and Swiss reformers . 
 In January 1532 , Cranmer was appointed the resident ambassador at the court of the Holy Roman Emperor , Charles V. As the emperor travelled throughout his realm , Cranmer had to follow him to his residence in Ratisbon ( Regensburg ) . He passed through the Lutheran city of Nuremberg and saw for the first time the effects of the Reformation . When the Imperial Diet was moved to Nuremberg in the summer , he met the leading architect of the Nuremberg reforms , Andreas Osiander . They became good friends , and during that July Cranmer took the surprising action of marrying Margarete , the niece of Osiander 's wife . This was all the more remarkable given that the marriage required him to set aside his priestly vow of celibacy . He did not take her as his mistress , as was the prevailing custom with priests for whom celibacy was too rigorous . Scholars note that Cranmer had moved , however moderately at this stage , into identifying with certain Lutheran principles . This progress in his personal life , however , could not be matched in his political life as he was unable to persuade Charles , Catherine 's nephew , to support the annulment of his aunt 's marriage . 
 = = Appointed Archbishop of Canterbury ( 1532 – 1534 ) = = 
 While Cranmer was following Charles through Italy , he received a royal letter dated 1 October 1532 informing him that he had been appointed the new Archbishop of Canterbury , following the death of archbishop William Warham . Cranmer was ordered to return to England . The appointment had been secured by the family of Anne Boleyn , who was being courted by Henry . When Cranmer 's promotion became known in London , it caused great surprise as Cranmer had previously held only minor positions in the Church . Cranmer left Mantua on 19 November and arrived in England at the beginning of January . Henry personally financed the papal bulls necessary for Cranmer ’ s promotion to Canterbury . The bulls were easily acquired because the papal nuncio was under orders from Rome to please the English in an effort to prevent a final breach . The bulls arrived around 26 March 1533 and Cranmer was consecrated as archbishop on 30 March in St Stephen 's Chapel . Even while they were waiting for the bulls , Cranmer continued to work on the annulment proceedings , which required greater urgency after Anne announced her pregnancy . Henry and Anne were secretly married on 24 or 25 January 1533 in the presence of a handful of witnesses . Cranmer did not learn of the marriage until a fortnight later . 
 For the next few months , Cranmer and the king worked on establishing legal procedures on how the monarch 's marriage would be judged by his most senior clergy . Several drafts of the procedures have been preserved in letters written between the two . Once the procedures were agreed , Cranmer opened his court on 10 May , inviting Henry and Catherine of Aragon to appear . Gardiner represented the king ; Catherine did not appear or send a proxy . On 23 May Cranmer pronounced the judgement that Henry 's marriage with Catherine was against the law of God . He even issued a threat of excommunication if Henry did not stay away from Catherine . Henry was now free to marry and , on 28 May , Cranmer validated Henry and Anne ’ s marriage . On 1 June , Cranmer personally crowned and anointed Anne queen and delivered to her the sceptre and rod . Pope Clement VII was furious at this defiance , but he could not take decisive action as he was pressured by other monarchs to avoid an irreparable breach with England . However , on 9 July he provisionally excommunicated Henry and his advisers ( which included Cranmer ) unless he repudiated Anne by the end of September . Henry kept Anne as his wife and , on 7 September , Anne gave birth to Elizabeth . Cranmer baptised her immediately afterwards and acted as one of her godparents . 
 It is difficult to assess how Cranmer ’ s theological views had evolved since his Cambridge days . There is evidence that he continued to support humanism ; he renewed Erasmus ' pension that had previously been granted by Archbishop Warham . In June 1533 , he was confronted with the difficult task of not only disciplining a reformer , but also seeing him burnt at the stake . John Frith was condemned to death for his views on the eucharist : he denied the real presence . Cranmer personally tried to persuade him to change his views without success . Although he rejected Frith ’ s radicalism , by 1534 he clearly signalled that he had broken with Rome and that he had set a new theological course . He supported the cause of reform by gradually replacing the old guard in his ecclesiastical province with men who followed the new thinking such as Hugh Latimer . He intervened in religious disputes , supporting reformers to the disappointment of religious conservatives who desired to maintain the link with Rome . 
 = = Under the vicegerency ( 1535 – 1538 ) = = 
 Cranmer was not immediately accepted by the bishops within his province . When he attempted a canonical visitation , he had to avoid locations where a resident conservative bishop might make an embarrassing personal challenge to his authority . In 1535 , Cranmer had difficult encounters with several bishops , John <unk> , John Longland , and Stephen Gardiner among others . They objected to Cranmer ’ s power and title and argued that the Act of Supremacy did not define his role . This prompted Thomas Cromwell , the king 's chief minister , to activate and to take the office of the <unk> , the deputy supreme head of ecclesiastical affairs . He created another set of institutions that gave a clear structure to the royal supremacy . Hence , the archbishop was eclipsed by <unk> Cromwell in regards to the king 's spiritual jurisdiction . There is no evidence that Cranmer resented his position as junior partner . Although he was an exceptional scholar , he lacked the political ability to outface even clerical opponents . Those tasks were left to Cromwell . 
 On 29 January 1536 , when Anne miscarried a son , the king began to reflect again on the biblical prohibitions that had haunted him during his marriage with Catherine of Aragon . Shortly after the miscarriage , the king started to take an interest in Jane Seymour . By 24 April , he had commissioned Cromwell to prepare the case for a divorce . Unaware of these plans , Cranmer had continued to write letters to Cromwell on minor matters up to 22 April . Anne was sent to the Tower of London on 2 May , and Cranmer was urgently summoned by Cromwell . On the very next day , Cranmer wrote a letter to the king expressing his doubts about the queen ’ s guilt , highlighting his own esteem for Anne . After it was delivered , however , Cranmer was resigned to the fact that the end of Anne 's marriage was inevitable . On 16 May , he saw Anne in the Tower and heard her confession and the following day , he pronounced the marriage null and void . Two days later , Anne was executed ; Cranmer was one of the few who publicly mourned her death . 
 The vicegerency brought the pace of reforms under the control of the king . A balance was instituted between the conservatives and the reformers and this was seen in the Ten Articles , the first attempt at defining the beliefs of the Henrician Church . The articles had a two @-@ part structure . The first five articles showed the influence of the reformers by recognising only three of the former seven sacraments : baptism , eucharist , and penance . The last five articles concerned the roles of images , saints , rites and ceremonies , and purgatory , and they reflected the views of the traditionalists . Two early drafts of the document have been preserved and show different teams of theologians at work . The competition between the conservatives and reformers is revealed in rival editorial corrections made by Cranmer and Cuthbert Tunstall , the bishop of Durham . The end product had something that pleased and annoyed both sides of the debate . By 11 July , Cranmer , Cromwell , and the Convocation , the general assembly of the clergy , had subscribed to the Ten Articles . 
 In the autumn of 1536 , the north of England was convulsed in a series of uprisings collectively known as the Pilgrimage of Grace , the most serious opposition to Henry ’ s policies . Cromwell and Cranmer were the primary targets of the protesters ’ fury . Cromwell and the king worked furiously to quell the rebellion , while Cranmer kept a low profile . After it was clear that Henry 's regime was safe , the government took the initiative to remedy the evident inadequacy of the Ten Articles . The outcome after months of debate was The Institution of a Christian Man informally known from the first issue as the Bishops ' Book . The book was initially proposed in February 1537 in the first <unk> synod , ordered by Cromwell , for the whole Church . Cromwell opened the proceedings , but as the synod progressed , Cranmer and Foxe took on the chairmanship and the co @-@ ordination . Foxe did most of the final editing and the book was published in late September . 
 Even after publication , the book ’ s status remained vague because the king had not given his full support to it . In a draft letter , Henry noted that he had not read the book , but supported its printing . His attention was most likely occupied by the pregnancy of Jane Seymour and the birth of the male heir , Edward , that Henry had sought for so long . Jane died shortly after giving birth and her funeral was held on 12 November . That month Henry started to work on the Bishops ’ Book ; his amendments were sent to Cranmer , Sampson , and others for comment . Cranmer 's responses to the king were far more confrontational than his colleagues ' and he wrote at much greater length . They reveal unambiguous statements supporting reformed theology such as justification by faith or sola fide ( faith alone ) and predestination . However , his words did not convince the king . A new statement of faith would be delayed until 1543 with the publication of the King ’ s Book . 
 In 1538 , the king and Cromwell arranged with Lutheran princes to have detailed discussions on forming a political and religious alliance . Henry had been seeking a new embassy from the Schmalkaldic League since summer 1537 . The Lutherans were delighted by this and they sent a joint delegation from various German cities , including a colleague of Martin Luther , Friedrich <unk> . The delegates arrived in England on 27 May 1538 . After initial meetings with the king , Cromwell , and Cranmer , discussions on theological differences were transferred to Lambeth Palace under Cranmer ’ s chairmanship . Progress on an agreement was slow partly due to Cromwell being too busy to help expedite the proceedings and partly due to the negotiating team on the English side , which was evenly balanced between conservatives and reformers . The talks dragged on through the summer with the Germans becoming weary despite the Archbishop ’ s strenuous efforts . The negotiations , however , were fatally neutralised by an appointee of the king . Cranmer ’ s colleague , Edward Foxe , who sat on Henry ’ s Privy Council , had died earlier in the year . The king chose as his replacement Cranmer ’ s conservative rival , Cuthbert Tunstall , who was told to stay near Henry to give advice . On 5 August , when the German delegates sent a letter to the king regarding three items that particularly worried them ( compulsory clerical celibacy , the withholding of the chalice from the laity , and the maintenance of private masses for the dead ) , Tunstall was able to intervene for the king and to influence the decision . The result was a thorough dismissal by the king of many of the Germans ’ chief concerns . Although Cranmer begged the Germans to continue with the negotiations using the argument " to consider the many thousands of souls in England " at stake , they left on 1 October having made no substantial achievements . 
 = = Reforms reversed ( 1539 – 1542 ) = = 
 Continental reformer Philipp Melanchthon was aware that he was very much admired by Henry . In early 1539 , Melanchthon wrote several letters to Henry criticising his views on religion , in particular his support of clerical celibacy . By late April another delegation from the Lutheran princes arrived to build on Melanchthon ’ s exhortations . Cromwell wrote a letter to the king in support of the new Lutheran mission . However , the king had begun to change his stance and concentrated on wooing conservative opinion in England rather than reaching out to the Lutherans . On 28 April 1539 , Parliament met for the first time in three years . Cranmer was present , but Cromwell was unable to attend due to ill health . On 5 May the House of Lords created a committee with the customary religious balance between conservatives and reformers to examine and determine doctrine . However , the committee was given little time to do the detailed work needed for a thorough revision . On 16 May , the Duke of Norfolk noted that the committee had not agreed on anything , and proposed that the Lords examine six doctrinal questions — which eventually formed the basis of the Six Articles . They affirmed the conservative interpretation of doctrines such as the real presence , clerical celibacy , and the necessity of auricular confession , the private confession of sins to a priest . As the Act of the Six Articles neared passage in Parliament , Cranmer moved his wife and children out of England to safety . Up until this time , the family was kept quietly hidden , most likely in Ford Palace in Kent . The Act passed Parliament at the end of June and it forced Latimer and Nicholas <unk> to resign their dioceses given their outspoken opposition to the measure . 
 The setback for the reformers was short @-@ lived . By September , Henry was displeased with the results of the Act and its <unk> ; the ever @-@ loyal Cranmer and Cromwell were back in favour . The king asked his archbishop to write a new preface for the Great Bible , an English translation of the Bible that was first published in April 1539 under the direction of Cromwell . The preface was in the form of a sermon addressed to readers . As for Cromwell , he was delighted that his plan of a royal marriage between Henry and Anne of Cleves , the sister of a German prince was accepted by the king . In Cromwell 's view , the marriage could potentially bring back contacts with the Schmalkaldic League . Henry was dismayed with Anne when they first met on 1 January 1540 but married her reluctantly on 6 January in a ceremony officiated by Cranmer . However , the marriage ended in disaster as Henry decided shortly thereafter that he would request a royal divorce . This resulted in Henry being placed in an embarrassing position and Cromwell suffered the consequences . His old enemies , including the Duke of Norfolk , took advantage of the weakened Cromwell and he was arrested on 10 June . He immediately lost the support of all his friends , including Cranmer . However , as Cranmer had done for Anne Boleyn , he wrote a letter to the king defending the past work of Cromwell . Henry 's marriage to Anne of Cleves was quickly annulled on 9 July by the vice @-@ <unk> synod , now led by Cranmer and Gardiner . 
 Following the annulment , Cromwell was executed on 28 July . Cranmer now found himself in a politically prominent position , with no one else to shoulder the burden . Throughout the rest of Henry ’ s reign , he clung to Henry ’ s authority . The king had total trust in him and in return , Cranmer could not conceal anything from the king . At the end of June 1541 , Henry with his new wife , Catherine Howard , left for his first visit to the north of England . Cranmer was left in London as a member of a council taking care of matters for the king in his absence . His colleagues were Lord Chancellor Thomas Audley and Edward Seymour , Earl of Hertford . This was Cranmer 's first major piece of responsibility outside the Church . In October , while the king and queen were away , a reformer named John Lascelles revealed to Cranmer that Catherine engaged in extramarital affairs . Cranmer gave the information to Audley and Seymour and they decided to wait until Henry ’ s return . Afraid of angering the king , Audley and Seymour suggested that Cranmer inform Henry . Cranmer slipped a message to Henry during mass on All Saints Day . An investigation revealed the truth of the marital indiscretions and Catherine was executed in February 1542 . 
 = = Support from the king ( 1543 – 1547 ) = = 
 In 1543 , several conservative clergymen in Kent banded together to attack and denounce two reformers , Richard Turner and John Bland , before the Privy Council . They prepared articles to present to the Council , but at the last moment , additional denunciations were added by Stephen Gardiner ’ s nephew , Germain Gardiner . These new articles attacked Cranmer and listed his misdeeds back to 1541 . This document and the actions that followed were the basis of the so @-@ called <unk> ' Plot . The articles were delivered to the Council in London and were probably read on 22 April 1543 . The king most likely saw the articles against Cranmer that night . The archbishop , however , appeared unaware that an attack on his person was made . His commissioners in Lambeth dealt specifically with Turner ’ s case where he was acquitted , much to the fury of the conservatives . 
 While the plot against Cranmer was proceeding , the reformers were being attacked on other fronts . On 20 April , the Convocation reconvened to consider the revision of the Bishops ’ Book . Cranmer presided over the sub @-@ committees , but the conservatives were able to overturn many reforming ideas , including justification by faith . On 5 May , the new revision called A Necessary Doctrine and <unk> for any Christian Man or the King ’ s Book was released . Doctrinally , it was far more conservative than the Bishops ’ Book . On 10 May , the reformers received another blow . Parliament passed the Act for the Advancement of True Religion , which abolished " erroneous books " and restricted the reading of the Bible in English to those of noble status . From May to August , reformers were examined , forced to recant , or imprisoned . 
 For five months , Henry took no action on the accusations against his archbishop . The conspiracy was finally revealed to Cranmer by the king himself . According to Cranmer ’ s secretary , Ralph Morice , sometime in September 1543 the king showed Cranmer a paper summarising the accusations against him . An investigation was to be mounted and Cranmer was appointed chief investigator . Surprise raids were carried out , evidence gathered , and ringleaders identified . Typically , Cranmer put the clergymen involved in the conspiracy through immediate humiliation , but he eventually forgave them and continued to use their services . To show his trust in Cranmer , Henry gave Cranmer his personal ring . When the Privy Council arrested Cranmer at the end of November , the nobles were stymied by the symbol of the king ’ s trust in him . Cranmer ’ s victory ended with two second @-@ rank leaders imprisoned and Germain Gardiner executed . 
 With the atmosphere in Cranmer ’ s favour , he pursued quiet efforts to reform the Church , particularly the liturgy . On 27 May 1544 the first officially authorised vernacular service was published , the processional service of intercession known as the Exhortation and Litany . It survives today with minor modifications in the Book of Common Prayer . The traditional litany uses invocations to saints , but Cranmer thoroughly reformed this aspect by providing no opportunity in the text for such veneration . Additional reformers were elected to the House of Commons and new legislation was introduced to curb the effects of the Act of the Six Articles and the Act for the Advancement of True Religion . 
 In 1546 , the conservatives in a coalition including Gardiner , the Duke of Norfolk , the Lord Chancellor Wriothesley , and the bishop of London , Edmund Bonner , made one last attempt to challenge the reformers . Several reformers with links to Cranmer were targeted . Some such as Lascelles were burnt at the stake . However , powerful reform @-@ minded nobles Edward Seymour and John Dudley returned to England during the summer from overseas and they were able to turn the tide against the conservatives . Two incidents in autumn tipped the balance . Gardiner was disgraced before the king when he refused to agree to exchange episcopal estates and the son of the Duke of Norfolk was charged with treason and executed . There is no evidence that Cranmer played any part in these political games and there were no further plots as the king 's health ebbed in his final months . Cranmer performed his final duties for the king on 28 January 1547 when he gave a reformed statement of faith while gripping Henry ’ s hand instead of giving him his last rites . Cranmer mourned Henry ’ s death and it was later said that he demonstrated his grief by growing a beard . The beard was also a sign of his break with the past . Continental reformers grew beards to mark their rejection of the old Church and this significance of clerical beards was well @-@ understood in England . On 31 January , he was among the executors of the king ’ s final will that nominated Edward Seymour as Lord Protector and welcomed the boy king , Edward VI . 
 = = Foreign divines and reformed doctrines ( 1547 – 1549 ) = = 
 Under the regency of Seymour , the reformers were now part of the establishment . A royal visitation of the provinces took place in August 1547 and each parish that was visited was instructed to obtain a copy of the Homilies . This book consisted of twelve homilies of which four were written by Cranmer . His reassertion of the doctrine of justification by faith elicited a strong reaction from Gardiner . In the " Homily of Good Works annexed to Faith " , Cranmer attacked monasticism and the importance of various personal actions involved in liturgical recitations and ceremonies . Hence , he narrowed the range of good works that would be considered necessary and reinforced the primacy of faith . In each parish visited , injunctions were put in place that resolved to , " ... eliminate any image which had any suspicion of devotion attached to it . " 
 Cranmer ’ s eucharistic views , which had already moved away from official Catholic doctrine , received another push from Continental reformers . Cranmer had been in contact with Martin Bucer since the time when initial contacts were made with the Schmalkaldic League . However , Cranmer and Bucer 's relationship became ever closer due to Charles V ’ s victory over the League at Mühlberg , which left England as the sole major nation that gave sanctuary to persecuted reformers . Cranmer wrote a letter to Bucer ( now lost ) with questions on eucharistic theology . In Bucer 's reply dated 28 November 1547 , he denied the corporeal real presence and condemned transubstantiation and the adoration of the elements . The letter was delivered to Cranmer by two Italian reformed theologians , Peter Martyr and Bernardino Ochino who were invited to take refuge in England . Martyr also brought with him an epistle written allegedly by John Chrysostom ( now regarded as a forgery ) , Ad <unk> <unk> , which appeared to provide patristic support against the corporeal real presence . These documents were to influence Cranmer ’ s thoughts on the eucharist . 
 In March 1549 , the city of Strasbourg forced Martin Bucer and Paul Fagius to leave . Cranmer immediately invited the men to come to England and promised that they would be placed in English universities . When they arrived on 25 April , Cranmer was especially delighted to meet Bucer face to face after eighteen years of correspondence . He needed these scholarly men to train a new generation of preachers as well as assist in the reform of liturgy and doctrine . Others who accepted his invitations include the Polish reformer , Jan Łaski , but Cranmer was unable to convince Osiander and Melanchthon to come to England . 
 = = Book of Common Prayer ( 1548 – 1549 ) = = 
 As the use of English in worship services spread , the need for a complete uniform liturgy for the Church became evident . Initial meetings to start what would eventually become the Book of Common Prayer were held in the former abbey of Chertsey and in Windsor Castle in September 1548 . The list of participants can only be partially reconstructed , but it is known that the members were balanced between conservatives and reformers . These meetings were followed by a debate on the Eucharist in the House of Lords which took place between 14 and 19 December . Cranmer publicly revealed in this debate that he had abandoned the doctrine of the corporeal real presence and believed that the Eucharistic presence was only spiritual . Parliament backed the publication of the Prayer Book after Christmas by passing the Act of Uniformity 1549 ; it then legalized clerical marriage . 
 It is difficult to ascertain how much of the Prayer Book is actually Cranmer ’ s personal composition . Generations of liturgical scholars have been able to track down the sources that he used , including the Sarum Rite , writings from Hermann von Wied , and several Lutheran sources including Osiander and Justus Jonas . More problematic is determining how Cranmer worked on the book and with whom he worked . Despite the lack of knowledge of who might have helped him , however , he is given the credit for the editorship and the overall structure of the book . 
 The use of the new Prayer Book was made compulsory on 9 June 1549 . This triggered a series of protests in Devon and Cornwall , the Prayer Book Rebellion . By early July , the uprising had spread to other parts in the east of England . The rebels made a number of demands including the restoration of the Six Articles , the use of Latin for the mass with only the consecrated bread given to the laity , the restoration of prayers for souls in purgatory , and the rebuilding of abbeys . Cranmer wrote a strong response to these demands to the King in which he denounced the wickedness of the rebellion . On 21 July , Cranmer commandeered St Paul 's Cathedral where he vigorously defended the official Church line . A draft of his sermon , the only extant written sample of his preaching from his entire career , shows that he collaborated with Peter Martyr on dealing with the rebellion . 
 = = Consolidating gains ( 1549 – 1551 ) = = 
 The Prayer Book Rebellion and other events had a negative effect on the Seymour regency . The Privy Council became divided when a set of dissident Councillors banded together behind John Dudley in order to oust Seymour . Cranmer and two other Councillors , William Paget , and Thomas Smith initially rallied behind Seymour . However , after a flurry of letters passed between the two sides , a bloodless coup d ’ état resulted in the end of Seymour ’ s <unk> on 13 October 1549 . Despite the support of religiously conservative politicians behind Dudley ’ s coup , the reformers managed to maintain control of the new government and the English Reformation continued to consolidate gains . Seymour was initially imprisoned in the Tower , but he was shortly released on 6 February 1550 and returned to the Council . The archbishop was able to transfer his former chaplain , Nicholas Ridley from the minor see of Rochester to the diocese of London , while John Ponet took Ridley ’ s former position . Incumbent conservatives were uprooted and replaced with reformers . 
 The first result of co @-@ operation and consultation between Cranmer and Bucer was the Ordinal , the liturgy for the ordination of priests . This was missing in the first Prayer Book and was not published until 1550 . Cranmer adopted Bucer ’ s draft and created three services for commissioning a deacon , a priest , and a bishop . In the same year , Cranmer produced the Defence of the True and Catholic Doctrine of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ , a semi @-@ official explanation of the eucharistic theology within the Prayer Book . It was the first full @-@ length book to bear Cranmer ’ s name on the title @-@ page . The preface summarises his quarrel with Rome in a well @-@ known passage where he compared " beads , pardons , pilgrimages , and such other like popery " with weeds , but the roots of the weeds were transubstantiation , the corporeal real presence , and the sacrificial nature of the mass . 
 Although Bucer assisted in the development of the English Reformation , he was still quite concerned about the speed of its progress . Both Bucer and Fagius had noticed that the 1549 Prayer Book was not a remarkable step forward , although Cranmer assured Bucer that it was only a first step and that its initial form was only temporary . However , by the winter 1550 , Bucer was becoming disillusioned . Cranmer , however , made sure that he did not feel alienated and kept in close touch with him . This attention paid off during the vestments controversy . This incident was initiated by John Hooper , a follower of Heinrich Bullinger who had recently returned from Zürich . Hooper was unhappy with Cranmer ’ s Prayer Book and Ordinal and he particularly objected to the use of ceremonies and vestments . When the Privy Council selected him to be the Bishop of Gloucester on 15 May 1550 , he laid down conditions that he would not wear the required vestments . He found an ally among the Continental reformers in Jan Łaski who had become a leader of the Stranger church in London , a designated place of worship for Continental Protestant refugees . His church ’ s forms and practices had taken reforms much further than Cranmer would have liked . However , Bucer and Peter Martyr , while they sympathised with Hooper ’ s position , supported Cranmer 's arguments of timing and authority . Cranmer and Ridley stood their ground . This led to Hooper ’ s imprisonment and he eventually gave in . He was consecrated on 8 March 1551 according to the Ordinal and he preached before the king in his episcopal garments . Cranmer ’ s vision of reform through careful steps under the authority of the government was maintained . 
 = = Final reform programme ( 1551 – 1553 ) = = 
 Cranmer ’ s role in politics was diminishing when on 16 October 1551 Seymour was arrested on charges of treason . In December he was put on trial and although acquitted of treason , he was judged guilty of felony and put to death on 22 January 1552 . This was the beginning of the breach between Cranmer and Dudley . It was aggravated during the year by the gradual appropriation of ecclesiastical property by the regency . However , even throughout this political turmoil , Cranmer worked simultaneously on three major projects in his reform programme : the revision of canon law , the revision of the Prayer Book , and the formation of a statement of doctrine . 
 The original Roman canon law that defined governance within the Church clearly needed revision following Henry 's break with Rome . Several revision attempts were made throughout Henry 's reign , but these initial projects were shelved as the speed of reform outpaced the time required to work on a revision . As the reformation stabilised , Cranmer formed a committee in December 1551 to restart the work . He recruited Peter Martyr to the committee and he also asked Łaski and Hooper to participate , demonstrating his usual ability to forgive past actions . Cranmer and Martyr realised that a successful enactment of a reformed ecclesiastical law @-@ code in England would have international significance . Cranmer planned to draw together all the reformed churches of Europe under England ’ s leadership to counter the Council of Trent , the Roman Catholic Church 's response to the Protestant Reformation . In March 1552 , Cranmer invited the foremost Continental reformers , Bullinger , John Calvin , and Melanchthon to come to England and to participate in an ecumenical council . The response was disappointing : Melanchthon did not respond , Bullinger stated that neither of them could leave Germany as it was riven by war between the Emperor and the Lutheran princes , and while Calvin showed some enthusiasm , he said he was unable to come . Cranmer acknowledged Calvin and replied stating , " Meanwhile we will reform the English Church to the utmost of our ability and give our labour that both its doctrines and laws will be improved after the model of holy scripture . " One partial manuscript of the project survived that was annotated with corrections and comments by Cranmer and Martyr . When the final version was presented to Parliament , the breach between Cranmer and Dudley was complete and the regent effectively killed the canon law bill in the House of Lords . 
 As in the first Prayer Book , the origins and participants in the work of its revision are obscure , but it was clear that Cranmer led the project and steered its development . It had begun as early as the end of 1549 when the Convocation of Canterbury met to discuss the matter . Late in 1550 , the opinions of Martyr and Bucer were sought on how the liturgy might be improved and they significantly influenced the revision . The spiritual presence view was clarified by the use of entirely different words when the communicants are offered the bread and the wine . New rubrics noted that any kind of bread could be used and any bread or wine that remained could be used by the curate , thus disassociating the elements from any physical presence . The new book removed any possibility of prayers for the dead , as such prayers implied support for the doctrine of purgatory . The Act of Uniformity 1552 , which authorised the book 's use , specified that it be exclusively used from 1 November . However , the final version was not officially published until nearly the last minute , due to Dudley 's intervention . While travelling in the north of the country , he met the Scots reformer , John Knox , then based in Newcastle . Impressed by his preaching , Dudley selected him to be a royal chaplain and brought him south to participate in the reform projects . In a sermon before the king , Knox attacked the practice of kneeling during communion . On 27 September 1552 , the Privy Council stopped the printing of the new Prayer Book and told Cranmer to revise it . He responded with a long letter using the argument that it was for Parliament with the royal assent to decide any changes in the liturgy . On 22 October , the council decided to keep the liturgy as it is and add the so @-@ called Black Rubric , which explained that no adoration was intended when kneeling at communion . 
 The origins of the Statement that eventually became the Forty @-@ Two Articles are equally obscure . As early as December 1549 , the archbishop was demanding from his bishops subscription to certain doctrinal articles . In 1551 Cranmer presented a version of a statement to the bishops , but its status remained ambiguous . Cranmer did not devote much effort into developing the articles , most likely due to work on the canon law revision . He became more interested once the hope for an ecumenical council began to fade . By September 1552 , draft versions of the articles were being worked on by Cranmer and John Cheke , his scholarly friend who was commissioned to translate them into Latin . When the Forty @-@ Two Articles were finally published in May 1553 , the title @-@ page declared that the articles were agreed upon by the Convocation and were published by the authority of the king . This was not in fact the case and the mistake was likely caused by miscommunications between the archbishop and the Privy Council . Cranmer complained about this to the council , but the authorities responded by noting that the articles were developed during the time of the Convocation — hence evading a direct answer . The council gave Cranmer the unfortunate task of requiring subscription to the articles from the bishops , many of whom opposed them and pointed out the anomaly of the title @-@ page . It was while Cranmer was carrying out this duty that events unfolded that would render the subscriptions futile . 
 = = Trials , recantations , death ( 1553 – 1556 ) = = 
 Edward VI became seriously ill from tuberculosis and the councillors were told that he did not have long to live . In May 1553 , the council sent several letters to Continental reformers assuring them that Edward 's health was improving . Among the letters was one addressed to Melanchthon inviting him to come to England to take up the Regius Chair in Cambridge which was vacant since the death of Martin Bucer in February 1551 . Both Henry VIII and Cranmer had previously failed to convince Melanchthon to come ; this time the council made a serious effort by sending him an advance to cover his travel expenses . Cranmer sent a personal letter urging him to take the offer . Despite his plea , Melanchthon never made the voyage to England . While this effort to shore up the reformation was taking place , the council was working to convince several judges to put on the throne Lady Jane Grey , Edward 's cousin and a Protestant , instead of Mary , Henry and Catherine of Aragon 's daughter and a Catholic . On 17 June 1553 the king made his will noting Jane would succeed him , contravening the Third Succession Act . Cranmer tried to speak to Edward alone , but he was refused and his audience with Edward occurred in the presence of the councillors . Edward told him that he supported what he wrote in his will . Cranmer ’ s decision to support Jane must have occurred before 19 June when royal orders were sent to convene the Convocation for the recognition of the new succession . 
 By mid @-@ July , there were serious provincial revolts in Mary ’ s favour and support for Jane in the council fell . As Mary was proclaimed queen , Dudley , Ridley , Cheke , and Jane ’ s father , the Duke of Suffolk were imprisoned . However , no action was taken against the archbishop . On 8 August he led Edward ’ s funeral according to the rites of the Prayer Book . During these months , he advised others , including Peter Martyr , to flee England , but he himself chose to stay . Reformed bishops were removed from office and conservative clergy , such as Edmund Bonner , had their old positions restored . Cranmer did not go down without a fight . When rumours spread that he authorised the use of the mass in Canterbury Cathedral , he declared them to be false and said , " ... all the doctrine and religion , by our said sovereign lord king Edward VI is more pure and according to God 's word , than any that hath been used in England these thousand years . " Not surprisingly , the government regarded Cranmer 's declaration as tantamount to sedition . He was ordered to stand before the council in the Star Chamber on 14 September and on that day he said his final goodbye to Martyr . Cranmer was sent straight to the Tower to join Hugh Latimer and Nicholas Ridley . 
 On 13 November 1553 Cranmer and four others were brought to trial for treason , found guilty , and condemned to death . Throughout February 1554 Jane Grey and other rebels were executed . It was now time to deal with the religious leaders of the reformation and so on 8 March 1554 the Privy Council ordered Cranmer , Ridley , and Latimer to be transferred to Bocardo prison in Oxford to await a second trial for heresy . During this time Cranmer was able to smuggle out a letter to Martyr who had fled to Strasbourg , the last surviving document written in his own hand . He stated that the desperate situation of the church was proof that it will eventually be delivered and wrote , " I pray that God may grant that we may endure to the end ! " Cranmer remained isolated in Bocardo prison for seventeen months before the trial started on 12 September 1555 . Although it took place in England , the trial was under papal jurisdiction and the final verdict would come from Rome . Under interrogation , Cranmer admitted to every fact that was placed before him , but he denied any treachery , disobedience , or heresy . The trial of Latimer and Ridley started shortly after Cranmer 's but their verdicts came almost immediately and they were burnt at the stake on 16 October . Cranmer was taken to a tower to watch the proceedings . On 4 December , Rome decided Cranmer 's fate by depriving him of the archbishopric and giving permission to the secular authorities to carry out their sentence . 
 In his final days Cranmer 's circumstances changed , which led to several recantations . On 11 December , Cranmer was taken out of Bocardo and placed in the house of the Dean of Christ Church . This new environment was very different from that of his two years in prison . He was in an academic community and treated as a guest . Approached by a Dominican friar , Juan de <unk> , he debated the issues of papal supremacy and purgatory . In his first four recantations , produced between the end of January and mid @-@ February , Cranmer submitted himself to the authority of the king and queen and recognised the pope as head of the church . On 14 February 1556 , he was degraded from holy orders and returned to Bocardo . He had conceded very little and Edmund Bonner was not satisfied with these admissions . On 24 February a writ was issued to the mayor of Oxford and the date of Cranmer 's execution was set for 7 March . Two days after the writ was issued , a fifth statement , the first which could be called a true recantation was issued . Cranmer repudiated all Lutheran and Zwinglian theology , fully accepted Catholic theology including papal supremacy and transubstantiation , and stated that there was no salvation outside the Catholic Church . He announced his joy of returning to the Catholic faith , asked for and received sacramental absolution , and participated in the mass . Cranmer 's burning was postponed and under normal practice of canon law , he should have been absolved . Mary , however , decided that no further postponement was possible . His last recantation was issued on 18 March . It was a sign of a broken man , a sweeping confession of sin . Despite the stipulation in Canon Law that recanting heretics be reprieved , Mary was determined to make an example of Cranmer , arguing that " his iniquity and obstinacy was so great against God and your Grace that your clemency and mercy could have no place with him " , and pressed ahead with his execution . 
 Cranmer was told that he would be able to make a final recantation but this time in public during a service at the University Church . He wrote and submitted the speech in advance and it was published after his death . At the pulpit on the day of his execution , he opened with a prayer and an exhortation to obey the king and queen , but he ended his sermon totally unexpectedly , deviating from the prepared script . He renounced the recantations that he had written or signed with his own hand since his degradation and as such he stated his hand would be punished by being burnt first . He then said , " And as for the pope , I refuse him , as Christ 's enemy , and Antichrist with all his false doctrine . " He was pulled from the pulpit and taken to where Latimer and Ridley had been burnt six months before . As the flames drew around him , he fulfilled his promise by placing his right hand into the heart of the fire while saying " that unworthy hand " and his dying words were , " Lord Jesus , receive my spirit ... I see the heavens open and Jesus standing at the right hand of God . " 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 The Marian government produced a pamphlet with all six recantations plus the text of the speech Cranmer was to have made in the University Church . His subsequent withdrawal of his recantations was not mentioned , though what actually happened soon became common knowledge , undermining the effectiveness of Marian propaganda . Similarly , the Protestant party had difficulty in making use of the event , given Cranmer 's recantations . The exiles ' propaganda concentrated on publishing various specimens of his writings . Eventually John Foxe put Cranmer 's story to effective use in 1559 , and it features prominently in his Acts and Monuments when it was first printed in 1563 . 
 Cranmer 's family had been exiled to the Continent in 1539 . It is not known exactly when they returned to England , but it was soon after the accession of Edward VI in 1547 that Cranmer publicly acknowledged their existence . Not much is known about the early years of the children . His daughter , Margaret , was likely born in the 1530s and his son , Thomas , came later , probably during the reign of Edward . Sometime around Mary 's accession , Cranmer 's wife , Margarete , escaped to Germany , while his son was entrusted to his brother , Edmund Cranmer , who took him too to the Continent . Margarete Cranmer eventually married Cranmer 's favourite publisher , Edward Whitchurch . The couple returned to England after Mary 's reign and settled in Surrey . Whitchurch also negotiated for the marriage of Margaret to Thomas Norton . Whitchurch died in 1562 and Margarete married for the third time to Bartholomew Scott . She died in the 1570s . Both of Cranmer 's children died without issue and his line became extinct . 
 When Elizabeth I came to power she restored the Church of England 's independence from Rome under the Elizabethan Religious Settlement . The church that she re @-@ established represented , in effect , a snapshot of the Edwardian Church from September 1552 . Thus the Elizabethan Prayer Book was basically Cranmer 's 1552 edition but without the " Black Rubric " . In the Convocation of 1563 the Forty @-@ Two Articles which were never adopted by the Church were altered in the area of eucharistic doctrine to form the Thirty @-@ Nine Articles . Most of the exiles returned to England and resumed their careers in the Church . To some like Edmund Grindal , an Archbishop of Canterbury during Elizabeth 's reign , Cranmer provided a shining example whose work should be upheld and extended . 
 Cranmer 's greatest concerns were the maintenance of the royal supremacy and the diffusion of reformed theology and practice . Scholars note that he is best remembered for his contribution to the realms of language and of cultural identity . His prose helped to guide the development of the English language , and the Book of Common Prayer is a major contribution to English literature that influenced many lives in the Anglophone world . It guided Anglican worship for four hundred years . 
 Catholic biographers sometimes depict Cranmer as an unprincipled opportunist , a <unk> , and a tool of royal tyranny . For their part , hagiographic Protestant biographers sometimes overlook the times that Cranmer betrayed his own principles . Yet both sides can agree in seeing Cranmer as a committed scholar whose life showed the strengths and weaknesses of a very human and often under @-@ appreciated reformer . The Anglican Communion commemorates him as a Reformation Martyr on 21 March , the anniversary of his death . 
 = Makinti Napanangka = 
 Makinti Napanangka ( c . 1930 – 9 January 2011 ) was a Pintupi @-@ speaking Indigenous Australian artist from Australia 's Western Desert region . She was referred to posthumously as Kumentje . The term Kumentje was used instead of her personal name as it is customary among many indigenous communities not to refer to the deceased by their original given name for some time after their death . She lived in the communities of Haasts Bluff , Papunya , and later at Kintore , about 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) north @-@ east of the Lake MacDonald region where she was born , on the border of the Northern Territory and Western Australia . 
 Makinti Napanangka began painting Contemporary Indigenous Australian art at Kintore in the mid @-@ 1990s , encouraged by a community art project . Interest in her work developed quickly , and she is now represented in most significant Australian public art galleries , including the National Gallery of Australia . A finalist in the 2003 Clemenger Contemporary Art Award , Makinti won the National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Award in 2008 . Her work was shown in the major indigenous art exhibition Papunya Tula : Genesis and Genius , at the Art Gallery of New South Wales . 
 Working in synthetic polymer on linen or canvas , Makinti 's paintings primarily take as their subjects a rockhole site , Lupul , and an indigenous story ( or " dreaming " ) about two sisters , known as Kungka Kutjarra . She was a member of the Papunya Tula Artists Cooperative , but her work has been described as more spontaneous than that of her fellow Papunya Tula artists . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Makinti Napanangka 's year of birth is uncertain , but several sources indicate she was born around 1930 , although other sources indicate she may have been born as early as 1922 or as late as 1932 at a location described by some sources as Lupul rockhole but by one major reference work as <unk> . All sources agree that she comes from the area of <unk> or Lake MacDonald , which straddles the border between Western Australia and the Northern Territory , 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) south @-@ west of Kintore , and about 500 kilometres ( 310 mi ) west of Alice Springs . 
 Makinti was a member of the Pintupi group of indigenous people , who are associated with the communities of Papunya , Kintore , and <unk> . " Napanangka " is a skin name , one of eight used to denote the subgroups in the Pintupi kinship system , not a surname in the sense used by Europeans . Thus her personal name was " Makinti " . The uncertainty around Makinti 's date and place of birth arises from the fact that Indigenous Australians often estimate dates of birth by comparison with other events , especially for people born before contact with European Australians . They may also cite the place of birth as being where the mother first felt the foetus move , rather than where the birth took place . 
 Makinti 's first contact with white people was seeing them riding camels , when she was living at Lupul . She was one of a large group of people who walked into Haasts Bluff in the early 1940s , together with her husband <unk> Tjupurrula ( brother of artist <unk> Tjupurrula ) , and their son Ginger Tjakamarra , born around 1940 . At Haasts Bluff they had a second child , Narrabri <unk> , in 1949 . The population moved to Papunya in the late 1950s , where Makinti had another child , Jacqueline <unk> , in 1958 . She had a daughter , Winnie Bernadette , in 1961 in Alice Springs . The family moved to Kintore when it was established in the early 1980s , and by 1996 Kumentje was painting there for the Papunya Tula Artists Cooperative . Her children Ginger , Narrabri , and Jacqueline also became artists , all of them painting for Papunya Tula Artists . 
 Physically tiny yet robust and strong , Kumentje was described as " a charmer and an irascible character " , with an infectious smile . She died in Alice Springs in January 2011 . 
 = = Artistic career = = 
 Artists of the Papunya Tula movement were painting at Haasts Bluff in the late 1970s , but the deaths of some of the main painters in the early 1980s led to a period of decline . In 1992 , the Ikuntji Women 's Centre was opened at Haasts Bluff and a new painting movement quickly developed , supported by founding art coordinator Marina Strocchi , who assisted in artists ' development at both Haasts Bluff and Kintore . It was through this initiative that Kumentje began painting in 1994 for the <unk> Tjukurrpa ( Kintore / Haasts Bluff Project ) and by 1997 her work was being acquired by major collecting institutions . She was one of the " Kintore ladies " who joined earlier generations of the famous Papunya Tula artists , and was referred to as " number one " by her fellow artists , of whom she was considered a leader . She painted with the Papunya Tula Artists Cooperative , in which she was a shareholder , from 1996 . 
 The only break in her career was in 1999 , when she underwent a cataract operation , an event that journalist Nicolas Rothwell suggested was associated with a distinct shift in her work , including the increasing use of thick lines . Johnson said the operation resulted in " a collection of light @-@ flooded canvases " ; Art Gallery of New South Wales curator Hetti Perkins said that , after her recovery , " her work showed renewed vigour " . 
 Makinti 's works were selected to hang in five consecutive National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Art Award ( NATSIAA ) exhibitions , beginning in 1997 . In 2000 , she held her first solo exhibition , and was one of the artists whose works were included in the major exhibition Papunya Tula : Genesis and Genius at the Art Gallery of New South Wales . The following year , she was a finalist at the NATSIAA . 2003 saw her named by Australian Art Collector magazine as one of the country 's 50 most collectible artists , an assessment repeated by that magazine in 2004 , 2005 , and 2006 . Also in 2003 , she was among the finalists for the Clemenger Contemporary Art Award . By 2006 , her works were commanding " the upper end of the price spectrum " , though the resale values of those of her works not sold through Papunya Tula artists were considered precarious , owing to such works being of variable quality . 
 In August 2008 , Makinti won the $ 40 @,@ 000 NATSIAA , but her age and circumstances prevented her from accepting it in person . In October 2008 , she was one of several prominent artists whose works featured in a charity auction securing funds for the Menzies School of Health Research in Darwin . Her painting sold for A $ 18 @,@ 500 , a significant contribution to the quarter of a million dollars raised . In 2009 , she was again a finalist in the NATSIAA , with an untitled painting and was also a finalist in the <unk> Contemporary Art Award the same year . In 2011 she was a finalist in the 36th Alice Art Prize and in 2011 she was posthumously awarded the Member of the Order of Australia , for " service to the arts as a contemporary Indigenous artist , to women painters of the Western Desert Art movement , and to the community of the Northern Territory " . 
 Most of Australia 's public collections hold one or more works by Makinti , including the National Gallery of Australia , the Art Gallery of New South Wales , the National Gallery of Victoria , the Queensland Art Gallery , Brisbane and the Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory . She participated in some major group exhibitions , such as Papunya Tula : Genesis and Genius at the Art Gallery of New South Wales , and Colour Power at the National Gallery of Victoria , as well as having had a small number of solo exhibitions at private galleries , including the gallery of influential art dealer Gabrielle Pizzi . The National Portrait Gallery in Canberra has in its collection a photographic portrait of Kumentje , by Malaysian @-@ born Australian artist Hari Ho . Her work was selected for inclusion in the 2012 Sydney Biennale . 
 = = Style of painting = = 
 Makinti 's works , including her Clemenger Award and NATSIAA paintings , are created with synthetic polymer on linen or canvas . 
 Many paintings by artists of the Western Desert relate to water , while the story ( or " dreaming " ) most frequently portrayed by Western Desert women is Kungka Kutjarra , or Two Women , concerning the travel of two sisters . Makinti 's works reflect those themes , and are particularly associated with a rockhole site , Lupul , and with Kungka Kutjarra . Her untitled painting in the Genesis and Genius exhibition was based on Kungka Kutjarra , while the painting that won the 2008 Telstra award related to Lupul . The iconography of her paintings includes the use of lines representing paths and ceremonial hair @-@ string skirts , and circles representing water @-@ holes . 
 According to Art Gallery of New South Wales indigenous art curator and NATSIAA judge Hetti Perkins , Makinti and her work are " very dynamic and charismatic " . Although a member of the Papunya Tula Artists , Makinti 's work has been described as taking " a more spontaneous approach in illustrating the traditional iconography than that done by previous artists painting at Papunya " . Her style evolved over time , beginning with gestural brush strokes in ordered compositions , and developing into more closely interwoven representations of the hair @-@ string skirts and designs reflecting those used in body painting . Throughout this evolution , her colour palette has consistently included a subtle range of yellows and pinks , through to oranges and whites . 
 Judith Ryan , senior curator at the National Gallery of Victoria , described Makinti 's entry in the 2003 Clemenger Contemporary Art Award as : 
 concerned with touching and sensing with fingers , rather than purely visual . The repetition of colour chords and textured striations , which closely echo each other , has a rhapsodic effect akin to many bodies in dance and reveals the inner or spiritual power , the essence , of Makinti Napanangka 's country and cultural identity . The energetic lines invoke body paint for women ’ s business , and more particularly represent spun hair @-@ string , which is used to make belts worn by women during ceremonies associated with the rockhole site of <unk> , a Peewee Dreaming place . 
 Reviewing the same exhibition , Robert Nelson described Makinti 's work as " sensual and chromatically effusive painting " . The work of the " Kintore ladies " has created " some of the most richly textured surfaces in the history of the ( Papunya Tula ) company " ; Makinti 's painting for Genesis and Genius was hailed as " a painterly celebration of colour and form " . 
 = = Major collections = = 
 Art Gallery of New South Wales 
 Campbelltown City Art Gallery 
 Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory 
 National Gallery of Australia 
 National Gallery of Victoria 
 Queensland Art Gallery 
 Macquarie Bank collection 
 Shell Aboriginal Art Fund Collection 
 = = Solo exhibitions and awards = = 
 1997 – 14th National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Award 
 1998 – 15th National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Award 
 1999 – 16th National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Award 
 2000 – 17th National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Award 
 2000 – Utopia Art , Sydney 
 2001 – finalist , 18th National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Award 
 2001 – Utopia Art , Sydney 
 2002 – Gallery Gabrielle Pizzi , Melbourne 
 2003 – Utopia Art , Sydney 
 2003 – finalist , Clemenger Contemporary Art Award at the National Gallery of Victoria 
 2007 – finalist , 24th National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Award 
 2008 – winner , 25th National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Award 
 = HMS Trump ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Trump ( pennant number <unk> ) was a British submarine of the third group of the T class . She was built by Vickers Armstrong , Barrow , and launched on 25 March 1944 . So far she has been the only ship of the Royal Navy to bear the name Trump . She spent the majority of her life attached to the 4th Submarine division based in Australia . She was kept in service following the war and was refitted for greater underwater performance , and was the final RN submarine to be posted in Australia , departing in January 1969 . She was sold off and broken up for scrap in August 1971 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 HMS Trump was one of the group three of T class submarines . She was part of the second batch of the third group to be ordered , in 1941 . She was one of a number of boats which had an all @-@ welded hull which increased diving depth to 350 feet ( 110 m ) , an increase of 50 feet ( 15 m ) . The torpedo armament was the same as the earlier group two , although by the time group three was coming into service it was realised that external torpedo tubes had major problems and affected the streamlining of the boats ; the external tubes were abandoned in the following Amphion class submarine . Because of expected use in tropical climates , boats of group three were equipped with <unk> blowers in order to deal with the increased temperatures . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Trump was commissioned in July 1944 . After trials and a work @-@ up in the North Sea in mid @-@ October she was sent to Perth in Western Australia . On arrival , she joined the 4th Submarine division , supported by the depot ship HMS Adamant . From Perth , Trump carried out four patrols before the end of the war . 
 During her Far East service , Trump sank the Japanese <unk> No. 15 <unk> Maru on 13 May ; a Japanese sailing vessel on 24 May ; and two coasters , one on 29 May and the other on 1 June . She sank a tanker on 5 June and together with her sister HMS Tiptoe , she sank a Japanese cargo vessel on 9 August . 
 Also with Tiptoe , Trump carried out an attack on a convoy on 3 August . Although the it was escorted by a Japanese patrol boat , they successfully sank Tencho Maru , an army cargo ship , with the sinking credited to Tiptoe . 
 = = = Post war = = = 
 Trump survived the war and continued in service with the Royal Navy . Trump was one of several all @-@ welded T @-@ Class submarines rebuilt for greater underwater performance . This " Slippery T " or " Super T " conversion involved the removal of the deck gun and the replacement of the conning tower with a streamlined " fin " . Extra batteries were installed below the control room and additional electric motors were accommodated by cutting through the pressure hull and adding in a new 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) hull section inserted aft of the control room . The diesel engines were modified and supercharged with output increased by 300 BHP . The gun armaments and external torpedo tubes were removed , and the bow reshaped . Trump was one of two submarines , the other being HMS Tabard , which had the bridge incorporated into the added fin section ; and was the last to undergo this conversion . 
 In 1960 , Trump , along with <unk> and Tabard , rejoined the 4th Submarine Flotilla at Sydney , Australia . There , they operated with units of the Far East Fleet , the Royal Australian Navy , and the Royal New Zealand Navy . In June 1964 , she participated in the NEWS EX anti @-@ submarine exercise in the Hauraki Gulf off the coast of New Zealand . 
 Trump underwent refits at Cockatoo Dockyard , between January 1962 and April 1963 , and again between August 1965 and October 1966 . She was the final Royal Navy submarine to be on station in Australia , departing on 10 January 1969 when the 1st Australian Submarine squadron was formed from the RN 4th Submarine Squadron . She was temporarily transferred to Royal Australian Navy service while boats of the Oberon class were under construction . Trump was scrapped at Newport from 1 August 1971 . 
 = General John A. Rawlins = 
 General John A. Rawlins is a statue depicting John Aaron Rawlins , a United States Army general who served during the Civil War and later as Secretary of War . The statue is a focal point of Rawlins Park , a small public park in the Foggy Bottom neighborhood of Washington , D.C. It was installed in 1874 , but relocated several times between 1880 and 1931 . The statue was sculpted by French @-@ American artist Joseph A. Bailly , whose best known work is the statue of George Washington in front of Independence Hall in Philadelphia . 
 The bronze statue , which rests on a granite base , is one of the city 's eighteen Civil War monuments that were collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 . The monument and park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . The statue is considered by historians to be one of the better portrait statues in Washington , D.C. 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 John Aaron Rawlins ( 1831 – 1869 ) was a lawyer and native of Illinois who organized the 45th Illinois Infantry for the Union Army during the Civil War . He served as a confidant and the closest advisor to General Ulysses S. Grant during the war and served as Grant 's Secretary of War after Grant was elected president of the United States . Rawlins died of tuberculosis five months into his term as secretary . During his short term in office , Rawlins spoke passionately about the plight of recently freed slaves and tried to protect Native Americans from military officers who were cruel to them . He also tried to protect Grant from men who would " lead him away from the straight and true . " One of Rawlins ' colleagues said " he had blunt , wrathful words of <unk> for those who put in Grant 's way temptations that he knew to be dangerous . " 
 Soon after Rawlins ' death in 1869 , efforts were under way to erect a statue honoring him . Interest in the project waned until 1872 when Grant wrote a letter to Congress to address the delay . On June 10 , 1872 , a congressional bill sponsored by Illinois Senator John A. Logan , who had served under Grant and admired Rawlins , was approved with $ 10 @,@ 000 appropriated for the erection of the statue . The legislation included instructions for a committee to be created that would solicit models and select an artist . The committee consisted of General Orville E. Babcock , Architect of the Capitol Edward Clark , and Librarian of Congress Ainsworth Rand Spofford . Sculptors that submitted designs included Theophilus Fisk Mills , son of Clark Mills , and Lot Flannery , sculptor of the 1868 Abraham Lincoln statue . The artist chosen was Joseph A. Bailly ( 1825 – 1883 ) , a French @-@ born American sculptor whose best known work is the 1869 statue of George Washington in Philadelphia . Bailly 's other works in Washington , D.C. include sculptures of Benjamin Hallowell and Alexander " Boss " Shepherd . The statue was founded by Robert Wood & Company . The bronze used for the statue was cast from Confederate cannons captured during the Civil War . 
 The total cost of the statue and its installation was $ 13 @,@ 000 . The original planned site for the statue was Franklin Square , though the site where it was installed was Rawlins Park , a small park in what was then an <unk> and remote area . There was no formal dedication ceremony when it was installed in November 1874 . The following year , the statue was placed atop a granite base constructed by the Westham Granite Company of Richmond , Virginia . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 In 1880 , members of the Grand Army of the Republic visited the statue and were dismayed by the park and its surroundings . They petitioned to have the statue moved to a more prominent location , 10th and D Streets NW , where it stood until a newspaper plant was built on that site . It was then moved to the north side of Pennsylvania Avenue between 7th Street and 9th Street NW , but a public restroom was built on the site in 1886 and the statue was moved across the street . In 1931 , construction began on the National Archives Building and the statue was moved for the last time to its original location , Rawlins Park . Rawlins Park was greatly improved with the addition of walkways and a reflecting pool in 1938 . In 1963 , Wyoming Representative William H. Harrison unsuccessfully attempted to have the statue moved to Rawlins , a town named after the general . 
 The statue is one of eighteen Civil War monuments in Washington , D.C. that were collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places on September 20 , 1978 , and the District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites on March 3 , 1979 . It is one of the few Civil War monuments that is a not an equestrian sculpture . The others are the Dupont Circle Fountain , Stephenson Grand Army of the Republic Memorial , Nuns of the Battlefield , the Peace Monument , and statues of Admiral David G. Farragut and Brigadier General Albert Pike . The statue and surrounding park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . Historian James M. Goode , author of Outdoor Sculpture of Washington , D.C. , considers it one of the better portrait statues in Washington , D.C. , and thinks the statue has a " certain elegance and spirit . " 
 = = Design and location = = 
 The statue is sited on the eastern end of Rawlins Park , a small public park located between 18th Street , 19th Street , E Street and New York Avenue NW in the Foggy Bottom neighborhood of Washington , D.C. The Main Interior Building lies to the south of the park , General Services Administration Building is on the north side of the park , and The Octagon House is on the northeast corner of the park . 
 The bronze statue measures 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) tall and the light gray , pedestal @-@ style granite base measures 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) high and 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) wide . The statue depicts Rawlins standing while wearing his Civil War military uniform : a hat , long belted jacket , tall boots , and gloves . His left leg is slightly forward and his right hand is holding a pair of field glasses by his side . He left hand is holding the sword handle which rests at his side . Rawlins is depicted with a beard and moustache . The inscription " <unk> " is on the front of the base . The inscriptions " R. <unk> & CO / <unk> FOUNDERS / <unk> " and " A. <unk> , sculpt / 1873 " are on the sculpture . 
 = All the Lovers = 
 All the Lovers is a song recorded by Australian recording artist Kylie Minogue for her eleventh studio album , Aphrodite ( 2010 ) . One of the last songs to be recorded for the album , " All the Lovers " was written by Jim Eliot and Mima Stilwell and produced by the former . Stuart Price , the executive producer of Aphrodite , was responsible for additional production and mixing of the song . Minogue felt " All the Lovers " summarised the " euphoria " of the album perfectly and chose it to be the lead single from Aphrodite . It was then globally released by Parlophone as a CD single and digital download on 11 June 2010 . " All the Lovers " is a midtempo disco song with influences of electropop music . The lyrics of the song serve as an invitation to the dance floor and an assertion that Minogue 's past relationships do not " compare " to the one she shares with her present lover . 
 Upon its release , " All the Lovers " garnered critical acclaim and was commended for its chorus and production . Many critics found it similar to Minogue 's 2004 single " I Believe in You " . Compared to the lead singles from Minogue 's previous albums , " All the Lovers " underperformed in Australia and missed peaking inside the top ten of the Australian Singles Chart . However , it was a commercial success in Europe , reaching the top ten in numerous countries including Austria , Belgium , France , Italy , Spain and Switzerland and the United Kingdom . In the latter country , " All the Lovers " peaked at number three on the UK Singles Chart . A club hit in the United States , it topped the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . " All the Lovers " was certified silver in the United Kingdom and gold in Australia and Italy . 
 An accompanying music video for " All the Lovers " was filmed in Downtown Los Angeles by Joseph Kahn , and features Minogue singing the song from atop a pyramid of underwear @-@ clad couples . Critical reception towards the video was favourable , with many critics enjoying its concept and imagery . The music video was banned in several Asian countries due to its sexual nature . For additional promotion , Minogue performed the song on various television shows , such as Germany 's Next Topmodel and Alan Carr : Chatty Man . It was included on the set list of the Aphrodite : Les Folies Tour and was performed during the encore segment of the concert shows . An orchestral version of the song was featured on the track list of Minogue 's 2012 compilation album The Abbey Road Sessions . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Following her recovery from breast cancer , Minogue released her tenth studio album X in 2007 . Slated to be released as Minogue 's comeback album , X went platinum in her native @-@ country Australia after it debuted at number one on the Australian Albums chart . In the United Kingdom , the album entered and peaked at number four on the UK Albums Chart and was eventually certified platinum . Critical reception towards X was generally favourable , but many critics felt that it lacked introspection from Minogue 's side . Later on , critics argued that the album did not serve as a worthy comeback for Minogue . 
 Soon , Minogue began working on her eleventh studio album Aphrodite . Grammy award @-@ winning British electronic music producer Stuart Price was enlisted as the executive producer of the album . " All the Lovers " was one of the last tracks to be written for Aphrodite and " only really came up " during the last three weeks of the recording sessions . It was written by Jim Eliot and Mima Stilwell , known collectively as British electropop group Kish Mauve . The duo had previously collaborated with Minogue on " 2 Hearts " , the lead single from X. Eliot produced the track and Price handled additional production and mixing . Minogue also recorded a Spanish @-@ language version of the song entitled " Los Amores " . 
 Minogue premiered " All the Lovers " on radio stations in the United Kingdom on 14 May 2010 . It was released worldwide as the lead single from the album on 11 June 2010 in CD single formats . The song was also made available to download digitally at the iTunes Store on the same day . In the United Kingdom , " All the Lovers " was initially released digitally on 13 June and later received a physical release in various formats on 28 June 2010 . " Los Amores " and " Go Hard or Go Home " were included as the B @-@ sides to the song . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , " All the Lovers " is an electropop @-@ influenced disco track . Minogue 's breathy and whisper @-@ y vocal delivery and the electronic production of the song make it similar to " I Believe in You " , a single from Minogue 's greatest hits album Ultimate Kylie ( 2004 ) . Through the lyrics of the song , Minogue invites her lover to dance with her , beginning with a line in which she softly sings " Dance , it 's all I wanna do , so won 't you dance ? I 'm standing here with you , why won 't you move ? " . During the anthemic chorus of the song , which is backed by a warbling synthesizer riff , Minogue asserts that her previous relationships do not " compare " to her present one , singing " All the lovers that have gone before , they don 't compare to you / Don 't be frightened , just give me a little bit more / They don 't compare , all the lovers . " UK @-@ based music website Popjustice opined that the song is " not really about relaxing while you dance , it 's about relaxing into a relationship . " Fraser McAlpine from BBC Chart Blog felt the " elegiac " and sad @-@ toned chorus " makes the verses transform from a straightforward plea for dancefloor action into what sounds like a demand that everyone join Kylie for one last dance before things become spoiled forever . " The song features a bridge section in which Minogue again asks her lover to dance with her , after which an electronic breakdown takes place . According to the sheet music of the song published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " All the Lovers " is composed in the key of C major and follows a midtempo of 142 beats per minute . Minogue 's vocal range spans from the key of G3 to A4 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " All the Lovers " was acclaimed by music critics and fans alike . Fraser McAlpine from BBC Chart Blog rated the single five out of five stars and applauded its chorus , calling it a " dancing / crying / loving feeling [ ... ] applied to everyone in a universal gesture of affection and regret . " The critic praised the electropop influences of the song and Minogue 's vocal delivery . Nick Levine from Digital Spy also rewarded " All the Lovers " a perfect five @-@ star score and called it a " shimmering midtempo electro @-@ disco tune with a lovely arms @-@ in @-@ the @-@ air chorus . " He found the song similar to " I Believe in You " . Entertainment Weekly critic Adam Markovitz opined that " All the Lovers " was not a " full @-@ on dance track production @-@ wise , " but predicted the song would attain " near @-@ ubiquity in gyms , gay clubs , and clothing stores . " Robbie Daw from Idolator felt its production stayed true to Minogue 's roots , labelling the song " 100 % pure Kylie , " and found it comparable to " I Believe in You . " Daily Mirror critic Gavin Martin gave " All the Lovers " a four out of five rating and complimented the song 's production and mixing , saying they " ensure Kylie 's pint @-@ size pop queen status is consolidated . " Martin also enjoyed Minogue 's " generously sensual " vocal performance . Chris Ryan from MTV Buzzworthy termed the song " classic Kylie , " praising its subtle production and the chorus for being " ecstatic , breathtaking . " MuuMuse editor Bradley Stern commended Minogue 's breathy delivery and felt that its instrumentation and Minogue 's vocals were reminiscent of " I Believe in You " . Stern rated it five out of five stars and concluded that " [ " All the Lovers " is ] a sing @-@ along track , it 's sad disco , it 's everything you 've been waiting for . " The Popjustice review of the song was also positive ; they pointed out that it would please fans of the singer and become the " sound of dancefloor stampedes from now until the end of time " due to its mature style . Rob Harvilla from The Village Voice wrote that the song features Minogue at her peak form and labelled it a " pleasingly vapid synth @-@ cheese jam . " 
 Upon the release of Aphrodite , critics viewed " All the Lovers " as one of the highlights of the album . Tim Sendra from AllMusic gave the song a " Track Pick , " calling it " massively catchy " and praising the synthesizer riffs in its instrumentation . Ian Wade from BBC Music found " All the Lovers " a far more superior effort than X , saying it " emits everything that X didn 't . " Neil McCormick from Daily Telegraph complimented the chorus and commented " once ' All The Lovers ' gets in your head , it is impossible to dislodge . " Mikael Wood from Entertainment Weekly encouraged readers to download the song , terming it a " thumping opener . " Helen Clarke from <unk> likened it to the works of British electronic music duo Goldfrapp and called it a " Kylie classic , " but found its placement as the opening track of the album unusual . Christel Loar from PopMatters found its synth riffs similar to those in songs by British synthpop duo Erasure and felt the song was perfect to dance to . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine , who gave Aphrodite a mixed review , picked the song as one of the better tracks from the album , comparing its hook to a " summer breeze . " Sophia Money @-@ Coutts from The National called the song a " euphoric , electro tune ripe for remixing and which will no doubt have the hordes waving their hands about in Ibiza " but criticised it for being too similar to " I Believe in You " . 
 = = = Accolades and recognition = = = 
 At the 24th Annual ARIA Music Awards in 2010 , Minogue was nominated for " Best Female Artist " , but lost to Megan Washington . At the 31st Annual Brit Awards in 2011 , Minogue was nominated for " International Female Solo Artist , " but lost to Barbadian recording artist Rihanna . In the same year , at the 26th Annual International Dance Music Awards ( <unk> ) ceremony , " All the Lovers " was nominated for " Best Pop Dance Track " while Minogue was nominated for " Best Solo Artist . " At the 2011 Virgin Media Music Awards , " All the Lovers " was voted the " Best Single " by British music fans . 
 About.com critic Bill Lamb ranked the song number 25 on his list of " Top 100 Pop Songs of 2010 , " saying " ' All the Lovers ' sounds like a grand culmination of Kylie Minogue 's international pop success . " PopMatters placed " All the Lovers " at number 43 on their list of " The 60 Best Songs of 2010 , " with critic Jer Fairall writing " Celebratory yet wistfully elegiac , ' All the Lovers ' is retro in the best possible way , Kylie 's disco fetishism channelled towards its most meaningful purpose yet . " Comparing it to Donna Summer 's 1978 song " Last Dance " and Cher 's 1998 song " Believe " , the critic termed " All the Lovers " a " rare love song that acknowledges the existence of both personal and cultural history , and the euphoric realization that these are things that brought us to who and where we are now . " " All the Lovers " received around a million " <unk> " on Last.fm and is Minogue 's second most @-@ played song on the website after her 2001 hit " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Commercially , " All the Lovers " underperformed in Minogue 's native country Australia in comparison to lead singles from her previous albums . It entered the ARIA Singles Chart at number 14 and failed to chart inside the top 10 , having reached its peak position of number 13 . In total , " All the Lovers " charted for a total of nine weeks and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) in 2012 for completing shipments of 35 @,@ 000 units . 
 In the United Kingdom , " All the Lovers " entered at number four on the UK Singles Chart . Two weeks later , it peaked at number three . The song spent four weeks inside the top ten of the chart and nineteen weeks inside the top hundred . The British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certified " All the Lovers " silver for completing shipments of 200 @,@ 000 units in the United Kingdom . As of March 2014 , the single has sold 370 @,@ 000 units in the country ( according to the Official Charts Company ) . 
 Similarly , the single charted strongly throughout the rest of Europe . In Austria , it became Minogue 's first single since " I Believe in You " to appear inside the top ten of the Ö3 Austria Top 40 chart after it debuted at number 10 . It later peaked at number five and stayed on the chart for 20 consecutive weeks . The song entered the Ultratop chart in the French @-@ speaking Wallonia region of Belgium at a low position of 31 , but peaked at number eight two weeks later . " All the Lovers " entered and peaked at number three on the SNEP chart in France , becoming Minogue 's highest @-@ debuting single in the country . Its total stay on the chart lasted for 29 weeks . In Germany , it peaked at number 10 on the Media Control Charts for two weeks and achieved Minogue 's longest charting period for a solo @-@ single in the country , appearing for 25 weeks in total . On the Hungarian Airplay Chart , " All the Lovers " reached number two , thus tying with " In Your Eyes " as her highest @-@ peaking single in the country . The single debuted and peaked at number six in Ireland . 
 In Italy , the song entered the top 20 of the FIMI Singles chart at number six . The following week , it dropped out of the top 20 and did not chart inside it again . Despite this , " All the Lovers " performed well in the country and was certified gold by the Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana ( FIMI ) for selling 15 @,@ 000 certified units . The song debuted at number 30 on the Slovak Airplay Chart and jumped to number four the next week . It appeared on the chart for a total of 20 weeks . On the PROMUSICAE chart in Spain , it peaked at number six and spent a total of 22 weeks . Similarly , it attained the same peak position in Switzerland after it debuted at number six on the Swiss Hitparade chart . It charted within the top 10 for seven non @-@ consecutive weeks and in the top 75 for 21 weeks . 
 In Canada , " All the Lovers " only reached number 72 on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 chart . " All the Lovers " became a club hit in the United States . During its eight @-@ week on the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart , it peaked at number one and displaced American recording artist Kesha 's song " Your Love Is My Drug " from the top spot . " All the Lovers " was the third most played song in American clubs in 2010 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and release = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " All the Lovers " was directed by Joseph Kahn , who is known for having previously collaborated with American recording artist Britney Spears on the videos for her singles " Toxic " and " Womanizer " . It was filmed in Downtown Los Angeles , the central business district of Los Angeles , California , in early May 2010 . Aiming to pay " homage " to her large gay audience , Minogue wanted the video to express " what I 'm about and what I love " and thus it was made to depict scenes of same @-@ sex kissing . Arts and culture magazine BlackBook reported that the video , which portrays a large group of underwear @-@ clad men and women , is a re @-@ imagination of the installations of Spencer Tunick , an American photographer known for organising large @-@ scale nude shoots . Minogue credited Kahn for the idea behind the video , saying " He came up with a brilliant , simple idea and executed it so sensitively , I thought . It 's still cutting edge , it still gets you a little hot under the collar , but I think there 's a real sensitivity . " Initially , two ideas for the storyline arose , one which was a " little gentler " and one which was " edgier , " and in the end the latter option was finalised . When Kahn submitted his cut of the video to Parlophone , a person working for the label refused to release it and wanted a new one to be shot . However , at Minogue 's interference the video was finally commissioned and released . A preview of the video was released on 25 May 2010 while the full version was premiered five days later . It was made available to download at the iTunes Store on 11 June 2010 . In 2011 , Kahn talked about working with Minogue and called her the " dream artist to work with " and a " joy to photograph , " praising her ability to " understand " directors . He further commented that : " [ The music video of " All the Lovers " ] is one of my favourite videos I did last year , and one of my favourites ever really . The message Kylie wanted to say with this video is important , and I am lucky to have worked with her on it . " 
 = = = Synopsis and analysis = = = 
 The video begins with close @-@ up shots of several items , including a soft @-@ drink glass , a bottle of milk , marshmallows , and pages from a briefcase , falling on to the ground . A QR code , which was said to produce the word " LOVE " when scanned , can be seen printed on the glass and bottle , and on the ground during the scene of the marshmallows falling . In their analysis of the video , Popjustice commented that the falling objects convey an environment of excitement , saying : " the general idea here is that something exciting is happening and someone is so excited by the exciting thing that they have dropped their drink . " Several couples are shown removing their clothes , stripping down to their underwear , and proceeding to kiss and caress each other . Minogue then rises up from the inside of a " mountain of writhing bodies " and a flock of doves flies around them . Her attire consists of a black bra , similar to the one Madonna wore in the 1990 music video of " Vogue " , wore underneath a " shredded " white top coupled with white go @-@ go boots and knee @-@ pads . She continues singing the song while laying atop the pyramid of couples and changes her position as the song approaches its second verse . A convertible standing in the middle of a road is shown releasing a bunch of white balloons from its top . The scene switches back to Minogue , from where the camera pans upward to reveal a large white inflatable elephant floating in between two skyscrapers . The flash mob continues growing in size and the height of the pyramid increases . Minogue sways her hand above the participants of the mob , emphasising rings and jewellery designed by UK @-@ based jeweller Shaun Leane . During of the bridge section of the song , Minogue is pulled inside the pyramid and the lighting is dimmed down . The song 's breakdown coincides with scenes of a white horse galloping on a road amid various couples kissing each other . As the chorus begins , Minogue again rises up and stands atop the pyramid , which has greatly increased in height . Popjustice pointed out that the increment in the height of the pyramid is reflective of the lines of the song in which Minogue repeats the word " higher " . The camera switches to a distant view of the scene , showing the pyramid in between the skyscrapers and the floating elephant and balloons . The video ends with Minogue realising a dove in the air . 
 Writing for New York Press , film and music critic Armond White deeply analysed the music video and found the flash mob , which consists of a few homosexual couples , a representation of the historic 1969 Stonewall riots , a series of spontaneous , violent demonstrations by members of the gay community against a police raid that took place at the Stonewall Inn , in the Greenwich Village neighbourhood of New York City . He also compared the video to two documentaries based on the riots . White commented that through the video , Kahn had corrected directors Kate Davis and David Heilbroner 's " blundering " in their 2010 documentary of the riots . The critic said that Davis and Heilbroner had misinterpreted the riots and that Kahn and Minogue had offered a more accurate version which was similar to the concept of the 1995 historical comedy @-@ drama film based on the uprising . He commented that the flash mob Minogue organises is " not a riot , not an orgy " and instead " an uprising as the swaying lovers amass and their joy takes them literally higher and higher . " He then concluded of the video : 
 Kahn 's gleaming fantasy of paradisical urban cleanliness is a creative act that idealizes an historical fact . Like Spencer Tunick , who photographs mass public <unk> , Kahn and Kylie emcee a multiracial party ; as critic John <unk> points out , restricting participants to the young , pretty , physically fit is part of their idealization . Importantly , Kahn and Kylie serenade their <unk> by the Stonewall @-@ era term " lovers " ( out @-@ <unk> by today ’ s " partner " ) . Stonewall Uprising is a whitewash ; this is a resurrection of affection . Rainbow Pride expressed as Kylie 's bliss [ sic ] 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Nick Levine from Digital Spy felt the video was unique and commented that " There aren 't many popstars who could make a video featuring doves , balloons , a galloping horse , a giant inflatable elephant and a mass grope @-@ fest in the middle of LA ... and get away with it [ sic ] . " Leah Greenblatt from Entertainment Weekly complimented its sexuality and said that the video could " best described as either a makeout flash mob , a Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade gone wild , or some serious " the touch , the feel of cotton " guerrilla marketing . " MuuMuse @-@ editor Bradley Stern praised the concept of the video as " incredible " and complimented the inclusion of the horse . Popjustice called the music video a " lovely <unk> pop moment . " Due to its sexual content and nature , the music video was censored and banned in numerous Asian countries including Singapore , Malaysia , and Indonesia . In an interview with Spanish television channel Cuatro , Minogue responded to the censorship and said : " I think , yes , it 's sexy but I also think it 's very touching and sensual and the message is love . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Minogue 's first live performance of " All the Lovers " was at the Wind Music Awards in Italy on 29 May 2010 . She sang the song dressed in a white gown inspired by the toga , a distinctive garment of Ancient Rome . During the performance , she struck a pose similar to Leonardo DiCaprio 's " I 'm the king of the world ! " pose in the 1997 film Titanic as male back @-@ up dancers lifted her in the air . On 10 June , she performed the song at the finale of the fifth season of reality television show Germany 's Next Topmodel . The performance was a re @-@ enactment of the music video and Minogue started the performance standing atop a pyramid of underwear @-@ clad dancers . At her Madrid Pride Parade concert on 6 July , Minogue performed " All the Lovers " , along with " Get Outta My Way " and " Better than Today " , dressed in a toga @-@ inspired white gown and golden bodice . She performed " All the Lovers " in a red dress on British comedy chat show Alan Carr : Chatty Man on 18 July . Minogue appeared at Australian television show Hey Hey It 's Saturday on 21 July to perform the single . On 25 July she sang it from atop a " dazzling " mountaintop @-@ like platform on the tenth season of the Australian version of Dancing with the Stars . Minogue performed " All the Lovers " , " Get Outta My Way " , and " In My Arms " at the Los Premios 40 Principales awards ceremony on 10 December . On 8 September 2012 , Minogue headlined at the Proms in the Park event in Hyde Park , London , to promote her orchestral compilation album The Abbey Road Sessions . At the event , she sang the orchestral version of " All the Lovers " , which was included as the opening track of the album . 
 Beginning from early 2011 , Minogue embarked on the Aphrodite : Les Folies Tour to promote Aphrodite . " All the Lovers " was included in the encore segment of the setlist and was the last performance of the shows . During the performances of the song , Minogue stood atop a rotating " three @-@ tiered cake stage " , which was " layered " with her back @-@ up dancers , as fountains and " swirling near @-@ naked dancers spinning on harnesses " surrounded her . The performance received positive reviews from critics . Jon O 'Brien from AllMusic commented that " the euphoric glittery disco of " All the Lovers " , [ ... ] benefit [ s ] from a live setting . " Dawn Collinson from Liverpool Echo praised the encore segment and its visuals , saying " All The Lovers took Aphrodite [ : Les Folies Tour ] to an incredible climax . " Ina Andersson from The National Student felt that through the performance Minogue " delivers a powerful finish . " Megan <unk> from The Washington Post also gave it a favourable review and concluded that " Minogue is proof that it pays to know your audience . " Minogue performed " All the Lovers " as part of her seven song set at the closing ceremony of the 2014 Commonwealth Games . The track was most recently performed on the Kiss Me Once Tour and Kylie Summer 2015 Tour as the last song of the fifth and third segment before the encore . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 On 22 June 2010 , American pop group Scissor Sisters performed a country @-@ inspired version of " All the Lovers " on the Live Lounge segment of the British radio station BBC Radio 1 . The group performed this version of the song for the second time at the annual Australian music festival Splendour in the Grass in Melbourne , which is Minogue 's birthplace . She joined the group during the performance . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of " All the Lovers " . 
 Kylie Minogue - backing vocals , lead vocals 
 Jim Eliot – songwriting , production , piano , keyboards , bass and drum programming 
 Mima Stilwell – songwriting , additional backing vocals 
 Stuart Price – additional production , mixing 
 Dave Emery – mixing assistant 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Greyhound Lines = 
 Greyhound Lines , Inc . , usually shortened to Greyhound , is an intercity bus common carrier serving over 2 @,@ 700 destinations across North America . The company 's first route began in Hibbing , Minnesota , in 1914 , and the company adopted the name The Greyhound Corporation in 1929 . Since October 2007 , Greyhound has been a subsidiary of Scottish transportation company FirstGroup , but continues to be based in Dallas , Texas , where it has been headquartered since 1987 . Greyhound and sister companies in FirstGroup America are the largest motorcoach operators in the United States and Canada . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1914 – 1930 ) = = = 
 Carl Eric Wickman was born in Sweden in 1887 . In 1905 he moved to the United States where he was working in a mine as a drill operator in Alice , Minnesota , until he was laid off in 1914 . In the same year , he became a Hupmobile salesman in Hibbing , Minnesota . He proved unable to sell the car . In 1914 , using his remaining vehicle , a 7 @-@ passenger car , he began a bus service with Andy ( Bus Andy ) Anderson and <unk> ( Arvid ) <unk> , by transporting iron ore miners from Hibbing to Alice ( known for its saloons ) at 15 cents a ride . 
 In 1915 Wickman joined forces with Ralph Bogan , who was running a similar service from Hibbing to Duluth , Minnesota . The name of the new organization was the Mesaba Transportation Company , and it made $ 8 @,@ 000 in profit in its first year . 
 By the end of World War I in 1918 , Wickman owned 18 buses and was making an annual profit of $ 40 @,@ 000 . In 1922 , Wickman joined forces with Orville Caesar , the owner of the Superior White Bus Lines . Four years later , Wickman purchased two West Coast operations , the Pioneer <unk> System ( the operator of the nation 's first transcontinental bus ) and the Pickwick Lines , creating a national intercity bus company . 
 The Greyhound name had its origins in the inaugural run of a route from Superior , Wisconsin to Wausau , Wisconsin . While passing through a small town , Ed Stone , the route 's operator , saw the reflection of his 1920s era bus in a store window . The reflection reminded him of a greyhound dog , and he adopted that name for that segment of the Blue Goose Lines . The Greyhound name became popular and later applied to the entire bus network . Stone later became General Sales Manager of Yellow Truck and Coach , a division of General Motors ( GM ) , which built Greyhound buses . Wickman , as the president of the company , continued to expand it so that by 1927 , his buses were making transcontinental trips from California to New York . In 1928 , Greyhound had a gross annual income of $ 6 million . 
 In 1929 , Greyhound acquired additional interests in Southland Transportation Company , the Gray Line , and part of the Colonial Motor Coach Company to form Eastern Greyhound Lines . Greyhound also acquired an interest in Northland Transportation Company , and renamed it Northland Greyhound Lines . 
 = = = 1930 – 1945 = = = 
 By 1930 more than 100 bus lines had been consolidated into what was called the " Motor Transit Company " . Recognizing that the company needed a more memorable name , the partners of the Motor Transit Company decided to rename it after the " Greyhound " marketing phrase used by earlier bus lines . 
 Wickman 's business suffered during the Great Depression , and by 1931 was over $ 1 million in debt . 
 As the 1930s progressed and the economy improved , the Greyhound Corporation began to prosper again . In 1934 , intercity bus lines ( of which Greyhound was the largest ) carried approximately 400 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 passengers — nearly as many passengers as the Class I railroads . The 1934 hit film , It Happened One Night , the first movie to win the Big Five Academy Awards , centered on an heiress traveling by Greyhound bus . The movie is credited by the company for spurring bus travel nationwide . In 1935 , national intercity bus ridership climbed 50 % to 651 @,@ 999 @,@ 000 passengers , surpassing the volume of passengers carried by the Class I railroads for the first time . In 1935 Wickman was able to announce record profits of $ 8 million . In 1936 , already the largest bus carrier in the United States , Greyhound began taking delivery of 306 new buses . 
 To accommodate the rapid growth in bus travel , Greyhound also built many new stations in the period between 1937 and 1945 , most of them in a late Art Deco style known as Streamline Moderne . In 1937 , Greyhound embarked on a program of unifying its brand identity by acquiring both buses and terminals in the Streamline style . By the outbreak of World War II , the company had 4 @,@ 750 stations and nearly 10 @,@ 000 employees . 
 = = = Expansion , desegregation , and diversification ( 1945 – 1983 ) = = = 
 Wickman retired as president of the Greyhound Corporation in 1946 , being replaced by his long @-@ time partner Orville Caesar . Wickman died at the age of 66 in 1954 . 
 After World War II , and the building of the Interstate Highway System beginning in 1956 , automobile ownership and travel became a preferred mode of travel in the United States . This , combined with the increasing affordability of air travel , spelled trouble for Greyhound and other intercity bus carriers . 
 In 1955 , the Interstate Commerce Commission ruled in the case of Keys v. Carolina Coach Co. that U.S. interstate bus operations , such as Greyhound 's , could not be segregated by race . In 1960 , in the case of Boynton v. Virginia , the U.S. Supreme Court found that an African American had been wrongly convicted of trespassing in a " whites only " terminal area . In May 1961 , civil rights activists organized interracial Freedom Rides as proof of the desegregation rulings . On May 14 , a mob attacked pair of buses ( a Greyhound and a Trailways ) traveling from Washington , D.C. , to New Orleans , Louisiana , and slashed the Greyhound bus 's tires . Several miles outside of Anniston , Alabama , the mob forced the Greyhound bus to stop , broke its windows , and firebombed it . The mob held the bus ' doors shut , intending to burn the riders to death . Sources disagree , but either an exploding fuel tank or an undercover state investigator brandishing a revolver caused the mob to retreat . When the riders escaped the bus , the mob beat them , while warning shots fired into the air by highway patrolmen prevented them from being lynched . Title II and Title III of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 broadened protections beyond federally regulated carriers such as Greyhound , to include non @-@ discrimination in hotels , restaurants , and other public accommodations , as well as state and local government buildings . 
 Later in the 1960s , Greyhound leadership saw a trend of declining ridership and began significant changes , including using the profitable bus operations to invest in other industries . By the 1970s , Greyhound had moved its headquarters to Phoenix , Arizona and was a large and diversified company , with holdings in everything from the Armour meat @-@ packing company ( which in turn owned the popular Dial deodorant soap brand ) , acquired in 1970 ; Traveller 's Express money orders , MCI bus manufacturing company , and even airliner leasing . Indeed , Greyhound had entered a time of great change , even beginning to hire African American and female drivers in the late seventies . 
 In 1972 , Greyhound introduced the special unlimited mileage " <unk> . " The pass was initially marketed as offering " 99 days for $ 99 " ( equal to $ 560 @.@ 05 today ) or , in other words , transportation to anywhere at any time , for a dollar a day . For decades it was a popular choice for tourists on a budget who wanted to wander across the cities and towns of America . Over time Greyhound raised the price of the pass , shortened its validity period and rebranded it as the Discovery Pass , before finally discontinuing it in 2012 . 
 Greyhound acquired Premier Cruise Line in 1984 . Between 1985 and 1993 , Premier operated as the " Official Cruise Line of Walt Disney World " with onboard Disney characters . 
 = = = Consolidation , strikes , and bankruptcies ( 1983 – 2001 ) = = = 
 = = = = 1983 Greyhound drivers ' strike = = = = 
 In 1983 , Greyhound operated a fleet of 3 @,@ 800 buses and carried about 60 percent of the United States ' bus @-@ travel market . Starting November 2 , 1983 , Greyhound suffered a major and bitter drivers ' strike with one fatality in Zanesville , Ohio , when a company bus ran over a worker at a picket line . A new contract was ratified December 19 , and drivers returned to work the next day . 
 = = = = Spin @-@ off , merger , and first bankruptcy ( 1986 – 1990 ) = = = = 
 By the time contract negotiations with the Amalgamated Transit Union ( ATU ) were due again at the end of 1986 , the bus line was in the process of being sold to Dallas @-@ based investors . By early 1987 , Greyhound Lines had returned to being a stand @-@ alone bus transportation company . Under CEO Fred Currey , a former executive of rival Continental Trailways , Greyhound 's corporate headquarters relocated to Dallas , Texas . 
 In February 1987 , Greyhound Lines ' new ownership and the ATU agreed on a new , 3 @-@ year contract . In June 1987 , Greyhound Lines acquired Trailways , Inc . ( formerly Continental Trailways ) , the largest member of the rival National Trailways Bus System , effectively consolidating into a national bus service . Greyhound was required by the ICC , in their action approving the merger , to maintain coordinated schedules with other scheduled service operators in the U.S. 
 Between 1987 and 1990 , Greyhound Lines ' former parent continued to be called Greyhound Corp. , confusing passengers and investors alike . Greyhound Corp. retained both Premier Cruise Lines , and ten Greyhound @-@ brand non @-@ bus subsidiaries , such as Greyhound Leisure Services , Inc . ( an operator of airport and cruise ship duty @-@ free shops ) , and Greyhound Exhibits . In March 1990 , the former conglomerate parent changed its name to Greyhound Dial . Because Greyhound Dial 's switchboard continued to get questions from misdirected bus passengers , it ultimately changed its name to Dial Corporation in March 1991 , to eliminate any association with bus travel . 
 = = = = 1990 Greyhound drivers ' strike = = = = 
 In early 1990 , the drivers ' contract from 1987 expired at the end of its three @-@ year term . In March , the ATU began its strike against Greyhound . The 1990 drivers ' strike was similar in its bitterness to the strike of 1983 , with violence against both strikers and their replacement workers . One striker in California was killed by a Greyhound bus driven by a strikebreaker , and a shot was fired at a Greyhound bus . During the strike by its 6 @,@ 300 drivers , Greyhound idled much of its fleet of 3 @,@ 949 buses and cancelled 80 % of its routes . At the same time , Greyhound was having to contend with the rise of low @-@ cost airlines like Southwest Airlines , which further reduced the market for long @-@ distance inter @-@ city bus transportation . Without the financial strength provided in the past by a parent company , the strike 's lower revenues and higher costs for security and labor @-@ law penalties caused Greyhound to file for bankruptcy in June 1990 . The strike would not be settled for 38 months under terms favorable to Greyhound . While the National Labor Relations Board ( NLRB ) had awarded damages for unfair labor practices to the strikers , this liability was discharged during bankruptcy reorganization . 
 = = = = Early 1990s : Bankruptcy and antitrust cases = = = = 
 At the end of 1990 , the company had $ 488 million in assets and $ 654 million in liabilities . During bankruptcy , the company ultimately had to address claims for $ 142 million in back @-@ pay for its striking drivers , and $ 384 million of pre @-@ bankruptcy debts owed mostly to the investor group led by Fred G. Currey . 
 According to the company , upon emergence from bankruptcy in August 1991 , Greyhound had shrunk its overall workforce to 7 @,@ 900 employees ( from 12 @,@ 000 pre @-@ bankruptcy ) , and trimmed its fleet to 2 @,@ 750 buses and 3 @,@ 600 drivers . 
 In August 1992 , Greyhound canceled its bus terminal license ( BTL ) agreements with other carriers at 200 terminals , and imposed the requirement that Greyhound be the sole @-@ seller of the tenant 's bus tickets within a 25 @-@ mile radius of such a Greyhound terminal . In 1995 , The United States Department of Justice Antitrust Division brought suit to stop this practice , alleging that it was an illegal restraint of trade , bad for consumers , and reduced competition . In February 1996 , the United States won its case , and Greyhound agreed to permit its tenants to sell tickets nearby and permit its tenants to honor interline tickets with competitors . 
 Greyhound 's total revenues in 1994 were $ 616 million . 
 = = = = Trailways @-@ Laidlaw mergers and bankruptcy of 2001 = = = = 
 In the late 1990s , Greyhound Lines acquired two more members of the National Trailways Bus System . The company purchased Carolina Trailways in 1997 , followed by the intercity operations of Southeastern Trailways in 1998 . Following the acquisitions , most of the remaining members of the Trailways System began interlining cooperatively with Greyhound , discontinued their scheduled route services , diversified into charters and tours , or went out of business altogether . 
 On September 3 , 1997 , Burlington , Ontario @-@ based transportation conglomerate Laidlaw Inc. announced it would buy Greyhound Canada Transportation <unk> ( Greyhound 's Canadian operations ) for US $ 72 million . 
 In October 1998 , Laidlaw announced it would acquire the U.S. operations of Greyhound Lines , Inc . , including Carolina Trailways and other Greyhound affiliates , for about $ 470 million . When the acquisition was completed in March 1999 , all of Greyhound and much of Trailways had become wholly owned subsidiaries of Laidlaw . 
 After incurring heavy losses through its investments in Greyhound Lines and other parts of its diversified business , Laidlaw Inc. filed for protection under both U.S. and Canadian bankruptcy laws in June 2001 . 
 = = = Laidlaw years ( 2002 – 2007 ) = = = 
 Naperville , Illinois @-@ based Laidlaw International , Inc. listed its common shares on the New York Stock Exchange on February 10 , 2003 and emerged from re @-@ organization on June 23 , 2003 as the successor to Laidlaw Inc . 
 After this bankruptcy filing , Greyhound dropped low @-@ demand rural stops and started concentrating on dense , inter @-@ metropolitan routes . It cut nearly 37 percent of its network . In some rural areas local operators took over the old stops ( often with government subsidies ) particularly in the Plains states , parts of the upper Midwest ( such as Wisconsin ) , and the Pacific Northwest . 
 Starting in 1997 , Greyhound had faced significant competition in the northeast from Chinatown bus lines . By 2003 , more than 250 buses , operated by competitors like Fung Wah and Lucky Star Bus were competing fiercely from <unk> in the <unk> of New York City , Boston , Philadelphia , and Washington , D.C. When operating on inter @-@ city routes , the Chinatown buses offered prices about 50 % less than Greyhound 's . Between 1997 and 2007 , Chinatown buses took 60 % of Greyhound 's market share in the northeast United States . 
 = = = FirstGroup ownership ( 2007 – present ) = = = 
 On February 7 , 2007 , Scottish transport group FirstGroup purchased Laidlaw International for $ 3 @.@ 6 billion . The deal closed on September 30 , 2007 and the acquisition was completed on October 1 , 2007 Although FirstGroup 's interest was primarily the school and transit bus operations of Laidlaw , FirstGroup decided to retain the Greyhound operations and in 2009 exported the brand back to the United Kingdom as Greyhound UK . 
 Today , Greyhound 's 1 @,@ 229 buses serve over 3 @,@ 800 destinations in North America , traveling 5 @.@ 5 billion miles ( 8 @.@ 8 billion km ) on North America 's roads . 
 = = = = The " New Greyhound " = = = = 
 Almost immediately after acquiring the carrier , FirstGroup sought to improve Greyhound 's image and create what it called the " New Greyhound " , by refurbishing many terminals , expanding the fleet with new buses , refurbishing old buses , and retraining customer service staff . Greyhound also started a new advertising campaign with Butler , Shine , Stern & Partners aimed at attracting 18- to 24 @-@ year @-@ olds and Hispanics back to " The New Greyhound " . 
 The " New Greyhound " also saw the introduction of a refreshed logo and a new navy blue and dark gray livery for buses , which was rolled out to the nationwide fleet over several years . As the older buses were repainted they were also refurbished , receiving wireless Internet access , power outlets , and new leather seating with increased legroom . 
 = = = = Addressing " overbooking " = = = = 
 During its ownership by Laidlaw , Greyhound had come under criticism for its ticket sale practices , specifically that although tickets had departure dates and times printed on them , Greyhound did not always stop sales after all the seats were purchased for each departure . In periods of high demand Greyhound added additional " sections " ( buses ) , but the threshold required to trigger an additional section varied , often leaving passengers behind to wait for the next bus departure . 
 Shortly after the sale to FirstGroup closed , Greyhound began a program in select markets , where riders could reserve a seat for an additional $ 5 . However , only a limited number of seats could be reserved and the fee would have to be paid at the terminal 's ticking counter , even if the ticket was bought in advance online . 
 The problem was further addressed in 2014 when Greyhound rolled out a new yield management computer system . With the new system , Greyhound is now able to more closely manage the number of tickets sold for each departure and dynamically adjust pricing based on sales . Although the amount of overbooked buses has been sharply reduced with this new system , Greyhound still does not explicitly guarantee a seat to everyone with a ticket ( except on Greyhound Express routes ) . 
 = = = = Services Launched since 2010 = = = = 
 The next major change made by FirstGroup was the launch of a brand of premium bus routes called " Greyhound Express " in 2010 . This came at the same time that competitor Megabus launched its third and fourth US hubs at Philadelphia and Washington D.C. and began to emphasize express services . Greyhound 's express routes make fewer stops between major cities ( compared to regular Greyhound routes ) , use only newer model or refurbished buses , have guaranteed seating , and tickets start at $ 1 . Expansions in Greyhound 's network and upgrades in its services in the early 2010s were at least partly a competitive response to Megabus . In 2014 , Greyhound CEO David S. Leach claimed a profit of $ 73 million on revenues of $ 990 @.@ 6 million , and attributed the company 's success to mix of changing urban populations , less attractive driving options , and competition that was benefiting all carriers . 
 In July 2015 , the company announced that it would open terminals in Monterrey and Nuevo Laredo , Mexico , and begin services between the two cities with onward schedules to existing terminals in Texas . In so doing , Greyhound claimed to be the first American bus company to operate an intra @-@ Mexican route . In September 2015 , Greyhound announced expanded service in Missouri and Kansas shortly after Megabus announced that it would be ending service to several cities and college campuses . 
 = = Services = = 
 Greyhound operates 123 routes serving over 2 @,@ 700 destinations across America . Greyhound 's scheduled services compete with the private automobile , low @-@ cost airlines , Amtrak , and other intercity coach companies . 
 = = = Greyhound Express = = = 
 Greyhound Express is a low @-@ cost express city @-@ to @-@ city service that makes either no stops or fewer stops compared to a traditional route . Fares start at $ 1 and seating is guaranteed since buses are not overbooked . Greyhound Express was designed to directly compete with low @-@ cost carriers like Megabus and the Chinatown bus lines . 
 The service began on September 28 , 2010 with several routes radiating from New York to major cities in the Northeastern United States and rapidly expanded to serve destinations in the Midwestern , Southern and Southwestern United States . Currently the Greyhound Express network has expanded to serve 930 city pairs in nearly 120 markets , with further expansion planned . 
 Greyhound Express routes are assigned new or refurbished buses that are equipped with Wi @-@ Fi , power outlets , leather seats , and extra legroom . In many stations Greyhound Express customers can take advantage of dedicated waiting areas , separate from passengers traveling on other Greyhound services or other carriers . Some stations also board passengers onto Greyhound Express buses using numbers printed on tickets . This number is assigned in the order in which the ticket was purchased , which means that passengers who bought their tickets earlier get to board the bus and choose their seats earlier . 
 = = = Greyhound Connect = = = 
 Greyhound Connect is a connector service that operates shorter routes to take passengers from stops in smaller , rural cities to stations in larger , urban cities . Buses are either from Greyhound 's existing fleet or smaller , mid @-@ sized buses ( that are not equipped with a lavatory ) . Currently the Greyhound Connect service is offered in Alabama , Arkansas , Colorado , Maryland , Missouri , Montana , North Carolina , and Utah . Some routes are operated using funds from the " Federal Formula Grant Program for Rural Areas " from the Federal Transit Administration . 
 = = = Greyhound Charter Services = = = 
 Greyhound Charter Services arranges charter buses for customers using Greyhound 's fleet of <unk> . Unlike many smaller charter operators , Greyhound is able to operate nationwide and offer one @-@ way services , due to its network of routes . In addition to providing transportation to individual groups , schools , and event operators , Greyhound Charter Services is also approved by the military and the government as a charter bus vendor . 
 = = = Greyhound Package Express = = = 
 In addition to carrying passengers and their luggage , Greyhound buses also carry packages . Through Greyhound Package Express customers can book expedited cargo shipping door @-@ to @-@ door or station @-@ to @-@ station . The company says that shipping by bus offers a cost @-@ effective alternative to other ground or air carriers for same @-@ day delivery . 
 = = = Special routes = = = 
 = = = = Lucky Streak = = = = 
 Lucky Streak is Greyhound 's brand for routes between cities with casinos and other nearby cities . All fares are sold as open @-@ ended round @-@ trips , with passengers allowed to return to their origin at any time . On the Atlantic City routes , casinos offer special bonuses ( gambling credit , room / dining discounts ) to Lucky Streak passengers . 
 There are currently three Lucky Streak routes : 
 Atlantic City : Baltimore , Brooklyn , New York City , Philadelphia and Washington , D.C. 
 Connecticut ( Mohegan Sun & Foxwoods Casino ) : Boston , Bridgeport , New Haven , New York City , Providence , and Stamford 
 Las Vegas : Anaheim , Barstow , Claremont , Compton , El Monte , Hollywood , Long Beach , Los Angeles , Phoenix , Riverside , San Bernardino , San Diego , Santa Ana , and Victorville 
 = = = = QuickLink = = = = 
 QuickLink is Greyhound 's brand of commuter bus service that runs frequently during the peak weekday commuting hours . In addition to one @-@ way and round @-@ trip tickets QuickLink offers monthly and 10 @-@ trip passes . Passes and tickets on QuickLink are flexible and passengers can board any bus with available seating . Currently the only QuickLink route is between Mt . Laurel , New Jersey and New York City . Routes were formerly operated from Sacramento , California to the San Francisco Bay Area and Macon , Georgia to Atlanta . 
 = = Other brands and partnerships = = 
 = = = BoltBus = = = 
 BoltBus is Greyhound 's brand of non @-@ stop and limited @-@ stop , premium level bus routes . Fares start as low as $ 1 , with the lowest fares depending on how far in advance a trip is booked and demand for the trip , with fares increasing for trips booked closer to departure . BoltBus uses newer model coaches that are equipped with Wi @-@ Fi , power outlets , and leather seats with extra legroom . 
 The first buses started running between Boston , New York City , and Washington , D.C. on March 27 , 2008 . In the Northeastern US BoltBus is operated in partnership with Peter Pan Bus Lines . 
 BoltBus expanded to the West Coast in May 2012 with a route in the Pacific Northwest ( between Vancouver , BC , Seattle , and Portland ) . Service was expanded again in October 2013 with a route between the two largest metropolitan areas in California , Los Angeles and the San Francisco Bay Area ( San Jose & Oakland ) . A stop in the city of San Francisco was added in December 2013 along with a new route between Los Angeles and Las Vegas . West Coast routes are owned and operated directly by Greyhound without a regional partner . 
 = = = Amtrak Thruway Motorcoach = = = 
 Greyhound is one of the largest operators of Amtrak 's Thruway Motorcoach service even though the two companies are competitors in some markets . Amtrak issues rail passengers a ticket for a regularly scheduled Greyhound route that connects with their train , often with buses making a stop at the train station . These Thruway Motorcoach routes allow Amtrak to serve passengers in areas without rail service and offer passengers in areas with rail service a wider selection of destinations . 
 = = Security = = 
 After the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , government scrutiny of train and airplane passengers substantially increased , but bus passengers are largely free of it . Baggage is seldom inspected , and cash customers do not require identification . Greyhound says that security wands have been deployed on buses , but they do not appear to be routinely used . 
 In February 2013 , in partnership with <unk> , Greyhound deployed video cameras across its entire fleet to increase safety and driver compliance by combining data and video analytics with real @-@ time driver feedback and coaching . 
 At some major Greyhound stations , passengers are subject to open @-@ bag checks , ticket checks , and pat @-@ downs with metal detectors . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 As of 2014 , Greyhound operates 1 @,@ 272 <unk> produced mainly by Motor Coach Industries and Prevost . 
 In an effort to improve its image , between 2007 and 2014 , the company aggressively purchased new coaches and refurbishing existing ones . As of 2016 , the majority of Greyhound 's fleet has the navy blue and grey " neoclassic " livery on the exterior , wireless internet access , leather seating , and 120 @-@ volt power outlets at most seats . Greyhound 's coaches have one fewer row of seats than the industry standard , giving passengers additional legroom . All buses purchased since 2009 have three @-@ point seat belts installed . 
 The majority of the Greyhound fleet consists of the following models : 
 = = Stations and stops = = 
 ( This list covers stations within or adjacent to larger transportation centers . ) 
 Greyhound serves over 2 @,@ 700 destinations across America . There are 230 Greyhound operated stations in most major cities , where passengers can catch a bus and buy tickets . All stations have Greyhound branding and are staffed by company representatives . Some stations stand alone , while others are a part of larger transportation centers with a Greyhound ticket counter and waiting area . 
 In small to mid @-@ size cities Greyhound buses stop at either locations operated by an agent ( like a convenience store or another business ) or at a curbside stop . At most agent operated locations , the staff can also sell tickets . 
 Greyhound buses also stop at stations belonging to partner bus companies . At most of these locations , representatives are able to sell tickets for Greyhound routes . 
 = = Notable incidents and accidents = = 
 Below is a list of major incidents and accidents on Greyhound buses and buses of subsidiaries in the United States . 
 August 4 , 1952 : In Greyhound 's most deadly collision two Greyhound buses collided head @-@ on with each other along the then @-@ U.S. Route 81 near Waco , Texas . The fuel tanks of both buses then ruptured , bursting into flames . Of the 56 persons aboard both coaches , 28 were killed , including both drivers . 
 May 13 , 1972 : Near Bean Station , Tennessee , between Knoxville and Bristol , a Greyhound <unk> on a scheduled trip from Memphis to New York City collided head @-@ on with a tractor @-@ trailer truck . The driver of the bus had begun to pass a car . Fourteen people , including both the bus and truck drivers , died . The National Transportation Safety Board determined that the cause of the crash was the Greyhound driver 's overtaking maneuver and his failure to avoid the truck . 
 May 9 , 1980 : A cargo ship collided with the Sunshine Skyway Bridge , near St. Petersburg , Florida , causing a part of the roadway to collapse and causing several vehicles , including a Greyhound bus , to fall into Tampa Bay . All 26 people aboard the bus died , as did nine others . 
 December 18 , 1990 : A Greyhound bus left Salt Lake City for Chicago and became entrenched in a driving snowstorm on I @-@ 80 . Just short of the Wyoming border , the bus was hit by a semi @-@ tractor trailer that had crossed the median heading the opposite direction . The force of the collision tipped the bus onto its right side and steered it down a steep embankment . The bus slid for 150 feet and came to rest against a fence , about 35 feet below the eastbound lanes of I @-@ 80 . 7 passengers were killed and more than 40 injured . 
 June 20 , 1998 : A Greyhound bus on a scheduled trip from New York City to Pittsburgh ran off a road near Burnt Cabins , Pennsylvania , and hit a truck parked in an emergency parking area . Six passengers and the driver died . The National Transportation Safety Board determined that the probable cause of the accident was the driver 's use of a sedating antihistamine and driver fatigue , due to an irregular work @-@ rest schedule . 
 October 3 , 2001 : At approximately 4 : 15 a.m. local time , a passenger , Damir Igric , assaulted the driver of his bus , attempting to slit his throat , and causing the bus to crash near Manchester , Tennessee , killing Igric himself and five other passengers and injuring 32 others . Since the incident occurred three weeks after the September 11 terrorist attacks , Greyhound temporarily suspended all schedules as soon as the company learned of the incident for fear that it may have been part of a larger co @-@ ordinated attack . After investigation by the company and the FBI , it was confirmed that Igric had acted alone and service resumed later that afternoon . After the incident , Greyhound bus stations increased security , though not nearly to the same level as airports or train stations . 
 September 30 , 2002 : Arturo Martinez Tapia assaulted a Greyhound driver near Fresno , California , resulting in two passenger deaths after the bus then rolled off an embankment and crashed . Following this attack , an aisle gate and driver 's shield were installed on most Greyhound buses which prevent passengers from having direct contact with the driver when the bus is in motion , even if the aisle gate is forced open . 
 January 23 , 2014 : <unk> <unk> Morris , ' who reportedly was hallucinating , screamed " Everybody 's going to die , " pummeled the driver and grabbed the steering wheel ' of a bus traveling on Interstate 10 near Tonopah , Arizona , 50 miles ( 80 km ) west of Phoenix . 24 passengers were injured , including 21 who were airlifted to nearby hospitals . Police credited the driver for keeping the bus upright and preventing it from crossing into oncoming traffic . 
 January 19 , 2016 : An overnight bus carrying 20 passengers that had departed from Los Angeles the previous night crashed on Highway 101 in San Jose , California , killing two and hospitalizing eight others . Investigators have ruled out mechanical failure , leaving driver fatigue as the likely cause . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 The 1934 film It Happened One Night shows the main character on a Greyhound bus from Florida to New York City . 
 The 1961 film Breakfast at Tiffany 's shows the main character seeing her ex @-@ husband off from New York City . 
 The 1969 film Midnight Cowboy shows the main character holding his hustler friend on a New York City to Florida bus . 
 The 1974 film Harry and Tonto shows the main character , played by Art Carney , traveling cross @-@ country with his cat aboard a Greyhound bus . 
 The 1991 film Sleeping with the Enemy sees the main character escape from Cape Cod , Massachusetts , to Cedar Falls , Iowa , on a Greyhound bus . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The Barry Mann / Cynthia Weil 1963 song " On Broadway " ( remade most famously by The Drifters and later George Benson ) mentions " I 'll catch a Greyhound bus for home " . 
 Chuck Berry rides a Greyhound bus from Norfolk , Virginia , to Birmingham , Alabama , in his 1965 song " Promised Land " . 
 Country singer Roy Clark sang about a romantic breakup in his 1970 song " Thank God and Greyhound . " 
 The Allman Brothers Band referenced Greyhound Lines in their 1973 song " Ramblin ' Man " . 
 Simon and Garfunkel referred to Greyhound Lines in their 1972 song " America " . 
 In his song " Me and the Devil Blues " , blues singer and guitarist Robert Johnson expresses a wish that his body be buried beside a road so that his " old evil spirit " can " catch a Greyhound bus and ride " . 
 Country star Sara Evans ' 2003 song " Backseat of a Greyhound Bus " describes a pregnant woman who escapes the confines of a small town and gives birth in a Greyhound bus . 
 On indie rock band The Hang Ups ' album So We Go , the last song is called " Greyhound Bus " . 
 Creedence Clearwater Revival mention Greyhound in their 1969 song , " Lodi " . 
 Billy Joel 's " New York State of Mind " from the <unk> album , released on May 19 , 1976 , refers to taking " a Greyhound on the Hudson River Line " . 
 American rock band The Mountain Goats references the narrator being " headed for the greyhound " in " See America Right " off of the album Tallahassee . 
 Kenny Chesney 's song " Pirate Flag " describes the singer 's escape from a small mountain town by taking a Greyhound bus to ( what is implied to be ) Key West , Florida . 
 Dexter <unk> 's 2000 hit " Leaving Town " mentions Greyhound ( " Take a drag and wait for the Greyhound , the world is your playground " ) . 
 Los Angeles – based rapper Skee @-@ Lo recites Greyhound 's advertising slogan in his 1995 hit single " I Wish " ( " Cause if you don 't want me around , See I go simple , I go easy , I go Greyhound " ) . 
 Death Cab for Cutie 's 2005 song " Soul Meets Body " contains the lyric " Cause in my head there ’ s a Greyhound station ... " . 
 = = = Stage productions = = = 
 The stage musical Violet , like the short story " The Ugliest Pilgrim " on which it is based , follows the title character on a Greyhound Bus trip from Spruce Pine , North Carolina , to Tulsa , Oklahoma , and back . 
 = Circinus = 
 Circinus is a small , faint constellation in the southern sky , first defined in 1756 by the French astronomer Nicolas @-@ Louis de Lacaille . Its name is Latin for compass , referring to the drafting tool used for drawing circles ( it should not be confused with Pyxis , a constellation that represents a mariner 's compass which points north ) . Its brightest star is Alpha Circini , with an apparent magnitude of 3 @.@ 19 . Slightly variable , it is the brightest rapidly oscillating Ap star in the night sky . AX Circini is a Cepheid variable visible with the unaided eye , and BX Circini is a faint star thought to have been formed from the merger of two white dwarfs . Two sun @-@ like stars have planetary systems : HD 134060 has two small planets , and HD 129445 has a Jupiter @-@ like planet . Supernova SN 185 appeared in Circinus in 185 AD and was recorded by Chinese observers . Two novae have been observed more recently , in the 20th century . 
 The Milky Way runs through the constellation , featuring prominent objects such as the open cluster NGC 5823 and the planetary nebula NGC <unk> . Circinus hosts one notable spiral galaxy , the Circinus Galaxy , which was discovered in 1977 and is the closest Seyfert galaxy to the Milky Way . The Alpha <unk> ( ACI ) , a meteor shower also discovered in 1977 , radiate from this constellation . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1756 , French astronomer Nicolas @-@ Louis de Lacaille introduced the constellation of Circinus with the French name le Compas , representing a pair of dividing compasses , on a chart of the southern sky . On that chart , Lacaille portrayed the constellations of Norma , Circinus , and Triangulum Australe , respectively , as a set square and ruler , a compass , and a surveyor 's level in a set of draughtsman 's instruments . Circinus was given its current name in 1763 , when Lacaille published an updated sky map with Latin names for the constellations he introduced . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Bordered by Centaurus , Musca , Apus , Triangulum Australe , Norma and Lupus , Circinus lies adjacent to the Alpha and Beta Centauri stars . As it is at declination − 50 ° to − 70 ° , the whole constellation is only visible south of latitude 30 ° N. The official constellation boundaries , as set by Eugène Delporte in 1930 , are defined by a polygon of 14 segments . In the equatorial coordinate system , the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 13h <unk> and 15h <unk> , and the declination coordinates are between − 55 @.@ 43 ° and − 70 @.@ 62 ° . Circinus culminates each year at 9 p.m. on 30 July . The recommended three @-@ letter abbreviation for the constellation , as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922 , is ' Cir ' . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 Circinus is a faint constellation , with only one star brighter than fourth magnitude . Alpha Circini , a white main sequence star with an apparent magnitude of 3 @.@ 19 , is 54 light @-@ years away and 4 ° south of Alpha Centauri . Not only the brightest star in the constellation , it is also the brightest example of a rapidly oscillating Ap ( <unk> ) star in the night sky . It has the unusual spectral type A7 Vp <unk> , showing increased emissions of strontium , chromium and europium . Stars of this type have oddly localised magnetic fields and are slightly variable . Alpha Circini forms a binary star system with an orange dwarf companion of spectral type K5 and magnitude 8 @.@ 5 , which with a separation of 5 @.@ 7 arcseconds is only discernible with a telescope . The distance between the two stars is 260 AU and they take 2600 years to rotate around a common centre of gravity . The second brightest star is Beta Circini , a white main sequence star of spectral type <unk> and a magnitude of 4 @.@ 07 , about 100 light @-@ years away . It has around 1 @.@ 8 times the diameter of the Sun . 
 Gamma Circini is a binary star 450 light @-@ years away , whose components need a telescope of 150 mm to be seen , as they are only 0 @.@ 8 arcseconds apart . The brighter component is a bluish Be star of spectral type <unk> + and magnitude 4 @.@ 51 , while the dimmer component is a yellow star of magnitude 5 @.@ 5 . They orbit each other every 180 years . Delta Circini is also a multiple star whose components have magnitudes of 5 @.@ 1 and 13 @.@ 4 and orbit around a common centre of gravity every 3 @.@ 9 days . The brighter component is a close eclipsing binary ( specifically , a rotating ellipsoidal variable ) , with a minor dip of magnitude ( 0 @.@ 1 ) . Both are hot blue stars of spectral types <unk> @-@ V and <unk> , respectively , and are estimated to have around 22 and 12 times the Sun 's mass . Over 3600 light @-@ years away , this system would outshine Venus at magnitude − 4 @.@ 8 if it were 32 light @-@ years ( 10 parsecs ) distant . The two main components are separated by 50 arcseconds , resolvable to the naked eye for individuals with good vision and easily discernible with a telescope . 
 Eta Circini is a yellow giant of spectral type G8III and magnitude 5 @.@ 17 , located around 276 light @-@ years distant , and Zeta Circini is a blue @-@ white main sequence star of spectral type B3V and magnitude 6 @.@ 09 , located around 1273 light @-@ years away . 
 493 variable stars have been recorded in Circinus , but most have a very small range or are quite dim . Three prominent examples are Theta Circini , T Circini , and AX Circini . Theta Circini is a B @-@ class irregular variable , ranging in magnitude from 5 @.@ 0 to 5 @.@ 4 . T Circini has a B @-@ type spectrum , ranging in magnitude from 10 @.@ 6 to 9 @.@ 3 over a period of 3 @.@ 298 days , although it is actually an eclipsing binary system rather than a pulsating star . AX is a Cepheid variable that varies between magnitudes 5 @.@ 6 and 6 @.@ 19 over 5 @.@ 3 days . It is a yellow @-@ white supergiant of spectral type <unk> + , 1600 light @-@ years away . BP Circini is another Cepheid variable with an apparent magnitude ranging from 7 @.@ 37 to 7 @.@ 71 over 2 @.@ 4 days . Both <unk> are spectroscopic binaries , with companions that are blue @-@ white stars of spectral type B6 and 5 and 4 @.@ 7 solar masses respectively . BX Circini is a faint star that fluctuates between magnitudes 12 @.@ 57 and 12 @.@ 62 over a period of 2 hours 33 minutes . Over 99 % of its composition appears to be helium . Its origin is unclear , but thought to be the result of the merger of a helium and a carbon / oxygen white dwarf . 
 Several stars with planetary systems lie within the borders of Circinus , although none of the host stars are particularly prominent . HD 134060 is a sun @-@ like yellow dwarf star of spectral type <unk> + 0 @.@ 4 and magnitude 6 @.@ 29 , around 79 light @-@ years away . Its two planets were discovered in 2011 through the radial velocity method : the smaller , HD 134060 b , has a mass of 0 @.@ <unk> MJ ( Jupiter masses ) and orbits its star every 3 @.@ 27 days , at 0 @.@ <unk> AU ; the larger , HD 134060 c ( 0 @.@ 15 MJ ) , orbits farther out at 2 @.@ 226 AU , with a period of approximately 1161 days . Even fainter , at magnitude 8 @.@ 8 , HD 129445 is 220 light @-@ years away and has 99 % of the Sun 's mass and a similar spectral type of G8V . HD 129445 b , a Jupiter @-@ like planet ( 1 @.@ 6 MJ ) discovered in 2010 via the radial velocity method , orbits this star at a distance of 2 @.@ 9 AU , approximately every 1840 days . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sky objects = = = 
 Three open clusters and a planetary nebula are found within the borders of Circinus , all visible with amateur telescopes of varying sizes . NGC 5823 , also called Caldwell 88 , is an 800 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old open cluster , located 3500 light @-@ years away and spanning a 12 @-@ light @-@ year region along the constellation 's northern border . Despite having an integrated magnitude of 7 @.@ 9 , the cluster can be seen by star hopping from Beta Circini or from Alpha Centauri . It contains 80 – 100 stars of 10th magnitude and fainter , which are spread out over a diameter of 10 arcseconds . The brighter stars , however , are not true members of the cluster , as they are closer to the Earth than the dimmer ones . NGC 5823 appears distinct to the observer , sometimes seen as a reversed " S " , as described by John Herschel , although it has also been described as " tulip @-@ shaped " and " boxy " . That cluster can be easily mistaken with a similar cluster , NGC <unk> , nearby in Lupus . Comparatively , open cluster NGC <unk> is fainter ( integrated magnitude of 9 @.@ 8 ) — its brightest star is only 11th magnitude — and smaller ( 7 @.@ 0 arcminutes ) , comprising only 30 stars . The third open cluster , <unk> 20 , contains 12 stars in a diameter of 4 @.@ 5 arcseconds but exhibits a magnitude similar to NGC 5823 ( 7 @.@ 8 ) . At <unk> light @-@ years , it requires an amateur telescope with an aperture over 300 mm to be easily discerned . 
 The planetary nebula NGC <unk> has a magnitude of 9 @.@ 8 around a central star of magnitude 14 @.@ 2 , located 5 @.@ 2 degrees west @-@ southwest of Alpha Circini . It is only visible as a disc at magnifications over 200 @-@ fold . Bernes 145 is a dark and reflection nebula first listed in the 1971 Bernes Catalog . The dark nebula component is easily visible in a large amateur telescope , and it measures 12 by 5 arcminutes . The smaller reflection nebula component requires a larger instrument and averted vision to be seen . 
 Circinus also houses ESO 97 @-@ G13 , commonly known as the Circinus Galaxy . Discovered in 1977 , it is a relatively unobscured galaxy ( magnitude 10 @.@ 6 ) , which is unusual for galaxies located in constellations near the Milky Way , since their dim light is obscured by gas and dust . This oblong spiral galaxy with 6 @.@ 9 by 3 @.@ 0 arcminutes and 26 @,@ 000 light @-@ years in diameter , is located 13 million light @-@ years away from Earth and lies 4 degrees off the galactic plane . It is the closest Seyfert galaxy to the Milky Way , and therefore hosts an active galactic nucleus . 
 Circinus X @-@ 1 is an X @-@ ray binary star system that includes a neutron star . Observations of Circinus X @-@ 1 in July 2007 revealed the presence of X @-@ ray jets normally found in black hole systems . Located at 19 @,@ 000 light @-@ years , the pulsar PSR <unk> @-@ 58 , also called the Circinus Pulsar , has expelled a 20 @-@ light @-@ year @-@ long jet of material from its southern pole , clearly visible in the X @-@ ray spectrum . Another supernova remnant in Circinus is that of SN 185 . Recorded by Chinese observers in 185 AD , SN 185 was visible in the night sky for around eight months ; its remnants , known as <unk> 86 , cover an area larger than the typical full moon . 
 A white dwarf star in a close binary system can accumulate material from its companion until it ignites and blows off in a thermonuclear explosion , known as a nova . These stars generally brighten by 7 to 16 magnitudes . Nova Circini 1926 , also known as X Circini , was observed at magnitude 6 @.@ 5 on 3 September 1926 , before fading and fluctuating between magnitudes 11 @.@ 7 and 12 @.@ 5 , during 1928 , and magnitude 13 , in 1929 . Nova Circini 1995 ( BY Circini ) reached an maximum apparent magnitude of 7 @.@ 2 in January 1995 . BW Circini is a low mass X @-@ ray binary system , comprising a black hole of around 8 solar masses and a yellow <unk> @-@ <unk> subgiant star . X @-@ ray outbursts were recorded in 1987 and 1997 , and possibly 1971 – 72 . 
 = = = Meteor showers = = = 
 Circinus is the radiant of an annual meteor shower , the Alpha <unk> ( ACI ) . First observed in Queensland in 1977 , the meteors have an average velocity of 27 @.@ 1 km / s and are thought to be associated with a long @-@ period comet . In 2011 , Peter <unk> proposed that the debris trail of comet C / 1969 T1 could intersect with the Earth 's orbit and generate a meteor outburst coming from a radiant close to Beta Circini . The ACI shower peaks on 4 June , the day it was first observed . 
 = Byzantine civil war of 1341 – 47 = 
 The Byzantine civil war of 1341 – 47 , sometimes referred to as the Second Palaiologan Civil War , was a conflict that broke out after the death of Andronikos III Palaiologos over the guardianship of his nine @-@ year @-@ old son and heir , John V Palaiologos . It pitted on the one hand Andronikos III 's chief minister , John VI Kantakouzenos , and on the other the Empress @-@ Dowager Anna of Savoy , the Patriarch of Constantinople John XIV Kalekas , and the megas doux Alexios Apokaukos . The war polarized Byzantine society along class lines , with the aristocracy backing Kantakouzenos and the lower and middle classes supporting the regency . To a lesser extent , the conflict acquired religious overtones . Byzantium was embroiled in the <unk> controversy , and adherence to the mystical doctrine of Hesychasm was often equated with support for Kantakouzenos . 
 As the chief aide and closest friend of Emperor Andronikos III , Kantakouzenos became regent for the under @-@ age John V upon the Emperor 's death in June 1341 . While Kantakouzenos was absent from Constantinople in September the same year , a coup d 'état led by Alexios Apokaukos and the Patriarch John XIV secured the support of Empress Anna and established a new regency . In response , Kantakouzenos ' army and supporters proclaimed him co @-@ emperor in October , cementing the rift between himself and the new regency . The split immediately escalated into armed conflict . 
 During the first years of the war , forces of the new regency prevailed . In the wake of several anti @-@ aristocratic uprisings , most notably that of the Zealots in Thessalonica , a majority of the cities in Thrace and Macedonia came under regency control . With assistance from Stefan Dušan of Serbia and Umur Beg of Aydin , Kantakouzenos successfully reversed these gains . By 1345 , despite Dušan 's defection to the opposition and the withdrawal of Umur , Kantakouzenos retained the upper hand through the assistance of Orhan , ruler of the Ottoman emirate . The June 1345 murder of megas doux Apokaukos , the regency 's chief administrator , dealt the regency a severe blow . Formally crowned as emperor in Adrianople in 1346 , Kantakouzenos entered Constantinople on 3 February 1347 . By agreement , he was to rule for ten years as the senior emperor and regent for John V , until the boy came of age and ruled alongside him . Despite this apparent victory , subsequent resumption of the civil war forced John VI Kantakouzenos to abdicate and retire to become a monk in 1354 . 
 The consequences of the prolonged conflict proved disastrous for the Empire , which had regained a measure of stability under Andronikos III . Seven years of warfare , the presence of marauding armies , social turmoil , and the advent of the Black Death devastated Byzantium and reduced it to a rump state . The conflict also allowed Dušan to conquer Albania , Epirus and most of Macedonia , where he established the Serbian Empire . The Bulgarian Empire also acquired territory north of the Evros river . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1341 , the once @-@ mighty Byzantine Empire was in a state of turmoil . Despite the restoration of the Empire 's capital to Constantinople and the recovery of a measure of its former power by Michael VIII Palaiologos ( r . 1259 – 1282 ) , the policies implemented during his reign had exhausted the state 's resources , and the Empire 's strength waned under his successor , Andronikos II Palaiologos ( r . 1282 – 1328 ) . During Andronikos II 's long reign , the remaining Byzantine possessions in Asia Minor slowly fell to the advancing Turks , most notably the newly established Ottoman emirate . This caused a flood of refugees into Byzantium 's European provinces , while at the same time the Catalan Company wrought havoc in the imperial domains . Taxes also rose dramatically to finance tributes to the Empire 's enemies . A combination of these failures and personal ambition moved the Emperor 's grandson and heir , the young Andronikos III Palaiologos , to revolt . Supported by a group of young aristocrats led by John Kantakouzenos and Syrgiannes Palaiologos , Andronikos III deposed his grandfather after a series of conflicts during the 1320s . Although successful in removing the old Emperor from power , the war did not augur well for the future , as the Empire 's neighbours — the Serbs , Bulgarians , Turks , Genoese and Venetians — took advantage of Byzantine infighting to gain territory or expand their influence within the Empire . 
 The only son of a former governor of the Byzantine holdings in the Morea , John Kantakouzenos was related to the Palaiologoi through his mother . He inherited vast estates in Macedonia , Thrace and Thessaly , and became a childhood friend and the closest and most trusted advisor of Andronikos III . During Andronikos III 's reign ( 1328 – 1341 ) , John Kantakouzenos acted as his chief minister , holding the office of megas domestikos , commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Byzantine army . The relationship between the two remained close , and in 1330 , when the heirless Andronikos III ( John V was born in 1332 ) fell ill he insisted that Kantakouzenos be proclaimed Emperor or regent after his death . Their ties were further strengthened in the spring of 1341 , when the latter 's eldest son , Matthew Kantakouzenos , wed Irene Palaiologina , a cousin of the Emperor . 
 Unlike Andronikos II , who had disbanded the Byzantine army and navy , and who favoured monks and intellectuals , Andronikos III was an energetic ruler who personally led his forces in military campaigns . In 1329 , his first campaign against the Ottomans resulted in a disastrous defeat at the Battle of <unk> , after which the Byzantine position in Bithynia rapidly collapsed . Subsequent sorties into the Balkans were nevertheless successful in shoring up Andronikos ' tottering realm . Thessaly and the Despotate of Epirus , two territories separated from the Empire after the Fourth Crusade , were restored to imperial rule , almost without bloodshed in 1328 and 1337 respectively . Andronikos III also rebuilt a modest fleet , which allowed him to recover the rich and strategically placed island of Chios from the Genoese Zaccaria family in 1329 as well as to claim the allegiance of <unk> Cattaneo , the Genoese governor of Phocaea on the Anatolian mainland . In 1335 , however , <unk> 's son Domenico captured the island of Lesbos with Genoese assistance . The Emperor led a fleet to recover it and Phocaea , and requested the aid of the Turkish emirs of Saruhan and Aydin . Saruhan sent troops and supplies , but Aydin 's ruler Umur Beg came to meet the Emperor in person . It was during this encounter that Kantakouzenos and Umur established a long @-@ lasting close friendship and alliance . 
 A war with Serbia in 1331 – 1334 proved less successful for the Emperor when several towns in Macedonia were captured by the Serbs , led by the renegade Syrgiannes Palaiologos . These gains were only curtailed when the assassination of Syrgiannes and the threat of a Hungarian invasion forced the Serbian ruler , Stefan Dušan , to seek a negotiated settlement . The subsequent peace treaty concluded between Andronikos III and Dušan was important for the future of Byzantine @-@ Serbian relations . For the first time , the Byzantines recognized the extensive gains the Serbs had made at the Empire 's expense in the central Balkans during Andronikos II 's reign . In the aftermath of the pact , Dušan also moved his seat , and with it his realm 's centre of gravity , south to Prilep . 
 Although the loss of Asia Minor proved irreversible , successes in Epirus and Thessaly led to a consolidation of the Empire in the Greek @-@ speaking lands of the southern Balkans . Andronikos III and Kantakouzenos planned further campaigns to recover the Latin principalities of southern Greece , a project of major long @-@ term importance , for , as the historian Donald Nicol writes , " if the whole peninsula of Greece could be united under Byzantine government then the Empire would once again be a homogeneous structure , able to stand up to the Serbians , the Italians and its other enemies . It would be small , but it would be a compact and manageable economic and administrative unit running from Cape Matapan to Thessalonica and Constantinople " . 
 = = Kantakouzenos ' regency : June – September 1341 = = 
 Following a short illness , on the night of 14 – 15 June 1341 the emperor Andronikos III died at the relatively early age of 45 , possibly due to chronic malaria . His nine @-@ year @-@ old son John ( John V ) was the obvious successor , but he had not been officially proclaimed or crowned as co @-@ emperor . This left a legal vacuum , and raised the question of who would lead the Empire 's government . 
 According to Byzantine custom , the empress @-@ dowager automatically headed any regency . Nevertheless , despite the lack of any formal appointment , Kantakouzenos placed Andronikos III 's sons and the Empress @-@ dowager Anna of Savoy under armed guard in the palace , and in a meeting of the Byzantine Senate claimed for himself the regency and governance of the state by virtue of his close association with the deceased Emperor . He also demanded that John V marry forthwith his own daughter Helena Kantakouzene . This claim was disputed by Patriarch John XIV Kalekas , who presented a document from Andronikos dating from 1334 , assigning to him the care of the imperial family in the case of his death . Only after a demonstration of the capital 's troops on 20 June did Kantakouzenos secure recognition as regent and control of the reins of government , as well as maintaining control over the army as its megas domestikos . 
 Nevertheless , opposition to Kantakouzenos began to coalesce around three figures : the Patriarch , a forceful man determined to have a voice in the governance of the Empire , the Empress @-@ regent , who feared that Kantakouzenos would dispossess her son , and last but not least Alexios Apokaukos , the ambitious megas doux ( commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the navy ) and head of the bureaucracy . A " new man " promoted to high office as the protégé of Andronikos III and possibly the richest man in the Empire by 1341 , Apokaukos was distrusted by the hereditary aristocracy . The only surviving narrative accounts of the period , Kantakouzenos 's memoirs and the history of Nikephoros Gregoras , with their pro @-@ aristocracy bias , paint a very negative picture of the man . According to Kantakouzenos , Apokaukos ' adherence to the Patriarch 's camp resulted from his ambition : Apokaukos sought further advancement by trying to convince Kantakouzenos to declare himself Emperor . When the latter refused , Apokaukos secretly switched his allegiance . 
 In Donald Nicol 's opinion , had Kantakouzenos remained at Constantinople , his authority might have remained secure . As the megas domestikos and regent however , he had the duty of dealing with the Empire 's various enemies , who sought to take advantage of Andronikos ' death . Dušan had invaded Macedonia , the Emir of Saruhan raided the coasts of Thrace , and Tsar Ivan Alexander of Bulgaria threatened war . In July Kantakouzenos left the capital at the head of the army , leaving control of the government to Apokaukos , whom he still believed loyal to him . Kantakouzenos ' campaign proved successful . He persuaded Dušan to withdraw and repulsed the Turkish raiders , while Ivan Alexander , threatened by a fleet from the Emirate of Aydin , renewed his peace treaty with Byzantium . To crown this success , Kantakouzenos received an embassy of the Latin barons of the Principality of Achaea in the Morea . They expressed readiness to surrender the country in exchange for a guarantee of their property and rights . It was a unique opportunity , as Kantakouzenos himself recognized in his memoirs , since if successful , the Catalan @-@ controlled Duchy of Athens was bound to follow , consolidating Byzantine control over Greece . 
 At this point Kantakouzenos received grave news from Constantinople . In late August Apokaukos attempted a coup and tried to kidnap John V. Having failed , he fled to his fortified house at Epibatai , where he was blockaded by troops . Kantakouzenos returned to Constantinople in early September , where he stayed for a few weeks consulting with the Empress . On his way back to Thrace to prepare for a campaign into the Morea , he went to Epibatai , where he pardoned Apokaukos and restored him to his former offices . 
 = = Outbreak of the war : Autumn 1341 = = 
 Kantakouzenos ' second departure proved a great error . Back in the capital , his enemies moved in his absence . Apokaukos gathered a group of high @-@ ranking aristocrats around him , including men such as the megas droungarios John <unk> or George <unk> , whom he tied to himself by marriage alliances . The Patriarch , backed by Apokaukos ' group and the authority of the Empress , dismissed Kantakouzenos from his offices and declared him a public enemy . Kalekas himself was proclaimed regent and Apokaukos named Eparch of Constantinople . Kantakouzenos ' relatives and supporters were imprisoned or forced to flee the city , and their properties confiscated . Although Kantakouzenos ' wife and children were safe in his headquarters at Demotika ( Didymoteicho ) , the regency placed his mother , Theodora , under house arrest . The privations she suffered during her imprisonment were to cause her eventual death . 
 As the first groups of his partisans fleeing the capital arrived at Demotika , Kantakouzenos , by his own account , tried to negotiate with the new regency , but his approach was rebuffed . Finally forced to take decisive action , on 26 October 1341 , the army ( 2 @,@ 000 cavalry and 4 @,@ 000 infantry , according to Gregoras ) and his supporters , largely drawn from the land @-@ holding aristocracy , proclaimed Kantakouzenos Emperor . Although he still presented himself officially as a junior colleague to John V , and claimed to be only acting in the boy 's name , having staked his claim on the throne , he had effectively started a civil war . Kantakouzenos still hoped that negotiation might resolve the situation , but all his envoys were imprisoned and he and his supporters excommunicated by Patriarch John XIV . On 19 November 1341 , the regency responded to Kantakouzenos ' proclamation as Emperor with the formal coronation of John V. 
 Reaction to Kantakouzenos ' proclamation caused a rift in Byzantine society , with the rich and powerful land @-@ holding magnates ( traditionally called the <unk> , the " powerful ones " ) who dominated the countryside quickly rallying to support him , while the ordinary population , often living in abject conditions and suffering under oppressive taxation , supported the Empress @-@ dowager and the Patriarch . Apokaukos was especially quick to capitalize upon this division and foment popular dislike for the aristocracy , by widely publicizing the immense wealth confiscated from Kantakouzenos ' and his supporters ' houses and estates . In the words of Donald Nicol , " it was against him [ Kantakouzenos ] and everything that he stood for as a millionaire and landowning aristocrat that the people rose up . ' Kantakouzenism ' became their war cry , the slogan of their discontent " . 
 Thus the battle lines of the civil war were drawn up between urban and rural factions . The cities , dominated by the middle @-@ class civil bureaucracy and merchant class ( the " people of the market " ) , favoured a more mercantile economy and close relations with the Italian maritime republics , while the countryside remained under the control of the conservative landed aristocracy , which derived its wealth from its estates and traditionally shunned commercial and entrepreneurial activities as unworthy of its status . The lower social strata tended to support the respective dominant faction , the middle classes in the cities and the landholding magnates in the countryside . 
 Polarization of this nature was not new in the Byzantine Empire . Evidence of competition between the landed aristocracy and the city @-@ based middle classes in the political , economic and social spheres has been attested since the 11th century , but the scale of the conflict that erupted in 1341 was unprecedented . This class conflict was mirrored in the breakaway Byzantine Empire of Trebizond as well , where a pro @-@ imperial and pro @-@ Constantinopolitan urban faction confronted the provincial landholding aristocracy between 1340 and 1349 ( cf . Niketas <unk> ) . The more conservative and anti @-@ Western tendencies of the aristocrats , and their links to the staunchly Orthodox and anti @-@ Catholic monasteries , also explain their increased attachment to the mystical Hesychasm movement advocated by Gregory Palamas , whose views were mostly opposed in the cities . Although several significant exceptions leave the issue open to question among modern scholars , in the contemporary popular mind ( and in traditional historiography ) , the supporters of " <unk> " and of " Kantakouzenism " were usually equated . Kantakouzenos ' eventual victory also meant the victory of Hesychasm , confirmed in a synod in Constantinople in 1351 . Hesychasm eventually became a hallmark of the Orthodox church tradition , although it was rejected by the Catholics as a heresy . 
 The first manifestation of this social division appeared in Adrianople where , on 27 October , the populace expelled the city 's aristocrats , securing it for the regency . This event was repeated over the next weeks in town after town throughout Thrace and Macedonia , as the people declared their support for the regency and against the despised forces of " Kantakouzenism " . In this hostile atmosphere , many of Kantakouzenos ' soldiers abandoned him and returned to Constantinople . In Demotika alone the popular uprising was quelled , and the town remained Kantakouzenos ' main stronghold in Thrace throughout the war . 
 = = Kantakouzenos seeks Dušan 's aid : 1342 = = 
 When heavy snowfall rendered campaigning impossible during the following winter , Kantakouzenos instead sent envoys , including an embassy of monks from Mount Athos to Constantinople . However , they too were dismissed by the Patriarch . By then , almost all of the Byzantine provinces and their governors had declared themselves for the regency . Only Theodore Synadenos , an old associate of Kantakouzenos who was the governor of the Empire 's second city , Thessalonica , indicated his support . Synadenos had kept his allegiance to Kantakouzenos secret from the city 's populace , and intended to surrender Thessalonica in collusion with the local aristocracy . Furthermore , Hrelja , the Serbian magnate and virtually independent ruler of Strumica and the Strymon River valley , seemed to lean towards Kantakouzenos . Consequently , as soon as the weather improved , on 2 March 1342 , Kantakouzenos left his wife Irene <unk> , his brother @-@ in @-@ law Manuel Asen and his daughters to hold Demotika and marched west with his army toward Thessalonica . On the way , he first attacked Peritheorion but was repelled and continued westward . Kantakouzenos was however able to take fortress Melnik , where he met with Hrelja to forge an alliance . Their two armies marched toward Thessalonica , but arrived too late to take control . As they approached the city , they were met by Synadenos and other aristocrats , who had fled after an uprising led by a radical popular party , the Zealots . Soon afterwards a fleet of 70 ships led by Apokaukos reinforced the city . Synadenos , whose family had remained behind in Thessalonica , defected to the regency . Apokaukos ' son John was appointed governor of Thessalonica , although effective power rested with the Zealots , who for the next seven years led an autonomous regime unparalleled in Byzantine history . 
 At the same time , the regency 's army campaigned in Thrace , formally taking possession of towns secured by popular revolt . With Thessalonica barred against him , his supply lines to Thrace cut , and desertions having reduced his army to 2 @,@ 000 men , of whom half belonged to Hrelja , Kantakouzenos was forced to withdraw north to Serbia , where he hoped to secure the aid of Stefan Dušan . Soon after , Hrelja also deserted Kantakouzenos and joined the regency , hoping to gain control of Melnik for himself . In July 1342 , Kantakouzenos met Dušan near Pristina . The Serbian ruler appeared initially reluctant to form an alliance . Nevertheless , under pressure from his nobles , especially the powerful Jovan Oliver , he could not afford to miss this unique opportunity to expand south . Desperately in need of Serbian aid , Kantakouzenos apparently agreed that the Serbs could keep any town they took , despite his own later account to the contrary . According to Nikephoros Gregoras , the Serbs claimed all of Macedonia west of Christopolis ( Kavala ) , except for Thessalonica and its environs . The only concession Kantakouzenos secured was that an exception be made for those towns that surrendered to him in person . To seal the pact , Kantakouzenos ' younger son , Manuel , was to be wed to the daughter of Jovan Oliver , although after Dušan later broke the alliance , the marriage did not take place . Hrelja too acceded to the pact , in exchange for the surrender of Melnik by Kantakouzenos ' garrison . After Hrelja 's death later that year , Melnik was seized by Dušan . 
 In late summer 1342 , Kantakouzenos , accompanied by several Serbian magnates , marched into Macedonia at the head of a Greek and Serbian force , intending to break through to his wife , who still held out at Demotika . His advance was stopped almost immediately before Serres when the city refused to surrender , and the subsequent siege had to be abandoned after an epidemic killed most of his men , forcing him to retreat into Serbia with a rump force of barely 500 soldiers . Dušan led a more successful parallel campaign , capturing Vodena ( Edessa ) . Serbian forces captured Florina and Kastoria shortly afterwards , thereby extending their hold over western Macedonia . The Serbs also expanded their control over Albania , so that by the summer of 1343 , with the exception of Angevin @-@ controlled Dyrrhachium , all of the region appears to have fallen under Serbian rule . Morale among Kantakouzenos ' followers fell dramatically . Rumours circulated in Constantinople that a dejected Kantakouzenos planned to retire to Mount Athos as a monk , and riots broke out in the city in which several rich men were killed and their houses looted by the populace . 
 In late fall , Empress Anna twice sent embassies to Dušan trying to convince him to surrender Kantakouzenos , but the Serbian ruler , seeking to extract more profit from their alliance , refused . Kantakouzenos ' fortunes began to improve when a delegation of the nobles of Thessaly reached him and offered to accept his authority . Kantakouzenos appointed his relative John Angelos as the province 's governor . Although in effect a semi @-@ independent ruler , Angelos was both loyal and effective . He soon brought Epirus — which he had governed in Andronikos II 's name in 1340 — into the Kantakouzenist camp , and even made gains in Thessaly at the expense of the Catalans of Athens . Another effort by Kantakouzenos to break from Serbia into Macedonia failed before Serres . In the meantime , Kantakouzenos ' wife Irene called upon the aid of the Bulgarians to help relieve the blockade of Demotika by the regency 's army . Ivan Alexander dispatched troops , but although they clashed with the regency 's forces , they made no effort in assisting the city , instead pillaging the countryside . 
 = = Kantakouzenos resurgent : 1343 – 45 = = 
 At this point , Kantakouzenos ' position was greatly strengthened by the intervention of his old friend , Umur Bey , who in late 1342 or early 1343 sailed up the Evros river with a fleet of 300 ships and 29 @,@ 000 ( according to Kantakouzenos ) or 15 @,@ 000 ( according to Turkish sources ) men @-@ in @-@ arms and relieved Demotika both from the siege by the regency 's forces and from the depredations of the Bulgarians . After pillaging Thrace for a few months , Umur was forced to retreat to Asia at the onset of winter , to which the Turks were unaccustomed . This turn of events displeased Dušan , for Kantakouzenos now had an independent power base and was less reliant on the Serbian ruler 's goodwill . The final rift between Kantakouzenos and Dušan occurred in April 1343 , when Kantakouzenos persuaded the town of Berroia , besieged by the Serbs , to surrender to him instead of Dušan . This was followed by the surrender of several other forts in the area to Kantakouzenos , including Servia and Platamon . These moves strengthened Kantakouzenos ' position and independence from Dušan , thereby thwarting the latter 's plans for expansion . Realizing that he had little to gain by continuing to support Kantakouzenos , Dušan opened negotiations with the regency and concluded a formal alliance with them in the summer of 1343 . 
 Meanwhile , Kantakouzenos and his army camped outside Thessalonica , hoping to take the city through the aid of his supporters within the walls . Apokaukos arrived at the head of the Byzantine fleet to aid the Zealots , pinning Kantakouzenos down in Macedonia between Thessalonica and Dušan 's possessions . Once again Umur of Aydin came to Kantakouzenos ' assistance with a fleet carrying some 6 @,@ 000 men , whereupon Apokaukos and his ships fled from the superior Turkish navy . Nevertheless , a reinforced Thessalonica was able to hold out against a siege by Kantakouzenos and Umur . Although he had failed to take Thessalonica , the presence of his Turkish allies allowed Kantakouzenos to turn his attention towards Thrace . In late 1343 he left his son Manuel as governor of Berroia and western Macedonia and marched towards Demotika , relieving the city and seeing his wife for the first time in almost two years . On his way to Demotika , Kantakouzenos had seized a number of fortresses in Thrace , although another siege of Peritheorion failed . He followed up with a successful campaign that took Komotini and other fortresses in the Rhodope area . Over the next couple of years , the towns and forts of Thrace came over to Kantakouzenos ' camp one by one , but at great cost , as his mainly Turkish troops repeatedly plundered the countryside . The shifting tide of the war did not go unnoticed in the opposing camp . In late 1344 , several prominent personalities defected to Kantakouzenos , including John Vatatzes , a general and relative by marriage to both the Patriarch and Apokaukos , the Patriarch of Jerusalem Lazaros , and , most importantly , Manuel Apokaukos , son of the megas doux and governor of Adrianople . 
 At the same time , the regency 's alliance with Dušan was paying dividends for the Serbian ruler alone , as he had free rein to plunder and occupy all of Macedonia and Epirus . By the end of 1345 , only Thessalonica , held by the Zealots , Serres and the surrounding region , which remained loyal to the regency , along with Berroia , which still held out under Manuel Kantakouzenos , remained outside Serbian control . 
 These developments placed the regency in considerable difficulties . In spite of Apokaukos ' adroit management of the state 's finances , the devastation caused by the prolonged wars had emptied the treasury . In August 1343 , Empress Anna was forced to pawn the crown jewels to Venice for 30 @,@ 000 ducats . In addition , Turkish ravages in Thrace led to a scarcity of food in Constantinople . Hoping for Western aid , Anna appealed to the Pope , promising the submission of herself , John V , Apokaukos and even the Patriarch to his authority , and began persecuting the pro @-@ <unk> and anti @-@ Western <unk> . 
 In 1344 , the regency concluded a further alliance with Bulgaria , which required the surrender of Philippopolis ( Plovdiv ) and nine other towns in northern Thrace along the river Evros . Nevertheless , after their occupation , Ivan Alexander refrained from direct action against Kantakouzenos ' forces operating in southern and eastern Thrace . At the same time , Momchil , a former brigand whom Kantakouzenos had entrusted with control over the region of Merope in the Rhodope mountains , switched over to the regency . In early 1344 , Kantakouzenos was deprived of Umur and the bulk of his army , who had sailed home to repel a Latin attack on his main harbour , Smyrna . On their way , the Turkish force was attacked by the Serbs under Gregory Preljub , but prevailed at the Battle of <unk> . Nevertheless , Kantakouzenos was able to ward off joint attacks by Dušan and Apokaukos until Umur returned to his aid the next spring at the head of an army of 20 @,@ 000 men . 
 Kantakouzenos and Umur raided Bulgaria , and then turned against Momchil . The latter had exploited the power vacuum in the Rhodope , an effective no man 's land between the Serbs , Bulgarians and Byzantines , to set himself up as a quasi @-@ independent prince , supported by a substantial force of around 5 @,@ 000 men . On 7 July 1345 , the two armies clashed at Peritheorion . Momchil 's army was crushed , and he himself fell in the field . Soon afterwards , Dušan arrived before Serres and laid siege to the city . Rejecting demands by Kantakouzenos to withdraw , a clash appeared inevitable until the murder of Alexios Apokaukos in Constantinople forced Kantakouzenos to direct his attention there . 
 = = Last years of the war : 1345 – 47 = = 
 In early 1345 , Kantakouzenos sent Franciscan monks to the regency to make an offer of conciliation , but it was rejected . Despite this show of confidence , the regency 's position remained insecure . The defections of the previous winter had weakened their control of the capital , and in response Apokaukos launched a series of proscriptions . He also ordered the construction of a new prison to house political prisoners . On 11 June 1345 , while undertaking an inspection of the prison unaccompanied by his bodyguard , Apokaukos was lynched by the prisoners . 
 When Kantakouzenos heard the news he marched towards Constantinople , urged by his supporters , who expected that the death of Apokaukos would result in the collapse of the regency . Kantakouzenos was more sceptical , and indeed the Patriarch and Empress Anna quickly brought the situation under control . At the same time , Kantakouzenos suffered a series of reverses . These began when John Apokaukos , the nominal governor of Thessalonica , openly announced his allegiance to Kantakouzenos and his plans to surrender the city . He was immediately thwarted by the Zealots who rose up again and killed Apokaukos and the other Kantakouzenist sympathizers in the city . Then John Vatatzes , who had defected to Kantakouzenos the year before , once more switched sides . He attempted to take some of Kantakouzenos ' Turkish allies and a few Thracian cities with him , but was murdered soon afterwards . Finally , Kantakouzenos lost the support of his most crucial ally , Umur of Aydin , who left with his army to confront the crusaders in Smyrna . Kantakouzenos replaced him by allying himself with the Emir of Saruhan and , more importantly , Orhan of the rising Ottoman emirate in Bithynia . 
 In September 1345 , after a long siege , Serres fell to Dušan . The Serbian ruler , who by now controlled about half of the pre @-@ 1341 Byzantine realm , was spurred by this success to lay his own claim on the Byzantine throne . Consequently , on Easter Sunday , 16 April 1346 , he was crowned " Emperor of the Serbs and the Romans " in Skopje , thereby founding the Serbian Empire . This development prompted Kantakouzenos , who had only been acclaimed Emperor in 1341 , to have himself formally crowned in a ceremony held at Adrianople on 21 May , presided over by the Patriarch of Jerusalem , Lazaros . Lazaros then convened a synod of bishops to excommunicate the Patriarch of Constantinople , John Kalekas . Not long afterwards , Kantakouzenos ' ties with his new ally Orhan were cemented through the marriage of his daughter Theodora Kantakouzene to the Ottoman emir at an elaborate ceremony in Selymbria . 
 For the regency , the situation had become desperate . Empress Anna 's requests for aid from foreign powers proved unsuccessful , as both Orhan and the <unk> of <unk> rebuffed her overtures for assistance . Only Balik , the ruler of Dobruja , sent an elite force of 1 @,@ 000 men under his brothers Theodore and Dobrotitsa , but they were routed by a Kantakouzenist army under protostrator George <unk> . The emirate of Saruhan offered a more substantial force of 6 @,@ 000 men in the summer of 1346 , but instead of fighting , they plundered Thrace and then defected to join Kantakouzenos ' army . Revenue remained scarce for the regency , the Genoese once again seized the imperial possessions of Chios and Phocaea , and on 19 May 1346 , a part of the Hagia Sophia cathedral collapsed , a terrible omen in the eyes of the capital 's inhabitants . 
 By the summer of 1346 , Kantakouzenos stood on the verge of victory . He left Thrace under the control of his son Matthew and moved on to Selymbria , close to Constantinople . He did not attack the capital , but waited for almost a year for the city to surrender . In his memoirs , he explains that he did not want to turn his Turks on the city , although contemporaries such as Gregoras accused him of indecision and of needlessly prolonging the war . 
 As the months passed , and the privations in Constantinople increased , the pro @-@ Kantakouzenos faction in the capital grew as the Empress refused even to consider negotiations . Twice agents were sent to assassinate Kantakouzenos , but they failed . The Empress eventually fell out with Patriarch John Kalekas , who was deposed in a synod on 2 February 1347 . On the same night , supporters of Kantakouzenos opened the disused Golden Gate , and Kantakouzenos entered the city with 1 @,@ 000 men . Meeting no resistance , his troops surrounded the Palace of Blachernae , the imperial residence , the next morning , but the Empress refused to surrender for several days , still fearful of the fate that awaited her . Kantakouzenos ' men grew impatient and stormed part of the palace complex , and John V persuaded his mother to accept a settlement . 
 = = Peace settlement and Kantakouzenos ' reign = = 
 On 8 February 1347 , the war formally ended with an agreement making Kantakouzenos senior emperor for ten years , after which he and John V would reign as equals . Kantakouzenos also promised to pardon anyone who had fought against him . To seal the pact , John V married Kantakouzenos ' daughter Helena , and in May , Kantakouzenos was crowned again in the Church of St. Mary of Blachernae . In the end , as Donald Nicol commented , the long conflict had been meaningless , with terms that " could have been agreed five years before and saved the Empire so much bitterness , hatred and destruction . " 
 Despite the moderation and clemency shown by Kantakouzenos in this settlement , it did not gain universal acceptance . Supporters of the Palaiologoi still distrusted him , while his own partisans would have preferred to depose the Palaiologoi outright and install the <unk> as the reigning dynasty . Kantakouzenos ' eldest son , Matthew , also resented being passed over in favour of John V , and had to be placated with the creation of a semi @-@ autonomous appanage covering much of western Thrace , which doubled as a march against Dušan 's Serbia . Of the remaining Byzantine territories , only the Zealots in Thessalonica , now an isolated exclave surrounded by the Serbs , refused to acknowledge the new arrangement , instead leading a de facto independent existence until Kantakouzenos conquered them in 1350 . 
 After 1347 , John VI Kantakouzenos tried to revive the Empire , but met with limited success . Aided by the depopulation brought by about by the Black Death , Dušan and his general Preljub took Kantakouzenos ' Macedonian strongholds as well as Epirus and Thessaly in 1347 – 1348 , thereby completing their conquest of the remaining Byzantine lands in mainland Greece . An attempt to break Byzantium 's dependence for food and maritime commerce on the Genoese merchants of Galata led to a Byzantine – Genoese war , which ended in 1352 with a compromise peace . In 1350 , Kantakouzenos took advantage of Dušan 's preoccupation with a war against Bosnia to recover Thessalonica from the Zealots as well as Berroia , Vodena and other Macedonian cities from the Serbs , but the Serbian emperor quickly reversed the Byzantine gains , leaving only Thessalonica in Byzantine hands . 
 Steadily deteriorating relations between Matthew Kantakouzenos , who now ruled eastern Thrace , and John V Palaiologos , who had taken over Matthew 's former domain in western Thrace , led to yet another internal conflict . Open warfare broke out in 1352 , when John V , supported by Venetian and Turkish troops , launched an attack on Matthew Kantakouzenos . John Kantakouzenos came to his son 's aid with 10 @,@ 000 Ottoman troops who retook the cities of Thrace , liberally plundering them in the process . In October 1352 , at Demotika , the Ottoman force met and defeated 4 @,@ 000 Serbs provided to John V by Stefan Dušan . This was the Ottomans ' first victory in Europe and an ominous portent . Two years later their capture of Gallipoli marked the beginning of the Ottoman conquest of the Balkans , which culminated a century later in the Fall of Constantinople . Meanwhile , John V fled to the island of Tenedos , from where he made an unsuccessful attempt to seize Constantinople in March 1353 . John VI Kantakouzenos responded by having Matthew crowned as co @-@ emperor , but John V Palaiologos , enlisting Genoese support and relying on the declining popularity of Kantakouzenos , succeeded in entering the capital in November 1354 . John VI abdicated and retired to a monastery . Matthew held out in Thrace until 1357 , when he too abdicated , leaving John V Palaiologos as the sole master of a rump state . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 The civil war proved a critical turning point in the history of the Byzantine Empire . In the words of the Byzantinist Angeliki Laiou , " after the end of the second civil war , Byzantium was an empire in name only " , while according to Eva de Vries @-@ Van der Velden , it marks " the point of rupture between the ' decline ' and ' the fall ' of the Byzantine Empire " . 
 The Byzantines ' division and reliance on foreign troops , especially the Serbs and Turks , encouraged the latter 's expansionism . Stefan Dušan in particular proved adept in exploiting the civil war to expand his state at Byzantium 's expense . Aside from huge territorial losses , the prolonged conflict exhausted the Byzantine state 's resources , as it brought " anarchy to the cities and devastation to the countryside " ( Alice @-@ Mary Talbot ) . Thrace , the largest contiguous territory remaining in the Empire , suffered such destruction that , along with Constantinople , it became dependent on grain imported from Bulgaria and the Crimea . Trade had stopped , and the treasury contained , in the words of Gregoras , " nothing but the atoms of Epicurus " . Kantakouzenos had exhausted his own personal fortune , and Empress Anne had left the Empire heavily indebted to the Venetians . The war also led to the collapse of the centralized imperial administration in the provinces , causing control of the Thracian countryside to shift to a manorial system run by the local magnates . Despite their considerable wealth , the magnates , through exemptions or outright evasion , managed to avoid paying taxes to the imperial government . In addition , the arrival in 1347 of the Black Death and its recurrent outbreaks further reduced the Empire 's tax and recruitment base , curtailing its ability to reverse the Serbian territorial gains . 
 Along with the renewal of the civil war in 1352 , these factors destroyed any chance of even a modest recovery similar to that experienced under Andronikos III . Thereafter , Byzantium remained under the menacing threat of stronger neighbours , unable to pursue an independent foreign policy , handicapped by a shortage of resources and riven by internal strife . Nevertheless , through a combination of fortuitous external circumstances and adroit diplomacy , it survived for another century , until finally conquered by the Ottomans in 1453 . Only the Byzantine exclave in the Morea remained prosperous , having been spared the ravages of the civil war because of its relative isolation . The appointment of Manuel Kantakouzenos as its despotes in 1349 heralded the creation of the semi @-@ independent Despotate of the Morea , which experienced the last economic and cultural flowering of the Byzantine world before it too fell to the Ottomans in 1460 . 
 = Defense of the Ancients = 
 Defense of the Ancients ( DotA ) is a multiplayer online battle arena mod for the video game Warcraft III : Reign of Chaos and its expansion , Warcraft III : The Frozen Throne , based on the " Aeon of Strife " map for StarCraft . The scenario objective is for each team to destroy the opponents ' Ancient , heavily guarded structures at opposing corners of the map . Players use powerful units known as heroes , and are assisted by allied heroes and AI @-@ controlled fighters . As in role @-@ playing games , players level up their heroes and use gold to buy equipment during the mission . 
 The scenario was developed with the " World Editor " of Reign of Chaos , and was updated upon the release of its expansion , The Frozen Throne . There have been many variations of the original concept ; the most popular being DotA Allstars , which eventually was simplified to DotA with the release of version 6 @.@ 68 . This specific scenario has been maintained by several authors during development , the latest of whom is the anonymous developer known as " IceFrog " who has developed the game since 2005 . 
 Since its original release , DotA has become a feature at several worldwide tournaments , including Blizzard Entertainment 's BlizzCon and the Asian World Cyber Games , as well as the <unk> Amateur and <unk> leagues ; in a 2008 article of video game industry website Gamasutra , the article 's author claimed that DotA was probably " the most popular and most @-@ discussed free , non @-@ supported game mod in the world " . DotA is largely attributed to being the most significant inspiration for the multiplayer online battle arena genre . Valve Corporation acquired the intellectual property rights to DotA to develop a stand @-@ alone sequel , Dota 2 , which was released in July 2013 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 DotA pits two teams of players against each other : the Sentinel and the Scourge . Players on the Sentinel team are based at the southwest corner of the map , and those on the Scourge team are based at the northeast corner . Each base is defended by towers and waves of units which guard the main paths leading to their base . In the center of each base is the " Ancient " , a building that must be destroyed to win the game . 
 Each human player controls one hero , a powerful unit with unique abilities . In DotA , players on each side choose one of 112 heroes , each with different abilities and tactical advantages over other heroes . The scenario is highly team @-@ oriented ; it is difficult for one player to carry the team to victory alone . Defense of the Ancients allows up to ten players in a five @-@ versus @-@ five format . 
 Because the gameplay revolves around strengthening individual heroes , it does not require focus on resource management and base @-@ building , unlike most traditional real @-@ time strategy games . Killing computer @-@ controlled or neutral units earns the player experience points ; the player gains a level when enough experience is accumulated . Leveling up improves the hero 's toughness and the damage they inflict , and allows players to upgrade spells or skills . In addition to accumulating experience , players also manage a single resource of gold . The typical resource @-@ gathering of Warcraft III is replaced by a combat @-@ oriented money system ; in addition to a small periodic income , heroes earn gold by killing hostile units , base structures , and enemy heroes . This has caused emphasis on a technique called " last @-@ hitting , " which is when the player attacks a hostile unit when " its hit points are low enough to kill it with one blow " . Using gold , players buy items to strengthen their hero and gain abilities ; certain items can be combined with recipes to create more powerful items . Buying items that suit one 's hero is an important tactical element of the mod . 
 DotA offers a variety of game modes , selected by the game host at the beginning of the match . The game modes dictate the difficulty of the scenario , as well as whether people can choose their hero or are assigned one randomly . Many game modes can be combined , allowing more flexible options . 
 = = Development = = 
 Warcraft III is the third title in the Warcraft series of real @-@ time strategy games developed by Blizzard Entertainment . As with Warcraft II , Blizzard included a free " world editor " in the game that allows players to create custom scenarios or " maps " for the game , which can be played online with other players through Battle.net. These custom scenarios can be simple terrain changes , which play like normal Warcraft games , or they can be entirely new game scenarios with custom objectives , units , items , and events , like Defense of the Ancients . 
 The first version of Defense of the Ancients was released in 2003 by a mapmaker under the alias of Eul who based the map on a previous StarCraft scenario known as " Aeon of Strife " . After the release of Warcraft 's expansion The Frozen Throne , which added new features to the World Editor , Eul did not update the scenario . Other mapmakers produced spinoffs that added new heroes , items , and features . Among the DotA variants created in the wake of Eul 's map , there was DotA Allstars , originally created and developed by custom map makers <unk> and <unk> , who took the most popular heroes and compiled them into one map . In March 2004 , map maker Guinsoo took control of development and began the <unk> to <unk> series of DotA Allstars . On February 28 , 2005 , soon after the release of <unk> , Guinsoo announced he would be leaving <unk> custom map making , and left the development in the hands of <unk> and IceFrog . Soon after , <unk> left the team and left it in the hand of IceFrog . This started the legendary <unk> series of DotA Allstars which is currently developed by IceFrog and Valve . 
 Defense of the Ancients is maintained via official forums . Users can post ideas for new heroes or items , some of which are added to the map . Players have contributed icons and hero descriptions and created the artwork displayed while the map loads , and suggestions for changes to existing heroes or items are taken seriously ; IceFrog once changed a new hero less than two weeks after the new version of the map was released . Versions of the scenario where enemy heroes are controlled by artificial intelligences have also been released . Mescon continued to maintain <unk> @-@ <unk> , which by the end of IceFrog 's affiliation in May 2009 had over 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 registered users and had received over one million unique visitors every month . Due to their separation , IceFrog announced that he would be further developing a new official site , <unk> , while continuing game development ; Mescon closed <unk> @-@ <unk> on July 22 , 2010 , citing dropping statistics and his new passion for League of Legends as the reason for its end . 
 Because Warcraft III custom games have none of the features designed to improve game quality ( matchmaking players based on connection speed , etc . ) , various programs are used to maintain Defense of the Ancients . External tools ping player 's locations , and games can be named to exclude geographic regions . Clans and committees such as <unk> maintain their own official list of rules and regulations , and players can be kicked from matches by being placed on " <unk> " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The popularity of Defense of the Ancients has increased over time . The scenario was featured by Computer Gaming World in a review of new maps and mods in Warcraft III . DotA Allstars became an important tournament scenario , starting with its prominence at the debut of Blizzard 's BlizzCon convention in 2005 . DotA Allstars was also featured in the Malaysia and Singapore World Cyber Games starting in 2005 , and the World Cyber Games Asian Championships beginning with the 2006 season . Defense of the Ancients was included in the game lineup for the internationally recognized <unk> Amateur League and <unk> leagues . Additionally , the scenario appeared in Electronic Sports World Cup ( <unk> ) 2008 ; Oliver Paradis , <unk> 's competition manager , noted that the high level of community support behind the scenario , as well as its worldwide appeal , were among the reasons it was chosen . 
 The scenario is popular in many parts of the world ; in the Philippines and Thailand , it is played as much as the game Counter @-@ Strike . It is also popular in Sweden and other Northern European countries , where the Defense of the Ancients @-@ inspired song " Vi sitter i <unk> och <unk> DotA " by Swedish musician <unk> reached the European 2006 charts at # 116 and cracked the top ten Singles Charts in Sweden , Norway , and Finland . LAN tournaments are a major part of worldwide play , including tournaments in Sweden and Russia ; however , due to a lack of LAN tournaments and championships in North America , several teams disbanded . Blizzard points to DotA as an example of what dedicated mapmakers can create using developer 's tools . 
 In June 2008 , <unk> , writing for Gamasutra , stated that DotA " is likely the most popular and most @-@ discussed free , non @-@ supported game mod in the world " . In pointing to the strong community built around the game , Walbridge stated that DotA shows it is much easier for a community game to be maintained by the community , and this is one of the maps ' greatest strengths . Former game journalist Luke Smith called DotA " the ultimate RTS " . 
 Defense of the Ancients has been credited as one of the influences for the 2009 Gas Powered Games title Demigod , with the video game publication GameSpy noting the game 's premise revolved around aspiring gods " [ playing ] DotA in real life " . Guinsoo went on to apply many of the mechanics and lessons he learned from Defense of the Ancients to the Riot Games title League of Legends . Other " DotA clones " include S2 Games ' Heroes of <unk> . Blizzard Entertainment has also developed a new game inspired by DotA titled Heroes of the Storm , which features an array of heroes from Blizzard 's franchises . 
 = = = Sequel = = = 
 In October 2009 , IceFrog was hired by Valve Corporation , leading a team in a project that he described as " great news for DotA fans " . Valve officially announced the stand @-@ alone sequel , Dota 2 , in October 2010 . Dota 2 follows heavily in the gameplay style of DotA , with aesthetics and heroes working mostly as direct ports to the original mod . In addition to the pre @-@ conceived gameplay constants , Dota 2 also features Steam support and profile tracking , intended to emphasize and support the game 's matchmaking and community . 
 The marketing and trademark of Dota as a franchise by Valve gained concern and opposition from the DotA Allstars contributors working at Riot Games , as well as Blizzard Entertainment , both of which legally opposed the franchising of Dota by Valve . The legal dispute was conceded on May 11 , 2012 , with Valve gaining undisputed franchising rights for commercial use to the trademark , while non @-@ commercial use remains open to the public . Dota 2 was officially released in July 2013 . 
 = Dragon Quest VI = 
 Dragon Quest VI : Realms of Revelation ( <unk> <unk> , Doragon Kuesuto Shikkusu Maboroshi no Daichi , " Dragon Quest VI : Land of Illusion " ) , Dragon Quest VI : Realms of Reverie in Europe , is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Heartbeat and published by Enix ( now Square Enix ) for the Super Famicom as a part of the Dragon Quest series and as the last Dragon Quest game in the Zenithia trilogy . It was released on December 9 , 1995 , in Japan , developed by Heartbeat ; whereas the previous Dragon Quest games were developed by Chunsoft . In July 2007 , Square Enix announced a series of remakes of Dragon Quest IV : Chapters of the Chosen , Dragon Quest V : Hand of the Heavenly Bride and Dragon Quest VI : Realms of Revelation for the Nintendo DS , making this the first time the game in question got released on other consoles and overseas . Like its predecessor , Dragon Quest VI was a Japan @-@ only release as the larger ROMs needed for English dialog were cost @-@ prohibitive ( the game was already 32 megabits in size , the limit for SNES ROMs without using bank switching ) . In addition , the game 's release occurred very late into the SNES 's lifespan , by which time Enix had dropped support for the console outside Japan . The title was finally released overseas for the Nintendo DS in North America on February 14 , 2011 , and in Europe on May 20 , 2011 . A version of the game for Android and iOS was released in Japan on June 10 , 2015 , and worldwide in English on June 24 , 2015 . 
 As the sixth installment to the Dragon Quest series , the graphics and gameplay remain close to the other games , with minor additions and upgrades . The graphics were vastly improved from Dragon Quest V : Hand of the Heavenly Bride , which was also for the SNES , but had rather unimpressive graphics due to being an early game on the console . Navigation remains largely unchanged from the previous games and the turn @-@ based battles are still in first @-@ person . The class system from Dragon Quest III returns , with minor adjustments . The large cartridge ROM used by the game resulted in an extremely high price of 11 @,@ 970 yen ( about 137 dollars ) , Dragon Quest VI sold 3 @.@ 2 million copies in Japan , becoming the best selling game of 1995 . The DS version sold an additional one million copies by March 2010 . 
 The story follows the traditional Dragon Quest " Hero " on a quest to save the world . In this particular installment , the heroes also have to endure the personal struggle of amnesia , as many of the main characters do not initially remember who they are . After completing a series of quests , the player learns that in addition to a Real World , there is also a Dream World , made up of people 's dreams , and that there is a great evil that wants to conquer both . The Hero and his new party work together to save both worlds from the ever @-@ growing threat . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dragon Quest VI is a traditional , turn @-@ based role @-@ playing video game ( in an overhead perspective ) which features random battles and a character class system that the Hero and his party members acquire new skills and spells . The Hero travels around the world gathering a party throughout his adventure . To progress in the story , the party must defeat specific boss monsters or trigger specific flags . In order to defeat the bosses , the player must spend time training the party by gaining experience points from battles to advance in character and class levels . 
 Other new features were added to the series , such as the monsters being animated when they attack . The Slime Arena and Best Dresser Contest were new mini @-@ games introduced ; the casinos return from previous Dragon Quest games . Like previous games , mini medals can be found hidden throughout the worlds and can be traded for items . There are bonus dungeons and a few extra characters after beating the main storyline . There is a day and night system , as in some previous installments ; with certain storyline events happening at night . While the Monster Master class can catch monsters in the original Super Famicom version it is not a major part of the game . Another returning feature from the past two games is the use of the wagon , which allows characters to be swapped out for other ones on the world map . 
 This Dragon Quest , similar to Dragon Warrior III and Dragon Warrior VII , has a class system . Once the party gets to <unk> Abbey , they have the option of becoming one of several starter classes . Each class has eight levels , which are gained by winning a specific number of battles ( unlike character levels , which are gained by earning experience points ) , and advancing in level teaches a character new spells and / or skills , which are retained across class changes . Once a character has mastered a specific set of two or three starter classes , they can change into a hybrid class which builds on their themes ; for example , mastering Warrior and Martial Artist unlocks the Gladiator Class , which learns powerful physical attacks , and mastering certain hybrid classes unlocks the Hero class . Some of the classes give special bonuses beyond their stats and abilities such as the Merchant who gives a small bonus to the party 's income after every battle , or the Sage who receives a discount to MP costs . To master a class , the character must fight a set number of battles as that class . Once certain hybrid classes are mastered , a stat relating to that class will permanently go up . There are two secret classes as well , Dragon ( <unk> ) and Liquid Metal Slime , which are unlockable through consumable books . Dragon Quest VI was the first game in the series to include abilities or skills ( <unk> , <unk> ) ( special attacks and other techniques which are not spells and usually do not cost MP ) for human party members . These special techniques were added to the remakes of III , IV and V later on . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Like the other Dragon Quest games in the series , the setting of Dragon Quest VI is very medieval , complete with castles , knights , and magic . The main world is divided into the " Real World " and " Dream World " , each with a separate , but similar map . To get from one world to the other , the party uses special warps ( such as in wells ) , by ascending / descending stairs on the world map or falling through holes in the " Dream World " to the " Real World " . If something cannot be found in the " Real World " , it may appear in the " Dream World " , such as with <unk> , at the middle of the game . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Dragon Quest VI opens as the Hero and his party of a mysterious woman and a bulky man approach Murdaw , the demon king ’ s castle . After the girl uses an ocarina to summon a dragon , the party enters the castle and comes face to face with Murdaw ( <unk> " <unk> " in Japanese version ) . <unk> the trio , the demon king appears to destroy each member of the party , but suddenly , the Hero wakes up in the mountain town Weaver 's Peak . Tania , a young woman from Weaver 's Peak , insists that he was having a bad dream and introduces herself as his sister . 
 After getting off the bed , the Hero is then given a task to get a crown in preparation for the annual Mountain Spirit festival from the elder which takes him to <unk> . However he finds out the man that is supposed to make the crown has gone out somewhere to the northwest of town and never came back . The hero then heads in that direction and finds a large hole with the crown maker just barely hanging on . The hero attempts to rescue him and succeeds but in the process , slips and falls to the world below . In this mysterious world , the hero finds a nearby town in which the townspeople cannot see him . The hero grabs a tip from one of the townspeople that there 's a special well to the north which people went in never came back ; thus the hero heads in that direction and returns to his world . 
 After getting the ceremonial crown from the crown maker for no charge after saving his life , the hero heads back to Weaver 's Peak just in time for the festival to begin . During the festival , the hero receives a mysterious vision that a great evil was to take over the world and asks him to leave the village in preparation for this disaster . The next day , the hero finds out that the world that he stumbled onto was called the " Phantom World " and is given a pass by the elder which allows him entry into Somnia , where he can meet the king . 
 At Somnia , the hero meets Carver , which doesn 't seem to remember the hero . The Hero then meets Captain Blade , leader of Somnia 's military which gives the potential soldier candidates a task to find a special item in a tower . The hero manages to find this item successfully and formally becomes a soldier of Somnia . After a task which the Hero and Carver work together to get a horse for an old man , Carver also becomes a soldier of Somnia and himself and the hero are given permission to talk to the king where they learn to defeat Murdaw , they need the Mirror of Ra . The Hero and Carver discover another portal similar to the one near <unk> , which eventually leads them to Port Haven , another town where they can not be seen . Milly , also appearing to have lost her memory , does see them and helps them become visible via Madame Luca 's help . 
 The party discovers a Somnia Castle in the “ Phantom World ” and learns that the prince is missing and that the Hero looks like him . They also meet Captain Rusty , who bears a striking resemblance to Captain Blade . Gaining entrance to the <unk> Tower , the party meets Ashlynn , a woman who was invisible in the “ Phantom World ” at first , too , and together they find the Mirror of Ra . The four of them travel to Murdaw 's castle , in the original world . After defeating Murdaw , the Hero uses the Mirror on him . Murdaw then turns into the King of Somnia , confused and unaware of what happened . The king reveals that the original world is in fact the Dream World and the Phantom World is the Real World . Upon traveling back to the Real World , the King of Somnia thanks the party for defeating Murdaw in his dreams , but that the real Murdaw lives and that the party must travel to Ghent to retrieve a boat to get to Murdaw 's lair . In Ghent , <unk> , a healer , joins the party and allows them to use the Ghent Clan 's ship . During the fight with the real Murdaw , the Hero gets is again sent back to Weaver 's Peak . However , with the Mirror of Ra , the Hero warps back into the battle and defeats Murdaw . 
 The Queen of Somnia tells the Hero to discover who he really is . The quest leads the party to <unk> , where a terrible monster is blocking a nearby cave . The reward for defeating the monster is the famed <unk> Blade , but before the party can strike the final blow , a warrior by the name of Terry kills the monster , winning the sword . After traveling both worlds , the party learns that Murdaw was not the only evil in the world , having fought several other monsters that all seem to be connected . 
 In <unk> , the party learns that this is Ashlynn 's home . The elders tell Ashlynn that the Demon Lord is watching her and give her the powerful spell Magic Burst to fight him . The party also learns that the only way to get to the Demon Lord is through Zenith Tower , but to activate the tower , they need to collect the sword , armor , shield , and helmet of legend . While doing so , the Hero meets his double in Real Weaver 's Peak , who gets spooked , and speaks ' Y @-@ You . Y @-@ You 're m @-@ m @-@ me ! ' , and says that he must prove himself to be faithful to his family if he is to join powers . Returning to Real Somnia , the King and Queen tell the Hero that he is indeed the prince . When he fused with his clone , the Hero gained his memory back , much like Ashlynn and Carver had done . 
 The party reaches <unk> Citadel and meets Dhuran ( <unk> ) , who claims to have taken over the castle . He summons Terry to fight the party and then fights the party himself . Dhuran then reveals that all the enemies the party has faced were just pawns of Mortamor , the <unk> . Milly reveals that Terry is her brother and Terry decides to join the party and fight against Mortamor . 
 Once <unk> Citadel is back to normal , the party speaks to King Zenith who informs them of Mortamor 's doings and how to reach the Dread Realm . Mortamor plans on merging both worlds . The party ’ s horse fuses with Pegasus , allowing the party to fly to the Dread Realm . Several challenges await in the Dread Realm , with one such challenge being the party 's strength suddenly and unexpectedly plummeting . With the help of two Supreme Sage brothers , Benjamin and Isaac , the party enters Mortamor 's Castle . After solving many puzzles , they come face to face with Mortamor and defeat him . Isaac reveals that the Dread Realm is falling apart and Pegasus helps them escape . After returning to the Real World , everyone parts ways , with Ashlynn having to return to the Dream World since her Real World self doesn 't exist anymore . With Mortamor 's link between the Real World and the Dream World severed , the Dream World vanishes , with only <unk> Castle being the remaining visible portion in the Real World . It 's then shown that Ashlynn is in the castle , taking care of the newly hatched <unk> Dragon . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The scenario designer , as in all previous Dragon Quest games , was Yuji Horii . Similarly , the lead artist was Akira Toriyama and the sound was composed by Koichi Sugiyama . This is the last game in the series to feature the Tenkuu no Shiro ( Castle in the Sky ) trilogy . 
 A prequel , Dragon Warrior Monsters ( Dragon Quest Monsters : Terry 's Wonderland in Japan ) , was released in 1998 . This game featured Terry and Milly years before the events of Dragon Quest VI . It was released in North America the next year , even though Dragon Quest VI was never released in North America . Along with Terry and Milly , several of the main enemies , including Mortamor , reappear , however , their previous roles have been eliminated , making them appear as just normal enemies . Mortamor and Murdaw ( <unk> and <unk> , respectively , in the localization ) do appear as very challenging , very late in @-@ game bosses , though . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The initial release was delayed over a year because of Enix wanting to further develop their game . The game was eventually shown at Shoshinkai in November 1995 . Dragon Quest VI was released a few weeks later on December 9 , with the very steep price of 11 @,@ 400 yen ( roughly over 100 U.S. dollars ) . The game went on to sell over 3 @.@ 2 million copies . In Japan , the game made the news in 2005 , when a Japanese student threatened another student over an argument about which Dragon Quest is the best , the student doing the threatening favoring Dragon Quest VI . 
 Like its predecessor , Dragon Quest VI did not receive an English @-@ language localization because of being cost @-@ ineffective . At 4MB , it was one of the largest games made for the SNES as well as the largest the console could support without adding bank @-@ switching circuitry to the cartridge , and translating it would have necessitated even bigger and more expensive ROMs . In addition , the game was a late release for the SNES and by the time an English localization could be finished , Enix had already dropped support for the console in North America and moved to the PlayStation . 
 = = = Nintendo DS remake = = = 
 The Dragon Quest VI enhanced remake for the Nintendo DS was announced in late 2007 by Square Enix and was developed by ArtePiazza . The game was released in Japan on January 28 , 2010 , in North America on February 14 , 2011 , and in Europe on May 20 , 2011 . 
 This version has a few differences 
 The after @-@ battle monster recruitment has been removed . In the original 1995 Super <unk> version of Dragon Quest VI , certain types of monsters can be randomly recruited if they are defeated with a Monster Master in the party . In the 2010 DS remake , this system has been removed , instead , there are certain Slimes that will join you once you accomplish a specific task . Lizzie still remains recruitable . 
 Since this version comes with a built in map of both worlds on the top of the screen , the World Map and the Magic Map have been removed . 
 The ' Tag Mode ' system from Dragon Quest IX has been implemented , which allows wireless communication and data transfer between two DS systems . 
 A Slime Curling mini @-@ game was added . 
 The names of the following characters from this game were changed in Dragon Quest IX as follows : Mireille ( <unk> ) as Milly , Hassan as Carver , Barbara ( <unk> ) as Ashlynn , <unk> ( <unk> ) as Somnia , and San Marino as Port Haven . 
 On April 28 , 2008 , it was reported that Square Enix has applied for the trademark " The Realms of Reverie " at the United States Patent and Trademark Office , leading to speculation that it was the localized title for this game . On May 20 , 2008 , Square Enix opened up the North American site featuring the three Dragon Quest DS remakes , acknowledging Realms of Reverie as the official subtitle , as well as confirming a release in North America . The title was later changed to " Realms of Revelation " just prior to release . Listings in some stores , including on price tags and the like , still use the " Reverie " title . 
 Mark Franklin , director of Public Relations at Nintendo , made the claim that Dragon Quest VI : Realms of Revelation “ will give fans unique access to a classic game in the series for the first time ” outside Japan . 
 = = Related media = = 
 = = = Soundtracks = = = 
 As with every Dragon Quest , Koichi Sugiyama composed the music and directed all the associated spinoffs . Three soundtracks were released for the music of Dragon Quest VI . The first was a two @-@ disk soundtrack , which included an orchestral performance and an OST . The second soundtrack was released on August 23 , 2000 , and just had the orchestral version . This version was released by SPE Visual Works ( now Aniplex ) , and was named Dragon Quest VI ~ The Dream World ~ Symphonic Suite . This version was featured on Dragon Quest <unk> Vol . 2 , which is a compilation of Dragon Quest music . A second Symphonic Suite edition of the OST was performed in March 2005 and released on July 19 , 2006 , also by Aniplex . The Symphonic Suite tracklist is as follows : 
 All songs written and composed by Koichi Sugiyama . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 A 10 @-@ volume manga adaptation of the game was also made , which titled Dragon Quest Maboroshi no Daichi ( ドラゴンクエスト <unk> , lit . Dragon Quest : Land of Illusion ) . It was authored by <unk> Kanzaki and published by Enix in the Monthly Shōnen Gangan between 1997 and 2001 . The storyline roughly follows that of the video game from which it was based but with several differences , such as the inclusion of the character <unk> <unk> , a spotted slime . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kurt Kalata of Gamasutra praised the game 's storyline , particularly its innovative scenario . While comparable to the light @-@ dark world setting of The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past , Dragon Quest VI featured a unique real world and dream world setting , which he suggests had an influence on the later Square role @-@ playing games Chrono Cross and Final Fantasy X. Kalata also praised the gameplay improvements , including its class system that improves on Dragon Quest III and is now more similar to Final Fantasy V , and the addition of a bag that improves on the inventory management of previous games . He concludes that it is " still a fantastic game . " 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Despite the very high price of 11 @,@ 970 yen ( about 100 US dollars ) , Dragon Quest VI sold 3 @.@ 2 million copies in Japan , of which 2 @.@ 5 million were sold before the end of 1995 resulting in it becoming the best selling game of 1995 . In 2010 , Dragon Quest VI for the Nintendo DS sold almost a million copies in Japan in its first week . The game sold over 1 @.@ 2 million copies by March 2010 . 
 According to Nintendo Power , Dragon Quest VI was originally planned for North American release in the spring of 1996 under the title " Dragon Warrior V. " However , the Super Nintendo localization of the game never happened , Enix having already given up on the U.S. market . Square , one of the only companies still willing to bring console role @-@ playing video games to the United States , was also still struggling to get their games to sell in the United States , and therefore , Dragon Quest VI had no companies willing to take a risk for it . In Nintendo Power vol . 81 , the staff wrote an article on Dragon Quest VI , hoping the game would find a North American release . They also suggested why the series might not appeal to the American audience : there is too much fighting and not enough adventuring . Other critics have mentioned that class building becomes tedious and that the dual worlds are too overwhelming , both possible reasons against a US release . Dragon Quest VI was listed as # 7 among the 10 Best Japanese Games Never Released in the U.S. by GamePro magazine in their May 2005 issue . 
 = Atlantic campaign of May 1794 = 
 The Atlantic campaign of May 1794 was a series of operations conducted by the British Royal Navy 's Channel Fleet against the French Navy 's Atlantic Fleet , with the aim of preventing the passage of a strategically important French grain convoy travelling from the United States to France . The campaign involved commerce raiding by detached forces and two minor engagements , eventually culminating in the full fleet action of the Glorious First of June 1794 , at which both fleets were badly mauled and both Britain and France claimed victory . The French lost seven battleships ; the British none , but the battle distracted the British fleet long enough for the French convoy to safely reach port . 
 By the spring of 1794 , the French Republic , under the rule of the National Convention , was at war with all its neighbours . With famine imminent , the French Committee of Public Safety looked to France 's colonies and the United States to provide an infusion of grain ; this was to be convoyed across the Atlantic during April , May and June , accompanied by a small escort squadron and supported by a second , larger squadron in the Bay of Biscay . However , political upheaval had severely reduced the French Navy 's ability to fight coherently and supply shortages had devastated its morale , significantly weakening the fleet . Britain , by contrast , was at a high state of readiness with a well @-@ organised command structure , but was suffering from a severe shortage of trained seamen with which to man its large navy . The French Atlantic Fleet , under Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse , was tasked with keeping the British Channel Fleet occupied long enough for the convoy to reach France safely . The Channel Fleet , commanded by Lord Howe , knew of the convoy 's passage , and dispatched squadrons to protect British commerce while pursuing Villaret himself with the main body of the Royal Navy 's Channel Fleet . For over a week the two battlefleets manoeuvred around one another , Villaret drawing Howe deeper westwards into the Atlantic and away from the convoy . Two partial but inconclusive fleet actions on 28 and 29 May followed , during which Howe seized the weather gage from Villaret , granting him freedom to choose the time and place of his next attack . 
 The culminating action of the campaign took place over 400 nautical miles ( 740 km ) into the Atlantic , and became known as the Glorious First of June . This final engagement saw Howe use the weather gage to attack Villaret directly while his opponent attempted to fight in a traditional line of battle formation . In the battle , the British fleet inflicted a heavy defeat on the French after a bitterly contested day of fighting . Forcing Villaret to retreat , Howe 's force captured seven French battleships , one of which later sank , and inflicted 7 @,@ 000 casualties on the enemy . Villaret however , claimed strategic success as his delaying tactics had bought enough time for the convoy to reach France safely . The battle was the first in a series of defeats the French Navy suffered during the early years of the war , which bred a defeatist attitude and an unwillingness among the French officer corps to engage the British at sea . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the winter of 1793 , war and internal disorder had combined with poor weather to leave France facing starvation following the collapse of the harvest . France 's ongoing conflict with her neighbours precluded overland imports ; the only nation willing and able to sell grain to the National Convention was the United States . Importing food from the Americas was a highly risky venture , as the British Royal Navy — at war with France since early 1793 — patrolled much of the Atlantic passage . To provide effective protection for the vessels involved , a plan was agreed between France and the United States to collect the supplies over a period of months and transport them in a single convoy . A gathering point was arranged at Hampton Roads in the Chesapeake Bay . 
 A squadron commanded by Admiral Pierre Vanstabel was dispatched to Hampton Roads to provide escort . Vanstabel would bring the convoy to the Bay of Biscay , where a second squadron under Joseph @-@ Marie Nielly would reinforce him for the rest of the journey . Together , these officers mustered six ships of the line and numerous smaller craft . The main French battlefleet of 25 ships under Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse would cruise the Bay of Biscay in order to challenge the British Channel Fleet if it attempted to intercept the supplies . The convoy 's passage was expected to take approximately two months , and it included 117 merchant ships carrying enough food to feed France for a year . 
 Lord Howe , admiral of the British Channel Fleet , was aware of the convoy 's nature and destination long before it left the Chesapeake , and made preparations to block its passage . Sending several small squadrons to protect British commerce crossing the Bay of Biscay , Howe detailed Admiral George Montagu with six battleships to search for the convoy in the south of the Bay while Howe took the main body of the fleet , 26 ships of the line , to patrol near Brest . 
 = = May 1794 = = 
 April 1794 was a month of fevered activity on both sides of the English Channel as Villaret and Howe made their final preparations for the coming campaign . The slow French convoy had departed American waters on 2 April , and British convoys destined for the Empire had sailed from Portsmouth on 2 May . Howe used his whole force to provide them with protection as far as the Western Approaches , and on 5 May sent the frigates HMS Latona and HMS Phaeton close in to Brest to ascertain the status of the French — they reported that Villaret 's battlefleet was still in harbour . 
 = = = Commerce raiding = = = 
 Out in the Atlantic , the detached squadrons of Nielly ( French ) and Montagu ( British ) were commerce raiding against enemy merchant shipping , but had thus far failed to find the main food convoy . Nielly encountered a British convoy from Newfoundland and took ten ships as prizes — including the convoy escort , the 32 @-@ gun frigate HMS Castor . Thomas Troubridge , captain of the Castor , would spend the entire campaign aboard Nielly 's flagship Sans Pareil . Montagu also met with some success on 15 May , recapturing the merchant ships Nielly had taken , along with the French corvette Marie @-@ <unk> and accurate intelligence on the direction and size of the French convoy which Montagu immediately passed to Howe . Resuming his patrol in the Mid @-@ Atlantic , Nielly found the convoy from America a few days later , and transferred two of his ships to Vanstabel 's escort to augment the convoy 's defences . He then returned to the Eastern Atlantic to look for signs of British activity which might pose a threat to its passage . He also dispatched frigates to Villaret , carrying information about the convoy 's location and speed . 
 While Nielly and Montagu searched out at sea , Howe took his fleet on a series of cruises back and forth across the Bay of Biscay in the hope of catching the convoy . Between 5 and 18 May he found nothing and so returned to Brest , where his scouting frigates reported that the French battlefleet had gone . Taking advantage of dense fog , Villaret had sailed the previous day , his ships passing within earshot of the British fleet . The French admiral was on the trail of Nielly 's squadron ; his intention was to meet both Nielly and the convoy and combine forces ; with superior numbers he would then be able to escort the convoy to France in safety . Having eluded Howe and still some days from his planned rendezvous , Villaret gained an unexpected success when he ran across a Dutch convoy of 53 vessels . Its escorts , Alliance and Waakzaamheid , fled at the sight of the approaching French fleet , and Villaret was free to attack the convoy , capturing 20 merchantmen . 
 = = = Howe 's pursuit = = = 
 Howe realised that the direction of Villaret 's departure would take him directly across Admiral Montagu 's planned route , and that , should Montagu meet Villaret , the British squadron would be destroyed . Setting all sail in pursuit , Howe followed Villaret into the Atlantic on 20 May . The next day Howe 's ships recaptured ten of the lost Dutch merchantmen , but he was forced to burn them since crewing them with British sailors would weaken his own already understrength fleet . Prisoners from these ships gave Howe the information that the French fleet was only a short distance ahead , but that it had been joined by an additional ship from Nielly 's squadron as well as several frigates . By now satisfied that Montagu was safely to the southwest , Howe pressed on hoped to bring Villaret to battle within the week . On 23 May however , the British fleet was driven southwards by strong winds and had to slowly work its way north to find the French track again . The detour did however enable him to recapture and destroy four more of Villaret 's Dutch prizes . 
 On the morning of 25 May Howe 's pursuit finally bore fruit , when his scouting frigates spotted a lone French ship of the line at 04 : 00 . This ship sighted Howe 's force at the same time , and immediately made off in the direction of the French fleet . The fleeing battleship left behind an American merchant ship she had been towing , which when taken reported that the French ship was Audacieux , of Nielly 's squadron . Pursuing Audacieux after burning the American prize , the British fleet also overran and burnt two French corvettes , the 20 @-@ gun Républicaine and 16 @-@ gun <unk> . Continuing his chase over the next three days , on 28 May Howe 's lookouts spotted the French on the eastern horizon slightly to the south , indicating that the French held the weather gage . [ Note A ] 
 = = 28 May = = 
 With his enemy visible from the deck of his flagship by 06 : 30 , Howe recalled his frigates and ordered his fleet to press on all sail in the hope of engaging the rear of the scattered French line . By 10 : 35 Howe 's continued pursuit was making his own battleline ragged , but he pressed on in the belief that Villaret intended to use the weather gage to outrun him and escape . To counter this , Howe ordered his fastest ships into a flying squadron under Admiral Thomas Pasley . This squadron was significantly faster than the majority of the vessels in either fleet and rapidly closed with the French rear . The first shots of the engagement were fired at 14 : 30 by HMS Russell , commanded by John Willett Payne , which managed some long @-@ distance fire at the rearmost French ships on the opposite tack . Fire was returned by the French but without significant effect . In an attempt to hold off Pasley 's squadron , at 17 : 00 the French first rate 110 @-@ gun Révolutionnaire exchanged places with the smaller third rates at the rear of the line and engaged the pursuing British van . This manoeuvre was apparently conducted on the initiative of Captain <unk> of Révolutionnaire without orders from Admiral Villaret or his political observer Jean Bon Saint @-@ André . 
 Through a sharp and skilful tack , HMS Bellerophon , one of the slowest ships in the British van , succeeded in bringing the Révolutionnaire to steady action at 18 : 00 . The ships exchanged fire for twenty minutes , the weaker Bellerophon taking severe damage to her rigging , and falling back to be replaced by HMS Marlborough under Captain George Cranfield Berkeley . Marlborough was joined by HMS Russell and HMS Thunderer , and between them they shot away much of the Révolutionnaire 's rigging , so that by 19 : 30 she was unmanageable . HMS Leviathan also joined the action , firing at an unidentified ship ahead of Révolutionnaire . Concerned about Pasley 's squadron becoming cut off from the main body of his fleet , Howe recalled them to the British line at 20 : 00 . All complied except the newly arrived HMS Audacious under Captain William Parker . Audacious had engaged Révolutionnaire so closely that she could not safely withdraw , and although her gunnery eventually dismasted her huge opponent , Audacious took severe damage . 
 It was not until 22 : 00 that Audacious and Révolutionnaire disentangled themselves and limped apart — their respective fleets now some way off . Audacious 's crew later claimed that Révolutionnaire had struck her colours during the engagement , although this has not been corroborated . Parker stated that he did not take possession of Révolutionnaire because he was concerned by the distant sighting of nine French battleships on the horizon . He had spotted a squadron under Commodore Jean @-@ Joseph <unk> , which was uninvolved in the current campaign and which soon disappeared without participating in any of the subsequent engagements . Audacious 's crew made strenuous efforts to repair their ship and rejoin the British fleet during the night , but became disorientated and in the morning Audacious was still only half a mile from her former opponent . 
 Révolutionnaire had suffered much more severely than Audacious , but survived the encounter without being boarded thanks to a misread signal by Captain Albemarle Bertie of Thunderer , who failed to take possession of the dismasted three @-@ decker when ordered to . During the night Villaret sent reinforcements to rescue Révolutionnaire , and at dawn on 29 May Parker saw that his large opponent was soon to be supported by the undamaged ship of the line Audacieux , the frigate Bellone , and two corvettes . Once more Audacious came under fire from Révolutionnaire , leaving her no option but to flee this superior force . Audacious was chased for half an hour by Bellone and the corvettes , before losing them in a rain squall , and eventually returned to Plymouth on 3 June . Révolutionnaire also escaped pursuit and was taken under tow by Audacieux , who brought her safely to Rochefort several days later . For leaving the battlefleet before the main engagement , Révolutionnaire 's captain was subsequently arrested . 
 = = 29 May = = 
 With Audacious and Révolutionnaire lost in the dark behind them , both British and French fleets continued westwards towards the convoy rendezvous . At dawn on 29 May the British fleet saw Audacieux retiring to the east but did not follow , concentrating on the main French line with the hope of provoking a decisive engagement . Howe ordered his ships to pursue the enemy rear , and the British line was placed on a tack that was intended to cut through the French line and isolate and capture the ships east of the cut . Captain Anthony Molloy in HMS Caesar was chosen to lead the attack as his ship was the fastest in the fleet , but the manoeuvre was a complete failure due to the inexplicable refusal of Molloy to close with the enemy . Instead , Caesar and HMS Queen opened fire on the rearmost French ships from a distance . The vans of the opposing fleets then engaged in a long @-@ range broadside duel from 10 : 00 . This inflicted mild damage on both sides , the worst hit being the French Montagnard . 
 Having failed to cut the French line at his first attempt , Howe reissued the order at 12 : 30 . Once more Caesar was to lead the way , with the intention of splitting the enemy fleet in half . Captain Molloy then refused to carry out the order , signalling without cause that Caesar was unable to tack and then turning and sailing eastwards down the outside of the British fleet , rather than towards the enemy . This unexpected move threw the following ships into a state of confusion ; Queen , coming behind Caesar , attempted to obey Howe 's signal alone but was badly damaged by shot , and her captain John Hutt mortally wounded . Unable to effectively manoeuvre , Queen passed down the outside of the French line , firing as she went . 
 His plan in tatters , Howe responded by example , leading his flagship HMS Queen Charlotte towards the French line which was rapidly slipping ahead of the British , steering around the meandering Caesar as he did so . Queen Charlotte first attempted to break through the French between the sixth and seventh ships from the rear , but was unable to reach this gap and instead sailed between the fifth and sixth , raking the sixth ship Eole from close range . Bellerophon and Lord Hugh Seymour in Leviathan followed close behind the flagship . Both battleships attempted to cut between the subsequent French ships ; Bellerophon successfully , Leviathan prevented by damage to her helm . This manoeuvre changed the course of the battle , as Howe 's ships isolated and raked the Terrible , Tyrannicide , and Indomptable , forcing Villaret to either abandon his ships or sacrifice the weather gage to save them . 
 As Howe pressed after the main body of the French fleet — now tailed by the damaged Terrible — the rest of his fleet followed , bombarding the already battered Tyrannicide and Indomptable as they passed . As HMS Orion , HMS Invincible , and HMS Barfleur cut through the French in turn , Villaret wore his fleet round to face Howe . Encouraged by Caesar 's disobedience , he deliberately sacrificed the weather gage in the belief that Howe 's fleet was more damaged than it appeared . All of Villaret 's ships followed him except Montagnard , which refused to turn , claiming to be seriously damaged . Villaret 's manoeuvre soon isolated the Queen Charlotte , Bellerophon , and Leviathan , which were forced to retreat hastily before the main French force . Having driven away the ships threatening Indomptable and Tyrannicide , Villaret reformed his fleet and attempted to escape westwards , closely followed by the British van who were now holding the weather gage . Both fleets were too damaged to continue action in the remaining daylight and firing stopped at 17 : 00 . The British fleet has suffered 67 killed and 128 wounded during the day 's fighting . 
 Evening found the fleets approximately 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ) apart , sailing northwest . Both were conducting hasty repairs and attempting to ready themselves for what all assumed would be another day of battle on 30 May . Significantly , Lord Howe was unaware that to the northeast , over the same sea as the previous day 's action had been fought , the ponderous convoy of merchant ships was passing , having successfully evaded British pursuit . Unlike his opponent Villaret knew the location of the convoy , which was joined that evening by the battered Montagnard . Escorting the convoy , Admiral Nielly had been appraised of the situation by Montagnard 's captain , and had left his escort duties to reinforce Villaret . 
 In a postscript to the day 's action the British frigate Castor , captured early in the campaign by Nielly , was attacked and retaken by the smaller HMS Carysfort under Captain Francis Laforey at the frigate action of 29 May 1794 . Some of the crew were released by their rescuers but most , including the officers , were not aboard , having been taken onto Nielly 's flagship Sans Pareil . 
 = = Between the actions = = 
 On the morning of 30 May , Howe sent a signal to all his captains asking if they considered their ships ready for combat . All but Caesar replied in the affirmative and Howe pushed his ships after the retreating French . Despite holding the weather gage , Howe 's pursuit was soon hampered by descending fog , and unable to see or come to grips with the enemy throughout the whole day , the admiral feared he may have lost his opportunity for battle . However , by 31 May the fog had cleared and the French were still within sight to the north . To the surprise of the British , none of the 26 battleships in the French fleet appeared to show battle damage , whereas many of the British ships were nursing damaged rigging and battered hulls . Villaret had made use of the fog to reorganise his force , losing Montagnard and the frigate Seine to the convoy but gaining the independently sailing battleship <unk> @-@ un @-@ Mai and Nielly 's squadron of Sans Pareil , Trajan , and <unk> . Villaret had also dispatched the battered Indomptable for home , escorted by an undamaged French ship . 
 Throughout 31 May Howe 's fleet closed with the French , making full use of the advantage of the weather gage . By 17 : 00 the fleets were five miles ( 9 km ) apart , but at 19 : 00 Howe gave orders to keep his ships out of shot range but within easy sailing of the French . He did not want a repeat of the confusion of 29 May and preferred to delay any combat until he was assured of a full day in which to conduct it , in order that his signals not be obscured or misinterpreted . During the night the fleets remained in visual contact , and by first light on 1 June the British were just six miles ( 11 km ) from Villaret 's fleet and organising in preparation to attack once more . Both fleets were now sailing in a western direction , Villaret still hoping to draw Howe away from the convoy . 
 = = Glorious First of June = = 
 At 09 : 24 on the morning of 1 June , Howe sent his ships into action using the original tactic of turning each ship in his line northwest simultaneously , so that they would bear down individually on Villaret 's fleet and each break the enemy line separately . His intention was to cut the French line in 25 places , raking the enemy vessels at both bow and stern and dividing their fire so they could be defeated piecemeal . Ultimately though this ambitious plan failed , due to ill @-@ discipline among Howe 's subordinates and the damage his fleet had sustained over the previous week . While six of Howe 's ships did break the French line as ordered , and several others came close , many of his captains failed to follow orders and instead engaged the enemy from a distance in desultory gun duels which had little effect . 
 As various British and French ships broke off into personal duels and some <unk> British ships struggled to get into action , Villaret led his flagship Montagne to the north and began assembling a coherent counter @-@ force from those of his fleet which had escaped Howe 's assault . In the melee itself several very hard @-@ fought engagements took place — particularly that between HMS Brunswick and Vengeur du Peuple . At least twelve ships were dismasted , with the British battleships HMS Marlborough and HMS Defence losing all three masts and ten French vessels suffering similarly . 
 By 11 : 30 the initial action was dying down , and Villaret brought his reconstituted force back towards the battle site to contest ownership of the dismasted hulks floating there . Howe likewise reformed his main force and met Villaret , who failed to capture any of the battered British ships but did regather six of his own , leaving Howe with seven prizes . Of these , the wrecked Vengeur soon sank , although British boats had removed many of her crew . Howe was left in possession of the battle site , but Villaret had successfully held off the British long enough for the convoy to pass to the east unmolested . Both fleets returned to their home ports over the next week . 
 = = The convoy arrives = = 
 While searching for the convoy during the first week of June , Montagu 's squadron became trapped between two French squadrons and was forced to sail southwards to avoid Villaret 's returning fleet . As a result , the French Atlantic seaboard was clear of British forces for a significant period . The food convoy arrived safely in France in the third week of June , and Montagu returned to Britain empty @-@ handed . Both nations claimed victory in the campaign ; the British by virtue of success in the only major action , and the French through the intact arrival of their convoy . 
 The campaign had notable effects on the navies of both Britain and France . The French did not directly contest British supremacy in Northern European waters again , spending most of the next 23 years in Brest and other ports , their few major sallies mainly directed at the Mediterranean . Continued upheavals in the French Navy resulted in a decline of quality in its officer corps , so that by the Battle of Trafalgar 11 years later the port @-@ bound nature of the French fleet had resulted in a cautious and inexperienced tactical outlook . In Britain , the battle created a division within the Royal Navy 's officer corps . Howe 's dispatch after the battle criticised some officers whom he believed had hesitated in action , and those officers received none of the honours distributed at the end of the campaign . Fallout from this dispute was widespread , with several senior figures resigning in disgust . Captain Molloy of HMS Caesar was ultimately court @-@ martialled and dismissed from the service for failing to support his admiral . 
 = Charles Abbott , 1st Baron Tenterden = 
 Charles Abbott , 1st Baron Tenterden PC SL ( 7 October 1762 – 4 November 1832 ) , was a British barrister and judge who served as Lord Chief Justice of the King 's Bench between 1818 and 1832 . Born in obscure circumstances to a barber and his wife in Canterbury , Abbott was educated initially at a dame school before moving to The King 's School , Canterbury in 1769 . He was noted as an excellent student , receiving an exhibition scholarship from the school in March 1781 , when he matriculated at Corpus Christi College , Oxford . Here he was elected a fellow , and also served as a tutor to the son of Sir Francis Buller , which first made him consider becoming a barrister . He joined the Middle Temple in 1787 , transferring to the Inner Temple in 1793 , and was called to the Bar by the Inner Temple in 1796 . Abbott was noted as an excellent barrister , earning more than any other during his time at the Bar , despite being considered <unk> and a poor speaker . He was offered a position as a Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in 1808 , which he turned down ; he accepted the same offer in 1816 , receiving the customary knighthood and being appointed a Serjeant @-@ at @-@ Law . 
 Three months after he started sitting as a judge he was transferred to the Court of King 's Bench , where he was initially rather poor , being unfamiliar with the court 's business . Within two years he showed " the highest judicial excellence " , and when Lord Ellenborough had a stroke in 1818 , Abbott was chosen to replace him as Lord Chief Justice . His reign at the head of the Court of King 's Bench saw the court flourish , with strong justices and his own much @-@ admired abilities . He was appointed to the peerage in 1827 , sitting as Charles Abbott , 1st Baron Tenterden , and initially attended the House of Lords regularly . His opposition to the Reform Act 1832 , which he claimed treated city corporations " with absolute contempt " , led to his refusal to attend the Lords . Continuing to sit as Lord Chief Justice , Abbott gradually grew weaker , and finally fell ill halfway through a two @-@ day trial . His disease baffled doctors , and he eventually died on 4 November 1832 at his home in Queen Square , London . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Abbott was born on 7 October 1762 in Canterbury to John Abbott , a barber , and his wife Alice . Abbot lived in a " small , mean @-@ looking house " near the Cathedral , and was initially educated at a dame school . During his childhood he was noted as " industrious , apprehensive , regular and correct in all his conduct " . He attended The King 's School , Canterbury , from 1769 , where he was such a good student that he received an exhibition scholarship on his matriculation at Corpus Christi College , Oxford , in March 1781 . At the time there were only two awards at Oxford : the Chancellor 's medals for English and Latin prose . After an initial attempt to win them which failed , he won the Latin prize in his second year and the English prize in the third . Abbot was then elected a fellow of Corpus Christi where , acting as a tutor to the son of Sir Francis Buller , he first considered becoming a barrister . On 16 November 1787 he became a member of the Middle Temple , transferring to the Inner Temple in 1793 , and worked for two years under Sir George Wood as a special pleader ; it was said that he had finished his work as a special pleader faster than " any man before or since " . He was called to the Bar by the Inner Temple in 1796 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Abbott began practising on the Oxford Circuit ; while travelling there he had a fall from his horse , which broke his leg in two places and left him permanently lame . In 1802 he published a legal tract , On Merchants ' Ships and Seamen , which was praised by his fellow lawyers and earned him a large amount of commercial work ; it was later republished in the United States , where it was misattributed to Charles Abbot , the Speaker of the House of Commons . He was eventually " as eminent and prosperous as a counsel can be at the English bar " , although he refused to apply for silk . From 1802 to 1816 he served as " Devil to the Attorney General " , opening all government prosecutions , and was standing counsel for the Bank of England and many Deans and Prelates in the Church of England . By 1807 he was making £ 8 @,@ 000 a year , and later exceeded this amount ; it was remarked that he earned more money than any other barrister of that time . Abbott was not a " flashy " barrister ; although known as an excellent lawyer , his speeches were monotonous and he lacked an imagination . 
 In 1808 he was offered a position as a Justice of the Court of Common Pleas , but refused it . After eight more years of work , however , he felt that his health could no longer take the strain , and accepted a position in the Court of Common Pleas on 24 January 1816 , along with becoming a Serjeant @-@ at @-@ Law as required . Abbot was granted the customary knighthood , with the motto " Labore " , which he also used for his peerage . He stayed in this post for barely three months , with no records of his work there surviving , before being transferred against his will to the Court of King 's Bench on 3 May to replace Simon Le Blanc . 
 Abbott , unfamiliar with the Court of King 's Bench ( having been a regional lawyer rather than a London @-@ based one ) , was initially a disappointment , but soon improved . By 1818 he showed " the highest judicial excellence " , although he was criticised for snapping at boring barristers and for taking the government 's side in prosecutions . That year , the Lord Chief Justice Lord Ellenborough had a stroke , forcing his retirement . Most of the other judges and legal figures were inappropriate for the role ; Sir Samuel Shepherd , for example , was while an able lawyer too deaf to sit as a judge . As a result , Abbott was appointed , and formally took up his position on 4 November 1818 . As Lord Chief Justice he saw the Court of King 's Bench flourish , with competent Justices and his own abilities ; " [ Abbott ] had more knowledge of mankind than any of [ the Justices ] , and was more skilful as a moderator in forensic disputation " . Abbott 's central weakness as a judge was seen to be his support of James Scarlett , his leader when Abbott was a barrister ; " The timid junior , become Chief Justice , still looked up to his old leader with dread , was afraid of offending him , and was always delighted when he could decide in his favour " . 
 On 30 April 1827 , Abbott was made Baron Tenterden , of Hendon in the County of Middlesex ; having feared that " Lord Abbott " would leave him open to ridicule , he instead picked the name of a Kentish town near his roots . On 24 May Abbott formally took up his position , attending the House of Lords regularly , and was the last Chief Justice to wear his official robes to the Lords ( other than those acting as interim Speakers ) . In 1830 he introduced several bills to Parliament following reports on the state of the Ecclesiastical Courts , common law courts and law of real property ; all were passed , except the ecclesiastical bills , as Parliament ran out of time to hear them . They were heard during the next Parliamentary session in 1831 , and both passed ; they " by no means established for him the reputation of a skilful legislator ... the judges have found it infinitely difficult to put a reasonable construction upon them " . The Reform Act 1832 led to his departure from the Lords , and is considered to have greatly shortened his life ; he fought strongly for the city corporations , which he claimed the bill treated " with absolute contempt " , but was eventually defeated . Having threatened that , should it pass , " Never , never my Lords , shall I enter the doors of this House " , he was true to his word , and never returned to politics , although from 8 August to 3 September 1827 he was interim Chancellor of the Exchequer , following the convention that , when vacant , the position should be held by the Lord Chief Justice . 
 = = Death = = 
 Abbott first began to grow ill in May 1832 , when he wrote to Sir Egerton Brydges that " My spirit is so depressed , that when I am not strongly excited by some present object that admits of no delay , I sink into something very nearly approaching <unk> " . Although he got somewhat better , giving his annual dinner to the King 's Counsel , it was noticed that he was unable to drink his wine properly . He went to the Midland Circuit in June , as it was the easiest one , but he suffered from " a violent cough " and other symptoms , returning to his home in Hendon . After the first day of a two @-@ day case he found himself losing his appetite and suffering from a fever , which caused him to talk incoherently and become delirious . The disease baffled doctors , and finally killed him on 4 November 1832 at his home in Queen Square , London ; his last words were " and now , gentlemen of the jury , you will consider of your verdict " . He was buried at the Foundling Hospital , of which he was a governor . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Abbott married Mary Lamotte on 30 July 1795 . He enjoyed the domestic element of his life , and records show love poetry written to his wife . Prior to their marriage Mary had sent him a lock of her hair ; in exchange , he wrote a poem for her entitled " The Answer of a Lock of Hair to the Inquiries of its Former Mistress " . The couple had two sons and two daughters ; John , Charles , Mary and Catherine . Catherine later married John Rowland Smyth . 
 Abbott was considered cautious , with an " aversion to all that was experimental " and a " want of fancy " which were considered excellent traits for a judge , giving him " a very prominent rank indeed amongst our ablest judges " . He possessed a violent disposition ; " his temper was naturally bad ; it was hasty and it was violent ; forming a natural contrast with the rest of his mind " , but he successfully controlled this . This occasionally came out in court , however , and he was noted as particularly caustic and intolerant of unnecessarily complex sentences . When one witness , an apothecary , used a particularly complex medical phrase , Abbott shouted that he should " Speak English sir , if you can , or I must swear in an interpreter " . He was considered " dull in private life as well as in public ; and neither crimes nor follies could ever be imputed upon him " ; despite this he was " a great magistrate , and his judgments [ were ] studied and admired " . Edward Foss wrote of him that " no judge ever sat on the bench who displayed greater learning , cleverness and discrimination ; nor whose judgments have ever been so undisputed . 
 = John J. Tigert = 
 John James Tigert , IV ( February 11 , 1882 – January 21 , 1965 ) was an American university president , university professor and administrator , college sports coach and the U.S. Commissioner of Education . Tigert was a native of Tennessee and the son and grandson of Methodist bishops . After receiving his bachelor 's degree , he earned his master 's degree as a Rhodes Scholar . 
 After completing his education , Tigert taught at Central College ; served as the president of Kentucky Wesleyan College ; and worked as a professor , sports coach and administrator at the University of Kentucky . 
 Tigert gained his greatest national prominence as the U.S. Commissioner of Education from 1921 to 1928 , and the third president of the University of Florida , from 1928 to 1947 . He is remembered as a forceful advocate for American public education , intercollegiate sports and university curriculum reform . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Tigert was born in Nashville , Tennessee , in 1882 , the third son of a Methodist Episcopal minister , John James Tigert , III , and his wife , Amelia <unk> Tigert . Tigert received his primary education in the public schools of Kansas City , Missouri , and Nashville , and earned his high school diploma , with honors , from the Webb School in Bell Buckle , Tennessee . 
 = = = Vanderbilt = = = 
 He was admitted to Vanderbilt University in Nashville , where he was a member of the Phi Delta Theta Fraternity ( Tennessee Alpha Chapter ) and a standout athlete in baseball , basketball , football and track . His time at Vanderbilt overlaps with Grantland Rice . As a senior , Tigert was honored as an All @-@ Southern halfback for the Vanderbilt Commodores football team . In his final game , he scored the first points netted all season against rival Sewanee . 
 Tigert graduated from Vanderbilt with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1904 ; he was selected for Phi Beta Kappa , and was chosen as a Rhodes Scholar , the first from the state of Tennessee , along with teammate Bob Blake . While at Oxford University in Oxford , England , he completed his Master of Arts degree at Pembroke College in 1907 , and he continued to participate in competitive university sports , including cricket , rowing and tennis . 
 = = Educator , administrator , reformer = = 
 After returning to the United States , Tigert taught at the Methodist @-@ affiliated Central College in Fayette , Missouri , and , at the age of 27 , was appointed president of Kentucky Wesleyan College in Owensboro , Kentucky in 1909 . That same year , he married the former Edith Jackson Bristol . 
 = = = University of Kentucky = = = 
 He later received an appointment as a professor of psychology and philosophy at the University of Kentucky in Lexington , Kentucky . He was perhaps best known for his work on psychology in advertising . While there , Tigert also served as the athletic director from 1913 to 1917 , the Kentucky Wildcats men 's basketball coach in 1913 , 1916 and 1917 , the Wildcats women 's basketball coach from 1911 to 1915 and again from 1916 to 1917 , and the Wildcats football coach in 1915 and 1916 . 
 = = = Commissioner of Education = = = 
 President Warren G. Harding appointed Tigert as the U.S. Commissioner of Education in 1921 , and he served for seven years during the administrations of Harding and Calvin Coolidge . As commissioner , he was an energetic advocate of education reform and greater educational opportunities for all classes of Americans , and he traveled widely and spoke often to virtually any group interested in education . In particular , he took an interest in rural education , and advocated innovative ways to impart public education to a wider audience , including the use of radio . During his time in Washington , D.C. , he also served a term as the national president of Phi Delta Theta Fraternity . 
 = = = University of Florida = = = 
 The Florida Board of Control selected Tigert as the third president of the University of Florida in Gainesville , Florida in 1928 . He assumed leadership of the university during an extended period of economic crisis in the state of Florida . When the Great Depression began with the Wall Street Crash of 1929 , Florida was already suffering from the after @-@ effects of the 1920s land boom and bust , as well the devastating aftermath of two major hurricanes in 1926 and 1928 . 
 The common thread of the nineteen years of Tigert 's administration was doing more with less . Faculty salary cuts were common ; Tigert himself never drew his full authorized annual salary of $ 10 @,@ 000 . Among Tigert 's many significant reforms , he decentralized the university budget to the level of the individual academic colleges , allowing them to set their own spending priorities . The University Council , composed of the president , the registrar and the college deans , retained final approval authority . Tigert also established the faculty senate , the Institute of Inter @-@ American Affairs and the Bureau of Economic and Business Research . 
 One of his most influential reforms as president was the founding of the new University College as an academic division within the University of Florida in 1935 . The college was modeled on the general education college at the University of Chicago , and administered the freshman and sophomore @-@ year liberal arts education of undergraduates before they were accepted to the university schools or colleges that administered their academic majors . The college 's stated purpose was to " stimulate intellectual curiosity " and " encourage independent work , " with new liberal arts requirements in biology , English language and literature , the humanities , logic , mathematics , physical sciences and social sciences , and thereby counter the growing trend toward " trade school " education at the university level . 
 As a former university athlete and coach , Tigert took a particular interest in athletics @-@ related policy issues while he was president and was an enthusiastic supporter of the Florida Gators sports program generally , and football in particular . He was responsible for the construction of the university 's first and only permanent football stadium , Florida Field , in 1930 . He borrowed $ 10 @,@ 000 to begin construction of the stadium , and then raised $ 118 @,@ 000 to pay the construction costs of the 22 @,@ 800 @-@ seat facility . Tigert was also instrumental in the organization of the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) , which the University of Florida joined as one of the thirteen founding institutions in December 1932 . Tigert subsequently served two terms as SEC president ( 1934 – 1936 and 1945 – 1947 ) . As a key leader within the SEC , he worked to impose a uniform set of rules and standards for academic eligibility for SEC athletes . Appalled by the under @-@ the @-@ table payments to amateur college athletes that were prevalent at the time , he advocated the grant of scholarships to athletes which would become the grant @-@ in @-@ aid of other university athletic programs and as mandated by the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) in the years to follow . 
 Like his predecessor , Albert A. Murphree , Tigert was elected president of the National Association of State Universities , serving from 1939 to 1940 . 
 Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 , students began to withdraw from the university in large numbers to enlist in the U.S. Armed Forces . The financial impact on the university had the potential to be devastating , but Tigert navigated the war years by making the university campus , dormitories and class rooms available for the training of U.S. Army Air Force flight crews . Tigert kept the lights on , and the bills paid . Veterans began to return to school with support from the GI Bill , and by the fall term of 1946 , over seventy percent of the University of Florida 's 7 @,@ 000 students were returning World War II veterans . Contributing to the shortage of facility space was the influx of new female students when the Florida Legislature reinstituted co @-@ education in 1947 . The university suddenly had more students than its available housing and classroom space could serve . 
 Tigert resigned as university president in 1947 , worked as an educational consultant to the government of India as a member of the Indian Higher Education Commission , and taught philosophy at the University of Miami until 1959 . 
 = = = = Legacy = = = = 
 Tigert served as president of the University of Florida for nineteen years , longer than any of the other presidents of the university . During his term , the university awarded its first doctoral degrees in 1934 , a chapter of Phi Beta Kappa was installed in 1938 , and total student enrollment grew from 2 @,@ 162 in 1928 to over 7 @,@ 500 in 1947 . As university president , he was responsible for significant and lasting academic , athletic and administrative reforms . 
 In recognition of Tigert 's long service as its president through depression and war , the University of Florida awarded him an honorary degree , a doctor of letters , during its 1953 centennial celebration , and renamed its main administrative building , Tigert Hall , for him in 1960 . Tigert died in Gainesville , Florida on January 21 , 1965 ; he was 82 years old . He was survived by his wife Edith , their son and daughter , and five grandchildren . 
 As a fitting final tribute to a professor , education reformer and administrator , who also fervently supported college sports , Tigert was inducted into the University of Florida Athletic Hall of Fame as an " Honorary Letter Winner , " and was elected to the College Football Hall of Fame as a player in 1970 . 
 = = Head coaching records = = 
 = = = Men 's basketball = = = 
 = = = Football = = = 
 = = = Women 's basketball = = = 
 = Vätsäri Wilderness Area = 
 The Vätsäri Wilderness Area ( Finnish : <unk> <unk> , Swedish : <unk> ) is located along the northeastern shore of Lake Inari in Inari , northern Finland , stretching all the way to the Finland – Norway border . The landscape is dominated by taiga forests of Scots pine , bog and bodies of water . The northeastern part rises as a treeless fell ridge . Vätsäri is one of twelve wilderness areas in Lapland and covers an area of 1 @,@ 550 square kilometers ( 600 sq mi ) . The wilderness has one marked trail and a few cabins . The reserve is under the management of <unk> ( Administration of Forests ) and was established with the other wilderness reserves in 1991 . It is part of Pasvik – Inari Trilateral Park along with Øvre Pasvik National Park and Øvre Pasvik Landscape Protection Area in Norway , and the joint Norwegian – Russian Pasvik Nature Reserve . 
 The area has a short growing season , cold winters , little precipitation and poor soil quality created by the gneiss bedrock . Lake Inari has been affected by acid rain and loss of fish from the Paatsjoki River Hydroelectric Plants . The reserve is an important habitat of the brown bear and also has a large moose population ; reindeer husbandry is practiced by the Samis . Whitefish and vendace are the most common species of fish , the latter being an introduced species . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The wilderness area is located on the northeastern shore of Lake Inari and stretches northeastwards into a treeless fell ridge . It is located entirely within the municipality of Inari , and the reserve 's eastern border is the Finland – Norway border . The landscape consists of taiga forests of Scots pine in the lower areas , bog , thousands of small lakes , and creeks . The reserve covers an area of 1 @,@ 550 square kilometers ( 600 sq mi ) . Most streams in Vätsäri flow into Lake Inari , which has the Pasvik River as its outflow . Construction of the Paatsjoki River Hydroelectric Plants has changed the hydrology considerably , providing for a more stable regulation of Lake Inari , but reducing the flow speed . Water levels are now highest during autumn and lowest during spring , opposite of before . 
 The bedrock consists of basement gneiss with occasional slate and volcanic rock . The Inari Basin was created after the last glacial period when an ice blockage in the Pasvik River hindered the draining of melted water in the area . The climate is harsh and allows only a limited growing season of between 110 and 120 days . Temperatures may rise to 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) during summer , but fall to − 40 ° C ( − 40 ° F ) in winter . The northeastern part of the reserve is moderated by the Barents Sea and so winter temperatures are higher and there is less snow . Precipitation is 200 to 500 millimeters ( 8 to 20 in ) during the year , half of which falls during the growing season . Not until June does the ice melt . Some lakes in the eastern part of the Wilderness are damaged by acid rain from the Norilsk Nickel plant in Nikel , Russia . 
 = = History = = 
 The area was populated in the Stone Age by Inari Sami people shortly after the last glacial period ended about 8000 BC . The first documents from the area are tax records from the 16th century . The Inari Sami originally engaged in reindeer husbandry , but later switched to farming and herding cattle and sheep . The area belonged to the Inari <unk> beginning in the Middle Ages . Until the border was closed in 1852 , the Sami from Norway came during winter to herd their reindeer . The border closing caused some Norwegian Sami to settle in the area and continue with reindeer husbandry . This caught on among the Inari Sami , and the amount of husbandry increased during the 20th century . People in the area traveled up Lake Inari and onwards to the coast of Finnmark , Norway , to fish during summer . Records of markets in Finnmark date back to the 16th century , and in the 1880s about 150 people traveled to the coast each year . Logging in the southern part boomed during the 1920s , when logs were driven down the Pasvik River to <unk> and <unk> in Norway . Previously there were birch forests in the fells , but in the 1960s their leaves were eaten by the caterpillar of the Autumnal Moth , leaving the fells barren . The construction of the Paatsjoki River Hydroelectric Plants starting in the 1940s had a strong negative effect on the fish population ; in 1976 the authorities therefore enforced the obligatory introduction of fish in Lake Inari . 
 The twelve wilderness areas in Lapland were all created in 1991 to protect both the natural wilderness and the Sami culture . These areas combined cover an area of 14 @,@ 903 square kilometers ( 5 @,@ 754 sq mi ) , where such activities as road construction and mining are prohibited , as is logging in some areas . Pasvik – Inari Trilateral Park was established in several steps : Øvre Pasvik National Park was created in 1970 , the Russian part of Pasvik Nature Reserve was established in 1992 , and the Norwegian part created the following year . In 2003 the national park was expanded and Øvre Pasvik Landscape Protection Area was established , creating a continually protected area spanning three countries . 
 = = Management = = 
 The wilderness area is managed by <unk> a government agency which manages the state @-@ owned land in Finland . The area is not a strictly protected area , instead falling into the Natura 2000 network . Limitations include the mandatory maintenance of forests in their natural state and a ban on logging . The sale and leasing of land is prohibited , as is construction of permanent roads and mining . 
 = = Nature = = 
 The area shares a common brown bear population with Norway and Russia . Other predators include red fox , stoat , pine marten and the rare wolverine and Eurasian lynx . The gray wolf was common until the 1940s . There is also a large population of moose . Inari – Pasvik has a shared population of 6 @,@ 000 reindeer , which are herded to different areas depending on the season . Fences have been installed to hinder reindeer from wandering across the national borders . 
 Whitefish and vendace are the most common fish species in Lake Inari , the latter having been accidentally naturalized . Lake trout can be caught in creeks . Other fish found in the park include Arctic char , grayling , pike , perch , burbot , three @-@ spined stickleback , <unk> stickleback and minnow . Stocking with fish has resulted in the introduction of Atlantic salmon , vendace and lake trout . 
 The lower areas of the wilderness area are covered by a taiga forest of Scots pine . Less common trees include downy birch , goat willow , aspen and rowan . Logging in the past has mostly occurred in the southern part ( " <unk> " ) , a large proportion of Vätsäri 's forests being old @-@ growth forests . The barren soil makes for poor growth conditions and most of the ground vegetation in the forests is <unk> . One area with limestone rock features green spleenwort . The reserve is located in an area between a western and eastern vegetation zones , giving rise to unique combinations of species , such as Siberian spruce and red cottongrass . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Most recreation takes place around Lake Inari , although a limited number of visitors hike into the fells . The reserve is a demanding hiking area and inexperienced hikers are recommended to avoid traversing the wilderness . The freedom to roam grants everyone the right to hike , ski and short @-@ term camping everywhere in the area . The park can be accessed from National Road 971 and 969 ; public transport is available to Nellim . 
 The <unk> Trail is the only marked trail in the park ; it is 35 kilometers ( 22 mi ) and connects the reserve to Øvre Pasvik National Park . Its northern starting point is at <unk> in Norway and the southern end is at <unk> Road . The trail is so demanding that it is not recommended for beginners . Lake Inari offers good fishing , making it a popular visitor attraction in the reserve . Boating on the lake is popular and harbors are located in Inari , <unk> and Nellim , in addition to several places where boats can be launched . The open parts of the lake can be stormy . There is a canoeing route which connects Lake Inari to several adjacent lakes , with two open wilderness huts along the route . During winter there is a snowmobile route between <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Nellim , Ivalo and Inari . 
 = Ridiculous Fishing = 
 Ridiculous Fishing : A Tale of Redemption is a mobile fishing video game where players use motion and touch controls to catch fish and subsequently shoot them out of the sky for cash . The game is known for its developers ' battle against a cloned version of their game released by another company . The game was developed and published by Vlambeer — Rami Ismail and Jan Willem Nijman — and released for iOS on March 13 , 2013 , and later that year for Android . 
 Players cast a fishing line into the ocean and use motion controls to avoid fish as the hook sinks and to catch as many fish as possible as the reel retracts . Players then touch the screen to shoot fish out of the sky for money that can be spent on upgrades . Nijman developed the idea during a television show about tuna fishermen . The game was first released as Flash game Radical Fishing with the same basic mechanics . A year after Vlambeer began their iOS development , Gamenauts released Ninja Fishing , a clone of the game that hurt Vlambeer morale . The team worked on other games and spoke publicly about the situation to a standing ovation at the 2012 Game Developers Conference before resolving to scrap the majority of their work and finish the game . Artist Greg Wohlwend moved in with iOS developer Zach Gage to work 14 @-@ hour days on the game . 
 Ridiculous Fishing received " near @-@ universal perfect scores " at launch — what review score aggregator Metacritic describes as " universal acclaim " . It won an Apple 's 2013 Design Award and was their iPhone game of the year . Reviewers noted Vlambeer 's struggle against the copy of their game and praised the game 's balance and both visual and game design . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player fishes in pursuit of fame as a fisherman named Billy . The game mechanics are " three tightly @-@ woven minigames in one " : casting the fishing line , catching fish , and shooting the fish in the air . The player casts the line and tilts the device to avoid the fish as the hook sinks . Upon hooking a fish , the hook ascends and the player tilts the device to catch as many fish as possible en route to the surface . Above water , the fish are launched into the air , and the player taps the screen to shoot the fish out of the sky to earn money before they fall into the water . The fish differ in characteristics including swim pattern and the number of shots required to cash in . The jellyfish shot detract from the total income . There are four stages , each with its own visual and audio theme and rare fish , and an endless mode where players can work towards the highest score . Earnings can be spent in a store towards persistent upgrades such as longer fishing line length , invulnerable drills , frivolous hats , bigger guns , chainsaw lures , a hair dryer and toaster ( to zap inadvertent catches ) , fuel for the chainsaw , and a necktie for greater income . There is also a Fish @-@ o @-@ <unk> in Billy 's smartphone that gives gameplay hints and tracks stats such as fish caught , which is the progress for unlocking new levels . There are no in @-@ app purchases . 
 = = Development = = 
 Vlambeer developed Radical Fishing , an Adobe Flash @-@ based game where a fisherman sits in a boat and casts his line into the water , pulls up fish into the air , and shoots them with a gun . It was built to take " everything good " from habit @-@ forming browser games without artificially extending its length just to hook players . The game was designed with a feedback loop , where performance in one minigame led to a more rewarding experience in the next minigame . Vlambeer designer Jan Willem ( " JW " ) Nijman developed the idea based on a television show about tuna fishermen that led him to consider an intersection between catching big fish , slow @-@ motion photography , and Duck Hunt 's game mechanics . Nijman immediately drafted the design , which never changed . The company sold the Flash game to a browser games website in 2010 but kept the rights to produce an iOS version , which they would call Ridiculous Fishing . They began production on the iOS version on December 7 , 2010 , with the intention of a " 2012 / 2013 equivalent " of the original . 
 About a year later , Gamenauts released Ninja Fishing , a game with similar game mechanics but different art that became known as a clone of Radical Fishing . Polygon reports that the game " became an overnight sensation " . Since game mechanics were not eligible for copyright protection , Vlambeer did not pursue legal action . Vlambeer 's primary project had been Serious Sam : The Random Encounter , which was sidelined to handle the new clone situation . At one point , Vlambeer revealed its multiple in @-@ game fishing locations and Ninja Fishing added a similar feature with a " coming soon " sign . 
 Vlambeer was " completely <unk> " and stopped Ridiculous Fishing development for several weeks , but later resolved to continue . Another concurrent project at the company , Super Crate Box , released in 2012 to industry praise . Super Crate Box was nominated for an Independent Games Festival award at the 2011 Game Developers Conference ( GDC ) , where the team was largely unknown and the game did not win the award . By the next year , Ridiculous Fishing was nominated for the 2012 Independent Games Festival " Best Mobile Game " award at GDC , and Vlambeer had become known within the game development community for their two titles and struggle against Gamenauts 's Ninja Fishing . Their 2012 GDC talk on game clones received standing ovations . Polygon referred to the speech as " a shot heard around the game industry " . Ridiculous Fishing was shown at the 2012 Independent Games Festival GDC booth . The team also released a concurrent side project , Yeti Hunter , live from the GDC show floor . Nijman began development for <unk> on the plane home from the conference . 
 By now the team had four members : designer Jan Willem Nijman , marketer Rami Ismail , iOS developer Zach Gage , and artist Greg Wohlwend . The team continued work separately and sporadically , making meager headway and disheartened by the project 's obstacles . Upon return to the Netherlands from GDC , Nijman and Ismail , the co @-@ founders of Vlambeer , began to plan a " really large game " , but ultimately decided that the idea was a diversion from the realities of finishing Ridiculous Fishing . In August 2012 , after a road trip home across the United States from Penny Arcade Expo in Seattle to New York , the team set a deadline to finish the game . The game was in a " disjointed " state , with good fishing mechanics , but poor shooting and menu navigation . They scrapped the store , interface , and endgame along with " 90 percent " of their work , which revealed a specific direction for the rest of the game 's development . Wohlwend , the artist , moved in with Gage , the developer , in New York City , working 14 @-@ hour days during the final weeks . The music was composed by Eirik Suhrke . The last parts of the game assembled smoothly , and Ismail submitted the game to the iOS App Store for approval from New York . 
 Ridiculous Fishing was scheduled to release the same day as a new , unrelated game by Gamenauts , Castle Champions . Vlambeer feared that Gamenauts 's prior success with Ninja Fishing would advantage Castle Champions for the coveted " featured " marketing position in the iOS App Store , and consequently embarrass the company . Vlambeer asked Gamenauts to reschedule Castle Champions 's launch , but the company declined . The team 's emotional tensions eased upon learning that <unk> Studios 's Super Stickman Golf 2 would also release on the same day , as they felt this took Gamenauts out of consideration . Vlambeer prepared several trailers for the launch , including a seven @-@ second Vine video and a 90 @-@ second trailer . The game was released March 13 , 2013 . The company live @-@ streamed Ridiculous Fishing 's launch from their Utrecht office . A July 2013 patch added custom soundtracks , new fish , and an item for exiting the game early . Vlambeer released an Android version with the November 19 , 2013 Humble Bundle . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game was well received at launch with " near @-@ universal perfect scores " . Review score aggregator Metacritic describes its reception as " universal acclaim " . As of April 2013 , the game was the highest @-@ rated for iOS in 2013 . It won the " featured " position in the App Store , and , later , an Apple Design Award at the 2013 Apple Worldwide Developers Conference and Apple 's iPhone game of the year . Pocket Gamer awarded it their gold award . In August 2013 , Vlambeer announced that the game was nearing one million dollars in sales . 
 Edge noted that Ridiculous Fishing did not carry the emotional baggage behind the company 's tumultuous development . Oli Welsh of Eurogamer called the balance beautiful and clever , an elaboration on their previous version 's " idiot @-@ savant design " without going too far . TouchArcade 's Eli Hodapp commended the upgrade structure that combined obtainable incentives alongside gameplay as engaging as Doodle Jump 's . IGN 's Justin Davis praised the game 's unpredictable and " poignant " ending at the bottom of the Arctic <unk> . He added that the game could have been " even more ridiculous " and its levels more differentiated in theme and art style , though he found the " almost cubist design ... absolutely gorgeous " . Welsh of Eurogamer agreed that Wohlwend 's art was " achingly cool " and reflected a " retro and minimalist " indie gaming trend without overpowering the gameplay . Welsh also praised the game 's character by way of its fake Twitter feed , and Pocket Gamer 's Rob Hearn compared its imaginative character to that of Wes Anderson 's The Life Aquatic . 
 TouchArcade 's Eli Hodapp called Ridiculous Fishing so well packaged as to make his recommendation " effortless " for both short few @-@ minute play sessions as well as longer ones . Rob Hearn of Pocket Gamer lauded its " blossoming " progression and became more interested as he unlocked upgrades . But when there was nothing left to upgrade , Hearn wrote that " it 's a shame that the innovation is confined to the first few hours " . While Ridiculous Fishing offered many hours of secrets and unlocks , IGN 's Davis noted that the game was at its core a " simple arcade experience ... ultimately a polished arcade time @-@ killer " . 
 = Australia at the 2014 Winter Paralympics = 
 Australia sent nine competitors to the 2014 Winter Paralympics in Sochi , Russia . The delegation also consisted of two sighted guides and 15 support staff . The team won two bronze medals . Toby Kane won a bronze medal in the men 's Super combined standing , and Jessica Gallagher and guide Christian Geiger won one in the women 's giant slalom visually impaired event . 
 The Australian Team 's performance was affected by the death of para @-@ snowboarder Matthew Robinson just prior to the Games , and injuries to Cameron Rahles @-@ Rahbula and <unk> Badenhorst forcing them to withdraw from their events . 
 = = Team Preparation = = 
 Australian Paralympic Winter Program members competed in competitions in Europe and the United States in the lead up to the 2014 Winter Paralympics in Sochi , Russia . In September 2013 , Australia hosted the IPC Alpine Skiing World Cup at Thredbo , New South Wales . Australia finished the competition with three gold , three silver and one bronze medal to finish third on the medal tally behind the United States ( eight gold , six silver , eight bronze medals ) and Slovakia ( eight gold , two silver , three bronze medals ) . Australia 's Mitchell Gourley and Cameron Rahles @-@ Rahbula won gold medals . 
 Three team members – Toby Kane , Cameron Rahles @-@ Rahbula and Mitchell Gourley undertook wind tunnel testing at Monash University in 2013 to assist them in determining their optimal aerodynamic position whilst skiing . 
 = = = Pre Games Skiing Accidents = = = 
 The Australian Paralympic Team suffered two major skiing accidents just prior to the games . Matthew Robinson died after a skiing accident while competing at the IPC Alpine Skiing World Cup , Whilst Robinson 's event was not included in the Games , he was an integral member of the Australian Paralympic snowboard team . Less than a day after being named as Australia 's flagbearer for the Sochi Paralympics , Cameron Rahles @-@ Rahbula was injured while training for the 2014 Sochi Winter Paralympic Games . Rahles @-@ Rahbula suffered a knee injury that forced him to miss his opening races , but he still hoped to be able to compete in his pet event , the slalom , and in the giant slalom . On 10 March 2014 , it was revealed that Rahles @-@ Rahbula has a knee fracture and would not be able to compete in any of his Paralympic events . 
 = = Administration = = 
 Kate McLoughlin was appointed the Chef de Mission in March 2013 . This was the first time that a woman had been appointed a Chef de Mission . However , she stepped down due to family reasons , and was replaced by Chris Nunn in November 2013 . The Australian Paralympic Committee announced that it cost AUD $ 1 @.@ 5 million to send the Team to Sochi , with $ 200 @,@ 000 of the budget still outstanding . To raise additional funds , it launched the " Believe " campaign . 
 = = Team = = 
 On 4 February 2014 , Australian Paralympic Committee announced a team of nine athletes , as well as two sighted guides , to attend the 2014 Sochi Winter Paralympics . Their head coach is Steve Graham . Athletes selected were : 
 Alpine skiing 
 Jessica Gallagher 
 Christian Geiger ( guide for Gallagher ) 
 Mitchell Gourley 
 Toby Kane 
