 According to Bruce Spizer : 
 George Harrison – vocals , acoustic guitars , gubgubbi , Moog synthesizer , percussion , backing vocals 
 Billy Preston – piano , organ 
 Tom Scott – flute 
 Jim Horn – flute 
 Chuck Findley – flute 
 Willie Weeks – bass 
 Andy Newmark – drums 
 Emil Richards – <unk> 
 = Live 'r Than You 'll Ever Be = 
 Live 'r Than You 'll Ever Be is a bootleg recording of the Rolling Stones ' concert in Oakland , California , from 9 November 1969 . It was one of the first live rock music bootlegs and was made notorious as a document of their 1969 tour of the United States . The popularity of the bootleg forced the Stones ' label Decca Records to release the live album Get Yer Ya @-@ Yas Out ! The Rolling Stones in Concert in 1970 . Live 'r is also one of the earliest commercial bootleg recordings in rock history , released in December 1969 , just two months after the Beatles ' Kum Back and five months after Bob Dylan 's Great White Wonder . Like the two earlier records , Live <unk> outer sleeve is plain white , with its name stamped on in black ink . 
 = = Recording and release = = 
 Live 'r Than You 'll Ever Be was recorded by " Dub " Taylor from Trademark of Quality using a Sennheiser shotgun microphone and a <unk> " Report 4000 " reel @-@ to @-@ reel tape recorder . It was the first audience @-@ recorded rock bootleg to be mastered and distributed ; some sources consider it the first live bootleg . Though the sound is not nearly as clear as the official release of Get Yer Ya @-@ Ya 's Out ! , the recording is considered to be very strong for an audience recording , especially one of that era . The Rolling Stones performed two sets that night and it is the second concert that was more heavily bootlegged and has sharper sound . Bootleggers had collaborated to record Stones shows across the United States , recording them on two @-@ track Sony recorders for months prior to the release of the album . At least one source claims that the recordings initially came from rock promoter Bill Graham 's staff , who used the tapes for broadcast on <unk> and released their edit on <unk> Records in early 1970 . 
 The recording was made available about one month after the concert , and it became popular enough to spur speculation that the Stones released Ya @-@ Ya 's as a response to the bootleg and the quality was high enough that it was rumoured that the band had even released the bootleg themselves . The recording has been released through several bootleg labels , including the original release by Trademark of Quality ( catalogue number <unk> ) , Swingin ' Pig , and Sister Morphine , usually documenting only the second set . The Swingin ' Pig release even replace performances of " Jumpin ' Jack Flash " and " Under My Thumb " with different recordings from the band 's 10 November performance in San Diego and their two @-@ night stint in New York City and attempted to enhance the sound quality by using de @-@ clicking technology — both changes have drawn criticism in comparison to the original TMOQ release . 
 = = Reception and influence = = 
 Live 'r Than You 'll Ever Be was reviewed by Greil Marcus in the 7 February 1970 , issue of Rolling Stone . In his review , Marcus praises the sound of the album and speculates that it may have been recorded from the stage ; footage from this concert was recorded by ABKCO Records for the film Gimme Shelter . The album also received praise as a more authentic example of the Stones on stage because Get Yer Ya @-@ Ya 's Out ! was heavily overdubbed in many places . Richie Unterberger has noted that the recording is inferior to the sound quality of Ya @-@ Ya 's , but displays a spontaneity that the official recording lacks and this helps to explain its long @-@ lasting appeal to fans . Reviewing the album in 1970 , Wim Wenders called it " the best Rolling Stones record . " The album would eventually sell enough copies to qualify for a gold record RIAA certification , with TMOQ sources claiming that it had sold 250 @,@ 000 copies by November 1970 — 150 @,@ 000 of which were produced by other bootleggers . Although the album did not chart on the Billboard 200 , the magazine did include it in a list of best @-@ selling bootlegs in 1971 , noting that hard sales figures were impossible to confirm , but six @-@ figure sales had been routinely discussed . The sleeve 's generic design was later copied by The Who 's 1970 album Live at Leeds . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Jagger / Richards , except where noted 
 Side one 
 " Carol " ( Chuck Berry ) – 3 : 44 
 " Gimme Shelter " – 4 : 18 
 " Sympathy for the Devil " – 6 : 23 
 " I 'm Free " – 5 : 07 
 " Live with Me " – 3 : 33 
 Side two 
 " Love in Vain " ( Robert Johnson ) – 5 : 24 
 " Midnight Rambler " – 7 : 40 
 " Little Queenie " ( Berry ) – 4 : 13 
 " Honky Tonk Women " – 4 : 04 
 " Street Fighting Man " – 4 : 10 
 Different versions of the bootleg include different track listings . The <unk> Records release includes both concerts performed on this date in their entirety and is represented here : 
 Disc 1 – Early Show 
 Band introduction – 1 : 36 
 " Jumpin ' Jack Flash " – 4 : 51 
 " Prodigal Son " ( Robert Wilkins ) – 4 : 03 
 " You Gotta Move " ( Fred McDowell and Reverend Gary Davis ) – 3 : 18 
 " Carol " ( Berry ) – 3 : 33 
 " Sympathy for the Devil " – 6 : 55 
 " Stray Cat Blues " – 4 : 18 
 " Love in Vain " ( Johnson ) – 5 : 13 
 " I 'm Free " – 5 : 08 
 " Under My Thumb " – 3 : 15 
 " Midnight Rambler " – 8 : 17 
 " Live with Me " – 4 : 00 
 " Little Queenie " ( Berry ) – 3 : 56 
 " ( I Can 't Get No ) Satisfaction " – 6 : 56 
 " Honky Tonk Women " – 4 : 17 
 " Street Fighting Man " – 4 : 03 
 Disc 2 – Late Show 
 " Jumpin ' Jack Flash " – 4 : 05 
 " Carol " ( Berry ) – 3 : 44 
 " Sympathy for the Devil " – 6 : 23 
 " Stray Cat Blues " – 4 : 13 
 " Prodigal Son " ( Wilkins ) – 3 : 59 
 " You Gotta Move " ( McDowell and Davis ) – 3 : 12 
 " Love in Vain " ( Johnson ) – 5 : 24 
 " I 'm Free " – 5 : 07 
 " Under My Thumb " – 3 : 23 
 " Midnight Rambler " – 7 : 40 
 " Live with Me " – 3 : 33 
 " Gimme Shelter " – 4 : 18 
 " Little Queenie " ( Berry ) – 4 : 13 
 " ( I Can 't Get No ) Satisfaction " – 6 : 04 
 " Honky Tonk Women " – 4 : 04 
 " Street Fighting Man " – 4 : 10 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Rolling Stones 
 Mick Jagger – lead vocals , harmonica 
 Keith Richards – lead guitar and rhythm guitar , backing vocals 
 Mick Taylor – lead and rhythm guitar , slide guitar 
 Bill Wyman – bass guitar 
 Charlie Watts – drums and percussion 
 Additional musicians 
 Ian Stewart – piano 
 = Brand New ( band ) = 
 Brand New is a rock band from Long Island , New York . Formed in 2000 , the band consists of Jesse Lacey ( lead vocals , guitars ) , Vincent Accardi ( guitars , backing vocals ) , Garrett Tierney ( bass guitar ) , and Brian Lane ( drums , percussion ) . From 2005 until 2013 the band also included Derrick Sherman ( guitar , backing vocals , keyboards ) . 
 In the late 1990s , Jesse Lacey , Garrett Tierney and Brian Lane were all members of the band The Rookie Lot . They eventually split off from the other members of the group , and in 2000 formed Brand New in Merrick , New York . The band signed to Triple Crown Records and in 2001 released their debut studio album , Your Favorite Weapon . Their second album , Déjà Entendu , was released in 2003 and marked a stylistic change for the band . The album 's first two singles , " The Quiet Things That No One Ever Knows " and " Sic Transit Gloria ... Glory Fades " , both received airplay on MTV2 and Fuse TV , entering the top 40 on the United Kingdom Singles Chart . Deja Entendu was eventually certified gold in the United States . 
 Brand New moved to Interscope Records and released The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me in 2006 . " Jesus " , also known as " Jesus Christ " , became their highest charting single in the US , peaking at number 30 on the Alternative Songs chart . In March 2008 , the band started their own record label , named <unk> ! Music Traitors . Their fourth album , Daisy , was released in 2009 and became their highest charting album in the US , reaching number six on the Billboard 200 . The band have been working on new material for some time , releasing new single " Mene " in April 2015 followed by " I Am a Nightmare " a year later in May 2016 . A new album is scheduled for release in 2016 . Recent t @-@ shirt designs and lyric book inserts hint at the band possibly breaking up in 2018 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early releases ( 2000 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Prior to Brand New 's official formation , in the late 1990s , Jesse Lacey , Garrett Tierney and Brian Lane were all members of the post @-@ hardcore band The Rookie Lot , along with Brandon Reilly and Alex Dunne of Crime in Stereo . After the band 's split and not playing together for a while , Lacey , Lane and Tierney started to rehearse again . They then recruited guitarist Vincent Accardi , who had been playing in a band called One Last Goodbye , since Reilly had joined The <unk> . 
 All four members had backgrounds linking into their local Long Island independent and hardcore music scenes , but with influences from an array of artists ranging from Buddy Rich to the Archers of Loaf . They eventually formed Brand New in 2000 , in a basement in Merrick , New York . Their initial intention was always to " move outside of whatever notions they felt inclined to when they were making music as younger people . " The band gained exposure in the local scene through playing shows with alternative rock contemporaries Midtown and post @-@ hardcore bands like Glassjaw , while also self @-@ releasing a four @-@ song demo . They signed to Triple Crown Records just after their second @-@ ever show . 
 = = = Debut album : Your Favorite Weapon ( 2001 – 2002 ) = = = 
 Brand New 's debut studio album Your Favorite Weapon was produced by friend of the band Mike Sapone . The album has been described as being " bitter about ex @-@ girlfriends " , with an excessive concentration on " post @-@ breakup angst " , receiving relatively positive reviews , with Allmusic awarding it three out of five and Popmatters also being favorable . It became a moderate success , selling over 50 @,@ 000 copies . The record deal gave Brand New the opportunity to tour , playing alongside the likes of Taking Back Sunday and touring the UK in support of Finch , to a " great response " from the crowds . 
 The only single released from Your Favorite Weapon was " Jude Law and a Semester Abroad " . The song has been described by Allmusic as a " semi @-@ hit " , after it received airplay on both MTV2 and Fuse . 
 = = = Déjà Entendu and acclaim ( 2003 – 2004 ) = = = 
 Brand New 's second studio album was written in " the year and @-@ a @-@ half or two years " that they were touring the material off Your Favorite Weapon . According to drummer Brian Lane , " Jesse [ Lacey ] wrote a lot of the lyrics about different things than ' I just broke up with my girlfriend ' for the new record , " as Lacey had written the songs on an acoustic guitar in his bedroom . Lane also explained that the band was now influenced by a range of different artists , " All of us got exposed to a lot of different music that all of us were listening to . For the first [ album ] we weren 't in such close quarters for 24 hours a day . I think that has a lot to do with it . " Unlike their first album , it was said that a lot of time and concentration went into making the album . 
 The band released Déjà Entendu through Razor & Tie / Triple Crown Records in June 2003 , with it being issued in Europe and Australia in October 2003 . The album 's title , Deja Entendu , is French for " already heard . " It was explained as " very tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek , " by singer Lacey . Elaborating on the title 's meaning , he told MTV , " No matter who you are or what your band is about , you can 't put a record out without people saying it 's derivative of something else . So by saying the record 's already been heard , it 's kind of like saying , ' Yeah , you 're right . We 're doing something that 's already been done before . ' " Also reinforcing , " We 're not trying to break new ground in music . We 're just trying to make good music . " The album was described as a " stylistic leap " from Your Favorite Weapon , with a " decidedly matured " sound . In an interview with Billboard , Lacey said that although Déjà Entendu does offer a different sound , the album " doesn 't seem like we 're departing from anything , really . I think we always knew that we had a lot of potential and there 's a lot of different stuff we were able to do , and a lot of different sounds we wanted to make . Not too long after we recorded the first record , we were already wondering where we were going to go from there . " 
 Déjà Entendu debuted at number 63 on the Billboard 200 . After just seven weeks , the album 's sales were at more than 51 @,@ 000 copies , already closing in on the total figure of its predecessor , Your Favorite Weapon . In May 2007 , four years after its release , it was certified gold for surpassing 500 @,@ 000 sales in the United States , by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 Déjà Entendu 's first single , " The Quiet Things That No One Ever Knows " , impacted radio airplay in July 2003 , a month after the album 's release . The song was said to be about regret , or " How there can be problems in a relationship and they get ignored . And how that often ends up as a broken home or some kind of bad situation down the road . It 's kind of something that if it wasn 't overlooked in the first place , you can kind of get through it . " The song 's music video chronicles the moments after a severe car accident , where a mortally wounded Lacey cannot depart for the next world until he knows that his girlfriend , also injured in the crash , is safe in this one . He says it " is about death or losing someone and it 's those moments that you kind of look back on your life and realize all the regrets that you had , and all the things you wish you could change " . They also made a music video for the second single , " Sic Transit Gloria ... Glory Fades , " where Lacey acts like a human voodoo doll ; discovering that when he moves a particular body part , it is mimicked by the target of his action . " Since the song is about taking advantage of someone else , " he said , " there 's a pretty strong correlation between the video and the song . " Both music videos gave the band exposure in the mainstream where Your Favorite Weapon went " virtually unnoticed " , with the videos finding " constant " airplay on MTV and the band making its live television debut on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . Furthermore , both singles entered the top 40 on the UK Singles Chart , whilst " The Quiet Things That No One Ever Knows " peaked at number 37 on the Alternative Songs chart . 
 Three shows of the band 's 24 @-@ date headlining US tour with Moneen , Senses Fail , and The Beautiful Mistake had sold out prior to even having released a single , with much of the buzz surrounding the band being produced by just word of mouth , touring and Internet message boards . Deja Entendu 's success also earned them tours alongside New Found Glory , Good Charlotte , Dashboard Confessional , and Blink @-@ 182 . The band went on to headline The Bamboozle festival with My Chemical Romance , Alkaline Trio , Thrice , The Starting Line , Fall Out Boy , The Bouncing Souls , <unk> Run and Flogging Molly . They also made their second trip to the UK in 2004 , their first as the headline act , the tour completely sold out . 
 In the wake of Déjà Entendu , Brand New was pegged as an act to watch in Rolling Stone 's annual " Hot Issue . " The band topped punk critics ' year @-@ end lists with the " genre @-@ defying " Déjà Entendu , and the album was described as a " landmark album of so @-@ called ' emo @-@ punk ' . " As a result of both the album 's success and the band 's notable underground following , Brand New found itself in the middle of a bidding war from record labels . At the time , Lane protested the label of " bidding war " , but conceded , " There 's a few labels that are definitely interested . We 've been talking to a lot of people for a while and we 're narrowing it down . " The band eventually signed with DreamWorks Records , which was then taken over by Interscope Records . 
 = = = The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me ( 2005 – 2008 ) = = = 
 Following their signing to Interscope , Brand New stopped touring to work on their third album and major label debut . In this time , little to no interviews or updates came from the band . In 2004 , Jesse Lacey told Chart magazine that he had written a " few songs " for the next album , commenting that " the other guys love it already " . He made mention of the pressure he felt with the " loads of anticipation building up on my shoulders , " saying that he even felt depressed because of this ; " I 'm getting depressed with all of the anxiety about the album and they say I write my best stuff when I 'm in that state . Great , I 'll spend the next six months all depressed and the rest of band will be excited , so that some good ( material ) might come out . And then I have to contend with how it 's received . " Lacey also said that the album would " move into new territory for Brand New " . 
 In late 2005 , Brand New started recording their highly anticipated third album in Oxford , Mississippi with producer Dennis Herring , but later dropped him in favor of Mike Sapone with whom they had worked on their first album . 
 In January 2006 , nine tracks recorded for the album were leaked to the Internet . In response to the leak , Garrett Tierney stated " I would say it did it in a good way ' cause so many people were curious to hear what we have been doing — and for the most part , the record tracks don 't sound anything like the leaked demos . " However , Lacey was not so upbeat when asked , saying , " For me it was different . It had me pretty down for a while . No one likes to show their creation in mid @-@ process , and those songs weren 't done . They were like blueprints . Just the plan , right ? It put me in a state where I was under the impression that those songs had been wasted or something — that we had to go and write new things because those had been heard . Now , in retrospect , I want those songs to be on the album and many of them aren 't , and I 'm probably more to blame for that than anyone . This record already feels incomplete to me without those tracks and probably will forever . " 
 In the following months , with Brand New doing their first tour dates in over 18 months , a few songs from the demos were performed with a full band , some were fleshed out and had new lyrics . New songs had their debut as well during the summer tour dates . Brand New began their first tour in years on June 20 , 2006 , where Lacey stated that the album had been completed the previous day . 
 Alternative Press published a preliminary date of October 10 , 2006 , as the album 's release date , this was later corrected on the band 's official website , when it was announced that the new album would be released on November 21 , 2006 in North America , and the day before in Europe . Soon after , a track listing and cover art were revealed , as well as new information regarding the release of the first single – " Sowing Season " . Having previously been leaked as a demo , the completed song began airing on radio on October 19 , 2006 , and appeared on their MySpace page a day later . According to Lacey in a radio interview from the UK ( BBC Radio 1 with Zane Lowe ) , the title The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me is taken from a conversation he had with his friend about the musician Daniel Johnston , who has bipolar disorder . 
 In late December 2006 , an unusual video was released for the instrumental track " Untitled " , also known as " - " , which mainly consists of a man spray painting a wall with " evil and good are raging Inside me " and correcting it to give the album title . On January 16 , 2007 , " Jesus " was announced as being the next official single from the album . On January 19 , the band performed the song on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . They performed it again on February 26 on the Late Show with David Letterman . 
 From January to June 2007 , the band toured the United States , Europe , Canada , and Australia , including a headline slot on the UK 's Give It A Name festival and playing the main stage at The Bamboozle festival . Despite the band 's reluctance towards the press around the time of the release of the album , they were featured in Alternative Press , a cover story for Rock Sound , Kerrang ! , and NME . The band went on tour for the fall of 2007 , with openers Thrice and MewithoutYou . In early 2008 , Brand New toured Australia and New Zealand on the Big Day Out festival . 
 In October 2007 , the band announced via their official website that a new song , entitled " ( Fork and Knife ) " , would be released online on October 23 , 2007 . " ( Fork and Knife ) " , a rerecorded version of the track formerly known as " Untitled 7 " from the leaked demos , was released as a non @-@ album digital download . 
 In March 2008 , Brand New started their own record label , named <unk> ! Music Traitors . The first act signed to the new label was longtime friend Kevin Devine . The first release from the label was a reissue of the 2006 Kevin Devine album , Put Your Ghost to Rest , in April 2008 . 
 = = = Daisy ( 2008 – 2011 ) = = = 
 In October 2008 , it was stated that Brand New was in the studio winding down their new record and were currently recording vocals . Then in December , an update on Brand New 's website announced that they had been in and out of the studio since about March , with roughly fifteen tracks to choose from . The album was recorded over a 12 @-@ month period from March 2008 , with the band announcing in April 2009 that they had commenced mixing with Dave Sardy and that they hoped to release their fourth studio album in the summer of 2009 , with potentially , a summer tour to follow . The release date was then delayed to October 2009 . Which was announced during a live performance at the 2009 Glastonbury Festival , where Brand New played two new songs , tentatively titled " Bride " and " Gasoline " . The band played on the main stage at Reading and Leeds Festivals in August 2009 , both performances at Reading Festival and Glastonbury Festival were filmed by the BBC however Brand New declined the BBC rights to broadcast either performance on television , or on the BBC website . 
 In June 2009 , UK music magazine Rock Sound , claimed on their website that they had received a copy of the upcoming album , though it was , according to an image later posted by the editor , " incomplete " . The site published a " tentative " track listing and reported the incomplete version that they had received to be roughly 30 minutes long . 
 In an interview with Kerrang ! , Jesse Lacey commented on the upcoming album 's content , " It 's a pretty exhausting record . It 's quite dense and I think some of the decisions we made don 't always go in the most obvious direction . We were thinking a lot more about what we 'd want to play when we were up onstage rather than actually what you 'd want to hear on a record . " He then questioned the future of the band , saying , " I think a lot of the record is about us trying to make decisions about how long the band should go on . When I listened back to it , I realized how many songs are about something coming to a close , or knowing when it 's time to put something away and move on . " 
 On July 7 , it was announced that the album would be titled And One Head Can Never Die ( to be typeset and one head can never die ) and would be released through Interscope Records on September 22 , 2009 . However , on July 9 it was announced on the band 's website that the album title had been changed to Daisy , still being released on the same day . The album 's first single , " At the Bottom " , was released through digital outlets on August 11 , 2009 . Daisy saw vocalist Jesse Lacey step back from songwriting and giving the role to guitarist Vincent Accardi along with the other members of the band . 
 Daisy debuted at number six on the Billboard 200 in the US , selling 46 @,@ 000 records in what was their first top 20 entrance on the chart after The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me had reached number 31 . 
 Brand New announced they would be bringing along Manchester Orchestra , Thrice , Glassjaw , <unk> , The Builders and the Butchers , and Crime in Stereo on selected / rotating dates of their headlining Fall North American tour . 
 On January 23 , 2010 , Brand New played their largest UK headline performance to date at London 's Wembley Arena in front of 12 @,@ 500 people . Support came from Glassjaw and Thrice . 
 When asked if rumours were true that Daisy would be the band 's final release , Lacey replied " I don 't think that will be true . It might be our last full @-@ length record for a little while , but we 've got a lot of things lined up that we want to record , so I think that will happen pretty soon . " In early 2010 , drummer Brian Lane stated that Brand New were unsure about how they plan to release music in the future with technology being a factor ; " I don ’ t know if there ’ s a point to releasing records if they ’ re not physical releases , if we 're going to release a lot of things digitally then I don ’ t see why we couldn ’ t release a song a week or a song a month or just put out what we like from whenever we record . " Lane also discussed the way the band may release their records in the future , " We ’ re talking about recording another album but we don ’ t know whether it ’ s going to come out on a label or whether we just release songs in batches . " 
 On April 28 , 2010 , at their show in Clifton Park , NY , it was announced that the band fulfilled their contract with Interscope Records , and were now unsigned . 
 On 21 November 2011 the band reissued their debut album Your Favourite Weapon with new artwork and bonus tracks . 
 = = = Fifth studio album ( 2011 – present ) = = = 
 Writing sessions for the bands fifth studio album first began in 2009 , shortly after the band released Daisy , Lacey stated that the band had new material that they were looking to record , dismissing rumours that Daisy would be their last full @-@ length album . Discussing the musical direction of the fifth album , Lacey stated that he believed Daisy " was like the end of a road " and that they would likely backtrack and explore an alternative direction to take their new music . The band were booked to enter a recording studio in April 2012 , however the band ultimately used this time for personal musical projects as opposed to recording Brand New . 
 It was officially announced through the bands website on 19 June 2014 that the band had been writing and recording new material , as well as building their own studio . 
 In April 2015 it was reported that the band had sent out lyric booklets for their album The Devil and God are Raging Inside Me as part of an unfulfilled offer made nine years previously , whereby if fans sent $ 1 they would receive the lyrics . The booklet , titled Pogolith 000 was first teased in late 2014 on the bands website and by The Up Studio . The booklet also contained a poster alluding to the release of the bands previously unreleased Fight Off Your Demons 2005 demos on cassette tape , as well as a postcard with the words " rip 2018 " , sparking rumors of a possible breakup of the band . As part of Record Store Day 2015 , the band rereleased their second album Deja Entendu as a limited vinyl , accompanied by Pogolith 00 a booklet containing the lyrics to the album . A standard edition , non @-@ limited vinyl was made available on 5 May 2015 . Both Pogolith 000 and Pogolith 00 were later made available at shows and through the band 's online store . 
 At their show in Denver , Colorado on 8 April 2015 the band performed a new song listed on the bands setlist as " Don 't Feel Anything " , which was later titled " Mene " . On 13 April , the track was made available as a free download through the band 's website . A second new song " Sealed to Me " was premiered in Los Angeles , California on 15 April . The band allowed their performances at Lollapalooza in Berlin on 13 September 2015 and Austin City Limits in Austin , Texas on 3 October 2015 to be broadcast . This marked the first time the band have allowed their performance to be broadcast , with Lacey previously stating that the band were not comfortable recording their live sets . On October 11 , 2015 while playing their last show of the 2015 tour at the Ryman Auditorium , Lacey told the audience that " this isn 't going to last much longer " . He spoke about his friendships with the band , the possibility of a new album , and that he would soon be a father . 
 On December 2 , 2015 , the band made their Leaked Demos 2006 available for the first time , releasing it on a limited edition red cassette tape with a digital download card included . The cassette was later released in black . On May 17 , 2016 , the band released a new single entitled " I Am a Nightmare " with a new album scheduled for release in 2016 . On June 1 , new shirt designs were announced via Twitter , two of which state " 2000 @-@ 2018 " . One of the designs was also projected onto the stage after the band 's show on the same day at the Vogue Theatre in Vancouver , increasing the amount of speculation regarding that the band may be implying a planned breakup in the year 2018 . 
 On July 13 , 2016 , the band released an EP called 3 Demos , Reworked . The EP contains re @-@ recorded versions of 3 songs that appear on Leaked Demos 2006 . On July 22 , 2016 , the band released a physical 7 " single of Mene with the b @-@ side " Out of Range , " a previously unreleased song that had been leaked in 2010 . 
 = = Style and influences = = 
 Brand New is most often described as alternative rock , indie , and emo . The band shares a strong interest in a wide variety of bands , from pop and rock such as The Beach Boys , Squeeze and The Cars , to more contemporary acts such as Weezer , Lifetime , Foo Fighters , Sunny Day Real Estate , Neutral Milk Hotel , Kevin Devine and Radiohead . Frontman Jesse Lacey is also known for his fondness for Built to Spill , Modest Mouse , The Smiths and Morrissey . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Current members 
 Jesse Lacey – lead vocals , rhythm guitar ( 2000 – present ) 
 Vincent Accardi – lead guitar , backing vocals , unclean vocals ( 2000 – present ) 
 Brian Lane – drums , percussion ( 2000 – present ) 
 Garrett Tierney – bass guitar , backing vocals ( 2000 – present ) 
 Past members 
 Derrick Sherman – keyboards , guitars , backing vocals ( 2005 – 2013 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Your Favorite Weapon ( 2001 ) 
 Deja Entendu ( 2003 ) 
 The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me ( 2006 ) 
 Daisy ( 2009 ) 
 = Hurricane Fico = 
 Hurricane Fico was the longest @-@ lived hurricane of the 1978 Pacific hurricane season and became the longest @-@ lasting Pacific hurricane on record , a record broken by Hurricane Tina fourteen years later . The sixth tropical storm , fourth hurricane , and third major hurricane , Fico developed from a tropical disturbance off the coast of Mexico on July 9 . It moved northwestward and then westward , quickly reaching peak winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) on July 12 . Moving nearly due westward , the intensity of Fico fluctuated from Category 1 to Category 4 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale for the following days , and it passed about 170 miles ( 275 km ) south of Hawaii on July 20 with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . Fico slowly weakened as it turned to the northwest over cooler waters , and became an extratropical cyclone on July 28 to the northeast of Midway Island . 
 Swells from Fico , combined with swells from a storm in the Southern Hemisphere , produced rough surf throughout the Hawaiian islands . The surf destroyed one house and resulted in considerable damage along the southern coast of the island of Hawaii . No deaths were reported , and damage totaled $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 1978 USD , $ 619 @,@ 000 2006 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical disturbance persisted 520 miles ( 835 km ) south of Acapulco on July 3 . It moved steadily westward and organized over warm water temperatures of 81 ° F ( 27 ° C ) . A circulation developed within the system , and on July 9 it organized into Tropical Depression Seven while located about 580 miles ( 930 km ) southwest of Acapulco . The depression turned to the west @-@ northwest , and after briefly weakening it organized more to attain tropical storm status on July 10 while located about 745 miles ( 1 @,@ 200 km ) south of the southern tip of Peninsula . 
 Tropical Storm Fico turned to the northwest after reaching tropical storm status , and entered an area of increasingly warm water temperatures . It quickly strengthened , and 18 hours after becoming a tropical storm Fico strengthened into a hurricane . As the hurricane turned to the west @-@ northwest , a well @-@ defined eye developed in the center of the hurricane , and Fico continued to quickly intensify . Fico attained Category 4 strength about 24 hours after it first became a hurricane , and on July 12 it reached peak winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) while located 640 miles ( 1 @,@ 030 km ) southwest of Cabo San Lucas . Throughout its duration , the eye of the hurricane was around 35 miles ( 56 km ) in diameter . 
 While moving nearly due westward , Fico maintained peak winds for about 12 hours before weakening over cooler water temperatures . On July 14 , passing over an area of 79 ° F ( 26 ° C ) waters , the hurricane became disorganized while its winds dropped to 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , it again moved into an area of 83 ° F ( 28 ° C ) waters , and again reached winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) on July 15 . For 48 hours , Fico 's winds fluctuated slightly , briefly dropping to 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) before strengthening again to 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) . On July 17 the hurricane again began to weaken , and its winds dropped to 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) as Fico entered the Central Pacific Hurricane Center area of responsibility . Fico slowly <unk> and reached Category 3 status late on July 20 while passing about 170 miles ( 275 km ) south of the island of Hawaii . The hurricane turned to the northwest toward an upper @-@ level trough of low pressure , and after maintaining 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) winds for about 36 hours it slowly weakened . On July 27 after entering an area of progressively cooler waters , Fico weakened to a tropical storm while located about 35 miles ( 60 km ) east @-@ northeast of Midway Island . It weakened to a tropical depression the next day , and late on July 28 after turning to the north Fico became an extratropical depression . An approaching cold front absorbed the remnants of Fico and passed near southern Alaska on July 31 . Ships to the southeast of Cold Bay reported heavy rainfall and strong winds in association with the remnants of Fico . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Fico never made landfall , though a strong east @-@ northeasterly swell from the hurricane along with a strong southerly swell from a southern hemisphere storm produced high surf along the coastline of Hawaii . Civil Defense officials reported 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) waves well offshore . The island of Hawaii received breaking waves of 20 feet ( 6 m ) in height , and eastern Maui reported up to 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) waves . Southern Oahu and Kauai also reported slightly above normal waves . Several ships in and around the periphery of the hurricane received moderate winds and rough surf , one of which reported swell waves of 41 feet ( 12 @.@ 5 m ) . The high seas washed a 65 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) tugboat ashore on a reef at <unk> . Six people aboard a sloop off Hanalei were rescued by a Navy torpedo boat after it lost its auxiliary power and was unable to progress in the strong winds of Fico . A strong trade wind gradient , increased due to the presence of the hurricane , produced winds of over 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) throughout the island chain . Hurricane Fico also dropped 6 inches ( 150 mm ) of rainfall in Oahu . 
 Days before the hurricane passed to the south of the state , high surf from Fico caused some beach flooding in the eastern portion of the island of Hawaii . High surf later resulted in considerable damage to roads and beachfront houses along the Big Island shores . The waves destroyed a home in Puna and wrecked a beach pavilion in Kau . The mayors of three Hawaiian cities issued a disaster declaration for their cities following the damage from Fico . In Maui , moderate waves led to road flooding near the water , though no damage occurred on the island . 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) winds throughout Hawaii downed trees , resulting in some power outages . Damage from the hurricane totaled $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 1978 USD , $ 619 @,@ 000 2006 USD ) . 
 = = Records and Naming = = 
 Fico was a northeast Pacific tropical cyclone for 20 days or 468 hours , breaking the previous record since the beginning of reliable satellite monitoring set by Hurricane Celeste of 1972 with 16 days . Fico was also a hurricane for 17 days , which also broke the record set by Celeste of 1972 with 10 days . Both records were later broken by Hurricane Tina . Fico also tracked about 6 @,@ 000 miles ( 9 @,@ 700 km ) , among the longest tracks on record for a Pacific hurricane . 
 This hurricane was the only usage of the name Fico . The name Fico was removed after this storm and replaced with Fabio in the 1982 season . It is unknown whether it was retired due to its damage or for another reason . Other possible reasons listed for the removal of a name are pronunciation ambiguity , a socially unacceptable meaning in another language , or because the storm name represented a significant human disaster . 
 = WINC ( AM ) = 
 WINC ( 1400 AM ) is a broadcast radio station licensed to Winchester , Virginia , United States . The station carries a news , talk , and sports format . WINC serves Winchester along with Frederick and Clarke counties in Virginia . 
 Launched on June 26 , 1941 , by Richard Field Lewis , Jr . , WINC was Winchester 's first radio station . It remained in the hands of the Lewis family until sold to North Carolina @-@ based Centennial Broadcasting in 2007 . The station 's current format , established in 1996 , consists mostly of conservative talk programs and top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ hour news from Fox News Radio . Sports programming from Virginia Tech is also broadcast . Prior formats heard on WINC include middle of the road music , adult contemporary , and classic hits . 
 Several milestones have occurred during the station 's 75 years of history . WINC was the station on which country music singer Patsy Cline made her debut in 1948 , when Cline asked the leader of a " hillbilly band " for a chance to perform with them on air . In the late 1950s , the station 's chief engineer , Philip Whitney , designed a CONELRAD alarm device for FM stations to warn listeners in the event of an enemy attack during the Cold War . Whitney also created many of the remote control systems used by radio stations . He was awarded for his work by the National Association of Broadcasters in 1970 . WINC had difficulty renewing its license in the early 1970s , as it was airing 22 minutes of commercials per hour — in excess of what the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) permitted . The station encountered further trouble in 1988 when a local prosecutor called one of its promotions an " illegal cash lottery " ; a judge disagreed . In that same year , the news department at WINC received an Associated Press Broadcasters Association national award for " Best Radio Spot News " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ broadcast and launch = = = 
 Richard Field Lewis , Jr. was a graduate of the College of Engineering at the University of California , Berkeley . He founded Fredericksburg , Virginia @-@ based radio station <unk> in 1939 . Before that , he had worked at <unk> in San Bernardino , California , as chief engineer . Lewis filed the initial application for a new station in Winchester , Virginia , with the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) during the week of November 10 , 1940 . He applied to have WINC broadcast on AM 1370 at 250 watts , and the application was approved on February 4 , 1941 . In early March 1941 , the FCC assigned the WINC call sign , derived from the first four letters in Winchester . In June 1941 , WINC announced it would join the NBC Blue Network the following month . 
 At 6 : <unk> , on June 26 , 1941 , WINC began broadcasting for the first time , becoming Winchester 's first radio station . Instead of the frequency of AM 1370 applied for , WINC launched on AM 1400 . At launch , the station broadcast at 250 watts day and night . Two weeks later , on July 13 , Virginia Senator Harry F. Byrd and Governor James Hubert Price attended the dedication of the station . The first announcer on WINC was Grant Pollock , who had been hired as the station 's commercial sales manager . Pollock came to Winchester from NBC Radio in Los Angeles . At the time of WINC 's launch , Winchester had a population of 12 @,@ 095 , with only 2 @,@ 968 radios . 
 Throughout the station 's existence , WINC 's studios have been located at 520 North Pleasant Valley Road in Winchester . The address at launch was 520 Kerr Street , later incorporated into Pleasant Valley Road . 
 = = = History since launch = = = 
 = = = = World War II = = = = 
 Less than six months after the station 's first broadcast , WINC carried live descriptions of the attack on Pearl Harbor and President Roosevelt 's " Infamy Speech " the following day . With the United States entry to World War II , WINC participated in the war effort on the air and at its studios . The City of Winchester erected an Aircraft Warning Service station , manned by volunteers , beside the WINC facility . The station aired an hour @-@ long special program called " Virginia Schools at War Mobilization " on February 22 , 1943 . The program involved approximately 618 @,@ 000 schoolchildren and teachers from around the state , war @-@ savings staff , and state and civic dignitaries . The special , broadcast live from Mount Vernon , was carried on 13 other Virginia stations and on WWDC in Washington , D.C. WINC participated in another wartime broadcast , this one in late January 1944 , to encourage the public to buy War Bonds . A total of $ 150 @,@ 525 in bonds were sold during the two @-@ hour program , broadcast on 13 stations in Virginia and 1 in Washington , D.C. 
 On June 15 , 1945 , the NBC Blue Network formally changed its name to the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) . WINC remained an affiliate of the renamed network . In the same year , C. Leslie Golliday was hired as the station 's production manager . Golliday also built and launched two stations of his own : <unk> in Martinsburg , West Virginia , in 1946 and WCLG in Morgantown , West Virginia , in 1954 . 
 = = = = Post World War II = = = = 
 The station began carrying Standard Oil 's " Your Esso Weather Reporter " spots on April 22 , 1946 . The Esso programs included the " latest weather prediction and [ a ] brief commercial " . WINC began carrying programming from the Keystone Broadcasting System ( KBS ) and Lang – Worth Feature Programs in 1946 and 1948 respectively . Both Keystone and Lang @-@ Worth were electrical transcription networks . Programming from Lang @-@ Worth was removed from the station 's schedule in 1951 , while Keystone programming remained until 1960 . Richard F. Lewis , Jr. launched WINC @-@ FM , sister station to WINC , on November 18 , 1946 . 
 A January 1947 contest on WINC was responsible for knocking out the entire telephone system for the city of Winchester . Mark Sheeler , a disc jockey at WINC , gave a " wolf whistle " as the signal for Winchester area " housewives " to call the studio . The first one to reach him would win " a free pair of nylon hose and a $ 10 handbag " . The station received around 4 @,@ 000 simultaneous phone calls ; the first call to get through was from the telephone company . Sheeler was informed that his contest was jamming local phone lines . He quickly made an on @-@ air announcement calling off the contest . 
 On August 8 , 1947 , WINC applied to move from 1400 to 950 AM . In the same application , the station requested an increase in the station 's power to 1 @,@ 000 watts during the day and 500 watts at night . More than two years later , the application was dismissed and WINC remained at its original frequency and power . 
 Fourteen @-@ year @-@ old country music singer Virginia " Ginny " Hensley , who later became Patsy Cline , began her career by making her broadcast debut on WINC in 1948 . Hensley asked " <unk> ' " Jim McCoy , the leader of a " hillbilly band " called " The Melody Playboys " , about to perform on the station , for a chance to sing with them . She told the band leader , " If you just give me a chance to sing with you , I 'll never ask for pay . " Cline continued to perform regularly on Saturday mornings on WINC . In 1948 and 1949 , respectively , Bing Crosby and Bob Hope visited WINC , where they were interviewed on @-@ the @-@ air . Crosby and Hope were each in town for the city 's annual Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival . 
 WINC joined the NBC Radio Network ( previously named NBC Red ) on November 1 , 1951 , after more than 10 years as an ABC affiliate ( previously called NBC Blue ) . WINC rejoined ABC Radio , carrying both networks ' programming , on January 18 , 1952 , but dropped NBC programming in 1953 . WINC became one of the flagship members of the Washington Senators Baseball Network , established in May 1952 . The station added the long @-@ running Voice of Prophecy program on June 3 , 1953 . On October 18 , 1957 , WINC owner Richard F. Lewis , Jr . , died , and control of WINC passed to his widow , Marion Park Lewis . Ownership of the station was transferred again on January 31 , 1964 , from Richard F. Lewis Jr . , Inc . , a company owned by Marion Park Lewis , to Mid @-@ Atlantic Network Inc . , a corporation wholly owned by the Lewis family . 
 The station applied for and received a construction permit on August 9 , 1958 , to increase its broadcasting power from 250 to 1 @,@ 000 watts , both day and night . The FCC approved the application in January 1961 but only for a daytime power increase . In 1959 , WINC engineer Philip Whitney designed a CONELRAD alarm device for FM stations . The CONELRAD system allowed for early nationwide warnings in the event of possible enemy attack during the Cold War . Whitney is also credited with creating many of the remote control systems used by radio stations , including the microwave remote control system . The National Association of Broadcasters presented Whitney with its annual Engineering Award on April 7 , 1970 , for his work . 
 = = = = 1960s through 1980s = = = = 
 In the 1960s , the station hosted interviews with several prominent figures . Paul Harvey , in town for a speaking engagement , broadcast his " News and Comment " program from WINC studios on April 14 , 1962 . President Lyndon B. Johnson , visiting for the Apple Blossom Festival in 1964 , was interviewed live on the station . The station was the first in Winchester to announce the assassinations of John F. Kennedy in 1963 and Robert F. Kennedy in 1968 . 
 While attempting to renew the station 's license in early 1971 , Mid @-@ Atlantic Network ran into trouble with the FCC due to the quantity of commercials the station was airing . The station was carrying 22 minutes of commercials an hour according to a letter from then @-@ FCC Broadcast Bureau Chief Francis R. Welsh . Welsh said in the letter that the FCC was not convinced the amount of commercials served the community in a positive way . At the time , the FCC allowed no more than 18 minutes of commercials per hour . However , the station 's license was ultimately renewed on May 14 , 1971 . 
 Part of WINC 's programming in 1977 included daily political commentaries from former California governor Ronald Reagan . WINC remained an ABC Radio affiliate in 1978 , carrying its American Contemporary Network with a middle of the road music format . WINC added adult contemporary music to its format in 1980 . In 1981 , the first year for which ratings information is available , WINC led all other area stations with a 16 @.@ 3 rating . The station dropped the middle of the road music in 1982 , airing only adult contemporary music . In 1985 , WINC removed ABC Radio 's " American Contemporary Network " from its schedule in favor of ABC 's " American Entertainment Network " , while continuing to air an adult contemporary format . The station increased its nighttime power to 1 @,@ 000 watts in 1986 . The news department at WINC received an Associated Press Broadcasters Association national award for " Best Radio Spot News " in 1988 . 
 = = = = = 1988 " Lottery " lawsuit = = = = = 
 The local prosecutor , City of Winchester Commonwealth 's Attorney Paul Thomson , filed suit against WINC and sister station WINC @-@ FM in June 1988 for a promotion Thomson called an " illegal cash lottery " . A license plate number of a car with a WINC bumper sticker was announced over the air , and the owner was given 92 minutes to call in and choose to accept a prize of $ 92 or give up the money for a chance of winning $ 9 @,@ 200 . Thomson compared the contest to the game show Let 's Make a Deal . On December 19 , 1988 , Winchester Circuit Court Judge Perry Sarver ruled in favor of WINC stating he didn 't believe " promotional plans such as was used ... are in violation of the lottery statute " . Sarver also said it would require a " substantial expenditure " for the contest to be considered a lottery . 
 = = = = 1990s and after = = = = 
 By 1991 , WINC was airing a classic hits format , which was dropped a year later , returning to adult contemporary . Talk programs were added in 1994 and all music dropped two years after that . Also in 1996 , WINC became an affiliate of AP Radio . With the change to News / Talk , WINC garnered only a 2 @.@ 9 in the 1996 radio ratings . In contrast , sister station WINC @-@ FM received a 12 @.@ 1 during the same ratings period . 
 The station 's Internet presence also began in 1996 , as a <unk> within sister station WINC @-@ FM 's website . WINC launched its own website in 2008 . In 1998 , WINC began using the slogan " The Right Side of the AM Dial " . The station picked up CBS and CNN affiliations in 2000 , dropping the Associated Press . 
 On October 22 , 2007 , WINC debuted a live and local morning show called The Winchester Morning Magazine airing weekdays from 6 : 00 am to 10 : 00 am . The program , hosted by Michael Haman , featured topics ranging from local general interest to news . The program was cancelled under a year later in September 2008 , and the station returned to syndicated programming in the mornings . Also in 2008 , WINC began using the " First in Winchester , First in News " slogan . 
 = = = = = Sale to Present day = = = = = 
 On May 17 , 2007 , Mid @-@ Atlantic Network announced it was selling WINC to North Carolina @-@ based Centennial Broadcasting . The price of the sale , initially reported at $ 36 million , also included sister stations WINC @-@ FM , <unk> ( now <unk> ) , and <unk> ( now <unk> ) in Winchester and <unk> and <unk> in Fredericksburg . Later reports had the price of the sale at $ 35 @.@ 972 million . 
 Centennial CEO Allen B. Shaw , commenting in a Winchester Star interview on the sale , said he had been considering buying the company for several months . At the time of the interview , he did not foresee any changes to the stations . The sale closed in August 2007 , and in the last ratings book under Lewis Family ownership , WINC received a 2 @.@ 7 rating . The station 's ratings have stayed within a 2 to 3 point range , while the format has remained the same after the sale . 
 WINC celebrated it 's 75th year on the air on June 26 , 2016 . The station aired vignettes with former employees and a classic photo album was added on the station 's website . 
 = = Programming = = 
 WINC carries a news / talk / sports format established in 1996 . The station 's weekday schedule starts with Jim Bohannon 's America in the Morning <unk> followed by Hugh Hewitt . Conservative talk show hosts Laura Ingraham , Rush Limbaugh , Sean Hannity , and Mark Levin are then broadcast , followed by the The Jim Bohannon Show and Coast to Coast AM . 
 WINC carries five @-@ minute newscasts every hour from Fox News Radio . The station also has a news department that prepares and broadcasts local news reports . The station is an affiliate of the Virginia Tech IMG Sports Network , which carries Virginia Tech football and basketball . 
 Weekend programming on WINC includes The Pet Show hosted by Warren Eckstein , The Sam Sorbo Show , The Kim Komando Show , and home @-@ improvement shows In the Garden with Andre <unk> and On the House with the Carey Brothers . The Score , a statewide conservative talk program , hosted by <unk> 's Scott Lee , is also heard . The station also airs " best of " editions of previously recorded weekday programming . 
 = FC Bayern Munich = 
 Fußball @-@ Club Bayern München e.V. , commonly known as FC Bayern München ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ̩ ] ) , FCB , Bayern Munich , or FC Bayern , is a German sports club based in Munich , Bavaria , Germany . It is best known for its professional football team , which plays in the Bundesliga , the top tier of the German football league system , and is the most successful club in German football history , having won a record 26 national titles and 18 national cups . 
 FC Bayern was founded in 1900 by eleven football players led by Franz John . Although Bayern won its first national championship in 1932 , the club was not selected for the Bundesliga at its inception in 1963 . The club had its period of greatest success in the middle of the 1970s when , under the captaincy of Franz Beckenbauer , it won the European Cup three times in a row ( 1974 – 76 ) . Overall , Bayern has reached ten European Cup / UEFA Champions League finals , most recently winning their fifth title in 2013 as part of a continental treble . Bayern has also won one UEFA Cup , one European Cup Winners ' Cup , one UEFA Super Cup , one FIFA Club World Cup and two Intercontinental Cups , making it one of the most successful European clubs internationally . Since the formation of the Bundesliga , Bayern has been the dominant club in German football with 26 titles and has won 8 of the last 12 titles . They have traditional local rivalries with TSV 1860 München and 1 . FC Nürnberg , as well as with Borussia Dortmund since the mid 1990s . 
 Since the beginning of the 2005 – 06 season , Bayern has played its home games at the Allianz Arena . Previously the team had played at Munich 's Olympiastadion for 33 years . The team colours are red and white , and the team crest shows the white and blue flag of Bavaria . In terms of revenue , Bayern Munich is the biggest sports club in Germany and the third biggest football club in the world , generating € 487 @.@ 5 million for the 2013 – 14 season . Bayern has over 270 @,@ 000 members . There are more than 4 @,@ 000 officially @-@ registered fan clubs with over 314 @,@ 000 members . The club has other departments for chess , handball , basketball , gymnastics , bowling , table tennis , and senior football with more than 1 @,@ 100 active members . 
 FC Bayern is ranked second in the current UEFA club coefficient rankings and second in IFFHS 's latest IFFHS Club World Ranking . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1900 – 65 ) = = = 
 FC Bayern Munich was founded by members of a Munich gymnastics club ( MTV 1879 ) . When a congregation of members of MTV 1879 decided on 27 February 1900 that the footballers of the club would not be allowed to join the German Football Association ( DFB ) , eleven members of the football division left the congregation and on the same evening founded Fußball @-@ Club Bayern München . Within a few months Bayern achieved high @-@ scoring victories against all local rivals , including a 15 – 0 win against FC <unk> , and reached the semifinals of the 1900 – 01 South German championship . In the following years the club won some local trophies and in 1910 – 11 Bayern joined the newly founded " <unk> " , the first regional Bavarian league . They won this league in its first year , but did not win it again until the beginning of World War I in 1914 , which halted all football activities in Germany . 
 In the years after the war , Bayern won several regional competitions , before winning their first South German championship in 1926 , an achievement repeated two years later . Their first national title was gained in 1932 , when coach Richard " Little <unk> " Kohn led the team to the German championship by defeating Eintracht Frankfurt 2 – 0 in the final . 
 The advent of Nazism put an abrupt end to Bayern 's development . The president , Kurt Landauer and the coach , both of whom were Jewish , left the country . Many others in the club were also purged . Bayern was taunted as the " Jew 's club " , while local rival 1860 München gained much support . Josef Sauter , who was inaugurated 1943 , was the only NSDAP member as president . As some Bayern players greeted Landauer , who was watching a friendly in Switzerland lead to continued discrimination . Bayern was also affected by the ruling that football players had to be full amateurs again . In the following years Bayern could not sustain its role of contender for the national title , achieving mid @-@ table results in its regional league instead . 
 After the war , Bayern became a member of the Oberliga Süd , the southern conference of the German first division , which was split five ways at that time . Bayern struggled , hiring and firing 13 coaches between 1945 and 1963 . Landauer returned from exile in 1947 and was once again appointed club president , the tenure lasted until 1951 . He remains as the club 's president with the longest accumulated tenure . Landauer has been deemed as inventor of Bayern as a professional club and his memory is e.g. being upheld by the Bayern ultras Schickeria . In 1955 they were relegated , but returned to the Oberliga in the following season and won the DFB @-@ Pokal for the first time , beating Fortuna Düsseldorf 1 – 0 in the final . The club struggled financially though , verging on bankruptcy at the end of the 1950s . Manufacturer Roland Endler provided the necessary funds and was rewarded with four years at the helm of the club . In 1963 , the <unk> in Germany were consolidated into one national league , the Bundesliga . Five teams from the Oberliga South were admitted . Bayern finished third in that year 's southern division , but another Munich team , TSV 1860 München , had won the championship . As the DFB preferred not to include two teams from one city , Bayern was not chosen for the Bundesliga . They gained promotion two years later , fielding a team with young talents like Franz Beckenbauer , Gerd Müller , and Sepp Maier — who would later be collectively referred to as the axis . 
 = = = Golden years ( 1965 – 79 ) = = = 
 In their first Bundesliga season , Bayern finished third and also won the DFB @-@ Pokal . This qualified them for the following year 's European Cup Winners ' Cup , which they won in a dramatic final against Scottish club Rangers , when Franz Roth scored the decider in a 1 – 0 extra time victory . In 1967 , Bayern retained the DFB @-@ Pokal , but slow overall progress saw Branko <unk> take over as coach . He replaced Bayern 's offensive style of play with a more disciplined approach , and in doing so achieved the first league and cup double in Bundesliga history in 1969 . Bayern Munich are one of four German clubs to win the Bundesliga and DFB @-@ Pokal in the same season along with Borussia Dortmund , 1 . FC Köln , and SV Werder Bremen . <unk> used only 13 players throughout the season . 
 Udo Lattek took charge in 1970 . After winning the DFB @-@ Pokal in his first season , Lattek led Bayern to their third German championship . The deciding match in the 1971 – 72 season against Schalke 04 was the first match in the new Olympiastadion , and was also the first live televised match in Bundesliga history . Bayern beat Schalke 5 – 1 and thus claimed the title , also setting several records , including points gained and goals scored . Bayern also won the next two championships , but the zenith was their triumph in the 1974 European Cup Final against Atlético Madrid , which Bayern won 4 – 0 after a replay . This title – after winning the Cup Winners ' trophy 1967 and two semi @-@ finals ( 1968 and 1972 ) in that competition – marked the club 's breakthrough as a force on the international stage . During the following years , the team was unsuccessful domestically but defended their European title by defeating Leeds United in the 1975 European Cup Final when Roth and Müller secured victory with late goals . " We came back into the game and scored two lucky goals , so in the end we were the winners but we were very , very lucky " , stated Franz Beckenbauer . Billy Bremner believed the French referee was " very suspicious . " Leeds fans then rioted in Paris and were banned from European Football for three years . A year later in Glasgow , AS Saint @-@ Étienne were defeated by another Roth goal and Bayern became the third club to win the trophy in three consecutive years . The final trophy won by Bayern in this era was the Intercontinental Cup , in which they defeated Brazilian club Cruzeiro over two legs . The rest of the decade was a time of change and saw no further titles for Bayern . In 1977 , Franz Beckenbauer left for New York Cosmos and , in 1979 , Sepp Maier and Uli Hoeneß retired while Gerd Müller joined the Fort Lauderdale Strikers . <unk> was coined during this period as an expression of either contempt or envy about the sometimes narrow and last @-@ minute wins against other teams . 
 = = = From FC <unk> to FC Hollywood ( 1979 – 98 ) = = = 
 The 1980s were a period of off @-@ field turmoil for Bayern , with many changes in personnel and financial problems . On the field , Paul Breitner and Karl @-@ Heinz Rummenigge , termed FC <unk> , led the team to Bundesliga titles in 1980 and 1981 . Apart from a DFB @-@ Pokal win in 1982 , two relatively unsuccessful seasons followed , after which Breitner retired and former coach Udo Lattek returned . Bayern won the DFB @-@ Pokal in 1984 and went on to win five Bundesliga championships in six seasons , including a double in 1986 . However , European success was elusive during the decade ; Bayern managed to claim the runners @-@ up spot in the European Cup in 1982 and 1987 . 
 Jupp Heynckes was hired as coach in 1987 , but after two consecutive championships in 1988 – 89 and 1989 – 90 Bayern 's form dipped . After a second place in 1990 – 91 the club finished just five points above the relegation places in 1991 – 92 . In the season of 1993 – 94 , Bayern lost out in the UEFA Cup second round to the Premier League team Norwich City , who remain the only English football club to beat them at the Olympiastadion . Success returned when Franz Beckenbauer took over for the second half of the 1993 – 94 season , winning the championship again after a four @-@ year gap . Beckenbauer was then appointed club president . 
 His successors as coach , Giovanni Trapattoni and Otto <unk> , both finished trophyless after a season , not meeting the club 's high expectations . During this time Bayern 's players frequently appeared in the gossip pages of the press rather than the sports pages , resulting in the nickname FC Hollywood . Franz Beckenbauer briefly returned at the end of the 1995 – 96 season as caretaker coach and led his team to victory in the UEFA Cup , beating Bordeaux in the final . For the 1996 – 97 season , Trapattoni returned to win the championship . In the following season , Bayern lost the title to newly promoted Kaiserslautern and Trapattoni had to take his leave for the second time . 
 = = = Renewed international success ( 1998 – present ) = = = 
 After his success at Borussia Dortmund , Bayern were coached by Ottmar Hitzfeld from 1998 to 2004 . In Hitzfeld 's first season , Bayern won the Bundesliga and came close to winning the Champions League , losing 2 – 1 to Manchester United into injury time after leading for most of the match . The following year , in the club 's centenary season , Bayern won the third league and cup double in its history . A third consecutive Bundesliga title followed in 2001 , won with a stoppage time goal on the final day of the league season . Days later , Bayern won the Champions League for the fourth time after a 25 @-@ year gap , defeating Valencia CF on penalties . The 2001 – 02 season began with a win in the Intercontinental Cup , but ended trophyless otherwise . In 2002 – 03 , Bayern won their fourth double , leading the league by a record margin of 16 points . Hitzfeld 's reign ended in 2004 , with Bayern underperforming , including defeat by second division Alemannia Aachen in the DFB @-@ Pokal . 
 Felix Magath took over and led Bayern to two consecutive doubles . Prior to the start of the 2005 – 06 season , Bayern moved from the Olympiastadion to the new Allianz Arena , which the club shares with TSV 1860 München . On the field their performance in 2006 – 07 was erratic . Trailing in the league and having lost to Alemannia Aachen in the cup yet again , coach Magath was sacked shortly after the winter break . 
 Hitzfeld returned as trainer in January 2007 , but Bayern finished the 2006 – 07 season fourth , thus failing to qualify for the Champions League for the first time in more than a decade . Additional losses in the DFB @-@ Pokal and the DFB @-@ Ligapokal left the club with no honours for the season . 
 For the 2007 – 08 season , Bayern made drastic squad changes to help rebuild . They signed a total of eight new players and sold , released or loaned out nine of their players . Among new signings were 2006 World Cup stars such as Franck Ribéry , Miroslav Klose and Luca Toni . Bayern went on to win the Bundesliga , being on top of the standings on every single week of play , and the DFB @-@ Pokal against Borussia Dortmund . 
 On 11 January 2008 , Jürgen Klinsmann was named as Hitzfeld 's successor , taking charge on 1 July 2008 . He signed a two @-@ year contract . Bayern Munich lost the DFL @-@ Supercup 1 – 2 against Borussia Dortmund in 2008 . Bayer Leverkusen eliminated Bayern in quarter @-@ finals of the DFB @-@ Pokal . In the Champions League Bayern also reached the quarter @-@ finals after winning Group F and defeating Sporting Clube de Portugal in the first knockout round , achieving a Champions League record aggregate of 12 – 1 . On 27 April , two days after a home defeat against Schalke which saw Bayern drop to the third place in the table , Klinsmann was fired . Former trainer Jupp Heynckes was named as caretaker until the end of the season . Bayern eventually finished second , thus qualifying directly for the Champions League in 2009 – 10 . 
 Bayern then signed Dutch manager Louis van Gaal for the 2009 – 10 season . Multi @-@ million signings of Arjen Robben and Mario Gómez also followed in a bid to return Bayern to the top of the European scene . On 8 May 2010 , Bayern Munich won the 2009 – 10 Bundesliga after a 3 – 1 win at Hertha BSC . Bayern then won the DFB @-@ Pokal on 15 May 2010 to secure the domestic double . Bayern also reached the 2010 UEFA Champions League Final but were beaten 2 – 0 by Internazionale , failing to become the first German club to complete the treble . 
 In the 2010 – 11 season , Bayern were eliminated in the first round of the Champions League knockout phase by Internazionale on the away goals rule and finished third in the Bundesliga . Van Gaal was fired by Bayern in April 2011 . 
 In the 2011 – 12 season , Heynckes returned to coach Bayern for a second permanent spell but the team was to end the season without a trophy for the second season running . Domestically they finished second in the Bundesliga and lost the DFB @-@ Pokal final 2 – 5 , both times finishing runner @-@ up to Borussia Dortmund . They also reached the final of the Champions League in their home stadium , but lost to Chelsea on penalties ( 3 – 4 ) , in what was only their second defeat to an English team in Munich , and their first at the Allianz Arena . 
 In the 2012 – 13 season , Bayern won the 2012 DFL @-@ Supercup 2 – 1 against rivals Borussia Dortmund . FC Bayern became the first team in history to win their first eight matches in the Bundesliga after their 5 – 0 away win to Fortuna Düsseldorf . On 6 April 2013 , Bayern won the 2012 – 13 Bundesliga after a 1 – 0 win at Eintracht Frankfurt with six games left , setting a new record for being the earliest ever Bundesliga winners . Other Bundesliga records set by Bayern in the 2012 – 13 season include most points in a season ( 91 ) , highest league winning points margin ( 25 ) , most wins in a season ( 29 ) and fewest goals conceded in a season ( 18 ) . Bayern also equaled the record for fewest defeats in a season , losing once to Bayer 04 Leverkusen . Bayern also reached the Champions League final for the third time in four seasons , winning the club 's fifth European Cup with a 2 – 1 defeat of domestic rivals Borussia Dortmund at Wembley Stadium . On 1 June 2013 , Bayern beat VfB Stuttgart 3 – 2 in the 2013 DFB @-@ Pokal Final to become the first German club in men 's football to complete the treble ; Bayern had missed out on trebles in 1999 and 2010 . 
 On 1 July 2013 , Pep Guardiola took over as manager ahead of the 2013 – 14 season . Bayern also completed the signing of Mario Götze from Borussia Dortmund for € 37m , who became the most expensive German player in history ( this was later surpassed by Mesut Özil 's transfer from Real Madrid to Arsenal for € 50m ) . On 24 July 2013 , it was reported that Bayern had become the first German club with over 200 @,@ 000 members . On 27 July 2013 , Bayern Munich lost against rivals Borussia Dortmund 2 – 4 in the 2013 DFL @-@ Supercup at Signal Iduna Park . On 30 August 2013 , Bayern won the UEFA Super Cup against Chelsea . On 9 November 2013 , Bayern set a new record for most successive Bundesliga matches without defeat , breaking Hamburger SV 's thirty @-@ year @-@ old record of 36 matches . This record was eventually extended to 53 matches , before Bayern lost 1 – 0 to FC Augsburg in April 2014 . On 27 November 2013 , Bayern became the first team to win ten consecutive Champions League matches with a 3 – 1 away victory over CSKA Moscow . On 21 December 2013 , Bayern beat Raja Casablanca 2 – 0 at the Stade de Marrakech to win the 2013 FIFA Club World Cup . 
 After almost a year of investigations against Uli Hoeneß , Bayern 's former player , former long time general manager , and president at the time , he was convicted of tax evasion on 13 March 2014 . Hoeneß resigned as president the next day , and Karl Hopfner was elected president on 2 May . Just days after Hoeneß conviction , on 25 March , Bayern won their 24th Bundesliga title by beating Hertha BSC 3 – 1 at the Olympiastadion in Berlin . With seven matches remaining in the season , it was the earliest the championship had been won in Bundesliga history , breaking the record Bayern had set in the previous season . At the end of the season Bayern beat Borussia Dortmund 2 – 0 in the 2014 DFB @-@ Pokal Final to give the club the tenth league and cup double in its history . 
 In 2014 – 15 , Bayern defended their league title , and , the following season , won an eleventh double , including a record fourth consecutive Bundesliga title . At the end of the in 2015 – 16 season , Guardiola left Bayern to take over as manager of Manchester City and was replaced by Carlo Ancelotti . 
 = = Colours = = 
 In the original club constitution , Bayern 's colours were named as white and blue , but the club played in white shirts with black shorts until 1905 , when Bayern joined MSC . MSC decreed that the footballers would have to play in red shorts . Also the younger players were called red @-@ shorts , which was meant as an insult . For most of the club 's early history , Bayern had primarily worn white and maroon home kits . In 1968 – 69 season , Bayern changed to red and blue striped shirts , with blue shorts and socks . Between 1969 and 1973 , the team wore a home strip of red and white striped shirts with either red or white shorts and red socks . In the 1973 – 74 season , the team switched to an all white kit featuring single vertical red and blue stripes on the shirt . From 1974 onwards , Bayern have mostly worn an all red home kit , with white trim . Bayern revived the red and blue striped colour scheme between 1995 and 1997 . In 1997 , blue was the dominant colour for the first time when Adidas released an all navy blue home kit with a red chest band . In 1999 , Bayern returned to a predominantly red kit , which featured blue sleeves , and in 2000 the club released a traditional all red kit with white trim to be worn for Champions League matches . Bayern also wore a <unk> coloured home kits in Bundesliga matches between 2001 and 2003 , and during the 2006 – 07 Champions League campaign , in reference to their first choice colours prior to the late 1960s . 
 The club 's away kit has had a wide range of colours over the years , including white , black , blue , and gold @-@ green . Bayern also features a distinct international kit . During the 2013 – 14 season , Bayern have used an all red home kit with a Bavarian flag diamond watermark pattern , a <unk> inspired white and black Oktoberfest away kit , and an all navy blue international kit . 
 In the 1980s and 1990s , Bayern used a special away kit when playing at 1 . FC Kaiserslautern , representing the Brazilian colours blue and yellow , a superstition borne from the fact that the club found it hard to win there . 
 = = = Historical kits = = = 
 = = Crest = = 
 Bayern 's crest has changed several times . Originally it consisted of the stylised letters F , C , B , M , which were woven into one symbol . The original crest was blue . The colours of Bavaria were included for the first time in 1954 . 
 The modern version of the crest has changed from the 1954 version in several steps . While the crest consisted of a single colour only for most of the time , namely blue or red , the current ( 2008 ) crest is blue , red , and white . It has the colours of Bavaria in its centre and FC Bayern München is written in white on a red ring enclosing the Bavarian colours . 
 = = Stadiums = = 
 Bayern played its first training games at the <unk> in the centre of Munich . The first official games were held on the <unk> . In 1901 , Bayern moved to a field of its own , located in <unk> at the <unk> . After joining the Münchner Sport @-@ Club ( MSC ) in 1906 , Bayern moved in May 1907 to MSC 's ground at the <unk> . As the crowds gathering for Bayern 's home games increased at the beginning of the 1920s , Bayern had to switch to various other premises in Munich . 
 From 1925 , Bayern shared the Grünwalder Stadion with 1860 Munich . Until World War II , the stadium was owned by 1860 Munich , and is still colloquially known as <unk> 'ger ( " Sixties " ) Stadium . It was destroyed during the war , and efforts to rebuild it resulted in a patchwork . Bayern 's record crowd at the Grünwalder Stadion is reported as more than 50 @,@ 000 in the home game against 1 . FC Nürnberg in the 1961 – 62 season . In the Bundesliga era the stadium had a maximum capacity of 44 @,@ 000 which was reached on several occasions , but the capacity has since been reduced to 21 @,@ 272 . As was the case at most of this period 's stadiums , the vast majority of the stadium was given over to terracing . Today the second teams of both clubs play in the stadium . 
 For the 1972 Summer Olympics the city of Munich built the Olympiastadion . The stadium , renowned for its architecture , was inaugurated in the last Bundesliga match of the 1971 – 72 season . The match drew a capacity crowd of 79 @,@ 000 , a total which was reached again on numerous occasions . The stadium was , in its early days , considered to be one of the foremost stadia in the world and played host to numerous major finals , such as that of 1974 FIFA World Cup . In the following years the stadium underwent several modifications , such as an increase in seating space from approximately 50 % to ca . 66 % . Eventually the stadium had a capacity of 63 @,@ 000 for national matches , and 59 @,@ 000 for international occasions such as European Cup competitions . Many people , however , began to feel that the stadium was too cold in winter , with half the audience exposed to the weather due to lack of cover . A further complaint was the distance between the spectators and the pitch , the stadium betraying its track and field heritage . Modification of the stadium proved impossible as the architect Günther Behnisch vetoed major modifications of the stadium . 
 After much discussion , the city of Munich , the state of Bavaria , FC Bayern , and TSV 1860 jointly decided at the end of 2000 to build a new stadium . While Bayern had wanted a purpose @-@ built football stadium for several years , the awarding of the 2006 FIFA World Cup to Germany stimulated the discussion as the Olympiastadion no longer met the FIFA criteria to host a World Cup game . Located on the northern outskirts of Munich , the Allianz Arena has been in use since the beginning of the 2005 – 06 season . Its initial capacity of 66 @,@ 000 fully covered seats has since been increased for matches on national level to 69 @,@ 901 by transforming 3 @,@ 000 seats to terracing in a 2 : 1 ratio . Since August 2012 , 2 @,@ 000 more seats were added in the last row of the top tier increasing the capacity to 71 @,@ 000 . In January 2015 , a proposal to increase the capacity was approved by the city council so now Allianz Arena has a capacity of 75 @,@ 000 ( 70 @,@ 000 in Champions League ) . 
 The most prominent feature of the stadium is the translucent outer layer , which can be illuminated in different colours for impressive effects . Usually , red lighting is used for Bayern home games , blue for TSV 1860 München games and white for German national team home games . 
 In May 2012 , Bayern opened a museum about its history , FC Bayern <unk> , inside the Allianz Arena . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 Bayern considers itself a national club . The club had 3 @,@ 202 <unk> with total 231 @,@ 197 members in 2012 , making it the club with the largest number of organised supporters in Germany . Owing partly to the club having supporters all over the country , all of Bayern 's away games have been sold out in recent years . Their following is mainly recruited from the aspiring middle class and regional Bavaria . Despite a large proportion of their supporters having to travel more than 200 km ( ca . 120 miles ) regularly , the club 's home matches in the Allianz Arena have almost always been sold out . According to a study by Sport + Markt Bayern is the fifth @-@ most popular football club in Europe with 20 @.@ 7 million supporters , and the most popular football club in Germany with 10 million supporters . 
 Bayern Munich is also renowned for its well @-@ organised ultra scene . The most prominent groups are the Schickeria München , the Inferno Bavaria , the Red <unk> ' 89 , the <unk> ' 73 , the <unk> 1996 , the Red Angels , and the Red Sharks . The ultras scene of Bayern Munch has been recognized for certain groups taking stance against right @-@ wing extremism , racism and homophobia , and in 2014 the group Schickeria München received the Julius Hirsch Award by the DFB for its commitment against antisemitism and discrimination . 
 Stern des <unk> is the song which fans sing at FCB home games . In the 1990s they also used to sing FC Bayern , Forever Number One . 
 The club also has quite a number of high @-@ profile supporters , among them Pope Benedict XVI , Boris Becker , retired German tennis player , Wladimir Klitschko , Ukrainian boxer , Horst <unk> and Edmund Stoiber , former Minister @-@ President of Bavaria , to name just a few . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 Bayern Munich has a rivalry with Borussia Dortmund . Bayern and Dortmund have competed against each other for many Bundesliga titles . Bayern and Dortmund have played against each other in the DFB @-@ Pokal final in 2008 , 2012 , and 2014 . The 2 – 5 loss against Dortmund in the 2012 DFB @-@ Pokal final was Bayern 's worst ever loss in a final . Bayern and Dortmund have also played against each other in the DFL @-@ Supercup in 1989 , 2008 , 2012 , 2013 and 2014 . The height of the rivalry was when Bayern defeated Dortmund , 2 – 1 in the final of the 2013 UEFA Champions League . 
 Bayern is one of three professional football clubs in Munich . Bayern 's main local rival is TSV 1860 München , who were the more successful club in the 1960s , winning a cup and a championship . In the 1970s and 1980s , TSV 1860 moved between the first and the third division , but lately have settled in the second division . The Munich derby is still a much anticipated event , getting a lot of extra attention from supporters of both clubs . 1860 is considered more working @-@ class , and therefore suffers from a diminishing fan base in a city where the manufacturing sector is declining . Bayern is considered the establishment club , which is reflected by many board members being business leaders and including the former Bavarian minister president , Edmund Stoiber . Despite the rivalry , Bayern has repeatedly supported 1860 in times of financial disarray . 
 Since the 1920s , 1 . FC Nürnberg has been Bayern 's main and traditional rival in Bavaria . Philipp Lahm said that playing Nürnberg is " always special " and is a " heated atmosphere " . Both clubs played in the same league in the mid @-@ 1920s , but in the 1920s and 1930s , Nürnberg was far more successful , winning five championships in the 1920s , making the club Germany 's record champion . Bayern took over the title more than sixty years later , when they won their tenth championship in 1987 , thereby surpassing the number of championships won by Nürnberg . The duel between Bayern and Nürnberg is often referred to as the Bavarian Derby . 
 Bayern also enjoys a strong rivalry with the 1 . FC Kaiserslautern , originating in parts from a game in 1973 , when Bayern lost 7 – 4 after leading 4 – 1 , but also from the two clubs competing for German championship honours at various times in the Bundesliga as well as the city of Kaiserslautern together with the surrounding Palatinate having been part of Bavaria until a plebiscite after the end of the Second World War . 
 Since the 1970s , Bayern 's main rivals have been the clubs who put up the strongest fight against its national dominance . In the 1970s this was Borussia Mönchengladbach , in the 1980s the category expanded to include Hamburger SV . In the 1990s , Borussia Dortmund , Werder Bremen , and Bayer Leverkusen emerged as the most ardent opponents . Recently Borussia Dortmund , Schalke , and Werder Bremen have been the main challengers in the Bundesliga . 
 Amongst Bayern 's chief European rivals are Real Madrid , A.C. Milan , and Manchester United due to many classic wins , draws and losses . Real Madrid versus Bayern is the match that has historically been played most often in the Champions League with 14 matches and the European Cup with 19 matches . Real 's biggest loss at home in the Champions League came at the hands of Bayern on 29 February 2000 ( 2 – 4 ) . Due to Bayern being traditionally hard to beat for Madrid , Madrid supporters often refer to Bayern as the " Bestia negra " ( " Black Beast " ) . Despite the number of duels , Bayern and Real have never met in the final of a Champions League or European Cup . The two teams met in the 2011 – 12 Champions League semi @-@ finals which resulted in 3 – 3 on aggregate , forcing extra time and penalties . Bayern won 3 – 1 on penalties to reach their first ever home Champions League final . They then again met in 2013 – 14 UEFA Champions League semi @-@ finals , a rematch of the 2012 semi @-@ final , with Real Madrid winning 5 – 0 on aggregate . 
 = = Organization and finance = = 
 Bayern is led mostly by former club players . Since 2 May 2014 , Karl Hopfner serves as the club 's president , following Uli Hoeneß who had been in office from 2009 to 2014 ; Hoeneß had resigned after being convicted of tax fraud . Karl @-@ Heinz Rummenigge is the chairman of the executive board of the AG . The supervisory board of nine consists mostly of managers of big German corporations . Besides the club 's president and the board 's chairman Karl Hopfner , they are Herbert <unk> ( Adidas ) , Rupert Stadler ( Audi ) , Werner <unk> ( Allianz ) , Timotheus <unk> ( Deutsche Telekom ) , Rudolf <unk> , Edmund Stoiber , Theodor Weimer ( <unk> Bank ) , and Martin <unk> ( Volkswagen ) . 
 Professional football at Bayern is run by the spin @-@ off organization FC Bayern München AG . AG is short for Aktiengesellschaft , and Bayern is run like a joint stock company , a company whose stock are not listed on the public stock exchange , but is privately owned . 75 % of FC Bayern München AG is owned by the club , the FC Bayern München e . V. ( e . V. is short for <unk> Verein , which translates into " Registered Club " ) . Three Germany @-@ based corporations , the sports goods manufacturer Adidas , the automobile company Audi and the financial services group Allianz each hold 8 @.@ 33 % of the shares , 25 % in total . Adidas acquired its shares in 2002 for € <unk> . The money was designated to help finance the Allianz Arena . In 2009 Audi paid € 90m for their share . The capital was reportedly going to be used to repay the loan for the Allianz Arena quicker than originally planned . And in early 2014 , Allianz became the fourth stakeholder of the company acquiring theirs share for € 110m . Bayern 's other sports departments are run by the club . 
 Bayern 's main advertising partner and current holder of the jersey rights is Deutsche Telekom . The main supplier of the club is Adidas . The premium partners include Audi , <unk> , <unk> , Lufthansa , MAN , <unk> Brewery , Samsung , DHL and Yingli Solar . Classic sponsors include Coca @-@ Cola , Siemens , Hublot , Henkel , <unk> , Nestle Schoeller , <unk> , Fitness First , Schaeffler Group , <unk> , <unk> , Trentino , Thomas Sabo and Starwood Hotels and Resorts . Food sponsors include Albi , <unk> , Ehrmann and MF . In previous years the jersey rights were held by Adidas ( 1974 – 78 ) , <unk> Deutz and Iveco ( trucks / 1978 – 84 ) , Commodore ( computers / 1984 – 89 ) and Opel ( cars / 1989 – 2002 ) . 
 Bayern is an exception in professional , international football , having generated profits in nine of the last ten seasons . Other clubs often report losses , realizing transfers via loans , whereas Bayern always uses current assets . Also Bayern differs from other European top clubs in their income composition . While other clubs derive more than 35 % of their revenues from broadcasting right , Bayern earn only 22 % of their revenues that way . This is often accounted for by Bayern not marketing their broadcasting right themselves . Instead the Deutsche Fußball Liga negotiates broadcasting rights for the whole Bundesliga . 
 In 2011 – 12 , Bayern reported revenues of € 373 @.@ 4 million , marking the eighth consecutive time that Bayern has topped their previous record earnings . According to the 2013 edition of Deloitte 's annual Football Money League , Bayern was the fourth richest club in the world in 2012 , generating revenues of € 368 @.@ 4 million . 
 While other European clubs have mainly marketed to international audiences , Bayern has focused on Germany . Forbes ranks Bayern as the world 's fifth most valuable football club in their annual list , estimating the club 's value at $ 1 @.@ 235 billion . As a result of Bayern 's finals appearance in the 2012 UEFA Champions League , the club 's brand value has reached $ 786 million USD which is up 59 percent from the previous year . Among European teams this is ahead of Real Madrid 's $ 600 million USD and behind first place Manchester United whose brand is valued at $ 853 million USD . In 2013 , Bayern overtook Manchester United to take first place in brand valuation . 
 = = Social engagement and charity = = 
 Bayern has been involved with charitable ventures for a long time , helping other football clubs in financial disarray as well as ordinary people in misery . In the wake of the 2004 Tsunami the " FC Bayern – <unk> e.V. " was founded , a foundation that aims to concentrate the social engagements of the club . At its inception this venture was funded with € 600 @,@ 000 , raised by officials and players of the club . The money was amongst other things used to build a school in <unk> , Sri Lanka and to rebuild the area of Trincomalee , Sri Lanka . In April 2007 it was decided that the focus of the foundation would shift towards supporting people in need locally . 
 The club has also time and again shown to have a soft spot for clubs in financial disarray . Repeatedly the club has supported its local rival 1860 Munich with gratuitous friendlies , transfers at favourable rates , and direct money transfers . Also when St. Pauli threatened to lose its license for professional football due to financial problems , Bayern met the club for a friendly game free of any charge , giving all revenues to St. Pauli . More recently when Mark van Bommel 's home club Fortuna Sittard was in financial distress Bayern came to a charity game at the Dutch club . Another well known example was the transfer of Alexander Zickler in 1993 from Dynamo Dresden . When Bayern picked up Zickler for 2 @.@ 3 Million DM many considered the sum to be a <unk> for the financially threatened <unk> . In 2003 , Bayern provided a 2 Million Euro loan without collateral to the nearly bankrupt Borussia Dortmund which has since been repaid . On 14 July 2013 , Bayern played a charity game against financially threatened third division Hansa Rostock . The game raised about € 1 million , securing Hansa 's licence . 
 In the summer of 2013 Bayern was the first club to give financial support to the Magnus Hirschfeld National Foundation . The foundation researches the living environment LGBT people , and developed an <unk> concept to facilitate unbiased dealing with LGBT themes in football . 
 = = Training facility = = 
 FC Bayern Munich training facilities , for both the professional and the Junior Team , are located at the Bayern Munich Headquarters . There are four grass pitches , one of which has undersoil heating , one artificial grass field and a multi @-@ functional sports hall . After the closure of Munich American High School , FC Bayern purchased the <unk> adjacent sporting fields that previously held <unk> 's football pitch and baseball field . A new grass pitch was placed over the existing football pitch while an artificial turf field was placed over the baseball diamond . 
 The players ' quarters opened in 1990 and were reconstructed after the 2007 – 08 season on suggestions by the new coach , Jürgen Klinsmann , who took inspiration from various major sports clubs . The quarters are now called the performance centre and feature a weights and fitness area , a massage unit , dressing rooms , the coaches ' office , and a conference room with screening facilities for video analysis . A café , a library , an e @-@ Learning room , and a family room are also included . 
 Located at the headquarters is also the Youth academy , which houses up to 13 young talents from outside the city . While being part of Bayern 's Junior Team they can work there on their development as footballers . Former residents of the Youth House include Owen Hargreaves , Michael Rensing , and Bastian Schweinsteiger . 
 In 2006 Bayern purchased land near the Allianz Arena with the purpose of building a new youth academy . In 2015 the project , estimated to cost € 70 million , was started , after overcoming internal resistance . The main reasons for the project were that the existing facilities were too small and that the club , while very successful at senior level , lacked competitiveness with other German and European clubs at youth level . The new facility is scheduled to open in the 2017 – 18 season . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Bayern is historically the most successful team in German football , as they have won the most championships and the most cups . They are also Germany 's most successful team in international competitions , having won eleven trophies . Bayern is one of only four clubs to have won all three major European competitions and also the last club to have won the European Cup three times in a row , entitling them to wear a multiple @-@ winner badge during Champions League matches . 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 German Champions 
 Winner ( 26 ) : 1931 – 32 , 1968 – 69 , 1971 – 72 , 1972 – 73 , 1973 – 74 , 1979 – 80 , 1980 – 81 , 1984 – 85 , 1985 – 86 , 1986 – 87 , 1988 – 89 , 1989 – 90 , 1993 – 94 , 1996 – 97 , 1998 – 99 , 1999 – 2000 , 2000 – 01 , 2002 – 03 , 2004 – 05 , 2005 – 06 , 2007 – 08 , 2009 – 10 , 2012 – 13 , 2013 – 14 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 ( record ) 
 DFB @-@ Pokal 
 Winner ( 18 ) : 1956 – 57 , 1965 – 66 , 1966 – 67 , 1968 – 69 , 1970 – 71 , 1981 – 82 , 1983 – 84 , 1985 – 86 , 1997 – 98 , 1999 – 2000 , 2002 – 03 , 2004 – 05 , 2005 – 06 , 2007 – 08 , 2009 – 10 , 2012 – 13 , 2013 – 14 , 2015 – 16 ( record ) 
 DFB / DFL @-@ Supercup 
 Winner : 1987 , 1990 , 2010 , 2012 
 ( Unofficial winners ) : 1982 
 DFB @-@ Ligapokal 
 Winner ( 6 ) : 1997 , 1998 , 1999 , 2000 , 2004 , 2007 ( record ) 
 = = = European = = = 
 UEFA Champions League / European Cup 
 Winner ( 5 ) : 1973 – 74 , 1974 – 75 , 1975 – 76 , 2000 – 01 , 2012 – 13 
 UEFA Europa League / UEFA Cup 
 Winner : 1995 – 96 
 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup 
 Winner : 1966 – 67 
 UEFA Super Cup 
 Winner : 2013 
 = = = Worldwide = = = 
 Intercontinental Cup 
 Winner : 1976 , 2001 
 FIFA Club World Cup 
 Winner : 2013 
 = = = Regional = = = 
 The regional Bavarian and Southern German honours of the club : 
 Southern German football championship 
 Champions : 1925 – 26 , 1927 – 28 
 Runners @-@ up : 1909 – 10 , 1910 – 11 , 1928 – 29 , 1931 – 32 
 Southern German Cup 
 Champions : 1957 
 Runners @-@ up : 1923 
 <unk> @-@ Liga ( I ) 
 Champions : 1910 , 1911 ; runners @-@ up : 1912 , 1913 , 1917 , 1918 ( record ) 
 <unk> Südbayern 
 Champions : 1920 , 1923 ( shared record ) 
 Runners @-@ up : 1922 
 <unk> Bayern 
 Champions : 1925 – 26 
 <unk> Südbayern 
 Champions : 1927 – 28 , 1928 – 29 , 1929 – 30 , 1930 – 31 , 1931 – 32 , 1932 – 33 ( record ) 
 <unk> Südbayern 
 Champions : 1943 – 44 
 Regionalliga Süd ( II ) 
 Champions : 1964 – 65 
 Runners @-@ up : 1963 – 64 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 As of 18 July 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Players out on loan = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 For recent transfers , see List of German football transfers summer 2016 . 
 See also : Bayern Munich II , Bayern Munich Junior Team 
 = = = Notable past players = = = 
 At his farewell game , Oliver Kahn was declared honorary captain of Bayern Munich . The players below are part of the FC Bayern Munich Hall of Fame . 
 1930s 
 Conrad Heidkamp ( DF ) 
 1970s : 
 Franz Beckenbauer ( DF ) 
 Gerd Müller ( FW ) 
 Uli Hoeneß ( FW ) 
 Paul Breitner ( MF ) 
 Sepp Maier ( GK ) 
 Hans @-@ Georg <unk> ( DF ) 
 Franz Roth ( MF ) 
 1980s : 
 Karl @-@ Heinz Rummenigge ( FW ) 
 Klaus <unk> ( DF ) 
 1990s : 
 Lothar Matthäus ( DF / MF ) 
 Stefan Effenberg ( MF ) 
 2000s : 
 Oliver Kahn ( GK ) 
 Mehmet Scholl ( MF ) 
 Bixente Lizarazu ( DF ) 
 Giovane Élber ( FW ) 
 = = = Captains = = = 
 Philipp Lahm has been the captain since 2011 . 
 = = = Retired numbers = = = 
 12 – Club Supporters ( the 12th Man ) 
 = = Coaches = = 
 See also : Category : FC Bayern Munich managers and List of FC Bayern Munich records and statistics # Coaches 
 = = = Current staff = = = 
 As of 3 July 2016 
 = = = Coaches since 1963 = = = 
 Bayern had 19 coaches since its promotion to the Bundesliga in 1965 . Udo Lattek , Giovanni Trapattoni , Ottmar Hitzfeld and Jupp Heynckes served two terms as head coach . Franz Beckenbauer served one term as head coach and one as caretaker . Lattek was the club 's most successful coach , having won six <unk> titles , two DFB Cups and the European Cup ; following closely is Ottmar Hitzfeld , who won five <unk> titles , two DFB cups and the Champions League . The club 's least successful coach was Søren <unk> , who won less than a third of his matches in charge and presided over the club 's near @-@ relegation in the 1991 – 92 campaign . 
 The present manager , since July 2013 , is Pep Guardiola , Barcelona 's former coach . On 20 December , the club announced that Guardiola would not extend his contract beyond the end of the 2015 – 16 season . Carlo Ancelotti was presented as his successor . 
 = = Current board = = 
 For a list of former presidents see List of FC Bayern Munich records and statistics # Presidents 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Recent seasons = = = 
 The season @-@ by @-@ season performance of the club over the last ten years : 
 As of 28 April 2015 . Rank 
 = Rank in the Bundesliga ; P = 
 Played ; W 
 = Win ; D = 
 Draw ; L 
 = Loss ; F = 
 Goals for ; A 
 = Goals against ; GD = 
 Goal difference ; Pts 
 = Points ; Cup = 
 DFB @-@ Pokal ; EL 
 = UEFA Europa League ; CL = 
 UEFA Champions <unk> 
 = Still in competition ; — = 
 Not attended ; 1R 
 = 1st round ; 2R = 
 2nd round ; 3R 
 = 3rd round ; R16 = 
 Round of sixteen ; QF 
 = Quarterfinals ; SF = 
 Semifinals . 
 = = = In Europe = = = 
 As of 16 February 2015 : 
 = = Other departments = = 
 = = = FC Bayern II = = = 
 The reserve team serves mainly as the final stepping stone for promising young players before being promoted to the main team . Bayern II is coached by Heiko Vogel , assisted by Danny Schwarz and Rainer Ulrich . Since the inception of the Regionalliga in 1994 , the team played in the Regionalliga Süd , after playing in the Oberliga since 1978 . In the 2007 – 08 season they qualified for the newly founded 3 . Liga , where they lasted until 2011 , when they were relegated to the Regionalliga . This ended 33 consecutive years of playing in the highest league that the German Football Association permits the second team of a professional football team to play . 
 = = = Junior football = = = 
 The Bayern Munich Junior Team has produced some of Europe 's top football players , including Owen Hargreaves , Thomas Hitzlsperger , Philipp Lahm , Thomas Müller and Bastian Schweinsteiger . The division was founded in 1902 and is run by Werner Kern and Björn Andersson . It consists of eleven teams with more than 170 players , the youngest being under ten . 
 = = = Women 's football = = = 
 The women 's football team which is led by head coach Thomas <unk> features several members of the German national youth team . In the 2008 – 09 season the team finished second in the women 's Bundesliga . The division was founded in 1970 and consists of four teams with 90 players . Their greatest successes were winning the championships in 1976 and 2015 . 
 = = = Other sports = = = 
 Bayern has other departments for : 
 = = = = Basketball = = = = 
 since 1946 with 280 players in 19 <unk> Champion 1954 @,@ 1955 and 2014 , German Cup 1968 
 = = = = Bowling = = = = 
 since 1984 with 46 players in 4 teams 
 = = = = Chess = = = = 
 since 1908 with 97 players in 8 teams 
 European Club Cup 1992 
 German champion 1983 , 1985 , 1986 , 1989 , 1990 , 1991 , 1992 , 1993 and 1995 
 German Fast chess champion 1984 , 1985 , 1987 , 1988 , 1989 , 1990 , 1991 , 1992 , 1993 , 1994 and 1995 ( record ) 
 = = = = Gymnastics = = = = 
 since 1974 with 35 gymnasts in 1 team 
 German champion 1983 , 1986 , 1987 and 1988 
 = = = = Handball = = = = 
 since 1945 with 3000 players in 10 teams 
 = = = = Table tennis = = = = 
 since 1946 with 160 players in 12 teams 
 = = = = Referees = = = = 
 since 1919 with 115 referees 
 = = = = Senior football = = = = 
 since 2001 with 135 players in 5 teams 
 = 18th Military Police Brigade ( United States ) = 
 The 18th Military Police Brigade is a military police brigade of the United States Army based in Grafenwoehr , Germany , with subordinate battalions and companies stationed throughout Germany . It provides law enforcement and force protection duties to United States Army Europe . 
 Activated during the Vietnam War , the Brigade oversaw all Military Police operations in the country for a large portion of the conflict , undertaking a wide variety of missions throughout the country and providing command and control for other military police groups in the region . After Vietnam , the Brigade deployed units to several other operations , namely Operation Desert Storm and Operation Provide Comfort . The brigade itself also deployed to Kosovo , supporting many of the units operating there attempting to settle unrest in the area due to the 1999 Bosnian War . 
 The brigade has also seen multiple deployments in the Global War on Terrorism to the Iraq War . Its primary responsibilities have been to train and equip the national Iraqi Police forces . The Brigade recently returned from its third deployment to Iraq , after serving for 15 months in the Baghdad area . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The 18th Military Police Brigade is a subordinate unit of the 21st Theater Sustainment Command and United States Army Europe . The brigade is headquartered in Sembach , Germany . The brigade has these subordinate units : 
 * 709th Military Police Battalion , Grafenwöhr 
 92nd Military Police Company , Sembach 
 <unk> Military Police Company , <unk> ; Ansbach ; Grafenwöhr 
 <unk> Military Police Company , Wiesbaden 
 <unk> Military Police Company , Stuttgart 
 615th Military Police Company , Grafenwöhr ; platoons in Vilseck 
 15th Engineer Battalion , Grafenwöhr 
 The Brigade is modular in nature , allowing it to take on additional units when deployed . Normally the Brigade only deploys with its Headquarters and Headquarters Company ( HHC ) ; organic battalions and companies normally don 't deploy with the HHC . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 Members of the Headquarters and Headquarters detachment deployed to Vung Tau , South Vietnam on 7 September 1966 . 
 On 26 September 1966 , the Brigade assumed operational control over all non @-@ divisional military police units in the Republic of Vietnam . The Brigade was composed of three major subordinate elements ; the 16th Military Police Group at Nha Trang , and the 89th Military Police Group and 8th Military Police Group ( Criminal Investigation ) at Long Binh . 
 The 16th and 89th Military Police Groups were composed of seven military police battalions , containing a mixture of military police and infantry companies . The units were stationed throughout every corps tactical zone in the Republic of Vietnam , ranging from Da Nang in the north to Soc Trang in the south . The total strength of the Brigade numbered more than 5 @,@ 000 personnel . 
 Members of the Brigade performed a wide variety of missions including evacuation of prisoners of war , security of vessels and ports , convoy escort , security of vital installations and VIPs , maintenance of discipline , law and order , and direct support to combat operations . During the Tet Offensive , the 716th MP Battalion fought off a resolute Viet Cong unit determined to take over the US Embassy , while other 18th Brigade units performed similar duties in the Mekong Delta , Bien Hoa , the Central Highlands , and throughout the RVN . The Brigade completed its service in Vietnam and was deactivated on 20 March 1973 in Oakland , California . 
 = = = Cold War era = = = 
 The Brigade was redesignated on 16 August 1985 as Headquarters and Headquarters Company , 18th Military Police Brigade and activated in Frankfurt , West Germany . During 1990 – 1991 , battalions from the Brigade deployed to support VII Corps in Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm , and V Corps in Operation Provide Comfort . Elements of the Brigade have also deployed to support Operation Provide Promise and Operation Joint Endeavor in the former Yugoslavia . 
 Demonstrating its rapid <unk> and ability to support V Corps and United States Army Europe contingency operations , every unit within the 18th Military Police Brigade deployed to the Balkans in 1999 . The 92nd Military Police Company , followed by the <unk> Military Police Company deployed to Sarajevo , Bosnia to provide security in support of SFOR . The 615th Military Police Company deployed to Albania in April in support of Task Force Hawk . The Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment , 793rd Military Police Battalion and 127th and <unk> Military Police Companies deployed in July to Kosovo in support of Task Force Falcon . The Headquarters and Headquarters Company , 18th Military Police Brigade deployed in July to Sarajevo in support of Task Force Summit . The HHD , 709th Military Police Battalion and 92nd and 212th Military Police Company deployed in November to Kosovo in support of Task Force Falcon . While in Kosovo , the battalions were the first ever Military Police battalions to conduct joint peacekeeping operations in general support of Russian , Greek , Jordanian , and Polish maneuver battalions . 
 = = = War on Terrorism = = = 
 In support of Operation Iraqi Freedom I , the 18th Military Police Brigade crossed into Iraq on 22 March 2003 . During its year of deployment , the brigade established Prisoner of War holding areas for over 3 @,@ 600 Iraqi prisoners and conducted main supply route patrolling over 2 @,@ 500 kilometers in southern Iraq . The Brigade entered Baghdad in April 2003 and began establishing the new Iraqi Police Service and rebuilding Iraqi police stations . From the beginning of Operation Iraqi Freedom until February 2004 the Brigade provided command and control for seven Military Police battalions , one Mechanized Infantry battalion , 30 Military Police companies , and two Law and Order detachments . The Brigade ’ s MPs conducted over 24 @,@ 000 combat patrols , apprehended over 2 @,@ 400 criminals , confiscated 7 @,@ 500 illegal weapons , and trained over 10 @,@ 000 Iraqi police officers . During their deployment , the Brigade recovered several precious artifacts , such as the Mask of Warka , which was recovered on 23 September 2003 . The brigade returned to Sandhofen in 2004 only to return to Iraq in 2007 . 
 The 127th and <unk> Military Police Companies began serving in Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom II in mid @-@ 2007 . The 127th Company served in <unk> , on patrol operations with local police . In November 2007 the Headquarters and Headquarters Company of the brigade and the 793rd Military Police Battalion deployed to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom III . The brigade replaced the 89th Military Police Brigade which was assigned there previously . The transition ceremony for this command was held on 30 October as 100 soldiers from the brigade 's headquarters took charge of the 89th 's area of responsibility . They deployed to the Baghdad area , and took responsibility for the training of the Iraqi Police . The brigade is supporting Iraqi police logistics , personnel management , maintenance , budget , operations , training , leadership and judicial integration . Other training for Police units included proper search of vehicles , providing medical assistance to Iraqi civilians , as well as expanding the number of Iraqi police and improving their training overall . In theater , the brigade commanded over 5 @,@ 000 soldiers . Units that the Brigade assumed control of included the 153rd Military Police Company of the Delaware Army National Guard and the 223rd Military Police Company of the Kentucky Army National Guard . The brigade worked with the 35th Engineer Brigade to finish construction on the Furat Training Facility , the primary training facility for thousands of Iraqi police . The project was completed in February 2008 . In August 2008 , the brigade began facilitating the transition for the 8th Military Police Brigade , which was set to replace the 18th MP Brigade when its 15 @-@ month tour of duty ended . The brigade cased its colors on 2 December 2008 and began redeploying back to its home bases . The 18th MP brigade trained 20 @,@ 000 Iraqi police during its deployment , and lost 15 soldiers . 
 In addition to the brigade 's support to the War on Terrorism , many soldiers of the brigade continually conduct law enforcement and force protection duties in communities located throughout the central region of Europe . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = Enron scandal = 
 The Enron scandal , revealed in October 2001 , eventually led to the bankruptcy of the Enron Corporation , an American energy company based in Houston , Texas , and the de facto dissolution of Arthur Andersen , which was one of the five largest audit and accountancy partnerships in the world . In addition to being the largest bankruptcy reorganization in American history at that time , Enron was cited as the biggest audit failure . 
 Enron was formed in 1985 by Kenneth Lay after merging Houston Natural Gas and InterNorth . Several years later , when Jeffrey Skilling was hired , he developed a staff of executives that , by the use of accounting loopholes , special purpose entities , and poor financial reporting , were able to hide billions of dollars in debt from failed deals and projects . Chief Financial Officer Andrew Fastow and other executives not only misled Enron 's board of directors and audit committee on high @-@ risk accounting practices , but also pressured Andersen to ignore the issues . 
 Enron shareholders filed a $ 40 billion lawsuit after the company 's stock price , which achieved a high of US $ 90 @.@ 75 per share in mid @-@ 2000 , plummeted to less than $ 1 by the end of November 2001 . The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) began an investigation , and rival Houston competitor Dynegy offered to purchase the company at a very low price . The deal failed , and on December 2 , 2001 , Enron filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code . Enron 's $ 63 @.@ 4 billion in assets made it the largest corporate bankruptcy in U.S. history until WorldCom 's bankruptcy the next year . 
 Many executives at Enron were indicted for a variety of charges and some were later sentenced to prison . Enron 's auditor , Arthur Andersen , was found guilty in a United States District Court of illegally destroying documents relevant to the SEC investigation which voided its license to audit public companies , effectively closing the business . By the time the ruling was overturned at the U.S. Supreme Court , the company had lost the majority of its customers and had ceased operating . Employees and shareholders received limited returns in lawsuits , despite losing billions in pensions and stock prices . As a consequence of the scandal , new regulations and legislation were enacted to expand the accuracy of financial reporting for public companies . One piece of legislation , the Sarbanes @-@ Oxley Act , increased penalties for destroying , altering , or fabricating records in federal investigations or for attempting to defraud shareholders . The act also increased the accountability of auditing firms to remain unbiased and independent of their clients . 
 = = Rise of Enron = = 
 In 1985 , Kenneth Lay merged the natural gas pipeline companies of Houston Natural Gas and InterNorth to form Enron . In the early 1990s , he helped to initiate the selling of electricity at market prices , and soon after , the United States Congress approved legislation <unk> the sale of natural gas . The resulting markets made it possible for traders such as Enron to sell energy at higher prices , thereby significantly increasing its revenue . After producers and local governments decried the resultant price volatility and asked for increased regulation , strong lobbying on the part of Enron and others prevented such regulation . 
 As Enron became the largest seller of natural gas in North America by 1992 , its trading of gas contracts earned $ 122 million ( before interest and taxes ) , the second largest contributor to the company 's net income . The November 1999 creation of the <unk> trading website allowed the company to better manage its contracts trading business . 
 In an attempt to achieve further growth , Enron pursued a diversification strategy . The company owned and operated a variety of assets including gas pipelines , electricity plants , pulp and paper plants , water plants , and broadband services across the globe . The corporation also gained additional revenue by trading contracts for the same array of products and services with which it was involved . 
 Enron 's stock increased from the start of the 1990s until year @-@ end 1998 by 311 % , only modestly higher than the average rate of growth in the Standard & Poor 500 index . However , the stock increased by 56 % in 1999 and a further 87 % in 2000 , compared to a 20 % increase and a 10 % decrease for the index during the same years . By December 31 , 2000 , Enron 's stock was priced at $ 83 @.@ 13 and its market capitalization exceeded $ 60 billion , 70 times earnings and six times book value , an indication of the stock market 's high expectations about its future prospects . In addition , Enron was rated the most innovative large company in America in Fortune 's Most Admired Companies survey . 
 = = Causes of downfall = = 
 Enron 's complex financial statements were confusing to shareholders and analysts . In addition , its complex business model and unethical practices required that the company use accounting limitations to misrepresent earnings and modify the balance sheet to indicate favorable performance . 
 The combination of these issues later resulted in the bankruptcy of the company , and the majority of them were perpetuated by the indirect knowledge or direct actions of Lay , Jeffrey Skilling , Andrew Fastow , and other executives . Lay served as the chairman of the company in its last few years , and approved of the actions of Skilling and Fastow although he did not always inquire about the details . Skilling constantly focused on meeting Wall Street expectations , advocated the use of mark @-@ to @-@ market accounting ( accounting based on market value , which was then inflated ) and pressured Enron executives to find new ways to hide its debt . Fastow and other executives " created off @-@ balance @-@ sheet vehicles , complex financing structures , and deals so bewildering that few people could understand them . " 
 = = = Revenue recognition = = = 
 Enron and other energy suppliers earned profits by providing services such as wholesale trading and risk management in addition to building and maintaining electric power plants , natural gas pipelines , storage , and processing facilities . When accepting the risk of buying and selling products , merchants are allowed to report the selling price as revenues and the products ' costs as cost of goods sold . In contrast , an " agent " provides a service to the customer , but does not take the same risks as merchants for buying and selling . Service providers , when classified as agents , are able to report trading and brokerage fees as revenue , although not for the full value of the transaction . 
 Although trading companies such as Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch used the conventional " agent model " for reporting revenue ( where only the trading or brokerage fee would be reported as revenue ) , Enron instead selected to report the entire value of each of its trades as revenue . This " merchant model " was considered much more aggressive in the accounting interpretation than the agent model . Enron 's method of reporting inflated trading revenue was later adopted by other companies in the energy trading industry in an attempt to stay competitive with the company 's large increase in revenue . Other energy companies such as Duke Energy , Reliant Energy , and Dynegy joined Enron in the wealthiest 50 of the Fortune 500 mainly due to their adoption of the same trading revenue accounting as Enron . 
 Between 1996 and 2000 , Enron 's revenues increased by more than 750 % , rising from $ 13 @.@ 3 billion in 1996 to $ 100 @.@ 8 billion in 2000 . This extensive expansion of 65 % per year was unprecedented in any industry , including the energy industry which typically considered growth of 2 – 3 % per year to be respectable . For just the first nine months of 2001 , Enron reported $ 138 @.@ 7 billion in revenues , which placed the company at the sixth position on the Fortune Global 500 . 
 = = = Mark @-@ to @-@ market accounting = = = 
 In Enron 's natural gas business , the accounting had been fairly straightforward : in each time period , the company listed actual costs of supplying the gas and actual revenues received from selling it . However , when Skilling joined the company , he demanded that the trading business adopt mark @-@ to @-@ market accounting , citing that it would represent " true economic value . " Enron became the first non @-@ financial company to use the method to account for its complex long @-@ term contracts . Mark @-@ to @-@ market accounting requires that once a long @-@ term contract was signed , income is estimated as the present value of net future cash flow . Often , the viability of these contracts and their related costs were difficult to estimate . Due to the large discrepancies of attempting to match profits and cash , investors were typically given false or misleading reports . While using the method , income from projects could be recorded , although they might not have ever received the money , and in turn increasing financial earnings on the books . However , in future years , the profits could not be included , so new and additional income had to be included from more projects to develop additional growth to appease investors . As one Enron competitor stated , " If you accelerate your income , then you have to keep doing more and more deals to show the same or rising income . " Despite potential pitfalls , the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) approved the accounting method for Enron in its trading of natural gas futures contracts on January 30 , 1992 . However , Enron later expanded its use to other areas in the company to help it meet Wall Street projections . 
 For one contract , in July 2000 , Enron and Blockbuster Video signed a 20 @-@ year agreement to introduce on @-@ demand entertainment to various U.S. cities by year @-@ end . After several pilot projects , Enron recognized estimated profits of more than $ 110 million from the deal , even though analysts questioned the technical viability and market demand of the service . When the network failed to work , Blockbuster withdrew from the contract . Enron continued to recognize future profits , even though the deal resulted in a loss . 
 = = = Special purpose entities = = = 
 Enron used special purpose entities — limited partnerships or companies created to fulfill a temporary or specific purpose to fund or manage risks associated with specific assets . The company elected to disclose minimal details on its use of " special purpose entities " . These shell companies were created by a sponsor , but funded by independent equity investors and debt financing . For financial reporting purposes , a series of rules dictate whether a special purpose entity is a separate entity from the sponsor . In total , by 2001 , Enron had used hundreds of special purpose entities to hide its debt . Enron used a number of special purpose entities , such as partnerships in its Thomas and Condor tax shelters , financial asset securitization investment trusts ( <unk> ) in the Apache deal , real estate mortgage investment conduits ( <unk> ) in the Steele deal , and <unk> and real estate investment trusts ( REITs ) in the Cochise deal . 
 The special purpose entities were used for more than just circumventing accounting conventions . As a result of one violation , Enron 's balance sheet understated its liabilities and overstated its equity , and its earnings were overstated . Enron disclosed to its shareholders that it had hedged downside risk in its own illiquid investments using special purpose entities . However , investors were oblivious to the fact that the special purpose entities were actually using the company 's own stock and financial guarantees to finance these hedges . This prevented Enron from being protected from the downside risk . Notable examples of special purpose entities that Enron employed were JEDI , Chewco , Whitewing , and LJM . 
 = = = = JEDI and Chewco = = = = 
 In 1993 , Enron established a joint venture in energy investments with CalPERS , the California state pension fund , called the Joint Energy Development Investments ( JEDI ) . In 1997 , Skilling , serving as Chief Operating Officer ( COO ) , asked CalPERS to join Enron in a separate investment . CalPERS was interested in the idea , but only if it could be terminated as a partner in JEDI . However , Enron did not want to show any debt from assuming CalPERS ' stake in JEDI on its balance sheet . Chief Financial Officer ( CFO ) Fastow developed the special purpose entity Chewco Investments limited partnership ( L.P. ) which raised debt guaranteed by Enron and was used to acquire CalPERS 's joint venture stake for $ 383 million . Because of Fastow 's organization of Chewco , JEDI 's losses were kept off of Enron 's balance sheet . 
 In autumn 2001 , CalPERS and Enron 's arrangement was discovered , which required the discontinuation of Enron 's prior accounting method for Chewco and JEDI . This disqualification revealed that Enron 's reported earnings from 1997 to mid @-@ 2001 would need to be reduced by $ 405 million and that the company 's indebtedness would increase by $ 628 million . 
 = = = = Whitewing = = = = 
 Whitewing was the name of a special purpose entity used as a financing method by Enron . In December 1997 , with funding of $ 579 million provided by Enron and $ 500 million by an outside investor , Whitewing Associates L.P. was formed . Two years later , the entity 's arrangement was changed so that it would no longer be consolidated with Enron and be counted on the company 's balance sheet . Whitewing was used to purchase Enron assets , including stakes in power plants , pipelines , stocks , and other investments . Between 1999 and 2001 , Whitewing bought assets from Enron worth $ 2 billion , using Enron stock as collateral . Although the transactions were approved by the Enron board , the asset transfers were not true sales and should have been treated instead as loans . 
 = = = = LJM and Raptors = = = = 
 In 1999 , Fastow formulated two limited partnerships : LJM Cayman . L.P. ( <unk> ) and <unk> Co @-@ Investment L.P. ( <unk> ) , for the purpose of buying Enron 's poorly performing stocks and stakes to improve its financial statements . LJM 1 and 2 were created solely to serve as the outside equity investor needed for the special purpose entities that were being used by Enron . Fastow had to go before the board of directors to receive an exemption from Enron 's code of ethics ( as he had the title of CFO ) in order to manage the companies . The two partnerships were funded with around $ 390 million provided by Wachovia , J.P. Morgan Chase , Credit Suisse First Boston , Citigroup , and other investors . Merrill Lynch , which marketed the equity , also contributed $ 22 million to fund the entities . 
 Enron transferred to " Raptor I @-@ IV " , four LJM @-@ related special purpose entities named after the velociraptors in Jurassic Park , more than " $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in assets , including millions of shares of Enron common stock and long term rights to purchase millions more shares , plus $ 150 million of Enron notes payable " as disclosed in the company 's financial statement footnotes . The special purpose entities had been used to pay for all of this using the entities ' debt instruments . The footnotes also declared that the instruments ' face amount totaled $ 1 @.@ 5 billion , and the entities notional amount of $ 2 @.@ 1 billion had been used to enter into derivative contracts with Enron . 
 Enron capitalized the Raptors , and , in a manner similar to the accounting employed when a company issues stock at a public offering , then booked the notes payable issued as assets on its balance sheet while increasing the shareholders ' equity for the same amount . This treatment later became an issue for Enron and its auditor Arthur Andersen as removing it from the balance sheet resulted in a $ 1 @.@ 2 billion decrease in net shareholders ' equity . 
 Eventually the derivative contracts worth $ 2 @.@ 1 billion lost significant value . Swaps were established at the time the stock price achieved its maximum . During the ensuing year , the value of the portfolio under the swaps fell by $ 1 @.@ 1 billion as the stock prices decreased ( the loss of value meant that the special purpose entities technically now owed Enron $ 1 @.@ 1 billion by the contracts ) . Enron , which used a " mark @-@ to @-@ market " accounting method , claimed a $ 500 million gain on the swap contracts in its 2000 annual report . The gain was responsible for offsetting its stock portfolio losses and was attributed to nearly a third of Enron 's earnings for 2000 ( before it was properly restated in 2001 ) . 
 = = = Corporate governance = = = 
 On paper , Enron had a model board of directors comprising predominantly of outsiders with significant ownership stakes and a talented audit committee . In its 2000 review of best corporate boards , Chief Executive included Enron among its five best boards . Even with its complex corporate governance and network of intermediaries , Enron was still able to " attract large sums of capital to fund a questionable business model , conceal its true performance through a series of accounting and financing maneuvers , and hype its stock to unsustainable levels . " 
 = = = = Executive compensation = = = = 
 Although Enron 's compensation and performance management system was designed to retain and reward its most valuable employees , the system contributed to a dysfunctional corporate culture that became obsessed with short @-@ term earnings to maximize bonuses . Employees constantly tried to start deals , often disregarding the quality of cash flow or profits , in order to get a better rating for their performance review . Additionally , accounting results were recorded as soon as possible to keep up with the company 's stock price . This practice helped ensure deal @-@ makers and executives received large cash bonuses and stock options . 
 The company was constantly emphasizing its stock price . Management was compensated extensively using stock options , similar to other U.S. companies . This policy of stock option awards caused management to create expectations of rapid growth in efforts to give the appearance of reported earnings to meet Wall Street 's expectations . The stock ticker was located in lobbies , elevators , and on company computers . At budget meetings , Skilling would develop target earnings by asking " What earnings do you need to keep our stock price up ? " and that number would be used , even if it was not feasible . At December 31 , 2000 , Enron had 96 million shares outstanding as stock option plans ( approximately 13 % of common shares outstanding ) . Enron 's proxy statement stated that , within three years , these awards were expected to be exercised . Using Enron 's January 2001 stock price of $ 83 @.@ 13 and the directors ’ beneficial ownership reported in the 2001 proxy , the value of director stock ownership was $ 659 million for Lay , and $ 174 million for Skilling . 
 Skilling believed that if employees were constantly worried about cost , it would hinder original thinking . As a result , extravagant spending was rampant throughout the company , especially among the executives . Employees had large expense accounts and many executives were paid sometimes twice as much as competitors . In 1998 , the top 200 highest @-@ paid employees received $ 193 million from salaries , bonuses , and stock . Two years later , the figure jumped to $ 1 @.@ 4 billion . 
 = = = = Risk management = = = = 
 Before its scandal , Enron was lauded for its sophisticated financial risk management tools . Risk management was crucial to Enron not only because of its regulatory environment , but also because of its business plan . Enron established long @-@ term fixed commitments which needed to be hedged to prepare for the invariable fluctuation of future energy prices . Enron 's bankruptcy downfall was attributed to its reckless use of derivatives and special purpose entities . By hedging its risks with special purpose entities which it owned , Enron retained the risks associated with the transactions . This arrangement had Enron implementing hedges with itself . 
 Enron 's aggressive accounting practices were not hidden from the board of directors , as later learned by a Senate subcommittee . The board was informed of the rationale for using the Whitewing , LJM , and Raptor transactions , and after approving them , received status updates on the entities ' operations . Although not all of Enron 's widespread improper accounting practices were revealed to the board , the practices were dependent on board decisions . Even though Enron extensively relied on derivatives for its business , the company 's Finance Committee and board did not have enough experience with derivatives to understand what they were being told . The Senate subcommittee argued that had there been a detailed understanding of how the derivatives were organized , the board would have prevented their use . 
 = = = = Financial audit = = = = 
 Enron 's auditor firm , Arthur Andersen , was accused of applying reckless standards in its audits because of a conflict of interest over the significant consulting fees generated by Enron . During 2000 , Arthur Andersen earned $ 25 million in audit fees and $ 27 million in consulting fees ( this amount accounted for roughly 27 % of the audit fees of public clients for Arthur Andersen 's Houston office ) . The auditor 's methods were questioned as either being completed solely to receive its annual fees or for its lack of expertise in properly reviewing Enron 's revenue recognition , special entities , derivatives , and other accounting practices . 
 Enron hired numerous Certified Public Accountants ( <unk> ) as well as accountants who had worked on developing accounting rules with the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) . The accountants searched for new ways to save the company money , including capitalizing on loopholes found in Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ( GAAP ) , the accounting industry 's standards . One Enron accountant revealed " We tried to aggressively use the literature [ GAAP ] to our advantage . All the rules create all these opportunities . We got to where we did because we exploited that weakness . " 
 Andersen 's auditors were pressured by Enron 's management to defer recognizing the charges from the special purpose entities as its credit risks became known . Since the entities would never return a profit , accounting guidelines required that Enron should take a write @-@ off , where the value of the entity was removed from the balance sheet at a loss . To pressure Andersen into meeting Enron 's earnings expectations , Enron would occasionally allow accounting companies Ernst & Young or PricewaterhouseCoopers to complete accounting tasks to create the illusion of hiring a new company to replace Andersen . Although Andersen was equipped with internal controls to protect against conflicted incentives of local partners , it failed to prevent conflict of interest . In one case , Andersen 's Houston office , which performed the Enron audit , was able to overrule any critical reviews of Enron 's accounting decisions by Andersen 's Chicago partner . In addition , after news of U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) investigations of Enron were made public , Andersen would later shred several tons of relevant documents and delete nearly 30 @,@ 000 e @-@ mails and computer files , causing accusations of a cover @-@ up . 
 Revelations concerning Andersen 's overall performance led to the break @-@ up of the firm , and to the following assessment by the Powers Committee ( appointed by Enron 's board to look into the firm 's accounting in October 2001 ) : " The evidence available to us suggests that Andersen did not fulfill its professional responsibilities in connection with its audits of Enron 's financial statements , or its obligation to bring to the attention of Enron 's Board ( or the Audit and Compliance Committee ) concerns about Enron 's internal contracts over the related @-@ party transactions " . 
 = = = = Audit committee = = = = 
 Corporate audit committees usually meet just a few times during the year , and their members typically have only modest experience with accounting and finance . Enron 's audit committee had more expertise than many . It included : 
 Robert <unk> of Stanford University , a widely respected accounting professor and former dean of Stanford Business School 
 John Mendelsohn , President of the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center 
 Paulo Pereira , former president and CEO of the State Bank of Rio de Janeiro in Brazil 
 John Wakeham , former United Kingdom Secretary for Energy 
 Ronnie Chan , a Hong Kong businessman 
 Wendy Gramm , former Chair of U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
 Enron 's audit committee was later criticized for its brief meetings that would cover large amounts of material . In one meeting on February 12 , 2001 , the committee met for an hour and a half . Enron 's audit committee did not have the technical knowledge to question the auditors properly on accounting issues related to the company 's special purpose entities . The committee was also unable to question the company 's management due to pressures on the committee . The United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs ' report accused the board members of allowing conflicts of interest to impede their duties as monitoring the company 's accounting practices . When Enron 's scandal became public , the audit committee 's conflicts of interest were regarded with suspicion . 
 = = = = Ethical and political analyses = = = = 
 Commentators attributed the mismanagement behind Enron ’ s fall to a variety of ethical and political @-@ economic causes . Ethical explanations centered on executive greed and hubris , a lack of corporate social responsibility , situation ethics , and get @-@ it @-@ done business pragmatism . Political @-@ economic explanations cited post @-@ 1970s deregulation , and inadequate staff and funding for regulatory oversight . A more libertarian analysis maintained that Enron ’ s collapse resulted from the company ’ s reliance on political lobbying , rent @-@ seeking , and the gaming of regulations . 
 = = = Other accounting issues = = = 
 Enron made a habit of booking costs of cancelled projects as assets , with the rationale that no official letter had stated that the project was cancelled . This method was known as " the snowball " , and although it was initially dictated that such practices be used only for projects worth less than $ 90 million , it was later increased to $ 200 million . 
 In 1998 , when analysts were given a tour of the Enron Energy Services office , they were impressed with how the employees were working so vigorously . In reality , Skilling had moved other employees to the office from other departments ( instructing them to pretend to work hard ) to create the appearance that the division was larger than it was . This ruse was used several times to fool analysts about the progress of different areas of Enron to help improve the stock price . 
 = = Timeline of downfall = = 
 In February 2001 , Chief Accounting Officer Rick Causey told budget managers : " From an accounting standpoint , this will be our easiest year ever . We 've got 2001 in the bag . " On March 5 , Bethany McLean 's Fortune article Is Enron <unk> ? questioned how Enron could maintain its high stock value , which was trading at 55 times its earnings . She argued that analysts and investors did not know exactly how Enron was earning its income . McLean was first drawn to the company 's situation after an analyst suggested she view the company 's 10 @-@ K report , where she found " strange transactions " , " erratic cash flow " , and " huge debt . " She telephoned Skilling to discuss her findings prior to publishing the article , but he called her " unethical " for not properly researching the company . Fastow cited two Fortune reporters that Enron could not reveal earnings details as the company had more than 1 @,@ 200 trading books for assorted commodities and did " ... not want anyone to know what 's on those books . We don 't want to tell anyone where we 're making money . " 
 In a conference call on April 17 , 2001 , then @-@ Chief Executive Officer ( CEO ) Skilling verbally attacked Wall Street analyst Richard Grubman , who questioned Enron 's unusual accounting practice during a recorded conference call . When Grubman complained that Enron was the only company that could not release a balance sheet along with its earnings statements , Skilling replied " Well , thank you very much , we appreciate that ... asshole . " This became an inside joke among many Enron employees , mocking Grubman for his perceived meddling rather than Skilling 's offensiveness , with slogans such as " Ask Why , Asshole " , a variation on Enron 's official slogan " Ask why " . However , Skilling 's comment was met with dismay and astonishment by press and public , as he had previously disdained criticism of Enron coolly or humorously . 
 By the late 1990s Enron 's stock was trading for $ 80 – 90 per share , and few seemed to concern themselves with the opacity of the company 's financial disclosures . In mid @-@ July 2001 , Enron reported revenues of $ 50 @.@ 1 billion , almost triple year @-@ to @-@ date , and beating analysts ' estimates by 3 cents a share . Despite this , Enron 's profit margin had stayed at a modest average of about 2 @.@ 1 % , and its share price had decreased by more than 30 % since the same quarter of 2000 . 
 As time passed , a number of serious concerns confronted the company . Enron had recently faced several serious operational challenges , namely logistical difficulties in operating a new broadband communications trading unit , and the losses from constructing the Dabhol Power project , a large power plant in India . There was also increasing criticism of the company for the role that its subsidiary Enron Energy Services had in the California electricity crisis of 2000 @-@ 2001 . 
 On August 14 , Skilling announced he was resigning his position as CEO after only six months . Skilling had long served as president and COO before being promoted to CEO . Skilling cited personal reasons for leaving the company . Observers noted that in the months before his exit , Skilling had sold at minimum 450 @,@ 000 shares of Enron at a value of around $ 33 million ( though he still owned over a million shares at the date of his departure ) . Nevertheless , Lay , who was serving as chairman at Enron , assured surprised market watchers that there would be " no change in the performance or outlook of the company going forward " from Skilling 's departure . Lay announced he himself would re @-@ assume the position of chief executive officer . 
 The next day , however , Skilling admitted that a very significant reason for his departure was Enron 's faltering price in the stock market . The economist Paul Krugman asserted in his New York Times column that Enron was an illustration of the consequences that occur from the deregulation and commodification of things such as energy . A few days later , in a letter to the editor , Kenneth Lay defended Enron and the philosophy of the company : 
 The broader goal of [ Krugman 's ] latest attack on Enron appears to be to discredit the free @-@ market system , a system that entrusts people to make choices and enjoy the fruits of their labor , skill , intellect and heart . He would apparently rely on a system of monopolies controlled or sponsored by government to make choices for people . We disagree , finding ourselves less trusting of the integrity and good faith of such institutions and their leaders . 
 The example Mr. Krugman cites of " <unk> " run amok ( the electricity market in California ) is the product of exactly his kind of system , with active government intervention at every step . Indeed , the only winners in the California fiasco were the government @-@ owned utilities of Los Angeles , the Pacific Northwest and British Columbia . The disaster that squandered the wealth of California was born of regulation by the few , not by markets of the many . 
 On August 15 , Sherron Watkins , vice president for corporate development , sent an anonymous letter to Lay warning him about the company 's accounting practices . One statement in the letter said : " I am incredibly nervous that we will implode in a wave of accounting scandals . " Watkins contacted a friend who worked for Arthur Andersen and he drafted a memorandum to give to the audit partners about the points she raised . On August 22 , Watkins met individually with Lay and gave him a six @-@ page letter further explaining Enron 's accounting issues . Lay questioned her as to whether she had told anyone outside of the company and then vowed to have the company 's law firm , Vinson & Elkins , review the issues , although she argued that using the law firm would present a conflict of interest . Lay consulted with other executives , and although they wanted to dismiss Watkins ( as Texas law did not protect company whistleblowers ) , they decided against it to prevent a lawsuit . On October 15 , Vinson & Elkins announced that Enron had done nothing wrong in its accounting practices as Andersen had approved each issue . 
 = = = Investors ' confidence declines = = = 
 By the end of August 2001 , his company 's stock value still falling , Lay named Greg Whalley , president and COO of Enron Wholesale Services and Mark <unk> , to positions in the chairman 's office . Some observers suggested that Enron 's investors were in significant need of reassurance , not only because the company 's business was difficult to understand ( even " indecipherable " ) but also because it was difficult to properly describe the company in financial statements . One analyst stated " it 's really hard for analysts to determine where [ Enron ] are making money in a given quarter and where they are losing money . " Lay accepted that Enron 's business was very complex , but asserted that analysts would " never get all the information they want " to satisfy their curiosity . He also explained that the complexity of the business was due largely to tax strategies and position @-@ hedging . Lay 's efforts seemed to meet with limited success ; by September 9 , one prominent hedge fund manager noted that " [ Enron ] stock is trading under a cloud . " The sudden departure of Skilling combined with the opacity of Enron 's accounting books made proper assessment difficult for Wall Street . In addition , the company admitted to repeatedly using " related @-@ party transactions , " which some feared could be too @-@ easily used to transfer losses that might otherwise appear on Enron 's own balance sheet . A particularly troubling aspect of this technique was that several of the " related @-@ party " entities had been or were being controlled by CFO Fastow . 
 After the September 11 , 2001 attacks , media attention shifted away from the company and its troubles ; a little less than a month later Enron announced its intention to begin the process of selling its lower @-@ margin assets in favor of its core businesses of gas and electricity trading . This policy included selling Portland General Electric to another Oregon utility , Northwest Natural Gas , for about $ 1 @.@ 9 billion in cash and stock , and possibly selling its 65 % stake in the Dabhol project in India . 
 = = = Restructuring losses and SEC investigation = = = 
 On October 16 , 2001 , Enron announced that restatements to its financial statements for years 1997 to 2000 were necessary to correct accounting violations . The restatements for the period reduced earnings by $ 613 million ( or 23 % of reported profits during the period ) , increased liabilities at the end of 2000 by $ 628 million ( 6 % of reported liabilities and 5 @.@ 5 % of reported equity ) , and reduced equity at the end of 2000 by $ 1 @.@ 2 billion ( 10 % of reported equity ) . Additionally , in January Jeff Skilling had asserted that the broadband unit alone was worth $ 35 billion , a claim also mistrusted . An analyst at Standard & Poor 's said , " I don 't think anyone knows what the broadband operation is worth . " 
 Enron 's management team claimed the losses were mostly due to investment losses , along with charges such as about $ 180 million in money spent restructuring the company 's troubled broadband trading unit . In a statement , Lay revealed , " After a thorough review of our businesses , we have decided to take these charges to clear away issues that have clouded the performance and earnings potential of our core energy businesses . " Some analysts were unnerved . David Fleischer at Goldman Sachs , an analyst termed previously ' one of the company 's strongest supporters ' asserted that the Enron management " ... lost credibility and have to <unk> themselves . They need to convince investors these earnings are real , that the company is for real and that growth will be realized . " 
 Fastow disclosed to Enron 's board of directors on October 22 that he earned $ 30 million from compensation arrangements when managing the LJM limited partnerships . That day , the share price of Enron decreased to $ 20 @.@ 65 , down $ 5 @.@ 40 in one day , after the announcement by the SEC that it was investigating several suspicious deals struck by Enron , characterizing them as " some of the most opaque transactions with insiders ever seen " . Attempting to explain the billion @-@ dollar charge and calm investors , Enron 's disclosures spoke of " share settled <unk> collar arrangements , " " derivative instruments which eliminated the contingent nature of existing restricted forward contracts , " and strategies that served " to hedge certain merchant investments and other assets . " Such puzzling phraseology left many analysts feeling ignorant about just how Enron managed its business . Regarding the SEC investigation , chairman and CEO Lay said , " We will cooperate fully with the <unk> and look forward to the opportunity to put any concern about these transactions to rest . " 
 Two days later , on October 25 , despite his reassurances days earlier , Lay dismissed Fastow from his position , citing " In my continued discussions with the financial community , it became clear to me that restoring investor confidence would require us to replace Andy as CFO . " However , with Skilling and Fastow now both departed , some analysts feared that revealing the company 's practices would be made all the more difficult . Enron 's stock was now trading at $ 16 @.@ 41 , having lost half its value in a little more than a week . 
 On October 27 the company began buying back all its commercial paper , valued at around $ 3 @.@ 3 billion , in an effort to calm investor fears about Enron 's supply of cash . Enron financed the re @-@ purchase by depleting its lines of credit at several banks . While the company 's debt rating was still considered investment @-@ grade , its bonds were trading at levels slightly less , making future sales problematic . 
 As the month came to a close , serious concerns were being raised by some observers regarding Enron 's possible manipulation of accepted accounting rules ; however , analysis was claimed to be impossible based on the incomplete information provided by Enron . Industry analysts feared that Enron was the new Long @-@ Term Capital Management , the hedge fund whose bankruptcy in 1998 threatened systemic failure of the international financial markets . Enron 's tremendous presence worried some about the consequences of the company 's possible bankruptcy . Enron executives accepted questions in written form only . 
 = = = Credit rating downgrade = = = 
 The main short @-@ term danger to Enron 's survival at the end of October 2001 seemed to be its credit rating . It was reported at the time that Moody 's and Fitch , two of the three biggest credit @-@ rating agencies , had slated Enron for review for possible downgrade . Such a downgrade would force Enron to issue millions of shares of stock to cover loans it had guaranteed , which would decrease the value of existing stock further . Additionally , all manner of companies began reviewing their existing contracts with Enron , especially in the long term , in the event that Enron 's rating were lowered below investment grade , a possible hindrance for future transactions . 
 Analysts and observers continued their complaints regarding the difficulty or impossibility of properly assessing a company whose financial statements were so cryptic . Some feared that no one at Enron apart from Skilling and Fastow could completely explain years of mysterious transactions . " You 're getting way over my head , " said Lay during late August 2001 in response to detailed questions about Enron 's business , a reaction that worried analysts . 
 On October 29 , responding to growing concerns that Enron might have insufficient cash on hand , news spread that Enron was seeking a further $ 1 – 2 billion in financing from banks . The next day , as feared , Moody 's lowered Enron 's credit rating from <unk> to <unk> , two levels above junk status . Standard & Poor 's also lowered Enron 's rating to BBB + , the equivalent of Moody 's rating . Moody 's also warned that it would downgrade Enron 's commercial paper rating , the consequence of which would likely prevent the company from finding the further financing it sought to keep solvent . 
 November began with the disclosure that the SEC was now pursuing a formal investigation , prompted by questions related to Enron 's dealings with " related parties " . Enron 's board also announced that it would commission a special committee to investigate the transactions , directed by William C. Powers , the dean of the University of Texas law school . The next day , an editorial in The New York Times demanded an " aggressive " investigation into the matter . Enron was able to secure an additional $ 1 billion in financing from cross @-@ town rival Dynegy on November 2 , but the news was not universally admired in that the debt was secured by assets from the company 's valuable Northern Natural Gas and <unk> Pipeline . 
 = = = Proposed buyout by Dynegy = = = 
 Sources claimed that Enron was planning to explain its business practices more fully within the coming days , as a confidence @-@ building gesture . Enron 's stock was now trading at around $ 7 , as investors worried that the company would not be able to find a buyer . 
 After it received a wide spectrum of rejections , Enron management apparently found a buyer when the board of Dynegy , another energy trader based in Houston , voted late at night on November 7 to acquire Enron at a very low price of about $ 8 billion in stock . Chevron Texaco , which at the time owned about a quarter of Dynegy , agreed to provide Enron with $ 2 @.@ 5 billion in cash , specifically $ 1 billion at first and the rest when the deal was completed . Dynegy would also be required to assume nearly $ 13 billion of debt , plus any other debt hitherto occluded by the Enron management 's secretive business practices , possibly as much as $ 10 billion in " hidden " debt . Dynegy and Enron confirmed their deal on November 8 , 2001 . 
 Commentators remarked on the different corporate cultures between Dynegy and Enron , and on the " straight @-@ talking " personality of the CEO of Dynegy , Charles Watson . Some wondered if Enron 's troubles had not simply been the result of innocent accounting errors . By November , Enron was asserting that the billion @-@ plus " one @-@ time charges " disclosed in October should in reality have been $ 200 million , with the rest of the amount simply corrections of dormant accounting mistakes . Many feared other " mistakes " and restatements might yet be revealed . 
 Another major correction of Enron 's earnings was announced on November 9 , with a reduction of $ 591 million of the stated revenue of years 1997 – 2000 . The charges were said to come largely from two special purpose partnerships ( JEDI and Chewco ) . The corrections resulted in the virtual elimination of profit for fiscal year 1997 , with significant reductions for the other years . Despite this disclosure , Dynegy declared it still intended to purchase Enron . Both companies were said to be anxious to receive an official assessment of the proposed sale from Moody 's and S & P presumably to understand the effect the completion of any buyout transaction would have on Dynegy and Enron 's credit rating . In addition , concerns were raised regarding antitrust regulatory restrictions resulting in possible divestiture , along with what to some observers were the radically different corporate cultures of Enron and Dynegy . 
 Both companies promoted the deal aggressively , and some observers were hopeful ; Watson was praised for attempting to create the largest company on the energy market . At the time , Watson said : " We feel [ Enron ] is a very solid company with plenty of capacity to withstand whatever happens the next few months . " One analyst called the deal " a <unk> [ ... ] a very good deal financially , certainly should be a good deal strategically , and provides some immediate balance @-@ sheet backstop for Enron . " 
 Credit issues were becoming more critical , however . Around the time the buyout was made public , Moody 's and S & P both reduced Enron 's rating to just one notch above junk status . Were the company 's rating to fall below investment @-@ grade , its ability to trade would be severely limited if there was a reduction or elimination of its credit lines with competitors . In a conference call , S & P affirmed that , were Enron not to be bought , S & P would reduce its rating to low BB or high B , ratings noted as being within junk status . Additionally , many traders had limited their involvement with Enron , or stopped doing business altogether , fearing more bad news . Watson again attempted to re @-@ assure , attesting at a presentation to investors that there was " nothing wrong with Enron 's business " . He also acknowledged that remunerative steps ( in the form of more stock options ) would have to be taken to redress the animosity of many Enron employees for management after it was revealed that Lay and other officials had sold hundreds of millions of dollars ' worth of stock during the months prior to the crisis . The situation was not helped by the disclosure that Lay , his " reputation in tatters " , stood to receive a payment of $ 60 million as a change @-@ of @-@ control fee subsequent to the Dynegy acquisition , while many Enron employees had seen their retirement accounts , which were based largely on Enron stock , ravaged as the price decreased 90 % in a year . An official at a company owned by Enron stated " We had some married couples who both worked who lost as much as $ 800 @,@ 000 or $ 900 @,@ 000 . It pretty much wiped out every employee 's savings plan . " 
 Watson assured investors that the true nature of Enron 's business had been made apparent to him : " We have comfort there is not another shoe to drop . If there is no shoe , this is a phenomenally good transaction . " Watson further asserted that Enron 's energy trading part alone was worth the price Dynegy was paying for the whole company . 
 By mid @-@ November , Enron announced it was planning to sell about $ 8 billion worth of underperforming assets , along with a general plan to reduce its scale for the sake of financial stability . On November 19 Enron disclosed to the public further evidence of its critical state of affairs . Most <unk> that the company had debt repayment obligations in the range of $ 9 billion by the end of 2002 . Such debts were " vastly in excess " of its available cash . Also , the success of measures to preserve its solvency were not guaranteed , specifically as regarded asset sales and debt refinancing . In a statement , Enron revealed " An adverse outcome with respect to any of these matters would likely have a material adverse impact on Enron 's ability to continue as a going concern . " 
 Two days later , on November 21 , Wall Street expressed serious doubts that Dynegy would proceed with its deal at all , or would seek to radically renegotiate . Furthermore , Enron revealed in a 10 @-@ Q filing that almost all the money it had recently borrowed for purposes including buying its commercial paper , or about $ 5 billion , had been exhausted in just 50 days . Analysts were unnerved at the revelation , especially since Dynegy was reported to have also been unaware of Enron 's rate of cash use . In order to end the proposed buyout , Dynegy would need to legally demonstrate a " material change " in the circumstances of the transaction ; as late as November 22 , sources close to Dynegy were skeptical that the latest revelations constituted sufficient grounds . 
 The SEC announced it had filed civil fraud complaints against Andersen . A few days later , sources claimed Enron and Dynegy were renegotiating the terms of their arrangement . Dynegy now demanded Enron agree to be bought for $ 4 billion rather than the previous $ 8 billion . Observers were reporting difficulties in ascertaining which of Enron 's operations , if any , were profitable . Reports described an en masse shift of business to Enron 's competitors for the sake of risk exposure reduction . 
 = = = Bankruptcy = = = 
 On November 28 , 2001 , Enron 's two worst @-@ possible outcomes came true : Dynegy Inc. unilaterally disengaged from the proposed acquisition of the company , and Enron 's credit rating was reduced to junk status . Watson later said " At the end , you couldn 't give it [ Enron ] to me . " The company had very little cash with which to operate , let alone satisfy enormous debts . Its stock price fell to $ 0 @.@ 61 at the end of the day 's trading . One editorial observer wrote that " Enron is now shorthand for the perfect financial storm . " 
 Systemic consequences were felt , as Enron 's creditors and other energy trading companies suffered the loss of several percentage points . Some analysts felt Enron 's failure indicated the risks of the post @-@ September 11 economy , and encouraged traders to lock in profits where they could . The question now became how to determine the total exposure of the markets and other traders to Enron 's failure . Early calculations estimated $ 18 @.@ 7 billion . One adviser stated , " We don 't really know who is out there exposed to Enron 's credit . I 'm telling my clients to prepare for the worst . " 
 Enron was estimated to have about $ 23 billion in liabilities from both debt outstanding and guaranteed loans . Citigroup and JP Morgan Chase in particular appeared to have significant amounts to lose with Enron 's bankruptcy . Additionally , many of Enron 's major assets were pledged to lenders in order to secure loans , causing doubt about what , if anything , unsecured creditors and eventually stockholders might receive in bankruptcy proceedings . 
 Enron 's European operations filed for bankruptcy on November 30 , 2001 , and it sought Chapter 11 protection two days later on December 2 . It was the largest bankruptcy in U.S. history ( before being surpassed by WorldCom 's bankruptcy the next year ) , and resulted in 4 @,@ 000 lost jobs . The day that Enron filed for bankruptcy , the employees were told to pack their belongings and were given 30 minutes to vacate the building . Nearly 62 % of 15 @,@ 000 employees ' savings plans relied on Enron stock that was purchased at $ 83 in early 2001 and was now practically worthless . 
 On January 17 , 2002 , Enron dismissed Arthur Andersen as its auditor , citing its accounting advice and the destruction of documents . Andersen countered that it had already ended its relationship with the company when Enron became bankrupt . 
 = = Trials = = 
 = = = Enron = = = 
 Fastow and his wife , Lea , both pleaded guilty to charges against them . Fastow was initially charged with 98 counts of fraud , money laundering , insider trading , and conspiracy , among other crimes . Fastow pleaded guilty to two charges of conspiracy and was sentenced to ten years with no parole in a plea bargain to testify against Lay , Skilling , and Causey . Lea was indicted on six felony counts , but prosecutors later dismissed them in favor of a single misdemeanor tax charge . Lea was sentenced to one year for helping her husband hide income from the government . 
 Lay and Skilling went on trial for their part in the Enron scandal in January 2006 . The 53 @-@ count , 65 @-@ page indictment covers a broad range of financial crimes , including bank fraud , making false statements to banks and auditors , securities fraud , wire fraud , money laundering , conspiracy , and insider trading . United States District Judge Sim Lake had previously denied motions by the defendants to have separate trials and to relocate the case out of Houston , where the defendants argued the negative publicity concerning Enron 's demise would make it impossible to get a fair trial . On May 25 , 2006 , the jury in the Lay and Skilling trial returned its verdicts . Skilling was convicted of 19 of 28 counts of securities fraud and wire fraud and acquitted on the remaining nine , including charges of insider trading . He was sentenced to 24 years and 4 months in prison . In 2013 the United States Department of Justice reached a deal with Skilling , which resulted in ten years being cut from his sentence . 
 Lay pleaded not guilty to the eleven criminal charges , and claimed that he was misled by those around him . He attributed the main cause for the company 's demise to Fastow . Lay was convicted of all six counts of securities and wire fraud for which he had been tried , and he was subject to a maximum total sentence of 45 years in prison . However , before sentencing was scheduled , Lay died on July 5 , 2006 . At the time of his death , the SEC had been seeking more than $ 90 million from Lay in addition to civil fines . The case of Lay 's wife , Linda , is a difficult one . She sold roughly 500 @,@ 000 shares of Enron ten minutes to thirty minutes before the information that Enron was collapsing went public on November 28 , 2001 . Linda was never charged with any of the events related to Enron . 
 Although Michael Kopper worked at Enron for more than seven years , Lay did not know of Kopper even after the company 's bankruptcy . Kopper was able to keep his name anonymous in the entire affair . Kopper was the first Enron executive to plead guilty . Chief Accounting Officer Rick Causey was indicted with six felony charges for disguising Enron 's financial condition during his tenure . After pleading not guilty , he later switched to guilty and was sentenced to seven years in prison . 
 All told , sixteen people pleaded guilty for crimes committed at the company , and five others , including four former Merrill Lynch employees , were found guilty . Eight former Enron executives testified — the main witness being Fastow — against Lay and Skilling , his former bosses . Another was Kenneth Rice , the former chief of Enron Corp. ' s high @-@ speed Internet unit , who cooperated and whose testimony helped convict Skilling and Lay . In June 2007 , he received a 27 @-@ month sentence . 
 Michael W. <unk> , a former Enron accountant , was among the accused who was acquitted of charges related to the scandal . Represented by Barry Pollack , <unk> was acquitted of federal criminal fraud charges after a month @-@ long jury trial . 
 = = = Arthur Andersen = = = 
 Arthur Andersen was charged with and found guilty of obstruction of justice for shredding the thousands of documents and deleting e @-@ mails and company files that tied the firm to its audit of Enron . Although only a small number of Arthur Andersen 's employees were involved with the scandal , the firm was effectively put out of business ; the SEC is not allowed to accept audits from convicted felons . The company surrendered its CPA license on August 31 , 2002 , and 85 @,@ 000 employees lost their jobs . The conviction was later overturned by the U.S. Supreme Court due to the jury not being properly instructed on the charge against Andersen . The Supreme Court ruling theoretically left Andersen free to resume operations . However , the damage to the Andersen name has been so great that it has not returned as a viable business even on a limited scale . 
 = = = NatWest Three = = = 
 Giles Darby , David Bermingham , and Gary Mulgrew worked for Greenwich NatWest . The three British men had worked with Fastow on a special purpose entity he had started called Swap Sub . When Fastow was being investigated by the SEC , the three men met with the British Financial Services Authority ( FSA ) in November 2001 to discuss their interactions with Fastow . In June 2002 , the U.S. issued warrants for their arrest on seven counts of wire fraud , and they were then extradited . On July 12 , a potential Enron witness scheduled to be extradited to the U.S. , Neil Coulbeck , was found dead in a park in north @-@ east London . Coulbeck 's death was eventually ruled to have been a suicide . The U.S. case alleged that Coulbeck and others conspired with Fastow . In a plea bargain in November 2007 , the trio plead guilty to one count of wire fraud while the other six counts were dismissed . Darby , Bermingham , and Mulgrew were each sentenced to 37 months in prison . In August 2010 , Bermingham and Mulgrew retracted their confessions . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Employees and shareholders = = = 
 Enron 's shareholders lost $ 74 billion in the four years before the company 's bankruptcy ( $ 40 to $ 45 billion was attributed to fraud ) . As Enron had nearly $ 67 billion that it owed creditors , employees and shareholders received limited , if any , assistance aside from severance from Enron . To pay its creditors , Enron held auctions to sell assets including art , photographs , logo signs , and its pipelines . 
 In May 2004 , more than 20 @,@ 000 of Enron 's former employees won a suit of $ 85 million for compensation of $ 2 billion that was lost from their pensions . From the settlement , the employees each received about $ 3 @,@ 100 . The next year , investors received another settlement from several banks of $ 4 @.@ 2 billion . In September 2008 , a $ 7 @.@ 2 @-@ billion settlement from a $ 40 @-@ billion lawsuit , was reached on behalf of the shareholders . The settlement was distributed among the main plaintiff , University of California ( UC ) , and 1 @.@ 5 million individuals and groups . UC 's law firm Coughlin <unk> Geller Rudman and Robbins , received $ 688 million in fees , the highest in a U.S. securities fraud case . At the distribution , UC announced in a press release " We are extremely pleased to be returning these funds to the members of the class . Getting here has required a long , challenging effort , but the results for Enron investors are unprecedented . " 
 = = = Sarbanes @-@ Oxley Act = = = 
 Between December 2001 and April 2002 , the Senate Committee on Banking , Housing , and Urban Affairs and the House Committee on Financial Services held multiple hearings about the Enron scandal and related accounting and investor protection issues . These hearings and the corporate scandals that followed Enron led to the passage of the Sarbanes @-@ Oxley Act on July 30 , 2002 . The Act is nearly " a mirror image of Enron : the company 's perceived corporate governance failings are matched virtually point for point in the principal provisions of the Act . " 
 The main provisions of the Sarbanes @-@ Oxley Act included the establishment of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board to develop standards for the preparation of audit reports ; the restriction of public accounting companies from providing any non @-@ auditing services when auditing ; provisions for the independence of audit committee members , executives being required to sign off on financial reports , and relinquishment of certain executives ' bonuses in case of financial restatements ; and expanded financial disclosure of companies ' relationships with unconsolidated entities . 
 On February 13 , 2002 , due to the instances of corporate <unk> and accounting violations , the SEC recommended changes of the stock exchanges ' regulations . In June 2002 , the New York Stock Exchange announced a new governance proposal , which was approved by the SEC in November 2003 . The main provisions of the final NYSE proposal include : 
 All companies must have a majority of independent directors . 
 Independent directors must comply with an elaborate definition of independent directors . 
 The compensation committee , nominating committee , and audit committee shall consist of independent directors . 
 All audit committee members should be financially literate . In addition , at least one member of the audit committee is required to have accounting or related financial management expertise . 
 In addition to its regular sessions , the board should hold additional sessions without management . 
 = Furniture & Meat = 
 " Furniture & Meat " is the eighth episode of the sixth season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written by Cole Sanchez and Andy Ristaino from a story by Kent Osborne , Pendleton Ward , Jack Pendarvis and Adam Muto . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adopted brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , BMO ( voiced by Niki Yang ) — concerned that Finn and Jake 's hoard of gold is threatening the structural integrity of their treehouse — talks Finn into spending the money in Wildberry Kingdom . 
 The episode was viewed by 1 @.@ 9 million viewers , and ranked as the 52nd most @-@ watched cable show on the day of its airing . Many reviews complimented the humor and tone of the episode , and Jason Krell of io9 Animation appreciated the return of the Ancient Psychic Tandem War Elephant . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Outside their tree house , Finn and Jake snooze , while BMO ( Niki Yang ) and N.E.P.T.R. ( Andy Milonakis ) play out a spoof of Robin Hood and the Sheriff of Nottingham . The two break open Finn and Jake 's treasure room , pouring their massive stash of gold out into the yard , as well as the Ancient Psychic Tandem War Elephant ( Steve Agee ) . BMO talks Finn into spending the money at an expensive resort at Wildberry Kingdom . When they arrive in the town square , Jake unloads their treasure into the city 's fountain . A guard scolds them for this , but they bribe him with a few shillings and a crown , freeing them from the law . Chaos follows shortly after Jake uses wealth to control the residents . When they disrespect her authority , Wildberry Princess ( Maria Bamford ) orders Finn and Jake to be arrested and for their money to be seized and melted down . Her punishment is for them to be covered in the molten gold , but BMO and N.E.P.T.R. arrive just in time and save the two . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Furniture & Meat " was written and storyboarded by Cole Sanchez and Andy Ristaino . It was adapted from a story by Kent Osborne , Jack Pendarvis , Adam Muto , and series creator Pendleton Ward . Like most episodes of the season , the episode was produced in approximately nine months . Muto , Osborne and Pendarvis crafted a two @-@ page outline , which was then sent to Sanchez and Ristaino for storyboarding in the course of two weeks ( Sanchez and Ristaino are one out of four main storyboarding teams for the series ) . The final storyboard was drafted on December 17 , 2013 . Stamped with the production code " 1025 @-@ 171 " , the storyboard was then sent back to Osborne , for any final feedback , and to the network , for any final notes . The network approved it three weeks later . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Furniture & Meat " first aired in the United States on June 19 , 2014 , on Cartoon Network . The episode was watched by 1 @.@ 9 million viewers , receiving a Nielsen rating of 0 @.@ 4 for adults in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . It was 52nd most @-@ watched television episode on the date of its airing , according to TV by the Numbers . 
 For io9 Animation , Jason Krell called it " pretty solid " , albeit lacking in relation to the season 's story arc . In his " additional musings " section , he hoped that the war elephant will make a " more meaningful " return , while questioning why nobody in the episode commented on the return of Finn 's arm from " Breezy " . Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club gave it a B + , referring it as a throwback to early episodes of the show where specific lessons were taught without dealing with the serial elements of surrounding episodes . He wrote that , while " not quite as substantial as recent installments , it 's still very entertaining " . Ryley Trahan of the online Entertainment Weekly praised the use of Ward 's " best , most subversive humor " , calling it a " great one @-@ shot look " into the main duo 's mischief ; in the print publication , Ray Rahman summarized , " it 's never too early to start saving , kids " . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 The episode first saw physical release on the Finn the Human DVD set on November 25 , 2014 , containing 16 episodes from assorted seasons . In Geek Smash , Colin O 'Boyle considered it one of many " great " episodes included in the release . 
 = COBOL = 
 COBOL ( / <unk> / , an acronym for common business @-@ oriented language ) is a compiled English @-@ like computer programming language designed for business use . It is imperative , procedural and , since 2002 , object @-@ oriented . COBOL is primarily used in business , finance , and administrative systems for companies and governments . COBOL is still widely used in legacy applications deployed on mainframe computers , such as large @-@ scale batch and transaction processing jobs . But due to its declining popularity and the retirement of experienced COBOL programmers , programs are being migrated to new platforms , rewritten in modern languages or replaced with software packages . Most programming in COBOL is now purely to maintain existing applications . 
 COBOL was designed in 1959 , by CODASYL and was partly based on previous programming language design work by Grace Hopper , commonly referred to as " the ( grand ) mother of COBOL " . It was created as part of a US Department of Defense effort to create a portable programming language for data processing . Intended as a stopgap , the Department of Defense promptly forced computer manufacturers to provide it , resulting in its widespread adoption . It was standardized in 1968 and has since been revised four times . Expansions include support for structured and object @-@ oriented programming . The current standard is ISO / IEC 1989 : 2014 . 
 COBOL has an English @-@ like syntax , which was designed to be self @-@ documenting and highly readable . However , it is verbose and uses over 300 reserved words . In contrast with modern , succinct syntax like y = x ; , COBOL has a more English @-@ like syntax ( in this case , MOVE x TO y ) . COBOL code is split into four divisions ( identification , environment , data and procedure ) containing a rigid hierarchy of sections , paragraphs and sentences . Lacking a large standard library , the standard specifies 43 statements , 87 functions and just one class . 
 Academic computer scientists were generally uninterested in business applications when COBOL was created and were not involved in its design ; it was ( effectively ) designed from the ground up as a computer language for businessmen , with an emphasis on inputs and outputs , whose only data types were numbers and strings of text . COBOL has been criticized throughout its life , however , for its verbosity , design process and poor support for structured programming , which resulted in monolithic and incomprehensible programs . 
 = = History and specification = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In the late 1950s , computer users and manufacturers were becoming concerned about the rising cost of programming . A 1959 survey had found that in any data processing installation , the programming cost US $ 800 @,@ 000 on average and that translating programs to run on new hardware would cost $ 600 @,@ 000 . At a time when new programming languages were proliferating at an ever increasing rate , the same survey suggested that if a common business @-@ oriented language were used , conversion would be far cheaper and faster . 
 In April 1959 , representatives from academia , computer users and manufacturers met at the University of Pennsylvania to organize a formal meeting on common business languages . Representatives among others , included Grace Hopper , inventor of the English @-@ like data processing language FLOW @-@ MATIC , Jean Sammet and Saul Gorn . 
 The group asked the Department of Defense ( DoD ) to sponsor an effort to create a common business language . The delegation impressed Charles A. Phillips , director of the Data System Research Staff at the DoD , who thought that they " thoroughly understood " the DoD 's problems . The DoD operated 225 computers , had a further 175 on order and had spent over $ 200 million on implementing programs to run on them . Portable programs would save time , reduce costs and ease modernization . 
 Phillips agreed to sponsor the meeting and tasked the delegation with drafting the agenda . 
 = = = COBOL 60 = = = 
 On May 28 and 29 of 1959 ( exactly one year after the Zürich ALGOL 58 meeting ) , a meeting was held at the Pentagon to discuss the creation of a common programming language for business . It was attended by 41 people and was chaired by Phillips . The Department of Defense was concerned about whether it could run the same data processing programs on different computers . <unk> , the only mainstream language at the time , lacked the features needed to write such programs . 
 Representatives enthusiastically described a language that could work in a wide variety of environments , from banking and insurance to utilities and inventory control . They agreed unanimously that more people should be able to program and that the new language should not be restricted by the limitations of contemporary technology . A majority agreed that the language should make maximal use of English , be capable of change , be machine @-@ independent and be easy to use , even at the expense of power . 
 The meeting resulted in the creation of a steering committee and short- , <unk> and long @-@ range committees . The short @-@ range committee was given to September ( three months ) to produce specifications for an interim language , which would then be improved upon by the other committees . Their official mission , however , was to identify the strengths and weaknesses of existing programming languages and did not explicitly direct them to create a new language . The deadline was met with disbelief by the short @-@ range committee . One member , Betty <unk> , described the three @-@ month deadline as " gross optimism " and doubted that the language really would be a stopgap . 
 The steering committee met on June 4 and agreed to name the entire activity as the Committee on Data Systems Languages , or CODASYL , and to form an executive committee . 
 The short @-@ range committee was made up of members representing six computer manufacturers and three government agencies . The six computer manufacturers were Burroughs Corporation , IBM , Minneapolis @-@ Honeywell ( Honeywell Labs ) , RCA , Sperry Rand , and Sylvania Electric Products . The three government agencies were the US Air Force , the Navy 's David Taylor Model Basin , and the National Bureau of Standards ( now the National Institute of Standards and Technology ) . The committee was chaired by Joseph <unk> of the US National Bureau of Standards . Work began by investigating data description , statements , existing applications and user experiences . 
 The committee mainly examined the FLOW @-@ MATIC , <unk> and COMTRAN programming languages . The FLOW @-@ MATIC language was particularly influential because it had been implemented and because <unk> was a derivative of it with only minor changes . FLOW @-@ MATIC 's inventor , Grace Hopper , also served as a technical adviser to the committee . FLOW @-@ MATIC 's major contributions to COBOL were long variable names , English words for commands and the separation of data descriptions and instructions . 
 IBM 's COMTRAN language , invented by Bob Bemer , was regarded as a competitor to FLOW @-@ MATIC by a short @-@ range committee made up of colleagues of Grace Hopper . Some of its features were not incorporated into COBOL so that it would not look like IBM had dominated the design process , and Jean Sammet said in 1981 that there had been a " strong anti @-@ IBM bias " from some committee members ( herself included ) . In one case , after Roy Goldfinger , author of the COMTRAN manual and intermediate @-@ range committee member , attended a subcommittee meeting to support his language and encourage the use of algebraic expressions , Grace Hopper sent a memo to the short @-@ range committee reiterating Sperry Rand 's efforts to create a language based on English . In 1980 , Grace Hopper commented that " COBOL 60 is 95 % FLOW @-@ MATIC " and that COMTRAN had had an " extremely small " influence . Furthermore , she said that she would claim that work was influenced by both FLOW @-@ MATIC and COMTRAN only to " keep other people happy [ so they ] wouldn 't try to knock us out " . Features from COMTRAN incorporated into COBOL included formulas , the PICTURE clause , an improved IF statement , which obviated the need for GO TOs , and a more robust file management system . 
 The usefulness of the committee 's work was subject of great debate . While some members thought the language had too many compromises and was the result of design by committee , others felt it was better than the three languages examined . Some felt the language was too complex ; others , too simple . Controversial features included those some considered useless or too advanced for data processing users . Such features included boolean expressions , formulas and table subscripts ( indices ) . Another point of controversy was whether to make keywords context @-@ sensitive and the effect that would have on readability . Although context @-@ sensitive keywords were rejected , the approach was later used in PL / I and partially in COBOL from 2002 . Little consideration was given to interactivity , interaction with operating systems ( few existed at that time ) and functions ( thought of as purely mathematical and of no use in data processing ) . 
 The specifications were presented to the Executive Committee on September 4 . They fell short of expectations : Joseph <unk> noted that " it contains rough spots and requires some additions " , and Bob Bemer later described them as a " hodgepodge " . The subcommittee was given until December to improve it . 
 At a mid @-@ September meeting , the committee discussed the new language 's name . Suggestions included " <unk> " ( Business System ) , " <unk> " ( Information System Language ) and " <unk> " ( Common Computer Systems Language ) . The name " COBOL " was suggested by Bob Bemer . 
 In October , the intermediate @-@ range committee received copies of the FACT language specification created by Roy Nutt . Its features impressed the committee so much that they passed a resolution to base COBOL on it . This was a blow to the short @-@ range committee , who had made good progress on the specification . Despite being technically superior , FACT had not been created with portability in mind or through manufacturer and user consensus . It also lacked a demonstrable implementation , allowing supporters of a FLOW @-@ MATIC @-@ based COBOL to overturn the resolution . RCA representative Howard Bromberg also blocked FACT , so that RCA 's work on a COBOL implementation would not go to waste . 
 It soon became apparent that the committee was too large for any further progress to be made quickly . A frustrated Howard Bromberg bought a $ 15 tombstone with " COBOL " engraved on it and sent it to Charles Phillips to demonstrate his displeasure . A sub @-@ committee was formed to analyze existing languages and was made up of six individuals : 
 William Selden and Gertrude Tierney of IBM , 
 Howard Bromberg and Howard Discount of RCA , 
 Vernon Reeves and Jean E. Sammet of Sylvania Electric Products . 
 The sub @-@ committee did most of the work creating the specification , leaving the short @-@ range committee to review and modify their work before producing the finished specification . 
 The specifications were approved by the Executive Committee on January 3 , 1960 , and sent to the government printing office , which printed these as COBOL 60 . The language 's stated objectives were to allow efficient , portable programs to be easily written , to allow users to move to new systems with minimal effort and cost , and to be suitable for inexperienced programmers . The CODASYL Executive Committee later created the COBOL Maintenance Committee to answer questions from users and vendors and to improve and expand the specifications . 
 During 1960 , the list of manufacturers planning to build COBOL compilers grew . By September , five more manufacturers had joined CODASYL ( Bendix , Control Data Corporation , General Electric ( GE ) , National Cash Register and Philco ) , and all represented manufacturers had announced COBOL compilers . GE and IBM planned to integrate COBOL into their own languages , <unk> and COMTRAN , respectively . In contrast , International Computers and <unk> planned to replace their language , <unk> , with COBOL . 
 Meanwhile , RCA and Sperry Rand worked on creating COBOL compilers . The first COBOL program ran on 17 August on an RCA 501 . On December 6 and 7 , the same COBOL program ( albeit with minor changes ) ran on an RCA computer and a Remington @-@ Rand <unk> computer , demonstrating that compatibility could be achieved . 
 The relative influences of which languages were used continues to this day in the recommended advisory printed in all COBOL reference manuals : 
 COBOL is an industry language and is not the property of any company or group of companies , or of any organization or group of organizations . 
 No warranty , expressed or implied , is made by any contributor or by the CODASYL COBOL Committee as to the accuracy and functioning of the programming system and language . Moreover , no responsibility is assumed by any contributor , or by the committee , in connection therewith . The authors and copyright holders of the copyrighted material used herein are as follows : 
 FLOW @-@ MATIC ( trademark of Unisys Corporation ) , Programming for the UNIVAC ( R ) I and II , Data Automation Systems , copyrighted 1958 , 1959 , by Unisys Corporation ; IBM Commercial Translator Form No . F28 @-@ <unk> , copyrighted 1959 by IBM ; FACT , DSI <unk> @-@ <unk> , copyrighted 1960 by Minneapolis @-@ Honeywell . 
 They have specifically authorized the use of this material , in whole or in part , in the COBOL specifications . Such authorization extends to the reproduction and use of COBOL specifications in programming manuals or similar publications . 
 = = = COBOL @-@ 61 to COBOL @-@ 65 = = = 
 Many logical flaws were found in COBOL 60 , leading GE 's Charles Katz to warn that it could not be interpreted unambiguously . A reluctant short @-@ term committee enacted a total cleanup and , by March 1963 , it was reported that COBOL 's syntax was as definable as ALGOL 's , although semantic ambiguities remained . 
 Early COBOL compilers were primitive and slow . A 1962 US Navy evaluation found compilation speeds of 3 – 11 statements per minute . By mid @-@ 1964 , they had increased to 11 – 1000 statements per minute . It was observed that increasing memory would drastically increase speed and that compilation costs varied wildly : costs per statement were between $ 0 @.@ 23 and $ 18 @.@ 91 . 
 In late 1962 , IBM announced that COBOL would be their primary development language and that development of COMTRAN would cease . 
 The COBOL specification was revised three times in the five years after its publication . COBOL @-@ 60 was replaced in 1961 by COBOL @-@ 61 . This was then replaced by the COBOL @-@ 61 Extended specifications in 1963 , which introduced the sort and report writer facilities . The added facilities corrected flaws identified by Honeywell in late 1959 in a letter to the short @-@ range committee . COBOL Edition 1965 brought further clarifications to the specifications and introduced facilities for handling mass storage files and tables . 
 = = = COBOL @-@ 68 = = = 
 Efforts began to standardize COBOL to overcome incompatibilities between versions . In late 1962 , both ISO and the United States of America Standards Institute ( now ANSI ) formed groups to create standards . ANSI produced USA Standard COBOL <unk> in August 1968 , which became the cornerstone for later versions . This version was known as American National Standard ( ANS ) COBOL and was adopted by ISO in 1972 . 
 = = = COBOL @-@ 74 = = = 
 By 1970 , COBOL had become the most widely used programming language in the world . 
 Independently of the ANSI committee , the CODASYL Programming Language Committee was working on improving the language . They described new versions in 1968 , 1969 , 1970 and 1973 , including changes such as new inter @-@ program communication , debugging and file merging facilities as well as improved string @-@ handling and library inclusion features . Although CODASYL was independent of the ANSI committee , the CODASYL Journal of Development was used by ANSI to identify features that were popular enough to warrant implementing . The Programming Language Committee also liaised with <unk> and the Japanese COBOL Standard committee . 
 The Programming Language Committee was not well @-@ known , however . The vice @-@ president , William <unk> , complained that two @-@ thirds of the COBOL community did not know of the committee 's existence . It was also poor , lacking the funds to make public documents , such as minutes of meetings and change proposals , freely available . 
 In 1974 , ANSI published a revised version of ( ANS ) COBOL , containing new features such as file organizations , the <unk> statement and the segmentation module . Deleted features included the NOTE statement , the <unk> statement ( which was replaced by <unk> ) and the <unk> @-@ defined random access module ( which was superseded by the new sequential and relative I / O modules ) . These made up 44 changes , which rendered existing statements incompatible with the new standard . The report writer was slated to be removed from COBOL , but was reinstated before the standard was published . ISO later adopted the updated standard in 1978 . 
 = = = COBOL @-@ 85 = = = 
 In June 1978 , work began on revising COBOL @-@ 74 . The proposed standard ( commonly called COBOL @-@ 80 ) differed significantly from the previous one , causing concerns about incompatibility and conversion costs . In January 1981 , Joseph T. Brophy , Senior Vice @-@ President of Travelers Insurance , threatened to sue the standard committee because it was not upwards compatible with COBOL @-@ 74 . Mr. Brophy described previous conversions of their 40 @-@ million @-@ line code base as " non @-@ productive " and a " complete waste of our programmer resources " . Later that year , the Data Processing Management Association ( <unk> ) said it was " strongly opposed " to the new standard , citing " prohibitive " conversion costs and enhancements that were " forced on the user " . 
 During the first public review period , the committee received 2 @,@ 200 responses , of which 1 @,@ 700 were negative form letters . Other responses were detailed analyses of the effect COBOL @-@ 80 would have on their systems ; conversion costs were predicted to be at least 50 cents per line of code . Fewer than a dozen of the responses were in favor of the proposed standard . 
 In 1983 , the <unk> withdrew its opposition to the standard , citing the responsiveness of the committee to public concerns . In the same year , a National Bureau of Standards study concluded that the proposed standard would present few problems . A year later , a COBOL @-@ 80 compiler was released to DEC VAX users , who noted that conversion of COBOL @-@ 74 programs posed few problems . The new EVALUATE statement and inline PERFORM were particularly well received and improved productivity , thanks to simplified control flow and debugging . 
 The second public review drew another 1 @,@ 000 ( mainly negative ) responses , while the last drew just 25 , by which time many concerns had been addressed . 
 In late 1985 , ANSI published the revised standard . Sixty features were changed or deprecated and many were added , such as : 
 Scope <unk> ( END @-@ IF , END @-@ PERFORM , END @-@ READ , etc . ) 
 Nested subprograms 
 <unk> , a no @-@ operation statement 
 EVALUATE , a switch statement 
 <unk> , a statement that can set groups of data to their default values 
 Inline PERFORM loop bodies – previously , loop bodies had to be specified in a separate procedure 
 Reference modification , which allows access to substrings 
 I / O status codes . 
 The standard was adopted by ISO the same year . Two amendments followed in 1989 and 1993 , the first introducing intrinsic functions and the other providing corrections . ISO adopted the amendments in 1991 and 1994 respectively , before subsequently taking primary ownership and development of the standard . 
 = = = COBOL 2002 and object @-@ oriented COBOL = = = 
 In 1997 , Gartner Group estimated that there were a total of 200 billion lines of COBOL in existence , which ran 80 % of all business programs . 
 In the early 1990s , work began on adding object @-@ orientation in the next full revision of COBOL . Object @-@ oriented features were taken from C + + and <unk> . The initial estimate was to have this revision completed by 1997 , and an ISO Committee Draft ( CD ) was available by 1997 . Some vendors ( including Micro Focus , Fujitsu , and IBM ) introduced object @-@ oriented syntax based on drafts of the full revision . The final approved ISO standard was approved and published in late 2002 . 
 Fujitsu / <unk> , Micro Focus and <unk> introduced object @-@ oriented COBOL compilers targeting the .NET Framework . 
 There were many other new features , many of which had been in the CODASYL COBOL Journal of Development since 1978 and had missed the opportunity to be included in COBOL @-@ 85 . These other features included : 
 Free @-@ form code 
 User @-@ defined functions 
 Recursion 
 Locale @-@ based processing 
 Support for extended character sets such as Unicode 
 Floating @-@ point and binary data types ( until then , binary items were truncated based on their declaration 's base @-@ 10 specification ) 
 Portable arithmetic results 
 Bit and boolean data types 
 Pointers and syntax for getting and freeing storage 
 The SCREEN <unk> for text @-@ based user interfaces 
 The VALIDATE facility 
 Improved interoperability with other programming languages and framework environments such as .NET and Java . 
 Three <unk> were published for the standard : two in 2006 and one in 2009 . 
 = = = COBOL 2014 = = = 
 Between 2003 and 2009 , three technical reports were produced describing object finalization , XML processing and collection classes for COBOL . 
 COBOL 2002 suffered from poor support : no compilers completely supported the standard . Micro Focus found that it was due to a lack of user demand for the new features and due to the abolition of the NIST test suite , which had been used to test compiler conformance . The standardization process was also found to be slow and under @-@ resourced . 
 COBOL 2014 includes the following changes : 
 Portable arithmetic results have been replaced by IEEE 754 data types 
 Major features have been made optional , such as the VALIDATE facility , the report writer and the screen @-@ handling facility . 
 Method overloading 
 Dynamic capacity tables ( a feature dropped from the draft of COBOL 2002 ) 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 COBOL programs are used globally in governments and businesses and are running on diverse operating systems such as z / OS , VME , Unix , OpenVMS and Windows . In 1997 , the Gartner Group reported that 80 % of the world 's business ran on COBOL with over 200 billion lines of code and 5 billion lines more being written annually . 
 Near the end of the 20th century , the year 2000 problem ( Y2K ) was the focus of significant COBOL programming effort , sometimes by the same programmers who had designed the systems decades before . The particular level of effort required to correct COBOL code has been attributed to the large amount of business @-@ oriented COBOL , as business applications use dates heavily , and to fixed @-@ length data fields . After the clean @-@ up effort put into these programs for Y2K , a 2003 survey found that many remained in use . The authors said that the survey data suggest " a gradual decline in the importance of <unk> in application development over the [ following ] 10 years unless ... integration with other languages and technologies can be adopted " . 
 In 2006 and 2012 , Computerworld surveys found that over 60 % of organizations used COBOL ( more than C + + and Visual Basic .NET ) and that for half of those , COBOL was used for the majority of their internal software . 36 % of managers said they planned to migrate from COBOL , and 25 % said they would like to if it was cheaper . Instead , some businesses have migrated their systems from expensive mainframes to cheaper , more modern systems , while maintaining their COBOL programs . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Syntax = = = 
 COBOL has an English @-@ like syntax , which is used to describe nearly everything in a program . For example , a condition can be expressed as x IS GREATER <unk> y or more concisely as x GREATER y or x > y . More complex conditions can be " abbreviated " by removing repeated conditions and variables . For example , a > b AND a > c OR a 
 = d can be shortened to a > b AND c OR = 
 d . As a consequence of this English @-@ like syntax , COBOL has over 300 keywords . Some of the keywords are simple alternative or pluralized spellings of the same word , which provides for more English @-@ like statements and clauses ; e.g. , the IN and OF keywords can be used interchangeably , as can IS and ARE , and <unk> and <unk> . 
 Each COBOL program is made up of four basic lexical items : words , literals , picture character @-@ strings ( see § PICTURE clause ) and separators . Words include reserved words and user @-@ defined identifiers . They are up to 31 characters long and may include letters , digits , hyphens and underscores . <unk> include numerals ( e.g. 12 ) and strings ( e.g. ' Hello ! ' ) . <unk> include the space character and commas and semi @-@ colons followed by a space . 
 A COBOL program is split into four divisions : the identification division , the environment division , the data division and the procedure division . The identification division specifies the name and type of the source element and is where classes and interfaces are specified . The environment division specifies any program features that depend on the system running it , such as files and character sets . The data division is used to declare variables and parameters . The procedure division contains the program 's statements . Each division is sub @-@ divided into sections , which are made up of paragraphs . 
 = = = Code format = = = 
 COBOL can be written in two formats : fixed ( the default ) or free . In fixed @-@ format , code must be aligned to fit in certain areas . Until COBOL 2002 , these were : 
 In COBOL 2002 , Areas A and B were merged and extended to column 255 , and the program name area was removed . 
 COBOL 2002 also introduced free @-@ format code . Free @-@ format code can be placed in any column of the file , as in newer programming languages . Comments are specified using * > , which can be placed anywhere and can also be used in fixed @-@ format source code . Continuation lines are not present , and the > > PAGE directive replaces the / indicator . 
 = = = Identification division = = = 
 The identification division identifies the following code entity and contains the definition of a class or interface . 
 = = = = Object @-@ oriented programming = = = = 
 Classes and interfaces have been in COBOL since 2002 . Classes have factory objects , containing class methods and variables , and instance objects , containing instance methods and variables . Inheritance and interfaces provide polymorphism . Support for generic programming is provided through parameterized classes , which can be instantiated to use any class or interface . Objects are stored as references which may be restricted to a certain type . There are two ways of calling a method : the <unk> statement , which acts similarly to <unk> , or through inline method invocation , which is analogous to using functions . 
 COBOL does not provide a way to hide methods . Class data can be hidden , however , by declaring it without a <unk> clause , which leaves the user with no way to access it . Method overloading was added in COBOL 2014 . 
 = = = Environment division = = = 
 The environment division contains the configuration section and the input @-@ output section . The configuration section is used to specify variable features such as currency signs , locales and character sets . The input @-@ output section contains file @-@ related information . 
 = = = = Files = = = = 
 COBOL supports three file formats , or organizations : sequential , indexed and relative . In sequential files , records are contiguous and must be traversed sequentially , similarly to a linked list . Indexed files have one or more indexes which allow records to be randomly accessed and which can be sorted on them . Each record must have a unique key , but other , alternate , record keys need not be unique . Implementations of indexed files vary between vendors , although common implementations , such as C ‑ ISAM and <unk> , are based on IBM 's ISAM . Relative files , like indexed files , have a unique record key , but they do not have alternate keys . A relative record 's key is its ordinal position ; for example , the 10th record has a key of 10 . This means that creating a record with a key of 5 may require the creation of ( empty ) preceding records . Relative files also allow for both sequential and random access . 
 A common non @-@ standard extension is the line sequential organization , used to process text files . Records in a file are terminated by a <unk> and may be of varying length . 
 = = = Data division = = = 
 The data division is split into six sections which declare different items : the file section , for file records ; the working @-@ storage section , for static variables ; the local @-@ storage section , for automatic variables ; the linkage section , for parameters and the return value ; the report section and the screen section , for text @-@ based user interfaces . 
 = = = = <unk> data = = = = 
 Data items in COBOL are declared hierarchically through the use of level @-@ numbers which indicate if a data item is part of another . An item with a higher level @-@ number is subordinate to an item with a lower one . Top @-@ level data items , with a level @-@ number of 1 , are called records . Items that have subordinate aggregate data are called group items ; those that do not are called elementary items . Level @-@ numbers used to describe standard data items are between 1 and 49 . 
 In the above example , elementary item <unk> and group item the @-@ date are subordinate to the record some @-@ record , while elementary items the @-@ year , the @-@ month , and the @-@ day are part of the group item the @-@ date . 
 Subordinate items can be <unk> with the IN ( or OF ) keyword . For example , consider the example code above along with the following example : 
 The names the @-@ year , the @-@ month , and the @-@ day are ambiguous by themselves , since more than one data item is defined with those names . To specify a particular data item , for instance one of the items contained within the sale @-@ date group , the programmer would use the @-@ year IN sale @-@ date ( or the equivalent the @-@ year OF sale @-@ date ) . ( This syntax is similar to the " dot notation " supported by most contemporary languages . ) 
 = = = = Other data levels = = = = 
 A level @-@ number of 66 is used to declare a re @-@ grouping of previously defined items , irrespective of how those items are structured . This data level , also referred to by the associated <unk> clause , is rarely used and , circa 1988 , was usually found in old programs . Its ability to ignore the hierarchical and logical structure data meant its use was not recommended and many installations forbade its use . 
 A 77 level @-@ number indicates the item is stand @-@ alone , and in such situations is equivalent to the level @-@ number 01 . For example , the following code declares two 77 @-@ level data items , property @-@ name and sales @-@ region , which are non @-@ group data items that are independent of ( not subordinate to ) any other data items : 
 An 88 level @-@ number declares a condition name ( a so @-@ called 88 @-@ level ) which is true when its parent data item contains one of the values specified in it <unk> clause . For example , the following code defines two 88 @-@ level condition @-@ name items that are true or false depending on the current character data value of the wage @-@ type data item . When the data item contains a value of ' H ' , the condition @-@ name wage @-@ is @-@ hourly is true , whereas when it contains a value of ' S ' or ' Y ' , the condition @-@ name wage @-@ is @-@ yearly is true . If the data item contains some other value , both of the condition @-@ names are false . 
 = = = = Data types = = = = 
 Standard COBOL provides the following data types : 
 Type safety is variable in COBOL . <unk> data is converted between different representations and sizes silently and alphanumeric data can be placed in any data item that can be stored as a string , including numeric and group data . In contrast , object references and pointers may only be assigned from items of the same type and their values may be restricted to a certain type . 
 = = = = = PICTURE clause = = = = = 
