 Although he had wanted to complete 20 years of active duty service , due to medical and " psychological issues " , Petry decided to seek medical retirement . On 23 July 2014 , Petry was promoted to Master Sergeant and was awarded the Legion of Merit during his retirement ceremony . He was inducted into the Honorable Order of Saint Maurice . He officially retired from the United States Army on 29 July 2014 , after nearly 15 years of service . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 MSG Petry has received the following awards : 
 = = = Medal of Honor citation = = = 
 For conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty : 
 Staff Sergeant Leroy A. Petry distinguished himself by acts of gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty in action with an armed enemy in the vicinity of <unk> Province , Afghanistan , on 26 May 2008 . As a Weapons Squad Leader with D Company , 2nd Battalion , 75th Ranger Regiment , Staff Sergeant Petry moved to clear the courtyard of a house that potentially contained high @-@ value combatants . While crossing the courtyard , Staff Sergeant Petry and another Ranger were engaged and wounded by automatic weapons fire from enemy fighters . Still under enemy fire , and wounded in both legs , Staff Sergeant Petry led the other Ranger to cover . He then reported the situation and engaged the enemy with a hand grenade , providing suppression as another Ranger moved to his position . The enemy quickly responded by maneuvering closer and throwing grenades . The first grenade explosion knocked his two fellow Rangers to the ground and wounded both with shrapnel . A second grenade then landed only a few feet away from them . Instantly realizing the danger , Staff Sergeant Petry , unhesitatingly and with complete disregard for his safety , deliberately and selflessly moved forward , picked up the grenade , and in an effort to clear the immediate threat , threw the grenade away from his fellow Rangers . As he was releasing the grenade it detonated , amputating his right hand at the wrist and further injuring him with multiple shrapnel wounds . Although picking up and throwing the live grenade grievously wounded Staff Sergeant Petry , his gallant act undeniably saved his fellow Rangers from being severely wounded or killed . Despite the severity of his wounds , Staff Sergeant Petry continued to maintain the presence of mind to place a tourniquet on his right wrist before communicating the situation by radio in order to coordinate support for himself and his fellow wounded Rangers . Staff Sergeant Petry 's extraordinary heroism and devotion to duty are in keeping with the highest traditions of military service , and reflect great credit upon himself , 75th Ranger Regiment , and the United States Army . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Petry and his wife Ashley have four children : son Landon as well as three children from Ashley 's previous relationship ; Brittany , Austin , and Reagan . 
 = = Honors = = 
 On 24 June 2013 , a 9 @-@ foot tall bronze and stainless steel statue of Petry by George Rivera , Governor of Pueblo of <unk> , was unveiled at Santa Fe City Hall . Among the visiting dignitaries was Medal of Honor recipient Bruce Crandall . 
 The city of Santa Fe announced that the South Meadows Bridge over the Santa Fe River will be rededicated as the " Sgt. First Class Leroy Arthur Petry Bridge . " 
 = Paterson Clarence Hughes = 
 Paterson Clarence " Pat " Hughes , DFC ( 19 September 1917 – 7 September 1940 ) was an Australian fighter ace of World War II . Serving with the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) , he was credited with as many as seventeen aerial victories during the Battle of Britain , before being killed in action on 7 September 1940 . His tally made him the highest @-@ scoring Australian of the battle , and among the three highest @-@ scoring Australians of the war . 
 Born in Cooma , New South Wales , Hughes joined the Royal Australian Air Force as a cadet in 1936 . After graduating as a pilot , he chose to take a commission with the RAF . In July 1937 , he was assigned to No. 64 Squadron , which operated Hawker Demon and , later , Bristol Blenheim fighters . Posted to No. 234 Squadron following the outbreak of World War II , Hughes began flying Supermarine Spitfires as a flight commander . He shared in his unit 's first aerial victory on 8 July 1940 , and began scoring heavily against the Luftwaffe the following month . Known for his practice of attacking his targets at extremely close range , Hughes is generally thought to have died after his Spitfire was struck by flying debris from a German bomber that he had just shot down . He was posthumously awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross , and was buried in England . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Paterson Clarence Hughes was born in Numeralla , near Cooma , New South Wales , on 19 September 1917 . He was the second @-@ youngest of twelve children , the last of four boys in his family . Hughes ' father was a teacher by profession but at the time of Pat 's birth was running the community post office ; christened Percival Clarence Hughes , and known as Percy , he had apparently adopted the name Paterson by the time of his marriage to Catherine <unk> in 1895 . Percy was also a writer , contributing to newspapers and magazines such as The Bulletin , and " Paterson " may have been homage to the poet Banjo Paterson . In any case , Pat shared his father 's interest in literature . He also grew to love the landscape of the local Monaro district in the shadow of the Snowy Mountains , which he described as " unrivalled in the magnificence and grandeur of its beauty " . 
 Hughes was educated at Cooma Public School until the age of twelve , when the family moved to Haberfield in Sydney ; his father was by then working as a labourer . He attended Petersham Boys ' School , becoming a prefect in 1932 and vice captain the following year . As well as playing sport , he was a keen aircraft modeller and built crystal radio sets . Having attained his intermediate certificate , Hughes entered Fort Street High School in February 1934 . He left after eight months to take up employment at Saunders ' Jewellers in George Street , Sydney , and enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) on 20 January 1936 . Hughes had also applied to , and been accepted by , the Royal Australian Navy , but chose the RAAF . 
 Training as an air cadet at RAAF Point Cook near Melbourne , Hughes learnt to fly in de Havilland Moths before progressing to Westland Wapitis in the middle of the year . A practical joker who bridled under RAAF discipline , his euphoria during his first solo on 11 March 1936 was such that he " went mad , whistled , sang and almost jumped for joy " . A fellow cadet recalled that Hughes " loved life and lived it at high pressure " . Upon graduation in December 1936 , Hughes was assessed as having " no outstanding qualities " despite being " energetic and keen " . Under a pre @-@ war arrangement between the British and Australian governments , he volunteered for transfer to the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) , and sailed for the United Kingdom in January 1937 . His decision to transfer had not been quick or easy ; though keen to " try and do something special " in England , and intrigued by " a fascinating picture of easy life , beer and women " that had been presented to him , in the end he felt that it was simply " willed " that he should go . 
 = = Early RAF service = = 
 On 20 March 1937 , Hughes was granted a five @-@ year short @-@ service commission as a pilot officer in the RAF . Like some of his compatriots , he refused to exchange his dark @-@ blue RAAF uniform for the lighter @-@ coloured RAF one . He undertook advanced flying instruction at No. 2 Flying Training School in Digby , Lincolnshire . Slated to fly bombers , he appealed and in July was posted as a fighter pilot to No. 64 Squadron , which operated Hawker Demons out of RAF Martlesham Heath , Suffolk . The squadron was transferred to RAF Church Fenton , Yorkshire , in May 1938 . Hughes was promoted to flying officer on 19 November . No. 64 Squadron subsequently received Bristol Blenheim 1F twin @-@ engined fighters , and completed its conversion to the type in January 1939 . 
 Hughes was promoted to acting flight lieutenant in November 1939 and became a flight commander in the newly formed No. 234 Squadron , which , like No. 64 Squadron , came under the control of No. 13 Group in the north of England . On establishment the previous month at RAF Leconfield , East Yorkshire , No. 234 Squadron was equipped with Blenheims , Fairey Battles and Gloster <unk> ; it began re @-@ arming with Supermarine Spitfires in March 1940 and was operational two months later . The commanding officer , Squadron Leader Richard Barnett , rarely flew , and Hughes assumed responsibility for overseeing conversion to the Spitfire . " More experienced and more mature " than his fellow pilots , according to historian Stephen Bungay , the Australian " effectively led " No. 234 Squadron . By this time , Hughes had acquired a young Airedale Terrier known as Flying Officer Butch , who sometimes flew with him — against regulations . He had also met and begun dating Kathleen ( " Kay " ) Brodrick of Hull . On 19 June , Hughes and his squadron transferred to RAF St Eval , Cornwall , under the jurisdiction of the newly formed No. 10 Group in south @-@ west England . 
 = = Battle of Britain = = 
 As the Battle of Britain got under way in July 1940 , Hughes shared in No. 234 Squadron 's first confirmed aerial victories . He and his section of two other Spitfires shot down a German Junkers Ju 88 attacking convoys near Lands End on 8 July , and another south @-@ east of Plymouth during a dawn patrol on 28 July . A shared claim for a Ju 88 on 27 July could not be confirmed as destroyed ; after a chase over the water at heights as low as 50 feet ( 15 m ) , the German escaped , despite being struck in the engines and cockpit , and was credited to the section as " damaged " . German records , made available post @-@ war , confirm that a Junkers 88A piloted by Leutnant <unk> , was lost on this day . On 1 August , Hughes was seconded from No. 234 Squadron to help set up the only Gloster Gladiator @-@ equipped unit to operate during the Battle of Britain , No. 247 ( China British ) Squadron in Plymouth . The same day , he married Kay Brodrick , who likened him to Errol Flynn , in the register office at Bodmin , Cornwall . Apart from Flying Officer Butch , the witnesses were strangers ; Kay arrived alone , and no @-@ one from No. 234 Squadron could attend . Barnett was transferred out of No. 234 Squadron on 13 August , and Hughes took temporary command until the arrival of Squadron Leader Joe " Spike " O 'Brien four days later . By now the fighting was intensifying over southern England , and the squadron relocated from St Eval to RAF Middle Wallop , Hampshire , on 14 August . Almost immediately after Hughes landed the Luftwaffe bombed the airfield ; several ground staff and civilian workers were killed , but No. 234 Squadron 's Spitfires escaped damage . 
 It was following No. 234 Squadron 's move to Middle Wallop that Hughes began to score heavily against German fighters . On 15 August , in one of the costliest engagements of the Battle of Britain , known thereafter to the Luftwaffe as " Black Thursday " , Hughes claimed victories ( one of them shared ) over two Messerschmitt Me 110s . He again achieved dual success on 16 , 18 and 26 August , all six victims being Messerschmitt Bf 109s brought down in the vicinity of the Isle of Wight . Whereas in July he had fired at his targets from a range of 150 to 50 yards ( 137 to 46 m ) , it was now his habit to close to 30 yards ( 27 m ) , approximately three Spitfire lengths , before delivering his final burst ; he also made head @-@ on attacks against enemy aircraft . He had a narrow escape on the 16th after his second victory of the day , when he chased a quartet of Junkers Ju 87s and had his tailplane shot up from behind by another Bf 109 ; he dived and forced the German to overshoot , then broke off having exhausted his ammunition firing at his former attacker . In the pub with Kay and his squadron mates that evening , Hughes jokingly told his wife , " In case of accidents make sure you marry again " . 
 On 3 September , Hughes ' promotion to substantive flight lieutenant was promulgated in The London Gazette . He claimed three Me 110s in the space of fifteen minutes south of Haslemere on 4 September , two Bf 109s while patrolling Kenley the following day , and a Bf 109 destroyed plus one probable near Dover on 6 September ; he had to break off combat with the last @-@ mentioned when its tanks ruptured , covering Hughes ' canopy in oil . One of his victims on 5 September may have been Oberleutnant Franz von Werra , who was captured and subsequently became famous as " the one that got away " . Hughes and his protégé , Bob Doe , claimed half of No. 234 Squadron 's victories between mid @-@ August and early September . 
 Hughes was killed in action on the evening of 7 September 1940 , after he intercepted a Dornier Do 17 bomber taking part in a large @-@ scale attack on London . His Spitfire crashed in a field between Sundridge and Bessels Green in Kent . He apparently bailed out , but his parachute failed to open ; his body was found in a garden on Main Road , Sundridge , not far from the wreck of his Spitfire . The Dornier came down in the River <unk> . No. 234 Squadron lost its commanding officer , O 'Brien , in the same action . Mystery surrounds exactly how Hughes came to grief , though his close @-@ in tactics are believed to have played a major part in it . The strain of regular combat without respite , manifesting itself in fatigue and spots before the eyes , may also have contributed . He is generally thought to have collided with flying wreckage from the crippled German bomber , rendering his Spitfire uncontrollable . It is also possible that Hughes accidentally rammed his target . Further speculation suggested that he was the victim of friendly fire from another British fighter attacking the same Dornier , or was struck by German bullets from a Bf 109 . Some observers on the ground , including collier Charles Hall , maintained that Hughes rammed the Dornier on purpose . Four days after his death , No. 234 Squadron was moved back to the relative quiet of Cornwall . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The top @-@ scoring Australian flying ace of the Battle of Britain and one of fourteen Australian fighter pilots killed during the battle , Hughes has been described as " the inspiration and driving force behind No. 234 Squadron RAF " . He is generally credited with seventeen confirmed victories — fourteen solo and three shared . This tally puts him among the top ten Allied Battle of Britain aces . It also ranks him among the three highest @-@ scoring Australians of World War II , after Clive Caldwell with thirty victories ( twenty @-@ seven solo and three shared ) and Adrian Goldsmith with seventeen ( sixteen solo and one shared ) . 
 A war widow after barely five weeks of marriage , Kay Hughes was inconsolable in her loss : " I wept until I could cry no more " . Flying Officer Butch ran out of the mess on the day of his master 's death , and was never seen again . Following a service at St James ' , Sutton @-@ on @-@ Hull , on 13 September 1940 , Hughes was buried in the churchyard at Row G , Grave 4 . A week later , Kay discovered she was pregnant , but eventually miscarried . She subsequently drove ambulances for the British war effort . News of his son 's marriage came as " a complete surprise " to Percy Hughes , who only learned of his daughter @-@ in @-@ law 's existence from the Australian Air Board 's casualty letter . Having married three more times after Hughes ' death , Kay died on 28 June 1983 and , in accordance with her wishes , her ashes were buried with her first husband , whose headstone was amended to read " In loving memory of his wife Kathleen " . 
 Hughes was posthumously awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) on 22 October 1940 for his " skill and determination " as a flight commander and " gallantry in his attacks on the enemy " ; Squadron Leader O 'Brien had recommended the decoration a week before their deaths . Kay was presented with the medal at Buckingham Palace on 23 June 1942 . In Australia , Hughes is commemorated at Christ 's Church , Kiama , with a memorial tablet placed by his sister Muriel . A special memorial is dedicated to him at Monaghan Hayes Place , Cooma . His name appears on the Battle of Britain Roll of Honour in Westminster Abbey , and on supplementary panel 12 in the Commemorative Area of the Australian War Memorial ( AWM ) , Canberra . The AWM also holds his DFC and service medals in its collection . Kay had given the medals to her sisters @-@ in @-@ law to pass on to Percy in the 1950s and , after being lost during an Anzac Day parade in the 1960s , they went through several family members ' hands before turning up in the safe of the Kiama Country Women 's Association ; they were donated to the AWM in 1990 . On 7 September 2005 , Charles Hall 's sons dedicated a plaque in Hughes ' honour at the house where he fell in Main Road , Sundridge ; Bob Doe attended , expressing his thanks for " an Australian who came to help us when we needed him " . Shoreham Aircraft Museum in Kent unveiled a memorial stone to Hughes at Sundridge on 23 August 2008 . On 15 September 2014 , the AWM 's daily Last Post Ceremony was dedicated to Hughes ' memory . 
 = = Combat record = = 
 = USS Harding ( DD @-@ 91 ) = 
 USS Harding ( DD @-@ 91 ) was a Wickes @-@ class destroyer in the United States Navy during World War I. She was the first ship named in honor of Seth Harding . 
 Launched in 1918 , she undertook training exercises off the East Coast of the United States sporadically for several years . In 1919 , she escorted a major transatlantic flight of Curtiss NC seaplane . Later that year , she was selected to be converted into a seaplane tender , and was then used to support naval aviator training off Naval Air Station Pensacola . She took one trip to Veracruz with emergency medical supplies , and was also on hand during aircraft bombing tests against decommissioned German ships , including the sinking of the SMS Ostfriesland . She was decommissioned in 1922 and sold for scrapping in 1936 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Harding was one of 111 Wickes @-@ class destroyers built by the United States Navy between 1917 and 1919 . She , along with seven of her sisters , were constructed at Union Iron Works shipyards in San Francisco , California using specifications and detail designs drawn up by Bethlehem Steel . 
 She had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 060 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 040 long tons ; 1 @,@ 170 short tons ) an overall length of 315 feet 5 inches ( 96 @.@ 14 m ) , a beam of 31 feet 8 inches ( 9 @.@ 65 m ) and a draught of 8 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 59 m ) . On trials , Harding reached a speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) . She was armed with four 4 " / 50 caliber guns , three .30 caliber machine guns , and twelve 21 @-@ inch torpedo tubes . She had a regular crew complement of 122 officers and enlisted men . She was driven by two Curtis steam turbines powered by four Yarrow boilers . 
 Specifics on Harding 's performance are not known , but she was one of the group of Wickes @-@ class destroyers known unofficially as the ' Liberty Type ' to differentiate them from the destroyers constructed from detail designs drawn up by Bath Iron Works , which used Parsons or Westinghouse turbines . The ' Liberty ' type destroyers deteriorated badly in service , and in 1929 all 60 of this group were retired by the Navy . Actual performance of these ships was far below intended specifications especially in fuel economy , with most only able to make 2 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 600 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) instead of the design standard of 3 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 700 km ; 3 @,@ 600 mi ) at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . The class also suffered problems with turning and weight . 
 Harding was the first ship to be named for Seth Harding . The second Harding was a Gleaves @-@ class destroyer commissioned in 1943 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Harding was launched on 4 July 1918 from Union Iron Works . She was sponsored by the wife of George A. Armes , and embarked under the command of Commander Henry D. Cooke . On 3 February 1919 , she was assigned to the United States Atlantic Fleet and sailed for Newport , Rhode Island via Santa Cruz , California . <unk> the Panama Canal , she arrived on 18 February . Two days later she moved to Boston , Massachusetts and stood out of that harbor on 21 February , to escort George Washington which was transporting President Woodrow Wilson from the Versailles Conference . Two days later she participated in ceremonies in Boston harbor celebrating the arrival of that ship . 
 Next , she put in for repairs at Norfolk , Virginia until 8 March , when she left for fleet exercises near Cuba . Following this , Harding left for New York , arriving there on 14 April . On 1 May , she departed as part of a group of destroyers acting as a guide for a flight of Navy Curtiss NC seaplanes across the Atlantic Ocean . Harding provided searchlight illumination by night during the first part of the flight ; NC @-@ 1 and NC @-@ 3 made forced landings near the Azores and Harding rendered assistance to NC @-@ 1 before it sank . NC @-@ 4 , the remaining seaplane , arrived at Ponta Delgada 20 May and as she took off for the last leg of her journey , Harding got underway to provide radio compass signals at sea . After the seaplanes landed at Plymouth , England , to complete the flight on 31 May 1919 , Harding visited Brest , France and the Azores before returning to Newport 18 June . For several months , Harding was based out of Newport and Norfolk on training exercises . 
 After the end of World War I , the U.S. Navy began to convert surplus ships to support its growing seaplane tender program . Several steamers and minelayers were selected in 1919 , but Harding was the only destroyer , because it was determined that she would require minimal modifications . Following this success , and as aircraft carrier designs advanced , more ships were designed specifically to support naval aviation . Fourteen Clemson @-@ class destroyers were converted to seaplane tenders in 1938 when it was determined that aircraft production was outpacing the development of these ships . During the conversion of Harding , her three .30 caliber machine guns were removed and her crew complement was reduced to 100 officers and enlisted men . Her torpedo tubes may also have been removed . On 13 December 1919 , she reported to the Philadelphia Navy Yard for conversion to a seaplane tender . She completed the conversion at Charleston Navy Yard and on 20 May 1920 , she sailed for duty at Pensacola Naval Air Station . Immediately after this , though , Harding was loaded with medical supplies from the American Red Cross and was ordered to Veracruz , Mexico , where an outbreak of bubonic plague necessitated serum and other supplies . She reached Veracruz on 9 June 1920 and unloaded her supplies . She then steamed for Pensacola , Florida , stopping at Tampico on the way , and arrived in Florida on 13 June . 
 At Pensacola , Harding was assigned to a seaplane pilot training program . She remained there until 4 August 1920 , after which she operated in the Caribbean area tending seaplanes until 23 February 1921 . She stopped briefly at Philadelphia before heading to Hampton Roads to support bombing tests on surrendered German ships , leaving Norfolk on 21 June . She was present during the bombing tests on SM U @-@ 117 and remained assigned to the tests until the sinking of the German battleship SMS Ostfriesland on 21 July 1921 . Harding was detached from this duty the next day . 
 Harding subsequently conducted training exercises out of Newport and other East Coast ports until 27 December 1921 , when she arrived at Charleston , South Carolina . Remaining there until 3 April 1922 , she sailed to Philadelphia where she decommissioned 1 July 1922 . Harding was then sold for scrap on 29 September 1936 , to Schiavone @-@ <unk> Corporation in New York City . 
 = Tamaraw = 
 The tamaraw or Mindoro dwarf buffalo ( Bubalus mindorensis ) is a small , hoofed mammal belonging to the family Bovidae . It is endemic to the island of Mindoro in the Philippines , and is the only endemic Philippine bovine . It is believed , however , to have once also thrived on the larger island of Luzon . The tamaraw was originally found all over Mindoro , from sea level up to the mountains ( 2000 meters above sea level ) , but because of human habitation , hunting , and logging , it is now restricted to only a few remote grassy plains and is now an endangered species . 
 Contrary to common belief and past classification , the tamaraw is not a subspecies of the local carabao , which is only slightly larger , or the common water buffalo . In contrast to the carabao , it has a number of distinguishing characteristics : it is slightly hairier , has light markings on its face , is not gregarious , and has shorter horns that are somewhat V @-@ shaped . It is the largest native terrestrial mammal in the country . 
 = = Anatomy and morphology = = 
 Bubalus mindorensis has the appearance of a typical member of its family . It has a compact , heavyset , bovine body , four legs that end in cloven hooves and a small , horned head at the end of a short neck . It is smaller and stockier compared to the water buffalo ( Bubalus bubalis ) . There is little sexual dimorphism in the species although males are reported to have thicker necks . The tamaraw has an average shoulder height of 100 – 105 cm ( 39 – 41 in ) . The length of the body is 2 @.@ 2 m ( 7 @.@ 2 ft ) while the tail adds a further 60 cm ( 24 in ) . Reported weights have ranged from 180 to 300 kg ( 400 to 660 lb ) . 
 Adults have a dark brown to grayish color and more hair than Bubalus bubalis . The limbs are short and stocky . White markings are seen in the hooves and the inner lower forelegs . These markings are similar to that of the anoa ( Bubalus <unk> ) . The face is the same color as that of the body . Most of the members of the species also have a pair of gray @-@ white strips that begins from the inner corner of the eye to the horns . The nose and lips have black skin . The ears are 13 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 3 in ) long from notch to tip with white markings on the insides . 
 Both sexes grows short black horns in a V @-@ shaped manner compared to C @-@ shaped horns of Bubalus bubalis . The horns have flat surfaces and are triangular at their base . Due to the regular rubbing , the tamaraw 's horns have a worn outer surface but with rough inner sides . The horns are reported to be 35 @.@ 5 to 51 centimetres ( 14 @.@ 0 to 20 @.@ 1 in ) long . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The tamaraw was first documented in 1888 on the island of Mindoro . Before 1900 , most people avoided settling on Mindoro due to a virulent strain of malaria . However , as anti @-@ malarial medicine was developed , more people settled on the island . The increase in human activity has drastically reduced tamaraw population . By 1966 the tamaraw 's range was reduced to three areas : Mount Iglit , Mount <unk> and areas near the Sablayan Penal Settlement . By 2000 , their range was further reduced to only two areas : the Mounts Iglit – Baco National Park and <unk> . 
 Initial estimates of the Bubalus mindorensis population on Mindoro was placed at around 10 @,@ 000 individuals in the early 1900s . Less than fifty years later in 1949 , the population had dwindled to around a thousand individuals . By 1953 , fewer than 250 animals were estimated to be alive . These population estimates continually grew smaller until the IUCN publication of their 1969 Red Data Book , where the tamaraw population was noted to be an alarmingly low 100 heads . This head count rose to 120 animals in 1975 . Current estimates place the wild tamaraw population from thirty to two hundred individuals . 
 = = Ecology and life history = = 
 As a rare , endemic mammal on a relatively secluded island , the ecology of the tamaraw is largely unknown . Individuals of the species are reclusive and shy away from humans . In addition , the small sizes of the species ' subpopulations , already spread thin throughout their fragmented range ( on 1986 , about 51 individuals are found in a 20 square kilometer area ) , make contact with any more than a solitary individual a rarity . 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 Bubalus mindorensis prefers tropical highland forested areas . It is typically found in thick brush , near open @-@ canopied glades where it may graze and feed on grasses . Since human habitation and subsequent forest fragmentation of their home island of Mindoro , the habitat preferences of the tamaraw have somewhat expanded to lower @-@ altitude grassy plains . Within their mountainous environment , tamaraws will usually be found not far from sources of water . They have to live by water so they can drink . They live in moist areas such as , marshy areas , and grasslands . 
 = = = Trophic ecology = = = 
 The tamaraw is a grazer that feeds on grasses and young bamboo shoots although it is known to prefer cogon grass and wild sugarcane ( Saccharum <unk> ) . They are naturally diurnal , feeding during the daytime hours ; however , daytime human activities have recently forced select B. mindorensis individuals to be nocturnal to avoid human contact . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 The tamaraw is known to live for about 20 years , with an estimated lifespan of about 25 . The adult female tamaraw gives birth to one offspring after a gestation period of about 300 days . There is an interbirth interval of two years , although one female has been sighted with three juveniles . The calf stays for 2 – 4 years with its mother before becoming independent . 
 = = Behavioral ecology = = 
 Unlike the closely related water buffalo , B. mindorensis is a solitary creature . Adults of the species do not occur in herds or smaller packs and are often encountered alone . Only juveniles exhibit the typical bovine herding behavior and clan hierarchy often seen in water buffalo . Males and females are known to associate all year round but this interaction lasts only a few hours . It has been suggested that this solitary behavior is an adaptation to its forest environment . Adult males are often solitary and apparently aggressive while adult females can be alone , accompanied by a bull , or three young of different ages . 
 Similar to other bovines , the tamaraw wallows in mud pits . It has been suggested that this behavior is employed by the animals in order to avoid biting insects . 
 Another distinct behavior in B. mindorensis is their fierceness . There are reports concerning their fierceness when cornered although most are unsubstantiated . Threat posture used by the bovine involves lowering of the head , shifting its horns into a vertical position . This is accompanied with a lateral shaking of the head . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 The presence of B. mindorensis on the island of Mindoro , coupled with the discovery of fossil <unk> in other islands around the archipelago indicates that the family was once widespread throughout the Philippines . In fact , fossil finds in the 20th century have shown that B. mindorensis were once found on the northern Philippine island of Luzon during the Pleistocene . 
 As a member of the family Bovidae , the tamaraw 's close affinity to the water buffalo ( Bubalus bubalis ) has been validated many times in the past . It was once considered a subspecies of B. bubalis ( as Anoa bubalis ) , Anoa bubalis mindorensis . Recent genetic analysis studies of the family members further strengthen this view . 
 = = Etymology and taxonomic history = = 
 The tamaraw was originally described as Anoa mindorensis by the French zoologist Pierre Marie <unk> in 1888 . In 1958 , it was described as Anoa bubalis mindorensis , a subspecies of the then @-@ water buffalo species ( Anoa bubalis ) . A little over a decade after , the tamaraw was elevated to species status as Anoa mindorensis in 1969 . 
 Later research and analyses of relationships determined the genus Anoa to be a part of the genus Bubalus . The tamaraw 's scientific name was updated into its present form , Bubalus mindorensis ( sometimes referred to as Bubalus ( Bubalus ) mindorensis ) . 
 The name tamaraw has other variants like <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . It has been suggested that the term tamaraw came from <unk> which is a probable alternative name for the banteng ( Bos javanicus ) . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Being an entirely endemic and rare land mammal , Bubalus mindorensis stands as an extremely vulnerable species . Currently , it is classified as a critically endangered species and has been so since 2000 by the IUCN on its IUCN Red List of endangered species . Awareness of the conservation status of Bubalus mindorensis began way back in 1965 when it was classified as Status inadequately known by the IUCN . Enough data was gathered on the tamaraw population by 1986 , and the IUCN conservation monitoring center declared the species endangered . Throughout succeeding surveys conducted in 1988 , 1990 , 1994 and 1996 , the species remained listed on the Red List as endangered . The <unk> of the species in 1996 fulfilled the IUCN criteria B1 + 2c and D1 . Criterion B1 indicated that the species ' range was less than 500 square kilometers and is known to exist in less than five independent locations . A noticed continuing decline in the population fulfilled sub @-@ criterion 2c , given the condition of the population 's sole habitat . Criterion D1 essentially required that a population be composed of less than 250 mature individuals ; individual counts of the B. mindorensis population at the time figured significantly lower than this . In 2000 , the tamaraw was relisted on the Red List under the more severe C1 criteria . This was due to estimates that the population would decline by 20 % in five years or within the timespan of two generations . 
 Many factors have contributed to the decline of the tamaraw population . Over the course of the century , the increase of the human population on Mindoro has exposed the island 's sole tamaraw population to severe anthropogenic pressures . In the 1930s , the introduction of non @-@ native cattle on the island caused a severe rinderpest epidemic among the tamaraw population then @-@ numbering in the thousands . Hunting of tamaraws for food and sustenance has also taken a toll on the species ' numbers . The most major factor threatening survival of B. mindorensis is habitat loss due to infrastructure development , logging and agriculture . These factors reduced the population of thousands during the early 1900s to less than 300 individuals in 2007 . 
 Due to the decline of the B. mindorensis population , various Philippine laws and organizations have been created towards the conservation of the species . In 1936 , Commonwealth Act No. 73 was enacted by the then @-@ Philippine Commonwealth . The act specifically prohibited killing , hunting and even merely wounding tamaraws , with an exception noted for self @-@ defense ( if one were to be attacked by an agitated individual ) or for scientific purposes . The penalties were harsh enough to include a hefty fine and imprisonment . 
 In 1979 , an executive order was signed creating a committee specifically geared towards the conservation of the tamaraw . The tamaraw was referred to as a " source of national pride " in the said E.O. The Tamaraw Conservation Project was also established in 1979 . The organization has successfully bred a tamaraw , nicknamed " Kali " , in captivity in 1999 . In 2001 , Republic Act <unk> , or the Wildlife Resources Conservation and Protection Act was enacted to protect the tamaraw and other endemic species from hunting and sale . During the 1970s , a gene pool was established to preserve the tamaraw 's numbers . However , the project was not successful as only one offspring , named " Kali " , was produced . As of 2011 , Kali is the only surviving animal in the gene pooling project . The project was also not improved as the Protected Areas and Wildlife Bureau shown that the tamaraws were already breeding in the wild . Cloning was not implemented for conservation as the Department of Environment and Natural Resource argued that such measures would diminish the genetic diversity of the species . 
 A small subpopulation of tamaraw has been found within the confines of the Mt . Iglit Game Refuge and Bird Sanctuary on the same island of Mindoro . 
 As of May 2007 , Bubalus mindorensis is on Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species where it has been since the species was first put on the list on January 7 , 1975 . With the listing , CITES recognizes the species as critically endangered and threatened with extinction . Thus , international commercial trade in the species or any derivatives of which , such as the meat , horns or flesh is considered illegal . While commercial trade in the species is prohibited , exchange for non @-@ commercial reasons such as scientific research is allowed . 
 In October 2008 , the Department of Agriculture 's Philippine Carabao Center ( DA @-@ PCC ) director , Dr. <unk> del Barrio , officially reported that the tamaraw population had increased yearly by an average of 10 % from 2001 to 2008 . The April 2008 tamaraw expedition reports of the Tamaraw Conservation Program ( Mt . Iglit @-@ Baco National Park in Mindoro Occidental ) , by government and private entities , including Far Eastern University ( FEU ) students , revealed that " the tamaraw population was counted at 263 this year compared to only 175 heads in 2001 . The calving rate estimated by number of yearlings is considerably high ... ( which could mean that ) more than 55 % of the tamaraws are giving birth . In Mount Iglit @-@ Baco National Park , the official count of the animal was 263 in 2006 , 239 in 2007 and 263 in 2008 . " Mindoro 's indigenous Mangyan people have stopped slaughtering the animal for its blood . 
 The <unk> Foundation called the animal " Mindoro ’ s endangered treasure " and later " the Philippines ’ endangered flagship species " until 2005 . In the 1930s the tamaraw population declined due to rinderpest , a viral disease affecting cattle . In the 1960s and 1970s , hunters killed tamaraws for sport . More importantly , the rampant deforestation ( from 80 % habitat forest cover in the 1900s down to 8 % in 1988 ) in the area hastened the animal 's decline . 
 The Bangkok , Thailand International Union for the Conservation of Species ( <unk> ) has established a 280 @-@ hectare gene pool farm in Rizal , Mindoro Occidental . Also , extensive reforestation was implemented to hasten the tamaraws ' propagation . The animals are now found only in the mountainous portions of Mt . Iglit @-@ Baco National Park , Mt . <unk> , Mt . <unk> @-@ Eagle Pass , Mt . <unk> @-@ Sablayan @-@ <unk> Valley , and Mt . <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 The 2002 Presidential Proclamation 273 set October as a " Special Month for the Conservation and Protection of the Tamaraw in Mindoro . " . At least 90 % belong to Mount Iglit @-@ Baco . To this day there are about 100 left . They 're becoming extinct because of humans . 
 = = Importance to humans = = 
 = = = Economical and commercial value = = = 
 While not as heavily exploited as other large , endangered mammals , the tamaraw population on Mindoro was subject to some harvesting pressure from subsistence hunters before conservation efforts were spurred towards the latter half of the 20th century . The IUCN has described this as still ongoing in their 2006 Red List report . 
 = = = In Philippine culture = = = 
 Though the national animal of the Philippines is the carabao , the tamaraw is also considered a national symbol of the Philippines . An image of the animal is found on the 1980 @-@ to @-@ early @-@ 1990 version of the one @-@ Peso coins . 
 In 2004 , Proclamation No. 692 was enacted to make October 1 a special working holiday in the province of Occidental Mindoro . In line with the Tamaraw Conservation Month , the proclamation aimed to remind the people of Mindoro the importance of the conservation of the tamaraw and its environment . 
 In the 1970s Toyota Motors , through the defunct local company Delta Motors , built the Tamaraw AUV ( Asian Utility Vehicle ) . Because of its ruggedness and simplicity of design , some examples still survive to this day , copied by multinational companies Ford , General Motors , and Nissan , through local subsidiary manufacturers to this day . Because it is an Asian Utility Vehicle , it shares its design with the Kijang , the Indonesian version . Automobile maker Toyota once held a franchise in the Philippine Basketball Association , naming its team the Toyota Tamaraws ( see below ) . 
 During the wake of the Asian utility popularity in the 1990s , Toyota Motors Philippines released an Asian Utility Vehicle ) called Tamaraw FX in the Philippines , an evolution of the Tamaraw AUV . It was widely patronized by taxi operators and was immediately turned into a staple mode of transportation much like a cross of the taxi and the jeepney . The FX eventually evolved into the Revo . 
 The tamaraw is also the mascot of the varsity teams of the Far Eastern University ( FEU Tamaraws ) in the University Athletic Association of the Philippines , and of the Toyota Tamaraws of the Philippine Basketball Association . 
 The Tamaraw Falls in Barangay <unk> , Puerto Galera were also named after the bovine . 
 = The Left Hand of Darkness = 
 The Left Hand of Darkness is a science fiction novel by Ursula K. Le Guin , published in 1969 . The novel became immensely popular ; in 1970 it won both the Hugo and Nebula Awards as the year 's " best novel " , and established Le Guin 's status as a major author of science fiction . 
 The novel follows the story of Genly Ai , a native of Terra , who is sent to the planet of Gethen as an envoy of the Ekumen , a loose confederation of planets . Ai 's mission is to persuade the nations of Gethen to join the Ekumen , but he is stymied by his lack of understanding of Gethenian culture . Individuals on Gethen are " ambisexual " , with no fixed gender identity . This fact has a strong influence on the culture of the planet , and creates a large barrier for Ai . Left Hand was among the first books published in the feminist science fiction genre and the most famous examination of androgyny in science fiction . A major theme of the novel is the effect of sex and gender on culture and society , in particular through the relationship between Ai and Estraven , a Gethenian politician who trusts and helps him . The novel touched off a feminist debate when it was first published , over depictions of the ambisexual Gethenians . The novel also addresses the theme of religion , by contrasting the two major faiths on Gethen , as well as exploring notions of loyalty and betrayal . 
 The novel is part of the Hainish Cycle , a series of novels and short stories by Le Guin set in the fictional Hainish universe , which she introduced in 1964 with " Dowry of the <unk> " . Among the Hainish novels , it was preceded in the sequence of writing by City of Illusions and followed by The Word for World is Forest , although Left Hand is the last work in the internal chronology of the Hainish cycle . 
 It has been reprinted more than 30 times , and received a highly positive response from reviewers . In addition to being voted the Hugo and Nebula awards by fans and writers , respectively , a 1975 poll in Locus magazine ranked Left Hand third behind Frank Herbert 's Dune and Arthur C. Clarke 's Childhood 's End . In 1987 , Locus ranked it second among science fiction novels after Dune . In an introduction to a critical anthology edited in 1987 , Harold Bloom stated ; " Le Guin , more than Tolkien , has raised fantasy into high literature , for our time " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Le Guin 's father Alfred Louis Kroeber was an anthropologist , and the experience that this gave Le Guin influenced all of her works . Many of the protagonists of Le Guin 's novels , such as The Left Hand of Darkness and Rocannon 's World are also anthropologists or social investigators of some kind . Le Guin uses the term Ekumen for her fictional alliance of worlds , a term which she got from her father , who derived it from the Greek <unk> to refer to Eurasian cultures that shared a common origin . 
 Le Guin 's interest in Taoism influenced much of her science fiction work . Douglas Barbour stated that the fiction of the Hainish Universe contain a theme of balance between light and darkness , a central theme of Taoism . She was also influenced by her early interest in mythology , and her exposure to cultural diversity as a child . Her protagonists are frequently interested in the cultures they are investigating , and are motivated to preserve them rather than conquer them . Authors that influenced Le Guin include Victor Hugo , Lev Tolstoy , Virginia Woolf , Italo Calvino , and Lao Tzu . 
 Le Guin identifies herself with feminism , and is interested in non @-@ violence and ecological awareness . She has participated in demonstrations against the Vietnam War and nuclear weapons . These sympathies can be seen in several of her works of fiction , including those in the Hainish universe . The novels of the Hainish universe frequently explore the effects of differing social and political systems , although she displays a preference for a " society that governs by consensus , a communal cooperation without external government . " Her fiction also frequently challenges accepted depictions of race and gender . 
 The original 1969 edition of The Left Hand of Darkness did not contain an introduction , but Le Guin wrote one for the 1976 edition after reflecting on her work . She states that science fiction is not <unk> , because that is " too rationalist and simplistic . " Instead , she calls it a " thought experiment , " which presupposes some changes to the world , and explores their consequences . In this case , her thought experiment explores a society without men or women , where individuals share the biological and emotional makeup of both sexes . Le Guin states that the purpose of the " thought experiment " was not to predict the future , but to " describe reality , the present world . " She has also said that the genre in general allows exploration of the " real " world through metaphors and complex stories , and that science fiction can use imaginary situations to comment on human behaviors and relationships . 
 = = Setting = = 
 The Left Hand of Darkness is set in the fictional Hainish universe , which Le Guin introduced in her first novel Rocannon 's World , published in 1966 . In this alternative history , human beings did not evolve on earth , but on Hain . The people of Hain colonized many neighboring planetary systems , including Terra ( Earth ) and Gethen , possibly a million years before the setting of the novels . Some of the groups that " seeded " each planet were the subjects of genetic experiments , including on Gethen . The planets subsequently lost contact with each other , for reasons that Le Guin does not explain . Le Guin does not narrate the entire history of the Hainish universe at once , instead letting readers piece it together from various works . Although it was the last to be written , The Dispossessed lies earliest in the internal chronology , while Left Hand is last . 
 The novels and other fictional works set in the Hainish universe recount the efforts to re @-@ establish a galactic civilization . Explorers from Hain as well as other planets use interstellar ships traveling nearly as fast as light . These take years to travel between planetary systems , although the journey is shortened for the travelers due to relativistic time dilation , as well as through instantaneous interstellar communication using the <unk> , introduced in The Dispossessed . This galactic civilization is known as the " League of All Worlds " in works set earlier in the chronology of the series , and has been reconstructed as the " Ekumen " by the time the events in The Left Hand of Darkness take place . During the events of Left Hand , the Ekumen is a union of 83 worlds , with some common laws . At least two " thought experiments " are used in each novel . The first is the idea that all humanoid species had a common origin ; they are all depicted as descendents of the original Hainish colonizers . The second idea is unique to each novel . 
 The Left Hand of Darkness takes place many centuries in the future – no date is given in the book itself . Reviewers have suggested the year <unk> AD , based on extrapolation of events in other works , and commentary on her writing by Le Guin . The protagonist of the novel , the envoy Genly Ai , is on a planet called Winter ( " Gethen " in the language of its own people ) to convince the citizens to join the Ekumen . Winter is , as its name indicates , a planet that is always cold . 
 The inhabitants of Gethen are sequentially hermaphroditic humans ; for twenty @-@ four days ( <unk> ) of each twenty @-@ six @-@ day lunar cycle , they are sexually latent <unk> . They only adopt sexual attributes once a month , during a period of sexual receptiveness and high fertility , called kemmer . During kemmer they become sexually male or female , with no predisposition towards either , although which sex they adopt can depend on context and relationships . Throughout the novel Gethenians are described as " he " , whatever their role in kemmer . This absence of fixed gender characteristics led Le Guin to portray Gethen as a society without war , and also without sexuality as a continuous factor in social relationships . On Gethen , every individual takes part in the " burden and privilege " of raising children , and rape and seduction are virtually absent . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The protagonist of the novel is Genly Ai , a male Terran native , who is sent to invite Gethen to join the Ekumen , the coalition of humanoid worlds . Ai travels to Gethen on a ship which remains in orbit around the planet with Ai 's companions , who are in stasis ; Ai himself is sent to the planet 's surface alone , as the " first mobile . " Like all envoys of the Ekumen , he can " <unk> " – a form of quasi @-@ telepathic speech , which Gethenians are capable of , but for which they have lost the ability . He lands in the Gethenian kingdom of Karhide , and spends two years attempting to persuade the members of its government of the value of joining the Ekumen . Karhide is one of two major nations on Gethen , the other being Orgoreyn . 
 The novel begins the day before an audience that Ai has obtained with Argaven Harge , the king of Karhide . Ai manages this through the help of Estraven , the prime minister , who seems to believe in Ai 's mission ; however , the night before the audience , Estraven tells Ai that he can no longer support Ai 's cause with the king . Ai begins to doubt Estraven 's loyalty because of his strange mannerisms , which Ai finds effeminate and ambiguous . The behavior of people in Karhide is dictated by shifgrethor , an intricate set of unspoken social rules and formal courtesy , which Ai does not understand , contributing to his distrust of Estraven . The next day , as he prepares to meet the King , Ai learns that Estraven has been accused of treason , and exiled from the country . The pretext for Estraven 's exile was his handling of a border dispute with the neighboring country of Orgoreyn , in which Estraven was seen as being too conciliatory . Ai meets with the king , who rejects his offer to join the Ekumen . Discouraged , Ai decides to travel through Karhide , as the spring has just begun , rendering the interior of the country accessible . 
 Ai travels to a fastness , a dwelling of people of the Handarrata , one of two major Gethenian religions . He pays the fastness for a foretelling , an art practiced to prove the uselessness of knowing the right answer to the wrong question . Ai decides to pursue his mission in Orgoreyn . He asks if Gethen / Winter will be a member of the Ekumen in five years , expecting that the <unk> will give him an ambiguous response ; however , he is answered " yes " . This leads him to muse that the Gethenians have " trained hunch to run in harness . " After several months of travelling through Karhide , Ai decides to pursue his mission in Orgoreyn , to which he has received an invitation . 
 Ai reaches the Orgota capital of Mishnory , where he finds that the Orgota politicians are initially far more direct with him . He is given comfortable quarters , and is allowed to present his invitation to the council that rules Orgoreyn . Three members of the council , Shusgis , Obsle , and Yegey , are particularly supportive of him . These three are members of an " Open Trade " faction , which wants to end the conflict with Karhide . Estraven , who was banished from Karhide , is found working with these council members , and tells Ai that he was responsible for Ai 's invitation to Orgoreyn . Despite the support , Ai feels uneasy ; Estraven warns him not to trust the Orgota leaders , and he hears rumors of the " Sarf , " or secret police , that truly control Orgoreyn . He ignores both his feeling and the warning , and is once again blindsided ; he is arrested unexpectedly one night , interrogated , and then sent to a far @-@ northern work camp to meet his death by cold , labor , and sterilizing drugs . 
 To Ai 's great surprise , Estraven — whom Ai still distrusts — goes to great lengths to save him . Estraven poses as a prison guard and breaks Ai out of the farm , using his training with the Handarrata to induce <unk> , or berserker strength to aid him in the process . Estraven spends the last of his money on supplies , and the pair begin an 80 @-@ day trek across the <unk> ice sheet back to Karhide , because Estraven believes that the very appearance of Ai in Karhide will force its acceptance of the Ekumen treaty . Over the journey Ai and Estraven learn to trust and accept one another 's differences . Ai is eventually successful in teaching Estraven <unk> ; Estraven hears Ai speaking in his mind with the voice of his dead sibling Arek , demonstrating the close connection that the two have developed . When they reach Karhide , Estraven tries to return to the land border with Orgoreyn , because he is still exiled from Karhide , but is killed by border guards , who capture Ai . As Estraven predicted , Ai 's presence in Karhide , and the fallout of Estraven 's death , triggers the collapse of governments in both Karhide and Orgoreyn . Soon after , Karhide agrees to join the Ekumen , followed shortly by Orgoreyn , completing Ai 's mission . 
 = = Primary characters = = 
 = = = Genly Ai = = = 
 Genly Ai is the protagonist of the novel ; a male native of Terra , or Earth , who is sent to Gethen by the Ekumen as a " first mobile " or envoy . He is called " <unk> " by the <unk> , who have trouble pronouncing the letter " L. " He is described as rather taller and darker than the average Gethenian . Although curious and sensitive to Gethenian culture in many ways , he struggles at first to trust the ambisexual Gethenians . His own masculine mannerisms , learned on Terra , also prove to be a barrier to communication . At the beginning of the book , he has been on Gethen for one year , trying to gain an audience with the king , and persuade the Karhidish government to believe his story . He arrives equipped with basic information about the language and culture from a team of investigators who had come before him . 
 In Karhide , the king is reluctant to accept his diplomatic mission . In Orgoreyn , Ai is seemingly accepted more easily by the political leaders , yet Ai is arrested , stripped of his clothes , drugged , and sent to a work camp . Rescued by Estraven , the deposed Prime Minister of Karhide , Genly realizes that cultural differences – specifically shifgrethor , gender roles and Gethenian sexuality – had kept him from understanding their relationship previously . During their 81 @-@ day journey across the frozen land to return to Karhide , Ai learns to understand and love Estraven . 
 = = = Estraven = = = 
 <unk> Harth rem ir Estraven is a Gethenian from the Domain of <unk> in <unk> Land , at the southern end of the Karhidish half of the continent . He is the Prime Minister of Karhide at the very beginning of the novel , until he is exiled from Karhide after attempting to assuage the <unk> Valley dispute with Orgoreyn . Estraven is one of the few Gethenians who believes Ai , and attempts to help him from the beginning . However , Ai 's lack of understanding of shifgrethor leads to severe misunderstanding between them . Estraven is said to have made a taboo <unk> vow to his brother , Arek Harth rem ir Estraven , while they were both young . Convention required that they separated after they had produced a child together ; however , because of the first vow , the vow he makes with Ashe <unk> , which also is broken before the events in Left Hand , is called a " false vow , a second vow " . In contrast to Ai , Estraven is shown with both stereotypically male and female qualities , and is used to demonstrate that they are both necessary for survival . 
 = = = Argaven = = = 
 Argaven Harge XV is the king of Karhide during the events of the novel . He is described both by his subjects and by Estraven as being " mad . " He has sired seven children , but has yet to bear " an heir of the body , king son " . During the events of the novel he becomes pregnant but loses the child before it is born , triggering speculation as to which of his sired children will be named his heir . His behavior towards Ai is consistently paranoid ; although he grants Ai an audience , he refuses to believe his story , and declines the offer to join the Ekumen . The tenure of his prime ministers tends to be short , with both Estraven and Tibe rising and falling from power during the two Gethenian years that the novel spans . Argaven eventually agrees to join the Ekumen due to the political fallout of Estraven 's death and Ai 's escape from Orgoreyn . 
 = = = Tibe = = = 
 <unk> Harge rem ir Tibe is Argaven Harge 's cousin . Tibe becomes the prime minister of Karhide when Estraven is exiled at the beginning of the novel , and becomes the regent for a brief while when Argaven is pregnant . In contrast to Estraven , he seems intent on starting a war with Orgoreyn over the <unk> valley dispute ; in addition to taking aggressive actions at the border , he regularly makes belligerent speeches on the radio . He is strongly opposed to Ai 's mission . He orders Estraven to be killed at the border at the end of the novel , as a last act of defiance , knowing that Estraven and Ai 's presence in Karhide means his own downfall ; he resigns immediately after Estraven 's death . 
 = = = Obsle , Yegey , and Shusgis = = = 
 Obsle , Yegey , and Shusgis are Commensals , three of the thirty @-@ three councilmen that rule Orgoreyn . Obsle and Yegey are members of the " Open Trade " faction , who wish to normalize relations with Karhide . Obsle is the commensal of the <unk> District , and was once the head of the Orgota Naval Trade Commission in <unk> , where he became acquainted with Estraven . Estraven describes him as the nearest thing to an honest person among the politicians of Orgoreyn . Yegey is the commensal who first finds Estraven during his exile , and who gives Estraven a job and a place to live in Mishnory . Shusgis is the commensal who hosts Genly Ai after Ai 's arrival in Mishnory , and is a member of the opposing faction , which supports the Sarf , the Orgota secret police . Although Obsle and Yegey support Ai 's mission , they see him more as a means of increasing their own influence within the council ; thus they eventually betray him to the Sarf , in order to save themselves . Their Open Trade faction takes control of the council after Ai 's presence in Karhide becomes known at the end of the novel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Left Hand of Darkness received overwhelmingly positive critical responses when it was published . It won both the Nebula Award , given by the Science Fiction Writers of America , and the Hugo Award , determined by science fiction fans . In 1987 , Locus ranked it number two among " All @-@ Time Best SF Novels " , based on a poll of subscribers . By 2014 , the novel had sold more than a million copies in English alone . The Paris Review stated that " No single work did more to upend the genre 's conventions than The Left Hand of Darkness . " 
 Algis Budrys praised the novel as " a narrative so fully realized , so compellingly told , so masterfully executed . " He found the book " a novel written by a magnificent writer , a totally compelling tale of human peril and striving under circumstances in which human love , and a number of other human qualities , can be depicted in a fresh context . " Budrys would later describe Left Hand as an influence upon his own writing . Darko Suvin , one of the first academics to study science fiction , wrote that Left Hand was the " most memorable novel of the year . " 
 Harold Bloom listed The Left Hand of Darkness in The Western Canon ( 1994 ) as one of the books in his conception of artistic works that been important and influential in influencing Western <unk> saying that " Le Guin , more than Tolkien , has raised fantasy into high literature , for our time " . Bloom said in 1987 that Left Hand was Le Guin 's " finest work to date , " and that critics had generally undervalued the book . <unk> Spivack stated that Left Hand established Le Guin 's status as a major science @-@ fiction writer . 
 Suzanne Reid wrote that at the time the novel was written , Le Guin 's ideas of androgyny were unique not only to science fiction , but to literature in general . Donna White stated that Left Hand was one of the seminal works of science fiction , as important as Frankenstein , by Mary Shelley , which is often described as the very first science fiction novel . Left Hand has been a focus of literary critique of Le Guin 's work , along with her Earthsea fiction and utopian fiction . The novel was also a personal milestone for Le Guin , with critics calling it her " first contribution to feminism . " It was one of her most popular books for many years after its publication . 
 The novel was at the center of a feminist debate when it was published in 1969 . Alexei Panshin objected to the use of masculine " he / him / his " gender pronouns to describes its androgynous characters . Other feminists maintained that the novel did not go far enough in its exploration of gender . Criticism was also directed at the portrayal of androgynous characters in the " masculine " roles of politicians and statesmen but not in family roles . Sarah <unk> , for example , wrote that Le Guin turned her back on on opportunity for experimentation . She stated that " these male heroes with their crises of identity , caught in the stranglehold of liberal individualism , act as a dead weight at the center of the novel . " Le Guin , who identifies as a feminist , responded to these criticisms in her essay " Is Gender Necessary ? " as well as by switching masculine pronouns for feminine ones in a later reprinting of Winter 's King , an unconnected short story set on Gethen . In her responses , Le Guin admitted to failing to depict <unk> in stereotypically feminine roles , but said that she considered and decided against inventing gender @-@ neutral pronouns , because they would mangle the language of the novel . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Hainish universe themes = = = 
 Le Guin 's works set in the Hainish universe explore the idea of human expansion , similar to the future history novels of other science @-@ fiction authors such as Isaac Asimov . These novels , such as The Dispossessed , Left Hand , and The Word for World is Forest also frequently explore the effects of differing social and political systems . Le Guin believed that contemporary society suffered from a high degree of alienation and division , and her depictions of encounters between races , such as in The Left Hand of Darkness sought to explore the possibility of an " improved mode of human relationships , " based on " integration and integrity . " The Left Hand of Darkness explores this theme through the relationship between Genly Ai and Estraven ; Ai initially distrusts Estraven , but eventually comes to love and trust him . Le Guin 's later Hainish novels also challenge contemporary ideas about gender , ethnic differences , the value of ownership , and human beings ' relationship to the natural world . 
 = = = Sex and gender = = = 
 A prominent theme in the novel are social relations in a society where gender is irrelevant ; in Le Guin 's words , she " eliminated gender , to find out what was left . " In her 1976 essay " Is Gender necessary ? " Le Guin wrote that the theme of gender was only secondary to the novel 's primary theme of loyalty and betrayal . However , Le Guin revisited this essay in 1988 , and stated that gender was actually central to the novel ; her earlier essay had described gender as a peripheral theme because of the defensiveness she felt over using masculine pronouns for her characters . 
 The novel also follows changes in the character of Genly Ai , whose behavior shifts away from " masculine " behavior , and grows more androgynous over the course of the novel . He becomes more patient and caring , and less rigidly rationalist . Ai struggles to form a bond with Estraven through much of the novel , and finally breaks down the barrier between them during their journey on the ice , when he recognizes and accepts Estraven 's dual sexuality . Their understanding of each other 's sexuality helps them achieve a more trusting relationship . The new intimacy they share is shown when Ai teaches Estraven to <unk> , and Estraven hears Ai speaking with the voice of Estraven 's dead sibling Arek . 
 Feminist theorists criticized the novel for what they saw as a homophobic depiction of the relationship between Estraven and Ai . Both are presented as superficially masculine throughout the novel , but they never physically explore the attraction between them . Estraven 's death at the end was seen as giving the message that " death is the price that must be paid for forbidden love . " In a 1986 essay , Le Guin acknowledged and apologized for the fact that Left Hand had presented heterosexuality as the norm on Gethen . 
 The androgynous nature of the inhabitants of Gethen is used to examine gender relations in human society . On Gethen , the permanently male Genly Ai is an oddity , and is seen as a " pervert " by the natives ; according to reviewers , this is Le Guin 's way of gently critiquing masculinity . Additionally , Le Guin seems to suggest that the absence of gender divisions leads to a society without the constriction of gender roles . The Gethenians are also not inclined to go to war , which reviewers have linked to their lack of sexual aggressiveness , derived from their <unk> . Harold Bloom states that " Androgyny is clearly neither a political nor a sexual ideal " in the book , but that " ... <unk> is a more imaginative condition than our bisexuality . ... the Gethenians know more than either men or women . " Bloom adds that this is the major difference between Estraven and Ai , and allows Estraven the freedom to carry out actions that Ai cannot ; Estraven " is better able to love , and freed therefore to sacrifice . " 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The book features two major religions : the Handdara , an informal system reminiscent of Taoism and Buddhism , and the <unk> or <unk> 's cult , a close @-@ to @-@ monotheistic religion based on the idea of absolute knowledge of the entirety of time attained in one visionary instant by <unk> , who was originally a Foreteller of the Handdara , when attempting to answer the question : " What is the meaning of life ? " The Handdara is the more ancient , and dominant in Karhide , while Yomesh is the official religion in Orgoreyn . The differences between them underlie political distinctions between the countries and cultural distinctions between their inhabitants . Estraven is revealed to be an adept of the Handdara . 
 Le Guin 's interest in Taoism influenced much of her science fiction work . Douglas Barbour said that the fiction of the Hainish Universe contain a theme of balance between light and darkness , a central theme of Taoism . The title of Left Hand derives from the first line of a lay traditional to the fictional planet of Gethen ; 
 Light is the left hand of darkness , and darkness the right hand of light . Two are one , life and death , lying together like lovers in kemmer , like hands joined together , like the end and the way . 
 Suzanne Reid states that this presentation of light and dark was in strong contrast to many western cultural assumptions , which believe in strongly contrasted opposites . She states that Le Guin 's characters have a tendency to adapt to the rhythms of nature rather than trying to conquer them , an attitude which can also be traced to Taoism . The Handarrata represent the Taoist sense of unity ; believers try to find insight by reaching the " <unk> " , a balance between knowing and unknowing , and focusing and <unk> . 
 The Yomesh cult is the official religion of Orgoreyn , and worships light . Critics such as David Lake have found parallels between the Yomesh cult and Christianity , such as the presence of saints and angels , and the use of a dating system based on the death of the prophet . Le Guin portrays the Yomesh religion as influencing the Orgota society , which Lake interprets as a critique of the influence of Christianity upon Western society . In comparison to the religion of Karhide , the Yomesh religion focuses more on enlightenment and positive , obvious statements . Le Guin suggests that this focus on positives leads to the Orgota being not entirely honest , and that a balance between enlightenment and darkness is necessary for truth . 
 = = = Loyalty and betrayal = = = 
 Loyalty , fidelity , and betrayal are significant themes in the book , explored against the background of both planetary and interplanetary relations . Genly Ai is sent to Gethen as an envoy of the Ekumen , whose mission is to convince the various Gethenian nations that their identities will not be destroyed when they integrate with the Ekumen . At the same time , the planetary conflict between Karhide and Orgoreyn is shown as increasing nationalism , making it hard for those in each country to view themselves as citizens of the planet . 
 This conflict is demonstrated by the varying loyalties of the main characters . Genly Ai tells Argaven after Estraven 's death that Estraven served mankind as a whole , just as Ai did . During the border dispute with Orgoreyn , Estraven tries to end the dispute by moving Karhidish farmers out of the disputed territory . Estraven believes that by preventing war he was saving Karhidish lives and being loyal to his country , while King Argaven sees it as a betrayal . At the end of the novel Ai calls his ship down to formalize Gethen 's joining the Ekumen , and feels conflicted while doing so because he had promised Estraven that he would clear Estraven 's name before calling his ship down . This demonstrates Le Guin 's portrayal of loyalty and betrayal as complementary rather than contradictory , because in joining Gethen with the Ekumen Ai was fulfilling the larger purpose that he shared with Estraven . Donna White wrote that many of Le Guin 's novels depict a struggle between personal loyalties and public duties , best exemplified in Left Hand , where Ai is bound by a personal bond to Estraven , but must subordinate that to his mission for the Ekumen and humanity . 
 The theme of loyalty and trust is related to the novel 's other major theme of gender . Ai has considerable difficulty in completing his mission because of his prejudice against the ambisexual Gethenians and his inability to establish a personal bond with them . Ai 's preconceived ideas of how men should behave prevents him from trusting Estraven when the two meet ; Ai labels Estraven " womanly " and distrusts him because Estraven exhibits both male and female characteristics . Estraven also faces difficulties communicating with Ai , who does not understand shifgrethor , the Gethenians ' indirect way of giving and receiving advice . A related theme that runs through Le Guin 's work is that of being rooted or rootless in society , explored through the experiences of lone individuals on alien planets . 
 = = = <unk> and communication = = = 
 <unk> is a fictional concept in the Hainish universe , first introduced in The Left Hand of Darkness . It is first mentioned by Genly Ai , when he thinks to himself " ... shifgrethor — prestige , face , place , the pride @-@ relationship , the untranslatable and all @-@ important principle of social authority in Karhide and all civilizations of Gethen . " It derives from an old Gethenian word for shadow . George <unk> describes shifgrethor as " this status is not rank , but its opposite , the ability to maintain equality in any relationship , and to do so by respecting the person of the other . " According to University of West Georgia Professor Carrie B. McWhorter , shifgrethor can be defined simply as " a sense of honor and respect that provides the Gethenians with a way to save face in a time of crisis . " 
 Ai initially refuses to see a connection between his sexuality and his mode of consciousness , preventing from truly understanding the Gethenians ; thus he is unable to persuade them of the importance of his mission . Ai 's failure to understand shifgrethor and to trust Estraven 's motives leads him to misunderstand much of the advice that Estraven gives him . As Ai 's relationship to Estraven changes , their communication also changes ; they are both more willing to acknowledge mistakes , and make fewer assertions . Eventually , the two are able to converse directly with <unk> , but only after Ai is able to understand Estraven 's motivations , and no longer requires direct communication . 
 = = Style and structure = = 
 The novel is framed as part of the report that Ai sends back to the Ekumen after his time on Gethen , and as such , suggests that Ai is selecting and ordering the material . Ai narrates ten chapters in the first person ; the rest are made up of extracts from Estraven 's personal diary and ethnological reports from an earlier observer from the Ekumen , interspersed with Gethenian myths and legends . The novel begins with the following statement from Ai , explaining the need for multiple voices in the novel : 
 I 'll make my report as if I told a story , for I was taught as a child on my homeworld that Truth is a matter of the imagination . The soundest fact may fail or prevail in the style of its telling : like that singular organic jewel of our seas , which grows brighter as one woman wears it and , worn by another , dulls and goes to dust . Facts are no more solid , coherent , round , and real , than pearls are . But both are sensitive . 
 The story is not all mine , nor told by me alone . Indeed I am not sure whose story it is ; you can judge better . But it is all one , and if at moments the facts seem to alter with an altered voice , why then you can choose the fact that you like the best ; yet none of them are false , and it is all one story . 
 The myths and legends serve to explain specific features about Gethenian culture , as well as larger philosophical aspects of society . Many of the tales used in the novel immediately precede chapters describing Ai 's experience with a similar situation . For instance , a story about the dangers of foretelling is presented before Ai 's own experience witnessing a foretelling . Other stories include a discussion of the legend of the " place inside the storm " ; another discusses the roots of the <unk> cult ; a third is an ancient Orgota creation myth ; a fourth is a story of one of Estraven 's ancestors , which discusses what a traitor is . The presence of myths and legends has also been cited by reviewers who state that Le Guin 's work , particularly Left Hand , is similar to allegory in many ways . These include the presence of a guide ( Estraven ) for the protagonist ( Ai ) , and the use of myths and legends to provide a backdrop for the story . 
 The heterogeneous structure of the novel has been described as " distinctly post @-@ modern " , and was unusual for the time of its publication , in marked contrast to ( primarily male @-@ authored ) traditional science fiction , which was straightforward and linear . In 1999 , literary scholar Donna White wrote that the unorthodox structure of the novel made it initially confusing to reviewers , before it was interpreted as an attempt to follow the trajectory of Ai 's changing views . Also in contrast to what was typical for male authors of the period , Le Guin narrated the action in the novel through the personal relationships she depicted . 
 Ai 's first @-@ person narration reflects his slowly developing view , and the reader 's knowledge and understanding of the <unk> evolves with Ai 's awareness . He begins in naivety , gradually discovering his profound errors in judgement . In this sense , the novel can be thought of as a Bildungsroman , or coming of age story . Since the novel is presented as Ai 's journey of transformation , Ai 's position as the narrator increases the credibility of the story . The narration is complemented by her writing style , described by a reviewer as " precise , dialectical – always evocative in its restrained pathos " which is " exquisitely fitted to her powers of invention . " 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In December 2004 , Phobos Entertainment acquired media rights to the novel and announced plans for a feature film and video game based on it . In 2013 , the Portland Playhouse and <unk> Theatre produced a stage adaptation of The Left Hand of Darkness in Portland , Oregon . On 12 April and 19 April 2015 , BBC Radio 4 broadcast a two @-@ part adaptation of the novel , starring <unk> <unk> @-@ Smith as Genly Ai , Lesley Sharp as Estraven , Toby Jones as Argaven , Ruth Gemmell as Ashe , Louise Brealey as Tibe and <unk> , Stephen Critchlow as Shusgis , and David Acton as Obsle . The radio drama was adapted by Judith Adams and directed by Allegra McIlroy . The adaptation was created and aired as part of a thematic month centered on the life and works of Ursula Le Guin , in honor of her 85th birthday . 
 = Hollywood ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Hollywood " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . The song was written and produced by Madonna and Mirwais Ahmadzaï for her ninth studio album , American Life ( 2003 ) . On July 14 , 2003 , it was released as the second single from the album by Maverick Records . It later appeared on the greatest hits album , Celebration ( 2009 ) . " Hollywood " is a dance @-@ pop and folk rock song that lyrically discusses American culture and greed , focusing on Hollywood , California , as a place of pop stars and illusory dreams . Madonna 's vocals in the song was noted as that of a little @-@ girl 's ; during the song she also raps , with the repeated phrase " Push the button " . Ahmadzaï did the main programming for the track and kept the track as simple as possible , without using too many instruments . 
 Several remixes of " Hollywood " , done by DJs such as Jacques Lu Cont , The Micronauts , Paul Oakenfold , <unk> and Victor Calderone , were included on physical releases of the single around the world . Music critics applauded the song 's catchiness but criticized its lyrics . The song topped Billboard 's Hot Dance Club Songs and Hot Dance Singles Sales component charts . The debut of the " Hollywood " remixes on the Dance Singles Sales chart gave Madonna her longest stretch of chart @-@ topping titles on this chart , " Hollywood " being her sixth in a row . It also reached the top ten in Canada , Finland , Italy and reached number two in the United Kingdom . 
 An accompanying music video , directed by Jean @-@ Baptiste Mondino , portrays Madonna highlighting the highs and lows of Hollywood . After the video was released , French photographer Guy Bourdin 's son filed a federal lawsuit that accused Madonna of ripping off the work of his father , showing sequences of the video to be similar to his father 's photographs taken in 1980s . " Hollywood " was first performed in an acoustic version along with " American Life " and " Mother and Father " on a promotional tour for the album . In August 2003 , Madonna opened the MTV Video Music Awards performing a medley of " Like a Virgin " and " Hollywood " with Britney Spears , Christina Aguilera and Missy Elliott . During the performance , Madonna kissed Spears and Aguilera on the lips , generating strong reactions from the media . " Hollywood " was later used as a dancers ' interlude on the 2004 Re @-@ Invention World Tour . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 When Madonna started working on her ninth studio album , the cultural mood of America was bleak and that of paranoia after the September 11 attacks . There was discontent and fear all around as the terrorism and hatred took people by surprise , as they started questioning the feasibility of the American Dream . While developing the songs for American Life with producer Mirwais Ahmadzaï , Madonna interrogated and pondered upon those values . The confusion , disorientation and the anger they created seeped into the making of each and every song , including " Hollywood " . She later spoke about Ahmadzaï 's downbeat existentialism and the long discussions they had about this , and society 's obsession with fame and fortune . In an interview with Q , in April 2003 , she described it as the allure of the beautiful life in " Hollywood " . Explaining in detail , 
 " I 've had 20 years of fame and fortune , and I feel that I have a right to an opinion on what it is and what it isn 't . All everyone is obsessed about at the moment is being a celebrity . I 'm saying that 's bullshit and who knows better than me ? Before it happens you have all kinds of notions about how wonderful celebrity is and how much joy it 's going to bring you . Then you arrive ... Look like this you 're gonna be happy . Drive this car you 're gonna be popular . Wear these clothes and people are gonna wanna fuck you . It 's a very powerful illusion and people are caught up in it , including myself . Or I was . " 
 In the VH1 special Madonna Speaks , the artist further clarified that the theme behind " Hollywood " , as well as " American Life " And " I 'm So Stupid " from the album , was about her " wanting to shout from the rooftops that we have all been living in a dream . I have been living in a dream — and you 're all living in a dream and we have to wake up to reality . " Madonna 's first single from American Life — the title track — became the lowest charting first single from a Madonna album since her debut , reaching a peak of number 37 on the Billboard Hot 100 . Warner Bros. Records hastily wanted to save the album from dropping off the charts , and decided to release " Hollywood " , believing the song to have commercial success potential . 
 = = Recording = = 
 " Hollywood " was produced by Madonna , along with Ahmadzaï . The recording sessions for American Life started in late 2001 , then was put on hold as Madonna filmed Swept Away in Malta and starred in the West End play Up for Grabs . She returned to the Olympic Recording Studios in late 2002 and finished off the sessions . Initially , Madonna was not satisfied with the original version of " Hollywood " recorded , so she developed an alternate melody for it . The instruments used on " Hollywood " are similar to the ones used on the other songs from American Life . The mixing for the track was done by Mark " Spike " Stent at the Westlake Recording Studios at West Hollywood , California , while Tim Young did the mastering of the song at Metropolis Studios in London . Ahmadzaï played the guitars , and also did the necessary programming . He used a drum kit and percussion from an E @-@ mu Emulator and also added extra drum sounds to give the song an old , disco vibe . Wanting to have a loud bass synth sound , Ahmadzaï used a Nord Lead synthesizer with lot of filtering manipulations . But he faced problems with it , so he used a Yamaha <unk> mixer . He did not want " Hollywood " to sound like the music being played at the nightclubs , so he recorded Madonna 's vocals with heavy compression in her headphones . Two machines were used for the vocal editing in " Hollywood " . Madonna preferred the Antares Auto @-@ Tune plug in , while Ahmadzaï chose an AMS pitch shifter . Madonna wanted Auto @-@ Tune because she wanted " Hollywood " to have a more dance @-@ like feel to it , although Ahmadzaï was against it . Describing the recording of the vocals , Ahmadzaï said : 
 " We used mainly analog compressors on the vocals , sometimes very cheap or mid @-@ budget stuff , recorded with a Sony <unk> tube mic , a Neve <unk> preamp and an LA @-@ 2A compressor / limiter . But everything is about the setting ... We experiment a lot with vocal sounds . For example , the pitch @-@ down vocal at the end was initially much longer . The mix of this one was very hard — like almost all tracks — because there was so much stuff going on . This is why maybe the final version is so simple . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Hollywood " is a " bouncy folk @-@ rock tune " , as noted by James Hannaham of Spin , while Ken Micallef of Electronic Musician described it as " a clubby disco beat underpins a mammoth bass line with freaky percussion , queasy arcing tones and madly treated vocals . " It also contains house beats with elements of space age and retro music , as well as synthpop . Following the sound of twittering birds , the song opens with a four @-@ chord sequence played on a Martin D @-@ 28 acoustic guitar ; the riff was compared to songs of the Red Hot Chili Peppers by Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna . It is followed by the sound of drums and synthesizers until after a minute , when the arrangement is pulled out , leaving just Madonna 's vocals and the acoustic guitar accompaniment . Madonna 's voice glides over pop beats throughout the song . During the final sequence , Madonna 's singing is slowly morphed lower in pitch into a distorted , robotic voice and she raps , with the repeated phrase " Push the button " . According to the sheet music published at Sheetmusicplus.com , " Hollywood " is written in common time with a moderately fast tempo of 126 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C major with Madonna 's voice spanning from B3 to C5 . An abrupt shift of key takes place at about three minutes into the song , from B minor to C ♯ minor , which according to Rooksby was utilized to give the song 's closing choruses a different treatment . The song follows a basic sequence of Bm – D – A – G – Em as its chord progression . 
 Lyrically , it discusses American culture and greed , focusing on Hollywood as a place of pop stars and illusory dreams . The bridge opens with Madonna saying , " Music stations always play the same songs / I 'm bored with the concept of right and wrong " . Contemporary author Ben Shapiro noted the verse " seems to be Madonna 's credo . Her purposeful degradation of morality has led to monumental success for her @-@ and created a monumentally bad influence for her teenage fans . " Further , Madonna questions the Hollywood experience , singing , " How could it hurt you when it looked so good ? " . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian noted Madonna 's vocals in the song are " high @-@ pitched [ to sound like a ] little @-@ girl " , with the intention of " [ underlying ] the notion of innocence lost " . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 Several remixes of " Hollywood " , done by DJs such as Jacques Lu Cont , The Micronauts , Paul Oakenfold , <unk> and Victor Calderone , were included on physical releases of the single around the world . In August 2003 , the song was remixed with " Into the Groove " and performed with Missy Elliott under the title " Into the Hollywood Groove " as part of a promotional campaign for clothing retailer , GAP . Copies of the promotional CD were given to customers and were not available for individual purchase . An extended version , " The Passengerz Mix " , was also included on the remix album Remixed & Revisited ( 2003 ) . A promotional video for the remix was also shot . Rob Walker of Slate considered the video " interesting because Madonna has always been praised as much for her ability to market herself as for her actual talent as a singer and performer " . However , he noted that " [ the singer ] can 't even get an actual commercial right . Maybe Madonna really is over . " A parody of the commercial which satirized at Madonna 's age was featured on the ninth season of MADtv . 
 " Hollywood " was also remixed by American DJ duo Blow @-@ Up . The remix was set to be included on Madonna 's second remix album planned for 2004 ; however , it remained unreleased . A Billboard review by Michael Paoletta considered it a " funky dark remix " . An unofficial remix was commissioned to DJ Junior Vasquez for designer Donatella Versace 's spring / summer 2004 menswear show in Milan , in spite of the singer having a falling out with Vasquez , following the DJ releasing an unauthorized single titled " If Madonna Calls " . The original version that Vasquez played at nightclubs contained an actual phone message from Madonna left on Vasquez 's answering machine . Madonna 's publicist Liz Rosenberg confirmed that this did not mean the singer would collaborate with Vasquez in the future since the commissioning of the remix was just a " personal favor " for Versace . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Hollywood " received mixed reviews from music critics . Michael Paoletta from Billboard described the song as " punky " and compared it to " Ray of Light " ( 1998 ) . Dimitri <unk> of Vibe magazine gave a positive review for the song , describing it as " disarmingly self @-@ deprecatory as it reflects on people 's desperate attempts to make it in America 's glamor industry " , writing that it was a perfect fit for American Life . Jude Adam of Third Way magazine gave the song a positive review , considering it as " quirky , sunny , and sweet in perfect measures . " Stephen Thompson of The A.V. Club considered the song as " actually catchy " . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian noted that Madonna divulges in the song that not everyone who wants to make it in the movies succeeds . Jessica Winter from The Village Voice commented that in the song , " Madonna channels a generic teen @-@ pop chanteuse " . Dennis Ferrera from Out , while interviewing Madonna for her 2005 album Confessions on a Dance Floor , described the song as a " killer single " . Another positive review by J. J. Evans from Naperville Sun described " Hollywood " as a track which best exemplifies Madonna 's " silly way of writing " but felt that it worked in this case . Chris Heath from Yahoo ! Music commented that " ' Hollywood ' breaks free of its inferior siblings to strike out as a sexy sliver of dance pop that 's as good as anything on Music " . 
 Ian Youngs of BBC News noted that the song was another diatribe about fame and how difficult it is being in the public eye . He further added that it " ranks among the disappointments " on the album saying it feels lacklustre and commented about the " embarrassing rap " . Ed Howard from Stylus Magazine commented that barring Madonna 's rapping , " Hollywood " is at least engaging . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine thought " following up ' American Life ' with ' Hollywood ' was nearly as ballsy " due to its lyrical content . Edna Gundersen of USA Today noted that the song " attest [ s ] to her undiminished skills as a shrewd pop composer " . Michael Hubbard of musicOMH commented that everything rhymes with " Hollywood " , and after commented the song would be better without these lazy lyrics , adding " [ The song ] has the name Madonna on it so it will sell , but it 's hardly vintage stuff . Time for some musical reinvention to go with the incessant changes of image . " In another review , Chuck Taylor from Billboard expressed his disappointment with the song . He explained that " Hollywood " is " a far cry from the ingenious fortitude displayed on so many previous singles of [ Madonna 's ] two decades of career " . He panned Ahmadzaï 's limited electronic production and Madonna 's excessive usage of acoustic guitar on the track , along with " whiney , preachy lyrics " . Writing for The Sydney Morning Herald , Bernard Zuel called Ahmadzaï a " one @-@ trick pony " for his production , but felt he pulled it off " on the groove @-@ rich ' Hollywood ' " . Ben Wener from The Beaver County Times condemned the track as a " knowingly hypocritical attack on Hollywood " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Hollywood " failed to enter the Billboard Hot 100 in the United States , or the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . It was the first time since " Burning Up " ( 1983 ) that a Madonna single did not reach the Hot 100 . However , it peaked at number one on both Billboard 's Hot Dance Club Play and Hot Dance Singles Sales component charts . The debut of the " Hollywood " remixes atop the Dance Singles Sales chart gave Madonna her longest stretch of chart @-@ topping titles on this chart , " Hollywood " being her sixth in a row . This stretch began with " Music " in 2000 , followed by " Don 't Tell Me " , " What It Feels Like for a Girl " , " Die Another Day " and " American Life " . " Hollywood " was Madonna 's 22nd number @-@ one on the Dance Singles Sales chart , the most for any artist . On the Billboard Hot Singles Sales chart , the song debuted at number four , but did not accumulate enough points to appear on the Hot 100 . At the 2003 Billboard Year @-@ end recap , Madonna was the number two Dance Club Play artist and the top Dance Singles artist . " Hollywood " was ranked at numbers 19 , 7 and 45 on the Hot Dance Club Play , Hot Dance Singles Sales and Hot Singles Sales charts respectively . Other than the dance charts , " Hollywood " also reached a peak of number 35 on the Adult Pop Songs . In Canada , the song peaked at number five on Canadian Singles Chart . 
 On July 19 , 2003 , " Hollywood " debuted at its peak of number two in the UK Singles Chart , being kept from the top spot by " Crazy in Love " by Beyoncé Knowles . The song was present for a total of seven weeks on the chart , and as of August 2008 , has sold 59 @,@ 633 copies according to the Official Charts Company . In Australia , " Hollywood " debuted on the chart at number 16 , before falling out to number 37 the next week . On April 27 , 2003 , " American Life " debuted at number 55 on the Austrian Singles Chart , peaking at number 34 after four weeks . The song achieved moderate chart positions in both the Flemish and Wallonian territories in Belgium , peaking at numbers 14 and 32 , respectively . Making its debut at its peak position of number 22 , " American Life " charted for a total of 23 weeks in France during 2003 . Between 2008 and 2009 , the song charted for five weeks . On the Dutch Singles Chart , the song made its debut at number 12 , spending a total of six weeks in the chart . On April 24 , 2003 , " American Life " debuted at number 20 on the Swedish Singles Chart . Similarly in Switzerland , the song debuted at number 15 on the Swiss Singles Chart , spending 13 weeks on the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Hollywood " was filmed at Universal Studios in Universal City , California and directed by Jean @-@ Baptiste Mondino , who previously worked with Madonna on her videos for " Open Your Heart " ( 1986 ) , " Justify My Love " ( 1990 ) , " Human Nature " ( 1995 ) , " Love Don 't Live Here Anymore " ( 1996 ) , and " Don 't Tell Me " ( 2000 ) . In the United States , it premiered on June 23 , 2003 , on VH1 . Madonna had long been a fan of the work of French fashion photographer Guy Bourdin since about a decade ago , commenting on his photographs as " They 're so sick and interesting . These girls , you have to see the look on their faces — they 're really bizarre . " Arianne Phillips created the costumes for the video and she described Madonna 's looks as an homage to old Hollywood glamour , while trying to be literal as well as conceptual . She paid tributes to stars like Ginger Rogers , Jean Harlow and Mae West . According to Mondino 's own words , the concept of the video was : 
 " Some kind of artifice that Hollywood can provide , that is so wide and has a graphic story @-@ line about it as well as some humor about it , and to show the beauty , the scariness , the sexiness and the loneliness that one 's success can be , ' cause everybody 's dreaming about Hollywood , no matter what . The expectation can be very dangerous , and maybe for somebody like Madonna , who might be at a point , to realize that to be on the top is maybe not that important . That 's what I feel about the video . " 
 The music video features Madonna in different styles and fashions . It also includes her dripping in twenty million dollars worth of vintage jewels and gowns in several transformations , including an original 25 carat ring and bracelet that was worn by West in the 1933 film , She Done Him Wrong . A real doctor ( Dr. David Kish ) was hired by Madonna to administer the fake shots , since she wanted to make the scenes appear real . The first day of shooting took place on June 2 , 2003 , and the scenes shot included the wall @-@ of @-@ mirrors , the massage , the botox injection and the ballet dancing sequences . The next day started with the French maid , the motel TV , the telephone conversation and the glamour shot scenes . Henry <unk> , one of the authors of Rewind , Play , Fast Forward : The Past , Present and Future of the Music Video , noted that Madonna exposed herself during the interventions portrayed in the video , by playing with the rumors and the stereotypes surrounding her . 
 After the release of the music video for " Hollywood " , Samuel Bourdin , the son of Guy Bourdin , filed a federal lawsuit that accused Madonna of ripping off the work of his father . Bourdin said they are " strikingly similar " to pictures taken by his father from the 1950s to 1980s decades and published in French Vogue magazine . He accused Madonna of copyright infringement over at least eleven of Bourdin 's works , including one of Madonna with her legs spread on top of a TV set . " It 's one thing to draw inspiration ; it 's quite another to simply plagiarize the heart and soul of my father 's work " , Bourdin said at the time . Included in Bourdin 's federal complaint were side @-@ by @-@ side comparisons of his father 's work with images with stills from the " Hollywood " video . According to Dustin Robertson , editor of the " Hollywood " video , the sequences featuring Madonna in a red dress staring into a mirror are the ones which were pointed by Bourdin 's estate in the lawsuit . The lawsuit named Madonna , Warner Bros. Records , and Mondino as defendants . The details presented in the lawsuit read as : " Factors such as composition , background , wardrobe , lighting , narrative , camera angle , decor , and objects depicted are strikingly similar ... There are very few scenes or sequences in the ' Hollywood ' video that are not directly derived from the Bourdin works . " Details of the financial settlement are confidential , and Madonna acknowledged no wrongdoing in her liberal appropriation of the images . Bourdin 's lawyer , John <unk> , said the parties reached a " very , very successful settlement " , adding that terms of the deal did not allow him to discuss exact dollar amounts . In 2011 , news website Independent Online disclosed the settled amount by Madonna to be $ 600 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 To start marketing American Life , Madonna performed the American Life Promo Tour . A performance on Tower 's Fourth Street in Manhattan was presented to around 400 people and featured acoustic performances of " American Life " , " Mother and Father " , and " Hollywood " . On August 27 , 2003 , Madonna opened the MTV Video Music Awards performing a medley of " Like a Virgin / Hollywood " with Britney Spears , Christina Aguilera , and Missy Elliott . The performance started with Madonna 's daughter Lourdes walking on stage with another girl , dressed as flower girls at a wedding . Spears appeared on stage atop of a giant wedding cake , wearing a wedding gown and veil ; she sang the first few lines of " Like a Virgin " before Aguilera appeared from behind the cake and joined her . Madonna then emerged from the cake wearing a black coat and hat and started singing " Hollywood " before proceeding to kiss Spears and Aguilera on the lips . Missy Elliott came out from a wedding chapel to sing her song " Work It " halfway through the performance . The whole performance was a tribute to Madonna and an homage to her performance of " Like a Virgin " at the awards ' inaugural show in 1984 . 
 The kiss generated strong reaction from the media and the celebrities alike . Nekesa Mumbi Moody from Associated Press deduced " Twenty years after the first MTV Video Music Awards , and not much has changed — Madonna still makes jaws drop and cheeks blush . " Brian Hiatt from Entertainment Weekly felt that " The close @-@ up of [ Madonna ] locking lips with the 21 @-@ year @-@ old Spears was an indelible MTV moment — sexy , vaguely transgressive , and as meaningless as it was entertaining . " Elysa Gardner from USA Today explained that the performance " offered a poignant reminder of MTV 's role in defining a youth culture that has become something of a tease — winking at convention without offering any fresh alternatives . " The MTV producers were skeptical , saying that " It was sensational , but I wonder what the good folk in places like Provo , Utah state , would make of it . Middle America is not gonna let this one go lightly . " When asked about it , Madonna revealed , " I am kissing [ Britney ] and passing my energy on to her . Like kind of a mythological fairytale . " The performance was listed by Blender magazine as one of the twenty @-@ five sexiest music moments on television history . MTV listed the performance as the number @-@ one opening moment in the history of the MTV Video Music Awards . In Madonna 's 2004 Re @-@ Invention World Tour , a remix interlude of " Hollywood " featured a breakdancer , a <unk> , a <unk> , a <unk> , and a skateboarder . The screens displayed animations of tarot cards . The performance was included in the I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret live album and documentary . On the same tour , the performance of " Into the Groove " contained samples from the remix " Into the Hollywood Groove " . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – lead vocals , background vocals , songwriter , producer 
 Mirwais Ahmadzaï – songwriter , producer , guitars , programming 
 Tim Young – audio mastering 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – audio mixing 
 Credits for " Hollywood " are adapted from American Life liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Road to Ruin ( Ramones album ) = 
 Road to Ruin is the fourth studio album by the American punk rock band the Ramones , released on September 21 , 1978 , through Sire Records . It was the first Ramones album to feature new drummer Marky Ramone , who replaced founding member Tommy Ramone . Tommy left due to lack of album sales and stress while touring ; however , he stayed with the band to produce the album with Ed Stasium . The artwork 's concept was designed by Ramones fan Gus MacDonald , and later modified by John Holmstrom to include Marky instead of Tommy . 
 The songs on Road to Ruin were considered by both fans and critics as an attempt to get the band more airplay . The album incorporated musical elements which were unheard of in punk rock , such as guitar solos and ballads . The difference in style caused for mixed reviews by critics , with many pointing out that the band was trying to sell more records through a change in form . This attempt by the band failed , as Road to Ruin debuted at 103 on the Billboard 200 , nearly 50 places behind its predecessor Rocket to Russia . 
 = = Conception = = 
 After the band 's previous album Rocket to Russia saw poor album sales , drummer Tommy Ramone left his performing position to focus primarily on producing for the band . After Tommy suggested they search for a new drummer , they began looking in New York City based clubs . While at CBGB , Ramones bassist Dee Dee Ramone approached Marc Bell ( Marky Ramone ) — who had previously been the drummer in Richard Hell and the Voidoids — asking him if he was interested in joining the Ramones . A month after this confrontation , Bell was invited by Danny Fields and Monte Melnick to audition for the band . Around twenty others auditioned to be drummer , with Tommy overseeing the final choice . Bell played " I Don 't Care " and " Sheena Is a Punk Rocker " and each member agreed to allow him into the band . 
 Three weeks after Marky joined the band , the Ramones began recording Road to Ruin in Midtown Manhattan at Media Sound Studios , a premises of a former Episcopalian Church . Album engineer Ed Stasium explained the recording process : " After Tommy left the band , we went straight into working on the Road to Ruin album with Marky . We rehearsed a long time with Marky , just getting it down . Then we went into the studio , recorded , and mixed the record at Media Sound . We spent a lot of money , and the entire summer , on Road to Ruin . " Music critic John Young of Rolling Stone called the album 's production " clean and simple , " but pointed out that the track " Bad Brain " contained " funny noises " in between drum beats , which prevents the song from having the humorous asperity that was intended . 
 The artwork 's concept was originated by Ramones fan Gus MacDonald , who illustrated the members performing with a lobster claw coming out of an amplifier and a snake around their feet . Following the drawing 's completion , MacDonald sent it to the band and they decided to make it their Road to Ruin album cover . This sketch did , however , include original drummer Tommy , so the drawing had to be modified to depict Marky instead . This alteration was undergone by artist John Holmstrom , a Punk magazine associate and designer . 
 = = Lyrics and compositions = = 
 The album introduced many characteristics which were previously unheard of in punk rock , such as guitar solos , acoustic rhythm guitars , and ballads . These attributes were debated on by the band 's fans as well as critics , who questioned whether these changes were to expand their musical fashion or the band was simply selling out and abandoning their punk rock edge . Though " Bad Brain , " " I Wanted Everything , " and " I 'm Against It " each serve as basic punk songs to intensify the behavior of the audience , the most popular tracks on the album are the pieces which part from their initial style . 
 " Road to Ruin reflected not just the Ramone 's enduring love for Sixties pop , but a nagging desire to expand beyond the confines of 120 seconds in search of a new vocabulary of harmonic hooks , albeit linked to the guitar @-@ crunching sonics established on their first three albums . " 
 The album opens with the midtempo piece " I Just Want to Have Something to Do , " which contains lyrics pertaining to ambivalence and anomie . In the song , Joey manages to rhyme " Second Avenue " with " chicken vindaloo . " The next track , " I Wanted Everything , " is compared to Merle Haggard 's song " If We Make It Through December , " being called its " punk counterpart " by Rock : A Canadian Perspective author Larry Starr . " <unk> " is a ballad focusing on failing relationships and heartbreak . " Don 't Come Close " uses elements which can also be heard in country music , such as twang . 
 " She 's the One " suggests that the band will continue making records , while " Needles and Pins " is a cover of the The Searchers ' song " Needles and Pins . " Rolling Stone critic Charles Young noted that the song could have easily been a joke , but was not since Joey " really puts his guts into these antiquated but beautiful lyrics and pulls it off . " " I Wanna Be Sedated " was written by Joey while in the hospital where he was treated for burns on his face and in his throat . The injury was the result of an exploding kettle full of boiling water which served to treat sinuses . The album concludes with " It 's a Long Way Back , " which was written by Dee Dee and depicts his childhood in Germany . 
 = = Reception = = 
 With the band 's slight change in musical style , material included on the album was intended to gain a sense of mainstream acceptance , though the band members felt as though this was not achieved . Tommy relates : " Road to Ruin was a flop Stateside , even though it had been a very deliberate attempt to secure American radioplay . " The album 's lack of commercial success showed for a negative impact on the member 's morale , and this exasperation would continue into the band 's future records and tours . On the US Billboard 200 , Road to Ruin peaked at number 103 , while on the UK Albums Chart it reached 32 . The album also debuted at 25 on the Swedish Sverigetopplistan chart . The drive to sell more albums in the United States failed , which is evident when comparing the charting positions to Road to Ruin 's predecessor Rocket to Russia , which peaked at 49 on the Billboard 200 . 
 Initially , the album received mixed reviews from critics . Roy <unk> of the New York Rocker called the album " uneven " and " sometimes lazy , " and preferred Tommy 's drumming style over Marky 's , writing : " his light , distinctive , jazz @-@ influenced drumming is sorely missed on Road to Ruin as Marky is of the heads @-@ down basher school . " Rolling Stone critic Charles Young noted that the album is not as humorous or influential as their debut , but that the band is not at all " losing its grip . " He observes that the band modified their style because " dumb " people did not understand the music , while " smart " people did . Young also inquired that " I Wanna Be Sedated " was the album 's " killer cut , " comparing it to " Blitzkrieg Bop , " " Loudmouth , " and " Cretin Hop . " 
 Critical acclaim for the album did not fully transpire until many decades after its release . AllMusic senior editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album 4 @.@ 5 out 5 stars , saying the album fails to " yield the same results as the other records . " He examined that their music mostly repeated past formula and that since the band was still in its prime " such nondescript material sounds good , but the record has neither the exuberant energy or abundant hooks . " Music critic Robert Christgau wrote that the band was constantly " topping itself , " and implied that each track on the album was very listenable except " Bad Brain , " the theme of which he called " repetitious . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Ramones ; except where indicated . 
 Notes 
 Tracks 13 @-@ 14 first issued on Hey Ho ! Let 's Go : The Anthology , Rhino # <unk> ( 7 / 20 / 99 ) 
 Track 15 is from the original soundtrack album Rock ' n ' Roll High School , Sire # <unk> ( 4 / 79 ) . Produced & Engineered by Ed Stasium . Remix Engineer : Joel <unk> 
 Track 16 is Previously unreleased . Outtake from Road to Ruin sessions . It appears later on the 1989 album , Brain Drain . 
 Track 17 was first issued on All the Stuff ( And More ! ) Volume 2 , Sire # <unk> ( 7 / 91 ) . Produced by Tommy Erdelyi , written by Joey Ramone . Recorded during demo sessions for Pleasant Dreams . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following personnel can be verified with AllMusic . 
 = One Less Lonely Girl = 
 " One Less Lonely Girl " is a song by singer Justin Bieber . The song was written and produced by Bieber 's mentor , Usher , as well as Ezekiel Lewis , Balewa Muhammad of The Clutch , and A @-@ Rex duo Sean Hamilton and Hyuk Shin . It was released exclusively to iTunes as the second single from his debut release , My World on October 6 , 2009 , and was later released to more digital distributions and mainstream and rhythmic radio soon after . 
 The song was positively received , with critics commending the song 's delivery and comparing it to pop @-@ R & B beatings by Chris Brown and Rihanna . It was a success in the United States and Canada , Bieber 's highest peaks in the countries at sixty nine and ten , respectively , until " Baby " bested the record in 2010 . It also charted in the Belgium ( Flanders ) tip chart and in Germany within the top thirty , and also charted in Austria , Australia , and United Kingdom . The music video features Bieber attracted to a girl he sees in the laundromat , as he leads her on a scavenger hunt to win a date with her . Bieber has performed the song in a number of live appearances including the Fearless Tour , The Next Star , and Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve with Ryan Seacrest . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Regarding the concept of the song , Bieber told MTV News , " I think it 's really important these girls have something so they can be one less lonely girl Bieber joked that " Lonely Girl " wasn 't always the choice for his second single stating " It was either between that or ' I Love High School . ' " , a remix of " I Love College " by label mate , Asher Roth . " One Less Lonely Girl " was released digitally on the iTunes Store on October 6 , 2009 . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 Crystal Bell of Billboard gave the song a generally positive review stating " much as he did on his debut single , " One Time , " Bieber makes a strong case for why he 's the next pop heartthrob . ' I 'm gonna put you first , I 'll show you what you 're worth / If you let me inside your world , ' he sings . The stump speech is hard to resist , especially when set to an arrangement that follows the lineage of hit midtempo ballads " With You " , and " Irreplaceable " . Although the lyrics are generic , Bieber 's smooth delivery is right on point , and his tender vocals blend well with the song 's easy @-@ flowing beat . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times called the song along with " Down to Earth " , " uncomplicatedly beautiful and earnest . " Andy Kellman of Allmusic listed the song as one of his recommended tracks from the album . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the U.S. , the single had 113 @,@ 000 downloads in its first week , propelling it to debut at number sixteen on the Billboard Hot 100 on the issue dated October 24 , 2009 . Bieber scored the second highest debut of the week , only being surpassed by " 3 " by Britney Spears . Due to the impact of mainstream radio in the U.S. , the song entered at thirty six on the Billboard Pop Songs on the week ending December 12 , 2009 , and in turn also re @-@ entered the Hot 100 at sixty nine . It dropped the next week on the Hot 100 , but rose to thirty two on the Pop Songs , and rose again to twenty six the following week . The single peaked at twenty @-@ one on the pop chart . Due to increased airplay and digital sales of My World , on the week ending January 9 , 2010 , the song rose thirty positions from sixty to thirty on the Hot 100 . As of February 2011 , the single has sold over 1 @,@ 025 @,@ 000 digital copies in the United States . The song debuted at number ten on the Canadian Hot 100 on the issue dated October 24 , 2009 . 
 It debuted in Austria at number fifty @-@ four , where it peaked , and remained four weeks on the chart . It debuted on the Belgian Tip Chart in Flanders at number twenty five , where it peaked , and remained for two weeks . It debuted in Germany at number twenty two , where it peaked , and remained for eight weeks . The song also peaked at eighty @-@ two in Australia and sixty two in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Music video = = 
 In an October 7 , 2009 , exclusive with MTV News , Bieber confirmed that a music video had been shot in Watertown , Tennessee ( a small town approximately 50 miles east of Nashville , Tennessee ) with Roman White who directed the music video for " You Belong With Me " by Taylor Swift . The video premiered on <unk> on October 9 , 2009 , and was released to iTunes three days later . It later premiered on Bieber 's official site and YouTube on October 13 , 2009 , Bieber 's mother , Pattie <unk> , makes a cameo during the flower stand scene in the music video . While filming the music video , Bieber joked and said , " It ’ s like the biggest town I ’ ve ever been in . " He went on to say , " " It ’ s really small and quaint and cute and cool . Everyone probably knows everyone I guess . " Promotional photography took place around the town a few days before the rest of the video shoot , including Bieber holding posters of his first shoot , and with an old turquoise truck . The video was the first to feature Bieber wearing his signature dog tag . In a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes feature , Bieber said that a fan gave it to him , and it belonged to one of their friends that died in the war . Bieber stated , " I wear it because its cool and kind of a memory . " The basic concept of the video is Bieber 's goal to win a girl 's heart after leading her around the town . Director Roman White said , " It ’ s romantic , it ’ s in a laundromat ... that ’ s all it takes to win a girl is strung lights " . 
 In the music video , Bieber is attracted to a girl ( Grace Marie Wilson ) he sees every day washing clothes at the local laundromat . In the opening scenes , Bieber is wearing a green hooded sweatshirt , similar to the gray one he wore in the " One Time " video , along with a cranberry shirt . One day while he is waiting for his clothes and is tuning his guitar , she drops a scarf , and he picks it up . In the laundromat scene Bieber is wearing a mixed purple , blue & orange plaid collared shirt , with a dark purple tee . The girl comes back the next day however he is not there . He then posts a sign beside the washer that he found her missing scarf . He leads the girl on a scavenger hunt for the scarf , posting signs with pictures of him on them around the town to encourage her to go on a date with him . He takes pictures of him in situations such as buying chocolate for her and the puppies scene , and others , with notes doting quips of what he would do for her . During the date and ending scenes Bieber has on a white striped collared shirt , with a dark cyan tee . She finally finds him at the end of the video and they have their date . 
 MTV called the video " lost @-@ and @-@ found action with a scarf that eventually leads to some young love , " and gives credit to Bieber as a new sensation , stating " The setting for " One Less Lonely Girl " seems to be Main Street , USA ... And why not ? Is this kid not the slice of apple pie cooling on the window sill of the American teen dream ? " AOL calls the video a " treasure hunt " and commended the pet store scene , saying " And then , as if the video couldn 't get more cute , they bring out the puppies . " 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 The " One Less Lonely Girl " phrase spawned several products from Bieber 's official store to have the coined phrase on them . One of the products is a cranberry colored scarf , the same color as a shirt Bieber wore in the music video . One end of the scarf has a patch with the " One Less Lonely Girl " phrase on it and the other end has a signature by Bieber . Tamar Antai of MTV Buzzworthy called the scarf " <unk> adorable " and " a total bargain for less loneliness " . Another product was a white t @-@ shirt that had the phrase stylized as " <unk> ♥ <unk> " in variations of sky blue colors . In December 2009 , Bieber teamed up with 1 @-@ 800 @-@ Flowers for a promotion . The company came out with a " One Less Lonely Girl " -branded bouquet of red " intuition " roses and a Valentine 's Day card from Bieber , depicting the singer holding a heart . Packages could either have a twenty @-@ four or twelve count stems , and a red , silver or clear vase . The flowers could be set for delivery between January 12 @-@ February 12 , 2010 , before Valentine 's Day . The first one thousand customers received a free replica of the scarf in the " One Less Lonely Girl " video . A portion of the proceeds went to Pencils of Promise , a charity that helps build schools in developing areas of the world . Bieber frequently participates in the charity . A contest was also set in place in which a winner would be greeted with their flowers by Bieber himself , or could win the flower bouquet and other Justin Bieber merchandise . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Bieber has performed " One Less Lonely Girl " as an acoustic rendition and with the original musical background . He premiered the song , performing an acoustic rendition when he made a return appearance to his native Canada on the finale of YTV 's The Next Star . Bieber performed the song along with his lead single " One Time " on September 26 , 2009 . He also performed the song acoustically when he appeared on It 's On with Alexa Chung on November 19 , 2009 . When Bieber performs the song with the musical background , he invites one or two girls on stage to be the object of his affection or the " lonely girl " during the performance . Bieber performed the song with the original musical background along with " One Time " , and " Favorite Girl " on his U.S. network television debut on The Today Show . He also performed the song with the musical background on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , and during Winter 2009 when he performed at several different Jingle Ball concerts . When Bieber performed at <unk> 's Jingle Ball in Atlanta , Georgia , where Bieber 's career is based out of , he invited good friend and former girlfriend , Caitlin <unk> , who had recently recovered from a boating accident , on stage as the girl during the song . Bieber performed the single as his second song during Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve with Ryan Seacrest , and invited his friend and fellow performer that night , Selena Gomez on stage to act as the lonely girl . The performance onstage fueled further speculation of a relationship between Bieber and Gomez but both claimed they were just friends , as they did before . He sang the song on VH1 's Pepsi Super Bowl Fan Jam , along with other performers Rihanna and Timbaland , and on CBS ' The Early Show as a part of their Super Bowl programming . He performed a medley of " One Less Lonely Girl " and " Never Let You Go " , along with " Baby " at BET 's SOS : Help for Haiti Telethon . As the telethon was also being broadcast in Haiti , Bieber sang the first verse in French . During the Purpose World Tour , Bieber unexpectedly performed the song at the tour for the very last time . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 A parody of the song performed by Bieber caused controversy after a video of it was released by the entertainment news website TMZ on June 4 , 2014 . The video featured a then 14 @-@ year @-@ old Bieber , parodying the song with the main lyric " One less lonely nigger , " and that if he were to kill " one less lonely nigger , " he 'd be " part of the KKK . " Sources stated that Bieber told his mentors , singer Usher and actor Will Smith , about the video after it was filmed , after which Usher showed Bieber some historically racist videos in an effort to teach him about the <unk> intent of the word " nigger " and other racial epithets . On June 5 , 2014 , the rapper and president of Young Money Entertainment , Mack Maine chose to defend Bieber after the racist remarks . He said Maine says Bieber is still family for the artists on Young Money , according to TMZ . The publication reports that Maine says Bieber has black friends and that " Bieber does not have a slave mentality . " According to Mack Maine , Bieber " treats his people with respect . " Mack Maine has said that he brought up a racial joke in his past . " I remember telling a White man , Chinese man , Black man joke as a kid that was terrible , " Maine says , " and I told it to my friends because I thought they 'd think it was funny . " Mack Maine also confirms that Young Money and Justin Bieber are slated to continue working together . On the same day , Bieber made an announcement of his apology for the parody . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Vance Tate , Thomas Olivera , Ezekiel Lewis , Balewa Muhammad , Sean Hamilton , Hyuk Shin ( <unk> ) 
 Production - Ezekiel Lewis , Balewa Muhammad , Sean Hamilton , Hyuk Shin ( <unk> ) , Vance Tate , Thomas Olivera 
 Vocal production and recording - Ezekiel Lewis and Dave Hyman 
 Mixing - Jaycen Joshua @-@ Fowler and Dave Pensado , assisted by Giancarlo Lino 
 A & R Consultants - Vance Tate , Steve Owens and Rosalind Harrell 
 Source 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Three of a Kind ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Three of a Kind " is the twentieth episode of the sixth season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on May 2 , 1999 in the United States . The episode was written by Vince Gilligan and John Shiban , and directed by Bryan Spicer . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Three of a Kind " earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 2 , being watched by 12 @.@ 9 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics , with some noting that the episode served as a stop @-@ gap . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , The Lone Gunmen run into the enigmatic Susanne Modeski . After deceiving Scully into joining them , the trio soon find out that Susanne 's fiancé is planning to use her new brainwashing drug for political assassinations . 
 " Three of a Kind " functions as a sequel of sorts to the fifth season episode " Unusual Suspects " , concluding the story of The Lone Gunmen and Susanne Modeski , the woman who led to the creation of the trio . While Mulder played a supporting role in " Unusual Suspects " , the concept is reversed in " Three of a Kind " , with Scully helping out The Lone Gunmen . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a high @-@ stakes poker game Lone Gunman John Fitzgerald Byers ( Bruce Harwood ) is thrown out after being exposed as a fraud at a government convention in Las Vegas . Unbeknownst to Richard Langly ( Dean Haglund ) and Melvin Frohike ( Tom Braidwood ) , Byers is still harboring an attraction to Susanne Modeski , a fellow conspirator who mysteriously disappeared almost ten years ago . Byers hopes that he will meet her at the convention . 
 The Gunmen cleverly trick Agent Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) into coming to Las Vegas using a text to speech program . Their friend Jimmy uses his special technique for gaining access to a secret meeting room where he believes he will learn about new assassination techniques employed by the government . However , Jimmy is discovered and injected with a mystery drug which forces him to kill himself . Meanwhile , Byers discovers that Susanne is alive and well , but has seemingly become a secretive government agent . 
 Scully performs Jimmy 's autopsy when she is attacked by an agent who injects something into her , who collapses . After being confronted by Byers , Susanne reveals that she is pretending to have switched sides so she , along with her fiancee Grant Ellis , can slow progress on the government 's harmful initiatives . She works alongside the Gunmen to set up Grant , whom she discovers has been lying to her . 
 Timmy , the late Jimmy 's friend , asks Langly to attend a Dungeons & Dragons game in Jimmy 's honor . The game , however , is a setup to inject Langly with a drug that effectively controls the subject 's mind , much like Scully and Jimmy . Frohike finds an extremely flirtatious Scully at the bar with a large cluster of men around her . He takes her back to the suite where Susanne recognizes the effects of the drug , which she identifies as <unk> histamine . She reveals that she had not actually made the compound , except for a small batch accessible only to her and Grant , confirming his betrayal . 
 Susanne counteracts the weapon 's effect on Scully as Langly returns . Langly reports to Timmy the next morning and is given his instructions : Enter the meeting room using the provided pass and fire three rounds into Susanne Modeski . Scully attempts to enter the meeting hall but is stopped by security outside . Langly draws a gun and shoots Susanne Modeski three times in the chest during the break . Scully comes in with the guard and has him call for an ambulance . Byers and Frohike arrive as the EMTs and take her away on a stretcher . It is revealed that Susanne realized Langly had been injected and counteracted the drug 's effect on him . Together , Scully , Susanne , and the Lone Gunmen orchestrated an elaborate ruse to allow Susanne to escape . Unfortunately the ruse fails , as Timmy Landau tastes the " blood " on the floor and realizes it is just corn syrup . 
 Grant Ellis is taken to Susanne Modeski by Scully so she can confront him about why he gave the drug to the government . She is furious as she could have been killed had she not checked Langly the night before . Ellis admits that he only betrayed her because the government threatened his own life . Timmy arrives , guns down Grant Ellis , and takes Susanne to the Lone Gunmen 's suite . 
 Timmy prepares to gun down Langly and Frohike , but is injected with the mind control drug by Byers . As it takes hold of him and he collapses , and the Lone Gunmen successful mind control him into turning himself in . Byers explains to Susanne Modeski that , for all intents and purposes , she is deceased and that she has a new identity . She asks Byers to go with her to start a new life , but he explains he has to keep up the fight . She kisses him goodbye and hands over a wedding ring meant for Grant Ellis . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and writing = = = 
 " Three of a Kind " functions as a sequel of sorts to the fifth season episode " Unusual Suspects " , concluding a minor story @-@ arc featuring The Lone Gunmen and Susanne Modeski , the woman who led to the creation of the trio . At the time of filming for " Three of a Kind " , David Duchovny , who portrays Fox Mulder , was unavailable for filming because he was preparing his directing debut , " The Unnatural " . Only David Duchovny 's voice appears in the episode , during a scene when The Lone Gunmen electronically synthesize it in order to convince Scully to travel to Las Vegas . In order to compensate for this loss , co @-@ executive producers Vince Gilligan and John Shiban decided to write an episode based around The Lone Gunmen . The two wanted to bring back several characters and unresolved plot lines , mostly notably the disappearance of Susanne Modeski . Gilligan explained , " I 'd been thinking a lot about what happened to Susanne Modeski — what happened to her after she drove off with X in that mysterious car at the end of ' Unusual Suspects ' " . Gilligan and Shiban soon formulated a plot that revolved around the Lone Gunmen in Las Vegas . " Las Vegas just seemed a really good place to put these guys . First of all , because the idea of them running through a casino is instantly hilarious . But the other thing [ ... ] is that Las Vegas is in some ways the most watched city in the world " . Furthermore , Michael McKean , who portrayed Morris Fletcher in the two @-@ part episode " Dreamland " , makes a brief cameo as one of the men flirting with Scully . 
 The entire sub @-@ plot featuring Susanne Modeski caused a minor continuity error that had to be retconned . Bruce Harwood , the actor who portrayed Byers , originally wore a wedding ring when he first portrayed the character , noting , " I 'd worn my wedding ring [ during the first part of the series ] so I imagined a married life for Byers " . During the filming of " Unusual Suspects " — an episode that would largely feature Byers feeling a romantic connection to Susanne — Harwood removed his wedding ring , deducing that in 1989 , when the episode took place , Byers had not been married yet . However , " Three of a Kind " — which takes place in 1999 — features Byers once again romantically drawn to Susanne . Harwood explained , " And then [ the producers ] brought back the character Suzanne [ sic ] Modeski back in season six , and that was supposed to be in the present . So I had to redo my back story ; I said Byers had been divorced " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Despite budgetary constraints , the crew of The X @-@ Files were given the green @-@ light to film on location in Las Vegas . This would make Las Vegas only one of the few cities to effectively " play itself " in the series . However , only two days were scheduled for Las Vegas , and most of the scenes were filmed in California at the Century Plaza and Park Hyatt , two hotels relatively close to the Fox studio . Furthermore , Gillian Anderson never had to leave Los Angeles to film the episode . Location manager Ilt Jones noted that The X @-@ Files crew 's desire to film on location at various hotels in Las Vegas caused a bidding war , " We went down this list of forty or fifty hotels known to be film @-@ friendly . [ ... ] At first , the reaction was sort of <unk> @-@ warm , then all of a sudden someone realized that this was The X @-@ Files , for heavens sake , seen by I @-@ can 't @-@ tell @-@ you @-@ how @-@ many millions [ ... ] then this huge bidding war broke out " . Eventually , Monte Carlo Resort and Casino was selected for shooting . In exchange for a special billing denoting " Production Assistance Provided by " and several shots of the hotel 's name appearing in the episode , The X @-@ Files crew received fee @-@ free permission to film anywhere in the hotel during day hours , as well as full access to the hotel 's illuminated message board . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Three of a Kind " first aired in the United States on May 2 , 1999 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 2 , with a 12 share , meaning that roughly 8 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 12 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 12 @.@ 94 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on July 4 , 1999 and received 0 @.@ 87 million viewers , making it the second most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " What 's gotten into Scully ? Tonight , when Scully hits Vegas , you 'll see a side of her you 've never seen before . " 
 The episode received mostly mixed reviews from critics , with many noting that the episode served as a stop @-@ gap . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " Three of a Kind " two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , calling the episode " likeable and good @-@ natured , and utterly redundant , this passes forty @-@ five minutes pleasantly enough , but you 'll be hard pushed to remember them afterwards " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a moderately positive review and awarded it two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris noted that the episode did " an adequate job , but all in all , this is a filler episode , more substitutes than the real thing " . 
 Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files wrote that , " ' Three of a Kind ' took the premise [ of the Lone Gunmen ] and ran with it , offering up a quasi @-@ entertaining effort that indulges [ the trio ] ' s paranoia , banishes Mulder from sight and offers up a very flirtatious Dana Scully . It was all cute and harmless . Kinda like The Lone Gunmen themselves . " Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " and called it " the second part of a story which didn ’ t really need one " but also noted that the " laid @-@ back , let ’ s just hang out and have some fun vibe " of the episode made the entry " very , very easy to watch . " Furthermore , he praised the scene wherein Scully is drugged , calling it " hilarious " and " glorious " . 
 = AgustaWestland Apache = 
 The AgustaWestland Apache is a licence @-@ built version of the AH @-@ 64D Apache Longbow attack helicopter for the British Army 's Army Air Corps . The first eight helicopters were built by Boeing ; the remaining 59 were assembled by Westland Helicopters ( now part of Leonardo @-@ Finmeccanica ) at Yeovil , Somerset in England from Boeing @-@ supplied kits . Changes from the AH @-@ 64D include Rolls @-@ Royce Turbomeca engines , a new electronic defensive aids suite and a folding blade mechanism allowing the British version to operate from ships . The helicopter was initially designated WAH @-@ 64 by Westland Helicopters and was later designated Apache AH Mk 1 ( often shortened to Apache AH1 ) by the Ministry of Defence . 
 The Apache was a valued form of close air support in the conflict in Afghanistan , being deployed to the region in 2006 . The Apache has been an object of controversy over the fitting of some munitions , such as cluster bombs and thermobaric weapons . Naval trials and temporary deployments at sea have proven the aircraft as an able platform to operate from the decks of ships , which is a unique application of the Apache amongst its operators . British Apaches served in the NATO 2011 military intervention in Libya operating from Royal Navy ships . 
 = = Development = = 
 The requirement for a new attack helicopter was identified by the British government in the early 1990s . In 1993 , invitations to bid were issued . Bids received included the Eurocopter Tiger , a modernised Bell AH @-@ 1 <unk> , the AH @-@ 64 Apache , the Boeing / Sikorsky RAH @-@ 66 Comanche , and the Agusta <unk> Mangusta . Both the Tiger and Cobra variant were derided for requiring development , and thus risk , while the Apache was combat proven , however its performance in the First Gulf War was criticised by competitors . Westland and the Apache was selected in July 1995 , a contract for 67 helicopters was signed in 1996 . 
 In September 1998 , Westland produced the first prototype WAH @-@ 64 Apache under licence from Boeing . The first nine Apache AH1s were authorised for service by the director of British Army Aviation on 16 January 2001 . The 67th and final Apache was handed over to the British Army in July 2004 . The helicopter fleet 's cost was around £ 3 @.@ 1 billion , with a total acquisition cost of £ 4 @.@ 1 billion . Reliability had been questioned by US Apache operations , the entire fleet in the Balkans had been grounded due to serious tail rotor failures in 1999 . In 1998 , the Longbow radar 's development ran into problems regarding its weight , impact upon overall agility , and data transfer abilities . These problems with key aircraft components , and fleet 's high cost , led to calls for its cancellation in 1999 . 
 When the requirement for the Apache had been formalised in the early 1990s , military doctrine assumed that a large conventional armoured assault from the Eastern Bloc was Britain 's main threat . Following the collapse and break @-@ up of the Soviet Union , the concepts of flexibility and rapid response took precedence . The UK 's Strategic Defence Review called for Apaches to undertake amphibious attack missions , operating from the helicopter carrier HMS Ocean , the Invincible class aircraft carriers and their successors , the Queen Elizabeth class aircraft carriers , and possibly the amphibious assault vessels HMS Bulwark and Albion . Each squadron equipped with the Apache should have eight operational aircraft . 
 The Westland Apache experienced delays in entering service due to complications with the modifications made for British service . Prior entering service in 2004 , several development problems were noted , including a lack of the ability to securely communicate with other helicopters and a risk of damage to the tail rotor and airframe from firing its Hellfire missiles . The problem with using the Hellfire was debris generated by the firing of missiles , both the Hellfire and CRV7 rockets , could strike the body of the aircraft and cause damage ; resolving this issue created a delay to training programmes . These problems were corrected prior to entering service , a secure communications suite was installed and Hellfire missiles are routinely fired by Apaches . In 2002 , government sources stated that full operational capability was set to be achieved by 2010 . 
 In 2005 , an out @-@ of @-@ service date for the Apache was forecast at 2030 , but the Army is looking at a capability sustainment programme ( CSP ) that will extend their life to 2040 . It was thought that updates would be necessary by 2017 because the US Army is to withdraw support for the AH @-@ 64D Block I on which the British Apaches are based , but US budget problems pushed this back to 2019 or 2020 . A decision will be taken in 2014 on the extent to which Britain will adopt the Block III upgrades of the AH @-@ 64E - the options range from abandoning the capability altogether to buying brand new Block III helicopters but Boeing believe it is most likely that Britain will remanufacture , putting the existing engines and avionics into new airframes . 
 In August 2015 , the UK requested through a Foreign Military Sale , the upgrade of 50 of its Apaches to AH @-@ 64E standard . In July 2016 , the UK placed an order for 50 AH @-@ 64Es through the US Foreign Military Sales ( FMS ) programme instead of upgrading their AgustaWestland @-@ built AH @-@ 64s . Leonardo Helicopters ( formerly AgustaWestland ) will continue to lead the support the existing Apache AH1s until they are retired from service in 2023 – 24 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Several deviations were made to the standard Apache design used by the US and those exported to other countries . One major difference is the use of a pair of Rolls @-@ Royce Turbomeca RTM322 01 / 12 engines , replacing the original General Electric T700 @-@ GE @-@ 701C engines . The Rolls @-@ Royce engine produces 1 @,@ 565 kW ( 2 @,@ 100 hp ) vs. 1 @,@ 410 kW ( 1 @,@ 890 hp ) for the GE <unk> engine . Compared to many helicopters used by coalition forces in Afghanistan , the Apache required less modification to serve in the region due to special filters incorporated into the design . Another change is the folding blade mechanism to stow the helicopters in confined spaces ; the rotor blades also have anti @-@ ice protection to allow operations in Arctic environments . 
 There were changes made to the sensor and avionics outfitting the craft as well ; connectivity with the <unk> secure communications system to interact with other British military units being a significant one . The Selex ES ( formerly BAE Systems Avionics ) Helicopter Integrated Defensive Aids System ( <unk> ) was also fitted . The <unk> system was retrofitted onto the aircraft in mid @-@ 2004 just prior to entering service , along with several redesigned composite bodywork components . An eye @-@ safe training laser to allow the Apache to function as a target designator was also installed . 
 Instead of the American Hydra 70 rocket pods , the Westland Apache can carry up to 76 CRV7 rockets . The CRV7 uses a modular warhead : " a high explosive , semi @-@ armour piercing warhead for attacks on unarmoured targets and a kinetic energy penetrator , which contains no explosive , for attacks on armoured targets " . There used to be a third type of warhead : the Multi @-@ Purpose Sub Munition ( <unk> ) , which was a controversial weapon as it has been classified as a cluster bomb ; each rocket contained nine <unk> submunitions . In May 2008 , several senior officers , such as General David Ramsbotham spoke out against British plans to keep the weapon . In the same month , Britain , as one of the 111 participating nations , agreed to ban cluster bombs on humanitarian grounds . Britain destroyed the last of its CRV7 <unk> in July 2009 . 
 Like the US AH @-@ 64D Apache Longbow , the Apache AH1 carries a fire @-@ control radar ( <unk> ) and Radar Frequency Interferometer ( RFI ) , providing an integrated surveillance and attack system . The ' Longbow ’ radar is the bulbous unit over the rotor hub assembly ; radar placement above the rotors allows the Apache to hover behind cover scanning for targets , with only the radar unit exposed . Additionally , the Longbow radar can monitor traffic in the Apache 's airspace . The radar can also be used for surveillance and terrain profiling . A modem is interfaced into the Longbow radar and other sensor systems to relay information to other aircraft , this allows other Apaches to fire on targets identified by only a single helicopter . 
 AgustaWestland have since made several upgrades to Britain 's Apache fleet . In May 2005 , a $ 212 million contract was awarded to equip all 67 Mk1 helicopters with the Apache Arrowhead sensor system upgrade , to be completed by 2010 . In 2009 , it was announced that AgustaWestland was also integrating new external fuel tanks with ballistic protection . Some of the internal fuel tanks can be removed , Apaches in Afghanistan may have these removed to allow for extra ammunition for the cannon to be fitted . It has been suggested that advanced rotor blades and additional controls to improve the agility of the aircraft may be fitted in a mid @-@ life update of the fleet . There is also a proposal to upgrade WAH @-@ 64s to the AH @-@ 64E Guardian standard . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 In May 2005 , the first Apache @-@ equipped regiment achieved operational status . The Westland Apache has replaced the Westland Lynx <unk> as the British Army 's tactical attack helicopter . The Apache is currently operated by two regiments of the Army Air Corps ( 3 Regt AAC and 4 Regt AAC ) as part of 16 ( Air Assault ) Brigade . The Apache is intended to operate in the armed reconnaissance and attack roles , similar to the US usage of Apaches during the 1991 Gulf War . Unlike US versions , the Westland Apache has been partially navalised and now serves aboard Royal Navy ships in addition to its land @-@ based role . It achieved maritime certification in December 2005 aboard HMS Ocean . On 17 November 2006 , HMS Ark Royal became the first aircraft carrier to land an Apache AH1 . 
 They first appeared in combat as part of Operation Herrick in Afghanistan in May 2006 . In August 2006 , the intense usage of Apaches in Afghanistan led to British commanders admitting that weapons and spare parts were being used at a far greater rate , and subsequently a greater cost , than anticipated . On 11 November 2007 , it was reported that half of the Apache gunships in British service had been grounded as they had fallen below the level considered " fit for purpose " , along with several other British Helicopters such as the Chinook and Merlin HC3 . By November 2008 , the situation had further declined , out of 67 aircraft only 20 were available for combat operations . In 2009 , AgustaWestland was awarded a contract for support services for the Apache and many components such as the Longbow radar ; in the following months senior officers noted that the support change had resulted in higher availability . In June 2011 , civilian maintainers of the Apache at Wattisham Airfield threatened industrial action over a pay dispute . 
 In October 2008 it was announced that Prince Harry had begun the process of qualifying to become an Apache pilot . In May 2010 , the terrorist organisation Al Qaeda threatened to abduct the prince if he piloted an Apache in Afghanistan . In April 2011 , Prince Harry was promoted to captain following his completion of Apache conversion training . In June 2011 , sections of the media reported that Prince Harry was to deploy to Afghanistan as an Apache pilot in 2012 . He subsequently deployed to Afghanistan as part of 662 Squadron in September 2012 . 
 = = = Afghanistan = = = 
 The Apache 's first operational tour was as part of 16 Air Assault Brigade in Afghanistan ; there were eight Apache AH1s deployed in Afghanistan in February 2007 . These were drawn from No. 656 Squadron and No. 664 Squadron of 9 Regiment AAC , based at <unk> Airfield . Unlike their American counterparts in Afghanistan , the Apache AH1 is deployed with its Longbow Fire Control Radar to enable the pilot to better manage traffic in their airspace . Initially pilots had to often fly for 16 – 18 hours at a time due to the low number of Apaches in the theatre ; typically each Apache would be stationed in Afghanistan for eight weeks before returning to Britain for roughly eight weeks of maintenance . On 22 May 2006 , a UK Apache operating in Afghanistan 's Helmand province used a Hellfire missile to destroy an abandoned French vehicle to protect sensitive equipment . 
 The Apache quickly became a highly valued tool against insurgents , able to escort ground and air forces and rapidly respond to Taliban forces on the ground . Major Huw Williams , second in command of 3rd Battalion , The Parachute Regiment , stated that : " We 're really impressed [ with the Apache ] . It 's a very effective beast . " It has been noted that Taliban forces refer to the aircraft as the " Mosquito " . 
 On 13 January 2007 , a 200 @-@ strong British force , led by Royal Marines , launched an operation to attack <unk> Fort , a major Taliban base in southern Helmand Province . After several hours of intense fighting , the Marines regrouped and it was discovered that Lance Corporal Mathew Ford of 45 Commando Royal Marines was missing . A rescue mission was launched using four volunteers , Royal Marines and a Royal Engineer , strapped to the stub @-@ wings of two Apaches . The helicopters could not travel above 50 mph to ensure the safety of the extra passengers from rotor downwash . The Apaches landed under fire inside the compound , after which the rescuers dismounted and recovered the body of <unk> Ford . Ford 's body was flown out in the same manner that the soldiers arrived . Other Apaches hovered above , providing suppressive fire throughout . None of the rescuers were injured in the recovery mission and they were later hailed for their bravery . 
 In May and June 2008 , British and Afghan National Army forces conducted Operation Eagle 's Eye , aimed at disrupting Taliban activities to the south of Musa Qaleh ; a key portion of which was a major night @-@ time helicopter raid , rapidly deploying members of 2nd Battalion , Parachute Regiment into the town . In June 2008 , a British Apache fired a thermobaric Hellfire missile ; the controversial usage of such weapons was approved after extensive legal and ethical evaluations within the MoD . In June 2008 , a Taliban leader and several cell members were killed in Helmand Province by a Hellfire missile launched by an Apache of the 664 Army Air Corps . There was a friendly fire incident in July 2008 , in which an Apache fired upon a position thought to be held by enemy forces , but instead hit members of a British patrol . This was the first time that a British aircraft had been involved in a blue @-@ on @-@ blue incident in Afghanistan . Although the Apaches have become targets for insurgents , as of November 2008 no British Apaches have been lost to enemy fire . In September 2008 , an Apache was seriously damaged by a crash shortly after takeoff in Helmand province , no loss of life occurred but the airframe was written off . 
 In early to mid @-@ 2009 , several narcotics and bomb @-@ making facilities were raided by British forces , supported by Apaches . In April 2009 , it was reported that an Apache had been used to intercept a suicide bombing attack in Helmand province . During the Summer of 2009 , British Apaches were an integral component of Operation Panther 's Claw , which was aimed at pushing insurgents out of civilian areas in the runup to the 2009 Afghan Elections . During this major offensive , Apaches from the UK routinely flew alongside US Cobra helicopters to provide air support to soldiers of 3rd Battalion Black Watch and the Royal Marines conducting ground operations . During the Summer 2009 operations , a senior Taliban leader , Mullah Mansur , and several accomplices were killed in a precision strike launched by an Apache . 
 On 13 October 2010 , newspapers reported that Army Air Corps maintenance workers had accidentally sent a live CRV7 missile in regular mail from Camp Bastion to the UK , a mistake which inspections had missed four times ; when the missile was discovered it sparked an evacuation , the MoD later changed procedure in regards to the incident . On 25 July 2011 , the MoD announced that during a combat operation in the Nahr @-@ e @-@ Saraj district of Helmand province , several Afghan children had been injured from crossfire by an Apache ; they were flown to Camp Bastion for medical treatment . 
 From 2006 to April 2014 , British Apache helicopters flew 50 @,@ 000 hours in Afghanistan , representing one @-@ third of all UK Apache flying . 
 = = = Naval operations and Libya = = = 
 In May 2011 , the MoD announced that the Apache fleet had reached 100 @,@ 000 hours flying time , and describing it as a " vital battlefield tool in Afghanistan " . The Apache was also recognised as having established a " limited maritime strike capability " and were deploying on vessels such as HMS Ocean . On 17 May 2011 , the Apache tested its Hellfire missiles against sea targets for the first time , 9 missiles were fired with a 100 % success rate . Media speculation suggested that the speed on trialling and establishing an Apache maritime presence is due to the withdrawal of the British Aerospace Harrier II , as a stopgap replacement . 
 On 27 May 2011 , military officials announced that Apaches would be deployed as part of Operation Ellamy , the ongoing military intervention in Libya . The helicopters operated from the flight deck of HMS Ocean in conjunction with French Eurocopter Tiger helicopters over Misrata . The Apaches were also to assist in Operation Unified Protector , the enforcement of an embargo and no @-@ fly zone upon Libya . On 14 June 2011 , reports of British preparation to evacuate Yemen emerged , involving Apache and Merlin helicopters operating from Royal Fleet Auxiliary vessels off the coast . 
 On 4 June 2011 , Apaches struck targets within Libya for the first time , destroying a radar site and an armed checkpoint near the town of Brega . Further precision strikes were launched by Apaches , typical targets were mobile air defenses , and were occasionally engaged by AK @-@ 47 fire from ground troops . In early June , Apaches conducted attacks on Gaddafi loyalists assaulting the town of Misrata . On 13 June , British Apaches destroyed several inflatable boats with 30 mm cannon fire , believed to be Libyan Special Forces , before engaging and destroying multiple vehicles along the coastline , including an anti @-@ aircraft system . On 25 June , in coordination with RAF Panavia Tornado strikes , Apaches attacked loyalist infantry and vehicles around Brega and its airfield . On 1 July , British Apaches were reportedly involved in a ' fierce ' battle at the town of Khoms . On 2 July , Apaches destroyed several tanks and a bunker at a military camp near Zawiya . On 5 August , Apaches participated in the rebel push for the town of <unk> was reported . 
 By 21 June 2011 , the Libyan government had dubiously claimed to have successfully shot down dozens of aircraft , including five Apaches ; NATO denied these claims and no Apache losses have been acknowledged to date . On 8 July 2011 , the MoD released information on the first month of Apache combat operations over Libya ; noting that Apaches had engaged targets within Libya on 39 occasions . Apache operations over Libya have been heavily influenced and supported by NATO reconnaissance flights and intelligence missions ; information is continually relayed to update target information , assess the threat of Surface to Air missiles ( SAM ) , and the presence of civilians , enabling real time changes to mission profiles . On 6 August , Apaches struck a military communications facility and troops at Al <unk> . Both the Apache and the Eurofighter Typhoon were withdrawn from Libyan operations in September 2011 as operational demands decreased . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United Kingdom 
 British Army Air Corps 
 No. 653 Squadron AAC 
 No. 662 Squadron AAC 
 No. 663 Squadron AAC - to be operational Conversion Squadron from 2015 
 No. 654 Squadron AAC ( former operator ) 
 No. 656 Squadron AAC 
 No. 664 Squadron AAC 
 No. 668 Squadron AAC - Training Squadron 
 No. 673 Squadron <unk> Training Squadron 
 = = Specifications ( Apache AH1 ) = = 
 Data from AgustaWestland page Jane 's Air Forces , British Army 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 2 
 Length : 17 @.@ 7 m ( 58 ft 4 in with rotors turning ) 
 Rotor diameter : 14 @.@ 6 m ( 48 ft ) 
 Height : 3 @.@ 87 m ( 12 ft 8 in ) 
 Disc area : 168 @.@ 11 m2 ( 1 @,@ 809 @.@ 5 ft2 ) 
 Empty weight : 5 @,@ 165 kg ( 11 @,@ 387 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 8 @,@ 006 kg ( 17 @,@ 650 lb ) 
 Max takeoff weight : 9 @,@ 525 kg ( 21 @,@ 000 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Rolls @-@ Royce / Turbomeca RTM322 turboshaft , 1 @,@ 693 kW ( 2 @,@ 270 hp ) each 
 Performance 
 Never exceed speed : 365 km / h ( 197 knots , 227 mph ) 
 Maximum speed : 293 km / h ( 158 knots , 182 mph ) 
 Cruise speed : 259 km / h ( 140 knots , 161 mph ) 
 Range : 537 km ( 290 nmi , 334 mi ) 
 Ferry range : 1 @,@ 700 km ( 974 nmi , 1 @,@ 121 mi ) 
 Service ceiling : 6 @,@ 400 m ( 21 @,@ 000 ft ) 
 Rate of climb : 12 @.@ 7 m / s ( 2 @,@ 500 ft / min ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : M230 Chain Gun , 1200 rounds 
 Missiles : Hellfire ( and Stinger , <unk> , Sidewinder / <unk> , Brimstone proposed ) 
 Rockets : CRV7 with <unk> ( Tungsten dart ) or High @-@ Explosive Incendiary Semi @-@ Armour Piercing ( <unk> ) warheads . Until 2008 also <unk> with nine M @-@ 73 bomblets . 
 = Velepromet camp = 
 The Velepromet camp was a detention facility established in the final days of the Battle of Vukovar during the Croatian War of Independence . The camp was set up by the Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska narodna armija – JNA ) , which shared control of the facility with the Croatian Serb troops . The facility , originally an industrial storage site , was located on the southern outskirts of the city of Vukovar , in close proximity to the JNA barracks . It consisted of eight warehouses surrounded by a wire fence , and was established on 16 November 1991 , when the first detainees were brought there . 
 Few days after the end of the Battle of Vukovar , there were 2 @,@ 000 detainees in the camp . Detainees usually spent several days in the camp , during which some of them were interrogated , beaten and killed . Up to 10 @,@ 000 detainees passed through the camp before it was closed down in March 1992 , when the United Nations Protection Force deployed to the area . Anywhere between 15 and 800 inmates may have been killed at the camp , though the latter figure includes approximately 700 people who are missing and presumed dead . The events in the camp formed part of three indictments issued by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia . As of 2014 , two of the trials are ongoing , while the trial of Slobodan Milošević was terminated following his death . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia by the Croatian Democratic Union ( Croatian : Hrvatska demokratska zajednica , HDZ ) , ethnic tensions between Croats and Serbs worsened . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska narodna armija – JNA ) confiscated the weapons of Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Teritorijalna obrana - TO ) forces to minimize resistance . On 17 August , tensions escalated into an open revolt by Croatian Serbs , centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina and eastern Croatia . This revolt was followed by two unsuccessful attempts by Serbia , supported by Montenegro and Serbia 's provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo , to obtain the approval of the Yugoslav Presidency for a JNA operation to disarm Croatian security forces in January 1991 . 
 After a bloodless skirmish between Serb insurgents and Croatian special police in March , the JNA itself , supported by Serbia and its supporters , asked the Presidency to give it wartime powers and declare a state of emergency . The request was denied on 15 March , and the JNA came under the control of Serbian President Slobodan Milošević . Milošević , preferring a campaign to expand Serbia rather than to preserve Yugoslavia , publicly threatened to replace the JNA with a Serbian army and declared that he no longer recognized the authority of the Presidency . By the end of the month , the conflict had escalated into the Croatian War of Independence . The JNA stepped in , increasingly supporting Croatian Serb insurgents and preventing Croatian police from intervening . In early April , the leaders of the Croatian Serb revolt declared their intention to integrate the area under their control , known as the Serbian Autonomous Oblast of Krajina , with Serbia . The Government of Croatia viewed this declaration as an attempt to secede . In May , the Croatian government responded by forming the Croatian National Guard ( Zbor narodne garde - ZNG ) , but its development was hampered by a United Nations ( UN ) arms embargo introduced in September . On 8 October , Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia . 
 The second half of 1991 saw the fiercest fighting of the war , as the 1991 Yugoslav campaign in Croatia culminated in the Siege of Dubrovnik , and the Battle of Vukovar . The Battle of Vukovar ended on 18 November , when the JNA captured the city after nearly three months of fighting . At the same time , Croatian Serb authorities began systematically expelling non @-@ Serb civilians from areas under their control . The expulsions in the area of eastern Slavonia were primarily motivated by the aim of changing the ethnic composition in favour of Serbs as well as the resettling of Serb refugees who had fled western Slavonia following Operation Swath @-@ 10 by the Croatian Army . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 The Velepromet storage facility is located on the southern edge of Vukovar , in the Sajmište city district , a few hundred metres from the JNA barracks . It consists of eight sheet metal warehouses , surrounded by a wire fence . A brickyard was located just beyond the perimeter fence , 50 metres ( 160 feet ) away . The Velepromet storage facility was turned into a detention camp when the first detainees were brought there on 16 November , during the final days of the Battle of Vukovar , shortly after the JNA captured the Sajmište district . It served as a detention facility where the JNA and various paramilitary groups held Croats before they were transported to prison camps in Serbia or they were executed nearby . The site was within the area of responsibility of the JNA 2nd Assault Detachment , commanded by Major Branislav Lukić , the commanding officer of the JNA garrison in Vukovar , but the camp security was provided by Croatian Serb TO , volunteers and by JNA military police . 
 After the Battle of Vukovar , the JNA and its allied forces started taking all civilians remaining in Vukovar to the Velepromet camp , transferring them from various shelters elsewhere in the city . About 11 : 00 on 19 November , Cyrus Vance and Herbert S. Okun toured Vukovar on a United Nations fact @-@ finding mission . They were given an escorted tour of several sites in or near the city , including the Velepromet camp , before departing for Belgrade at 13 : 00 . 
 According to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) prosecutor Carla Del Ponte , there were approximately 2 @,@ 000 people held in the facility on 19 November , including civilians and approximately 800 people detained as prisoners of war by the JNA . Those included several hundred detainees taken from the Vukovar hospital . People transported to the Velepromet camp were then separated based on their ethnicity and suspected ZNG and Croatian police personnel were separated from the others . Colonel Bogdan Vujić of the JNA Counterintelligence Service visited the camp that day and described the conditions there as " inhumane " . The International Committee of the Red Cross was denied access to the Velepromet camp . 
 Upon arrival at the facility , some of the prisoners were selected for beatings or execution . Survivors reported that some of the detainees were escorted to the brickyard , from which shots could be heard , and those detainees were not seen again . One surviving prisoner later reported that he witnessed the killing of one prisoner in the camp itself , when Serbian paramilitaries slit the victim 's throat in front of detainees . Other prisoners were beaten during interrogations , were shot and wounded , or were otherwise abused . On 19 November , gradual transfer of the detainees to Sremska Mitrovica prison in Serbia started . These transfers caused a clash between Vujić and the Croatian Serb TO , as the latter wanted to keep the detainees under their control . 
 Detainees were generally kept in the Velepromet camp for three to four days before being transferred to Sremska Mitrovica . It is estimated that up to 10 @,@ 000 civilians and prisoners of war passed through the Velepromet camp before the camp was closed down in March 1992 , when the United Nations Protection Force deployed to the area . According to survivors , up to 800 were killed there , although a large number of those deaths are unconfirmed and many are considered missing . The figure includes 700 missing and presumed dead as of 2009 . Seventeen victims were buried in graves within the detention facility itself . According to the Croatian Government , about 350 inmates did not leave the camp alive . This figure was repeated by Croatian lawyers in March 2014 , during the trial phase of the Croatia – Serbia genocide case before the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) . Serbia 's legal team maintained that the figure of 350 killed is exaggerated , but conceded that crimes had been committed in the camp . Based on the findings of the ICTY , the ICJ found that at least 15 inmates had been killed at Velepromet , but stated that it was impossible for the court to determine the exact number of deaths . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The events in the Velepromet camp have formed part of three different ICTY indictments . In the trial of Slobodan Milošević , the charges brought against Milošević by the ICTY prosecutors included unlawful confinement , imprisonment , torture and inhumane acts against Croat and other non @-@ Serb civilians , including one hundred detainees held in the Velepromet camp . Milošević died before his trial was completed . Vojislav Šešelj , the leader of the Serb Radical Party , associated with the White Eagles paramilitaries , was charged with the unlawful confinement and killing of at least six people at the Velepromet camp who were buried in a mass grave near the site of the Ovčara massacre , near the village of <unk> south of Vukovar , as well as an unspecified number of people in the brick yard adjacent to the Velepromet camp . Goran Hadžić , a Croatian Serb <unk> leader in eastern Slavonia , who held the office of President of SAO Eastern Slavonia , Baranja and Western Syrmia , was charged with the unlawful confinement and murder of the 17 people in Velepromet who were later buried within the compound . As of 2014 , the trials of Šešelj and Hadžić are ongoing . 
 The site of the Velepromet camp is marked by a commemorative plaque , and there is a wreath @-@ laying ceremony each November at the site . The compound was restored to is original use as a storage facility . 
 = Sense and Sensibility ( film ) = 
 Sense and Sensibility is a 1995 American period drama film directed by Ang Lee and based on Jane Austen 's 1811 novel of the same name . Actress Emma Thompson wrote the script and stars as Elinor Dashwood , while Kate Winslet plays Elinor 's younger sister Marianne . The story follows the Dashwood sisters , members of a wealthy English family of landed gentry , as they must deal with circumstances of sudden destitution . They are forced to seek financial security through marriage . Actors Hugh Grant and Alan Rickman play their respective suitors . The film was released on 13 December 1995 in the United States and on 23 February 1996 in the United Kingdom . 
 Producer Lindsay Doran , a longtime admirer of Austen 's novel , hired Thompson to write the screenplay . The actress spent five years drafting numerous revisions , continually working on the script between other films as well as into production of the film itself . Studios were nervous that Thompson – a first @-@ time screenwriter – was the credited writer , but Columbia Pictures agreed to distribute the film . Though initially intending to have another actress portray Elinor , Thompson was persuaded to take the role . 
 Thompson 's screenplay exaggerated the Dashwood family 's wealth to make their later scenes of poverty more apparent to modern audiences . It also altered the traits of the male leads to make them more appealing to contemporary viewers . Elinor and Marianne 's different characteristics were emphasised through imagery and invented scenes . Ang Lee was selected as director , both due to his work in the 1993 film The Wedding Banquet and because Doran believed he would help the film appeal to a wider audience . Lee was given a budget of $ 16 million . 
 A commercial success , the movie garnered overwhelmingly positive reviews upon release and received many accolades , including three awards and eleven nominations at the 1995 British Academy Film Awards . It earned seven Academy Awards nominations , including for Best Picture and Best Actress . Thompson received the Best Adapted Screenplay , becoming the only person to have won Academy Awards for both acting and screenwriting . Sense and Sensibility contributed to a resurgence in popularity for Austen 's works , and has led to many more productions in similar genres . It persists in being recognised as one of the best Austen adaptations of all time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On his deathbed , Mr. Dashwood ( Tom Wilkinson ) tells his son from his first marriage , John ( James Fleet ) , to take care of his second wife ( Gemma Jones ) and three daughters , Elinor ( Emma Thompson ) , Marianne ( Kate Winslet ) and Margaret ( Emilie François ) , since they will inherit nothing . John 's greedy and snobbish wife Fanny ( Harriet Walter ) convinces him to give his half sisters practically nothing financially ; John and Fanny immediately install themselves in the large house , forcing the Dashwood ladies to look for a new home . Fanny invites her brother Edward Ferrars ( Hugh Grant ) to stay with them . Elinor and Edward soon form a close friendship , but Fanny haughtily tells Mrs. Dashwood that Edward would be disinherited if he married someone of no importance with no money . Mrs. Dashwood understands her meaning completely . 
 Sir John Middleton ( Robert Hardy ) , a cousin of the widowed Mrs. Dashwood , offers her a small cottage house on his estate , Barton Park in Devonshire . She and her daughters move in , and are frequent guests at Barton Park . The Dashwoods meet the older Colonel Brandon ( Alan Rickman ) , who falls in love with Marianne at first sight . However , Marianne considers him an old bachelor , incapable of feeling love or inspiring it in another . 
 One afternoon , Marianne takes a walk with Margaret and slips and falls in the rain . She is carried home by the dashing John Willoughby ( Greg Wise ) , with whom Marianne falls in love . They spend a great deal of time together , but on the morning she expects him to propose marriage to her , he instead leaves hurriedly for London . Unbeknownst to the Dashwood family , Brandon 's ward Beth , the illegitimate daughter of his former love Eliza , is pregnant with Willoughby 's child . Willoughby 's aunt Lady Allen disinherited him upon discovering this . 
 Sir John 's mother @-@ in @-@ law , Mrs. Jennings ( Elizabeth Spriggs ) , invites her daughter and son @-@ in @-@ law , Mr. and Mrs. Palmer ( Hugh Laurie and Imelda Staunton ) , to visit . They bring with them the impoverished Lucy Steele ( Imogen Stubbs ) . Lucy confides in Elinor that she and Edward have been engaged secretly for five years , dashing Elinor 's hopes of a future with him . Mrs. Jennings takes Lucy , Elinor , and Marianne to London , where they meet Willoughby at a ball . He greets Marianne uncomfortably and barely acknowledges their acquaintance , and they soon learn he is engaged to the extremely wealthy Miss Grey . Marianne becomes inconsolable . 
 Lucy is invited to stay with John and Fanny , as a way for Fanny to avoid inviting the Dashwood sisters to visit them . Lucy , falsely believing that she has a friend in Fanny , confides her clandestine engagement to Edward and is thrown out of the house . Edward 's mother demands that he break off the engagement . When he refuses , she arranges to have his fortune transferred to his younger brother , Robert ( Richard Lumsden ) . On hearing this , Colonel Brandon offers Edward the living of the parish on his estate , feeling sympathy for the unfortunate but honorable Edward . 
 On their way home to Devonshire , Elinor and Marianne stop for the night at the country estate of the Palmers , who live five and a half miles away from Willoughby 's estate . Marianne cannot resist going to see the estate ; she becomes gravely ill trekking up a hill in a torrential rain . Colonel Brandon finds her in the rain and brings her home . Elinor stays at her side until she recovers , and the sisters return home . Colonel Brandon and Marianne begin spending time together , as Marianne has a new appreciation for him . She admits to Elinor that even if Willoughby had chosen her , she was no longer convinced that love would have been enough to make him happy . 
 The Dashwoods soon learn that Miss Steele has become Mrs. Ferrars and assume that she is married to Edward . Later when Edward visits their house , they learn that Miss Steele unexpectedly jilted him in favor of his brother Robert , and Edward is thus released from his engagement . Edward proposes to and marries Elinor . Edward becomes a vicar , under the patronage of Colonel Brandon , whom Marianne marries . Willoughby is seen forlornly watching their wedding from a distance , and then rides away . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and adaptation = = = 
 In 1989 , Lindsay Doran , the new president of production company Mirage Enterprises , was on a company retreat brainstorming potential film ideas when she suggested the Jane Austen novel Sense and Sensibility to her colleagues . It had been adapted three times , most recently in a 1981 television serial . Doran was a longtime fan of the novel , and had vowed in her youth to adapt it if she ever entered the film industry . She chose to adapt this particular Austen work because there were two female leads . Doran stated that " all of [ Austen 's ] books are funny and emotional , but Sense and Sensibility is the best movie story because it 's full of twists and turns . Just when you think you know what 's going on , everything is different . It 's got real suspense , but it 's not a thriller . Irresistible . " She also praised the novel for possessing " wonderful characters ... three strong love stories , surprising plot twists , good jokes , relevant themes , and a heart @-@ stopping ending . " 
 Prior to being hired at Mirage , the producer had spent years looking for a suitable screenwriter – someone who was " equally strong in the areas of satire and romance " and could think in Austen 's language " almost as naturally as he or she could think in the language of the twentieth century . " Doran read screenplays by English and American writers until she came across a series of comedic skits , often in period settings , that actress Emma Thompson had written . Doran believed the humour and style of writing was " exactly what [ she 'd ] been searching for . " Thompson and Doran were already working together on Mirage 's 1991 film Dead Again . A week after its completion , the producer selected Thompson to adapt Sense and Sensibility , although she knew that Thompson had never written a screenplay . Also a fan of Austen , Thompson first suggested they adapt Persuasion or Emma before agreeing to Doran 's proposal . The actress found that Sense and Sensibility contained more action than she had remembered , and decided it would translate well to drama . 
 Thompson spent five years writing and revising the screenplay , both during and between shooting other films . Believing the novel 's language to be " far more arcane than in [ Austen 's ] later books , " Thompson sought to simplify the dialogue while retaining the " elegance and wit of the original . " She observed that in a screenwriting process , a first draft often had " a lot of good stuff in it " but needed to be edited , and second drafts would " almost certainly be rubbish ... because you get into a panic . " Thompson credits Doran for " help [ ing ] me , nourish [ ing ] me and mentor [ ing ] me through that process ... I learned about screenwriting at her feet . " 
 Thompson 's first draft was more than three hundred handwritten pages , which required her to reduce it to a more manageable length . She found the romances to be the most difficult to " juggle " , and her draft received some criticism for the way it presented Willoughby and Edward . Doran later recalled the work was criticized for not getting underway until Willoughby 's arrival , with Edward sidelined as backstory . Thompson and Doran quickly realised that " if we didn 't meet Edward and do the work and take that twenty minutes to set up those people ... then it wasn 't going to work . " At the same time , Thompson wished to avoid depicting " a couple of women waiting around for men " ; gradually her screenplay focused as much on the Dashwood sisters ' relationship with each other as it did with their romantic interests . 
 With the draft screenplay , Doran pitched the idea to various studios in order to finance the film , but found that many were wary of the beginner Thompson as the screenwriter . She was considered a risk , as her experience was as an actress who had never written a film script . Columbia Pictures executive Amy Pascal supported Thompson 's work , and agreed to sign as the producer and distributor . 
 As Thompson mentioned on the BBC program QI in 2009 , at one point in the writing process a laptop failure almost lost the entire work . In panic Thompson called fellow actor and close friend Stephen Fry , the host of QI and a self @-@ professed " geek " . After seven hours , Fry was able to recover the documents from the device . 
 = = = = Lee 's hire = = = = 
 Taiwanese director Ang Lee was hired as a result of his work in the 1993 family comedy film The Wedding Banquet , which he co @-@ wrote , produced , and directed . He was not familiar with the author Austen . Doran felt that Lee 's films , which depicted complex family relationships amidst a social comedy context , were a good fit with Austen 's storylines . She recalled , " The idea of a foreign director was intellectually appealing even though it was very scary to have someone who didn 't have English as his first language . " The producer sent Lee a copy of Thompson 's script , to which he replied that he was " cautiously interested " . Fifteen directors were interviewed , but according to Doran , Lee was one of the few who recognised Austen 's humour ; he told them he wanted the film to " break people 's hearts so badly that they 'll still be recovering from it two months later . " 
 From the beginning , Doran wanted Sense and Sensibility to appeal to both a core audience of Austen aficionados as well as younger viewers attracted to romantic comedy films . She felt that Lee 's involvement prevented the film from becoming " just some little English movie " that appealed only to local audiences instead of to the wider world . Lee said , 
 " I thought they were crazy : I was brought up in Taiwan , what do I know about 19th @-@ century England ? About halfway through the script it started to make sense why they chose me . In my films I 've been trying to mix social satire and family drama . I realised that all along I had been trying to do Jane Austen without knowing it . Jane Austen was my destiny . I just had to overcome the cultural barrier . " 
 Because Thompson and Doran had worked on the screenplay for so long , Lee described himself at the time as a " director for hire " , as he was unsure of his role and position . He spent six months in England " learn [ ing ] how to make this movie , how to do a period film , culturally ... and how to adapt to the major league film industry . " 
 In January 1995 , Thompson presented a draft to Lee , Doran , co @-@ producer Laurie Borg , and others working on the production , and spent the next two months editing the screenplay based upon their feedback . Thompson would continue making revisions throughout production of the film , including altering scenes to meet budgetary concerns , adding dialogue changes , and changing certain aspects to better fit the actors . Brandon 's confession scene , for instance , initially included flashbacks and stylised imagery before Thompson decided it was " emotionally more interesting to let Brandon tell the story himself and find it difficult . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Thompson initially hoped that Doran would cast sisters Natasha and Joely Richardson as Elinor and Marianne Dashwood . Lee and Columbia wanted Thompson herself , now a " big @-@ deal movie star " after her critically successful role in the 1992 film Howards End , to play Elinor . The actress replied that at the age of thirty @-@ five , she was too old for the nineteen @-@ year @-@ old character . Lee suggested Elinor 's age be changed to twenty @-@ seven , which would also have made the difficult reality of spinsterhood easier for modern audiences to understand . Thompson agreed , later stating that she was " desperate to get into a corset and act it and stop thinking about it as a script . " 
 The formal casting process began in February 1995 , though some of the actors met with Thompson the previous year to help her conceptualise the script . Lee eventually cast all but one of them : Hugh Grant ( as Edward Ferrars ) , Robert Hardy ( as Sir John Middleton ) , Harriet Walter ( as Fanny Ferrars Dashwood ) , Imelda Staunton ( as Charlotte Jennings Palmer ) , and Hugh Laurie ( as Mr. Palmer ) . Amanda Root had also worked with Thompson on the screenplay , but had already committed to star in the 1995 film Persuasion . Commenting on the casting of Laurie , whom she had known for years , Thompson has said , " There is no one [ else ] on the planet who could capture Mr. Palmer 's disenchantment and redemption so perfectly , and make it funny . " 
 Thompson wrote the part of Edward Ferrars with Grant in mind , and he agreed to receive a lower salary in line with the film 's budget . Grant called her screenplay " genius " , explaining " I 've always been a philistine about Jane Austen herself , and I think Emma 's script is miles better than the book and much more amusing . " Grant 's casting was criticised by the Jane Austen Society of North America ( JASNA ) , whose representatives said that he was too handsome for the part . Actress Kate Winslet initially intended to audition for the role of Marianne but Lee disliked her work in the 1994 drama film Heavenly Creatures ; she auditioned for the lesser part of Lucy Steele . Winslet pretended she had heard that the audition was still for Marianne , and won the part based on a single reading . Thompson later said that Winslet , only nineteen years old , approached the part " energised and open , realistic , intelligent , and tremendous fun . " The role helped Winslet become recognised as a significant actress . 
 Also appearing in the film was Alan Rickman , who portrayed Colonel Brandon . Thompson was pleased that Rickman could express the " extraordinary sweetness [ of ] his nature , " as he had played " Machiavellian types so effectively " in other films . Greg Wise was cast as Marianne 's other romantic interest , John Willoughby , his most noted role thus far . Twelve @-@ year @-@ old Emilie François , appearing as Margaret Dashwood , was one of the last people cast in the production ; she had no professional acting experience . Thompson praised the young actress in her production diaries , " Emilie has a natural quick intelligence that informs every movement – she creates spontaneity in all of us just by being there . " Other cast members included Gemma Jones as Mrs. Dashwood , James Fleet as John Dashwood , Elizabeth Spriggs as Mrs. Jennings , Imogen Stubbs as Lucy Steele , Richard Lumsden as Robert Ferrars , Tom Wilkinson as Mr. Dashwood , and Lone <unk> as Miss Grey . 
 = = = Costume design = = = 
 According to Austen scholar Linda Troost , the costumes used in Sense and Sensibility helped emphasise the class and status of the various characters , particularly among the Dashwoods . They were created by Jenny Beavan and John Bright , a team of designers best known for Merchant Ivory films who began working together in 1984 . The two attempted to create accurate period dress , and featured the " fuller , classical look and colours of the late 18th century . " They found inspiration in the works of the English artists Thomas Rowlandson , John Hopper , and George Romney , and also reviewed fashion plates stored in the Victoria and Albert Museum . The main costumes and hats were manufactured at <unk> , a London @-@ based costumer company . 
 To achieve the tightly wound curls fashionably inspired by Greek art , some of the actresses wore wigs while others employed heated hair twists and slept in pin curls . Fanny , the <unk> of the characters , possesses the tightest of curls but has less of a Greek silhouette , a reflection of her wealth and silliness . Beavan stated that Fanny and Mrs. Jennings " couldn 't quite give up the frills , " and instead draped themselves in lace , fur , feathers , jewellery , and rich fabrics . Conversely , sensible Elinor opts for simpler accessories , such as a long gold chain and a straw hat . Fanny 's shallow personality is also reflected in " flashy , colourful " dresses , while Edward 's buttoned @-@ up appearance represents his " repressed " personality , with little visible skin . Each of the 100 extras used in the London ballroom scene , depicting " soldiers and lawyers to <unk> and <unk> , " don visually distinct costumes . 
 For Brandon 's costumes , Beavan and Bright consulted with Thompson and Lee and decided to have him project an image of " experienced and dependable masculinity . " Brandon is first seen in black , but later he wears sporting gear in the form of corduroy jackets and <unk> . His rescue of Marianne has him transforming into the " romantic Byronic hero " , sporting an unbuttoned shirt and loose cravat . In conjunction with his tragic backstory , Brandon 's " flattering " costumes help his appeal to the audience . Beavan and Bright 's work on the film earned them a nomination for Best Costume Design at the 68th Academy Awards . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film was budgeted at $ 16 million , the largest Ang Lee had yet received as well as the largest awarded to an Austen film that decade . In the wake of the success of Columbia 's 1994 film Little Women , the American studio authorised Lee 's " relatively high budget " out of an expectation that it would be another cross @-@ over hit and appeal to multiple audiences , thus yielding high box office returns . Nevertheless , Doran considered it a " low budget film " and many of the ideas Thompson and Lee came up with – such as an early dramatic scene depicting Mr. Dashwood 's bloody fall from a horse – were deemed unfilmable from a cost perspective . 
 According to Thompson , Lee " arrived on set with the whole movie in his head " . Rather than focus on period details , he wanted his film to concentrate on telling a good story . He showed the cast a selection of films adapted from classic novels , including Barry Lyndon and The Age of Innocence , which he believed to be " great movies ; everybody worships the art work , [ but ] it 's not what we want to do . " Lee criticised the latter film for lacking energy , in contrast to the " passionate tale " of Sense and Sensibility . 
 The cast and crew experienced " slight culture shock " with Lee on a number of occasions . He expected the assistant directors to be the " tough ones " and keep production on schedule , while they expected the same of him ; this led to a slower schedule in the early stages of production . Additionally , according to Thompson the director became " deeply hurt and confused " when she and Grant made suggestions for certain scenes , which was something that was not done in his native country . Lee thought his authority was being undermined and lost sleep , though this was gradually resolved as he became used to their methods . The cast " grew to trust his instincts so completely , " making fewer and fewer suggestions . Co @-@ producer James Schamus stated that Lee also adapted by becoming more verbal and willing to express his opinion . 
 Lee became known for his " frightening " tendency to not " mince words " . The director often had his cast do numerous takes for a scene in order to get the perfect shot , and was not afraid to call something " boring " if he disliked it . Thompson later recalled the director would " always come up to you and say something unexpectedly crushing " , such as asking her not to " look so old . " She also commented , however , that " he doesn 't indulge us but is always kind when we fail . " Due to Thompson 's extensive acting experience , the director encouraged her to practice t 'ai chi to " help her relax [ and ] make her do things simpler . " Other actors soon joined them in meditating – according to Doran , it " was pretty interesting . There were all these pillows on the floor and these pale @-@ looking actors were saying , ' What have we got ourselves into ? ' [ Lee ] was more focused on body language than any director I 've ever seen or heard of . " He suggested Winslet read books of poetry and report back to him in order to best understand her character . He also had Thompson and Winslet live together to develop their characters ' sisterly bond . Many of the cast took lessons in etiquette and riding side @-@ saddle . 
 Lee found that in contrast to Chinese cinema , he had to dissuade many of the actors from using a " very stagy , very English tradition . Instead of just being observed like a human being and getting sympathy , they feel they have to do things , they have to carry the movie . " Grant in particular often had to be restrained from giving an " over @-@ the @-@ top " performance ; Lee later recalled that the actor is " a show stealer . You can 't stop that . I let him do , I have to say , less ' star ' stuff , the Hugh Grant thing ... and not [ let ] the movie serve him , which is probably what he 's used to now . " For the scene in which Elinor learns Edward is unmarried , Thompson found inspiration from her reaction to her father 's death . Grant had been unaware that Thompson would cry through most of his speech , and the actress attempted to reassure him , " ' There 's no other way , and I promise you it 'll work , and it will be funny as well as being touching . ' And he said , ' Oh , all right , ' and he was very good about it " . Lee had one demand for the scene , that Thompson avoid the temptation to turn her head towards the camera . 
 = = = = Locations = = = = 
 Production of Sense and Sensibility was scheduled for fifty @-@ eight days , though this was eventually extended to sixty @-@ five . Filming commenced in mid @-@ April 1995 at a number of locations in Devon , beginning with Saltram House ( standing in for Norland Park ) , where Winslet and Jones shot the first scene of the production : when their characters read about Barton Cottage . As Saltram was a National Trust property , Schamus had to sign a contract before production began , and staff with the organisation remained on set to carefully monitor the filming . Production later returned to shoot several more scenes , finishing there on 29 April . The second location of filming , <unk> House , stood in for part of Mrs. Jennings ' London estate , where Edward first sees Elinor with Lucy . Representing Barton Cottage was a <unk> Estate stone cottage , which Thompson called " one of the most beautiful spots we 've ever seen . " 
 Early May saw production at the " exquisite " village church in Berry Pomeroy for the final wedding scene . From the tenth to the twelfth of May , Marianne 's first rescue sequence , depicting her encounter with Willoughby , was shot . Logistics were difficult , as the scene was set upon a hill during a rainy day . Lee shot around fifty takes , with the actors becoming soaked under rain machines ; this led to Winslet eventually collapsing from hypothermia . Further problems occurred midway through filming , when Winslet contracted phlebitis in her leg , developed a limp , and sprained her wrist after falling down a staircase . 
 From May to July , production took place at a number of other National Trust estates and stately homes across England . Trafalgar House and Wilton House in Wiltshire stood in for the grounds of Barton Park and the London Ballroom respectively . <unk> House , an eighteenth @-@ century townhouse located in Salisbury , represented Mrs. Jennings ' sumptuous townhouse . Sixteenth @-@ century Montacute House in South Somerset was the setting for the Palmer estate of Cleveland House . Further scenes were shot at Compton Castle in Devon ( Mr Willoughby 's estate ) and at the National Maritime Museum in Greenwich . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Composer Patrick Doyle , who had previously worked with his friend Emma Thompson in the films Henry V , Much Ado About Nothing , and Dead Again , was hired to produce the music for Sense and Sensibility . Asked by the director to select existing music or compose new " gentle " melodies , Doyle wrote a score that reflected the film 's events . He explained , " You had this middle @-@ class English motif , and with the music you would have occasional outbursts of emotion . " Doyle explains that the score " becomes a little more grown @-@ up " as the story progresses to one of " maturity and an emotional catharsis . " The score contains romantic elements and has been described by National Public Radio as a " restricted compass ... of emotion " with " instruments [ that ] blend together in a gentle sort of way " . They also noted that as a reflection of the story , the score is a " little wistful ... and sentimental . " 
 Two songs are sung by Marianne in the film , with lyrics adapted from seventeenth @-@ century poems . Lee believed that the two songs conveyed the " vision of duality " visible both in the novel and script . In his opinion , the second song expressed Marianne 's " mature acceptance , " intertwined with a " sense of melancholy " . The melody of " Weep You No More Sad Fountains " , Marianne 's first song , appears in the opening credits , while her second song 's melody features again during the ending credits , this time sung by dramatic soprano Jane <unk> . The songs were written by Doyle before filming began . The composer received his first Academy Award nomination for his score . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 Thompson and Doran discussed how much of the love stories to depict , as the male characters spend much of the novel away from the Dashwood sisters . The screenwriter had to carefully balance the amount of screentime she gave to the male leads , noting in her film production diary that such a decision would " very much lie in the editing . " Thompson wrote " hundreds of different versions " of romantic storylines . She considered having Edward re @-@ appear midway through the film before deciding that it would not work as " there was nothing for him to do . " Thompson also opted to exclude the duel scene between Brandon and Willoughby , which is described in the novel , because it " only seemed to subtract from the mystery . " She and Doran agonised about when and how to reveal Brandon 's backstory , as they wanted to prevent viewers from becoming bored . Thompson described the process of reminding audiences of Edward and Brandon as " keeping plates spinning " . 
 A scene was shot of Brandon finding his ward in a poverty @-@ stricken area in London , but this was excluded from the film . Thompson 's script included a scene of Elinor and Edward kissing , as the studio " couldn 't stand the idea of these two people who we 've been watching all the way through not kissing . " It was one of the first scenes cut during editing : the original version was over three hours , Lee was less interested in the story 's romance , and Thompson found a kissing scene to be inappropriate . The scene was included in marketing materials and the film trailer . Thompson and Doran also cut out a scene depicting Willoughby as remorseful when Marianne is sick . Doran said that despite it " being one of the great scenes in book history , " they could not get it to fit into the film . 
 Tim <unk> edited the film , his fourth collaboration with Ang Lee . He reflected in 2013 about the editing process , 
 " It was the first film that I had done with Ang that was all in English , and it 's Emma Thompson , Kate Winslet , Alan Rickman , and Hugh Grant — these great , great actors . When you get footage like that , you realise that your job is really not technical . It was my job to look at something that Emma Thompson had done and say , ' Eh , that 's not good , I 'll use this other one instead . ' And not only was I allowed to pass judgment on these tremendous actors , I was required to . " 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 = = = Changes from source material = = = 
 Scholar Louise Flavin has noted that Thompson 's screenplay contains significant alterations to the characters of Elinor and Marianne Dashwood : in the novel , the former embodies " sense " , i.e. " sensible " in our terms , and the latter , " sensibility " , i.e. " sensitivity " in our terms . Audience members are meant to view self @-@ restrained Elinor as the person in need of reform , rather than her impassioned sister . To heighten the contrast between them , Marianne and Willoughby 's relationship includes an " erotic " invented scene in which the latter requests a lock of her hair – a direct contrast to Elinor 's " reserved relationship " with Edward . Lee also distinguishes them through imagery – Marianne is often seen with musical instruments , near open windows , and outside , while Elinor is pictured in door frames . Another character altered for modern viewers is Margaret Dashwood , who conveys " the frustrations that a girl of our times might feel at the limitations facing her as a woman in the early nineteenth century . " Thompson uses Margaret for exposition in order to detail contemporary attitudes and customs . For instance , Elinor explains to a curious Margaret – and by extension , the audience – why their half @-@ brother inherits the Dashwood estate . Margaret 's altered storyline , giving her an interest in fencing and geography , also allows audience members to see the " feminine " side of Edward and Brandon , as they become father or brother figures to her . The film omits the characters of Lady Middleton and her children , as well as that of Ann Steele , Lucy 's sister . 
 When adapting the characters for film , Thompson found that in the novel , " Edward and Brandon are quite shadowy and absent for long periods , " and that " making the male characters effective was one of the biggest problems . Willoughby is really the only male who springs out in three dimensions . " Several major male characters in Sense and Sensibility were consequently altered significantly from the novel in an effort to appeal to contemporary audiences . Grant 's Edward and Rickman 's Brandon are " ideal " modern males who display an obvious love of children as well as " pleasing manners " , especially when contrasted with Palmer . Thompson 's script both expanded and omitted scenes from Edward 's storyline , including the deletion of an early scene in which Elinor assumes that a lock of hair found in Edward 's possession is hers , when it belongs to Lucy . He was made more fully realised and honourable than in the novel to increase his appeal to viewers . To gradually show viewers why Brandon is worthy of Marianne 's love , Thompson 's screenplay has his storyline mirroring Willoughby 's ; they are similar in appearance , share a love of music and poetry , and rescue Marianne in the rain while on horseback . 
 = = = Class = = = 
 Thompson viewed the novel as a story of " love and money , " noting that some people needed one more than the other . During the writing process , executive producer Sydney Pollack stressed that the film be understandable to modern audiences , and that it be made clear why the Dashwood sisters could not just obtain a job . " I 'm from Indiana ; if I get it , everyone gets it , " he said . Thompson believed that Austen was just as comprehensible in a different century , " You don 't think people are still concerned with marriage , money , romance , finding a partner ? " She was keen to emphasise the realism of the Dashwoods ' predicament in her screenplay , and inserted scenes to make the differences in wealth more apparent to modern audiences . Thompson made the Dashwood family richer than in the book and added elements to help contrast their early wealth with their later financial predicament ; for instance , because it might have been confusing to viewers that one could be poor and still have servants , Elinor is made to address a large group of servants at Norland Park early in the film for viewers to remember when they see their few staff at Barton Cottage . Lee also sought to emphasise social class and the limitations it placed on the protagonists . Lee conveys this in part when Willoughby publicly rejects Marianne ; he returns to a more lavishly furnished room , a symbol of the wealth she has lost . " Family dramas , " he stated , " are all about conflict , about family obligations versus free will . " 
 The film 's theme of class has attracted much scholarly attention . Carole Dole noted that class constitutes an important element in Austen 's stories and is " impossible " to avoid when adapting her novels . According to Dole , Lee 's film contains an " ambiguous treatment of class values " that stresses social differences but " underplays the consequences of the class distinctions so important in the novel " ; for instance , Edward 's story ends upon his proposal to Elinor , with no attention paid to how they will live on his small annual income from the vicarage . Louise Flavin believed that Lee used the houses to represent their occupants ' class and character : the Dashwood sisters ' decline in eligibility are represented through the contrast between the spacious rooms of Norland Park and those of the isolated , cramped Barton Cottage . James Thompson criticised what he described as the <unk> " mélange of disconnected picture postcard @-@ gift @-@ calendar @-@ perfect scenes , " in which little connection is made between " individual subjects and the land that supports them . " Andrew Higson argued that while Sense and Sensibility includes commentary on sex and gender , it fails to pursue issues of class . Thompson 's script , he wrote , displays a " sense of impoverishment [ but is ] confined to the still privileged lifestyle of the disinherited Dashwoods . The broader class system is pretty much taken for granted . " The ending visual image of flying gold coins , depicted during Marianne 's wedding , has also drawn attention ; Marsha McCreadie noted that it serves as a " visual wrap @-@ up and emblem of the merger between money and marriage . " 
 = = = Gender = = = 
 Gender has been seen as another major theme of the film , often intersecting with class . Penny Gay observed that Elinor 's early dialogue with Edward about " feel [ ing ] idle and useless ... [ with ] no hope whatsoever of any occupation " reflected Thompson 's background as a " middle class , Cambridge @-@ educated feminist . " Conversely , Dole wrote that Thompson 's version of Elinor " has a surprising anti @-@ feminist element to it , " as she appears more dependent on men than the original character ; the film presents her as repressed , resulting in her emotional breakdown with Edward . Linda Troost opined that Lee 's production prominently features " radical feminist and economic issues " while " paradoxically endorsing the conservative concept of marriage as a woman 's goal in life . " Despite this " mixed political agenda , " Troost believed that the film 's faithfulness to the traditional heritage film genre is evident through its use of locations , costumes , and attention to details , all of which also emphasize class and status . Gay and Julianne Pidduck stated that gender differences are expressed by showing the female characters indoors , while their male counterparts are depicted outside confidently moving throughout the countryside . Nora <unk> observed that Thompson " emphasises Austen ’ s feminist satire on Regency gender economics , " drawing attention not only to the financial plight of the Dashwoods but also to eighteenth @-@ century women in general . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 In the United States , Sony and Columbia Pictures released Sense and Sensibility on a slow schedule compared to mainstream films , first premiering it on 13 December 1995 . Believing that a limited release would position the film both as an " exclusive quality picture " and increase its chances of winning Academy Awards , Columbia dictated that its first weekend involve only seventy cinemas in the US ; it opened in eleventh place in terms of box office takings and earned $ 721 @,@ 341 . To benefit from the publicity surrounding potential Academy Award candidates and increase its chance of earning nominations , the film was released within " Oscar season " . The number of theatres showing Sense and Sensibility was slowly expanded , with particular surges when its seven Oscar nominations were announced and at the time of the ceremony in late March , until it was present in over one thousand cinemas across the US . By the end of its American release , Sense and Sensibility had been watched by more than eight million people , garnering an " impressive " total domestic gross of $ 43 @,@ 182 @,@ 776 . 
 On the basis of Austen 's reputation as a serious author , the producers were able to rely on high @-@ brow publications to help market their film . Near the time of its US release , large spreads in The New York Review of Books , Vanity Fair , Film Comment , and other media outlets featured columns on Lee 's production . In late December , Time magazine declared it and Persuasion to be the best films of 1995 . Andrew Higson referred to all this media exposure as a " marketing coup " because it meant the film " was reaching one of its target audiences . " Meanwhile , most promotional images featured the film as a " sort of chick flick in period garb . " New Market Press published Thompson 's screenplay and film diary ; in its first printing , the hard cover edition sold 28 @,@ 500 copies in the US . British publisher Bloomsbury released a paperback edition of the novel containing film pictures , same title design , and the cast 's names on the cover , whilst Signet Publishing in the US printed 250 @,@ 000 copies instead of the typical 10 @,@ 000 a year ; actress Julie Christie read the novel in an audiobook released by Penguin Audiobooks . Sense and Sensibility increased dramatically in terms of its book sales , ultimately hitting tenth place on the The New York Times Best Seller list for paperbacks in February 1996 . 
 In the United Kingdom , Sense and Sensibility was released on 23 February 1996 in order to " take advantage of the hype from Pride and Prejudice " , another popular Austen adaptation recently broadcast . Columbia Tristar 's head of UK marketing noted that " if there was any territory this film was going to work , it was in the UK . " After receiving positive responses at previews , marketing strategies focused on selling it as both a costume drama and as a film attractive to mainstream audiences . Attention was also paid to marketing Sense and Sensibility internationally . Because the entire production cycle had consistently emphasised it as being " bigger " than a normal British period drama literary film , distributors avoided labelling it as " just another English period film . " Instead , marketing materials featured quotations from populist newspapers such as the Daily Mail , which compared the film to Four Weddings and a Funeral ( 1994 ) . It was watched by more than ten million viewers in Europe . Worldwide , the film ultimately grossed $ 134 @,@ 582 @,@ 776 , a sum that reflected its commercial success . It had the largest box office gross out of the Austen adaptations of the 1990s . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Sense and Sensibility has received overwhelmingly positive reviews from film critics , and was included on more than a hundred top @-@ ten of the year lists . Writing for Variety magazine , Todd McCarthy observed that the film 's success was assisted by its " highly skilled cast of actors , " as well as its choice of Lee as director . McCarthy clarified , " Although [ Lee 's ] previously revealed talents for dramatizing conflicting social and generational traditions will no doubt be noted , Lee 's achievement here with such foreign material is simply well beyond what anyone could have expected and may well be posited as the cinematic equivalent of Kazuo Ishiguro writing The Remains of the Day . " 
 Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle lauded the film for containing a sense of urgency " that keeps the pedestrian problems of an unremarkable 18th century family immediate and personal . " LaSalle concluded that the adaptation has a " right balance of irony and warmth . The result is a film of great understanding and emotional clarity , filmed with an elegance that never calls attention to itself . " Film critic John Simon praised most of the film , particularly focusing on Thompson 's performance , though he criticised Grant for being " much too adorably bumbling ... he urgently needs to <unk> his onscreen persona , and stop hunching his shoulders like a dromedary . " 
 In The Mail on Sunday , William Leith found Sense and Sensibility to be " an extremely sharp , subtle , clever , lovely looking film " that was superior to the serial Pride and Prejudice . Leith especially saved praise for the cast , writing that Grant plays his role " masterfully " and Harriet Walter " conveys sour bitchiness like you never thought she could . " <unk> Carr of The Boston Globe thought that Lee " nail [ ed ] Austen 's acute social observation and tangy satire , " and viewed Thompson and Winslet 's age discrepancy as a positive element that helped feed the dichotomy of sense and sensibility . The Radio Times ' David Parkinson was equally appreciative of Lee 's direction , writing that he " avoid [ s ] the chocolate @-@ box visuals that cheapen so many British costume dramas " and " brings a refreshing period realism to the tale of two sisters that allows Emma Thompson 's respectful Oscar @-@ winning script to flourish . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Out of the 1990s Austen adaptations , Sense and Sensibility received the most recognition from Hollywood . It garnered seven nominations at the 68th Academy Awards ceremony , where Thompson received the Award for Best Adapted Screenplay , making her the only person to have won an Oscar for both her writing and acting ( Thompson won the Best Actress award for Howards End , in 1993 ) . The film also was the recipient of twelve nominations at the 49th British Academy Film Awards , including Best Film , Best Actress in a Leading Role ( for Thompson ) , and Best Actress in a Supporting Role ( for Winslet ) . In addition , the film won the Golden Bear at the 46th Berlin International Film Festival , making Lee the first director to win this twice . 
 Despite the recognition given to the film , Lee was not nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director ( though he was nominated for the Golden Globe ) . The scholar Shu @-@ mei Shih and the journalist Clarence Page have attributed this snub to Hollywood 's racism against Lee , and Chinese cinema in general . Lee sought to avoid turning his omission into a scandal and specifically asked the Taiwan state media not to make it a " national issue , " explaining that he endured more pressure when forced to act as his country 's representative . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Following the theatrical release of Persuasion by a few months , Sense and Sensibility was one of the first English @-@ language period adaptations of an Austen novel to be released in cinemas in over fifty years , the previous being the 1940 film Pride and Prejudice . The year 1995 saw a resurgence of popularity for Austen 's works , as Sense and Sensibility and the serial Pride and Prejudice both rocketed to critical and financial success . The two adaptations helped draw more attention to the previously little @-@ known 1995 television film Persuasion , and led to additional Austen adaptations in the following years . In 1995 and 1996 , six Austen adaptations were released onto film or television . The filming of these productions led to a surge in popularity of many of the landmarks and locations depicted ; according to the scholar Sue Parrill , they became " instant <unk> for viewers . " 
 When Sense and Sensibility was released in cinemas in the US , Town & Country published a six @-@ page article entitled " Jane Austen 's England " , which focused on the landscape and sites shown in the film . A press book released by the studio , as well as Thompson 's published screenplay and diaries , listed all the filming locations and helped to boost tourism . Saltram House for instance was carefully promoted during the film 's release , and saw a 57 percent increase in attendance . In 1996 , JASNA 's membership increased by fifty percent . The popularity of both Sense and Sensibility and Pride and Prejudice led to the BBC and ITV releasing their Austen adaptations from the 1970s and 1980s onto DVD . 
 As the mid @-@ 1990s included adaptations of four Austen novels , there were few of her works to adapt . Andrew Higson argued that this resulted in a " variety of successors " in the genres of romantic comedy and costume drama , as well as with films featuring strong female characters . Cited examples included Mrs Dalloway ( 1997 ) , Mrs. Brown ( 1997 ) , Shakespeare in Love ( 1998 ) , and Bridget Jones 's Diary ( 2001 ) . In 2008 , Andrew Davies , the screenwriter of Pride and Prejudice , adapted Sense and Sensibility for television . As a reaction to what he said was Lee 's overly " sentimental " film , this production featured events found in the novel but excluded from Thompson 's screenplay , such as Willoughby 's seduction of Eliza and his duel with Brandon . It also featured actors closer to the ages in the source material . 
 Sense and Sensibility has maintained its popularity into the twenty @-@ first century . In 2004 , Louise Flavin referred to the 1995 film as " the most popular of the Austen film adaptations , " and in 2008 , The Independent ranked it as the third @-@ best Austen adaptation of all time , opining that Lee " offered an acute outsider 's insight into Austen in this compelling 1995 interpretation of the book [ and ] Emma Thompson delivered a charming turn as the older , wiser , Dashwood sister , Elinor . " Journalist Zoe Williams credits Thompson as the person most responsible for Austen 's popularity , explaining in 2007 that Sense and Sensibility " is the definitive Austen film and that 's largely down to her . " In 2011 , The Guardian film critic Paul Laity named it his favourite film of all time , partly because of its " exceptional screenplay , crisply and skilfully done . " . <unk> Looser reflected on the film in The Atlantic on the 20th anniversary of its release , arguing that the film served as " a turning point " for " pro @-@ feminist masculinity " in Austen adaptations . 
 = Sourav Ganguly = 
 Sourav Chandidas Ganguly ( pronunciation ; born 8 July 1972 ) , affectionately known as Dada ( meaning " elder brother " in Bengali ) , is a former Indian cricketer and captain of the Indian national team . Currently , he is appointed as the honourable President of the CAB and President of the Editorial Board with Wisden India . 
 Ganguly was introduced into the world of cricket by his elder brother Snehasish . He is regarded as one of India 's most successful captains in modern times , and one of the greatest ODI batsmen of all time . He started his career by playing in state and school teams . Currently , he is the 8th highest run scorer in One Day Internationals ( ODIs ) and was the 3rd batsman in history to cross the 10 @,@ 000 run landmark , after Sachin Tendulkar and Inzamam Ul Haq . In 2002 , the Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack ranked him the sixth greatest ODI batsman of all time , next to Viv Richards , Sachin Tendulkar , Brian Lara , Dean Jones and Michael Bevan . 
 After playing in different Indian domestic tournaments , such as the Ranji and Duleep trophies , Ganguly got his big @-@ break while playing for India on their tour of England . He scored 131 runs and cemented his place in the Indian team . Ganguly 's place in the team was assured after successful performances in series against Sri Lanka , Pakistan and Australia , winning the Man of the Match awards . In the 1999 Cricket World Cup , he was involved in a partnership of 318 runs with Rahul Dravid , which remains the highest overall partnership score in the World Cup tournament history . Due to the match @-@ fixing scandals in 2000 by other players of the team , and for his poor health , Indian captain Sachin Tendulkar resigned his position , and Ganguly was made the captain of the Indian cricket team . He was soon the subject of media criticism after an unsuccessful stint for county side Durham and for taking off his shirt in the final of the 2002 NatWest Series . He led India into the 2003 World Cup final , where they were defeated by Australia . Due to a decrease in individual performance , he was dropped from the team in the following year . Ganguly was awarded the Padma Shri in 2004 , one of India 's highest civilian awards . He returned to the National team in 2006 , and made successful batting displays . Around this time , he became involved in a dispute with Indian team coach Greg Chappell over several misunderstandings . Ganguly was again dropped from the team , however he was selected to play in the 2007 Cricket World Cup . 
 Ganguly joined the Kolkata Knight Riders team as captain for the Indian Premier League Twenty20 cricket tournament in 2008 . The same year , after a home Test series against Australia , he announced his retirement from international cricket . He continued to play for the Bengal team and was appointed the chairman of the Cricket Association of Bengal 's Cricket Development Committee . The left @-@ handed Ganguly was a prolific One Day International ( ODI ) batsman , with over 11 @,@ 000 ODI runs to his credit . He is one of the most successful Indian Test captains to date , winning 21 out of 49 test <unk> <unk> is the most successful Indian test captain overseas with 11 wins . The Indian team was ranked eighth in the ICC rankings before he became the captain , and under his tenure the team rank went up to second . An aggressive captain , Ganguly is credited with having nurtured the careers of many young players who played under him , and transforming the Indian team into an aggressive fighting unit . 
 Along with <unk> <unk> , Sanjiv Goenka , Utsav <unk> , and Spanish La Liga side Atlético de Madrid , Ganguly is also the co @-@ owner of Atlético de Kolkata , a franchise of the Indian Super League , which won the inaugural season in 2014 . 
 He was awarded with the Banga <unk> Award from the Government of West Bengal on 20 May 2013 . 
 Sourav is currently a part of the Supreme Court of India appointed Justice Mudgal Committee probe panel for the IPL Spot fixing and betting scandal 's investigations . 
 He presently holds the post of being a member of the Indian Premier League governing council . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = 1972 – 1989 : Early life and introduction to cricket = = = 
 Sourav Ganguly was born on 8 July 1972 in Calcutta , and is the youngest son of Chandidas and <unk> Ganguly . Chandidas ran a flourishing print business and was one of the richest men in the city . Ganguly had a luxurious childhood and was nicknamed the ' Maharaja ' , meaning the ' Great King ' . Ganguly 's father Chandidas Ganguly died at the age of 73 on 21 February 2013 after a long illness . 
 Since the favourite sport for the people of Calcutta was the game of football , Ganguly was initially attracted to the game . However , academics came in @-@ between his love for sports and <unk> was not very supportive of Ganguly taking up cricket or any other sport as a career . By then , his elder brother Snehasish was already an established cricketer for the Bengal cricket team . He supported Ganguly 's dream to be a cricketer and asked their father to get Ganguly enrolled in a cricket coaching camp during his summer holidays . Ganguly was studying in tenth grade at that time . 
 Despite being right @-@ handed , Ganguly learnt to bat left @-@ handed so he could use his brother 's sporting equipment . After he showed some promise as a batsman , he was enrolled in a cricket academy . An indoor multi @-@ gym and concrete wicket was built at their home , so he and Snehasish could practice the game . They used to watch a number of old cricket match videos , especially the games played by David Gower , whom Ganguly admired . After he scored a century against the Orissa Under – 15 side , he was made captain of St Xavier 's School 's cricket team , where several of his teammates complained against what they perceived to be his arrogance . While touring with a junior team , Ganguly refused his turn as the twelfth man , as he reportedly felt that the duties involved , which included organising equipment and drinks for the players , and delivering messages , were beneath his social status . Ganguly purportedly refused to do such tasks as he considered it beneath his social status to assist his teammates in such a way . However , his <unk> gave him a chance to make his first @-@ class cricket debut for Bengal in 1989 , the same year that his brother was dropped from the team . 
 = = = 1990 – 96 : Career beginning and debut success = = = 
 Following a prolific Ranji season in 1990 – 91 , Ganguly scored three runs in his One Day International ( ODI ) debut for India against the West Indies in 1992 . He was dropped immediately since he was perceived to be " arrogant " and his attitude towards the game was openly questioned . It was rumoured that Ganguly refused to carry drinks for his teammates , commenting that it was not his job to do so , later denied by him . Consequently , he was removed from the team . He toiled away in domestic cricket , scoring heavily in the 1993 – 94 and 1994 – 95 Ranji seasons . Following an innings of 171 in the 1995 – 96 Duleep Trophy , he was recalled to the National team for a tour of England in 1996 , in the middle of intense media scrutiny . He played in a single ODI , but was omitted from the team for the first Test . However , after teammate <unk> Singh Sidhu left the touring , citing ill @-@ treatment by then captain Mohammad Azharuddin , Ganguly made his Test debut against England in the Second Test of a three @-@ match series at Lord 's Cricket Ground alongside Rahul Dravid . England had won the First Test of the three @-@ match series ; however , Ganguly scored a century , becoming only the third cricketer to achieve such a feat on debut at Lord 's , after Harry Graham and John Hampshire . Andrew Strauss and Matt Prior have since accomplished this feat , but Ganguly 's 131 still remains the highest by any batsman on his debut at the ground . India was not required to bat in the second innings due to the match ending in a draw . In the next Test match at Trent Bridge he made 136 , thus becoming only the third batsman to make a century in each of his first two innings ( after Lawrence Rowe and Alvin <unk> ) . He shared a 255 run stand with Sachin Tendulkar , which became at that time the highest partnership for India against any country for any wicket outside India . The Test again ended in a draw , handing England a 1 – 0 series victory ; Ganguly scored 48 in the second innings . 
 = = = 1997 – 99 : Marriage , Opening in ODIs and World Cup ' 99 = = = 
 Weeks after his successful tour of England , Ganguly eloped with childhood sweetheart Dona Roy . The bride and groom 's family were sworn enemies at that point and this news caused an uproar between them . However , both families reconciled and a formal wedding was held in February 1997 . Same year , Ganguly scored his maiden ODI century by hitting 113 , opposed to Sri Lanka 's team total of 238 . Later that year , he won four consecutive man of the match awards , in the Sahara Cup with Pakistan ; the second of these was won after he took five wickets for 16 runs off 10 overs , his best bowling in an ODI . After a barren run in Test cricket his form returned at the end of the year with three centuries in four Tests , all against Sri Lanka , and two of these involved stands with Sachin Tendulkar of over 250 . 
 During the final of the Independence Cup at Dhaka in January 1998 , India successfully chased down 315 off 48 overs , and Ganguly won the Man of the Match award . In March 1998 he was part of the Indian team that defeated Australia ; in Kolkata , he took three wickets having opened the bowling with his medium pace . 
 Ganguly was part of the Indian team that competed in the 1999 Cricket World Cup in England . During the match against Sri Lanka at Taunton , India chose to bat . After Sadagoppan Ramesh was bowled , Ganguly scored 183 from 158 balls , and hit 17 fours and seven sixes . It became the second highest score in World Cup history and the highest by an Indian in the tournament . His partnership of 318 with Rahul Dravid is the highest overall score in a World Cup and is the second highest in all ODI cricket . In 1999 – 00 , India lost Test series to both Australia and South Africa that involved a combined total of five Tests . Ganguly struggled scoring 224 runs at 22 @.@ 40 ; however his ODI form was impressive , with five centuries over the season taking him to the top of the PwC One Day Ratings for batsmen . Around the same time , allegations came that Ganguly was romantically involved with South Indian actress Nagma , something he denied . 
 = = = 2000 – 05 : Ascension to captaincy and accolades = = = 
 In 2000 , after the match fixing scandal by some of the players of the team , Ganguly was named the Captain of the Indian cricket team . The decision was spurred due to Tendulkar stepping down from the position for his health , and Ganguly being the vice @-@ captain at that time . He began well as a captain , leading India to a series win over South Africa in the five @-@ match one day series and led the Indian team to the finals of the 2000 ICC <unk> Trophy . He scored two centuries , including one in the final ; however , New Zealand still won by four wickets . The same year , Ganguly tried his hand at county cricket career in England but was not successful . In " The Wisden Cricketer " , reviewers Steve <unk> and John Stern called him as " The imperious Indian — dubbed ' Lord <unk> ' . They commented : 
 " At the crease it was sometimes uncertain whether his partner was a batsman or a batman being dispatched to take his discarded sweater to the pavilion or carry his kit bag . But mutiny was afoot among the lower orders . In one match Ganguly , after reaching his fifty , raised his bat to the home balcony , only to find it deserted . He did not inspire at Glamorgan or Northamptonshire either . At the latter in 2006 he averaged 4 @.@ 80 from his four first @-@ class appearances . " 
 His Lancashire teammate Andrew Flintoff thought him to be aloof and compared his attitude to that of Prince Charles . In Australia 's three Test and five match ODI tour of India in early 2001 , Ganguly caused controversy by arriving late for the toss on four occasions , something that agitated opposing captain Steve Waugh . In the Fourth ODI , he caused further controversy by failing to wear his playing attire to the toss , something considered unusual in cricket circles . However , India won the Test series 2 – 1 , ending Australia 's run of 16 consecutive Test match victories in the Second Test . The match saw India looking set for defeat after conceding a first innings lead of 274 . Waugh chose to enforce the follow @-@ on and V. V. S. Laxman ( 281 ) and Rahul Dravid ( 180 ) batted for the entire fourth day 's play to set Australia a target of 384 on a dusty , spinning wicket . The Australians were unable to survive and became only the third team to lose a Test after enforcing the follow @-@ on . In November 2001 , Ganguly 's wife Dona gave birth to their daughter Sana Ganguly . During the final match of the 2002 NatWest Series held in Lords after a stunning performance by team mates Yuvraj Singh and Mohammad Kaif , Ganguly took off his shirt in public and brandished it in the air to celebrate India 's winning of the match . He was later strongly condemned for tarnishing the " gentleman 's game " image of cricket and disrespecting Lord 's protocol . Ganguly said that he was only mimicking an act performed by the British all @-@ rounder Andrew Flintoff during a tour of India . In 2003 , India reached the World Cup Final for the first time since 1983 , where they lost to the Australians . Ganguly had a successful tournament personally , scoring 465 runs at an average of 58 @.@ 12 , including three centuries . 
 By 2004 , he had achieved significant success as captain and was deemed as India 's most successful cricket captain by sections of the media . However , his individual performance deteriorated during his captaincy reign , especially after the World Cup , the tour of Australia in 2003 and the Pakistan series in 2004 . In 2004 , Australia won a Test series in India for the first time since 1969 . It was speculated that Ganguly was in disagreement with the head of cricket in Nagpur over the type of pitch to be used for the Third Test . The groundsmen went against Ganguly , leaving a large amount of grass on the pitch . Some experts indicated that the reason for this was for " spite or revenge " against the Indian captain . When Australia 's stand @-@ in @-@ captain , Adam Gilchrist , went to the toss , he noticed Rahul Dravid was waiting instead of Ganguly , leaving him to ask Dravid where Ganguly was . Dravid could not give a definitive answer , saying : " Oh , who knows ? " 
 Following indifferent form in 2004 and poor form in 2005 , he was dropped from the team in October 2005 . Having been nominated and rejected in 2000 , when the game suffered a tarnished reputation due to match fixing scandals , the captaincy was passed to Dravid , his former deputy . Ganguly decided against retiring and attempted to make a comeback to the team . Ganguly was awarded the Padma Shri in 2004 , India 's fourth highest civilian award , in recognition of his distinguished contribution in the field of sports . He was presented with the award on 30 June 2004 , by then President of India , Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam . 
 = = = 2006 – 07 : Comeback and rift with Greg Chappell = = = 
 In September 2005 , Greg Chappell became the coach of India for the tour of Zimbabwe . Ganguly 's dispute with him resulted in many headlines . Chappell had emailed the Board of Control for Cricket in India , stating that Ganguly was " physically and mentally " unfit to lead India and that his " divide and rule " behaviour was damaging the team . This email was leaked to the media and resulted in huge backlash from Ganguly 's fans . Ganguly had enlisted the support from the Indian media and eventually the board had to intervene and order a truce between the pair . BCCI president Ranbir Singh Mahendra issued a statement that , 
 " In view of the decision that cricket is to go forward , both the coach and the captain have been asked to work out a mutual and professional working relationship . For this , performance will be the criteria , applicable to captain , coach and players . [ ... ] Of course the captain controls the game , the coach does his own job . Mutual trust is important . Henceforth no player / captain / coach will write or have any interaction with the media . Going to the media will lead to disciplinary action . " 
 Ganguly , Chappell and the Indian team manager for the Zimbabwe tour , Amitabh Choudhary , were asked to appear before the BCCI committee , where it was reported that assurance of working together was given by them . Consequently , due to his poor form and differences with the coach , Ganguly was dropped as the captain of the team , with Dravid taking his place . <unk> Narayan , chief correspondent for The Times of India , commented that " The row with Greg Chappell just added to the mystery , but he was going through a really bad patch then , his only score [ of note ] was a hundred against Zimbabwe and that didn 't count for much . " Ten months later , during India 's tour to South Africa , Ganguly was recalled after his middle order replacements Suresh Raina and Mohammad Kaif suffered poor form . 
 Following India 's poor batting display in the 2006 ICC Champions Trophy and the ODI series in South Africa , in which they were whitewashed 4 – 0 , Ganguly made his comeback to the Test team . Wasim Jaffer , Zaheer Khan and Anil Kumble had earlier been selected for the one @-@ day squad , despite their recent poor performances . Many saw this as an indictment of coach Greg Chappell 's youth @-@ first policy . Coming in at 37 / 4 , Ganguly scored 83 in a tour match against the rest of South Africa , modifying his original batting style and taking a middle @-@ stump guard , resulting in India winning the match . During his first Test innings since his comeback , against South Africa in Johannesburg his score of 51 helped India to victory , marking the first Test match win for the team in South Africa . Though India lost the series , Ganguly accumulated the most runs on the scoring chart . After his successful Test comeback he was recalled for the ODI team , as India played host to West Indies and Sri Lanka in back to back ODI tournaments . In his first ODI innings in almost two years , he scored a <unk> 98 . He performed well in both series , averaging almost 70 and won the Man of the Series Award against Sri Lanka . 
 Ganguly was allotted a place in the official team for the 2007 Cricket World Cup . He was the leading scorer for India in their first round defeat against Bangladesh . After India were knocked out of the tournament in the group stage , there were reports of a rift between certain members of the Indian team and Chappell . Ganguly was alleged to have ignored instructions from the team management to score quickly . After Tendulkar issued a statement saying that what hurt the team most was that " the coach has questioned our attitude " , Chappell decided not to renew his contract with the Indian team and left his post as coach , citing " family and personal reasons " . On 12 December 2007 , Ganguly scored his maiden double century of his career while playing against Pakistan . He scored 239 runs in the first innings of the third and final Test match of the series . He was involved in a 300 run partnership for the fifth wicket with Yuvraj Singh . Ganguly remained prolific in both Test and ODI cricket in the year 2007 . He scored 1106 Test runs at an average of 61 @.@ 44 ( with three centuries and four fifties ) in 2007 to become the second highest run @-@ scorer in Test matches of that year after Jacques Kallis . He was also the fifth highest run @-@ scorer in 2007 in ODIs , where he scored 1240 runs at an average of 44 @.@ 28 . 
 = = = 2008 – present : International retirement and IPL = = = 
 In February 2008 , Ganguly joined as the captain of Kolkata Knight Riders ( KKR ) team , owned by Bollywood actor Shahrukh Khan , as part of the Indian Premier League ( IPL ) . On 18 April 2008 , Ganguly led the KKR , in the IPL Twenty20 cricket match . They had a 140 run victory over Bangalore Royal Challengers ( captained by Rahul Dravid and owned by Vijay Mallya ) . Ganguly opened the innings with Brendan McCullum and scored 10 runs while McCullum remained unbeaten , scoring 158 runs in 73 balls . On 1 May , in a game between the Knight Riders and the Rajasthan Royals , Ganguly made his second T20 half century , scoring 51 runs off of 39 balls at a strike rate of 130 @.@ 76 . In his innings , Ganguly hit four 4s and two sixes , topping the scorers list for the Knight Riders . 
 On 7 July 2008 , media reported that Ganguly was being projected as a candidate for the post of President of the Cricket Association of Bengal ( CAB ) against his former mentor Jagmohan <unk> . Reports also suggested that he could run for the post of BCCI President in 2014 as East Zone 's representative . Ganguly himself did not deny the reports and did not rule out any such move . The same year in October , Ganguly announced that the Test series against Australia starting in October 2008 would be his last and stated " [ t ] o be honest , I didn 't expect to be picked for this series . Before coming here , [ at the conference ] I spoke to my team @-@ mates and hopefully I will go out with a winning knock . " Ganguly played in every game of the four @-@ Test series and amassed 324 runs at an average of 54 @.@ 00 . While playing the second Test match of the series in Mohali , Ganguly scored his final test century . In the final test match he played at Nagpur against Australia he scored 85 and 0 in his first and second innings respectively . In the Fourth and final Test , with India needing one wicket to secure a victory , the Indian captain , Mahendra Singh Dhoni , invited Ganguly to lead the side in the field for the final time . India regained the Border @-@ Gavaskar Trophy , winning the series 2 – 0 . 
 In May 2009 , Ganguly was removed from the captaincy of the KKR for the 2009 season of the IPL , and was replaced by McCullum . The decision was questioned by media and other players of the team , when KKR finished at the bottom of the ranking table with three wins and ten losses . After that , Bengali television channel Zee Bangla roped him as the host of the reality quiz show titled <unk> Unlimited . It presented participants from the 19 districts of West Bengal , who had to answer questions posed by Ganguly . By August , he was appointed the chairman of CAB 's Cricket Development Committee . The job of the committee is to receive a report from the selectors at the end of every cricket season , assess the accountability of the selectors and make necessary recommendations . He played for the Ranji cup in the Bengal team in October 2009 . Ganguly scored 110 in the match against Delhi and was involved in a partnership of 222 runs with <unk> Saha . 
 In the third season of the IPL , Ganguly was once again given the captaincy of KKR , after the team ended at the bottom in the second season . The coach John Buchanan was replaced by <unk> Whatmore . In 40 matches and 38 innings for KKR Ganguly scored 1 @,@ 031 runs and took eight wickets . In the fourth season of the IPL he was signed by the Pune Warriors India , after being unsold in initial bidding process and he made 50 runs of four matches and three innings . In the 2012 season he has been appointed as the Captain cum mentor for Pune Warriors India . On 29 October 2012 , he announced that he has decided not to play in next year 's IPL and to retire from the game . 
 = = Playing style and influences = = 
 Ganguly commented that David Gower was the first cricketer to attract him to the game . He loved Gower 's style and used to watch old videos of him playing . Other cricketers who had an influence on him are : David Boon , Mohinder Amarnath , Kapil Dev and Allan Border . Ganguly is a left @-@ handed batsman whose runs came primarily from the off @-@ side . <unk> Dutta , author of Sourav Ganguly , the maharaja of cricket , commented that throughout his career , " Ganguly played off @-@ side shots such as the square cut , square drive and cover drive with complete command . " Rahul Dravid has called Ganguly " ... next to God on the off @-@ side . " He used to hit powerful shots to the off @-@ side on front and back foot with equal ease . However , early in his career he was not comfortable with the hook and pull , often giving his wicket away with mistiming such shots . He was also criticised for having difficulty in handling short bouncers , notoriously exploited by the Australians and South Africans . However , after his comeback in 2007 , he worked upon these weaknesses to a large extent . 
 Amrita <unk> , author of Sourav Ganguly : the fire within , noted that in ODIs , where Ganguly usually opened the innings , he used to try to take the advantage of fielding restrictions by advancing down the pitch and hitting pace bowlers over extra cover and mid @-@ off . She commented : " Ganguly was notorious for attacking left @-@ arm spin bowlers . Due to excellent eye – hand coordination , he was noted for picking the length of the ball early , coming down the pitch and hitting the ball aerially over mid @-@ on or midwicket , often for a six . However , he did have a weakness in running between the wickets and judging quick singles . " There were many instances where Ganguly 's batting partner was run out due to Ganguly 's calling for a run , and then sending him back while halfway down the pitch . A situation like this happened in an ODI against Australia where he took a single when on 99 , but he coasted and did not ground his bat . Although the bat was past the crease , it was in the air and he was consequently run out . Ganguly said , " I love to watch myself hit a cover drive , to watch myself hit a hundred . " Ganguly 's relationship with former Indian coach John Wright has been well documented in contemporary media , with them denoting the relationship as a " symbiotic process " . They credited Wright and Ganguly with bringing out international class performers , through academic , coaching and scientific fitness regimens . According to Dubey , Ganguly and Wright , along with other members of the team like Tendulkar and Dravid , were the first to understand the importance of a foreign coach for the Indian cricket team and was convinced that the domestic coach has outlived its utility . Ganguly 's aggressive style and Wright 's importance on fitness ushered in the development of a better cricket team for India . 
 Ganguly is a right @-@ arm medium pace bowler . He can swing and seam the ball both ways and often chips in with useful wickets to break partnerships . Vinod Tiwari , author of the biography Sourav Ganguly praised him saying " [ d ] espite not being very athletic as a fielder , Ganguly has taken 100 catches in one @-@ day Internationals . That 's something to be proud of ! " However he criticised Ganguly 's ground fielding , especially his slowness in intercepting the ball to prevent runs and his tendency to get injured during catching the ball . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Author Pradeep <unk> commented that in his tenure between 2000 and 2005 , Ganguly became India 's most successful Test captain . He led his team to victory on 21 occasions – seven times more than Mohammad Azharuddin with the second most wins — and led them for a record 49 matches — twice more than both Azharuddin and Sunil Gavaskar . Compared to his batting average of 45 @.@ 47 when not captain , Ganguly 's Test batting average as captain was a lower 37 @.@ 66 . 
 Statistics about Ganguly show that he was the seventh Indian cricketer to have played 100 Test matches , the 4th highest overall run scorer for India in Tests , and the fourth Indian to have played in more than 300 ODIs . In terms of overall runs scored in ODIs , Ganguly is the second among Indians after Sachin Tendulkar ( who has the most ODI runs ) and the eighth overall . He has scored 16 centuries in Test matches and 22 in ODIs . He is also one of only ten batsmen to score more than 10 @,@ 000 runs in ODIs . Along with Tendulkar , Ganguly has formed the most successful opening pair in One Day Cricket , having amassed the highest number of century partnerships ( 26 ) for the first wicket . Together , they have scored more than 7000 runs at an average of 48 @.@ 98 , and hold the world record for creating most number of 50 @-@ run partnership in the first wicket ( 44 fifties ) . Ganguly became the fourth player to cross 11 @,@ 000 ODI runs , and was the fastest player to do so in ODI cricket , after Tendulkar . As of 2006 , he is the only Indian captain to win a Test series in Pakistan ( although two of the three Tests of that series was led by Rahul Dravid ) . He is also one of the five players in the world to achieve amazing treble of 10 @,@ 000 runs , 100 wickets and 100 catches in ODI cricket history , the others being Tendulkar , Kallis , <unk> Jayasuriya and <unk> <unk> . 
 Author Mihir Bose , in his book , The magic of Indian cricket : cricket and society in India. commented that " The cricket world had gotten too used to the stereotype of the meek Indian cricketer . All that has changed under Ganguly , perhaps for the better . " He credits Ganguly for not being shy of taking on responsibility . " He showed that he can be a leader of a team , which has greats like Sachin and Dravid in the side , without any problems . Under Ganguly 's leadership , India started winning matches and tournaments , previously lacking from the team considerably . " Within a few years of his captaincy , Ganguly rewrote the rules of being a captain of a cricket team . Unlike some of his predecessors , Ganguly was considered impartial , non @-@ parochial , and forever pushed his players to perform better . Off the field , his interactions with the media , his fans , and detractors were uncompromisingly honest and earned him the respect of cricket followers everywhere . However , along with this respect came the criticisms . Ganguly was condemned as a hot @-@ tempered man who refused to listen to other 's opinions and abided by his own rules and regulations . Matthew Engel , ICC sport critic , noted that this " turning deaf " to other 's opinions would one day harm Ganguly and that it was sheer luck that he existed on the sporting world . 
 Ganguly believed that his legacy as a captain was that he was able to build a proper Indian team . He added , 
 " [ We ] were able to change the face of Indian cricket . That 's what I 'm proud of , because I think we made a huge difference . People used to think that we would simply roll over when playing out of India , but we changed the image . [ ... ] [ The team wouldn 't take any crap from any opposition ] Absolutely , and that came from self @-@ belief that , that we had the ability to do well outside India . " 
 Bose commented that Ganguly 's greatest legacy lay in his influence on the younger and budding generation of cricketers . Ganguly felt that every young player should play two years of domestic cricket before being selected for international assignments . He also said that every newcomer should be given at least five games to prove himself . Later he explained that being at the receiving end of an unfair decision against him , that threatened to ruin his international cricket career , it enabled him to understand the insecurities of other newcomers in the team better than his predecessors . Ganguly had always backed the influence and contribution of younger players of the team . 
 Despite his contributions , his captaincy and coaching methods came under immense scrutiny from the press as well as other scholars . Engel commented that " He seems like aloof to the problems that his mal @-@ decisions are creating . I don 't particularly believe that Ganguly has an ' <unk> knowledge how to lead his team and tries to counter @-@ pose it with instigating limitless , confrontational behaviours within the younger members of it . [ One day ] the time will come when such shock tactics will cease to work . " An article on Cricinfo Magazine pointed out his reckless behaviour . The reporter Rahul Bhattacharya said , " Generally Ganguly fostered angry or reckless young men . To him ' good behaviour ' , a broad term espoused by the present team management , belonged in school and probably not even there . He himself had been summoned to the match referee no less than 12 times in the last decade . His approach was bound to precipitate what could possibly be termed a cultural conflict in the world of modern sport . For Ganguly , like for Arjuna <unk> , competitiveness involved brinksmanship rather than training . As far as they were concerned Australia were not to be aspired to . They were simply to be toppled . England were not to be appeased . Victory lay precisely in their disapproval . In other words , Ganguly and <unk> wanted to do things their way . " 
 = = Overall career performance = = 
 = = Records and achievements = = 
 The only cricketer to win four consecutive man of the match awards in One Day Internationals . 
 The eighth highest run @-@ scorer in ODI history and second among the Indians , with 11 @,@ 363 runs . 
 The fastest batsman to reach 9 @,@ 000 ODI runs . 
 One of the only five cricketers to have achieved the unique treble of 10 @,@ 000 runs , 100 wickets & 100 catches in ODI cricket . 
 His Test batting average never went below 40 . 
 Has the highest individual score by an Indian batsman ( 183 ) in the Cricket World Cup . 
 One of the 14 cricketers in the world to have played 100 or more Tests and 300 or more ODIs . 
 India 's most successful Test captain overseas , winning 11 out of 28 matches that he led . 
 = = Captaincy record = = 
 = Lisa 's First Word = 
 " Lisa 's First Word " is the tenth episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . It was first broadcast on Fox in the United States on December 3 , 1992 . In the episode , as the Simpson family gathers around Maggie and tries to encourage her to say her first word , Marge reminisces and tells the story of Lisa 's first word . Elizabeth Taylor appeared for the voicing of Maggie 's first word . 
 The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland and written by Jeff Martin . After its initial airing on Fox , the episode was later released as part of a 1999 video collection : The Simpsons : Greatest Hits , and released again on the 2003 DVD edition of the same collection . The episode features cultural references to two chains of fast food restaurants , Wendy 's and McDonald 's , as well as a reference to the 1981 arcade video game Ms. Pac @-@ Man . " Lisa 's First Word " received positive reception from television critics , and acquired a Nielsen rating of 16 @.@ 6 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpson family are trying unsuccessfully to get Maggie to speak , inspiring Marge to share the story of Lisa 's first word . 
 The story flashes back to March 1983 where Homer , Marge and Bart originally lived in an apartment on the lower east side of Springfield . Homer and Marge had to cope with Bart , who was two years old at the time . Marge reveals to her husband and their son that she 's pregnant again , and points out to Homer that they will probably need a bigger place . After viewing several unsuitable properties , they buy a house on Evergreen Terrace with a $ 15 @,@ 000 down payment from the sale of Grampa Simpson 's house . 
 In 1984 , the Simpsons move into their new home and meet their new neighbors , Ned Flanders and his family . Meanwhile , Krusty the Clown begins a promotion for the 1984 Summer Olympic Games with his Krusty Burger chain , a scratch @-@ and @-@ win game in which people scratch off the name of an event from the game card and if the United States wins a gold in that event , they win a free Krusty Burger . However , Krusty is told that the game cards are rigged so they only contain events in which " Communists never lose " . Shortly thereafter , Krusty is told of a boycott of the Games by the Soviets and their allies and that he stands to lose $ 44 million on the game . 
 Bart is forced to give up his crib so it can be used for the baby . Homer builds him a new bed shaped like a maniacal clown , which terrifies Bart. When Lisa is born and gets all the attention , Bart takes an immediate dislike to her . Eventually , he is about to run away until Lisa says her first word , " Bart " . Thrilled that his name is his sister 's first word , Marge explains to Bart that Lisa adores him . He accepts her as his little sister and they both find it funny that they each call Homer by his name , rather than " daddy " as he wishes . 
 Back in the present day , Homer takes Maggie to bed , commenting on how the sooner kids learn to talk , the sooner they learn to talk back , and tells Maggie that he hopes she never says a word . But as soon as he turns off the light and closes the door , Maggie takes her pacifier out of her mouth and utters the word " daddy " , before going to sleep . This takes on added significance because as shown earlier in the episode , when both Bart and Lisa first learn to speak , they address their dad for the first time as " Homer " and not " daddy " as Homer tries to admonish against the use of his first name . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Lisa 's First Word " was written by Jeff Martin , and directed by Mark Kirkland . The Simpsons writers Mike Reiss and Al Jean were discussing about having an episode where Maggie would say her first word , and Reiss thought it would be cute to have her say " daddy " when no one could hear her . Jeff Martin was assigned to write the episode because he had done another flashback episode in the past , " I Married Marge " . Martin was excited to do another flashback episode because he thought it was fun to check out old newspapers and go back and see what was in the news back in 1983 and 1984 . Martin felt it was a good way of finding a new set of things to make jokes about . 
 In the episode , Homer builds a scary clown @-@ shaped bed for Bart. The scene was inspired by Mike Reiss , whose dad had built him a clown @-@ shaped bed when he was younger , and just like Bart , Reiss was scared of sleeping in it . As the flashback begins in 1983 , a young Homer strolls down the street , singing Cyndi Lauper 's song " Girls Just Want to Have Fun " , which was released the same year . The idea for this sequence came from animation director Chuck Sheetz , who suggested it because the length of the final version of the episode was too short . The Fox censors wrote a note concerning Homer 's line , " Bart can kiss my hairy , yellow butt ! " after Marge tells Homer that Bart might be jealous of baby Lisa , citing that the line is considered " coarse " , due to the fact that Bart was two during the flashback . 
 Maggie 's first word was provided by the Academy Award @-@ winning actress Elizabeth Taylor , who would also voice herself in the season four finale , " Krusty Gets Kancelled " . While promoting the episode , the producers initially did not reveal who the voice of Maggie would be , prompting speculation as to the identity of the actress . Although it was only one word , the voice came out " too sexy " and Taylor had to record the part numerous times before the producers were satisfied and thought it sounded like a baby . Several sources , including John Ortved 's The Simpsons history article " Simpsons Family Values " in Vanity Fair , have reported that after Taylor had been made to repeatedly record the line , she said " fuck you " to series creator Matt Groening and stormed out of the studio . Groening recounted this event on a 1994 appearance on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien , and was also quoted by the New York Daily News in 2007 as saying " We did 24 takes , but they were always too sexual . Finally Liz said , ' F — you , ' and walked out . " However , Groening later denied the story in the DVD commentary for the episode " Gump Roast " , while Jean stated in a piece after Taylor 's death in 2011 that Taylor had said " fuck you " in jest and in Maggie 's voice and did not storm out . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The Springfield Shopper headline from the day Lisa was born ( " Mondale to Hart : Where 's the beef ? " ) uses the then @-@ current advertising slogan for Wendy 's . Mondale , a candidate in the 1984 presidential election , used the " Where 's the beef ? " phrase at an election rally in 1984 while mocking one of his opponents . Recounting his cousin Frank who became Francine in 1976 and then joined a cult , Homer says , " I think his name is Mother <unk> now " , a reference to Ma Anand Sheela , chief assistant to Indian mystic / so @-@ called sex guru Rajneesh and manager of Rajneeshpuram from 1981 to 1985 . Marge begins telling her story of Lisa 's first word by saying : " This story begins in the unforgettable spring of 1983 . Ms. Pac @-@ man struck a blow for women 's rights and a young Joe Piscopo taught us how to laugh " , making references to the 1981 arcade video game Ms. Pac @-@ Man and the American actor Joe Piscopo . The episode features an Itchy & Scratchy cartoon called " 100 @-@ Yard Gash " , which uses the music from the 1981 film Chariots of Fire . Homer and Marge consider buying a houseboat from the Sea Captain ; his pitch is cut short by a shark , which he proceeds to fight , in a reference to the film Jaws . Abe Simpson tells Homer he built their house with his own two hands ; Homer corrects him saying he won it on a crooked 50 's game show , but Abe ratted on everyone and got away <unk> @-@ free , referencing the scandal surrounding 50 's quiz show " Twenty One " . When Lisa started saying " Bart " repeatedly , Bart replies " Suffering <unk> ! " which is Sylvester the Cat 's catchphrase . 
 The Olympic promotion by Krusty Burger is loosely based on a similar " scratch @-@ and @-@ win " promotion by McDonald 's , in which McDonald 's visitors could win a Big Mac , french fries , a drink , or even a cash prize up to $ 10 @,@ 000 if Team USA won a medal in the visitor 's listed event . McDonald 's lost millions on the promotion due to the 1984 Summer Olympics boycott by the Soviet Union , as happened to Krusty . At one point in the episode , Dr. Hibbert refers to Olympic gymnastic medalist Mary Lou Retton . Bart has Lisa say the name David Hasselhoff when he shows her his picture on a TV Guide . This is a reference to Knight Rider . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Lisa 's First Word " was watched by 28 @.@ 6 million viewers , the most @-@ watched episode of the season . It finished thirteenth in the ratings for the week of November 30 to December 6 , 1992 , with a Nielsen rating of 16 @.@ 6 . The episode was the highest @-@ rated show on Fox that week . It acquired the highest national Nielsen rating of the show since the season two episode " Bart Gets an " F " " aired on October 11 , 1990 . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . 
 Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , said the episode is a " convincing portrait of young marriage and hardship in the days of Reaganomics — and the biggest name to guest voice gets the littlest , but the most significant , to say " . When asked to pick his favorite season out of The Simpsons seasons one through twenty , Paul Lane of the Niagara Gazette picked season four and highlighted " the sweetly funny " " Lisa 's First Word " . David Johnson at DVD Verdict named it " one of the greatest flashback episodes " . Dave Manley at DVDActive said in a review of the The Simpsons : Greatest Hits DVD that it is " one of the better episodes and probably my personal favourite on the disc , although most Simpsons connoisseurs would probably go for the previous episode [ on the DVD ] " , and added that there are " some great parodies in the episode too " . The Orlando Sentinel 's Gregory Hardy named it the fourteenth best episode of the show with a sports theme ( the Olympics in this case ) . 
 Elizabeth Taylor 's performance as Maggie was praised by critics . She was named the 13th greatest guest spot in the history of the show by IGN . Taylor also appeared on AOL 's list of their favorite 25 Simpsons guest stars . Todd Everett at Variety called the last scene in the episode , where Maggie speaks her first word , " quite a heart @-@ melter " . He added that " it is probably no surprise that the casting of Elizabeth Taylor as the voice for baby Maggie Simpson 's first word was a publicity stunt [ ... ] No mind , the episode in question delivered well @-@ rounded view of series ' multiple attractions . " Total Film 's Nathan Ditum ranked her performance as the best guest appearance in the show 's history . Fox rebroadcast the episode on April 3 , 2011 in memory of Taylor , following her death on March 23 . 
 = = = " Can 't sleep , clown will eat me " = = = 
 Inspired by an event in The Simpsons writer Mike Reiss ' childhood , young Bart does not want to give up sleeping in the crib to make way for his newborn sister . Noticing Bart 's affection for Krusty the Clown but unable to afford a professionally built Krusty @-@ themed bed , Homer decides to build a bed with Krusty 's likeness to please his son . However , because of Homer 's poor handicraft skills , the bed takes on an ominous appearance and frightens Bart , especially in the darkened room . In his first night in the new bed , far from " laughing himself to sleep " , Bart imagines that the face on the headboard of the bed comes to life , intoning with evil glee , " if you should die before you wake ... " , before collapsing into evil cackling . 
 The next morning , Bart is curled up into the fetal position on the floor next to the sofa downstairs , repeatedly uttering the phrase " can 't sleep , clown will eat me ... " The catchphrase inspired the Alice Cooper song " Can 't Sleep , Clowns Will Eat Me " from the 2001 album <unk> . The phrase has since found its way into popular use . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 " Lisa 's First Word " originally aired on December 3 , 1992 , on the Fox network . The episode was selected for release in a 1999 video collection of selected episodes titled : The Simpsons : Greatest Hits . Other episodes included in the collection set were " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " , " Trash of the Titans " , and " Bart Gets an " F " " . It was included in The Simpsons season 4 DVD set , which was released on June 15 , 2004 as The Simpsons — The Complete Fourth Season . The episode was again included in the 2003 DVD release of the " Greatest Hits " set , but this time the set did not include " Trash of the Titans " . 
 = Flame & Citron = 
 Flame & Citron ( Danish : Flammen & <unk> ) is a 2008 Danish drama film co @-@ written and directed by Ole Christian Madsen . The film , a fictionalized account based on historical events , stars Thure Lindhardt and Mads Mikkelsen as two Danish resistance movement fighters nicknamed Flammen and Citron , during the Nazi occupation of Denmark in World War II . Attracted by the story of the pair since he was twelve , Madsen spent eight years along with co @-@ writer Lars K. Andersen researching historical archives to produce it . 
 Madsen 's idea was to bring attention to the story of Flammen and Citron as he felt it had been neglected or misrepresented . The most expensive Danish film produced to that date , it was co @-@ produced by German companies because initially there was no interest in producing the film in Denmark . Portraying the protagonists as morally ambiguous characters , the director tried to depict war as a complicated experience that goes beyond a good versus evil dichotomy . With visual and narrative references borrowed from film noir and the French film Army of Shadows , Flame & Citron also explores themes of love , betrayal , and the emotional aspects of relationships . 
 The film was released in Denmark on 28 March 2008 to positive reviews . The most @-@ watched film in the country that year , it was praised mostly for the actors ' performances , dramatic style , and depiction of war and its moral dilemmas . Considered an art film by some critics , the film was compared , both favorably and negatively , to Army of Shadows and other war films ; it also sparked a debate over its historical accuracy . Additionally , it was nominated for both domestic and international film awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Set after the Nazi invasion of Denmark , the film focuses on the Holger Danske resistance group 's Bent <unk> <unk> ( known as Flammen ) and Jørgen Haagen <unk> ( known as Citron ) . In a bar , Bent flirts with a woman , who identifies herself as Ketty Selmer and disturbs him by saying his real name . Bent and Jørgen follow the woman , and she tells Bent she is an emissary from Stockholm to Copenhagen . 
 Aksel Winther , Bent and Jørgen 's handler , signals to them to kill Elisabeth Lorentzen , Horst Gilbert , and Hermann Seibold – members of the Abwehr , the German military intelligence service . Bent and Jørgen argue over it as they kill only Danes , to reduce the chance of retaliation by the Nazis . However , Winther claims orders from the government in exile in London . Bent kills Lorentzen but fails to kill Gilbert and Seibold . Later , Jørgen , his wife , Bodil , and their daughter , Ann , celebrate the girl 's birthday on their car as they are without money , and Bodil laments over their relationship . Three weeks later , Bent , Jørgen and <unk> meet Spex from the Danish Army Intelligence . He says there will be no more attacks , as they need peace to assemble men for a big attack . The three agree that they should not follow Spex 's order , and later Jørgen kills Gilbert . That night , Jørgen robs a grocery store and takes the products to his wife and daughter ; however , Bodil announces she is seeing another man . 
 After several members of the resistance are killed by the Gestapo , Winther suspects they have an informant among them . Later , Bent visits Ketty 's hotel room , and they have sex . Meanwhile , Jørgen visits his wife and advises her boyfriend to treat her properly or he will return . In a meeting , Winther says the informer is Ketty and orders her death . Bent meets Ketty ; she tells him she works for both Winther and army intelligence , and that Winther does not work for the British . Winther , involved with Gilbert and Seibold , had ordered them to be killed in order not to be seen as a traitor . Bent and Jørgen search for Winther in the bar and discover that he has escaped to Stockholm . They realize it is a trap , and they escape from the Gestapo men . They decide to kill Karl Heinz Hoffmann , the Gestapo 's leader , and then take over the favorite Gestapo restaurant . Bent cannot kill Hoffmann because they have to get away when he notices the police coming . That night , Ketty says to Bent that he and Jørgen should go to Stockholm . In the meeting , they are offered positions in the Danish Army but they refuse . A man called <unk> gives them the name of the real informer , and Jørgen soon kills him . 
 Bent visits his father , the owner of a hotel , who says Hoffmann , his family and his mistresses visit there on occasion . In a fateful coincidence Bent sees Ketty arrive at the hotel in the company of Hoffman in what appears to be a tryst . Later Bent confronts Ketty , and she argues that army intelligence requested her to stay close to Hoffmann . Bent demands to know what car Hoffman uses and what his route is . Later , on the road , Bent , Jørgen and some allies open fire on two cars with Nazi flags ; however , they are dismayed to discover they have killed a father and wounded a child . An enraged Bent goes to Ketty 's hotel room , only to discover that she has flown to Stockholm , fearing Hoffmann 's retaliation . Now , Bent and Jørgen plan to kill Hoffmann , and they disguise themselves as policemen . However , they are arrested in a general round @-@ up of the German @-@ allied Danish police , who are killing policemen by firing squad . Jørgen decides to jump over a fence and is shot , allowing Bent to escape . Time passes , and Jørgen is at a safe house . A squad of German officers arrives . He kills some of them with a sub @-@ machine gun and grenades but ultimately is killed . Meanwhile , Bent , in his home , commits suicide with a pill when he sees the Gestapo arriving . Later , Hoffmann gives Ketty the reward for helping apprehend Bent and a letter from him found in his room , in which he expresses his feelings and his doubt of her betrayal . The film ends with notes about Bent and Jørgen 's legacy . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Director Ole Christian Madsen had read the book They Saw It Happen about the Nazi Resistance when he was 12 . He was especially attracted by the story of the pair because of their moral ambiguity . Madsen stated , " They both fascinated and scared me , and I sensed there was something dark and untold in their story . " He " wanted to make a film that would revive and reassess their reputation " . Years later , he met writer Lars K. Andersen , who had also read the book during his childhood , and this led them to envision a film . The project started in 1999 ; the idea for the film did not attract sponsors because it was viewed as " past history " or because it portrayed the resistance " outrageously " . This was precisely one of Madsen 's objectives : to talk about their story because Danish wartime archives listed many fatalities simply as casualties of war instead of counting them as murders , thus " suppress [ ing ] " their real story . He wanted to bring attention to a part of Danish history " the nation has since neglected to talk about " , resulting in a " collective misrepresentation " . 
 Even in the wake of major companies ' refusal to support the project , Madsen and Andersen continued to research archives in England , Germany and Sweden . In 2005 , however , German films about World War II started to become popular , and several German companies became interested in the idea for the film . It became a co @-@ production between Denmark and Germany , with three companies — Nimbus Film , <unk> Film and Babelsberg Studio — producing it . Filming took place at the Babelsberg locations in Potsdam @-@ Babelsberg , Germany , and large parts of the film were shot at locations in Copenhagen , Denmark , and Prague , Czech Republic . It received a $ 460 @,@ 000 grant from the German Film Fund for its total budget of more than 45 million Danish kroner ( or $ 7 @.@ 6 million ) , making it the most expensive Danish film produced to that date . 
 Originally , Madsen planned to create a docudrama @-@ style film but when he discovered Ketty was a Russian spy and had a love affair with Flammen he changed his mind . This finding " forced me to make the film a much more stylish , more noirish piece of work . " " Even so , I tried to keep a soft touch style @-@ wise out of respect for the film 's subject , " said Madsen . He tried to make it feel real by " eliminating the distance to 1944 " and directing the film as if it were set in the present . 
 Thure Lindhardt , a frequent collaborator in Madsen 's films with an ability to " slip himself into any part " , according to the director , was cast . Mads Mikkelsen was chosen by the director before his international career was launched because , as Madsen said , " he has this grand masculinity , and he approaches his roles like an animal " . Both Lindhardt and Mikkelsen were cast early in the project , in about 2005 , and Stengade was cast even earlier — in 2001 . The casting process " wasn 't really difficult , because I didn 't feel that so many people could play these parts " , Madsen stated . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 The visual style was described by the director as a mix of his own former films which varied from " film @-@ noir in its essence , very dark and very eclectic " to " hand @-@ held " , " more visually relaxing " . Guy Lodge of <unk> described it as " owing much to film noir in the intricacy of its narrative and the lush , shadow @-@ drenched stylization of its visuals " . Wally Hammond , for Time Out London , said its cinematography varies " between atmospheric , noir @-@ esque period evocation and modern widescreen stylings , with excellent use of low @-@ key lighting , silhouettes and location " . Mark Jenkins of NPR said it had a " classic look " both in visuals and in storytelling ; visually , " with widescreen compositions , overhead shots and dramatic contrasts of light and dark " , and in its narrative " [ s ] ome sequences are quick and messy , but others are grand and theatrical . " Joe Morgenstern , critic for The Wall Street Journal , said the " pace is deliberate , [ and ] the tone is pensive , albeit punctuated by occasional violence . " 
 Madsen was influenced by Jean @-@ Pierre Melville 's Army of Shadows ( 1969 ) , about the French Resistance , especially " the way it told its story through only rituals and dialogue " . He watched it about half a year before filming Flame & Citron , and it also inspired " the mythologizing of the characters " in Flame & Citron . Manohla Dargis of The New York Times affirmed , " You can see the Melville touch in the impenetrable shadows that spill across Mr. Madsen 's carefully composed mise @-@ en @-@ scène and in the fedoras and trench coats worn by his two heroes . " Erica Abeel of The Hollywood Reporter said , " In its tough @-@ mindedness Flame [ & Citron ] owes much to Jean @-@ Pierre Melville 's Army of Shadows . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 In the film Madsen tried to challenge the idea of war as " black and white " and the idea that the resistance was " a cohesive whole " . He says of war that it " has many more nuances , it is grayer , less defined . When an enemy may stop being one at any time and a friend can become an enemy overnight , things become less clear " . Ella Taylor of The Village Voice commented , " Flame & Citron is less about the battle between good and evil than about losing one 's way in the fog of war , which makes it hard to tell friend from foe and harder yet to sort through the rules of engagement , and complicates the heroic honor codes of movies about the ' good war . ' " Marshall Fine of The Huffington Post asserted that the violence in the film is double @-@ edged : " [ it ] takes its toll on the perpetrator as well as the victim . " Similarly , The Irish Times 's Derek Scally stated the film analyses " the dehumanising effect of assassinations on assassin " . 
 Madsen tried to explore this " moral dilemma " , " the drama behind the story of the ' <unk> ' " and human psychology in crisis situations . Madsen ultimately defined his film " as an investigation of what happens psychologically to someone who sacrifices himself in war " . Because of this , he portrayed Flammen and Citron as " modern heroes with cracks in their souls and doubts and insecurities " . Citron even reflected upon killing people but " he did it . He sold out his humanity for the highest price . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times described the story as " a psychologically complex look at what heroism does to heroes . The actions these men take tear at their lives , their families , their very essence . " Morgenstern analysed it as " a meditation on the nature of heroism , and the quest for purity of purpose " . Turan even said it is " more nihilistic than idealistic " , while Tirdad Derakhshani of The Philadelphia Inquirer asserted that it " balances the whizzing bullets and political intrigue with an elegiac tone and an existential edge just this side of nihilism " . Its depiction of the resistance in a non @-@ heroic way made it a " one @-@ off film " in Danish cinema , according to film historian Lars @-@ Martin Sørensen . 
 Another theme the film deals with is the bureaucracy in the resistance , according to Ty Burr of Boston Globe , as the main pair would prefer to work as freelancers . Writing for The Washington Post , Michael O 'Sullivan said the film also has " a surprisingly contemporary subtext , as when Hoffmann , in an abortive showdown with Flame , calls his would @-@ be assassin a well @-@ intentioned , but ultimately misguided , terrorist . ' Don 't you realize , ' Hoffmann asks , ' you 're just a tool for someone with less pure motives ? ' " Burr also commented that " The film repeatedly poses that question [ " Who 's being set up here ? " ] and pointedly refuses to answer . By its silence , it suggests that in wartime everyone can be both user and used . " 
 Kenneth Turan affirmed that Flame & Citron has several themes as it " is chock full of plot and incident , action and romance , loyalty and betrayal " . Derakhshani stated it " rehearses virtually every element of the classic genre piece : violence , sex and romance , gunplay , spies , betrayals , a femme fatale , and a murderous Gestapo officer " . Cynthia Fuchs of PopMatters noted that , though he has to deal mainly with " moral questions , Flame confronts an emotional complication — in the conventional form of a woman " . Abeel argued that " For beneath his stony exterior , it 's Flame 's romantic soul that will prove his worst enemy . This masterful film is at once a portrait of wartime heroism and a poignant journey into a boy 's secret heart . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Flame & Citron debuted in Danish theaters on 28 March 2008 and premiered on 28 August 2008 in Germany . The film was seen by over 770 @,@ 000 people in Europe ; it had a public of 668 @,@ 000 in Denmark , making it the most watched film in the country that year . It grossed $ 9 @,@ 210 @,@ 518 in Denmark for a total of $ 10 @,@ 186 @,@ 084 from screenings in twelve other countries — Argentina , Austria , Colombia , Germany , Greece , New Zealand , Norway , Portugal , Spain , the United Kingdom , and the United States . 
 Flame & Citron was domestically distributed by <unk> Metronome ; it was released on DVD and Blu @-@ Ray Disc on 30 September 2008 . The film was distributed by Metrodome in the United Kingdom , debuting on 6 March 2009 . Metrodome Video released the DVD in the United Kingdom on 1 January 2009 , while its Blu @-@ Ray release occurred on 29 June 2009 . In the United States , IFC Films licensed the film , and its North American debut occurred at the Telluride Film Festival on 29 August 2008 . IFC released it on demand on 29 July 2009 , while its theatrical release was on 31 July 2009 , and its home media release was on 23 February 2010 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Domestic reviews = = = 
 Critical response to the film was mixed but mostly positive , in Denmark , including praise for Madsen 's direction , the performances of Lindhardt , Mikkelsen , Stengade and <unk> ; opinions were divided about the portrayal of the main characters . The film " has shocked Danish audiences " for its portrayal of the protagonists as non @-@ heroic , and has been criticised by historians . Berlingske 's Ebbe Iversen commented that it can be both good and bad to have morally ambiguous characters as it can be seen as " an artistic force " to have " authentic protagonists psychology " , but it can also be frustrating to have their motives portrayed as " enigmatic " . The critic stated it did not make it a bad film , instead " its subtle , not uncritical portrayal of the resistance seems sober and serious , the style is worked out to the smallest detail , and in its outer form the film is the type of work that you unkindly call conventional and more kindly describe as classic . " 
 Henrik <unk> of <unk> Bladet praised the action sequences for its details , even saying it is the best Danish war film ever and said it is also " a booming interesting history and a multifaceted psychological portrait – not only of Flame and Citron , but also of the many people they come across in their path " . Kim <unk> of Politiken said it had more gunfire than psychology and that it lacked a more detailed explanation of the characters ' backgrounds that would justify their personalities . Writing for Jyllands @-@ Posten , Johs . H. Christensen wrote that there " never occurs any real connection , no excitement , no interaction , no common destiny between Flame and Citron , although they are inextricably linked most of the time " . 
 DR 's Per <unk> Carlsen declared that although the film is visually beautiful , he is not sure it should be this way : " Had it not been better and more correct to tell the story really ugly and blurry in the rain instead of sunshine ... with realism instead of polished <unk> [ ? ] " . He also criticized it for sharing too much of the American gangster and spy film clichés . The most critical review was done by Georg Metz of Dagbladet Information , who criticized its historicity and thought the characters were psychologically underdeveloped and uninteresting . Metz wrote , " The nicest [ thing ] one can say about this film , if it is nice , is that it celebrates the naïve view of history " and described it as " [ a ] neo @-@ nationalistic panopticon of predominantly cardboard figures that will be suitable for evening entertainment for the Danish People 's Party and the Liberal Party congresses . Quite apart from that about a third of the dialogue is hard to understand , because the players do not articulate appropriately . " 
 = = = International reviews = = = 
 The film was generally well received by Western critics . Based on 70 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , it has an overall approval rating of 87 percent from critics and an average score of 6 @.@ 8 out of 10 . According to the website 's consensus , the film , " though lengthy and sprawling , is gripping and competently made " . Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating from 100 top reviews by mainstream critics , calculated a score of 74 based on 20 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 <unk> 's Walter stated , " [ t ] hough the material might lend itself to heavy @-@ handedness , director Ole Christian Madsen is steady , and he gets fine performances from the two leads and [ Stine ] Stengade . " The actors ' performances were also praised by Fine , who said " Lindhardt and Mikkelsen make a fascinating team " , while " Stengade is appropriately slippery " . Todd McCarthy from Variety asserted that " [ p ] <unk> are low @-@ key but resolute and brimming with nerves and intensity . " Marc Savlov of The Austin Chronicle commented that " Mikkelsen and Lindhardt are spectacularly invested in their roles . ... Beyond that is a drop @-@ dead gorgeous period noir , rife with paranoia , femmes fatales , and good men inexorably sinking into the bloody mire and opaque texture of life ( and death ) during wartime . " 
 Abeel praised how , by " [ a ] voiding the docu @-@ style string of anecdotes of many fact @-@ based films , it offers the shapeliness and irony of classic drama " . Hammond commended Madsen as the film " achieves a sense of psychological complexity – and a pervasive atmosphere of fear and confusion – without sacrificing the rhythm and dramatic tension necessary to a war film " . Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly praised its combination of " sharp scenes of moral inquiry with a few too many functional , <unk> espionage twists " . Fuchs applauded the interpolation of emotional relations as they " help to make Flame & Citron 's taut action even more effective . Beautifully choreographed and filmed in deep shadows that cut the violence into shadowy , brutal fragments , Flame and Citron 's jobs are at once thrilling and disconcerting " . Kate Taylor from The Globe and Mail , however , said the romantic relationship , " predictable in a James Bond kind of way , is the weakest link in the script " . 
 Nick de Semlyen from Empire considered it an average film , saying " It 's familiar ground for anyone who 's seen Black Book or Sophie Scholl , but director Ole Christian Madsen steers a skilful course , keeping things grim but not to an off @-@ putting extent , bringing a David Lynch @-@ esque vibe to Flame 's hotel dalliances with a shady lady and pulling off an incredible death scene for one of the leads . " Noel Murray of The A.V. Club criticized it for " hammer [ ing ] too hard on the <unk> theme of how war sickens souls . Far more interesting is Flame & Citron 's other theme : the idea that war turns the notion of ' shades of gray ' into a luxury " . V. A. Musetto , for the New York Post , commented that , although it " features well @-@ choreographed shootouts and assassinations " , its " script is too melodramatic and complicated for its own good " . Burr mostly praised it but said that " Madsen eventually loses his way " , stating that there was " not enough " information about Citron and that the film " feels packed with events and frustratingly unfocused " . Derakhshani argued that it " has some rough , tedious patches – at 130 minutes , it 's simply too long . And its reiteration of Hollywood cliches isn 't always successful . Regardless , it is , along with Paul Verhoeven 's Black Book , one of the most accomplished films to come out of the recent wave of neoclassic and revisionist WW II films " . 
 = = = Comparisons to other films = = = 
 Jenkins said the best scenes in Flame and Citron are the ones who share Army of Shadows 's " chaos " , and he criticised what he described as an aspiration " to be a noble national epic , rather than the rougher , more universal tale of two desperate men fighting for a cause " . To Jenkins , Melville 's film had a " more cogent outlook " because " [ f ] <unk> the Nazis was just like any other gang war – a mad scramble to survive " . On the other hand , Dargis commented that Army of Shadows 's " lack of pity " makes it " so unbearably sad , its almost repellent hardness of heart . What Flame & Citron has instead are decent men taking down Nazis ... and some appealing actors . " Slant Magazine 's Tom Stempel affirmed , " I found Army of Shadows both admirable and chilling , and in some ways Flame & Citron is even better . " 
 Although he praised the " beautifully choreographed and shot " action sequences , Murray criticized Flame & Citron for " lean [ ing ] toward the handsome and thoughtful when it could stand to be a lot dirtier and more visceral " , citing Black Book as a " superb counter @-@ example " . Stempel declared that it " is not as exciting as " Black Book , " but Verhoeven was dealing with people having to make complex moral decisions instantaneously . Flame & Citron takes its time to turn the screws on its characters , and us . " Ella Taylor argued in favor of Flame & Citron , saying it " is the film that the horribly overrated Black Book could have been , had Paul Verhoeven not indulged in the puerile reversals of sensitive Nazis and treacherous partisans . " Fuchs also compared the moral dilemmas the characters have to deal with to Black Book and Steven Spielberg 's Munich but said Flame & Citron does not have " the splendid <unk> excess " and " the weird conflation of maternal bodies and <unk> " of the two films , respectively . Gleiberman could " feel the shadow of Steven Spielberg 's Munich hovering over Flame & Citron " . 
 Another film it was compared to was Inglourious Basterds ; Brad Auerbach , for Entertainment Today , wrote that " Whereas Inglorious Basterds contains a bevy of cleverly humorous moments as it builds to its climax , Flame & Citron is a calculated and somber treatment of an intriguingly difficult topic . " O 'Sullivan said that " Inglourious Basterds @-@ style wish fulfillment this isn 't , " and Burr dubbed it " the anti @-@ Inglourious Basterds " . O 'Sullivan said that it shared similarities to Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid as it is " the story of handsome rogues with guns . It 's fast @-@ paced , stylish and thrilling . But it also raises one tough question . " Kate Taylor , however , commented that as opposed to Cassidy and Kid , Flame and Citron " remain an imperfectly matched duo " . St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch 's Joe Williams said that in contrast to " lavish thrillers " Black Book , Inglourious Basterds and Avatar of Hollywood @-@ ish " heroic defiance " , Flame and Citron is " lean and psychological , rooted in the either @-@ or of wartime choices " . 
 = = = Art @-@ house film status = = = 
 Usually described as a drama or a thriller , Flame & Citron can also be classified as a historical drama , a war film , a war drama ( or a war thriller ) and a gangster drama . As it has been screened in art @-@ house theaters in the United States and Europe , it has also been described as an art @-@ house film . Lodge stated it has " stately middle @-@ arthouse stylings and thriller overtones " . <unk> commented that it " has the look , and sometimes the pacing , of a serious Hollywood picture , but it has an art @-@ house mood " . Nick Roddick of the London Evening Standard commented that " it could succumb to the Sod 's Law of foreign @-@ language cinema : make a arthouse movie too commercial and you risk losing both audiences . " Abeel opined , " This icy portrait of two assassins shooting Nazis point @-@ blank offers no Hollywood @-@ style uplift to mollify mainstream viewers . But Flame [ & Citron ] should pull in a niche group of World War II connoisseurs and will delight art @-@ house and fest audiences with its innovative mix of drama and history filtered through genre . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 The film was nominated for fourteen Robert Awards , winning Best Costume Design , Best Make @-@ Up , Best Production Design , Best Sound , and Best Special Effects . Out of three Bodil Awards nominations , Flame & Citron won Best Cinematography . At the Zulu Awards , it won all three awards for which it was nominated . The film was also nominated for the European Film Awards , Marrakech International Film Festival , and Valladolid International Film Festival , but did not win any award . 
 = = Historical accuracy = = 
 The involvement of the Danish people with the Nazis and the assassinations committed by the resistance movement had been a taboo subject since World War II , with scholarly literature on the topic only being produced from the 1980s and 1990s . Contemporary works on Flammen and Citron have been scarce . Madsen opined , " I think they didn 't fit into the official storytelling on how Denmark behaved during the Second World War . " Many of the members of the resistance suffered from different traumas , became alcoholics or committed suicide and a very few survived . Because of this , in addition to conducting research for eight years in historical archives , Madsen and his crew interviewed surviving people related to them . Nonetheless , the film has sparked controversy among historians . 
 The depiction of Flammen 's death was challenged by Danish National Archives 's Peter Birkelund . In the film Flammen commits suicide in the basement of his house after the Gestapo find him , presumably because of Ketty 's betrayal . Birkelund , however , says Flammen was killed on a coastal road while the Gestapo was looking for another resistance member . In contrast , the filming of Citron 's death , which would require 250 soldiers , was consciously altered by Madsen for budgetary reasons . 
 Ketty 's depiction as a double agent and Flammen 's lover has also been contested by Birkelund . However , Madsen was sure about the affair and found in a Stockholm archive a receipt for 20 @,@ 000 Danish crowns given to her by the Gestapo two days after Flammen 's death . Her involvement with the Gestapo leader Hoffmann , and her refusal to talk about the topic , were the main reasons for Madsen 's conclusion . 
 In the film , Aksel Winther , who is based on Vilhelm Leifer , is the one who gives Flammen and Citron orders to kill . Birkelund pointed out that he had already moved to Sweden by the time of their assassinations , while Madsen stated he was sure Leifer gave orders before leaving the country . Also , they met Frode Jacobsen in a meeting in Sweden , and he is said to have given orders from there . Birkelund rejected the idea of Jacobsen giving orders , but Madsen said the meetings were created by him to show that the resistance movements of that time had approaches different from those of their present @-@ day counterparts . 
 Citron 's relationship with his wife was debated because historians doubt that she betrayed him , since she gave birth to their child shortly after his death . Madsen was sure the betrayal happened , but he took the liberty of affirming the couple did not get back together . Madsen declared , " I do not think it is morally tarnished to show that people have affairs with people they are not married to . It 's a beautiful description of a relationship that falls apart in a time that had great personal cost . " 
 Ole Ewé , a former member of <unk> — another group in the Danish resistance movement — disagreed with the description of the attempt to kill the Gestapo leader Hoffman on a road <unk> . In the film , the car had Nazi flags , and a soldier and his son are killed by the resistance 's sub @-@ machine guns . Ewé said that on that day he and other <unk> members were enlisted to kill Arno Oskar <unk> , a Gestapo informer . Flammen , who also received tips about the informer 's whereabouts , appeared there and shot up the car . However , said Ewé , the man in the car was in civilian clothes and there were no Nazi flags on the car . 
 According to The Irish Times , " Flame & Citron has sparked an emotive public debate in Denmark that has drawn all sorts of pseudo @-@ experts out of the woodwork to debate the portrayal of the period and the two true @-@ life figures . " Madsen defended himself saying it was an interpretation that " though it may not correspond absolutely to reality , is somehow more true " . Mikkelsen stressed that they were the first " to do the original research , yet we suddenly had a lot of so @-@ called experts telling us how it really was and how we were wrong " . The actor affirmed not too much is known about the period and they hope it sparks the debate so " people will research and think some more about it " . 
 In the book <unk> the Uses of the Past , edited by Helle <unk> , Claudia Lenz and Erik <unk> , the authors compared the criticism Flame & Citron received for its historical representation to that received by Max Manus : Man of War , a <unk> film also about the resistance . While Madsen 's film has been highly criticized by historians , Max Manus gained the status of " real past " and received only a few criticisms that were dismissed by resistance veterans , politicians and even the king Harald V. <unk> et al. argued that the difference in reception may be attributed to the films ' content , saying , " In stark contrast to Flame & Citron , [ Max Manus ] doesn 't challenge the notions of the right and the wrong side and the unambiguous good cause . " 
 = Tony Adamle = 
 Anthony " Tony " Adamle ( May 15 , 1924 – October 7 , 2000 ) was a professional American football linebacker and fullback in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) and the National Football League ( NFL ) . He played his entire career for the Cleveland Browns before retiring to pursue a medical degree . 
 Adamle grew up in Cleveland , Ohio and was a star fullback on his Collinwood High School football team . He attended Ohio State University in 1942 , but his college career was cut short by World War II . After a stint in the U.S. Air Force , Adamle returned to finish his education at Ohio State in 1946 . He soon dropped out of school , however , and joined the Browns . Cleveland won AAFC championships in each of Adamle 's first three years , after which the league folded and the Browns were absorbed by the more established NFL . Cleveland continued to succeed in the NFL , winning the 1950 championship and advancing to the 1951 championship but losing to the Los Angeles Rams . Adamle left the Browns after the 1951 season to pursue a medical degree , but he came out of retirement briefly in 1954 as the Browns won another NFL championship . 
 Adamle left football for good after the season , earning a medical degree from Western Reserve University in Cleveland in 1956 . He settled with his family in Kent , Ohio , where he ran a medical practice until his death in 2000 . He was a team physician for his local high school and for Kent State University for more than 35 years . Adamle 's son Mike played in the NFL as a fullback in the 1970s before retiring and becoming a sports broadcaster . 
 = = Early life and high school = = 
 Adamle was born in Fairmont , West Virginia to immigrants from Slovenia . His family moved to Cleveland when he was a child , and he attended Collinwood High School on the city 's east side . Adamle was a standout fullback on his high school team and made a Cleveland @-@ area All @-@ Star squad in 1941 that matched up against a team of stars from Florida . He was " without question the best high school player I have ever seen , " one Cleveland sports editor said after he was chosen as an all @-@ star . He was also named an All @-@ Ohio player by the Associated Press and United Press International and earned three varsity letters in football in high school . 
 = = College and military career = = 
 Adamle attended Ohio State University and was on the 1942 Ohio State Buckeyes freshman team , but left school prior to the 1943 season to fight in World War II . After serving in the U.S. Air Force in the Mediterranean Theatre of War , he returned to Ohio State for the team 's 1946 season — his only season with the varsity Buckeyes . Playing as a center in a November game against the Northwestern Wildcats , Adamle intercepted a Frank <unk> pass in the third quarter and returned it 38 yards . He had another interception in the fourth quarter of the 39 – 27 Buckeyes victory . Ohio State finished the season with a 4 – 3 – 2 record and Adamle was selected to play in the College All @-@ Star Game , a now @-@ defunct matchup between the National Football League ( NFL ) champion and a selection of the best college players from around the country . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Adamle was eligible to play for the Buckeyes again in 1947 , but decided to leave school and join the Cleveland Browns of the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) . Adamle had been selected with the 105th pick in the 1947 NFL Draft by the Chicago Bears , and he told Cleveland head coach Paul Brown , who coached Ohio State 's varsity team between 1941 and 1943 , that he would join the Bears if the Browns did not sign him . " I would be a pretty sick fellow today , knowing what I do about Tony , if George Halas had gotten him , " Brown said before the season began . 
 Adamle 's decision to drop out was controversial because of rules that under normal circumstances would have barred him from playing professionally before graduating . The interruption of the war had forced the suspension of the rule to account for players ' military service , however , and he was allowed to leave college . The Browns denied that they encouraged Adamle to drop out . Adamle may have been convinced to join the Browns by Gene Fekete , Dante Lavelli , Lou Groza and Bill Willis , four Browns players who were back at Ohio State to finish their studies after the 1946 season . 
 With the Browns starting in the team 's 1947 season , Adamle played as a fullback . He competed with Marion Motley at the position , and said he was " not working to be a second @-@ stringer " . Adamle was a straight @-@ talker and was not afraid to stand up to Brown , a cold disciplinarian who was the team 's coach between 1946 and 1962 . Brown was impressed with Adamle 's candor and held him in respect . Before the seventh game of the 1947 season , a matchup against the Chicago Rockets that October , Adamle replaced Motley as the team 's starting fullback . Brown said that while he had not given up on Motley , a big back who had anchored the offense in the Browns ' early years , the former starter had " made a few mistakes lately that hurt us " and thought competition would be helpful . Adamle , who was about 15 pounds lighter than Motley , started for a brief time as part of an offense led by quarterback Otto Graham , registering 23 carries for 95 yards on the season , a career high . The Browns went on to finish the 1947 season with a 12 – 1 – 1 record and win the AAFC championship game against the New York Yankees . Adamle returned to Ohio State in the offseason to continue his studies . 
 By the team 's following season , Adamle was being used mostly on defense as a left @-@ side linebacker , and Motley was again the primary fullback . Cleveland had a perfect season in 1948 , winning all of its games and beating the Buffalo Bills in the championship . Adamle had 88 rushing yards and a touchdown that year . 
 Adamle filled in for an injured Motley at fullback for several games the following year while continuing to play as a linebacker . He had 64 rushing yards and made four interceptions , a career high . Cleveland again won the AAFC championship in 1949 , but the league then folded and the Browns were absorbed by the more established NFL . 
 Cleveland 's success continued in the NFL in its 1950 season as Adamle was named team captain , replacing Lou Saban following his retirement . The team won the 1950 NFL Championship Game , and <unk> was one of seven Browns players chosen to play in the first Pro Bowl , football 's all @-@ star game . He led the NFL with five fumble recoveries that year and was also named a second @-@ team All @-@ Pro by the New York Daily News . 
 Adamle was again one of eight Browns chosen for the Pro Bowl after Cleveland 's 1951 season , when the team reached the championship game but lost to the Los Angeles Rams . He was named a first @-@ team All @-@ Pro by United Press International and the New York Daily News after the season , when he had one interception and one fumble recovery . He was used mainly as an outside linebacker in Cleveland 's 5 @-@ 3 defense later in his career , only attempting three rushes in the 1950s . Adamle finished college at Kent State University in 1950 , earning a bachelor 's degree , and received a master 's degree in education from Western Reserve University in Cleveland in 1951 . 
 Upset by Brown 's criticisms of the defense in the 1951 championship game , Adamle left the Browns before the next season to enter medical school . Brown nevertheless traded the rights to Adamle to the Green Bay Packers as part of a deal that brought defensive back Ace Loomis to Cleveland . " We know Adamle is determined to enter medical school and informed the Packers it is very unlikely he would play any more football , " Brown said . The Packers hoped to get him to play part @-@ time while he was in school . Adamle spent most of 1952 working as an orderly at Glenville Hospital in Cleveland , entering Western Reserve 's medical school in September . 
 Adamle came out of retirement to play for the Browns at 30 years old in October 1954 . He had been working as a scout for the Chicago Cardinals and was in his third year of medical school ; he agreed to come back on the condition that he would only practice once a week so he could continue his studies . The Browns had advanced to the NFL championship game in both of the seasons he did not play , but lost both times to the Detroit Lions . In Cleveland 's 1954 season , the team reached the championship game and beat the Lions , 56 – 10 . 
 = = Medical career = = 
 Adamle quit football for good after the season and focused on his medical career . He received a medical degree from Western Reserve in 1956 . He settled in Kent , Ohio , where he ran a medical practice for the rest of his life . He also served as the team doctor for Theodore Roosevelt High School and Kent State University for more than 35 years . Adamle specialized in knee and neck injuries , and published articles about cold therapy and the use of Vitamin C in sports medicine . The Ohio High School Athletic Association named him the state 's Outstanding Team Physician in 1983 . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Adamle died in 2000 after a seven @-@ year battle with cancer . His son , Mike Adamle , was a running back at Roosevelt High School and Northwestern University , and played professionally as a fullback for the Kansas City Chiefs , New York Jets and Chicago Bears in the 1970s before becoming a sports broadcaster . 
 = U.S. Route 202 in New Jersey = 
 U.S. Route 202 ( US 202 ) is a U.S. Highway running from New Castle , Delaware northeast to Bangor , Maine . In the U.S. state of New Jersey , the route runs 80 @.@ 31 mi ( 129 @.@ 25 km ) from the New Hope @-@ Lambertville Toll Bridge over the Delaware River at the Pennsylvania border in Delaware Township , Hunterdon County near Lambertville northeast to the New York border in Mahwah , Bergen County . Along the route 's journey , it passes through a variety of suburban and rural environments , including the communities of Flemington , Somerville , Morristown , Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills , Wayne , and Oakland as well as five counties : Hunterdon , Somerset , Morris , Passaic , and Bergen . US 202 encounters many major roads in New Jersey , including Route 31 , US 206 , US 22 , Interstate 80 ( I @-@ 80 ) , US 46 , Route 23 , and Route 17 . From Somerville to the New York border , US 202 generally runs within a close distance of I @-@ 287 and interchanges with that route several times . The road ranges from a four @-@ lane freeway between Lambertville and Ringoes in Hunterdon County to a two @-@ lane undivided road through much of the northern portion of the route . North of the Route 53 intersection in Morris Plains , US 202 is maintained by individual counties rather than the New Jersey Department of Transportation with a few exceptions . 
 In the original system of New Jersey state highways , present @-@ day U.S. Route 202 was legislated as pre @-@ 1927 Route 5 between Morristown and Morris Plains in 1916 and as pre @-@ 1927 Route 16 between Somerville and Morristown in 1921 . In 1927 , the current route was designated as Route 29 between Lambertville and Ringoes , Route 30 ( now Route 31 ) between Ringoes and Flemington , Route 12 between Flemington and Somerville , Route 31 ( now U.S. Route 206 ) between Somerville and Bedminster , Route 32 between Bedminster and Mountain View , and Route 23 within a portion of Wayne . Meanwhile , US 122 was signed in New Jersey to run from the New Hope @-@ Lambertville Bridge in Lambertville , where the route continued south to State Road , Delaware , along Bridge Street , Route 29 , and Route 30 to Flemington , and then along present @-@ day County Route 523 ( CR 523 ) to US 22 in White House . In the mid @-@ 1930s , US 122 was renumbered to US 202 , and realigned to follow its current route to New York border near Suffern , New York where it continued to Bangor , Maine . In 1953 , all the state highway designations were removed from US 202 except for Route 23 and Route 30 ( which became Route 69 before becoming Route 31 in 1967 ) to avoid long concurrencies with the route . In the 1960s , plans were made to upgrade US 202 to a freeway between the Pennsylvania border and I @-@ 287 in Bridgewater Township . The only parts of this freeway that were completed were a bypass of Ringoes in the 1960s and a freeway between the Delaware River and Ringoes in 1974 ; the rest was canceled due to opposition from residents along the route . With the completion of the US 202 freeway in Hunterdon County , the former alignment became Route 179 . The portion of US 202 concurrent with Route 23 in Wayne was upgraded from a four @-@ lane road to a six @-@ lane road in the 1980s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Hunterdon County = = = 
 U.S. Route 202 crosses into Delaware Township in Hunterdon County , New Jersey on the New Hope @-@ Lambertville Toll Bridge over the Delaware River from Solebury Township , Pennsylvania , heading to the northeast as a four @-@ lane freeway maintained by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission . Shortly after entering New Jersey , the route passes over the Delaware and Raritan Canal comes to an interchange with Route 29 that features a northbound exit , a northbound entrance from southbound Route 29 , and a southbound entrance . The route becomes maintained by the New Jersey Department of Transportation here and crosses the Alexauken Creek into Lambertville where the route features a southbound exit and northbound entrance with Alexauken Creek Road that provides access to Route 29 from southbound U.S. Route 202 and to northbound U.S. Route 202 from northbound Route 29 . Past Alexauken Creek Road , the freeway enters West Amwell Township , where it heads through a mix of woodland and farmland . It comes to a diamond interchange with County Route 605 ( Queen Road ) , which provides access to Mount Airy and <unk> Corner . Past the County Route 605 interchange , U.S. Route 202 continues northeast through agricultural areas , paralleled by Frontage Road to the north . It crosses into East Amwell Township and features to a partial cloverleaf interchange with Route 179 . Past the Route 179 interchange , the road runs briefly through West Amwell Township before entering East Amwell Township again , bypassing the community of Ringoes . It comes to a partial interchange with Route 31 and County Route 579 , with access to southbound Route 31 and County Route 579 from both directions of U.S. Route 202 and access to northbound U.S. Route 202 from northbound Route 31 and County Route 579 . 
 Here , Route 31 begins a concurrency with U.S. Route 202 , and both routes continue north as a four @-@ lane divided surface road with jughandles , intersecting County Route 602 ( <unk> Road ) . The next intersection is for Old York Road , which heads to the southwest as Route 179 and to the northeast as County Route 514 . Shortly past this intersection , the route briefly forms the border between East Amwell Township to the west and Raritan Township to the east before crossing entirely into Raritan Township . The road continues north through farms , reaching commercial development as it approaches the Flemington area . Past the intersection with County Route 611 ( South Main Street ) , the road widens to six lanes and crosses into Flemington . The road comes to the Flemington Circle where Route 31 heads north and Route 12 heads west . 
 Past the Flemington Circle , U.S. Route 202 proceeds northeast on a four @-@ lane divided highway that crosses back into Raritan Township . It heads through woodland , passing by <unk> , which is home to the world 's largest model railroad in HO scale . The road crosses the South Branch Raritan River into Readington Township , where it heads east , passing over Norfolk Southern 's Lehigh Line north of Three Bridges . Past Three Bridges , the route runs through a mix of woods and farms . 
 = = = Somerset County = = = 
 U.S. Route 202 crosses into <unk> Township , where it crosses Old York Road again . It continues northeast through agricultural areas with residences and businesses increasing along the road After crossing Old York Road ( County Route 637 ) another time , the route heads through suburban commercial areas . It passes over the North Branch Raritan River and enters Bridgewater Township , where it passes under New Jersey Transit ’ s Raritan Valley Line and runs past a shopping center . U.S. Route 202 heads east into Raritan , where it passes through business areas and crosses County Route 567 ( First Avenue ) . Past the County Route 567 intersection , the road comes to the modified Somerville Circle , where it intersects U.S. Route 206 and Route 28 . U.S. Route 202 passes over the circle with ramps to U.S. Route 206 and Route 28 , which head through the circle . 
 U.S. Route 206 forms a concurrency with U.S. Route 202 past the Somerville Circle and the two routes continue north through Bridgewater Township , briefly entering Somerville . The road features an interchange with U.S. Route 22 and heads north with the Bridgewater Commons shopping mall on the east side of the road and the Somerset Corporate Center on the west side of the road . An interchange with Commons Way provides access to both these places . Past Commons Way , the road passes under <unk> Road and comes to an interchange with Interstate 287 that also provides access to Interstate 78 . Past the Interstate 287 interchange , U.S. Routes 202 and 206 continue north as a two @-@ lane undivided road with residences to the east and corporate parks to the west . The road crosses Chambers Brook into Bedminster Township , where it soon passes under Interstate 78 . Shortly after Interstate 78 , it widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway with a Jersey barrier that runs through a mix of commercial and residential areas . U.S. Routes 202 and 206 come to another interchange with Interstate 287 , pass over the North Branch Raritan River again , and come to an intersection where the two routes split . 
 Upon splitting from U.S. Route 206 , U.S. Route 202 heads north on Somerville Road , a two @-@ lane undivided road . It soon meets County Route 523 ( Main Street ) , and U.S. Route 202 makes a right turn to head to the northeast on Lamington Road . The route heads east through residential areas and crosses the North Branch Raritan River into Far Hills . Upon entering Far Hills , the route intersects County Route 512 ( Peapack Road ) , forming a concurrency that lasts with that route until County Route 512 heads south on Far Hills Road just before U.S. Route 202 crosses New Jersey Transit ’ s Gladstone Branch near the Far Hills Station . From here , the road heads northeast through wooded areas with some clearings and residences , crossing into Bernardsville . In Bernardsville , U.S. Route 202 heads through rural areas with trees and fields as Mine Brook Road before reaching the town itself . In the town , the route intersects County Route 525 ( Claremont Road ) , briefly running concurrent with that route until it heads south on Mt . Airy Road . From the center of Bernardsville , U.S. Route 202 runs northeast as Morristown Road , crossing into Bernards Township , where it heads through wooded residential areas . In Bernards Township , the road features an intersection with County Route 613 ( Childs Road ) and North Maple Avenue , the latter providing access to Interstate 287 . 
 = = = Morris County = = = 
 U.S. Route 202 crosses the Passaic River into Harding Township , Morris County , where the route becomes Mt . Kemble Avenue . The NJDOT replaced this bridge with a new bridge built in seven days during August 2012 . The new bridge was designed by <unk> Corporation and built by Joseph M. <unk> , Inc. utilizing Accelerated Bridge Construction techniques . In Harding Township , the road runs north through mostly runs through wooded residential and commercial areas , closely paralleling Interstate 287 , which runs to the east of U.S. Route 202 . It heads into more heavily wooded areas , running to the east of Morristown National Historical Park , before continuing northeast into Morris Township . Here , U.S. Route 202 continues through woodland , but residences start to increase along the road and it passes by an industrial facility . It passes by the Spring Brook Country Club before crossing into Morristown . Upon entering Morristown , the route heads toward the downtown area , where it splits into a one @-@ way pair following Market Street northbound and Bank Street southbound . The one @-@ way pair comes to Park Place , a square in the center of Morristown , where U.S. Route 202 meets County Route 510 and Route 124 . County Route 510 heads west from the square on Washington Street and east from the square on Morris Street , while Route 124 heads east from the square on South Street . Meanwhile , U.S. Route 202 continues north from Park Place on Speedwell Avenue , a two @-@ lane road that heads past numerous downtown businesses . The route then leaves the downtown area , heading through residential neighborhoods and crossing the Whippany River before leaving Morristown and crossing back into Morris Township , where it briefly passes through an area of businesses . At the intersection with County Route 650 ( Hanover Avenue ) , U.S. Route 202 crosses into Morris Plains , where it continues north through suburban commercial and residential areas . The route passes under New Jersey Transit ’ s Morristown Line near the Morris Plains Station and intersects the southern terminus of Route 53 ( Tabor Road ) . 
 Past the Route 53 intersection , maintenance of U.S. Route 202 is transferred from the New Jersey Department of Transportation to the county and it resumes northeast on Littleton Road , heading through residential areas . It enters an area of corporate parks as it crosses Route 10 and heads into Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills . After passing through the area of corporate parks , the road heads back through suburban neighborhoods before coming to an interchange with Interstate 80 . In the vicinity of the Interstate 80 interchange , U.S. Route 202 is state maintained . Past the interchange , U.S. Route 202 closely parallels Interstate 80 to the north as a four @-@ lane undivided road before coming to an intersection with County Route 511 ( Parsippany Boulevard ) , where U.S. Route 202 makes a left turn onto that route to form a concurrency . 
 The two routes continue north on Parsippany Boulevard , a two @-@ lane road that comes to an intersection with U.S. Route 46 , where the road is briefly state maintained . Past U.S. Route 46 , the road continues north , intersecting ramps that provide access to and from southbound Interstate 287 . Here , the road becomes county maintained again . It passes by business parks and then wooded residential areas , closely paralleling Interstate 287 again . At the intersection with Intervale Road , U.S. Route 202 and County Route 511 make a right turn , immediately interchanging with Interstate 287 , with access to the southbound direction and from the northbound direction . The routes follow Intervale Road briefly before making a left turn to resume onto Parsippany Boulevard . The road crosses over the Jersey City Reservoir , which supplies drinking water to Jersey City , and enters Boonton , where the road becomes Washington Street . This street carries the two routes through residential areas before coming to another interchange with Interstate 287 that also features access to the southbound direction and access from the northbound direction . Past this interchange , U.S. Route 202 splits from County Route 511 by heading to the northeast on Myrtle Avenue . 
 Myrtle Avenue carries U.S. Route 202 through commercial areas sandwiched by Interstate 287 to the southeast and New Jersey Transit ’ s Montclair @-@ Boonton Line . Along Myrtle Avenue , U.S. Route 202 features ramps to and from southbound Interstate 287 . The route crosses into Montville , where it becomes Main Road and runs a farther distance from Interstate 287 , heading north through residential areas . The road turns east and makes a left turn to head north on Main Street , which angles east and comes to an interchange with Interstate 287 . Past this interchange , U.S. Route 202 continues through commercial areas , crossing over the Montclair @-@ Boonton Line , before heading into residential neighborhoods , running parallel to the Montclair @-@ Boonton Line . After passing Towaco Station , the route makes a right turn , passes under the railroad line , immediately makes a left turn to resume on Main Street . The route heads east as a four @-@ lane road running to the south of the railroad tracks through residential areas , narrowing to two lanes . It enters Lincoln Park , where U.S. Route 202 intersects County Route 633 ( Boonton Turnpike ) , continuing east onto Boonton Turnpike . A short distance later , the route intersects County Route 511 Alternate ( <unk> Road ) and forms a wrong @-@ way concurrency with that route . The two routes continue southeast through wooded residential neighborhoods , eventually running parallel to the Pompton River . 
 = = = Passaic County = = = 
 U.S. Route 202 and County Route 511 Alternate cross the Pompton River into Wayne , Passaic County , where the road becomes Mountainview Boulevard . It crosses the Montclair @-@ Boonton Line near the Mountain View Station and comes to an interchange with Route 23 , where County Route 511 Alternate ends and U.S. Route 202 heads north on Route 23 , a six @-@ lane freeway that is state maintained . The road interchanges with County Route 670 ( Alps Road ) and then with County Route 683 ( Newark @-@ Pompton Turnpike ) . Route 23 and U.S. Route 202 continue north from this point as a surface road through commercial areas . At a U @-@ turn ramp , the eastbound direction of County Route 504 follows both directions of the road , having to use the ramp in order to continue across the road . Northbound U.S. Route 202 splits from Route 23 , where the cut @-@ off intersection with County Route 504 is located . At this point , the westbound direction of County Route 504 and the southbound direction of U.S. Route 202 follow southbound Route 23 until an intersection . 
 Past Route 23 and County Route 504 , U.S. Route 202 heads north on Black Oak Ridge Road , a county maintained road that heads through residential neighborhoods . The road comes to an intersection with County Route 689 ( Paterson @-@ Hamburg Turnpike ) , where U.S. Route 202 merges onto that road , forming a concurrency . The Paterson @-@ Hamburg Turnpike heads north past some businesses , running a short distance to the east of the Ramapo River , before coming to Terhune Drive , where U.S. Route 202 makes a right turn onto that road with County Route 689 continuing north on Paterson @-@ Hamburg Turnpike . Terhune Drive carries U.S. Route 202 north through wooded neighborhoods , running in between Pines Lake to the east and Pompton Lake , which is part of the Ramapo River , to the west . 
 = = = Bergen County = = = 
 U.S. Route 202 crosses into Oakland , Bergen County , where the route becomes Ramapo Valley Road . In Bergen County , U.S. Route 202 is cosigned with County Route 91 . In Oakland , the route turns east and passes the Long Hill Mall , where it makes a left turn to continue north along Ramapo Valley Road with County Route 93 continuing straight on Long Hill Road . U.S. Route 202 heads north through commercial areas of the town , where it passes by the <unk> Mall , before coming to an interchange with Interstate 287 . In the vicinity of this interchange , the route is maintained by the state . Past the Interstate 287 interchange , the road continues northeast through residential areas , crossing into Mahwah . Here , the route parallels the Ramapo River again , which runs to the west of the road . U.S. Route 202 passes through wooded residential areas before passing by Ramapo College of New Jersey . It passes under Interstate 287 and continues northeast , coming to an interchange with Route 17 . Past this interchange , U.S. Route 202 heads east and then north through more dense neighborhoods . It passes under a railroad line that serves as part of both New Jersey Transit ’ s Main Line and Bergen County Line before immediately coming to an intersection with County Route 507 ( Franklin Turnpike ) . Here , U.S. Route 202 makes a left turn onto this road and heads 0 @.@ 03 mi ( 0 @.@ 05 km ) north to the New York state line where it continues into Suffern , New York as Orange Avenue . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old roads = = = 
 The alignment of U.S. Route 202 followed portions of many historical roads , including Old York Road , a historical 18th @-@ century road that linked Philadelphia to New York City ; the Paterson @-@ Hamburg Turnpike , which was chartered on March 3 , 1806 to run from Passaic to the Pennsylvania border ; and the Union Turnpike , which was chartered on February 23 , 1804 to run from Morristown to the Pennsylvania border . When the original system of New Jersey state highways was established , the current routing of U.S. Route 202 was legislated as part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 5 between Morristown and present @-@ day Route 53 in Morris Plains in 1916 and as part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 16 between Somerville and Morristown in 1921 . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , present @-@ day U.S. Route 202 was legislated as part of Route 29 between Lambertville and Ringoes , Route 30 ( now Route 31 ) between Ringoes and Flemington , Route 12 between Flemington and Somerville , Route 31 ( now U.S. Route 206 ) between Somerville and Bedminster , Route 32 from Bedminster to Mountain View , and Route 23 through a portion of Wayne . Also , by 1927 , U.S. Route 122 was signed to run from the New Hope @-@ Lambertville Bridge over the Delaware River in Lambertville , where it continued south all the way to State Road , Delaware , to White House , following locally maintained Bridge Street in Lambertville , Route 29 between Lambertville and Ringoes , Route 30 between Ringoes and Flemington , and present @-@ day County Route 523 from Flemington to U.S. Route 22 in White House . 
 Eventually , Route 29 was realigned to follow present @-@ day U.S. Route 202 between Ringoes and Somerville , replacing Route 12 between Flemington and Somerville . In the mid @-@ 1930s , U.S. Route 122 was renumbered to U.S. Route 202 and was rerouted to head from Flemington to the New York border at Suffern , where it would continue to Bangor , Maine . U.S. Route 202 would follow newly built Route 29 from Flemington northeast to Somerville ; Route 31 north to Bedminster ; Route 32 northeast to Mountain View , which was state maintained south of Route 5N ( now Route 53 ) in Morris Plains ; Route 23 in Wayne ; and county roads from Route 23 northeast to the New York border . In 1948 , Bridge Street in Lambertville from the New Hope @-@ Lambertville Bridge to Route 29 was designated as Route S29 . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , which eliminated long concurrencies between U.S. and state routes , many of the state routes that followed U.S. Route 202 were removed from the route . Route 29 was removed from U.S. Route 202 and rerouted to follow former Route 29A to Frenchtown , and Routes S29 , 31 , and 32 were entirely eliminated . In addition , Route 30 was renumbered to Route 69 as it conflicted with U.S. Route 30 in southern New Jersey . 
 = = = Freeway upgrades = = = 
 Plans for a limited @-@ access highway along the U.S. Route 202 corridor date back to 1932 when a parkway was planned to continue into Pennsylvania along U.S. Route 202 ; this proposal never came to fruition . In the 1960s , a bypass around Ringoes opened for U.S. Route 202 and Route 69 ( which became Route 31 in 1967 ) with the former alignment of U.S. Route 202 through town becoming Route 179 . In 1966 , a freeway was proposed along the U.S. Route 202 corridor between the Pennsylvania border and Interstate 287 in Bridgewater Township . The portion of this freeway between the Pennsylvania border and the Route 179 interchange in Ringoes was legislated in 1969 with the New Hope @-@ Lambertville Toll Bridge opening in 1971 . The freeway opened in October 1974 , and the former alignment of U.S. Route 202 between Lambertville and Ringoes became an extension of Route 179 . Meanwhile , the portion of the proposed U.S. Route 202 freeway between Lambertville and Bridgewater Township was cancelled due to opposition from residents along the route . 
 In the 1980s , upgrades were made to the portion of U.S. Route 202 concurrent with Route 23 . This portion of road , which was originally a four @-@ lane undivided road , saw an upgrade to a six @-@ lane freeway south of the Alps Road interchange and to a six @-@ lane surface road north of there . Construction on these improvements was completed in 1986 . There were also plans to replace the Flemington Circle with an interchange as part of a project that would have also built a limited @-@ access bypass of Flemington for Route 31 ; however , this plan was never realized . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Rivington = 
 Rivington is a small village and civil parish of the Borough of Chorley , Lancashire , England , occupying 2 @,@ 538 acres ( 10 @.@ 27 km2 ) . It is about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) southeast of Chorley and about 8 @.@ 5 miles ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) northwest of Bolton . Rivington is situated on the fringe of the West Pennine Moors , at the foot of Rivington Pike . According to the United Kingdom Census 2001 it had a population of 144 , reducing to 109 at the 2011 Census . 
 Life in the Middle Ages centred on the families who owned the manor in what was then an isolated rural community . Agriculture , hand loom weaving , quarrying and mining occupied the few inhabitants until the middle of the 19th century . A chapel built before 1541 was replaced by the present church in 1666 and by 1703 Nonconformism led to the building of a Presbyterian church , now a Unitarian Chapel . A grammar school was founded by charter of Queen Elizabeth I in 1556 . 
 Construction of reservoirs for Liverpool Corporation in the mid @-@ 19th century led to a decrease in the population when farms were cleared , the valley flooded and property in the western part of the village demolished . William Lever bought the Rivington Hall estate at the turn of the 20th century and used his wealth to renovate the old barns and create a large public park . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The origin of the name Rivington is unclear , but is made up of three elements . The first element <unk> comes from either the rowan plants or from the Old English word <unk> meaning rough . The second element <unk> usually referred to a place belonging to a person , but in the case of Rivington the element seems to have crept in over the years . The last element comes from the Old English word " tun " meaning a farmstead or settlement . Together the name Rivington may mean " a settlement in the <unk> " or " a rough farmstead " . 
 Rivington has been recorded in many ways in earlier centuries , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> were used in 1202 ; <unk> in 1212 , <unk> in 1226 , <unk> and <unk> in 1278 , Roynton in 1332 , <unk> in 1400 , <unk> although rare , and <unk> and <unk> from the 16th century . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 It is possible that settlements have existed in the area around Rivington since the Bronze Age . Arrowheads , a flint knife , scrapers and the remains of cremations were excavated from a Bronze Age cairn at Noon Hill in 1958 and 1963 – 64 . It is possible that the name Coblowe on the eastern bank of the Lower Rivington Reservoir derives from the Old English <unk> , a hill , which denoted an ancient barrow or burial place . Evidence for the existence of a settlement here in Anglo @-@ Saxon times is found in the Rivington and Coblowe names . 
