 = = = Manor = = = 
 In 1212 Alexander de Pilkington held six oxgangs of land in <unk> , the majority of land in the Manor of Rivington , and in 1290 it became home to a junior branch of the Pilkington family . Robert Pilkington extended the original Rivington Hall in the 15th century . Rivington Hall Barn is variously dated from Saxon times to the 16th century . Robert 's son , Richard , rebuilt the chapel . Richard ’ s son James Pilkington , Bishop of Durham from 1560 – 75 , founded Rivington Grammar School . 
 After the death of George Pilkington ( 1516 – 97 ) , the estate passed to his son , Robert , but it was by then in decline . Robert died in 1605 . In 1611 , the Pilkingtons sold Rivington Hall estate to Robert Lever and Thomas <unk> . 
 A quarter of the manor was owned by the <unk> and an eighth by the Shaws . In the 18th century the Shaws sold their land to Lord Willoughby of Parham . On the death of Hugh Willoughby the 15th baron in 1765 the Shaws and <unk> inherited his estates . 
 In 1729 John Andrews of Little Lever bought the <unk> ' share of the manor and was responsible for building the Pike Tower in 1733 . His descendant , Robert Andrews , partially rebuilt Rivington Hall in red brick in the Georgian style in 1774 . After Andrew 's death the property passed to his sister Hannah Maria Andrews , who had married Robert Fletcher of Liverpool . Their daughter , Lucy , married Woodhouse Crompton in 1834 and their descendants remained resident at the hall until 1910 . In 1900 the <unk> sold their interest in the manor and estate of 2 @,@ 169 acres ( 8 @.@ 78 km2 ) to William Hesketh Lever . The Rivington Hall estate was acquired by compulsory purchase by Liverpool Corporation in 1902 as part of the reservoir scheme . William Lever created a 364 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 47 km2 ) park to the north of the reservoir , Lever Park . He donated the park to the town of Bolton and after his death the park was owned by Liverpool Corporation . The land is owned by United Utilities . 
 = = = Industries = = = 
 Foundations of a building that was perhaps a water mill or the manor corn mill are to be found opposite Mill Hill Cottages next to where a possible mill pond was shown on the 1848 first edition Ordnance Survey map . 
 Until the 19th century Rivington was a rural village built around what is now the village green . Its inhabitants were employed in agriculture on scattered local farms , hand loom weaving in their own homes , working in the local quarries or the small coal mines on Winter Hill . <unk> Colliery , owned by Nicholas Fish , appeared in the 1869 Mines List . Coal mining was on a very small scale ; in 1896 the Rivington Moor Colliery employed two workers mining coal from the Mountain coal seam for own or local use . 
 At Tiger 's Clough , in the River Douglas valley , close to the boundary with Horwich , the Knoll <unk> and a calico @-@ printing works were operating before 1800 . They were demolished by Liverpool Corporation as part of the reservoir scheme in the 1860s . 
 = = = Reservoirs = = = 
 Rivington was dramatically changed by the construction of the Anglezarke , Upper Rivington , Lower Rivington and Yarrow reservoirs which were built to provide Liverpool with a safe , clean water supply . Nine properties in the valley were demolished before construction work began . The Rivington Pike Scheme , still in use today , was undertaken by Thomas Hawksley between 1850 and 1857 . The scheme was to construct five reservoirs and a water treatment works at the south end of Lower Rivington with a 17 @-@ mile ( 27 km ) pipeline to storage reservoirs at Prescot . Water from two higher level reservoirs , Rake Brook and Lower <unk> , was carried south in the <unk> , a man @-@ made channel connecting them to the lower reservoirs . The scheme was expanded in 1856 , to include High Bullough Reservoir , built in 1850 by J. F. Bateman to supply water to Chorley . The scheme was further expanded by the construction of the Upper <unk> Reservoir in 1867 – 75 by Thomas Duncan and Joseph Jackson . Yarrow Reservoir , on which work began in 1867 , was designed by Thomas Duncan , the Liverpool Borough Engineer . 
 In 1900 Liverpool Corporation attempted to acquire the entire area to safeguard its water supply , and proposed to demolish the entire village . Some buildings were protected and others left vulnerable in an Act of Parliament known as the Liverpool Corporation Act 1902 . This allowed the corporation to acquire by compulsory purchase properties in the west of the village , including the Black @-@ a @-@ Moors Head public house and the New Hall , which were demolished between 1902 and 1905 . The result was the small settlement that has remained largely unchanged since then . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Rivington was a township in the ecclesiastical parish of Bolton le Moors , in the Salford hundred in Lancashire . It became part of the Chorley Poor Law Union , formed in 1837 , and took responsibility for the administration and funding of the Poor Law in that area . In 1866 Rivington became a civil parish . It became part of the Chorley Rural Sanitary District from 1875 to 1894 , and part of the Chorley Rural District from 1894 to 1974 . 
 Since 1974 Rivington has been a civil parish of the Borough of Chorley , which comprises 47 councillors each elected for 4 @-@ year terms to represent wards in the borough . In May 2010 the constitution of the Chorley council was Conservatives had 27 seats , Labour 15 seats , Liberal Democrats 3 seats and Independents 2 seats . Rivington is part of the Heath Charnock and Rivington ward and in 2010 elected a Conservative councillor , Pat Case , CBE , who is deputy leader of the council . Chorley is part of the Lancashire County Council created in 1889 under the Local Government Act 1888 and reconstituted under the Local Government Act 1972 . Rivington is part of the Chorley Rural East ward . 
 Rivington is part of the Chorley parliamentary constituency , which elected Lindsay Hoyle as Member of Parliament for the Labour party at the 2010 General Election . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Rivington is situated on the moorland fringe between the high unenclosed moorland of the West Pennine Moors and the fields below . The landscape is characterised by marginal pastures with isolated farmsteads , reservoirs and disused mines and quarries scattered across the hillsides . There is an extensive network of footpaths providing public access . The reservoir valleys are dominated by expanses of water and the Victorian gothic architecture of the dams and embankments surrounded by woodland . 
 To the east of Rivington is Rivington Pike and to the west the flatter land of the Lancashire Plain . Rivington is north of Horwich and Bolton and to the south of Anglezarke Moor and Yarrow Reservoir . To the west of the village is the wide shallow valley containing the Anglezarke , Upper and Lower Rivington reservoirs . The village is accessed from the west by a road on top of the 876 @-@ foot ( 267 m ) long <unk> Embankment , a dam that separates the Upper and Lower Rivington reservoirs . The River Douglas has its source on Winter Hill , and flows in a southwest direction forming part of the southern boundary . The River Yarrow has its source on Anglezarke Moor and forms the northern boundary . The area of the township is 2 @,@ 768 acres ( 11 @.@ 20 km2 ) , the reservoirs and filter beds occupy 275 acres ( 1 @.@ 11 km2 ) . 
 The underlying geology is Millstone Grit overlaid with coal measures . <unk> was quarried for building stone in the area . Around Rivington are chalybeate springs and in Dean Wood is a waterfall with a descent of 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) . 
 = = Demography = = 
 In 2001 , 144 people lived in Rivington , 63 males and 81 females . There were 48 households of which 34 lived in detached houses and 14 in terraced or semi @-@ detached properties . Most households , 60 % , were owner @-@ occupied ; the remainder were privately rented . The mean age of the population was 53 @.@ 4 years . In 2001 most of those employed , 47 , worked in the service industries . Ten worked in extractive and manufacturing industries , and three males were unemployed . The average distance travelled to work by employed persons was 20 @.@ 5 km . 
 = = = Population change = = = 
 = = Economy = = 
 In the 19th century farming became less economic when construction of the reservoirs reduced the amount of agricultural land in the village . The weaving industry was mechanised , small mines closed and the population declined further when properties in the village were demolished in the early 20th century . Agriculture , mainly sheep farming , continues although on a small scale . Tourism at Rivington began in Victorian times and after the reservoirs were filled in the 1860s was known as the Little Lake District . Rivington became a popular destination when Lever Park opened in 1904 . From the late Victorian period until the mid @-@ 20th century tourists from Bolton travelled on day trips by tram along Chorley New Road and then on to Rivington on foot , many more visitors arrived by train . Today thousands of visitors are attracted to the village , Rivington Pike and Lever Park every year , making tourism the most significant source of income in the area . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Rivington is to the east to the M61 motorway , which connects the M6 and Preston to the north with the M60 and the Greater Manchester conurbation to the south . The nearest access is at Junction 6 . The village is accessed by minor roads from Horwich to the south and Adlington to the west . A winding road to the north passes through Anglezarke and a road over the moors to the east leads to Belmont . The nearest places with regular bus services are Horwich to the south and Adlington to the west , which are served by buses between Bolton and Chorley or Preston . 
 The arrival of the Manchester and Bolton Railway 's extension to Preston and opening of Blackrod railway station in 1841 brought visitors to the area . The line remains open with stations at Blackrod and Horwich Parkway giving access to Bolton , Manchester , Chorley and Preston . 
 = = Education = = 
 Rivington Grammar School 's charter was granted to James Pilkington by Queen Elizabeth I in 1566 . The school opened in 1575 and was rebuilt in 1714 . Blackrod Grammar School , founded in 1568 , merged with it in 1875 . In 1882 Rivington & Blackrod Grammar School opened on a site at the south of the township , close to the boundary with Horwich . The school is now Rivington and Blackrod High School , a specialist technology college , focusing on design and technology , mathematics and science . Year Seven pupils occupy the former Horwich County Secondary School . 
 The old grammar school building in the village centre is now occupied by Rivington Foundation Primary School . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Rivington was a chapelry in the ancient ecclesiastical parish of Bolton le Moors until it became a parish in its own right in 1856 . Rivington Church is built on a hill known as Chapel Croft . An earlier chapel on this site was named in a deed by Margaret Pilkington and her son Robert in 1476 . The parochial chapelry covered Rivington and the surrounding areas of Anglezarke , <unk> and Foulds . In 1628 a chapel was built " upon a little toft and <unk> of land " by the local population and where divine service was celebrated " for many years of antiquity " . The early 16th century chapel was rebuilt in 1666 and altered and restored during the late 19th century . It is a small plain building built in sandstone with a bell turret . It is an Anglican church and is unusual in that it is not dedicated to any saint or martyr , referred to simply as Rivington Church . 
 Rivington Unitarian Chapel was built with a bellcote of local stone in 1703 . Originally founded as a Presbyterian church and became Unitarian in the late 18th century . The chapel , which retains its box pews , was restored in 1990 . Both churches are listed buildings and active places of worship . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Rivington conservation area = = = 
 There are a number of listed buildings in Rivington , most of which have Grade II , but two have the higher Grade II * status . They are spread throughout the village and Lever Park , and include the tower on top of Rivington Pike . 
 There are eight listed properties in the Rivington conservation area , almost half of the houses in the village . Listed buildings include the former vicarage , the Manse House and a row of cottages , one of which was the post office , two rows of cottages at Mill Hill and Pilkington 's Farmhouse , all of which are private residences . Rivington Church and the Unitarian Chapel are active places of worship ; the former grammar school is now a primary school . 
 The village stocks on the green are inscribed " T W 1719 " on the stone base . The churchwarden and village constable patrolled the village and anyone disregarding the sanctity of the sabbath would be bound in them . 
 Outside the village centre , the Georgian Rivington Hall , the adjacent Hall Barn and Great House Barn , which is possibly a tithe barn , are all listed buildings . Great House Farm now houses an information centre . 
 = = = Lever Park = = = 
 Lever Park is a designed landscape between the open moorland and the chain reservoirs which incorporates the village and buildings of Rivington into the overall design and is " one of the largest and most impressive examples of landscape design in Edwardian England " . It is of national importance and historical significance but has been neglected and has deteriorated . Situated on the east bank of the Lower Rivington reservoir , the park is named after William Lever , Lord Leverhulme , who bought the estate in 1900 and donated 364 acres ( 1 @.@ 47 km2 ) of land to the people of his native Bolton as a public park . Under the terms of a compulsory purchase order , William Lever was allowed to continue with plans to lay out Lever Park at his own expense , and he maintained it during his lifetime . The park opened in 1904 and contained a boating lake , a zoo , tree @-@ lined avenues and a network of footpaths . A folly , Rivington Castle , was built as a scale replica of Liverpool Castle at Coblowe Hillock near the Lower Rivington Reservoir . Lodges were built at the entrances to the estate , including Stone House Lodge at the main driveway . 
 Roynton Cottage , originally a single @-@ storey wooden bungalow , and its extensive gardens were the private property of William Lever , which he used for weekend visits and entertaining , high on the hillside below Rivington Pike . The bungalow was destroyed in an arson attack by suffragette , Edith Rigby , on 8 July 1913 . Its replacement was built of stone . Thomas Mawson designed the 45 @-@ acre ( 180 @,@ 000 m2 ) gardens between 1905 and 1922 . The private gardens contained terraces and a pool , a Japanese lake and pagoda , Italian @-@ style gardens , a seven @-@ arched bridge and the Pigeon Tower with Lady Leverhulme 's sewing room on the top floor . 
 After Lever 's death Roynton Cottage was acquired by the Bolton brewer , John Magee . During the Second World War the bungalow was requisitioned to be used as a billet for troops , and nissen huts were erected in the grounds . After the war the site was acquired by Liverpool Corporation , who decided to demolish the building . 
 In 1974 the park and gardens passed to the North West Water Authority from Liverpool Corporation , and to United Utilities on privatisation , and are maintained as a public country park for the people of Bolton , protected by rights afforded by the Liverpool Corporation Act 1902 ensuring " Free and uninterrupted enjoyment by the public " . The listed historic landscape of Lever Park now forms part of Rivington County Park and is used for recreation . 
 = = Sport = = 
 The Rivington Pike Fell Race has been held on Easter Saturday since 1892 . The fell race originally started from the Horwich railway works , but since 1930 from the park entrance at Lever Park Avenue . It now attracts around 400 runners . The course is 3 @.@ 25 miles ( 5 @.@ 2 km ) and there is a 700 @-@ foot ( 213 m ) ascent . 
 The area around Rivington and Anglezarke was the location for the 2002 Commonwealth Games mountain biking competition . The area is well used by hikers and hillwalkers . The Holcombe Hunt meets each year at Rivington Hall Barn . 
 = Joe Hewitt ( RAAF officer ) = 
 Air Vice Marshal Joseph Eric ( Joe ) Hewitt , CBE ( 13 April 1901 – 1 November 1985 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . A Royal Australian Navy officer who transferred permanently to the Air Force in 1928 , he commanded No. 101 ( Fleet Cooperation ) Flight in the early 1930s , and No. 104 ( Bomber ) Squadron RAF on exchange in Britain shortly before World War II . Appointed the RAAF 's Assistant Chief of the Air Staff in 1941 , Hewitt was posted the following year to Allied Air Forces Headquarters , South West Pacific Area , as Director of Intelligence . In 1943 , he took command of No. 9 Operational Group , the RAAF 's main mobile strike force , but was controversially sacked by the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , less than a year later over alleged morale and disciplinary issues . 
 Described as a " small , dapper man " who was " outspoken , even ' cocky ' " , Hewitt overcame the setback to his career during the war and made his most significant contributions afterwards , as Air Member for Personnel from 1945 to 1948 . Directly responsible for the demobilisation of thousands of wartime staff and the consolidation of what was then the world 's fourth largest air force into a much smaller peacetime service , he also modernised education and training within the RAAF . Hewitt was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1951 , the same year he became Air Member for Supply and Equipment . Retiring from the military in 1956 , he went into business and later managed his own publishing house . He wrote two books including Adversity in Success , a first @-@ hand account of the South West Pacific air war , before his death in 1985 at the age of 84 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born on 13 April 1901 in Tylden , Victoria , Joe Hewitt was the son of Reverend J.H. Hewitt . He attended Scotch College , Melbourne , before entering the Royal Australian Naval College at Jervis Bay in 1915 , aged 13 . Graduating in 1919 , Hewitt rose to lieutenant in the RAN before volunteering for secondment to the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) as a flight lieutenant in January 1923 . He undertook the pilots ' course at No. 1 Flying Training School , Point Cook , and graduated at the end of the year . Hewitt was further seconded to the Royal Air Force on 4 May 1925 , holding a temporary commission as a flying officer ; this commission was cancelled on 25 September . He married Lorna Bishop on 10 November ; they had three daughters . 
 Hewitt joined the newly formed No. 101 ( Fleet Cooperation ) Flight , operating Seagull III amphibians , in August 1926 . Prior to the unit deploying to Queensland to survey the Great Barrier Reef with HMAS Moresby , he practiced manoeuvres around the centre of Melbourne , landing in the Yarra River near Flinders Street Station . Media criticism of the escapade led to him being brought before the Chief of the Air Staff , Group Captain Richard Williams , who rather than upbraiding Hewitt expressed himself " reservedly pleased about the publicity " . After completing its survey work in November 1928 , the unit served aboard the seaplane carrier HMAS Albatross . 
 Hewitt 's transfer to the Air Force had been made permanent in 1928 . He became commanding officer of No. 101 Flight in February 1931 , and supervised embarkation of the Seagull aboard the cruiser HMAS Australia in September – October 1932 , by which time he had been promoted to squadron leader . Finishing his tour with No. 101 Flight the following year , Hewitt was posted to Britain in 1934 . He attended RAF Staff College , Andover , in his first year abroad , and served as Assistant Liaison Officer at Australia House , London , in 1935 . Although a specialist seaplane pilot , he converted to bombers while in England , flying Hawker Hinds and Bristol Blenheims as the commanding officer of No. 104 Squadron RAF from 1936 . 
 Returning to Australia in 1938 , Hewitt was appointed senior air staff officer at RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , and by July that year had been promoted wing commander . In May 1939 , he was chosen to lead No. 10 Squadron , due to be formed on 1 July at the recently established RAAF Station Rathmines , near Lake Macquarie . Hewitt was preparing to depart for England to take delivery of the unit 's planned complement of Short Sunderland flying boats when he broke his neck riding his motor cycle near Richmond , and had to forgo the assignment while he recovered . Fit for duty by August , he was given command of the Rathmines base to manage the deployment of No. 10 Squadron and its aircraft , but this was suspended due to the outbreak of World War II in September , and the Sunderlands and their RAAF crews remained in Britain for service alongside the RAF . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Director of Personnel Services to AOC No. 9 Operational Group = = = 
 On 20 November 1939 , the RAAF formed No. 1 Group in Melbourne , which evolved into Southern Area Command early in 1940 with Hewitt as senior administration staff officer . Having been promoted group captain , he was made Director of Personnel Services ( DPS ) after completing his posting to Southern Area , and was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire on 11 July . Described as having " a Calvinist background and rigid ideas on women 's place in society " , as DPS he opposed the creation of the Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force ( WAAAF ) and later advocated that its members be enrolled on a contractual basis rather than enlisted or commissioned as Permanent Air Force staff . In 1941 , Hewitt became Assistant Chief of the Air Staff , before being assigned in April the following year to the newly formed Allied Air Forces Headquarters ( AAF HQ ) , South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , as Director of Intelligence . He established cordial working relations with his American peers at AAF HQ , becoming a confidant of its commander , Major General George Kenney . 
 Promoted air commodore , in February 1943 Hewitt was appointed Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) No. 9 Operational Group ( No. 9 OG ) . The RAAF 's premier mobile strike force , No. 9 OG initially comprised seven Australian combat squadrons and came under the control of the US Fifth Air Force . The month he took over , Hewitt 's squadrons were reorganised into two wings based in New Guinea : No. 71 Wing , comprising units at Milne Bay , New Guinea , and No. 73 Wing , comprising those at Port Moresby . In March , No. 9 OG led the RAAF 's contribution to the Battle of the Bismarck Sea , " the decisive aerial engagement " in the SWPA according to General Douglas MacArthur , resulting in 12 Japanese ships being sunk . 
 By April 1943 , Hewitt had been dragged into the divisive personal conflict between the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , and the AOC of RAAF Command , Air Vice Marshal Bill Bostock . RAAF Command was the Air Force 's main operational formation in the Pacific , controlling 24 Australian squadrons . Jones , administrative and de jure head of the RAAF , sought to extend his authority into the sphere of operations by posting a " more accountable " officer into Bostock 's position , namely Hewitt . The Minister for Air , Arthur Drakeford , backed Jones ' manoeuvre but was informed by Prime Minister John Curtin that General MacArthur , as Supreme Commander SWPA , " would insist on the replacement of AVM Bostock by an equally able officer " , and that " Air Commodore Hewitt ... was not considered an adequate replacement . " 
 No changes were made to command arrangements in the South West Pacific following this episode , and Hewitt continued to lead No. 9 OG in its bombing and strafing campaign against Japanese airfields and lines of communication in New Britain , north @-@ east of New Guinea . By mid @-@ June 1943 , he had set up Group Headquarters at Milne Bay , and No. 73 Wing HQ at Goodenough Island . On 22 July , he mounted an operation against Gasmata airfield using 62 aircraft from five of his squadrons , the largest strike undertaken by the Australians to that date . No. 9 OG would take most of the credit for the RAAF reaching a peak of 254 tons of bombs dropped in October , as against 137 tons delivered the previous month . On 8 November , Hewitt sent out a formation of three Bristol Beauforts in a severe electrical storm to attack the heavily defended harbour at Rabaul . This was conceived as a " make or break " effort to prove the worth or otherwise of the Beaufort as a torpedo bomber , in which role it had so far been a disappointment ; in what the official history of the RAAF in World War II described as " an heroic attack " , at least one enemy tanker was struck , for the loss of one Beaufort . 
 = = = AOC No. 9 Operational Group to Air Member for Personnel = = = 
 Although Hewitt was performing an " excellent job " according to Fifth Air Force commander Major General Ennis Whitehead , he was controversially removed from his post in mid @-@ November 1943 by Air Vice Marshal Jones , over accusations of poor discipline and morale within No. 9 OG . RAAF historian Alan Stephens later described the circumstances of Hewitt 's dismissal as " murky " , and the allegations leading to it as unofficial . Drakeford defended Hewitt 's service record , informing the Prime Minister that " the present position may be largely , if not entirely , due to some temporary physical stress brought about by the strain of his important duties as <unk> of No. 9 Group . " Hewitt himself believed that he had been smeared by a disgruntled former staff officer ; historian Kristen Alexander identified Wing Commander Kenneth Ranger , who would play a leading part in the " Morotai Mutiny " of 1945 , as having made allegations regarding Hewitt 's supposed " lack of balance , vanity and lack of purpose in the prosecution of the war " . As a result , Hewitt returned to his previous position as Director of Intelligence at Allied Air Headquarters , while the Air Member of Personnel , Air Commodore Frank Lukis , took over as AOC No. 9 OG in December . General Kenney considered Hewitt 's removal " bad news " . 
 After completing his tour as Director of Intelligence at AAF HQ at the end of 1944 , Hewitt became acting Air Member for Personnel ( AMP ) in 1945 . As AMP , Hewitt sat on the Air Board , the RAAF 's controlling body that consisted of its most senior officers and was chaired by the Chief of the Air Staff . Along with the other members of the board , he reviewed the findings of the inquiry by Justice John Vincent Barry into the " Morotai Mutiny " , which had involved senior pilots of the Australian First Tactical Air Force ( No. 1 TAF ) attempting to resign their commissions to protest the relegation of RAAF fighter squadrons to strategically unimportant ground attack missions . Hewitt recommended that the AOC No. 1 TAF , Air Commodore Harry Cobby , be removed from command , along with his two senior staff officers . The majority of the Air Board saw no reason to take such action , leaving Hewitt to append a dissenting note to its decision . Drakeford supported Hewitt 's position , and the three senior No. 1 TAF officers were later dismissed from their posts by Air Vice Marshal Jones . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 = = = Demobilisation and rationalisation = = = 
 Hewitt 's appointment as Air Member for Personnel was made permanent following the end of World War II in August 1945 . In this role he was directly responsible for the demobilisation of what had become the world 's fourth largest air force , and its transition to a much smaller peacetime service . Hewitt considered that the RAAF was in danger of losing some of its best staff through rapid , unplanned demobilisation , and recommended that its workforce be stabilised for two years at a strength of 20 @,@ 000 while it reviewed its post @-@ war requirements . Although the Air Board supported Hewitt 's proposal , government cost @-@ cutting resulted in the strength of the so @-@ called Interim Air Force remaining lower than planned , being reduced to some 13 @,@ 000 by October 1946 and under 8 @,@ 000 by the end of 1948 . Despite claiming that employing women in the Air Force was an important factor in reducing " antagonism and prejudice " against them in the work force in general , Hewitt also recommended that the WAAAF be disbanded after the war . 
 As AMP , Hewitt was responsible for reviewing the potential employment of senior officers in the post @-@ war Air Force . This review led to the early retirement of such figures as Air Marshal Richard Williams and Air Vice Marshals Stanley Goble , Bill Bostock , Frank McNamara , Bill Anderson , Henry Wrigley and Adrian Cole , ostensibly to make way for the advancement of younger and equally capable officers . Hewitt helped draft the letters to each of the retirees , explaining the reasons for the decision and redundancy payments involved . He also had the " thankless task " of rationalising the Air Force List of officers and their seniority , which had become a source of numerous irregularities due to the temporary and acting promotions granted during wartime . This resulted in many officers of senior rank being ' demoted ' as many as three levels , such as group captain to flight lieutenant , in the first post @-@ war List released in June 1947 . 
 = = = RAAF education and other work = = = 
 Hewitt was responsible for initiating major improvements in Air Force education that took place between 1945 and 1953 , playing a key role in the establishment of RAAF College and the introduction of an apprenticeship training programme . The purpose of the College was , in Hewitt 's words , to " sow the seeds of service " for future leaders , helping create a special RAAF esprit de corps . He added that it was " almost a truism that the future RAAF can be no better than the Air Force College " . Founded at Point Cook in January 1948 , RAAF College 's inaugural commandant was Air Commodore Val Hancock , who also drafted its first charter . With the support of the Air Member for Engineering and Maintenance , Air Vice Marshal Ellis Wackett , Hewitt developed the Apprenticeship Training Scheme to raise the standard of technical roles in the Air Force , introducing it with a nationwide publicity campaign to attract recruits . Its base was the Ground Training School , which opened at Wagga , New South Wales , in early 1948 to provide education and technical training for youths aged 15 to 17 . It was renamed RAAF Technical College in 1950 and then the RAAF School of Technical Training in 1952 . 
 Parallel to his initiatives in Air Force education and training , Hewitt introduced a revised aircrew ranking scheme that consisted of skill categories with various levels , such as navigator level 4 or pilot level 1 , rather than the regular military ranks such as sergeant or flight lieutenant . This was abandoned in 1950 due to dissatisfaction caused by the lack of obvious equivalence between these specialist ' ranks ' and the traditional ranking system common to the rest of the RAAF and other defence forces . After completing his term as Air Member for Personnel in 1948 , he was posted to London as the Australian Defence Representative . By now promoted air vice marshal , Hewitt was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1951 New Year Honours . Returning from Britain the same year , he took over as Air Member for Supply and Equipment ( AMSE ) from Air Vice Marshal George Mackinolty , who had died suddenly of cancer . Hewitt served as AMSE until his retirement from the RAAF in April 1956 . In this role , he again cooperated with Air Vice Marshal Wackett — now the Air Member for Technical Services — to introduce the concept of acquiring spare parts based on ' life @-@ of @-@ type ' , whereby the forecast number and type of spares necessary for an aircraft 's projected service life would be ordered when it was first deployed operationally , to reduce support costs and delivery times . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 Following his retirement from the Air Force in 1956 , Hewitt joined International Harvester Co . Australia as Manager of Education and Training . He became a trustee of the Services Canteen Trust the same year , serving in this position until 1977 . Having retired from International Harvester in 1966 , Hewitt became an author in later life and wrote two books on his experiences in the military . The first , Adversity in Success , was published in 1980 and gave his account of the air war in the South West Pacific . He followed it in 1984 with The Black One . Hewitt also acted as chairman and managing director of his own publishing house , <unk> Publishing . Predeceased by his wife Lorna , he died on 1 November 1985 . 
 Hewitt is credited with being primarily responsible for the " education revolution " that took place in the RAAF between 1945 and 1953 , his initiatives while Air Member for Personnel being carried on by his successor in the position , Air Vice Marshal Frank Bladin . According to Air Force historians Alan Stephens and Keith Isaacs , the importance of RAAF College and the Apprenticeship Training Scheme in contributing to the professionalism of the post @-@ war service " cannot be over @-@ stated " . Air Vice Marshal Ernie Hey , the Air Member for Technical Services from 1960 through 1972 , declared that the apprenticeship programme was " one of the best things " the RAAF ever established and its graduates — numbering some 5 @,@ 500 from 1952 to 1993 — as " absolutely outstanding " . Joe Hewitt is commemorated by Hewitt Reef in Great Barrier Reef Marine Park , named in his honour by the survey team on HMAS Moresby , with whom he worked as a member of No. 101 Flight in 1926 – 28 . Hewitt also founded an eponymous trophy for small arms proficiency in the Air Force . 
 = Club Life : Volume Two Miami = 
 Club Life : Volume Two Miami is the seventh mix compilation by Dutch disc jockey and music producer Tiësto , released on April 21 , 2012 . The second installment of the Club Life series , the album serves as a homage to the nightlife of Miami , Florida , a city renowned for being a focal point for electronic music . As well as collaborating with producers such as Axwell , Wolfgang Gartner , Afrojack , and Hardwell , Tiësto developed remixes of " Paradise " by Coldplay , Gotye 's " Somebody That I Used to Know " and The Naked and Famous ' " Young Blood " . 
 Music critics reacted favorably to the album , who cited its bombastic approach and musical composition as highlights . Critics also felt that the album effectively reflected the dance culture in Miami . Club Life : Volume Two Miami performed successfully in several countries including Canada , Russia , Switzerland and the United States , where it peaked at number sixteen on the Billboard 200 . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Club Life : Volume Two Miami is the second installment of the Club Life series , succeeding its predecessor Club Life : Volume One Las Vegas ( 2011 ) . The album serves as a tribute to the nightlife in Miami , Florida , a city internationally renowned for being an epicenter for electronic dance music . Upon arriving in the United States in 2002 , Tiësto was instantly enamored by the city 's vibrant electronic music scene , as the genre had yet to garner mainstream popularity throughout the rest of the country . " Literally the first place I came to in America was Miami , " he recalled , " and since then I 've always been in love with the city . They 've always been very supportive of my music . Like , even in the beginning of 2002 , when the whole of America was not really into dance music , Miami had already embraced my music here and played it in all the stores . " Tiësto , who performs in the area annually , sought inspiration from varying discothèques in the city . He explained , " I wanted to create songs that give fans the opportunity to experience the sound of Miami clubs , whether they ’ ve been there or not . " 
 Tiësto collaborated with multiple record producers and disc jockeys in the recording process of the album , which include Afrojack , Wolfgang Gartner and Swanky Tunes . Club Life : Volume Two possess remixes of Coldplay 's " Paradise " ( 2011 ) , " Somebody That I Used to Know " ( 2011 ) by Gotye and The Naked and Famous ' " Young Blood " ( 2011 ) — songs that Tiësto professes to be some of his favorites . " With the remixes on this album , I took a handful of songs I love and created remixes filtered through the Club Life sound " , he explained . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The album opens with the interlude " Miami " and " Chasing Summers " , which are homages to the summers in the city . The collaborative effort We Own the Night follows as the third track ; the song features vocals from English recording artist Luciana <unk> , which coincides over electronic basslines . After transitioning from " What Can We Do ( A Deeper Love ) " and " If a Lie Was Love " , the respective seventh and eighth tracks — the remixes of " Paradise " and " Somebody That I Used to Know " — follows suit ; the latter contains an upbeat melody with pounding synthesizers . It continues with " Walls " , the album 's ninth song , which contains an upbeat melody and a house @-@ inspired breakdown . Hardwell 's remix of " Young Blood " constitutes the tenth tune of Club Life : Volume Two Miami , which albeit retains the original song 's banger themes , provides a " euphoric sound with progressively sweet vocals building next to synths before releasing a thumping beat " . The thirteenth track , " Arena " , commences after " Life " , " Long Time " , and the " electric summer sound " of Axwell 's " In My Mind " . " Can 't Stop Me " , a collaborative work between Tiësto and fellow Dutch producer Afrojack , is drenched with thumping percussion and grandiose vocals . " <unk> Crazy " serves as the album 's concluding number . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Club Life : Volume Two Miami has been well received by music critics . The album provoked Elektro Daily 's Cynthia Conte to conclude that Tiësto " drops some serious fierce beats that will have you dancing all day and all night " . Analogous sentiments were echoed by Sanam <unk> , who concluded : " Overall , Club Life Volume Two : Miami is a perfect symphony of sound for all listeners of music and is a must buy . " <unk> commended the album 's bombastic approach , and asserted that it accurately embodied Miami 's electronic music scene . " As the time is finally here , the international DJ maestro presents his finest work as the album is a home to stellar productions , including collaborations with Wolfgang Gartner and unique remixes of Afrojack 's latest hit ' Can ’ t Stop Me Now ' as well as Gotye 's ' Somebody I Used To Know ' . It ’ s big , and it ’ s here . " Writing for Brig , a publication from the University of Stirling , Stuart Kenny avouched that the album contained a plethora of potential hits " that will unleash excessive amounts of euphoria when blasted from a live stage " . 
 Club Life : Volume Two Miami performed successfully in several countries . It debuted at number sixteen on the Billboard 200 , becoming Tiësto 's highest @-@ charting album in the United States . Subsequently , it charted at number three on the Independent Albums Chart and topped the Dance / Electronic Albums Chart . The following week , Club Life : Volume Two Miami descended forty @-@ eight spots to number sixty @-@ four on the Billboard 200 . In Canada , the remix album ascended and peaked at number seven on the Canadian Albums Chart . Club Life : Volume Two Miami attained similar successes in European markets . It garnered its highest position in Switzerland , where it debuted within the top three . The album acquired top @-@ ten positions in Austria , Russia , and the United Kingdom , while also obtaining top @-@ 100 entries in Spain and Denmark . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 In the iTunes Bonus Edition , " Miami " is a part of " Chasing Summers . " 
 The digital download of " Make Some Noise " has its own cover art but the song is not identified as a single . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Hwa Chong Institution = 
 Hwa Chong Institution ( HCI ) ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ; Wade – Giles : <unk> <unk> <unk> ; Pe ̍ h @-@ ōe @-@ jī : <unk> @-@ <unk> Tiong @-@ o ̍ h ) is an independent school in Singapore for students aged 13 to 18 covering both secondary and pre @-@ university levels . A Ministry of Education @-@ designated <unk> , it operates under the Special Assistance Plan ( SAP ) for bilingualism , and offers the Integrated Programme ( IP ) and the School Based Gifted Education Programme ( <unk> ) , after the Secondary School Gifted Education Programme was phased out . The main campus , in Bukit Timah , covers 72 acres ( equivalent to 29 ha or 0 @.@ 3 km2 ) , which is shared among Hwa Chong Institution , Hwa Chong International School , the institution 's boarding school , and the Bukit Timah campus of SIM University . 
 Previously two separate but affiliated schools , The Chinese High School and Hwa Chong Junior College , HCI was the result of a merger on 1 January 2005 . The change was in line with the Ministry of Education 's introduction of the Integrated Programme , whereby students undertake a six @-@ year " through @-@ train " education in which they bypass the traditional GCE ' O ' levels . In spite of the merger , the secondary school section remains boys @-@ only , while the junior college ( JC ) section is co @-@ educational . Students from Nanyang Girls ' High School ( across the road from HCI ) also continue on in HCI for their JC education . Approximately 4000 students are enrolled in the school ; the student @-@ teacher ratio ranges from 13 : 1 to 35 : 1 , depending on the class . Hwa Chong has been a top feeder school for international students to Oxford University . The school is a member of Strategic Alliance of Global Educators and Strategic Educational Alliance of Southeast Asia . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The Chinese High School ( 1919 – 2004 ) = = = 
 The Chinese High School , at that time the Nanyang Chinese High School , was founded by Tan Kah Kee in March 1919 at Niven Road . With an enrolment of 78 pupils , it was the first Chinese institution of higher learning at that time in Southeast Asia , catering to Chinese dialect groups amongst the overseas Chinese . Six years later , the school moved to its Bukit Timah campus . 
 After its founding , the school offered comprehensive secondary level Chinese education . It remained funded and supported by Tan Kah Kee until shortly before World War II . In 1934 , Lee Kong Chian , son @-@ in @-@ law of Tan Kah Kee , became the chairman of the school 's board and remained in his post until 1955 . During his tenure , the school faced the threat of closure several times due to financial difficulties , but managed to survive due to strong financial support from both Tan and Lee . Together they built a legacy , which the current school body commemorates them for . 
 During the Battle of Singapore , the school 's clock tower , for its height and vantage point , served as a headquarters for the Allied defenders . Following the war , the school resumed its predominant Chinese education . In the 1950s and 1960s , during periods of civil unrest in Singapore , many students , teachers and alumni participated in or led the anti @-@ colonial riots . 
 After Singapore gained independence in 1965 , the school came under the purview of the Ministry of Education and was accorded the Special Assistance Plan ( SAP ) status in 1979 . Later , in 1988 the school achieved the status of an independent school , under a scheme that the ministry perceived as proven successful and which was extended to other top schools in Singapore . On 19 March 1999 , the school 's clock tower was gazetted as a national monument . 
 = = = Hwa Chong Junior College ( 1974 – 2004 ) = = = 
 Hwa Chong Junior College , now HCI 's college section , was established in 1974 at the Bukit Timah campus of The Chinese High School as a separate pre @-@ university education institution , but under the same management board . The college was the government @-@ aided junior college , with its name being an abbreviation of the high school 's Chinese name to mark the relationship between the two schools . 
 Hwa Chong Junior College moved out of its campus at Bukit Timah Road in the late 1980s following the discovery of structural problems with the building to facilitate rebuilding . Lessons continued but conducted at various locations . The rebuilding of the campus finished in 1992 and lessons restarted at the campus in 1993 . Following The Chinese High School 's accord of independent school status in 1987 , the junior college followed suit in 2004 , becoming the first JC in Singapore to be granted the status of an independent school . 
 = = = Merger ( 2005 – present ) = = = 
 Following the introduction of the Integrated Programme into Singapore 's education system in the early 2000s , The Chinese High School merged with Hwa Chong Junior College on 1 January 2005 to form Hwa Chong Institution . In 2008 , HCI was selected by the Ministry of Education to implement the <unk> @ Singapore programme , one of five initial schools to do so and amongst the eventual fifteen planned . Also in the same year , the Hwa Chong Diploma was introduced . The diploma is awarded to the best performing 30 % of its graduating cohort , stacking upon the GCE ' A ' Levels certificate . 
 The school enrols an estimated 4 @,@ 000 students , spread across the six levels , with a student @-@ teacher ratio of 13 : 1 . Hwa Chong Institution has produced 54 President 's Scholars . The college section 's Humanities Programme has a significant percentage of its students going on to study abroad at such universities as Oxford , Cambridge , Harvard University , Yale University , Stanford University , MIT , UC Berkeley , Peking University and Tsinghua University . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The main campus of HCI in Bukit Timah covers 72 acres , making it one of the largest in Southeast Asia . The campus land is shared between the Hwa Chong Family of Schools - namely , Hwa Chong Institution itself , Hwa Chong International School and Hwa Chong Institution Boarding School . Also onsite is the Bukit Timah campus of SIM University and its administrative headquarters . Despite the multi @-@ sharing , each entity possesses its own set of facilities , marked by certain perimeters . 
 The dedicated Science Research Centre , built in 2008 , has ten purpose @-@ built laboratories in which students experience different research disciplines outside of the usual curriculum , including labs for Robotics and Engineering , Biotechnology and Microbiology , and the Pharmaceutical Sciences . The centre provides resources to support the research and innovation programmes , serving as a central facility for student research activities . 
 The Ong Teng Cheong Student Activities and Leadership Training Centre ( also called the Ong Teng Cheong SALT Centre , or the SALT Centre ) , named in honour of alumnus and former President of Singapore Ong Teng Cheong , aims to develop students holistically , particularly in arts and leadership development . Housed in it are dance studios , music rooms , and a cardiovascular and weight @-@ training room . A moot parliament is also housed in the centre , modelled on the Singapore Parliamentary Chamber , and it is a central venue for events such as student council meetings and Model United Nations conferences . 
 Apart from the two purpose @-@ built facilities , other facilities in HCI include a table tennis room , street soccer courts , a judo dojo , three @-@ storey library , a gymnasium , a 400 @-@ metre track , a multi @-@ purpose hall , a multi @-@ storey carpark , lecture theatres , general laboratories and classrooms . The 31 @-@ metre tall Clock Tower of the school is a national monument , the only one in a Singapore school . 
 = = = Beijing Satellite Campus = = = 
 In line with the school 's plan to set up a Global Academy , HCI established its Beijing Satellite Campus in 2007 , the first of its kind for a Singapore school . An agreement was inked with a top school in China , Beijing 's The Second High School Attached to Beijing Normal University , in which classrooms will be leased . A total of four batches of students make their way to the campus every year , staying for up to two months . Priority is given to scholars of HCI 's <unk> Studies Programme and Humanities Programme . Students in the campus take lessons together with students from China in partner schools , carry out community involvement activities , and take field trips to cities such as Xi 'an , Tianjin and Shanghai . 
 HCI has been quoted as saying that it is looking to opening satellite campuses in India and the United States , with the aim of establishing the two in the near future . In July 2010 , it was announced that HCI would be developing a school in the Sino @-@ Singapore Guangzhou Knowledge City in Guangzhou , China , akin to that of its first satellite campus , following the inking of a memorandum of understanding ( MOU ) . This would see HCI partnering a top local school for exchange and mutual learning programmes . 
 = = Academics = = 
 Incorporated within HCI are the high school ( junior high ) section and college ( senior high ) section , each caring for different cohorts of students separated by age group . Secondary 1 ( age 13 ) students first enter the high school section and study there for four years , before proceeding to the college section where they prepare to take the GCE ' A ' Levels final examinations . The high school section uses the Mean Subject Grade grading system in tests and exams . The school @-@ wide Integrated Programme offered enables students to skip the GCE ' O ' Levels , typically taken by Secondary 4 students in Singapore . The Hwa Chong Diploma was introduced in 2008 and is awarded to the best performing 30 % of its graduating cohort . It is awarded on top of the ' A ' Levels certificate , and is an added qualification to university applications . 
 HCI also organises academic competitions and conferences , both for its students and external participants . The school organises the Asia Pacific Mathematical Olympiad for Primary Schools ( <unk> ) and the Singapore Mathematical Olympiad for Primary Schools ( <unk> ) . At the same time , the International Science Youth Forum ( <unk> ) is hosted at HCI and co @-@ organised by Nanyang Technological University , Institute of Advanced Studies ( IAS ) , bringing students from across Asia @-@ Pacific together to network and dialogue , with Nobel laureates coming down to share their experiences in the scientific field ; a record five Nobel laureates were involved in 2010 . 
 = = = <unk> and faculties = = = 
 Students in the high school section are divided into what are called consortia - a different naming convention from the typical house system . The four consortia in the school are Aphelion , iSpark , Ortus and <unk> . The iSpark consortium houses HCI 's School Based Gifted Education Programme ( <unk> ) . The consortia work closely with one another and each has its own student council . In the college section , they are instead called faculties , highlighting the differences in function between consortia and faculties . There are four faculties , namely - Apollo , Ares , Athena and Artemis - all named after Greek deities . 
 = = = Special programmes = = = 
 Various special programmes are offered in HCI , such as the Bi @-@ cultural Studies Programme , the Art Elective Programme ( Singapore ) and the Science and Math Talent Programme . These programmes offer a degree of specialisation that is generally not possible in the standard curriculum , enabling students in the school to explore respective fields to a greater degree . Despite having similar names , the special programmes offered in the high school and the college section are different ; however , most are closely associated with each other . An example would be the Humanities Programme ( HP ) , in which the high school HP focuses on the three core humanities subjects - History , Geography and English Literature , while HP in the college section offers a greater variety of subjects such as China Studies and economics , while gearing students for university humanities programmes locally and abroad . 
 Special programmes offered in the school are as follows : 
 In 2008 , the Centre for Scholastic Education ( CSE ) was set up to house all special programmes in the high school section except for the AEP and the MSP . They are the <unk> Studies Programme , Humanities Programme and the Science and Math Talent Programme . From 2013 onwards , all students participating in Special Programmes are housed under CSE , part of the iSpark Consortium . The Integrated Programme @-@ Special Programme ( IPSP ) has been abolished in the same year . CSE also used to house the now @-@ defunct Entrepreneurship Programme . CSE is also used as an umbrella term to describe the specialised academic programmes offered at the upper secondary level . 
 From 2013 onwards , Special Science and Maths Talent programme ( <unk> ) is introduced to the SMTP curriculum to train talented students in areas such as Physics and Biology . Sexuality and relationship education programmes are also conducted . 
 = = = Sabbatical Programme = = = 
 Under HCI 's Integrated Programme , the Sabbatical Programme is offered whereby students from Secondary 1 to 4 go on one week sabbatical courses in each term in the first semester ( Terms 1 and 2 ) . The programme is unique in allowing the majority of the school populace to put aside formal curricular lessons for a week in pursuit of their passions or interests . <unk> offered are of a wide variety , in categories as defined by the school : Arts & Aesthetics , Chinese Studies , Humanities , English & Literature , Leadership , Technology , Science and Math , Camps and Student Exchange ; they are essentially courses for students to opt for , such as beginner guitar and songwriting lessons , professional music production , Model United Nations training camps , football friendlies with other schools , et cetera . Also , the school requires students to use the specifically designed Online Bidding System - the i @-@ <unk> - to organise their sabbatical plans . Students who accumulate demerit points as a result of various offences are penalised in their sabbatical bidding or are recommended for corrective work order . 
 = = = Exchange programmes = = = 
 HCI offers a host of exchange programmes with schools spread across the Asia @-@ Pacific , including University of Tsukuba in Japan , Philippine Science High School in the Philippines and the <unk> Academy in South Korea . In 2008 , a collaboration between the Loudoun Academy of Science and HCI saw the team winning the Extreme Collaboration Award in the Stanford Global Innovation Tournament , in a unique achievement for both schools . 
 = = Co @-@ curricular activities = = 
 HCI offers a wide variety of extra @-@ curricular activities , labelled Co @-@ Curricular Activities ( CCA ) by the Ministry of Education , and this is in part due to the school 's large student population and size . 
 = = = Leadership = = = 
 Since 2006 , HCI has hosted an annual international leadership conference , the Hwa Chong Asia @-@ Pacific Young Leaders Summit , a forum where Asian and international student leaders gather to discuss pertinent issues in the region , as well as to share their cultural and personal experiences . It has seen students from schools in Australia , China , India , Japan , Saudi Arabia , Singapore , South Korea , the United Kingdom , the United States and more , providing an international representation to the summit . 
 Another annual leadership conference which HCI organises is the Student Leaders Convention ( SLC ) . This is the conference organised by student councillors from the High School section , in collaboration with student councillors from Nanyang Girls ' High School , HCI 's sister school . The Student Leaders Convention witnesses the gathering of over 400 student leaders locally and internationally . Student leaders from other countries include those from Malaysia , India , China , Mexico , Australia and many more . Into its 19th year , the SLC hopes to provide a platform for the discussion of issues and problems which affect youth and the nation . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 There are a number of sports CCAs offered in HCI , ranging from soccer to ten @-@ pin bowling , and from wushu to touch rugby . The canoeing , gymnastics , judo , shooting , table tennis and track & field teams garner nationwide achievements almost every year . HCI has won track & field championships in most divisions . The HCI track & field team used to hold and currently holds a few national records , particularly in pole vault . Other sports which have achieved significant results over the years include the basketball , canoeing , volleyball , water polo and wushu teams . For example , in 2010 , the volleyball team , won the championships in both A divisions ( Boys and Girls ) . Nine HCI students were selected to represent Singapore in the Youth Olympics Games 2010 , two of them from the championship @-@ winning basketball team . 
 = = = Uniformed groups = = = 
 There are currently four uniformed groups in HCI : National Cadet Corps ( Land ) , National Police Cadet Corps , St. John Ambulance Brigade , and Scouts ( and Ventures & Rovers ) . These CCAs provide a highly structured organisation and a well @-@ defined hierarchy . The HCI National Cadet Corps unit ( <unk> ) has been awarded Gold for 15 consecutive years , winning the Best Unit Competition ( <unk> ) in 2000 . Also , <unk> is the only Centre of Excellence in Precision Drill department amongst all NCC units in Singapore . The National Police Cadet Corps ( NPCC ) is currently the largest uniformed group in Singapore , and in HCI , in terms of membership . <unk> is also one of the only 2 units in Singapore to have achieved 20 gold awards in the annual Unit Overall Proficiency Award ( <unk> ) . They have received The NPCC Golden Cane , in honour of their achievement . The St. John Ambulance Brigade is one of two School Corps awarded Gold in the Corp Achievement Award for 15 consecutive years . The Ambulance Cadet team from Hwa Chong finished as National Champions for the Inter @-@ Zone First Aid and Home Nursing Competition in 2010 , 2011 , 2012 and 2014 . The Ambulance Cadet team then went on to win the biennial Singapore @-@ Malaysia First Aid and Nursing Competition in 2011 and 2013 . The Ambulance Adult team also won 1st place for the Inter @-@ Zone First Aid and Home Nursing Competition 2013 , and finished 2nd runners up in 2014 . The Scouts uniformed group hosts the Lion Dance troupe , which performs at special and commemorative events . All four uniformed groups achieved Gold in the annual national assessment . Apart from regular planned training , other activities include inter @-@ unit competitions in bowling and captain 's ball . 
 = = = Performing arts = = = 
 The eleven performing arts groups in HCI are : the Chinese Orchestra , the String Ensemble , the Piano Ensemble , the Chinese Drama Club , the Harmonica Ensemble , the English Drama Club , the Choir , the Music And Dance Society , the Guitar Ensemble , the Band and lastly Chinese Dance . The 2010 Singapore Youth Festival , saw the English Drama Club judged , where it attained a Silver Award . The previous year , 2009 , saw the other performing arts groups being assessed ; a number of awards were won , including two Golds with Honours for the Chinese Orchestra and the High School Band . 
 Apart from occasional performances held locally in Victoria Theatre and the school 's Drama Centre , many of the performing arts groups travel overseas both for exchange and performances . Amongst them , the High School Band , the Choir and the String Orchestra are notable for their international achievements . In 2010 the College Choir attained significant achievements in an international competitions , the Festival of Songs in Olomouc , Czech <unk> while in 2011 , the choir attained a Gold with Honours in the 2011 Singapore Youth Festival Central Judging of Choirs . The High School Band , which once performed in the Istana , travelled to Hawaii to attend the Pacific Basin Music Festival for the second time in 2010 , attaining a gold award . The Band has also performed at the National Day Parade . The High School String Orchestra , more commonly known by the acronym " <unk> " , has also travelled widely . It won first runners @-@ up at the open category of the 2006 Gothenburg International Music Festival , and went on tour with the Australian Boy 's Choir to Melbourne , Australia , and Johor Baru , Malaysia , to perform at the opening of the 7th JB Arts Festival . Most recently , the string orchestra achieved Gold with Honours at the 2011 Singapore Youth Festival for String Ensembles . It was also one of the six schools , and the only school in Asia , to be invited to participate in the 2012 Los Angeles International Music Festival at the Walt Disney Concert Hall . 
 = = = Clubs and societies = = = 
 Clubs and societies are the most numbered in the school , stemming from a diverse range , such as the Socrates Club ( mathematics ) , the Chinese Calligraphy Society , the English Drama Club and the <unk> Club ( photography / live sound mixing / stage lighting ) . Many of these clubs / societies have performed well in competitions . The English and Chinese drama clubs of the high school section put up an annual performance , where the students of the school are invited to watch . 
 = = School culture = = 
 = = = Student councils = = = 
 The Hwa Chong Institution student council comprises the College Council , High School Council , and the smaller consortium councils , which represent the college section , high school section and the four high school consortia respectively . Currently into its 43rd year ( in 2016 ) , the High School Council is generally regarded to be among the oldest student councils in Singapore . It is tasked with caring for the welfare of students in the school , and acts as a middleman between the school administration and the student body . The council also organises multiple events every year , mostly with teacher involvement limited to mentorship only , including skills workshops , forums , the Hwa Chong Student Leaders Convention ( SLC ) , the two yearly freshman orientations ( one for Secondary One students and one for <unk> students ) and the Hwa Chong @-@ Nanyang Annual Combined Sports Meet . The President and Vice @-@ President of the 43rd High School Council are Dylan Wee ( from class <unk> ) and Joel Tan ( from class <unk> ) respectively . 
 = = = Information technology usage = = = 
 Having been designated a <unk> in 2008 , HCI has rapidly adopted new Information Technology ( IT ) resources . Announcements and notices are posted regularly online in the school 's Electronic Message Board ( EMB ) , as a replacement for traditional school @-@ wide announcements , and students are required to check the online board regularly . HCI recently developed its own wiki platform , called the Hwa Chong Institution <unk> , which further supports collaborative learning and interacting for all staff and students of HCI . The school also organises home learning periods every term , typically lasting one to three days , where students study and learn from home through the Internet and their computers without the need to return to school . 
 = = = Uniform and discipline = = = 
 In the high school section , students in Secondary 1 to Secondary 3 ( inclusive ) must wear a white short @-@ sleeved shirt with khaki short trousers and white socks , which must cover the ankle . The four metal buttons must be worn on the two front pockets and on both shoulders . The school collar pin should be worn on the left collar . Either white , blue or black shoes with either white or black laces must be worn . Secondary 4 students wear long beige trousers with a beige shirt , similar to the male students in the college section . College girls wear a beige blouse and a beige skirt . 
 Students earn demerit points for poor behaviour . Accumulated demerit points can affect final grades and eligibility for certain awards , scholarships and overseas trips . The student handbook states that , for serious offences , male students at Hwa Chong Institution may be punished with detention , suspension , caning or expulsion . Only the Principal or Discipline Master may administer corporal punishment , which consists of a maximum of five strokes of the cane . Students found smoking are immediately caned or suspended or both . Caning may also be given for integrity @-@ related offences ( e.g. cheating ) , uncivilized behaviour ( e.g. defiance ) , and criminal offences ( e.g. fighting ) . 
 = = = Class naming conventions and allocations = = = 
 Classes in the high school section of HCI have a special naming convention . The class name is made of a digit , a letter then a digit . The first digit is the class ' level ( 1 for Secondary 1 , 2 for Secondary 2 , 3 for Secondary 3 , 4 for Secondary 4 ) . The letter is the first letter of the consortium of the class ' pupils . An exception is made for secondary 3 and 4 students enrolled in the school 's Center for Scholastic Excellence ( CSE - iSpark ) . In this case , they would be both part of the iSpark consortium and their original consortium . The letter would then represent the program he enrolled in : S for Science and Math Talent Programme ( SMTP ) , B for the Bi @-@ Cultural Special Programme ( BSP ) and H for the Humanities Programme ( HP ) . An Aphelion class would have the letter A , iSpark the letter I , Ortus the letter O and <unk> the letter P. The last digit is the class number . Therefore , class <unk> would be the first Aphelion class in Secondary 4 , <unk> would be the first Science and Math Talent Programme class . 
 Classes in the college section of HCI has a different naming convention , in the format of " <unk> " , where <unk> is the year they enter JC 1 , and X is either " S " ( for science stream ) or " A " ( for arts stream ) , and ZZ is the class number . Students are streamed into classes by virtue of their subject combination . The first number of the class number represents the type of subject combination that the class has taken ( 1 for arts , 6 for Physics , and 7 if anyone in the class takes Biology ) . Administratively , the student population are sometimes grouped by the stream and the first number : S6 or S7 . A1 is however not used often to categorize the student population because all the arts stream classes have 1 as the first number of the class number . The last digit starts from 0 and can range up to K ( as of 2015 ) . An example of a class is <unk> , which means that the students in the class are taking physics as 1 of their 4 H2 subjects and entered <unk> in the year 2014 . 
 Unlike in the high school section , the naming of the classes are not affiliated with the faculty that the class is in , instead , the faculty that each class is in is decided by the subject combination or type of subject combination ( e.g. Hybrid ) of the students in the class . In other words , the subject combination of a student decides both their class and their faculty . Another factor is the special programme that the students of the class are offered . For example , in 2015 , the classes who are offered the Science and Math Talent Programme ( SMTP ) are allocated to 1 of 3 classes ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) , regardless of their subject combination ( note however that special programmes often only accept a small range of subject combinations ) . 
 One exception are those who take odd ( or uncommon ) subjects and / or combinations , such as taking H2 Foreign Language . One cannot ascertain which class they will be allocated in purely based on their subject combinations . The students are often allocated to a class that have students that have a similar subject combination , with the exception of 1 or 2 subjects , most often the contrasting subject . For example , 2 students both with the same combination of Biology / Chemistry / Maths / Foreign Language ( BCM @-@ Foreign Language ) might be allocated to 2 different classes entirely . 
 An exception though is that if a student is offered a special programme , he / she will be allocated a class based on their special programme , and often not their subject combinations , despite the odd combination . 
 = = Affiliations = = 
 HCI offers the Integrated Programme that extends to Nanyang Girls High School ( <unk> ) , an all @-@ girls high ( junior @-@ high ) school , under the name Hwa Chong Affiliate Programme . Under the programme , a supermajority of <unk> students graduate to the college ( pre @-@ university ) section of HCI to undergo their pre @-@ university education . All students of HCI 's high school section also move on automatically to the college section and undertake the ' A ' Levels , unless they fail to meet requirements ( students must have an MSG of 3 @.@ 00 and below at the end of Secondary 4 ) or specifically apply to leave . 
 Under the umbrella Hwa Chong Family of Schools , HCI is affiliated to Hwa Chong International School ( <unk> ) and Hwa Chong Institution Boarding School ( <unk> ) . All three schools share the same prefix in their names , and are located in the same main campus . However , in spite of the multi @-@ sharing , each school possesses its own set of facilities . However , the students from the different schools may access and use the facilities in other schools . 
 Hwa Chong International School is a co @-@ educational international school , offering a six @-@ year programme from Grade 7 ( 11 – 13 years old ) to Grade 12 , finishing with the International Baccalaureate . In the interim years , the students will sit for the <unk> . The fully private independent school saw its final batch of graduating international ' A ' Levels students and the first batch of graduating IB students in 2010 . Hwa Chong Institution Boarding School is the institution 's boarding school , accommodating HCI 's international scholars . It also houses international scholars studying in other local schools such as Singapore Chinese Girls ' School and Bukit Panjang Government High School . Local Singaporean boarders staying in the boarding school are participants of HCI 's Integrated Boarding Programme . The boarding complex was designed by renowned architect Kenzo Tange , consisting of seven six @-@ storey halls providing accommodation for up to 1 @,@ 000 boarders or guests . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 HCI and its predecessor schools , <unk> and <unk> , have a wide alumni base extending to various sectors and industries in Singapore and other countries . Its best known alumnus is probably Ong Teng Cheong , the fifth President of Singapore , who graduated from <unk> in 1955 . Other prominent alumni in the civil service include Grace Fu , a Minister in the Prime Minister 's Office , and Ministers of State such as Lee Yi <unk> , Sim Ann and Sam Tan . Ng Yat Chung , the fifth Chief of Defence Force , and Hoo Cher Mou , the current Chief of Air Force , are among the HCI alumni in the Singapore Armed Forces top brass . HCI 's more notable alumni in business and finance include Olivia Lum ( the founder of <unk> ) , Toh Soon Huat ( the founder of <unk> Holdings ) , and Wee Cho Yaw ( the Chairman of United Overseas Bank ) . In the arts and media scenes , there are also notable HCI alumni such as Warren Fernandez , the editor of The Straits Times , musicians Liang <unk> Fook and Eric Moo , and artist Tan Swie Hian . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Calgary Cannons = 
 The Calgary Cannons were a minor league baseball team located in Calgary , Alberta , Canada for 18 seasons , from 1985 until 2002 . They were a member of the AAA Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) and played at Foothills Stadium . The Cannons displaced the Calgary Expos , who played in the rookie level Pioneer League from 1977 until 1984 . The team was previously known as the Salt Lake City Gulls before being relocated to Calgary . Following the 2002 season , the team moved to Albuquerque , New Mexico and are now known as the Isotopes . 
 The Cannons played 2 @,@ 538 regular season games in Calgary , compiling a record of 1 @,@ 225 – 1 @,@ 308 . They qualified for the playoffs five times : 1985 , 1987 , 1989 , and 1991 as an affiliate of the Seattle Mariners , and 1998 as an affiliate of the Chicago White Sox . They reached the PCL Championship Series three times , in 1987 , 1991 , and 1998 , though they never won a title . 
 More than 400 Major League players wore a Cannons jersey , including Alex Rodriguez , Edgar Martínez , Danny Tartabull and Jim Abbott . Of those , 11 remain active in the majors as of 2011 . Two players pitched no hitters with the Cannons : Frank Wills in 1985 , and Erik Hanson in 1988 . In 1985 , Tartabull led all professional baseball players with 43 home runs . 
 = = History = = 
 Russ Parker had operated a rookie @-@ level Pioneer League team , the Calgary Expos , since 1977 . In 1983 , the opportunity to move up to AAA presented itself when the Salt Lake City Gulls were put up for sale . In December 1983 , Parker purchased an option to buy the Gulls with the intention of moving the team to Calgary for the 1985 season . The Pacific Coast League approved the sale in May 1984 , and reconstruction of Foothills Stadium began . More than 500 names were submitted in a name the team contest . Five finalists were selected : Stallions , Outlaws , <unk> , Chinooks and Cannons . The Cannons name was selected by a panel of local media representatives . The name was unique , as at the time , no professional or collegiate team in North America used the name . 
 = = = AAA arrives in Calgary = = = 
 The Cannons began play in 1985 as the AAA affiliate of the Seattle Mariners . Their first game was played April 11 , 1985 against the Phoenix Giants . The Cannons won 6 – 2 , led by Danny Tartabull 's home run , the first in Cannons history . Following a 6 – 2 opening road @-@ trip , Calgary 's home opener was scheduled for April 19 . It was snowed out , however , as were attempts to play the following two days . On their fourth attempt , the Cannons finally played their first home game on April 22 against the Tucson Toros . Parker threw the ceremonial first pitch out to Calgary 's mayor , Ralph Klein . Led by Mickey Brantley 's four @-@ hit game , the Cannons won 7 – 6 to send the crowd of 4 @,@ 313 who braved the near @-@ freezing temperatures home happy . 
 The Cannons were a success at the gate , drawing 272 @,@ 322 fans in 63 openings . The season was also a success on the field . The Cannons won the first half pennant in the North Division with a 37 – 32 record , earning a trip to the playoffs . The Cannons entered their North Division playoff series against the Vancouver Canadians without Tartabull , however , as he was recalled by the Mariners before the first game of the series . Tartabull 's loss was significant , as he led all of professional baseball with 43 home runs . Calgary lost their best of five series to Vancouver in three games . 
 The first no @-@ hitter by a Cannons pitcher was hurled by Frank Wills on May 31 , 1985 against the Tacoma Tigers in a seven @-@ inning game . Three years later , Erik Hanson pitched the second no @-@ hitter in Cannons history on August 21 , 1988 , posting a 5 – 0 victory over the Las Vegas Stars . Hanson walked only one batter in the seven @-@ inning game . 
 = = = Pennant chases = = = 
 Calgary again made the playoffs in 1987 , finishing atop the North Division second half standings with a record of 46 – 25 . The Cannons ' overall record of 84 – 57 would ultimately stand as the best record the team compiled in Calgary . The Cannons lost the first two games of the Northern Division Championship Series against the Tacoma Tigers on the road before returning to Calgary to sweep the final three games of the series . Parker described the game five victory as " the biggest moment in Calgary baseball history . " The Cannons faced the Albuquerque Dukes in the Pacific Coast League Championship Series . After splitting the first two games in Calgary , the Cannons dropped the next two in Albuquerque as the Dukes won their fourth PCL championship in ten years . 
 The Cannons made their third playoff appearance in five years in 1989 by winning the second @-@ half pennant with a record of 42 – 29 . The record represented a worst @-@ to @-@ first result for Calgary , as the club finished last in the PCL North in the first half with a 28 – 43 record . The Guns faced the Vancouver Canadians in a rematch of the 1985 North Division Final . As in 1985 , Vancouver swept Calgary in three games . 
 1991 marked the fourth playoff appearance for the Cannons , who posted a 45 – 24 record in the second half . The Cannons swept the Portland Beavers in three games to claim the second Northern Division pennant in franchise history . They also won their first playoff road @-@ games in team history in setting up a championship clash with the Tucson Toros . Calgary won the first two games of the best @-@ of @-@ five series at home over Tucson , giving them three chances to win the title . The Cannons , however , dropped the final three games in Tucson , losing the title in the process . In the fifth game , the Cannons were forced to start Dennis Powell on two days rest after the Mariners unexpectedly recalled intended starter Dave Fleming prior to the game . The move left Russ Parker " upset " and " dumbfounded " . The relationship between the Mariners and Cannons was never the same . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 In 1993 , Calgary 's Foothills Stadium was identified by the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues as one of several minor league facilities requiring renovations to meet new standards . The Cannons were given a deadline of April 1 , 1995 to complete renovations , or the team would be forced to relocate . The Cannons and the City of Calgary engaged in a protracted battle over who would pay for the renovations . Renovations finally began in the fall of 1994 and were completed on time . 
 The 1994 season saw the brief appearance of Alex Rodriguez in a Cannons uniform . The first @-@ overall draft pick of the Mariners in 1993 , Rodriguez vaulted through the Mariners organization in 1994 , starting with the Appleton Foxes in Class A , then the AA Jacksonville Suns . Rodriguez was then promoted to the Mariners , playing 17 major league games before being optioned to Calgary to complete the season . 
 Following the 1994 season , the Cannons and Mariners parted ways , as Seattle moved its AAA team to nearby Tacoma . The Cannons signed an affiliation agreement with the Pittsburgh Pirates , which lasted for three seasons . In 1998 , the Cannons became the AAA affiliate of the Chicago White Sox . 
 The 1998 Cannons qualified for the playoffs for the first time in seven seasons , doing so in dramatic fashion . Calgary clinched its third North Division pennant on September 3 , 1998 , defeating the Canadians 4 – 3 when Kevin Roberson hit a pinch @-@ hit , two @-@ run home run in the bottom of the ninth inning . The victory was the Cannons ' 11th straight , and occurred before a crowd of 8 @,@ 976 , both franchise records . In the playoffs , the Cannons defeated the Fresno Grizzlies in five games to win the Pacific Conference championship , earning their third trip to the PCL Championship Series in team history . After dropping the first game of the final at home to the New Orleans Zephyrs , Calgary rebounded with 12 – 8 and 5 – 2 wins , the latter in New Orleans , to move within one game of winning the title . However , as in 1991 , the Cannons were unable to clinch the title , falling 8 – 1 and 4 – 3 in New Orleans as the Zephyrs won the title . 
 After the season , the Cannons switched major league teams for a final time , and became the Florida Marlins affiliate for the final four years in Calgary . 
 = = = Relocation = = = 
 Citing six years of financial losses , Parker signed a letter of intent to sell the Cannons to a group from Albuquerque , New Mexico , in January 2001 . It was not the first time Parker had considered such a sale . He backed out of a similar sale to a Portland , Oregon – based group at the last minute in 1999 . The sale , which would see the team play in Calgary in 2001 , then relocate to Albuquerque for the 2002 season , was contingent on voters in New Mexico supporting a referendum to pay for a new ballpark . 
 Parker argued that the Cannons no longer made economic sense in Calgary . Foothills Stadium was badly outdated . The Canadian dollar was at record lows against the American dollar , placing the team at a disadvantage in a league that was American @-@ based . Poor weather was also blamed , especially early in the season , leading to lower attendance . The new ballpark in Albuquerque was approved ; however , construction delays pushed the relocation of the team back a year . The Cannons 18th , and final , season took place in 2002 . 
 The Cannons ' final game was played on September 2 , 2002 , against the Edmonton Trappers . It ended in a wild 14 – 13 victory over Calgary 's provincial rival before a sellout crowd of 8 @,@ 512 . The Cannons scored four runs in the bottom of the ninth inning to win the game , with the winning run scored on a strikeout / wild pitch . The team left the field to the song Happy Trails while the cannon in right field that had been fired every time a Calgary player hit a home run fired off a 21 @-@ gun salute . 
 The team began play as the Albuquerque Isotopes in 2003 , named after a Simpsons episode where Homer Simpson attempted to prevent the Springfield Isotopes from relocating to Albuquerque . In Calgary , two new teams began play at Foothills Stadium . The Calgary Outlaws of the independent Canadian Baseball League lasted only a half @-@ season before the entire league folded . The Calgary Dawgs of the Western Major Baseball League operated as a college summer league team . The Calgary Vipers of the independent North American League was the most recent team to represent Calgary , but folded at the end of the 2011 season . 
 = = All @-@ time record = = 
 Note : the PCL abandoned the split @-@ season format beginning in the 1998 season as the league expanded to 16 teams following the dissolution of the American Association . 
 = = Cannons in the Major Leagues = = 
 Over 400 Cannons players also played in the Major Leagues . Of them , the following players played at least parts of ten or more seasons at the Major League level or remain active as of the 2011 season . Eleven former Cannons remain active in the Majors . 
 Players listed in bold have been active on a Major League roster in 2011 . 
 = = Foothills Stadium = = 
 The status of Foothills Stadium , formerly known as Burns Stadium , was a consistent story throughout the Cannons history . The ballpark 's owner , the City of Calgary , risked scuttling the move of the Gulls to Calgary by choosing to reassess the feasibility of AAA baseball in Calgary in 1984 . Council ultimately voted to support Parker , agreeing to a seven @-@ year lease and $ 1 @.@ 5 million to renovate Foothills , one of the PCL 's conditions on approving the relocation . In the Cannons early years , Foothills was regarded as a park with good atmosphere . Mel <unk> of the Edmonton Trappers described the park in 1988 : " They provide a good atmosphere at the park . Seating 's good , and so is the field . The lighting , concessions , parking ... everything 's good . " 
 Renovations to Foothills again became a major issue in 1993 , when the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues demanded that the Cannons upgrade Foothills to AAA standards . The Cannons and the city fought a protracted battle to see who would pay the majority of the $ 2 million renovation costs . The debate also included the Alberta government . Parker argued that if council did not choose to pay the majority of the renovation costs that he would sell or relocate the team . Groups representing Portland , Oregon , Fresno and Sacramento , California all expressed interest in the team . Unable to reach an agreement with the city , the Cannons then turned to the federal government in March 1994 , making a pitch for a federal infrastructure grant to help pay for renovations . Renovations to Foothills Stadium finally began following the 1994 season . 
 As other teams built new ballparks throughout the 1990s , Foothills ' lack of luxury boxes , small clubhouses and open concourse became a growing concern for Parker . By 1998 , he was arguing the need for a new stadium , or a major renovation of Foothills at a cost of $ 20 million . Despite numerous efforts to convince city council to help renovate Foothills , Parker was unable to secure support for the project . When the Cannons were sold and relocated in 2002 , Foothills Stadium was regarded as one of the major reasons why the team moved south to Albuquerque . 
 = HMS Courageous ( 50 ) = 
 HMS Courageous was the lead ship of the Courageous @-@ class cruisers built for the Royal Navy during the First World War . Designed to support the Baltic Project championed by First Sea Lord John Fisher , the ship was very lightly armoured and armed with only a few heavy guns . Courageous was completed in late 1916 and spent the war patrolling the North Sea . She participated in the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight in November 1917 and was present when the German High Seas Fleet surrendered a year later . 
 Courageous was decommissioned after the war , then rebuilt as an aircraft carrier during the mid @-@ 1920s . She could carry 48 aircraft compared to the 36 carried by her half @-@ sister Furious on approximately the same displacement . After recommissioning she spent most of her career operating off Great Britain and Ireland . She briefly became a training carrier , but reverted to her normal role a few months before the start of the Second World War in September 1939 . Courageous was torpedoed and sunk in the opening weeks of the war , going down with more than 500 of her crew . 
 = = Origin and construction = = 
 During the First World War , Admiral Fisher was prevented from ordering an improved version of the preceding Renown @-@ class battlecruisers by a wartime restriction that banned construction of ships larger than light cruisers in 1915 . To obtain ships suitable for the doctrinal roles of battlecruisers , such as scouting for fleets and hunting enemy raiders , he settled on ships with the minimal armour of a light cruiser and the armament of a battlecruiser . He justified their existence by claiming he needed fast , shallow @-@ draught ships for his Baltic Project , a plan to invade Germany via its Baltic coast . 
 Courageous had an overall length of 786 feet 9 inches ( 239 @.@ 8 m ) , a beam of 81 feet ( 24 @.@ 7 m ) , and a draught of 25 feet 10 inches ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) at deep load . She displaced 19 @,@ 180 long tons ( 19 @,@ 490 t ) at load and 22 @,@ 560 long tons ( 22 @,@ 922 t ) at deep load . Courageous and her sisters were the first large warships in the Royal Navy to have geared steam turbines . To save design time , the installation used in the light cruiser Champion , the first cruiser in the navy with geared turbines , was simply replicated for four turbine sets . The Parsons turbines were powered by eighteen Yarrow small @-@ tube boilers . They were designed to produce a total of 90 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 67 MW ) at a working pressure of 235 psi ( 1 @,@ 620 kPa ; 17 kgf / cm2 ) . The ship reached an estimated 30 @.@ 8 knots ( 57 @.@ 0 km / h ; 35 @.@ 4 mph ) during sea trials . 
 The ship 's normal design load was 750 long tons ( 762 t ) of fuel oil , but she could carry a maximum of 3 @,@ 160 long tons ( 3 @,@ 211 t ) . At full capacity , she could steam for an estimated 6 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 110 km ; 6 @,@ 900 mi ) at a speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . 
 Courageous carried four BL 15 @-@ inch Mk I guns in two hydraulically powered twin gun turrets , designated ' A ' and ' Y ' from front to rear . Her secondary armament consisted of eighteen BL 4 @-@ inch Mk IX guns mounted in six manually powered mounts . The mount placed three breeches too close together , causing the 23 loaders to get in one another 's way , and preventing the intended high rate of fire . A pair of QF 3 @-@ inch 20 cwt anti @-@ aircraft guns were fitted abreast the mainmast on Courageous . She mounted two submerged tubes for 21 @-@ inch torpedoes and carried 10 torpedoes for them . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Courageous was laid down on 26 March 1915 , launched on 5 February 1916 and completed on 4 November . During her sea trials later that month , she sustained structural damage while running at full speed in a rough head sea ; the exact cause is uncertain . The forecastle deck was deeply buckled in three places between the breakwater and the forward turret . The side plating was visibly buckled between the forecastle and upper decks . Water had entered the submerged torpedo room and rivets had sheared in the angle irons securing the deck armour in place . The ship was stiffened with 130 long tons ( 130 t ) of steel in response . As of 23 November 1916 , she cost £ 2 @,@ 038 @,@ 225 to build . 
 Upon commissioning , Courageous was assigned to the 3rd Light Cruiser Squadron of the Grand Fleet . She became flagship of the 1st Cruiser Squadron near the end of 1916 when that unit was re @-@ formed after most of its ships had been sunk at the Battle of Jutland in May . The ship was temporarily fitted as a minelayer in April 1917 by the addition of mine rails on her quarterdeck that could hold over 200 mines , but never laid any mines . In mid @-@ 1917 , she received half a dozen torpedo mounts , each with two tubes : one mount on each side of the mainmast on the upper deck and two mounts on each side of the rear turret on the quarterdeck . On 30 July 1917 , Rear @-@ Admiral <unk> Napier assumed command of the 1st Cruiser Squadron and was appointed Acting Vice @-@ Admiral Commanding the Light Cruiser Force until he was relieved on 26 October 1918 . 
 On 16 October 1917 , the Admiralty received word of German ship movements , possibly indicating a raid . Admiral Beatty , the commander of the Grand Fleet , ordered most of his light cruisers and destroyers to sea in an effort to locate the enemy ships . Courageous and Glorious were not initially included amongst them , but were sent to reinforce the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron patrolling the central part of the North Sea later that day . Two German Brummer @-@ class light cruisers managed to slip through the gaps between the British patrols and destroy a convoy bound for Norway during the morning of 17 October , but no word was received of the engagement until that afternoon . The 1st Cruiser Squadron was ordered to intercept , but was unsuccessful as the German cruisers were faster than expected . 
 = = = Second Battle of Heligoland Bight = = = 
 Throughout 1917 the Admiralty was becoming more concerned about German efforts to sweep paths through the British @-@ laid minefields intended to restrict the actions of the High Seas Fleet and German submarines . A preliminary raid on German minesweeping forces on 31 October by light forces destroyed ten small ships . Based on intelligence reports , the Admiralty allocated the 1st Cruiser Squadron on 17 November 1917 , with cover provided by the reinforced 1st Battlecruiser Squadron and distant cover by the battleships of the 1st Battle Squadron , to destroy the minesweepers and their light cruiser escorts . 
 The German ships — four light cruisers of II Scouting Force , eight destroyers , three divisions of minesweepers , eight Sperrbrechers ( cork @-@ filled trawlers ) and two other trawlers to mark the swept route — were spotted at 7 : 30 am . Courageous and the light cruiser Cardiff opened fire with their forward guns seven minutes later . The Germans responded by laying an effective smoke screen . The British continued in pursuit , but lost track of most of the smaller ships in the smoke and concentrated fire on the light cruisers . Courageous fired 92 fifteen @-@ inch shells and 180 four @-@ inch shells during the battle , and the only damage she received was from her own muzzle blast . One fifteen @-@ inch shell hit a gun shield of the light cruiser SMS Pillau but did not affect her speed . At 9 : 30 the 1st Cruiser Squadron broke off their pursuit so that they would not enter a minefield marked on their maps ; the ships turned south , playing no further role in the battle . 
 After the battle , the mine fittings on Courageous were removed , and she spent the rest of the war intermittently patrolling the North Sea . In 1918 , short take @-@ off platforms were fitted for a Sopwith Camel and a Sopwith 1 ½ Strutter on both 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) turrets . The ship was present at the surrender of the German High Seas fleet on 21 November 1918 . Courageous was placed in reserve at Rosyth on 1 February 1919 and she again became Napier 's flagship as he was appointed Vice @-@ Admiral Commanding the Rosyth Reserve until 1 May , The ship was assigned to the Gunnery School at Portsmouth the following year as a turret drill ship . She became flagship of the Rear @-@ Admiral Commanding the Reserve at Portsmouth in March 1920 . Captain Sidney Meyrick became her Flag Captain in 1920 . He was relieved by Capt John Casement in August 1921 . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 = = = Conversion = = = 
 The Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 severely limited capital ship tonnage , and the Royal Navy was forced to scrap many of its older battleships and battlecruisers . The treaty allowed the conversion of existing ships totalling up to 66 @,@ 000 long tons ( 67 @,@ 059 t ) into aircraft carriers , and the Courageous class 's combination of a large hull and high speed made these ships ideal candidates . The conversion of Courageous began on 29 June 1924 at Devonport . Her fifteen @-@ inch turrets were placed into storage and reused during the Second World War for HMS Vanguard , the Royal Navy 's last battleship . The conversion into an aircraft carrier cost £ 2 @,@ 025 @,@ 800 . 
 The ship 's new design improved on her half @-@ sister HMS Furious , which lacked an island and a conventional funnel . All superstructure , guns , torpedo tubes , and fittings down to the main deck were removed . A two @-@ storey hangar was built on top of the remaining hull ; each level was 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) high and 550 feet ( 167 @.@ 6 m ) long . The upper hangar level opened onto a short flying @-@ off deck , below and forward of the main flight deck . The flying @-@ off deck improved launch and recovery cycle flexibility until new fighters requiring longer takeoff rolls made the lower deck obsolete in the 1930s . Two 46 @-@ by @-@ 48 @-@ foot ( 14 @.@ 0 m × 14 @.@ 6 m ) lifts were installed fore and aft in the flight deck . An island with the bridge , flying control station and funnel was added on the starboard side , since islands had been found not to contribute significantly to turbulence . By 1939 the ship could carry 34 @,@ 500 imperial gallons ( 157 @,@ 000 l ; 41 @,@ 400 US gal ) of petrol for her aircraft . 
 Courageous received a dual @-@ purpose armament of sixteen QF 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk VIII guns in single HA Mark XII mounts . Each side of the lower flight deck had a mount , and two were on the quarterdeck . The remaining twelve mounts were distributed along the sides of the ship . During refits in the mid @-@ 1930s , Courageous received three quadruple Mk VII mounts for 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) 2 @-@ pounder " pom @-@ pom " anti @-@ aircraft guns , two of which were transferred from the battleship Royal Sovereign . Each side of the flying @-@ off deck had a mount , forward of the 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns , and one was behind the island on the flight deck . She also received four water @-@ cooled .50 @-@ calibre Mk III anti @-@ aircraft machine guns in a single quadruple mounting . This was placed in a sponson on the port side aft . 
 The reconstruction was completed on 21 February 1928 , and the ship spent the next several months on trials and training before she was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet to be based at Malta , in which she served from May 1928 to June 1930 . In August 1929 , the 1929 Palestine riots broke out , and Courageous was ordered to respond . When she arrived off Palestine , her air wing was disembarked to carry out operations to help to suppress the disorder . The ship was relieved from the Mediterranean by Glorious and refitted from June to August 1930 . She was assigned to the Atlantic and Home Fleets from 12 August 1930 to December 1938 , aside from a temporary attachment to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1936 . In the early 1930s , traverse arresting gear was installed and she received two hydraulic aircraft catapults on the upper flight deck before March 1934 . Courageous was refitted again between October 1935 and June 1936 with her pom @-@ pom mounts . She was present at the Coronation Fleet Review at Spithead on 20 May 1937 for King George VI . The ship became a training carrier in December 1938 when Ark Royal joined the Home Fleet . She was relieved of that duty by her half @-@ sister Furious in May 1939 . Courageous participated in the Portland Fleet Review on 9 August 1939 . 
 = = = Air group = = = 
 Courageous could carry up to 48 aircraft ; following completion of her trials and embarking stores and personnel , she sailed for Spithead on 14 May 1928 . The following day , a Blackburn Dart of 463 Flight made the ship 's first deck landing . The Dart was followed by the Fairey Flycatchers of 404 and 407 Flights , the Fairey IIIFs of 445 and 446 Flights and the Darts of 463 and 464 Flight . The ship sailed for Malta on 2 June to join the Mediterranean Fleet . 
 From 1933 to the end of 1938 Courageous carried No. 800 Squadron , which flew a mixture of nine Hawker Nimrod and three Hawker Osprey fighters . 810 , 820 and 821 Squadrons were embarked for reconnaissance and anti @-@ ship attack missions during the same period . They flew the Blackburn Baffin , the Blackburn Shark , the Blackburn Ripon and the Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers as well as Fairey Seal reconnaissance aircraft . As a deck landing training carrier , in early 1939 Courageous embarked the Blackburn Skua and Gloster Sea Gladiator fighters of 801 Squadron and the Swordfish torpedo bombers of 811 Squadron , although both of these squadrons were disembarked when the ship was relieved of her training duties in May . 
 = = Second World War and sinking = = 
 Courageous served with the Home Fleet at the start of World War II with 811 and 822 Squadrons aboard , each squadron equipped with a dozen Fairey Swordfish . In the early days of the war , hunter @-@ killer groups were formed around the fleet 's aircraft carriers to find and destroy U @-@ boats . On 31 August 1939 she went to her war station at Portland and embarked the two squadrons of Swordfish . Courageous departed Plymouth on the evening of 3 September 1939 for an anti @-@ submarine patrol in the Western Approaches , escorted by four destroyers . On the evening of 17 September 1939 , she was on one such patrol off the coast of Ireland . Two of her four escorting destroyers had been sent to help a merchant ship under attack and all her aircraft had returned from patrols . During this time , Courageous was stalked for over two hours by U @-@ 29 , commanded by Captain @-@ Lieutenant Otto <unk> . The carrier then turned into the wind to launch her aircraft . This put the ship right across the bow of the submarine , which fired three torpedoes . Two of the torpedoes struck the ship on her port side before any aircraft took off , knocking out all electrical power , and she capsized and sank in 20 minutes with the loss of 519 of her crew , including her captain . The survivors were rescued by the Dutch ocean liner Veendam and the British freighter <unk> . The two escorting destroyers counterattacked U @-@ 29 for four hours , but the submarine escaped . 
 An earlier unsuccessful attack on Ark Royal by U @-@ 39 on 14 September , followed by the sinking of Courageous three days later , prompted the Royal Navy to withdraw its carriers from anti @-@ submarine patrols . Courageous was the first British warship to be sunk by German forces . ( The submarine Oxley had been sunk a week earlier by the British submarine Triton . ) The commander of the German submarine force , Commodore Karl Dönitz , regarded the sinking of Courageous as " a wonderful success " and it led to widespread jubilation in the Kriegsmarine ( German navy ) . Grand Admiral Erich Raeder , commander of the Kriegsmarine , directed that <unk> be awarded the Iron Cross First Class and that all other members of the crew receive the Iron Cross Second Class . 
 = New York State Route 264 = 
 New York State Route 264 ( NY 264 ) is a north – south state highway located within Oswego County , New York , in the United States . It runs for 8 @.@ 65 miles ( 13 @.@ 92 km ) from an intersection with County Route 57 ( CR 57 , formerly NY 57 ) in the village of Phoenix to a junction with NY 3 in the town of Palermo . The southernmost portion of NY 264 serves as a connector between Phoenix and NY 481 , which bypasses the village to the northeast . When NY 264 was assigned in the early 1930s , it originally served the hamlet of Pennellville , located midway between Phoenix and Palermo . The route was altered to bypass the community later in the decade . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 264 begins at an intersection with CR 57 ( Main Street ; formerly NY 57 ) in the village of Phoenix , located in the town of Schroeppel . The route proceeds north through the village as a two @-@ lane road named Volney Street , passing several blocks of homes before crossing CSX Transportation 's Baldwinsville Subdivision rail line . Past the railroad , NY 264 leaves the Phoenix village limits , taking on a northwesterly alignment as it continues through a lightly populated area of the town of Schroeppel as an unnamed road . NY 481 approaches NY 264 from the southeast , and the freeway loosely parallels the surface road as NY 264 intersects the eastern terminus of CR 59 . Not far to the north , the route enters an interchange with NY 481 ( exit 14 ) and meets the nearby southern terminus of CR 6 . 
 Past the exit , NY 264 turns northeastward away from the freeway to serve less developed areas of Schroeppel . The highway winds its way past a mixture of cultivated fields and forested areas , passing the south end of CR 54 and crossing over Sixmile Creek on its way to a small cluster of homes near the northern town line . Here , NY 264 connects to Godfrey Road , a local highway leading southeast to CR 54 in the hamlet of Pennellville . The route climbs a hill as it crosses into the town of Palermo and the hamlet of Suttons Corner , located at the junction of NY 264 and NY 49 . From Suttons Corner , the route heads generally north @-@ northeastward across along another sparsely populated stretch to a junction with NY 3 south of the hamlet of Palermo . NY 264 ends here while NY 3 continues north on NY 264 's right @-@ of @-@ way toward Palermo . 
 = = History = = 
 The north – south highway between Phoenix and Palermo was acquired by the state of New York in stages over the course of the early 20th century . The first section to become a state highway was a 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) portion leading north from the Phoenix village limits in Schroeppel , which became state @-@ maintained on November 20 , 1909 . Its continuation south to Main Street in Phoenix was added to the state highway system on December 12 , 1914 . The remainder of the highway in Schroeppel was taken over by the state on September 13 , 1916 . At the time , the highway veered eastward to serve the hamlet of Pennellville . Lastly , the part in Palermo was accepted into the state highway system on October 14 , 1922 . Although each segment of the Phoenix – Palermo state highway had an unsigned inventory number , the road did not have a posted route number . 
 Unlike hundreds of through state roads without a signed designation , the Phoenix – Palermo state highway did not receive a number as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . It was finally designated as NY 264 c . 1932 . The route continued to pass through Pennellville until c . 1938 , when it was moved onto a new highway bypassing the hamlet to the west . The southern half of NY 264 's former routing became an extension of CR 54 , which originally began at NY 264 in the center of Pennellville . North of the hamlet , the old route is now a town @-@ maintained road named Godfrey Road . NY 264 's alignment has not been changed since that time . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Oswego County . 
 = Ars Technica = 
 Ars Technica ( / <unk> <unk> / ; Latin @-@ derived for the " art of technology " ) is a technology news and information website created by Ken Fisher and Jon Stokes in 1998 . It publishes news , reviews , and guides on issues such as computer hardware and software , science , technology policy , and video games . Many of the site 's writers are postgraduates and some work for research institutions . Articles on the website are written in a less @-@ formal tone than those in traditional journals . 
 Ars Technica was privately owned until May 2008 , when it was sold to Condé Nast Digital , the online division of Condé Nast Publications . Condé Nast purchased the site , along with two others , for $ 25 million and added it to the company 's Wired Digital group , which also includes Wired and , formerly , Reddit . Though officially headquartered in the Condé Nast offices in 1 World Trade Center , the staff works from home and is spread across the US in various locations , including the San Francisco Bay Area , Chicago , Houston , and New York City . 
 The operations of Ars Technica are funded primarily by online advertising , and it has offered a paid subscription service since 2001 . The website generated controversy in 2010 , when it experimentally prevented readers who used advertisement @-@ blocking software from viewing the site . 
 = = History = = 
 Ken Fisher and Jon Stokes created the Ars Technica website and limited liability company in 1998 . Its purpose was to publish computer <unk> and software @-@ related news articles and guides ; in their words , " the best multi @-@ OS , PC hardware , and tech coverage possible while ... having fun , being productive , and being as informative and as accurate as possible " . " Ars <unk> " is a Latin phrase that translates to " technological art " . The website published news , reviews , guides , and other content of interest to computer enthusiasts . Writers for Ars Technica were geographically distributed across the United States at the time ; Fisher lived in his parents ' house in Boston , Massachusetts , Stokes in Chicago , Illinois , and the other writers in their respective cities . 
 On May 19 , 2008 , Ars Technica was sold to Condé Nast Digital , the online division of Condé Nast Publications . The sale was part of a purchase by Condé Nast Digital of three unaffiliated websites costing $ 25 million in total : Ars Technica , <unk> , and <unk> . Ars Technica was added to the company 's Wired Digital group , which included Wired and Reddit . In an interview with The New York Times , Fisher said other companies offered to buy Ars Technica and the site 's writers agreed to a deal with Condé Nast because they felt it offered them the best chance to turn their " hobby " into a business . Fisher , Stokes , and the eight other writers at the time were employed by Condé Nast , with Fisher as editor @-@ in @-@ chief . <unk> at Condé Nast in November 2008 affected websites owned by the company " across the board " , including Ars Technica . 
 On May 5 , 2015 , Ars Technica launched its United Kingdom site to expand its coverage of the U.K. and Europe . 
 = = Content = = 
 The content of articles published by Ars Technica has generally remained the same since its creation in 1998 and are categorized by four types : news , guides , reviews , and features . News articles relay current events . Ars Technica also hosts <unk> , a free Internet forum for the discussion of a variety of topics . 
 Originally , most news articles published by the website were relayed from other technology @-@ related websites . Ars Technica provided short commentary on the news , generally a few paragraphs , and a link to the original source . After being purchased by Condé Nast , Ars Technica began publishing more original news , investigating topics , and interviewing sources themselves . A significant portion of the news articles published there now are original . <unk> news is still published on the website , ranging from one or two sentences to a few paragraphs . 
 Ars Technica 's features are long articles that go into great depth on their subject . For example , the site published a guide on CPU architecture in 1998 named " Understanding CPU caching and performance " . An article in 2009 discussed in detail the theory , physics , mathematical proofs , and applications of quantum computers . The website 's 18 @,@ 000 @-@ word review of Apple Inc . ' s iPad described everything from the product 's packaging to the specific type of integrated circuits it uses . 
 Ars Technica is written in a less @-@ formal tone than that found in a traditional journal . Many of the website 's regular writers have postgraduate degrees , and many work for academic or private research institutions . Website cofounder Jon Stokes published the computer architecture textbook Inside The Machine in 2007 ; John Timmer performed postdoctoral research in developmental neurobiology ; Timothy Lee is a scholar at the Cato Institute , a public @-@ policy institute , which has republished Ars Technica articles by him . Biology journal Disease Models & Mechanisms called Ars Technica a " conduit between researchers and the public " in 2008 . 
 On September 12 , 2012 , Ars Technica recorded its highest daily traffic ever with its iPhone 5 event coverage . It recorded 15 @.@ 3 million page views , 13 @.@ 2 million of which came from its live blog platform of the event . 
 = = Revenue = = 
 The cost of operating Ars Technica has always been funded primarily by online advertising . Originally handled by Federated Media Publishing , selling advertising space on the website is now managed by Condé Nast . In addition to online advertising , Ars Technica has sold subscriptions to the website since 2001 , now named Ars Premier subscriptions . Subscribers are not shown advertisements , and receive benefits including the ability to see exclusive articles , post in certain areas of the Ars Technica forum , and participate in live chat rooms with notable people in the computer industry . To a lesser extent , revenue is also collected from content sponsorship . A series of articles about the future of collaboration was sponsored by IBM , and the site 's Exploring <unk> section is sponsored by data @-@ management company NetApp . In the past , Ars Technica collected shared revenue from affiliate marketing by advertising deals and discounts from online retailers , and from the sale of Ars Technica @-@ branded merchandise . 
 = = = Advertisement block = = = 
 On March 5 , 2010 , Ars Technica experimentally blocked readers who used <unk> Plus — one of several computer programs that stop advertisements from being displayed in a web browser — from viewing the website . Fisher estimated 40 % of the website 's readers had the software installed at the time . The next day , the block was lifted , and the article " Why Ad Blocking is devastating to the sites you love " was published on Ars Technica , persuading readers not to use the software on websites they care about : 
 ... blocking ads can be devastating to the sites you love . I am not making an argument that blocking ads is a form of stealing , or is immoral , or unethical ... It can result in people losing their jobs , it can result in less content on any given site , and it definitely can affect the quality of content . It can also put sites into a real advertising death spin . 
 The block and article were controversial , generating articles on other websites about them , and the broader issue of advertising ethics . Readers of Ars Technica generally followed Fisher 's persuasion ; the day after his article was published , 25 @,@ 000 readers who used the software had allowed the display of advertisements on Ars Technica in their browser , and 200 readers had subscribed to Ars Premier . 
 In February 2016 , Fisher noted , " That article lowered the ad @-@ block rate by 12 percent , and what we found was that the majority of people blocking ads on our site were doing it because other sites were irritating them . " In response to an increasing use of ad blockers , Ars Technica intends to identify readers who filter out advertisements and ask them to support the site by several means . 
 = Skarnsund Bridge = 
 Skarnsund Bridge ( Norwegian : Skarnsundet <unk> or <unk> ) is a 1 @,@ 010 @-@ metre ( 3 @,@ 310 ft ) long concrete cable @-@ stayed bridge that crosses the Skarnsundet sound , in Inderøy , Norway . When finished in 1991 , it replaced the Vangshylla – Kjerringvik Ferry and it gives the communities in Mosvik and Leksvik easier access to the central areas of Innherred . The bridge is the only road crossing of the Trondheimsfjord , and is located on Norwegian County Road 755 . 
 The bridge has a span of 530 metres ( 1 @,@ 739 ft ) , making it the longest of its type in the world for two years . The two 152 @-@ metre ( 499 ft ) tall pylons are located at Kjerringvik in Mosvik on the west side , and at Vangshylla in Inderøy on the east side . Following the opening , there was a seventeen @-@ year collection of tolls , needed to finance 30 % of the NOK 200 million investment . In 2007 , the bridge was listed as a cultural heritage . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to its 2012 merger with Inderøy , Mosvik was a separate municipality on the Fosen peninsula and part of Nord @-@ Trøndelag county . The first automotive transport from Mosvik to the more populated area of Innherred commenced in 1958 , when the ferry company Innherredsferja started the Levanger – Hokstad – Vangshylla – Kjerringvik – Venneshamn route . In 1964 , the road between Kjerringvik and <unk> , both in Mosvik , opened , and a new ferry was purchased , establishing the Vangshylla – Kjerringvik Ferry . 
 The ferry , and subsequently the bridge , is located at the narrowest section of Skarnsundet , between the villages of Kjerringvik and Vangshylla . In addition to Mosvik , the bridge also caters for the larger municipality Leksvik , further out along the fjord . The bridge is the only one to cross the Trondheimsfjord . 
 = = History = = 
 The first meeting of local commercial and political interests to establish a bridge was made in 1972 . By 1983 , it was formalized by the establishment of the company AS <unk> to finance construction . The Parliament of Norway passed the plans in 1986 , and construction started two years later . The main contractor was Aker ; and after the bridge was finished , maintenance was taken over by the Nord @-@ Trøndelag Public Roads Administration . The bridge cost NOK 200 million . The bridge was opened by King Harald V on 19 December 1991 , after he had taken the last ferry across the fjord . A monument , the King 's Stone , bearing the signature of the king , is located at the resting place on the Mosvik side . 
 Following the opening , it won several awards : Betongtavlen ( 1992 ) ; Beautiful Roads Award ( 1994 ) ; and the international FIP Award ( 1994 ) . In 2008 , the Norwegian Directorate for Cultural Heritage listed the bridge as a protected cultural heritage . In 2010 , the bridge came in second in a competition held by Teknisk Ukeblad to declare Norway 's most beautiful road bridge . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The bridge is one of the world 's longest cable @-@ stayed bridges , with a length of 1 @,@ 010 metres ( 3 @,@ 310 ft ) . The span is 530 metres ( 1 @,@ 740 ft ) , while the two towers are 152 metres ( 499 ft ) above sea level . The deck is 2 @.@ 15 metres ( 7 @.@ 1 ft ) deep , and 13 metres ( 43 ft ) wide , with two lanes for automobiles and one for pedestrians and bicycles . It is the longest concrete cable @-@ stayed span . The sailing height is 45 metres ( 148 ft ) . The bridge was , on its completion , the longest cable @-@ stayed bridge in the world by the length of main span , but has since lost the title . 
 The original construction work also included 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 0 mi ) of new road , including a resting place on the Mosvik side . In the construction of the bridge , 19 @,@ 600 cubic metres ( 25 @,@ 600 cu yd ) concrete was used and the 208 cables , with a total length of 33 kilometres ( 21 mi ) , weighed 1 @,@ 030 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 010 long tons ; 1 @,@ 140 short tons ) . The cables have diameters varying between 52 and 85 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 and 3 @.@ 3 in ) and can , if needed , be replaced separately . The bridge 's foundations are bedrock below the seabed under each tower . The bridge was built to withstand winds up to 48 @.@ 5 metres per second ( 159 ft / s ) ( century storms ) and has been designed to withstand earthquakes . 
 = = Financing = = 
 Toll collection started the day after the opening , and lasted until 24 May 2007 . Seventy percent of the costs were to be covered by the state , and thirty percent through toll fees . The debt was borrowed by the private company that was given a concession to operate a toll plaza on the Inderøy side . Including interest , NOK 80 million was collected , and the bridge was paid off three years before schedule . The <unk> @-@ based company was disestablished following the closure of the plaza . Until only a few years before the closing , it was the only toll plaza in Nord @-@ Trøndelag . There were several price increases during the toll period . The bridge was free for pedestrians and cyclists , but all motor vehicles were charged , although discounts were available for frequent travelers . The plaza was manned , and did not take into use Autopass , like many other plazas . 
 = Harold Urey = 
 Harold Clayton Urey ( April 29 , 1893 – January 5 , 1981 ) was an American physical chemist whose pioneering work on isotopes earned him the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1934 for the discovery of deuterium . He played a significant role in the development of the atom bomb , but may be most prominent for his contribution to theories on the development of organic life from non @-@ living matter . 
 Born in Walkerton , Indiana , Urey studied thermodynamics under Gilbert N. Lewis at the University of California . After he received his PhD in 1923 , he was awarded a fellowship by the American @-@ Scandinavian Foundation to study at the Niels Bohr Institute in Copenhagen . He was a research associate at Johns Hopkins University before becoming an associate professor of Chemistry at Columbia University . In 1931 , he began work with the separation of isotopes that resulted in the discovery of deuterium . 
 During World War II Urey turned his knowledge of isotope separation to the problem of uranium enrichment . He headed the group located at Columbia University that developed isotope separation using gaseous diffusion . The method was successfully developed , becoming the sole method used in the early post @-@ war period . After the war , Urey became professor of chemistry at the Institute for Nuclear Studies , and later Ryerson professor of chemistry at the University of Chicago . 
 Urey speculated that the early terrestrial atmosphere was probably composed of ammonia , methane , and hydrogen . One of his Chicago graduate students was Stanley L. Miller , who showed in the Miller – Urey experiment that , if such a mixture be exposed to electric sparks and water , it can interact to produce amino acids , commonly considered the building blocks of life . Work with isotopes of oxygen led to pioneering the new field of paleoclimatic research . In 1958 , he accepted a post as a professor at large at the new University of California , San Diego ( UCSD ) , where he helped create the science faculty . He was one of the founding members of UCSD 's school of chemistry , which was created in 1960 . He became increasingly interested in space science , and when Apollo 11 returned moon rock samples from the moon , Urey examined them at the Lunar Receiving Laboratory . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Harold Clayton Urey was born on April 29 , 1893 , in Walkerton , Indiana , the son of Samuel Clayton Urey , a school teacher and a minister in the Church of the Brethren , and his wife Cora Rebecca née <unk> . He had a younger brother , Clarence , and a younger sister , Martha . The family moved to Glendora , California , but moved back to Indiana to live with Cora 's widowed mother when Samuel became seriously ill with tuberculosis . He died when Urey was six years old . 
 Urey was educated in an Amish grade school , which he graduated from at the age of 14 . He then attended high school in <unk> , Indiana . After graduating in 1911 , he obtained a teacher 's certificate from Earlham College , and taught in a small school house in Indiana . He later moved to Montana , where his mother was then living , and he continued to teach there . Urey entered the University of Montana in Missoula in the autumn of 1914 , where he earned a Bachelor of Science ( BS ) degree in zoology in 1917 . After the United States entry into World War I that year , Urey took a wartime job with the Barrett Chemical Company in Philadelphia , making TNT . After the war ended , he returned to the University of Montana as an instructor in Chemistry . 
 An academic career required a doctorate , so in 1921 Urey enrolled in a PhD program at the University of California , Berkeley , where he studied thermodynamics under Gilbert N. Lewis . His initial attempt at a thesis was on the ionization of cesium vapor . He ran into difficulties , and an Indian physicist published a better paper on the same subject . Urey then wrote his thesis on the ionization states of an ideal gas , which was subsequently published in the Astrophysical Journal . After he received his PhD in 1923 , Urey was awarded a fellowship by the American @-@ Scandinavian Foundation to study at the Niels Bohr Institute in Copenhagen , where he met Werner Heisenberg , Hans Kramers , Wolfgang Pauli , Georg von Hevesy , and John Slater . At the conclusion of his stay , he traveled to Germany , where he met Albert Einstein and James Franck . 
 On returning to the United States , Urey received an offer of a National Research Council fellowship to Harvard University , and also received an offer to be a research associate at Johns Hopkins University . He chose the latter . Before taking up the job , he traveled to Seattle , Washington , to visit his mother . On the way , he stopped by Everett , Washington , where he knew a woman called Kate Daum . Kate introduced Urey to her sister , Frieda . Urey and Frieda soon became engaged . They were married at her father 's house in Lawrence , Kansas , in 1926 . The couple had four children : Gertrude Bessie ( Elisabeth ) , born in 1927 ; Frieda Rebecca , born in 1929 ; Mary Alice , born in 1934 ; and John Clayton Urey , born in 1939 . 
 At Johns Hopkins , Urey and Arthur Ruark wrote Atoms , Quanta and Molecules ( 1930 ) , one of the first English texts on quantum mechanics and its applications to atomic and molecular systems . In 1929 , Urey became an associate professor of Chemistry at Columbia University , where his colleagues included Rudolph <unk> , David Rittenberg , and T. I. Taylor . 
 = = Deuterium = = 
 Around this time , William <unk> and Herrick Johnston at the University of California discovered the stable isotopes of oxygen . Isotopes were not well understood at the time ; James Chadwick would not discover the neutron until 1932 . Two systems were in use for classifying them , based on chemical and physical properties . The latter was determined using the mass spectrograph . Since it was known that the atomic weight of oxygen was almost exactly 16 times as heavy as hydrogen , Raymond Birge , and Donald Menzel hypothesized that hydrogen had more than one isotope as well . Based upon the difference between the results of the two methods , they predicted that only one hydrogen atom in 4 @,@ 500 was of the heavy isotope . 
 In 1931 , Urey set out to find it . Urey and George Murphy calculated from the Balmer series that the heavy isotope should have lines redshifted by 1 @.@ 1 to 1 @.@ 8 ångströms ( 1 @.@ 1 × 10 − 10 to 1 @.@ 8 × 10 − 10 metres ) . Urey had access to a 21 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) grating spectrograph , a sensitive device that had been recently installed at Columbia and was capable of resolving the Balmer series . It had a resolution of 1 Å per millimetre , so on this machine , the difference was about 1 millimetre . However , since only one atom in 4 @,@ 500 was heavy , the line on the spectrograph was very faint . Urey therefore decided to delay publishing their results until he had more conclusive evidence that it was heavy hydrogen . 
 Urey and Murphy calculated from the Debye model that the heavy isotope would have a slightly higher boiling point than the light one . By carefully warming liquid hydrogen , 5 litres of liquid hydrogen could be distilled to 1 millilitre , which would be enriched in the heavy isotope by 100 to 200 times . To obtain five litres of liquid hydrogen , they traveled to the cryogenics laboratory at the National Bureau of Standards in Washington , D.C. , where they obtained the help of Ferdinand Brickwedde , whom Urey had known at Johns Hopkins . 
 The first sample that Brickwedde sent was evaporated at 20 K ( − 253 @.@ 2 ° C ; − 423 @.@ 7 ° F ) at a pressure of 1 standard atmosphere ( 100 kPa ) . To their surprise , this showed no evidence of enrichment . Brickwedde then prepared a second sample evaporated at 14 K ( − 259 @.@ 1 ° C ; − 434 @.@ 5 ° F ) at a pressure of 53 mmHg ( 7 @.@ 1 kPa ) . On this sample , the Balmer lines for heavy hydrogen were seven times as intense . The paper announcing the discovery of what we now call deuterium was jointly published by Urey , Murphy , and Brickwedde in 1932 . Urey was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1934 " for his discovery of heavy hydrogen " . He declined to attend the ceremony in Stockholm , so that he could be present at the birth of his daughter Mary Alice . 
 Working with Edward W. Washburn from the Bureau of Standards , Urey subsequently discovered the reason for the anomalous sample . Brickwedde 's hydrogen had been separated from water by electrolysis , resulting in depleted sample . Moreover , Francis William Aston now reported that his calculated value for the atomic weight of hydrogen was wrong , thereby invalidating Birge and Menzel 's original reasoning . The discovery of deuterium stood , however . 
 Urey and Washburn attempted to use electrolysis to create pure heavy water . Their technique was sound , but they were beaten to it in 1933 by Lewis , who had the resources of the University of California at his disposal . Using the Born – Oppenheimer approximation , Urey and David Rittenberg calculated the properties of gases containing hydrogen and deuterium . They extended this to enriching compounds of carbon , nitrogen , and oxygen . These could be used as tracers in biochemistry , resulting in a whole new way of examining chemical reactions . He founded the Journal of Chemical Physics in 1932 , and was its first editor , serving in that capacity until 1940 . 
 Urey contributed a science article to The Scientific Monthly on Irving Langmuir , who invented atomic hydrogen welding in 1911 by utilizing 300 to 650 volts of electricity and tungsten filaments , and won the 1932 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work in surface chemistry . 
 At Columbia , Urey chaired the University Federation for Democracy and Intellectual Freedom . He supported <unk> Clarence Streit 's proposal for a federal union of the world 's major democracies , and the republican cause during the Spanish Civil War . He was an early opponent of German Nazism and assisted refugee scientists , including Enrico Fermi , by helping them find work in the United States , and to adjust to life in a new country . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 By the time World War II broke out in Europe in 1939 , Urey was recognized as a world expert on isotope separation . Thus far , separation had involved only the light elements . In 1939 and 1940 , Urey published two papers on the separation of heavier isotopes in which he proposed centrifugal separation . This assumed great importance due to speculation by Niels Bohr that uranium 235 was fissile . Because it was considered " very doubtful whether a chain reaction can be established without separating 235 from the rest of the uranium , " Urey began intensive studies of how uranium enrichment might be achieved . Apart from centrifugal separation , George Kistiakowsky suggested that gaseous diffusion might be a possible method . A third possibility was thermal diffusion . Urey coordinated all isotope separation research efforts , including the effort to produce heavy water , which could be used as a neutron moderator in nuclear reactors . 
 In May 1941 , Urey was appointed to the S @-@ 1 Executive Committee , which oversaw the uranium project as part of the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) . In 1941 , Urey and George B. Pegram led a diplomatic mission to England to establish co @-@ operation on development of the atomic bomb . The British were optimistic about gaseous diffusion , but it was clear that both gaseous and centrifugal methods faced formidable technical obstacles . In May 1943 , as the Manhattan Project gained momentum . Urey became head of the wartime Substitute Alloy Materials ( SAM ) Laboratory at Columbia , which was responsible for the heavy water and all the isotope enrichment processes except Ernest Lawrence 's electromagnetic process . 
 Early reports on the centrifugal method indicated that it was not as efficient as predicted . Urey suggested that a more efficient but technically more complicated countercurrent system be used instead of the previous flow @-@ through method . By November 1941 , technical obstacles seemed formidable enough for the process to be abandoned . <unk> centrifuges were developed after the war , and today are the favored method in many countries . 
 The gaseous diffusion process remained more encouraging , although it too had technical obstacles to overcome . By the end of 1943 , Urey had over 700 people working for him on gaseous diffusion . The process involved hundreds of cascades , in which corrosive uranium hexafluoride diffused through gaseous barriers , becoming progressively more enriched at every stage . A major problem was finding proper seals for the pumps , but by far the greatest difficulty lay in constructing an appropriate diffusion barrier . Construction of the huge K @-@ 25 gaseous diffusion plant was well under way before a suitable barrier became available in quantity in 1944 . As a backup , Urey championed thermal diffusion . 
 Worn out by the effort , Urey left the project in February 1945 , handing over his responsibilities to R. H. Crist . The K @-@ 25 plant commenced operation in March 1945 , and as the bugs were worked out , the plant operated with remarkable efficiency and economy . For a time , uranium was fed into the <unk> liquid thermal diffusion plant , then the K @-@ 25 gaseous , and finally the Y @-@ 12 electromagnetic separation plant ; but soon after the war ended the thermal and electromagnetic separation plants were closed down , and separation was performed by K @-@ 25 alone . Along with its twin , K @-@ 27 , constructed in 1946 , it became the principal isotope separation plant in the early post @-@ war period . For his work on the Manhattan Project , Urey was awarded the Medal for Merit by the Project director , Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . 
 = = Post @-@ war years = = 
 After the war , Urey became professor of chemistry at the Institute for Nuclear Studies , and then became Ryerson professor of chemistry at the University of Chicago in 1952 . He did not continue his pre @-@ war research with isotopes . However , applying the knowledge gained with hydrogen to oxygen , he realized that the fractionation between carbonate and water for oxygen @-@ 18 and oxygen @-@ 16 would decrease by a factor of 1 @.@ 04 between 0 and 25 ° C ( 32 and 77 ° F ) . The ratio of the isotopes could then be used to determine average temperatures , assuming that the measurement equipment was sufficiently sensitive . The team included his colleague Ralph <unk> . Examination of a 100 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old belemnite then indicated the summer and winter temperatures that it had lived through over a period of four years . For this pioneering paleoclimatic research , Urey was awarded the Arthur L. Day Medal by the Geological Society of America , and the Goldschmidt Medal of the Geochemical Society . 
 Urey actively campaigned against the 1946 May @-@ Johnson bill because he feared that it would lead to military control of nuclear energy , but supported and fought for the McMahon bill that replaced it , and ultimately created the Atomic Energy Commission . Urey 's commitment to the ideal of world government dated from before the war , but the possibility of nuclear war made it only more urgent in his mind . He went on lecture tours against war , and became involved in Congressional debates regarding nuclear issues . He argued publicly on behalf of Ethel and Julius Rosenberg , and was even called before the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee . 
 = = <unk> and the Miller – Urey experiment = = 
 In later life , Urey helped develop the field of <unk> and is credited with coining the term . His work on oxygen @-@ 18 led him to develop theories about the abundance of the chemical elements on earth , and of their abundance and evolution in the stars . Urey summarized his work in The Planets : Their Origin and Development ( 1952 ) . Urey speculated that the early terrestrial atmosphere was probably composed of ammonia , methane , and hydrogen . One of his Chicago graduate students , Stanley L. Miller , showed in the Miller – Urey experiment that , if such a mixture be exposed to electric sparks and to water , it can interact to produce amino acids , commonly considered the building blocks of life . 
 Urey spent a year as a visiting professor at Oxford University in England in 1956 and 1957 . In 1958 , he reached the University of Chicago 's retirement age of 65 , but he accepted a post as a professor at large at the new University of California , San Diego ( UCSD ) , and moved to La Jolla , California . He was subsequently made a professor emeritus there from 1970 to 1981 . Urey helped build up the science faculty there . He was one of the founding members of UCSD 's school of chemistry , which was created in 1960 , along with Stanley Miller , Hans Suess , and Jim Arnold . 
 In the late 1950s and early 1960s , space science became a topical field of research in the wake of the launch of Sputnik I. Urey helped persuade NASA to make unmanned probes to a moon a priority . When Apollo 11 returned moon rock samples from the moon , Urey examined them at the Lunar Receiving Laboratory . The samples supported Urey 's contention that the moon and the Earth shared a common origin . While at UCSD , Urey published 105 scientific papers , 47 of them about lunar topics . When asked why he continued to work so hard , he joked , " Well , you know I ’ m not on tenure anymore . " 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Urey enjoyed gardening , and raising <unk> , <unk> and other orchids . He died at La Jolla , California , and is buried in the Fairfield Cemetery in DeKalb County , Indiana . 
 Apart from his Nobel Prize , he also won the Franklin Medal in 1943 , the J. Lawrence Smith Medal in 1962 , the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1966 , and the Priestley Medal of the American Chemical Society in 1973 . In 1964 he received the National Medal of Science . He became a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1947 . Named after him are lunar impact crater Urey , asteroid <unk> Urey , and the H. C. Urey Prize , awarded for achievement in planetary sciences by the American Astronomical Society . The Harold C. Urey Middle School in Walkerton , Indiana , is also named for him , as is Urey Hall , the chemistry building at Revelle College , UCSD , in La Jolla . UCSD has also established a Harold C. Urey chair whose first holder is Jim Arnold . 
 = Future Science Fiction and Science Fiction Stories = 
 Future Science Fiction and Science Fiction Stories were two American science fiction magazines that were published under various names between 1939 and 1943 and again from 1950 to 1960 . Both publications were edited by Charles Hornig for the first few issues ; Robert W. Lowndes took over in late 1941 , and remained editor until the end . The initial launch of the magazines came as part of a boom in science fiction pulp magazine publishing at the end of the 1930s . In 1941 the two magazines were combined into one , titled Future Fiction combined with Science Fiction , but in 1943 wartime paper shortages ended the magazine 's run , as Louis Silberkleit , the publisher , decided to focus his resources on his mystery and western magazine titles . In 1950 , with the market improving again , Silberkleit relaunched Future Fiction , still in the pulp format . In the mid @-@ 1950s he also relaunched Science Fiction , this time under the title Science Fiction Stories . Silberkleit kept both magazines on very slim budgets throughout the 1950s . In 1960 both titles ceased publication when their distributor suddenly dropped all of Silberkleit 's titles . 
 The fiction was generally unremarkable , with few memorable stories being published , particularly in the earlier versions of the magazines . Lowndes spent much effort to set a friendly and engaging tone in both magazines , with letter columns and reader departments that interested fans . He was more successful than Hornig in obtaining good stories , partly because he had good relationships with several well @-@ known and emerging writers . Among the better @-@ known stories he published were " The Liberation of Earth " by William Tenn , and " If I Forget Thee , Oh Earth " by Arthur C. Clarke . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 Although science fiction ( sf ) had been published before the 1920s , it did not begin to coalesce into a separately marketed genre until the appearance in 1926 of Amazing Stories , a pulp magazine published by Hugo Gernsback . By the end of the 1930s the field was booming . One of Gernsback 's employees , Louis Silberkleit , became a publisher in his own right in 1934 when he founded the Winford Publishing Company . Towards the end of the 1930s Silberkleit decided to launch an sf pulp magazine under his Blue Ribbon Magazines imprint ; the title he chose was Science Fiction . Gernsback recommended Charles Hornig to Silberkleit for the post of editor ; Hornig had previously edited Wonder Stories for Gernsback from 1933 to 1936 . Silberkleit took the recommendation and Hornig was hired in October 1938 . Hornig had no office ; he worked from home , coming in to the office as needed to drop off manuscripts and dummy materials , and pick up typeset materials to proof . He was given broad freedom to select what he wanted to publish ; he reported to Silberkleit 's chief editor , Abner J. Sundell , but Sundell knew little about sf and did not get involved with running the magazine . The first issue was dated March 1939 . The schedule was intended to be bimonthly , but it began to slip immediately , with the second issue dated June 1939 . 
 In order to spread his costs over more magazines , Silberkleit soon decided to launch two additional titles . When he had worked for Gernsback , Silberkleit had suggested " Future Fiction " as a possible title for the magazine Gernsback was planning to launch . Gernsback eventually chose " Amazing Stories " instead , and Silberkleit now decided to use his original suggestion for one of the new magazines . In November 1939 the first issue of Future Fiction appeared ; it was followed in July 1940 by Science Fiction Quarterly . Hornig was editor for all three magazines . In October 1940 , Hornig received his military draft notice ; he was a pacifist , and decided to move to California and register as a conscientious objector . He continued to edit the magazines from the west coast , but Silberkleit was unhappy with the arrangement . Silberkleit allowed Hornig to retain his post as editor of Science Fiction , and offered the editorship of the other two titles to Sam Moskowitz . Moskowitz declined , saying afterwards " I would never strike at a man 's job " , but Donald Wollheim heard of the offer and prompted Robert W. Lowndes to write to Silberkleit . Lowndes later recalled Wollheim 's idea : " In the letter , I 'd suggest that it might be a good idea to add a science fiction title to the list , offering my services as editor at a slightly lower price than Hornig was being paid , and also find fault with all the other sf titles presently out , but particularly with Hornig 's " . Lowndes relates that Silberkleit took the bait and hired him in November 1940 ; Hornig recalls the separation as being by mutual consent because of his move to California . Lowndes subsequently agreed that this was likely to be the real reason Silberkleit replaced Hornig . The first issues Lowndes was responsible for were the Spring 1941 issue of Science Fiction Quarterly and the April 1941 issue of Future Fiction . He completed the preparations for the last issue of Science Fiction , dated September 1941 , but he used material that Hornig had already selected for the article , with minor exceptions . The changes included the replacement of Fantasy Times , a fan department by James Taurasi , with Futurian Times , a similar department from a rival group of fans , the Futurians , to which Lowndes belonged . Initially Silberkleit kept tighter control on Lowndes ' editorial selections than he had on Hornig 's , vetoing five of the seven stories Lowndes proposed for the April 1941 Future , but by the August 1941 issue , Lowndes later recalled , Silberkleit " was satisfied that I knew what I was doing , and ... didn 't need to oversee any story I had accepted " . 
 Science Fiction was not selling well , and later that year Silberkleit merged it with Future Fiction , under the title Future Combined with Science Fiction . The last independent issue of Science Fiction was dated September 1941 , and the first merged issue was dated October 1941 . The final two issues of the combined magazine , dated April and June 1943 , were , confusingly , titled Science Fiction Stories ; this was an attempt to improve sales by reminding readers of Science Fiction , but before sales figures could be tallied to determine the impact of the title change , Silberkleit made the decision to cease publication . The June 1943 issue was the last for some years : Silberkleit was forced to cut some of his titles because of wartime paper shortages , and he decided to retain his western and detective magazines instead . 
 = = = Revival in the 1950s = = = 
 In 1950 , Silberkleit brought back Future , under the title Future Combined with Science Fiction Stories ; this allowed Silberkleit to keep the rights to both the titles . The first issue was dated May / June 1950 . In January 1952 the title changed to just Future Science Fiction Stories . Payment rates at that time were one to three cents per word . In the summer of 1953 , with Future still in pulp format , Silberkleit issued a single digest @-@ sized magazine with no number and no date , under the title Science Fiction Stories . Another issue with the same format and title followed in the spring of 1954 , also unnumbered . Silberkleit decided that the digest format was partly responsible for the good sales of these experimental issues , so he changed the format of Future from pulp to digest . The first issue in the new format was dated January 1955 , and in response to reader feedback the title was changed to Science Fiction Stories . The volume numbering was continued from the existing Future volume numbering , despite the fact that the title was taken from Science Fiction , the earlier magazine . Complicating matters , Silberkleit decided later in 1955 that the market could support both titles , so he revived Future again . Since Science Fiction Stories was using the volume numbering from the previous pulp @-@ format incarnation of Future , Silberkleit switched to an issue number format , with no volume . The first issue was numbered 28 , counting forward from the May / June 1950 issue as 1 . 
 Both Science Fiction Stories and Future Fiction were able to maintain a fairly regular schedule through the rest of the 1950s . Science Fiction Stories was bimonthly throughout , except for a brief period from mid @-@ 1958 to early 1959 when it patchily adhered to a monthly schedule . Future Fiction began with three undated issues , then switched to a quarterly schedule in 1956 , and finally to a regular bimonthly schedule from the start of 1958 . 
 With the September 1955 issue , the title graphic of Science Fiction Stories was modified so that the cover read The Original Science Fiction Stories . This was intended to make it clear that the magazine was a continuation of the 1939 version of Science Fiction , but it led to additional confusion , with some readers believing that this was an entirely new magazine . Lowndes addressed the confusion in the letter column of Science Fiction Stories , saying 
 I am often asked whether Future SF October 1954 Volume 5 Number 3 should be followed by Volume 5 Number 4 ( Science Fiction Stories January 1955 ) or by Future SF No. 28 . To this I reply that you may have it either way , or in this instance , both ways ! Really , I don 't see why science <unk> , who can absorb alternate time tracks etc. with the utmost aplomb , should be confused . 
 In 1960 Silberkleit 's distributor stopped carrying his magazines , and both titles ceased publication , with no notice given in their final issues that this was the end . The last issues were the April 1960 Future Science Fiction and the May 1960 Science Fiction Stories . James Taurasi acquired rights to the Science Fiction Stories title from Silberkleit and produced three semi @-@ professional issues in 1961 , 1962 , and 1963 , but the venture was not successful enough for Taurasi to continue . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 The first issue of Science Fiction showed the continuing influence of Hugo Gernsback in the sf magazine field : in addition to an editor who had worked for him , the magazine featured a guest editorial by Gernsback , and the cover was painted by Frank R. Paul , a stalwart of the Gernsback days — in fact , all 12 of Science Fiction 's covers for the first series were painted by Paul . Both Future Fiction and Science Fiction began life with very limited budgets . Hornig worked with Julius Schwartz , a literary agent who was a friend of his ; this gave him access to stories by the writers Schwartz represented , but Schwartz would not allow his authors ' real names to be used unless they were paid at least one cent per word . Hornig could not afford to pay the one cent rate for everything he bought , so he paid half a cent a word for much of what he acquired through Schwartz , and ran those stories under pseudonyms . Unsurprisingly , given the low rates , the stories sent to Hornig had usually already been rejected by the better @-@ paying markets . The result was mediocre fiction , even from the better @-@ known writers that Hornig was able to attract . The magazines paid on publication , rather than acceptance , and this slower payment also discouraged some authors from submitting material . 
 A letter from Ray Bradbury , who was a friend of Hornig 's , was published in the second issue of Science Fiction , encouraging Hornig to publish sophisticated stories ; in response , Hornig wrote " I 'm trying to give the magazine an appeal to mature minds " , but sf historian Mike Ashley comments that " this never became evident " . Hornig 's comment was probably intended as a criticism of Raymond Palmer 's editorial approach at Amazing Stories and Fantastic Adventures , but Ashley points out that the authors Hornig relied on , concealed behind pseudonyms , were generally the same authors that were selling to Palmer . The first issue of Future included stories by M.M. Kaplan , J. Harvey Haggard , and Miles J. Breuer , all of whom had been more active some years earlier , and Ashley suggests that Hornig may have obtained some of the many stories that Palmer threw out when he became editor of Amazing Stories in 1938 . 
 When Future was relaunched in early 1950 , the sf magazine field was not particularly crowded , and Lowndes was able to attract moderately good stories from writers who were either well @-@ known or on their way up in the field . The first issue included stories by James Blish , Lester del Rey and Murray Leinster ; other authors featured in the early issues included Fritz Leiber , Judith Merril , H. Beam Piper , and L. Sprague de Camp . Some of the better @-@ known stories Lowndes published in the early 1950s were " And There Was Light " by del Rey , " If I Forget Thee , Oh Earth " by Arthur C. Clarke , and " Liberation of Earth " by William Tenn , which Damon Knight described as " the funniest story [ Tenn has ] ever written " . He also bought work by some of the women writers active in the 1950s , including several early stories by Carol Emshwiller . Lowndes knew many successful writers in the field , and was able to call on them for stories , but the expanding sf magazine market of the mid @-@ 1950s meant that the best material was spread thinly . To attract readers , Lowndes established a friendly and personal style for the magazine , with letter columns and departments aimed at science fiction fans . Blish , writing as William Atheling , Jr . , commented in 1953 that Lowndes was doing a " surprisingly good job " with Future , despite the low rates and the slow payment to authors . 
 The trial issues of Science Fiction Stories in 1953 and 1954 were competent but unremarkable , with stories by some popular writers , such as Poul Anderson , Algis Budrys , and Philip K. Dick . Once Science Fiction Stories became established in 1955 , Future was relegated to the junior role , and Science Fiction Stories tended to publish the better stories of the two . During the period when Science Fiction Stories was monthly , it carried serialized novels , including de Camp 's The Tower of <unk> and Ward Moore and Robert Bradford 's Caduceus Wild . It also published " Genius Loci " , described by Ashley as one of Thomas N. <unk> 's best short stories . Some well @-@ received stories did appear in Future towards the end of the decade , including " Vulcan 's Hammer " , an early novella version of Philip K. Dick 's novel of the same name ; Clifford D. Simak 's " Worlds Without End " ; and Judith Merril 's " <unk> " , reprinted in the 1960s in SF Impulse , whose editor , Kyril Bonfiglioli , commented " I don 't believe I have ever read a more successful attempt to imagine an utterly alien way of thought . " Lowndes did what he could to provide interesting non @-@ fiction departments : a book review column was started in the early 1950s , and the end of the decade saw a series of science articles written by Isaac Asimov , and critical articles on science fiction history , written by Lowndes himself . R.A. Lafferty 's first story appeared in Science Fiction Stories in the January 1960 issue , shortly before the magazine was closed down . The budget for both magazines , never very great , shrank even further towards the end , so that Lowndes had to fill space with reprints and re @-@ use old illustrations to avoid paying for new stories and artwork . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Charles Hornig was the editor of all 12 issues of the first incarnation of Science Fiction , and of the first five issues of Future Fiction . Robert W. Lowndes was the editor of all subsequent issues of both titles . Both Future and Science Fiction began as pulp magazines ; the 1953 experimental issue of Science Fiction Stories saw a change to digest format for that title , and Future followed suit in late 1955 with issue 28 . Both titles were initially priced at 15 cents . Future raised its price to 20 cents for the July 1943 issue , the last of its first run , but dropped to 15 cents again when it was relaunched in 1950 . With the November 1950 issue the price went back to 20 cents , and it rose to 25 cents with the January 1953 issue and 35 cents in June 1954 . When Science Fiction Stories reappeared in 1953 , it was priced at 35 cents , and stayed at that price throughout the remainder of its run . 
 Science Fiction began in March 1939 at 132 pages . Future Fiction was 112 pages when it was launched in November of that year , and shortly afterwards , March 1940 , Science Fiction dropped to 116 pages . The combined magazine , Future Combined with Science Fiction , retained Future 's page count of 112 ; when Future was relaunched , still as a pulp , in 1950 , the page count had dropped again , to 96 . Both Future and Science Fiction Stories were 128 pages long when they changed to digest format ; Future remained at that length , but Science Fiction Stories switched to 144 pages for nine issues , from January 1956 to May 1957 . 
 The sequence of title changes for the two magazines is summarized below . For Science Fiction : 
 Note that although the cover read " The Original Science Fiction Stories " for much of the second run , the title was always " Science Fiction Stories " , though some reference books index the magazine under " O " . For Future : 
 Louis Silberkleit was the publisher of both magazines throughout their existence , but he changed the imprint he used for them twice . Both were initially published by Blue Ribbon Magazines , Holyoke , Massachusetts . Starting with the March 1940 issue of Future , and the March 1940 issue of Science Fiction , the magazines were published by Double Action Magazines , with offices in Chicago . This changed to Columbia Publications , with offices in Springfield and Holyoke , Massachusetts , with the March 1941 issue of Science Fiction and the April 1941 issue of Future . 
 A Canadian edition of Science Fiction ran for 6 pulp @-@ sized issues of 64 pages from October 1941 to June 1942 , priced at 25 cents ; it was intended to be monthly but there were no issues in December 1941 , or in April or May 1942 . The publisher was Superior Magazines of Toronto for the first two issues , and Duchess Printing of Toronto for the remaining four . A different editor , William Brown @-@ Forbes , was listed , but the fiction was all reprinted from Silberkleit 's U.S. magazines . The artwork was new , however , with covers by John <unk> and Edwin Shaw , among others . 
 Two issues of Science Fiction were reprinted in the UK by Atlas Publications ; these were abridged versions of the October and December 1939 issues . They were 96 pages , in pulp format . There were no British reprints of the first series of Future , but Thorpe & Porter reprinted 14 numbered and undated issues from November 1951 to June 1954 , corresponding roughly to the U.S. issues from March 1951 to March 1954 . They were 96 pages in pulp format , and were priced at 1 / 6 ( <unk> ) . In 1957 Strato Publications reprinted another 11 issues , again undated , from November 1957 to February 1960 , corresponding to the U.S. issues from Summer 1957 to August 1959 , skipping the February 1958 issue . These were in digest format , and were 128 pages ; they were priced at 2 / - ( 10p ) . Strato Publications also produced a reprint series of Science Fiction ; this ran from October 1957 to May 1960 , for 12 undated issues , in digest format , 128 pages , priced at 2 / - . The first 11 of these reprints were cut versions of the U.S. originals , corresponding to 11 of the U.S. issues between September 1957 and May 1959 — the omitted issues were January , March , and September 1958 . The final issue was the U.S. issue for May 1960 , overprinted with the British price . 
 There are no anthologies of stories drawn solely from either Science Fiction or Future , but in the 1960s Ivan Howard edited several anthologies for Silberkleit 's publishing imprint , Belmont Books , with contents drawn solely from Silberkleit 's magazines . These included : 
 Howard , Ivan , ed . ( 1962 ) . The Weird Ones . New York : Belmont Books . Three stories from Future Fiction . 
 Howard , Ivan , ed . ( 1962 ) . Escape to Earth . New York : Belmont Books . Three stories from Future Fiction . 
 Howard , Ivan , ed . ( 1963 ) . Rare Science Fiction . New York : Belmont Books . Four stories from Science Fiction . 
 Howard , Ivan , ed . ( 1963 ) . Novelets of Science Fiction . New York : Belmont Books . Four stories from Future Fiction 
 Howard , Ivan , ed . ( 1963 ) . 6 and the Silent Scream . New York : Belmont Books . Three stories from Science Fiction 
 Howard , Ivan , ed . ( 1964 ) . Masters of Science Fiction . New York : Belmont Books . Four stories from Science Fiction . 
 Howard , Ivan , ed . ( 1964 ) . Things . New York : Belmont Books . Three stories from Future Fiction . 
 Howard , Ivan , ed . ( 1965 ) . Now and Beyond . New York : Belmont Books . Four stories from Science Fiction , and four from Future Fiction . 
 In addition , Douglas Lindsay edited an anthology titled Blue Moon in 1970 , published by Mayflower Books , which contains six stories from the August 1942 issue of Future , plus one story from the Winter 1942 issue of Science Fiction Quarterly . 
 = U.S. Route 10 in Michigan = 
 US Highway 10 ( US 10 ) is a part of the United States Numbered Highway System that runs from West Fargo , North Dakota , to the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . The highway enters Michigan on the SS Badger , which crosses Lake Michigan between Manitowoc , Wisconsin , and Ludington . As the highway crosses the state , it is a two @-@ lane undivided highway between Ludington and Farwell and a freeway from Farwell east to the highway 's terminus in Bay City . US 10 runs concurrently with US 127 in the Clare area along a section of freeway that includes a welcome center in the median . Outside of the Clare and Midland areas , US 10 runs through rural areas of Western and Central Michigan in a section of the Manistee National Forest as well as farm fields . 
 As part of the original US Highway System , US 10 was first designated in Michigan in 1926 . It replaced three state trunkline highways of the day : M @-@ 20 , M @-@ 24 and M @-@ 10 , running between Ludington on Lake Michigan and downtown Detroit . It also ran concurrently with US 23 between Saginaw and Flint . The highway has been realigned several times during the construction of Interstate 75 in southeast Michigan , even being temporarily designated " TO I @-@ 75 " to connect segments of the I @-@ 75 freeway . The US 10 freeway between Clare and Midland was opened in the early 1960s . The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) truncated the highway to Bay City in 1986 , removing it from I @-@ 75 and the Lodge Freeway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Through the Lower Peninsula , US 10 is both an undivided highway and a freeway maintained by MDOT . The entire 140 @-@ mile ( 230 km ) length has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . US 10 is also one of only two highways in the state that utilizes a car ferry , the other being M @-@ 134 in the Upper Peninsula . 
 = = = Undivided highway = = = 
 US 10 enters the state after it crosses Lake Michigan from Manitowoc , Wisconsin , to Ludington . Traffic is carried across the lake during the summer months on the SS Badger , a privately owned carferry . Heading eastward from the ferry , the highway runs along Pere Marquette Lake and then northward through a light industrial area along James Street in Ludington . At the intersection with Ludington Avenue in the downtown business area , the trunkline turns to the east . US 10 runs through commercial and residential areas on its course out of town . Near the Mason County Airport , the highway intersects the northern end of Business US 31 ( Bus . US 31 , Pere Marquette Highway ) . About a mile and a half ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) east of that intersection , US 10 meets the interchange that marks the northern end of the US 31 freeway in the state . From here to Scottville , the two highways run concurrently together through a mix of rural fields and forests . On the west side of town , US 31 turns northward along the Scottville Bypass , and US 10 continues through the middle of town on State Street . The road heads eastward roughly parallel to the Pere Marquette River . Near Custer , US 10 crosses into the Manistee National Forest . 
 The trunkline continues eastward through the forest passing north of the community of Walhalla . At Branch , it crosses out of Mason County and enters Lake County , jogging to the southeast through town . South of Long Lake , the roadway returns to a due easterly course . North of Baldwin , US 10 turns southerly and merges with M @-@ 37 . The two highways run together for about three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) into town on Pine Street before separating . US 10 follows Washington Street easterly and exits town . The roadway passes near several small lakes near Idlewild and turns southeasterly into Chase . The highway exits the Manistee National Forest , and runs through farm fields as it continues across the county line into Osceola County . 
 Northwest of Reed City , US 10 meets the US 131 freeway before curving around the north side of town . The highway passes to the south of <unk> Field near the intersection with Bus . US 10 . The highway crosses the White Pine Trail State Park , a rail trail that runs north through the area . US 10 continues east around the north side of town and runs parallel to the Pere Marquette State Trail , an east – west rail trail that follows the Ludington Division of the Pere Marquette Railway . The highway intersects the business loop on the east side of town and exits Reed City . US 10 continues east and northeasterly though rural fields in Osceola County . The highway passes to the north of <unk> Municipal Airport and enters the city of <unk> . It runs along 7th Street through downtown before and crossing the Muskegon River and exiting the city . The trunkline runs parallel to the rail trail through rural country side to north of the small community of Sears before turning to the southeast . US 10 passes between Big Mud , Big Cranberry and Mystic Lakes as it crosses into Clare County . The highway continues to the east , and near Farwell , it transitions to a full freeway . 
 = = = Freeway routing = = = 
 Immediately after the traffic lanes spread apart to form the separate carriageways of the freeway , US 10 has an interchange with M @-@ 115 . This interchange , like most of them along the US 10 freeway has no exit number although the freeway contains mileposts based on the mileage from Ludington . There is another interchange near Lake Thirteen for Old State Avenue that provides access to Farwell . About five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) east of here , US 10 meets US 127 north of Clare . These two freeways merge and run south toward Clare , using the <unk> and exit numbering of US 127 along the concurrency . Near a curve to the southeast , there is an MDOT Welcome Center located in the median between the two halves of the freeway . Past this facility is an interchange that connects to Bus . US 127 / Bus . US 10 which provides access to downtown Clare . The freeway turns to the south between Lake Shamrock and the Clare Municipal Airport . US 10 separates from US 127 at a partial interchange south of the airport using a left exit southbound to continue on eastbound US 10 . The connections for westbound US 10 to southbound US 127 or northbound US 127 to eastbound US 10 are made using the business routes through downtown . 
 The interchange that marks the southern end of the US 127 / US 10 concurrency is also the place where US 10 crosses into the northeastern corner of Isabella County . About three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of there , US 10 has its partial interchange with the eastern end of the Clare business loop . The freeway continues southeasterly now parallel to the Pere Marquette Rail @-@ Trail , another former rail line of the Pere Marquette Railway . US 10 bypasses the community of Loomis to the north before crossing into Midland County near Coleman . The landscape through this area is dominated by farms . US 10 bypasses North Bradley connecting with an interchange that marks the southern terminus of M @-@ 18 . Further along , the freeway crosses the southern end of Sanford Lake on a set of bridges ; on the eastern shore there is an interchange with M @-@ 30 ( Meridian Road ) that connects to Sanford . 
 After crossing the lake , the freeway runs southeasterly roughly parallel to the Tittabawassee River for about three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) until the interchange with Stark Road . US 10 turns to run due east between Airport Road to the north and <unk> Street to the south . The freeway passes the Jack Barstow Municipal Airport as it enters Midland . At the interchange with Eastman Avenue , the city 's business loop departs to connect to downtown , and the freeway passes near the Midland Mall and the Midland County Fairgrounds . Two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) further east , US 10 turns to the southeast , bordered by residential subdivisions of the city of Midland to its south and vacant fields to its north . There is a partial interchange that straddles the Midland – Bay county line that provides access to the eastern end of Bus . US 10 / M @-@ 20 , which is also a freeway on this side of town . Traffic exiting the business loop freeway is forced onto US 10 eastbound , and only westbound US 10 traffic and enter the westbound direction of Bus . US 10 / M @-@ 20 ; the other connections are possible by using the adjoining Bay City Road interchange on US 10 and the Waldo Avenue interchange on the business loop . 
 Past the Bay City Road interchange , US 10 continues due east through Bay County . It intersects the northern end of the M @-@ 47 freeway . Further east , there are a pair of interchanges for Auburn as the freeway runs through a landscape that is a mix of suburban residential subdivisions and farm fields . The freeway is paralleled to the south by segments of Fisher Road in spots ; about a half mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) north is Midland Road . There is one last interchange for Mackinaw Road along the freeway before US 10 ends at the cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 75 / US 23 on the west side of Bay City . This junction is both the eastern terminus of US 10 both in the state of Michigan and nationally . 
 = = History = = 
 The first state trunkline highways designated along the original path of US 10 were M @-@ 20 , M @-@ 24 and M @-@ 10 as far back as 1919 . When the US Highway System was announced on November 11 , 1926 , US 10 replaced these designations . The highway started in Ludington and ran east replacing M @-@ 20 to Midland , M @-@ 24 to Saginaw and M @-@ 10 to Detroit . Between Saginaw and Flint , US 10 and US 23 were routed concurrently . 
 Two changes were made in the routing of US 10 by 1929 . As shown on the maps of the time , US 10 was rerouted to bypass Flint . The former routing through the city was redesigned M @-@ 10 . A second change moved the highway to its present routing west of Baldwin to the Lake – Mason county line . A bypass of downtown Midland was opened in 1934 . The previous routing through town was initially renumbered US 10A . A rerouting project in Osceola County started in 1936 . By the end of the year , a new roadway was opened between Sears and M @-@ 66 . Until the second segment of the project was completed two years later , US 10 was routed concurrently with M @-@ 66 . When the new routing between M @-@ 66 and Lake in Clare County was opened , that concurrency was eliminated and all the previous routings were transferred to local control . 
 By 1942 , the M @-@ 10 designation in Flint was renumbered Bus . US 10 , eliminating the second M @-@ 10 designation from the maps . The last segments of US 10 that were gravel @-@ surfaced were paved by 1948 . The last section paved was between Chase and Reed City . 
 A bypass of Saginaw was completed by 1953 . This new roadway was designated as US 23 alone . The highway through downtown Saginaw was numbered US 10 / Bus . US 23 . The Fenton – Clio Expressway was completed in 1957 from Birch Run past Flint . The new expressway was numbered US 23 , leaving the former highway through Flint as just US 10 . A bypass of Reed City opened by 1960 ; the former routing was renumbered Bus . US 10 . 
 Many changes were made in 1960 to the routing of US 10 . A new freeway opened for I @-@ 75 / US 10 / US 23 between M @-@ 13 northeast of Saginaw and the M @-@ 20 freeway in Bay City . US 10 replaced the M @-@ 20 designation on the freeway between Midland and Bay City . M @-@ 47 replaced US 10 between Midland and Saginaw , and M @-@ 81 replaced US 10 in the city of Saginaw . An addition segment of US 10 between Saginaw and Bridgeport was renumbered BL I @-@ 75 . The US 10A designation previously in use in Midland was changed to Bus . US 10 at this time as well . 
 Additional freeway was built in 1961 , relocating US 10 / US 23 between Birch Run and M @-@ 13 to the new I @-@ 75 . The freeway between Midland and the US 27 freeway at Clare was completed in the same year . US 10 was signed as " TO I @-@ 75 " to route traffic between the completed freeways at Bay City and Grayling by way of Clare . Changes made in the Pontiac area moved US 10 to the former routing of M @-@ 58 . The former highway through town was redesignated as Bus . US 10 . More I @-@ 75 freeway was completed in 1962 between Flint and Pontiac . US 10 was transferred to the new freeway while the old routing was renumbered M @-@ 54 . The former Bus . US 10 became Bus . M @-@ 54 . These changes made all of US 10 from Clare east to Clarkston freeway . 
 Until 1970 , US 10 followed Woodward Avenue between Detroit and Pontiac . That year , Woodward Avenue was redesignated M @-@ 1 and US 10 was moved to the Lodge Freeway and Telegraph Road . The TO I @-@ 75 designation was removed in 1973 when the last segments of I @-@ 75 were completed between West Branch and Roscommon . Farwell and Clare were bypassed on their northern side in 1975 by a new freeway section of US 10 / M @-@ 115 . The previous routing was partially numbered Bus . US 10 while the remainder was unsigned . 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) truncated the US 10 designation from Detroit to Bay City in 1986 . The US 10 designation was removed from its concurrencies with I @-@ 75 and US 23 . The section along Dixie Highway and Telegraph Road between Pontiac and Southfield was redesignated as an extension of US 24 . The Lodge Freeway was given the M @-@ 10 designation and Bus . US 10 in Pontiac was renumbered as Bus . US 24 . M @-@ 115 was transferred off the US 10 freeway in the Clare area in 1989 back to its previous routing before the 1975 changes . The last change made to the routing of the highway came in 1998 in Ludington . <unk> of the carferry docks and parking lot moved US 10 along James Street instead of William Street . The three blocks of Ludington Avenue affected by the change were given the M @-@ 116 designation . At their Spring Meeting in 2015 , the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials official extended US 10 to include the route of the SS Badger between Ludington and Manitowoc . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = = Business loops = = 
 There are currently three business loops of US 10 in the state of Michigan , and two that were previously designated . The three currently designated are in Reed City , Clare , and Midland . The business route that existed in Flint has been decommissioned while the one in Pontiac has been renumbered . 
 = 2001 India cyclone = 
 The 2001 India cyclone was the second strongest tropical cyclone , in terms of barometric pressure , to form in the Arabian Sea on record ; only Cyclone Gonu in 2007 was stronger . The storm originated from a tropical disturbance that formed east of Somalia on May 18 . Over the following few days , the system gradually organized into a tropical depression . Tracking eastward , towards the coastline of southwestern India , the storm slowly intensified . Shortly before reaching shore , the system turned north and later west , away from land . After taking this turn , the storm intensified into a very severe cyclonic storm , attaining its peak intensity on May 24 with winds of 215 km / h ( 135 mph 3 @-@ minute winds ) and a barometric pressure of 932 mbar ( hPa ) . At the time , this ranked the cyclone as the strongest known storm in the Arabian Sea . 
 After stalling several hundred kilometres offshore , the storm weakened over cooler waters that it had upwelled . By May 27 , the system weakened to a cyclonic storm and by this time was approaching the northwestern coastline of India , near Gujarat . The following day , the storm made landfall in the Saurashtra region as a deep depression with winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph 3 @-@ minute winds ) . The depression quickly weakened after moving inland and dissipated early on May 29 . 
 Although a powerful cyclone over water , the storm had relatively little impact over land . In the Valsad district , two coastal communities lost a combined 200 homes due to large swells produced by the storm . However , the losses were more extensive offshore . Between 120 and 900 fishermen were listed as missing after contact was lost with their vessels during the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of the 2001 India cyclone can be traced to a tropical disturbance over the Arabian Sea on May 18 . The following day , the system was determined to be relatively stationary near the island of Socotra . Although deep convection was associated with the disturbance , there was no evidence of a low @-@ level circulation . By May 20 , the disturbance slowly moved towards the southeast in response to an upper @-@ level trough over India . The overall structure gradually improved as good outflow developed . A mid @-@ level circulation finally developed late on May 21 , prompting the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) to issue a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert . Several hours later , they began monitoring the system as a tropical depression with the identifier 01A ; however , operational advisories were not issued until the cyclone was estimated to have attained tropical storm intensity . By the morning of May 22 , the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) also took notice of the system . 
 Situated in a region favoring tropical cyclone development about 650 km ( 400 mi ) southwest of Mumbai , India , the storm rapidly developed . By the afternoon of May 22 , the JTWC estimated that 01A attained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Additionally , a 22 km ( 14 mi ) wide eye developed within the center of circulation during this intensification phase . Throughout most of May 22 , the strengthening slowed considerably as it paralleled the southwestern coast of India . Initially , it was feared that the storm would move inland as a powerful cyclone ; however , a ridge over the northern Arabian Sea caused the storm to turn westward , back over open water . Once further away from land , the cyclone resumed intensification , becoming a rare , Category 3 equivalent storm by the morning of May 24 . Later that morning , 01A attained its peak intensity with winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) , according to the JTWC . However , the IMD considered the storm to be slightly stronger , estimating that it attained winds of 215 km / h ( 135 mph ) by three @-@ minute sustained winds along with a barometric pressure of 932 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 52 inHg ) . 
 At the time of peak intensity , the cyclone displayed a well @-@ defined eye and excellent outflow . Although a powerful storm , it quickly weakened as conditions became hostile for tropical cyclone development . Strong wind shear tore convection away from the cyclone and caused it to become disorganized . Within 48 hours , the system had degraded to a tropical storm and was situated roughly 555 km ( 345 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Mumbai . The weakening trend lessened shortly thereafter but still continued . Operationally , the JTWC issued their final advisory on the cyclone on May 28 as it weakened to a tropical depression over open waters . The once powerful cyclone , now devoid of all convection , tracked towards the northwestern coast of India . During the afternoon of May 29 , the cyclone rapidly regenerated as it made landfall in Gujarat . The JTWC estimated that it crossed the coastline with winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) . Not long after moving overland , the system rapidly weakened and dissipated over India within several hours . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Ahead of the storm , all ports in Gujarat , including Kandla , one of the largest in the country , were closed as a precautionary measure . On May 25 , over 10 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from coastal areas in the threatened region . Throughout India , a total of 118 @,@ 800 people were evacuated and 100 @,@ 000 more were evacuated in Pakistan . The Indian military was placed on standby to undertake search @-@ and @-@ rescue missions immediately after the storms ' passage . Fourteen districts of Gujarat were placed on red alert , the highest level of preparedness . Seven emergency control centers were set up across the country and officials alerted hospitals and fire crews about the approaching storm . 
 Several relief agencies were already positioned in the region in response to a magnitude 6 @.@ 9 earthquake in January of that year that killed over 20 @,@ 000 people . Additional disaster relief teams were deployed to the region to further prepare residents for the cyclone . Food , water and other necessities were stored and ready to be provided to victims of the storm . Large swells produced by the storm affected a large portion of the western Indian coastline , especially in the city of Bombay . In the Valsad district , two coastal communities lost a combined 200 homes due to large swells produced by the storm . Offshore , between 1 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 000 fishing vessels had lost contact with the mainland . Later reports indicated that between 120 and 900 fishermen had gone missing as a result of the cyclone . 
 = = Records = = 
 Operationally , the cyclone was considered to be a Category 4 equivalent storm by the JTWC , with peak winds of 215 km / h ( 135 mph ) . This would have made the system the first recorded storm of that intensity on record in the Arabian Sea . However , in post @-@ storm analysis , it was discovered that 1 @-@ minute winds did not exceed 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) . The next storm to reach this intensity was Cyclone Gonu in 2007 North Indian Ocean cyclone season , which became the first known super cyclonic storm in the region . Upon attaining its peak intensity , the storm attained a barometric pressure of 932 mbar ( hPa ) , the lowest in the region at the time . The cyclone was ranked as the strongest in the Arabian Sea for six years until it was surpassed by Gonu in 2007 , which attained a minimum pressure of 920 mbar ( hPa ) . In 2010 , Cyclone Phet surpassed the 2001 cyclone as the second @-@ strongest storm in the region , attaining winds of 240 km / h ( 145 mph ) , according to the JTWC . 
 = History of Atlantic hurricane warnings = 
 The history of Atlantic tropical cyclone warnings details the progress of tropical cyclone warnings in the north Atlantic Ocean . The first service was set up in the 1870s from Cuba with the work of Father Benito Viñes . After his death , hurricane warning services were assumed by the United States Signal Corp and United States Weather Bureau over the next few decades , first based in Jamaica and Cuba before shifting to Washington , D.C .. The central office in Washington , which would evolve into the National Meteorological Center and the Weather Prediction Center , assumed the responsibilities by the early 20th century . This responsibility passed to regional hurricane offices in 1935 , and the concept of the Atlantic hurricane season was established in order to keep a vigilant lookout for tropical cyclones during certain times of the year . Hurricane advisories issued every six hours by the regional hurricane offices began at this time . 
 The National Hurricane Center became a tropical cyclone warning center in 1956 , and assumed many of the functions it has today by 1965 . The National Hurricane Research Project , begun in the 1950s , used aircraft to study tropical cyclones and carry out experiments on mature hurricanes through its Stormfury project . Forecasts within the hurricane advisories were issued one day into the future in 1954 before being extended to two days into the future in 1961 , three days into the future in 1964 , and five days into the future in 2001 . From the 1960s through the 1980s , work from the various regional hurricane offices was consolidated into the National Hurricane center . Its name was changed to the Tropical Prediction Center in 1995 , before <unk> its National Hurricane Center name in 2010 . Tropical cyclone forecasting is done nowadays using statistical methods based on tropical cyclone climatology , as well as methods of numerical weather prediction where computers use mathematical equations of motion to determine their movement . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The first hurricane warning service was set up in the early 1870s from Cuba with the work of Father Benito Viñes , who served as director of the Meteorological Observatory of the Royal College of Belén . He established a network of observation sites and developed the first method to forecast tropical cyclone movement , with the oldest known forecast made for a hurricane in late August 1873 . He would give track details days in advance , based upon clouds which progress well in advance of hurricanes . His hurricane warning service in Cuba continued until his death on July 23 , 1893 . Within the United States , the public was dissatisfied with the Signal Corp forecasts after the Hurricane of 1875 . The immediate response by the Signal Corp was the creation of the hurricane warning flag , a pair of red flags ten by eight feet each in size , inset with black rectangles . Beginning on October 1 , 1875 , hurricane warning flags were hoisted in areas where hurricane warnings were in effect , and illuminated at night . 
 The United States Congress passed a bill to authorize the establishment and operations of weather stations across the West Indies and Caribbean Sea on July 7 , 1889 . The ultimate outcome was the advent of the Weather Bureau in 1890 , through the passing of the Organic Act which assigned the new organization to the Department of Agriculture . The September 1896 hurricane led to an expansion of the Weather Bureau hurricane network through the Caribbean Sea . The Spanish – American War led to the United States establishing a hurricane warning office in Kingston , Jamaica in 1898 , before shifting to Havana , Cuba after the war 's end in 1899 . After the 1900 Galveston Hurricane , a hurricane warning office was established at New Orleans , Louisiana to deal with hurricane warnings in the Gulf of Mexico . The Hurricane Warning Service moved to Washington , D. C. in 1902 . The use of radio by shipping , which began in 1905 , added significantly more information for those tracking hurricanes . The first report from a hurricane was received in 1909 , with the total of radio reports rising to 21 @,@ 000 per hurricane season in 1935 . Despite the issuance of hurricane watches and warnings , forecasting the path of tropical cyclones did not occur until 1920 . 
 A hurricane warning program was established in 1935 and established regional offices in Jacksonville , Florida , Washington , D.C. , San Juan , Puerto Rico , and New Orleans , Louisiana . Hurricane warning offices issued advisories at six hourly intervals for tropical cyclones , issuing warnings for storm and hurricane @-@ force winds . The idea of aircraft reconnaissance of hurricanes was put forth by Captain W. L. Farnsworth of the Galveston Commercial Association in the early 1930s . Supported by the United States Weather Bureau , the " storm patrol bill " passed both the United States Senate and United States House of Representatives on June 15 , 1936 . The Jacksonville hurricane warning office moved to Miami , Florida in 1943 , and a hurricane warning office was opened in Boston , Massachusetts . After World War II , the United States Navy and United States Air Force had separate warning centers for the military . In the case of tropical cyclones , the civilian and military warning agencies maintained close coordination . Tropical cyclone naming began for Atlantic tropical cyclones using the phonetic alphabet by 1947 , switching to female names in 1953 . Starting in 1950 , the Miami Hurricane Warning Office began to prepare the annual hurricane season summary articles . Tropical cyclone track forecasts for one day in the future began in 1954 . After the 1954 Atlantic hurricane season , efforts were made to enhance the hurricane reporting network along the coast by setting up a Cooperative Hurricane Reporting Network ( <unk> ) by supplying anemometers and barometers to members of the public which left no length of United States coastline along the Atlantic or Gulf coasts greater than 25 miles ( 40 km ) uncovered . 
 = = = Hurricane season concept = = = 
 The basic concept of a hurricane season began during 1935 , when dedicated wire circuits known as hurricane circuits began to be set up along the Gulf and Atlantic coasts , a process completed by 1955 . It was originally the time frame when the tropics were monitored routinely for tropical cyclone activity , and was originally defined as from June 15 through October 31 . Over the years , the beginning date was shifted back to June 1 , while the end date was shifted to November 15 , before settling at November 30 by 1965 . This was when hurricane reconnaissance planes were sent out to fly across the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico on a routine basis to look for potential tropical cyclones , in the years prior to the continuous weather satellite era . After regular satellite surveillance began , hurricane hunter aircraft flew only into areas which were spotted first by satellite imagery . 
 = = National Hurricane Research Project = = 
 The National Hurricane Research Project ( NHRP ) was initiated in 1955 by the United States Weather Bureau in response to the devastating 1954 hurricane season , which significantly impacted the Mid @-@ Atlantic states and New England . Robert Simpson , a Weather Bureau meteorologist who had participated in Air Force hurricane reconnaissance flights as an observer , was appointed as the first director of NHRP and organized the Research Operations Base at Morrison Air Force Base ( now Palm Beach International Airport ) in West Palm Beach , Florida in 1956 . During the first three years of the Project , scientists used three specially instrumented Air Force Hurricane Hunters aircraft with crews on <unk> from the 55th Weather Reconnaissance Squadron , collecting data which delineated the structure and energy budget of hurricanes for the first time . 
 In 1959 , the Project was moved to Miami and collocated with the Miami hurricane forecast office . The Department of Commerce leased two DC @-@ 6 aircraft and received a B @-@ 57 jet from the Air Force so that NHRP could continue to carry out airborne experiments on hurricanes . The combination of research project , forecast center , and aircraft facility was dubbed the " National Hurricane Center " ( NHC ) . During the 1960s , while NHRP continued to carry out research flights , the Project also began to create computer models of hurricane circulation , formulated a statistical track program ( NHC @-@ 64 ) , wrote a manual on hurricane forecasting , and evaluated the accuracy of track forecasts . Starting with Hurricane Esther ( 1961 ) , NHRP was heavily involved with Project Stormfury , the U. S. Government 's experiment in hurricane modification . Late in 1964 , the Project was renamed the National Hurricane Research Laboratory in recognition of it becoming a permanent institution within the Weather Bureau . This presaged the creation of the Environmental Research Laboratories the next year . 
 = = National Hurricane Center = = 
 On July 1 , 1956 , a National Hurricane Information Center had become established in Miami , Florida which became a warehouse for all hurricane @-@ related information from one office . The Miami Hurricane Warning Office ( HWO ) was moved from Lindsey Hopkins Hotel to the Aviation Building 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the northwest on July 1 , 1958 . Forecasts for tropical cyclone movement were extended to two days in advance ( at one day intervals ) in 1961 . The Miami HWO moved to the campus of the University of Miami in 1964 , which is when tropical cyclone forecasts were extended to three days into the future , at one day intervals . The Miami HWO tropical cyclone reports were done regularly and took on their modern format in 1964 . In 1970 , NHC began analyzing tropical cyclone initial positions in real @-@ time and added a 12 ‑ hour forecast . Beginning in 1973 , a portion of the National Meteorological Center ( later renamed the Weather Prediction Center ) gained advisory responsibility for dissipating inland tropical depressions . The World Meteorological Organization assumed control of the Atlantic hurricane naming list in 1977 . 
 In 1978 , the NHC 's offices moved off campus to the IRE Financial Building . The hurricane warning offices remained active past 1983 . Organizationally , the NHC left the aegis of the National Weather Service State Forecast Office in Miami in 1984 , leaving the Southern Region and becoming its own national center , one of three in existence at that time . In 1988 , NHC added a 36 @-@ hour point to their forecast . During the National Weather Service reorganization in the 1990s , the NHC was renamed the Tropical Prediction Center on October 1 , 1995 , and moved into a building on the campus of Florida International University . The Hurricane Specialists were grouped as a separate NHC unit under the Tropical Prediction Center , separating themselves from the Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch . By 2001 , tropical cyclone forecasts were extended from three to five days in advance , including forecast points for 96 and 120 hours . On October 1 , 2010 , the Tropical Prediction Center was renamed the NHC , and the group formerly known as the NHC became known as the Hurricane Specialists Unit ( HSU ) . 
 = = Tropical cyclone forecasting = = 
 Tropical cyclone forecasting relies on data provided by numerical weather models . Three main classes of tropical cyclone guidance models exist : Statistical models are based on an analysis of storm behavior using climatology , and correlate a storm 's position and date to produce a forecast that is not based on the physics of the atmosphere at the time . Dynamical models are numerical models that solve the governing equations of fluid flow in the atmosphere ; they are based on the same principles as other limited @-@ area numerical weather prediction models but may include special computational techniques such as refined spatial domains that move along with the cyclone . Models that use elements of both approaches are called statistical @-@ dynamical models . 
 In 1978 , the first hurricane @-@ tracking model based on atmospheric dynamics — the movable fine @-@ mesh ( MFM ) model — began operating . Within the field of tropical cyclone track forecasting , despite the ever @-@ improving dynamical model guidance which occurred with increased computational power , it was not until the 1980s when numerical weather prediction showed skill , and until the 1990s when it consistently outperformed statistical or simple dynamical models . Predictions of the intensity of a tropical cyclone based on numerical weather prediction continue to be a challenge , since statistical methods continue to show higher skill over dynamical guidance . 
 = = Advisory , watch , and warning evolution = = 
 The timing and naming of tropical cyclone advisories , watches , and warnings has changed over time . In 1958 , tropical cyclone advisories were issued every six hours starting at 0400 UTC each day . During 1967 , hurricane watches were used to designate areas where hurricane conditions were possible in the next 24 hours , while hurricane warnings indicated areas where the hurricane center should cross the coast . Small craft , gale , and storm warnings were issued for hurricanes not expected to make landfall . By 1987 , the definition of tropical cyclone watches had changed to areas where gale or hurricane @-@ force winds were possible within 36 hours , with warnings issued when gale or hurricane @-@ force winds were expected within 24 hours . In 1987 , gale watches / warnings were renamed tropical storm watches / warnings . In 1991 , advisory timing shifted back to every six hours starting at 0330 UTC every day . In 1992 , advisory timing changed to every six hours starting at 0300 UTC each day . The length of time used for watches and warnings changed again in 2010 , with watches using a 48 ‑ hour time frame and warnings using a 36 hour time frame . 
 Within the United States , a separate set of inland tropical cyclone warnings was issued by National Weather Service forecast offices , based upon the latest NHC advisory , during the decade of the 2000s . These warnings used the word " Wind " inserted before the " Watch " or " Warning " , which was dropped for 2005 . Previously , standard High Wind Warnings and Watches were issued ( which denote ≥ 39 MPH winds or ≥ 58 MPH gusts ) . When they were inland , watches and warnings were posted for tropical storm or hurricane @-@ force winds expected during the next 24 and 12 hours , respectively . 
 = = Current operations = = 
 During the hurricane season , the National Hurricane Center routinely issues their Tropical Weather Outlook product , which identifies areas of concern within the tropics which could develop into tropical cyclones . If systems occur outside the defined hurricane season , special Tropical Weather Outlooks will be issued . While a tropical cyclone is active , six hourly advisories will be issued , which become more frequent once a tropical cyclone watch or warning are issued . Tropical cyclone watches and warnings are coordinated within the countries and dependencies involved , with the National Hurricane Center coordinating with National Weather Service Forecast Offices concerning storms threatening the United States and its dependencies . Routine coordination occurs at 1700 UTC each day between the Weather Prediction Center and National Hurricane Center to identify systems for the pressure maps three to seven days into the future within the tropics , and points for existing tropical cyclones six to seven days into the future . 
 = George Kistiakowsky = 
 George Bogdanovich Kistiakowsky ( November 18 , 1900 – December 7 , 1982 ) ( Ukrainian : <unk> <unk> <unk> , Russian : Георгий <unk> <unk> ) was a Ukrainian @-@ American physical chemistry professor at Harvard who participated in the Manhattan Project and later served as President Dwight D. Eisenhower 's Science Advisor . 
 Born in Kiev in the old Russian Empire , Kistiakowsky fled his homeland during the Russian Civil War . He made his way to Germany , where he earned his PhD in physical chemistry under the supervision of Max Bodenstein at the University of Berlin . He emigrated to the United States in 1926 , where he joined the faculty of Harvard University in 1930 , and became a citizen in 1933 . 
 During World War II , Kistiakowsky was the head of the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) section responsible for the development of explosives , and the technical director of the Explosives Research Laboratory ( ERL ) , where he oversaw the development of new explosives , including RDX and HMX . He was involved in research into the hydrodynamic theory of explosions , and the development of shaped charges . In October 1943 , he was brought into the Manhattan Project as a consultant . He was soon placed in charge of X Division , which was responsible for the development of the explosive lenses necessary for an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon . In July 1945 , he watched as the first one was detonated in the Trinity test . A few weeks later another Fat Man implosion @-@ type weapon was dropped on Nagasaki . 
 From 1962 to 1965 , Kistiakowsky chaired the National Academy of Sciences 's Committee on Science , Engineering , and Public Policy ( <unk> ) , and was its vice president from 1965 to 1973 . He severed his connections with the government in protest against the war in Vietnam , and became active in an antiwar organization , the Council for a Livable World , becoming its chairman in 1977 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George Bogdanovich Kistiakowsky was born in Kiev , in the Kiev Governorate of the Russian Empire ( now part of Ukraine ) , on November 18 , 1900 . George 's grandfather Oleksandr Fedorovych Kistiakovsky was a professor of law and an attorney of the Russian Empire who specialized in criminal law . His father Bogdan Kistiakovsky was Professor of Legal Philosophy at the University of Kiev , and was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine in 1919 . Kistiakowsky 's mother was Maria <unk> , and he had a brother , Alexander . George 's uncle <unk> Kistiakovsky was the Minister of Internal Affairs of the Ukrainian State . 
 Kistiakowsky attended private schools in Kiev and Moscow until the Russian Revolution broke out in 1917 . He then joined the anti @-@ Communist White Army . In 1920 he escaped from Russia in a commandeered French ship . After spending time in Turkey and Yugoslavia , he made his way to Germany , where he enrolled at the University of Berlin later that year . In 1925 , he earned his PhD in physical chemistry under the supervision of Max Bodenstein , writing his thesis on the photochemical decomposition of chlorine monoxide and ozone . He then became Bodenstein 's graduate assistant . His first two published papers were elaborations of his thesis , co @-@ written with Bodenstein . 
 In 1926 , Kistiakowsky traveled to the United States as an International Education Board fellow . Hugh Stott Taylor , another student of Bodenstein , accepted Bodenstein 's assessment of Kistiakowsky , and gave him a place at Princeton University . That year , Kistiakowsky married a Swedish woman , Hildegard Moebius . In 1928 , they had a daughter , Vera , who later became a Professor Emerita of Physics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology . When Kistiakowsky 's two @-@ year fellowship ran out in 1927 , he received a Research Associate and DuPont Fellowship . On October 25 , 1928 , he became an associate professor at Princeton . Taylor and Kistiakowsky published a series of papers together . Encouraged by Taylor , Kistiakowsky also published an American Chemical Society monograph on photochemical processes . 
 In 1930 , Kistiakowsky joined the faculty of Harvard University , an affiliation that continued throughout his career . At Harvard , his research interests were in thermodynamics , spectroscopy , and chemical kinetics . He became increasingly involved in consulting for the government and industry . He became an associate professor again , this time at Harvard in 1933 . That year he also became an American citizen . In 1938 , he became the Abbott and James Lawrence Professor of Chemistry . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = National Defense Research Committee = = = 
 Foreseeing an expanded role for science in World War II , which the United States had not yet joined , President Franklin D. Roosevelt created the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) on June 27 , 1940 , with Vannevar Bush as its chairman . James B. Conant , the President of Harvard , was appointed head of Division B , which was responsible for bombs , fuels , gases and chemicals . He appointed Kistiakowsky to head its Section A @-@ 1 , which was concerned with explosives . In June 1941 , the NDRC was absorbed into the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) . Bush became Chairman of the OSRD , Conant succeeded him as Chairman of the NDRC , and Kistiakowsky became head of Section B. In a reorganization in December 1942 , Division B was broken up , and he became head of Division 8 , which was responsible for explosives and propellants , remaining in this position until February 1944 . 
 Kistiakowsky was unhappy with the state of American knowledge of explosives and propellants . Conant established the Explosives Research Laboratory ( ERL ) near the laboratories of the Bureau of Mines in Bruceton , Pennsylvania in October 1940 , and Kistiakowsky initially supervised its activities , making occasional visits ; but Conant did not formally appoint him as its Technical Director until the spring of 1941 . Although initially hampered by a shortage of facilities , the ERL grew from five staff in 1941 to a wartime peak of 162 full @-@ time laboratory staff in 1945 . An important field of research was RDX . This powerful explosive had been developed by the British before the war . The challenge was to develop an industrial process that could produce it on a large scale . RDX was also mixed with TNT to produce Composition B , which was widely used in various munitions , and torpex , which was used in torpedoes and depth charges . Pilot plants were in operation by May 1942 , and large @-@ scale production followed in 1943 . 
 In response to a special request for an explosive that could be smuggled through Japanese checkpoints by Chinese guerrillas , <unk> mixed HMX , a non @-@ toxic explosive produced as a by @-@ product of the RDX process , with flour to create " Aunt Jemima " , after a brand of pancake flour . This was an edible explosive , which could pass for regular flour , and even be used in cooking . 
 In addition to research into synthetic explosives like RDX and HMX , the ERL investigated the properties of detonations and shock waves . This was initiated as a pure research project , without obvious or immediate applications . Kistiakowsky visited England in 1941 and again in 1942 , where he met with British experts , including William Penney and Geoffrey Taylor . When Kistiakowsky and Edgar Bright Wilson , Jr . , surveyed the existing state of knowledge , they found several areas that warranted further investigation . Kistiakowsky began to look into the Chapman – <unk> model , which describes the way the shock wave created by a detonation propagates . 
 At this time , the efficacy of the Chapman – <unk> model was still in doubt , and it was the subject of studies by John von Neumann at the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study . Kistiakowsky realized that the deviations from hydrodynamic theory were the result of the speed of the chemical reactions themselves . To control the reaction , calculations down to the microsecond level were needed . Section 8 was drawn into the investigation of shaped charges , whose mechanism was explained by Taylor and James Tuck in 1943 . 
 = = = Manhattan Project = = = 
 At the Manhattan Project 's Los Alamos Laboratory , research into implosion had been proceeding under Seth Neddermeyer , but his division had worked with cylinders and small charges , and had only produced objects that looked like rocks . Their research was accorded a low priority , owing to expectations that a gun @-@ type nuclear weapon design would work for both uranium @-@ 235 and plutonium , and implosion technology would not be required . 
 In September 1943 , the Los Alamos Laboratory 's director , Robert Oppenheimer , arranged for von Neumann to visit Los Alamos and investigate implosion with a fresh set of eyes . After reviewing Neddermeyer 's studies , and discussing the matter with Edward Teller , von Neumann suggested the use of high explosive in shaped charges to implode a sphere , which he showed could not only result in a faster assembly of fissile material than was possible with the gun method , but which could greatly reduce the amount of material required . The prospect of more efficient nuclear weapons impressed Oppenheimer , Teller and Hans Bethe , but they decided that an expert on explosives was required . Kistiakowsky 's name was immediately suggested , and he was brought into the project as a consultant in October 1943 . 
 Kistiakowsky was initially reluctant to come , " partly because " , he later explained , " I didn 't think the bomb would be ready in time and I was interested in helping to win the war " . At Los Alamos , he began reorganizing the implosion effort . He introduced techniques such as photography and X @-@ Rays to study the behavior of shaped charges . The former had been extensively employed by the ERL , while the latter had been described in papers by Tuck , who also suggested using three @-@ dimensional explosive lenses . As with other aspects of the Manhattan Project , research into explosive lenses followed multiple lines of inquiry simultaneously because , as Kistiakowsky noted , it was " impossible to predict which of these basic techniques will be the more successful . " 
 Kistiakowsky brought with him to Los Alamos a detailed knowledge of all the studies into shaped charges , of explosives like Composition B , and of the procedures used at the ERL in 1942 and 1943 . Increasingly , the ERL itself would be drawn into the implosion effort ; its deputy director Duncan MacDougall also took charge of the Manhattan Project 's Project Q. Kistiakowsky replaced Neddermeyer as head of E ( for explosives ) Division in February 1944 . 
 The implosion program acquired a new urgency after Emilio Segrè 's group at Los Alamos verified that plutonium produced in the nuclear reactors contained plutonium @-@ 240 , which made it unsuitable for use in a gun @-@ type weapon . A series of crisis meetings in July 1944 concluded that the only prospect for a working plutonium weapon was implosion . In August , Oppenheimer reorganized the entire laboratory to concentrate on it . A new explosives group , X Division , was created under Kistiakowsky to develop the lenses . 
 Under Kistiakowsky 's leadership , X @-@ Division designed the complex explosive lenses needed to compress the fissile plutonium pit . These employed two explosives with significantly different velocities of detonation in order to produce the required wave form . Kistiakowsky chose Baratol for the slow explosive . After experimenting with various fast explosives , X @-@ Division settled on Composition B. Work on molding the explosives into the right shape continued into 1945 . The lenses needed to be flawless , and techniques for casting Composition B and Baratol had to be developed . The ERL managed to accomplish this by devising a procedure for preparing Baratol in a form that was easy to cast . In March 1945 , Kistiakowsky became part of the Cowpuncher Committee , so @-@ called because it rode herd on the implosion effort . On July 16 , 1945 , Kistiakowsky watched as the first device was detonated in the Trinity test . A few weeks later a Fat Man implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon was dropped on Nagasaki . 
 Along with his work on implosion , Kistiakowsky contributed to skiing in Los Alamos by using rings of explosives to fell trees for a ski slope — leading to the establishment of Sawyer 's Hill Ski Tow Association . He divorced Hildegard in 1942 and married Irma E. Shuler in 1945 . They were divorced in 1962 , and he married Elaine Mahoney . 
 = = White House service = = 
 In 1957 , during the Eisenhower Administration , Kistiakowsky was appointed to the President 's Science Advisory Committee , and succeeded James R. Killian as chairman in 1959 . He directed the Office of Science and Technology Policy from 1959 to 1961 , when he was succeeded by Jerome B. Wiesner . 
 In 1958 , Kistiakowsky suggested to President Eisenhower that inspection of foreign military facilities was not sufficient to control their nuclear weapons . He cited the difficulty in monitoring missile submarines , and proposed that the arms control strategy focus on disarmament rather than inspections . In January 1960 , as part of arms control planning and negotiation , he suggested the " threshold concept " . Under this proposal , all nuclear tests above the level of seismic detection technology would be forbidden . After such an agreement , the US and USSR would work jointly to improve detection technology , revising the permissible test yield downward as techniques improved . This example of the " national means of technical verification " , a euphemism for sensitive intelligence collection used in arms control , would provide safeguards , without raising the on @-@ site inspection requirement to a level unacceptable to the Soviets . The US introduced the threshold concept to the Soviets at the Geneva arms control conference in January 1960 and the Soviets , in March , responded favorably , suggesting a threshold of a given seismic magnitude . Talks broke down as a result of the U @-@ 2 Crisis of 1960 in May . 
 At the same time as the early nuclear arms control work , the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , General Nathan F. Twining , sent a memorandum , in August 1959 , to the Secretary of Defense , Neil McElroy , which suggested that the Strategic Air Command ( SAC ) formally be assigned responsibility to prepare the national nuclear target list , and a single plan for nuclear operations . Up to that point , the Army , Navy , and Air Force had done their own target planning . This had led to the same objectives being targeted multiple times by the different services . The separate service plans were not mutually supporting as in , for example , the Navy destroying an air defense facility on the route of an Air Force bomber going to a deeper target . While Twining had sent the memo to McElroy , the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff disagreed on the policy during early 1960 . Thomas Gates , who succeeded McElroy , asked President Dwight D. Eisenhower to decide the policy . 
 Eisenhower said he would not " leave his successor with the monstrosity " of the uncoordinated and un @-@ integrated forces that then existed . In early November 1960 , he sent Kistiakowsky to SAC Headquarters in Omaha to evaluate its war plans . Initially , Kistiakowsky was not given access , and Eisenhower sent him back , with a much stronger set of orders for SAC officers to cooperate . <unk> 's report , presented on November 29 , described uncoordinated plans with huge numbers of targets , many of which would be attacked by multiple forces , resulting in overkill . Eisenhower was shocked by the plans , and focused not just on the creation of the Single Integrated Operational Plan ( SIOP ) , but on the entire process of picking targets , generating requirements , and planning for nuclear war operations . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Between his work for the Manhattan Project and his White House service , and again after he left the White House , Kistiakowsky was a professor of physical chemistry at Harvard . When asked to teach a freshmen class in 1957 , he turned to Hubert Alyea , whose lecture style had impressed him . Alyea sent him some 700 4 @-@ by @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 10 @.@ 2 by 15 @.@ 2 cm ) index cards containing details of lecture demonstrations . Aside from the cards , Kistiakowsky never prepared the demonstrations . He later recalled : 
 I didn 't think that was giving mother Nature a sporting chance . I would come into the lecture hall , glance at the chemicals and pile of cards and announce to the students " let 's see what Alyea has for us today " . I never used a text book , only your cards . I would glance at the instructions and carry out the experiment . If it worked we would bless you and pass on to the next demonstration . If it didn 't work we would curse you , and spend the rest of the lecture trying to make it work . 
 He retired from Harvard as professor emeritus in 1972 . 
 From 1962 to 1965 , Kistiakowsky chaired the National Academy of Science 's Committee on Science , Engineering , and Public Policy ( <unk> ) , and was its vice president from 1965 to 1973 . He received several awards over the years , including the Department of the Air Force Decoration for Exceptional Civilian Service in 1957 . He was awarded the Medal for Merit by President Truman , the Medal of Freedom by President Eisenhower in 1961 , and the National Medal of Science by President Lyndon Johnson in 1967 . He was also a recipient of the Priestley Medal from the American Chemical Society in 1972 and the Franklin Medal from Harvard . 
 In later years , Kistiakowsky was active in an antiwar organization , the Council for a Livable World . He severed his connections with the government in protest against the US involvement in the Vietnam War . In 1977 , he assumed the chairmanship of the Council , campaigning against nuclear proliferation . He died of cancer in Cambridge , Massachusetts , on December 17 , 1982 . His body was cremated , and his ashes scattered near his summer home on Cape Cod , Massachusetts . His papers are in the Harvard University archives . 
 = Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) = 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " is a song by American actress and singer @-@ songwriter Lindsay Lohan , taken from her second studio album , A Little More Personal ( Raw ) ( 2005 ) . The alternative rock song was written by Lohan as a letter to her father , Michael Lohan , who survived a car crash for which he was charged with driving under the influence of alcohol . Additional writing and production was done by Kara DioGuardi and Greg Wells , while Lohan recorded the song on her trailer during the shoot of Herbie : Fully Loaded . " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " was first previewed at AOL Music 's First Listen on September 30 , 2005 and was sent to radio in the United States on October 18 , 2005 by Casablanca Records as the first single from the album . 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " received mixed reviews from music critics , who praised Lohan 's conviction on the song , but considering it a cliché " I @-@ hate @-@ you @-@ Daddy " lament . The song achieved mild commercial success , peaking at number 7 in Australia , number 74 in Austria , number 14 on the United States Hot Digital Songs , and at number 57 on Billboard Hot 100 . An accompanying music video , directed by Lohan herself , portrays the singer and her actual sister , Ali , listening to her parents arguing and fighting in the living room of their home . " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " was performed by Lohan at the American Music Awards of 2005 . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " was written by Lohan as a letter to her father , Michael Lohan , who was incarcerated in June 2005 after surviving a car crash for which he was charged with driving under the influence of alcohol . Additional writing and song production was done by Greg Wells and Kara DioGuardi , who revealed , " If you solo the vocals you 'll hear race cars , because we brought the studio to [ Lindsay 's ] trailer on Herbie : Fully Loaded . I 'm not kidding ! She had no time to do the record , so she would be on her lunch break , and I 'd be like , ' Throw that thing down your throat and get over here , ' cause we got to finish these vocals ! ' So I sat for 14 hours on the set and would grab her for , like , 10 minutes at a time . The poor girl . That 's the reality of young Hollywood . When they 're hot , they 're worked to death . It was 18 / 20 @-@ hour days . ... And I swear : ' Vroom ! Vroom ! ' You can hear it in the back . " " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " was first previewed at AOL Music 's First Listen on September 30 , 2005 , and was sent to mainstream radio in the United States on October 18 , 2005 , as the lead single from A Little More Personal ( Raw ) . The song was released digitally in the United States on November 8 , 2005 , while being released internationally on January 15 , 2006 by Casablanca Records . 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " is a alternative rock song that lasts for three minutes and 41 seconds . According to the digital music sheet published at Musicnotes.com , the song is composed in the key of G ♯ minor and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 120 beats per minute , while Lohan 's vocal range spans from F ♯ 3 to D ♯ 5 . When asked about the lyrical content of the song , Lohan revealed , " A lot of people go through family issues , abuse and that kind of thing . I think it 's important to show that other people go through it . [ ... ] I hope [ my father ] see what I say in the song is , ' I love you , ' so many times , that I need him and the crazy things in my life . I hope he sees the positive side of the video rather than the negative . The video is kind of offensive , but it is very raw . He 's my father . I need someone to walk me down the aisle when I get married . " The single 's b @-@ side , " My Innocence " , features a similar message to Lohan 's father . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " received mixed reviews from music critics . Brian Hiatt of Rolling Stone noted " the album de @-@ emphasizes the ( very ) guilty pop pleasures of her 2004 debut in favor of leaden I @-@ hate @-@ you @-@ Daddy laments such as " Confessions of a Broken Heart " and " My Innocence " . Entertainment Weekly writer Leah Greenblatt commented that " it 's hard to imagine a more explicit snapshot of the highly publicized family problems that have plagued the star than " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " " . PopMatters 's Whitney Strub said " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " " immediately commences with a line about ' wait [ ing ] for the postman to bring me a letter ' , which suggests songwriters dipping into the well of cliché without worrying about freshness , " while commenting that " the world might not need another version of Britney Spears ' ' E @-@ Mail My Heart ' , but good lord , that song came out in 1999 . Perhaps a text @-@ message might arrive faster than snail @-@ mail in late 2005 , should Lohan 's song @-@ persona deign to enter the 21st century " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " achieved mild commercial success around the world , including reaching number seven in Australia on the week of its debut on chart . The song spent 13 weeks on the chart , peaking at number 45 on the last . In Austria , the song reached number 74 on the week of March 24 , 2006 . In the United States , the song peaked at number 14 on Hot Digital Songs on the week of December 3 , 2005 , while reaching number 57 on Billboard Hot 100 on the week of December 24 , 2005 , becoming her first and only single to chart on the Hot 100 in the US . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " was directed by Lohan in Chelsea , Manhattan , New York City , and references her father Michael 's alcoholism and alleged domestic abuse . Tommy Mottola , head of Casablanca Records , revealed that no one could direct the video better than Lohan herself , who said to the singer , " ' No one knows this song better than you , no one knows this situation better than you . ' It 's a lot to take on , but I told her she 's ready , and we 'll give her all the support she needs " . Lohan said that the video 's storefront setting was chosen because , in her words , " my life is on display " . The singer also wanted to break a mirror during the bathroom scenes , because she wanted to show her real feelings in the music video . Assistant director Jeb Bryan said to Lohan , " This is real glass , Lindsay . We weren 't prepared for you to break these things . [ ... ] Do you want this slow motion ? " She responded , " Regular frame will make it more violent . [ ... ] I don 't want it to be too pretty " . The music video was first aired on MTV 's Making the Video , and later released to iTunes Store on October 25 , 2005 . 
 In the video , Lohan hides in the bathroom and prays a rosary as her parents , Michael and Dina ( played by Drake Andrew and Victoria Hay , respectively ) , argue and fight in the living room . Her sister , Ali ( who plays herself , according to Lohan ) , goes to her bedroom after coming home from ballet class , breaks into tears , saying a rosary . The three rooms are shown behind a department store window , outside which a crowd of observers form . At the end of the video , Lohan stands behind the glass and photographs of memories fly up onto it , from which she breaks out . As a response to the music video , Michael Lohan wrote a letter to the New York Daily News , saying , " while I always considered and expressed how truly blessed Lindsay , as well as my other children are , I never realized how blessed I am to have a daughter as amazing as Lindsay . Hold onto my shirt honey , soon enough you 'll be able to hold on to me ! " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The music video for " Confessions of A Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " received widespread critical acclaim with some calling it one of the greatest heartbreaking music videos of all time . When reviewing the video , VH1 stated that " “ Daddy issues ” is an understatement when it comes to this melodramatic — and we admit , effective — clip . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 CD single 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " – 3 : 41 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " ( Dave Audé Remix ) – 4 : 45 
 " My Innocence " – 4 : 19 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " ( Music Video ) 
 Digital download 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " – 3 : 41 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " ( Dave Audé Remix ) – 4 : 45 
 " My Innocence " – 4 : 19 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Transient lunar phenomenon = 
 A transient lunar phenomenon ( TLP ) or lunar transient phenomenon ( LTP ) is a short @-@ lived light , color , or change in appearance on the surface of the Moon . 
 Claims of short @-@ lived lunar phenomena go back at least 1 @,@ 000 years , with some having been observed independently by multiple witnesses or reputable scientists . Nevertheless , the majority of transient lunar phenomenon reports are <unk> and do not possess adequate control experiments that could be used to distinguish among alternative hypotheses to explain their origins . 
 Most lunar scientists will acknowledge that transient events such as outgassing and impact cratering do occur over geologic time : the controversy lies in the frequency of such events . 
 The term was created by Patrick Moore in his co @-@ authorship of NASA Technical Report R @-@ 277 Chronological Catalog of Reported Lunar Events , published in 1968 . 
 = = Description of events = = 
 Reports of transient lunar phenomena range from foggy patches to permanent changes of the lunar landscape . Cameron classifies these as ( 1 ) gaseous , involving mists and other forms of obscuration , ( 2 ) reddish colorations , ( 3 ) green , blue or violet colorations , ( 4 ) <unk> , and ( 5 ) <unk> . Two extensive catalogs of transient lunar phenomena exist , with the most recent tallying 2 @,@ 254 events going back to the 6th century . Of the most reliable of these events , at least one @-@ third come from the vicinity of the Aristarchus plateau . 
 A few of the more famous historical accounts of transient phenomena include the following : 
 On June 18 , 1178 , five or more monks from Canterbury reported an upheaval on the Moon shortly after sunset . " There was a bright new moon , and as usual in that phase its horns were tilted toward the east ; and suddenly the upper horn split in two . From the midpoint of this division a flaming torch sprang up , spewing out , over a considerable distance , fire , hot coals , and sparks . Meanwhile the body of the moon which was below writhed , as it were , in anxiety , and , to put it in the words of those who reported it to me and saw it with their own eyes , the moon throbbed like a wounded snake . Afterwards it resumed its proper state . This phenomenon was repeated a dozen times or more , the flame assuming various twisting shapes at random and then returning to normal . Then after these transformations the moon from horn to horn , that is along its whole length , took on a blackish appearance . " Before you start to think these monks were crazy , you need to look at the date this happened . In 1178 , how would you describe seeing meteors crash into a new moon ? In 1976 , Jack Hartung proposed that this described the formation of the Giordano Bruno crater . However , more recent studies suggest that it appears very unlikely the 1178 event was related to the formation of Crater Giordano Bruno , or was even a true transient lunar phenomenon at all . The millions of tons of lunar debris ejected from an impact large enough to leave a 22 @-@ km @-@ wide crater would have resulted in an unprecedentedly intense , week @-@ long meteor storm on Earth . No accounts of such a memorable storm have been found in any known historical records , including several astronomical archives from around the world . In light of this , it is suspected that the group of monks ( the event 's only known witnesses ) saw the atmospheric explosion of a directly oncoming meteor in chance alignment , from their specific vantage point , with the far more distant moon . 
 During the night of April 19 , 1787 , the British astronomer Sir William Herschel noticed three red glowing spots on the dark part of the Moon . He informed King George III and other astronomers of his observations . Herschel attributed the phenomena to erupting volcanoes and perceived the luminosity of the brightest of the three as greater than the brightness of a comet that had been discovered on April 10 . His observations were made while an aurora borealis ( northern lights ) rippled above Padua , Italy . Aurora activity that far south from the Arctic Circle was very rare . Padua 's display and Herschel 's observations had happened a few days before the number of sunspots had peaked in May 1787 . 
 In 1866 , the experienced lunar observer and mapmaker J. F. Julius Schmidt claimed that the Linné crater had changed its appearance . Based on drawings made earlier by J. H. Schröter , as well as personal observations and drawings made between 1841 and 1843 , he stated that the crater " at the time of oblique illumination cannot at all be seen " ( his emphasis ) , whereas at high illumination , it was visible as a bright spot . Based on repeat observations , he further stated that " Linné can never be seen under any illumination as a crater of the normal type " and that " a local change has taken place " . Today , Linné is visible as a normal young impact crater with a diameter of about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) . 
 On November 2 , 1958 , the Russian astronomer Nikolai A. <unk> observed an apparent half @-@ hour " eruption " that took place on the central peak of Alphonsus crater using a 48 @-@ inch ( 122 @-@ cm ) reflector telescope equipped with a spectrometer . During this time , the obtained spectra showed evidence for bright gaseous emission bands due to the molecules C2 and C3 . While exposing his second spectrogram , he noticed " a marked increase in the brightness of the central region and an unusual white colour . " Then , " all of a sudden the brightness started to decrease " and the resulting spectrum was normal . 
 On October 29 , 1963 , two Aeronautical Chart and Information Center cartographers , James Clarke Greenacre and Edward M. Barr , at the Lowell Observatory , Flagstaff , Arizona , manually recorded very bright red , orange , and pink colour phenomena on the southwest side of Cobra Head ; a hill southeast of the lunar valley Vallis <unk> ; and the southwest interior rim of the Aristarchus crater . This event sparked a major change in attitude towards TLP reports . According to Willy Ley : " The first reaction in professional circles was , naturally , surprise , and hard on the heels of the surprise there followed an apologetic attitude , the apologies being directed at a long @-@ dead great astronomer , Sir William Herschel . " A notation by Winifred <unk> Cameron states ( 1978 , Event Serial No. 778 ) : " This and their November observations started the modern interest and observing the Moon . " The credibility of their findings stemmed from Greenacre 's exemplary reputation as an impeccable cartographer , rather than from any photographic evidence . 
 On the night of November 1 – 2 , 1963 , a few days after Greenacre 's event , at the Observatoire du Pic @-@ du @-@ Midi in the French Pyrenees , Zdeněk <unk> and Thomas Rackham made the first photographs of a " wide area lunar luminescence " . His article in Scientific American transformed it into one of the most widely publicized TLP events . <unk> , like others , had argued that Solar Energetic Particles could be the cause of such a phenomenon . 
 During the Apollo 11 mission in 1969 , Houston radioed to Apollo 11 : " We 've got an observation you can make if you have some time up there . There 's been some lunar transient events reported in the vicinity of Aristarchus . " Astronomers in Bochum , West Germany , had observed a bright glow on the lunar surface — the same sort of eerie luminescence that has intrigued Moon watchers for centuries . The report was passed on to Houston and thence to the astronauts . Almost immediately , Michael Collins reported back : " Hey , Houston , I 'm looking north up toward Aristarchus now , and there 's an area that is considerably more illuminated than the surrounding area . It seems to have a slight amount of fluorescence . " 
 In 1992 , Audouin <unk> of the Observatoire de Paris reported anomalous features on the floor of Langrenus crater using a one @-@ meter ( 3 @.@ 2 @-@ foot ) telescope . While observations on the night of December 29 , 1992 , were normal , unusually high albedo and polarization features were recorded the following night that did not change in appearance over the six minutes of data collection . Observations three days later showed a similar , but smaller , anomaly in the same vicinity . While the viewing conditions for this region were close to specular , it was argued that the amplitude of the observations were not consistent with a specular reflection of sunlight . The favored hypothesis was that this was the consequence of light scattering from clouds of airborne particles resulting from a release of gas . The fractured floor of this crater was cited as a possible source of the gas . 
 = = Explanations = = 
 Explanations for the transient lunar phenomena fall in four classes : outgassing , impact events , electrostatic phenomena , and unfavorable observation conditions . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Some TLPs may be caused by gas escaping from underground cavities . These gaseous events are purported to display a distinctive reddish hue , while others have appeared as white clouds or an indistinct haze . The majority of TLPs appear to be associated with floor @-@ fractured craters , the edges of lunar maria , or in other locations linked by geologists with volcanic activity . However , these are some of the most common targets when viewing the Moon , and this correlation could be an observational bias . 
 In support of the outgassing hypothesis , data from the Lunar Prospector alpha particle spectrometer indicate the recent outgassing of radon to the surface . In particular , results show that radon gas was emanating from the vicinity of the craters Aristarchus and Kepler during the time of this two @-@ year mission . These observations could be explained by the slow and visually imperceptible diffusion of gas to the surface , or by discrete explosive events . In support of explosive outgassing , it has been suggested that a roughly 3 <unk> ( 1 @.@ 9 <unk> ) diameter region of the lunar surface was " recently " modified by a gas release event . The age of this feature is believed to be about 1 million years old , suggesting that such large phenomena occur only infrequently . 
 = = = Impact events = = = 
 Impact events are continually occurring on the lunar surface . The most common events are those associated with micrometeorites , as might be encountered during meteor showers . Impact flashes from such events have been detected from multiple and simultaneous Earth @-@ based observations . Tables of impacts recorded by video cameras exist for years since 2005 many of which are associated with meteor showers . Furthermore , impact clouds were detected following the crash of ESA 's SMART @-@ 1 spacecraft , India 's Moon Impact Probe and NASA 's LCROSS . Impact events leave a visible scar on the surface , and these could be detected by analyzing before and after photos of sufficiently high resolution . No impact craters formed between the Clementine ( global resolution 100 metre , selected areas 7 @-@ 20 metre ) and SMART @-@ 1 ( resolution 50 metre ) missions have been identified . 
 = = = Electrostatic phenomena = = = 
 It has been suggested that effects related to either electrostatic charging or discharging might be able to account for some of the transient lunar phenomena . One possibility is that electrodynamic effects related to the fracturing of near @-@ surface materials could charge any gases that might be present , such as implanted solar wind or radiogenic daughter products . If this were to occur at the surface , the subsequent discharge from this gas might be able to give rise to phenomena visible from Earth . Alternatively , it has been proposed that the triboelectric charging of particles within a gas @-@ borne dust cloud could give rise to electrostatic discharges visible from Earth . Finally , electrostatic levitation of dust near the terminator could potentially give rise to some form of phenomenon visible from Earth . 
 = = = Unfavourable observation conditions = = = 
 It is possible that many transient phenomena might not be associated with the Moon itself but could be a result of unfavourable observing conditions or phenomena associated with the Earth . For instance , some reported transient phenomena are for objects near the resolution of the employed telescopes . The Earth 's atmosphere can give rise to significant temporal distortions that could be confused with actual lunar phenomena ( an effect known as astronomical seeing ) . Other non @-@ lunar explanations include the viewing of Earth @-@ orbiting satellites and meteors or observational error . 
 = = Debated status of TLPs = = 
 The most significant problem that faces reports of transient lunar phenomena is that the vast majority of these were made either by a single observer or at a single location on Earth ( or both ) . The multitude of reports for transient phenomena occurring at the same place on the Moon could be used as evidence supporting their existence . However , in the absence of eyewitness reports from multiple observers at multiple locations on Earth for the same event , these must be regarded with caution . As discussed above , an equally plausible hypothesis for some of these events is that they are caused by the terrestrial atmosphere . If an event were to be observed at two different places on Earth at the same time , this could be used as evidence against an atmospheric origin . 
 One attempt to overcome the above problems with transient phenomena reports was made during the Clementine mission by a network of amateur astronomers . Several events were reported , of which four of these were photographed both beforehand and afterward by the spacecraft . However , careful analysis of these images shows no discernible differences at these sites . This does not necessarily imply that these reports were a result of observational error , as it is possible that outgassing events on the lunar surface might not leave a visible marker , but neither is it encouraging for the hypothesis that these were authentic lunar phenomena . 
 Observations are currently being coordinated by the Association of Lunar and Planetary Observers and the British Astronomical Association to re @-@ observe sites where transient lunar phenomena were reported in the past . By documenting the appearance of these features under the same illumination and libration conditions , it is possible to judge whether some reports were simply due to a misinterpretation of what the observer regarded as an abnormality . Furthermore , with digital images , it is possible to simulate atmospheric spectral dispersion , astronomical seeing blur and light scattering by our atmosphere to determine if these phenomena could explain some of the original TLP reports . 
 = Chief Keef = 
 Keith Cozart ( born August 15 , 1995 ) , better known by his stage name Chief Keef , is an American rapper and record producer from Chicago , Illinois . During his teenage years and while under house arrest , Keef 's music videos were met with acclaim from local high school students . His increasing popularity led to him being the subject of a brief bidding war among labels . Ultimately , Keef signed a major record deal with Interscope Records and later signed with 1017 Brick Squad . Keef also became the CEO of his own record label , Glory Boyz Entertainment , which later developed into Glo Gang . His debut album Finally Rich was released on December 18 , 2012 . 
 Since becoming famous , Keef has continued to experience ongoing legal issues . Despite being dropped from Interscope in late 2014 , Keef continued self @-@ releasing mixtapes through his Glo Gang label . Although Keef had originally planned Bang 3 to be released as his second album , a then @-@ track from the album , " Nobody " , developed into its own project . Keef released Nobody as a full @-@ length album in December 2014 , while continuing to delay the often @-@ pushed back Bang 3 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life ( 1995 – 2010 ) = = = 
 Chief Keef was born Keith Cozart in Chicago , Illinois when his mother was 16 , and is named after his deceased uncle . He grew up in the Englewood neighborhood on the city 's South Side . Keef is estranged from his biological father ; when he was a minor , Keef 's legal guardian was his grandmother , whom he lived with during his residence in Chicago . He began rapping at a very young age , regularly listed as 5 , using his mother 's karaoke machine and blank tapes to record his music . During his childhood , Keef attended Dulles Elementary School and the Banner School , a therapeutic day school . Keef dropped out of <unk> High School at age 15 . 
 = = = Early years , Finally Rich , and subsequent mixtapes ( 2011 – 13 ) = = = 
 In 2011 , Keef first earned local attention from Chicago 's South Side community with his mixtapes , The Glory Road and Bang . In December , Keef fired gunshots from a Pontiac Grand Prix in Chicago 's Washington Park neighborhood . Police showed up at the scene and the incident resulted in Keef being arrested and charged with unlawful use of a weapon . Keef was consequently placed under house arrest at his grandmother 's house for 30 days , followed by another 30 days of home confinement . It has been noted that by the time this incident occurred , Keef had already achieved local South Side popularity , and that much of his early fan base consisted of high school students in the area . While under house arrest , Keef posted several videos to his YouTube account . These videos were at the forefront of Chicago 's hip hop subgenre , drill . The attention he received increased during the short time between the release of his mixtapes , Bang and Back From the Dead , and music videos , including " Bang " , " <unk> " and " I Don 't Like " . Once his house arrest ended , <unk> released a video of a child hysterically celebrating Keef 's release from house arrest , affording Keef further <unk> . Early in his music career , Keef 's song " I Don 't Like " became a local hit in Chicago , which was described by a local party promoter , as " the perfect Chicago song because ' niggas just hate everything out here . ' " It also caught fellow Chicago rapper Kanye West 's attention , and West created a remix of the song with rappers Pusha T , Jadakiss and Big Sean . In response to these events , David Drake of Spin writes that in 2012 , Keef " suddenly shot up out of obscurity . " 
 In the summer of 2012 , Keef was the subject of a bidding war with many labels to sign him , including Young Jeezy 's CTE World . While 2013 proved to be a relatively quiet year , in terms of his music output , Keef began the year by signing with Interscope Records , as a separate deal promised his own label imprint , Glory Boyz Entertainment ( GBE ) . The deal was worth $ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 over a three album layout , as well as an additional $ 440 @,@ 000 in advance , to establish GBE . The deal also set up rights for Interscope to pull out of the contract in the case that Keef 's debut album failed to sell 250 @,@ 000 copies by December 2013 . Chief Keef 's debut studio album Finally Rich , was released on December 18 , 2012 . Featured guests on the album included rappers 50 Cent , Wiz Khalifa , Young Jeezy , Rick Ross and his fellow Glory Boyz member Lil Reese . 
 On March 26 , 2013 , it was announced that Keef would be a part of XXL Magazine 's 2013 Freshman Class . On May 8 , 2013 , Gucci Mane announced via Twitter that Chief Keef was the newest member of 1017 Brick Squad Records . 
 Keef was featured on " Hold My Liquor " , the fifth track off Kanye West 's album , Yeezus , released on June 18 , 2013 . Keef 's contributions to the track were praised by musician Lou Reed , with Reed stating , " ' Hold My Liquor ' is just heartbreaking , and particularly coming from where it 's coming from – listen to that incredibly poignant hook from a tough guy like Chief Keef , wow . " 
 On his 18th birthday , August 15 , 2013 , Chief Keef celebrated by releasing the mixtape Bang , Pt . 2 . Bang , Pt . 2 was highly anticipated as the first project following his debut album , but received a mixed to negative critical response . On October 12 , 2013 a further mixtape , Almighty Sosa was released . Like Bang , Pt . 2 , Almighty So also received mixed to negative critical responses . Following his October 2013 jail term ( see § Legal issues ) , he began working on his second studio album and a biopic . 
 = = = Bang 3 , Nobody , and The Cozart ( 2014 – 2016 ) = = = 
 Keef began experimenting with the production of his music in 2014 , which Meaghan Garvey of The Fader noted as being fitting for Keef , as the rapper has " always been more concerned with vibe than meaning , and production is his most efficient tool to create a mood without getting bogged down by pesky syntax . " In January , Keef announced working on a new mixtape entitled Bang 3 . In February , Keef revealed the cover art to his upcoming mixtape Back From The Dead 2 , which served as the sequel to his critically acclaimed mixtape , Back From The Dead . During the month , Keef stated that his former lean addiction and bad mixing contributed to the lack of quality music on his two mixtape projects Bang Pt . 2 and Almighty So and that he was also disappointed in both projects . Later in the month , Keef announced an EP before his second studio album Bang 3 , entitled Bang 4 , as a preview . The following day , Fredo Santana announced that he and Keef were going to release a collaboration album . In March , Keef released the first official single from Bang 3 entitled " Fuck Rehab " featuring his fellow Glo Gang artist and cousin Mario " Blood Money " Hess , which marked Hess 's final appearance on a song before his death on April 9 , 2014 . On March 14 , Keef released the official music video for " Fuck Rehab " . Although Interscope executive Larry Jackson announced that Bang 3 would be released on June 10 , it was again delayed . 
 In October 2014 , Keef was dropped by Interscope Records , but confirmed via Twitter that every project he had planned , including the release of the long @-@ awaited Bang 3 would still be released , as he planned . Young Chop criticized Interscope 's decision to drop Keef . Despite being set for a Christmas 2014 release , Bang 3 did not materialize . Keef 's mixtapes , Mansion Musick , which was set for a November 28 release , and <unk> Breakers , which was set to release on February 14 , 2015 , were also noted to not release as scheduled . However , Keef was successful in releasing Big Gucci Sosa , a 12 @-@ track collaborative mixtape , with Gucci Mane , as well as Back From the Dead 2 , which was made available for digital download from iTunes . Keef experimented with the production of his own tracks , self @-@ producing 16 of the 20 songs on the mixtape . David Drake of Pitchfork Media , stated , " For his first steps into rapper @-@ producer territory , he shows promise — though it 's tough to imagine most of these beats working outside the context of a Chief Keef album , as they are primed to frame his vocals . " Rolling Stone ranked the mixtape 25th on its list of the 40 best rap albums of 2014 , with the publication commenting , " The bleak world from which he came still shapes his sound ; it 's a bleak and lonely record , with few guests and a darkly psychedelic shape formed by drugs and likely PTSD . Yet he finds a gleeful humanity inside the world 's rotten core , with bluntly potent , economical rapping that gets strong mileage per word . " In November , Keef announced Nobody , a " Glo Producer album " that featured guest vocals from Kanye West and Tadoe . The album was set to be released on December 2 , but was ultimately released on December 16 . The album 's title track was noted for being one of Keef 's more emotionally driven outputs , with Chris Coplan of Consequence of Sound writing , " the track itself feels like the apex of a night spent binge @-@ drinking . " Additionally , the album was awarded a 7 @.@ 0 / 10 score by Pitchfork Media 's Meaghan Garvey . 
 On February 18 , 2015 , Keef released Sorry 4 the Weight , a 20 @-@ track mixtape . Elliott Pearson of The Alibi commented " Sorry 4 the Weight is another consistent chapter in the rapper ’ s singular Midwestern gothic repertoire , and if ' What Up ' is any indication , he ’ s made serious progress as a beat @-@ maker too . " The mixtape was largely a solo effort , featuring only Andy Milonakis and Glo Gang labelmate , Benji Glo . In 2015 , Keef 's track " <unk> " was noted for slowly building momentum since its October 2014 release . On April 24 , 2015 , Keef announced his next album , titled The Cozart , adding that it would be released soon . 
 In May 2015 , Keef signed with FilmOn Music , a division of media tycoon Alki David . 
 On July 11 , 2015 , Marvin Carr , better known by his stage name , Capo , a longtime member of Keef 's Glo Gang label , was shot and killed in a drive @-@ by shooting in Chicago . Upon killing Capo , the drivers of the vehicle reportedly struck a stroller with 13 @-@ month @-@ old <unk> Harris in it , killing the baby instantly . Keef later announced via Twitter that he would be holding a free benefit concert to tribute Capo , as well as encourage concertgoers to donate to Harris ' family . Additionally , Keef announced the formation of the Stop the Violence Now Foundation , in an attempt to decrease crime in Chicago . Due to outstanding warrants in Illinois , Keef was scheduled to attend the concert via hologram from a sound stage in Beverly Hills . The concert , organized by <unk> and FilmOn Music originally intended to be held in Chicago 's <unk> Theater , faced a series of delays after Chicago mayor Rahm Emanuel 's office claimed Keef was " an unacceptable role model " and that his music promoted violence . Keef 's representatives then worked out an arrangement with promoters of the Craze Fest event , located in Hammond , Indiana , in an attempt to hold the concert there . Keef 's hologram was able to plea for peace in Chicago , stating , " Stop the violence , stop nonsense , stop the killing . Let the kids grow up , " before performing " I Don 't Like " . Fearing that the concert was a threat to public safety , Hammond mayor Thomas McDermott , Jr. successfully organized for the city 's police to shut down the generators powering Keef 's hologram . McDermott was quoted saying , " I know nothing about Chief Keef . All I ’ d heard was he has a lot of songs about gangs and shooting people — a history that ’ s anti @-@ cop , pro @-@ gang and pro @-@ drug use . He ’ s been basically outlawed in Chicago , and we ’ re not going to let you circumvent Mayor Emanuel by going next door . " Chicago Tribune columnist Eric Zorn criticized Emmanuel and Hammond for their decisions , claiming they infringed upon Keef 's First Amendment rights . 
 = = = Retirement ( 2016 @-@ present ) = = = 
 In March 2016 , Keef tweeted that he was retiring from rapping . He confirmed his retirement in response to a tweet asking if it were true . The announcement came as Keef 's recorded output was slowing down . 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 = = = Glo Gang = = = 
 As part of his signing with Interscope Records , Keef 's label imprint , Glory Boyz Entertainment ( GBE ) , was established . Keef , along with his manager , <unk> Manuel , each owned 40 % shares of GBE . Keef 's cousin and fellow rapper , Fredo Santana , Keef 's uncle Alonzo Carter , and Anthony H. Dade , owned the remaining 20 % of GBE . Various associates of Keef 's would be signed with the label , such as rappers Lil Reese , Fredo Santana and producer Young Chop . The label had already been active since 2011 , however only released mixtapes and was not a full on record company . After releasing Keef 's Finally Rich in December 2012 , the label was set to release an album by Lil Reese in the coming months , along with various mixtapes . However , on January 3 , 2014 , Keef said that Glory Boyz Entertainment was " no more , " and was starting a new record label named Glo Gang . Prior to his death , Blood Money revealed in an interview the members of Glo Gang to be Keef , Tray Savage , <unk> , Capo , Tadoe , Justo , and himself . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 At the age of 16 , Keef had his first child , a daughter , born <unk> Kash Cozart and nicknamed Kay Kay . Keef was served with a request for child support by the child 's mother . In November 2013 , DNA documents revealed that Keef had fathered a 10 month old daughter , and was subsequently ordered to begin paying child support . In September 2014 , Keef announced the birth of his third child , and his first son , whom he named <unk> <unk> Cozart . In May 2015 , Keef was sued by another woman , claiming that Keef is the father of her child . Due to never originally responding to the legal documents , Keef was ordered to court , with a warrant for his arrest placed as the consequence for his absence in court . Despite these issues , LA Weekly reported that , at least on Instagram , Keef , " appears to take fatherhood seriously . " In August 2015 , Keef caused controversy after naming his newborn son Sno " FilmOn Dot Com , " inspired by his current record label , FilmOn Music , to promote his album Bang 3 . Nevertheless , following a paternity dispute over the child , FilmOn Music retracted the name rights until the paternity is settled . 
 Two of Keef 's cousins , Fredo Santana and Tadoe , were signed to his Glory Boyz Entertainment label . Keef 's stepbrother was shot dead on January 2 , 2013 . Another of Keef 's cousin , Mario Hess , also known as Big Glo , who performed under the stage name Blood Money , was shot and killed in Chicago 's Englewood neighborhood on April 9 , 2014 . Hess had been signed to Interscope Records just two weeks prior to his killing . In an interview with Billboard , Keef explains how Big Glo 's death influences his life , " When that happened that was the biggest lesson . It told me ' You gotta grow up . ' " 
 After being evicted from his Highland Park home , Keef relocated to Los Angeles . In an interview with Noisey 's Rebecca Haithcoat , Keef told Haithcoat his favorite part about Los Angeles is , " the quiet . " After moving to Los Angeles , Keef began indulging in his new @-@ found hobby of art collecting , once he discovered the paintings of art teacher Bill da Butcher , while in rehab . Once acquainted , da Butcher began working on paintings personally meant for Keef . Keef believed that his move to Los Angeles benefited him ; in an interview with Billboard , Keef stated " I got away from all the unnecessary trouble . It 's better out here [ in L.A. ] than in Chicago , because I got in so much trouble . I like living out here . I think it improved me . It changed me , and [ inspired ] me to go somewhere bigger . " 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 On January 27 , 2011 , Keef was apprehended on charges of heroin manufacture and distribution . As a juvenile offender , <unk> was determined " delinquent " , rather than guilty of his charges , and served time on house arrest . 
 In December 2011 , Keef left his grandmother 's home holding a coat over his hands in front of his waistband . A policeman stopped to question the rapper , who dropped the coat , flashed a handgun and ran away . Officers chased then 16 @-@ year @-@ old Keef , who turned around several times and pointed the gun at them . The policemen " discharged their weapons , " but missed . They caught him a half @-@ block later and recovered the pistol , which was loaded . Keef was charged with three counts of aggravated assault with a firearm on a police officer and aggravated unlawful use of a weapon . He was also given a misdemeanor charge for resisting arrest . He was held in the Cook County Juvenile Detention Center until a judge sentenced him to home confinement at his grandmother ’ s house . 
 On September 5 , 2012 , Chicago Police stated that Keef was being investigated for a possible connection in the shooting death of fellow rapper and Englewood resident , Joseph Coleman , who performed under the stage name " Lil JoJo " . This came after Keef had mocked his death on Twitter , which he later claimed was the result of his account being hacked . Coleman 's mother has openly claimed that Chief Keef paid to have her son killed . 
 On October 17 , 2012 , Cook County prosecutors asked a judge to remand Keef to juvenile detention for alleged parole violations stemming from a video interview he held at a shooting range which included him discharging a firearm . A hearing was set for November 20 , 2012 , which was subsequently pushed back January 28 , 2013 , and then moved up to January 15 . The website that posted it , Pitchfork Media , was ordered by the court to provide the interview 's footage after they removed it three months prior . On December 31 , 2012 , Keef was issued a judicial summons for a new and unrelated alleged parole violation . Prosecutors claimed that he failed to notify his juvenile parole officer about a change of address . A hearing was set for January 2 , 2013 . Although prosecutors requested that he be jailed , Cook County judge Carl Anthony Walker allowed him to remain free , citing that he had not been presented " any credible evidence . " 
 On January 15 , 2013 , Keef was taken into custody after a juvenile court judge ruled that the aforementioned gun range interview video constituted a probation violation . Two days later , Keef was sentenced to two months in a juvenile detention facility and was additionally made a ward of the state . He completed serving the sentence on March 14 , 2013 . 
 On January 17 , 2013 , Keef was sued by Washington , D.C.-based promotion company Team Major for $ 75 @,@ 000 for a missed show . According to the firm , Keef was supposed to perform at the <unk> Arena in London on December 29 , 2012 but never showed . Neither Keef nor his label has given any kind of response as to why he missed the date . He ignored the lawsuit and the court sided with Team Major , ordering Keef to pay $ 230 @,@ 019 to Team Major by default . 
 On May 20 , 2013 , he was arrested in an upscale hotel in DeKalb County , Georgia for allegedly smoking marijuana in public and for disorderly conduct . He was released later in the day . Eight days later , Keef was arrested for driving 110 mph in a 55 mph zone in his hometown Chicago , and also for driving with an unlawful amount of passengers . He was later released on a bond . He returned to court on June 17 , and pleaded guilty to speeding . He was ordered to pay a $ 531 fine , serve 18 months of probation , complete 60 hours of community service and undergo random drug tests . 
 On October 15 , 2013 , Keef returned to jail for a 20 @-@ day sentence due to a probation violation after testing positive for marijuana . On October 24 , 2013 , Keef was released ten days early for good behavior . However , again on November 6 , 2013 , Keef was sent back to jail on another probation violation . Then following a stint in rehab , Keef was arrested on March 5 , 2014 in Highland Park , Illinois for DUI of marijuana , driving on a suspended license and cited for having no proof of insurance . 
 On February 4 , 2014 , Kim Productions filed suit against Keef to recover losses they allege they incurred after he failed to appear at a <unk> benefit concert in Cleveland , Ohio in June 2013 . The suit alleges that Kim Productions provided Keef with a $ 15 @,@ 000 deposit for the performance . Despite the advance , the lawsuit further alleges that as a result of Keef 's failure to appear , the concert had to be cancelled . 
 In June 2014 , Keef was evicted from his Highland Park home . Although Bal Bansal , the owner of the house , maintained Keef was a good tenant , and that his departure from the home was voluntary , police confirmed it was an eviction . 
 = = Image = = 
 Keef is often seen as a representation of the " <unk> " gangsta rap culture that is present in Chicago . Additionally , Chief Keef is often referred to as " Sosa " by himself , his peers , and the media . The nickname , " Sosa " is a reference to the drug dealer " Sosa " from Scarface the movie . LA Weekly reported that Keef 's Glo Gang entourage respects the rapper . One member of the Glo Gang , <unk> , stated , " We learned all that from Sosa , we be in the studio with him so much , " calling him , " a rhyming machine . A music genius . Black Justin Bieber , if you ask me . " The New York Times stated that Chief Keef , " symbolizes , " Chicago 's drill music scene , and is the " best known of the young generation of Chicago rappers . " In November 2012 , Lucy <unk> of The Guardian , described Keef as drill 's , " alpha male . " David Drake of Pitchfork Media writes , " Chief Keef is in rarefied air for street rap — a creative voice with an original , cohesive aesthetic , " adding , " to the grassroots , among a new generation of stars , he sits at street rap ’ s aesthetic center , not its margins . " 
 Keef has drawn comparisons to 50 Cent , as The New York Times writes , that like 50 Cent , Keef makes thuggery , " a major part of his early @-@ career persona . " Lupe Fiasco , who has been involved with a controversy with Keef , has been referred to as an " antagonist " to Keef 's more gangsta @-@ rap persona . The New York Times writes , " Lupe Fiasco is a stern and didactic teacher , but it ’ s arguable that Chief Keef ’ s music is far better at ringing warning bells . " Another rapper , Common , has praised Chief Keef 's contributions to rap , stating , " I think Chief Keef brought something that nobody else was doing and he brought it raw . He brought it real . With that , I have to respect that as an artist that he has come and brought that . " Other rappers , such as Rhymefest and Lupe Fiasco , however , have been critical of Chief ( see controversies section below ) . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 = = = = Hip hop feuds = = = = 
 In June 2012 , Chicago rapper Rhymefest authored a blog post critical of Keef 's image and message , describing the rapper as a " bomb " and a " spokesman for the Prison Industrial Complex " . The post was also critical of rappers Waka Flocka Flame and Rick Ross , citing similar reasons . Rhymefest reiterated these views in a subsequent interview with Salon . 
 In an August 2012 interview with Baltimore radio station <unk> Jams , Lupe Fiasco stated that Chief Keef " scares " him and went on to describe the other rapper as a " hoodlum " and representative of Chicago 's " skyrocketing " murder rate . A tweet from Keef 's account threatening Lupe Fiasco was posted on September 5 , but then Keef claimed that his account had been hacked and that the previous tweet was inauthentic . On September 13 , 2012 , Fiasco released a video interview in which he made amends to Keef . 
 In November 2014 , rap group Migos and Glo Gang member , Capo , were involved in a physical altercation in a Chicago restaurant . Later , Keef uploaded an image onto Instagram featuring the alleged stolen chain belonging to rapper <unk> of Migos . Though this incident escalated the already existing tension between members of Glo Gang and members of Migos , the feud between the two groups was later seemingly ended . 
 = = = = Instagram = = = = 
 On September 15 , 2012 , Keef uploaded an obscene photograph featuring the rapper receiving fellatio from a female fan onto the image sharing application Instagram . Keef shortly removed the image from his account . However , his account was subsequently banned for violating Instagram 's terms of service . Keef has since created another Instagram account , and has had his activities on the app mentioned by various outlets . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Albums : 
 Finally Rich ( 2012 ) 
 Bang 3 ( 2015 ) 
 = Earth @-@ grazing meteoroid of 13 October 1990 = 
 The Earth @-@ grazing meteoroid <unk> of 13 October 1990 was a meteoroid with an estimated mass of 44 kg that entered Earth 's atmosphere above Czechoslovakia and Poland and , after a few seconds , returned to space . Observations of such events are quite rare ; this was the second recorded using scientific astronomical instruments ( after the 1972 Great Daylight Fireball ) and the first recorded from two distant positions , which enabled the calculation of several of its orbital characteristics . The encounter with Earth significantly changed its orbit and , to a smaller extent , some of its physical properties ( mass and structure of its upper layer ) . 
 = = Observations = = 
 Visual observations were reported by three independent comet observers : Czech astronomers Petr <unk> , Pavel <unk> , and Lucie <unk> . According to their report , the event started at 03 : 27 : 16 ± 3 UT and the observed bright meteor ( fireball ) was moving from the south to the north . It left a track that was visible for 10 seconds . 
 Most data about the encounter was acquired using photographic observations by cameras of the European Fireball Network . It was the first event of this type recorded by cameras from two distant locations , at <unk> hora and <unk> ( both in what is now the Czech Republic ) , which enabled the calculation of the meteoroid 's orbital characteristics by geometrical methods . Both were equipped with all @-@ sky fisheye objectives . 
 The <unk> hora image was especially valuable . It recorded the fireball 's trajectory over approximately 110 ° , starting 51 ° above the southern horizon , passing the zenith just 1 ° westward and disappearing only 19 ° above the northern horizon ( thus crossing about 60 % of the sky ) . Its camera was also equipped with a rotating shutter that interrupted the exposure 12 @.@ 5 times per second and divided the captured track of the fireball , allowing the determination of its speed . Over the last 4 ° , the fireball 's angular velocity was lower than the resolution of the instrument . The <unk> image recorded the trajectory only for about 15 ° , beginning at 30 ° above the northwest horizon , and the pictured fireball was quite weak . Despite this , the data were sufficient for the calculations . 
 <unk> M. Kristensen also detected the fireball in <unk> , Denmark , using a pen recorder connected to a radio receiver for 78 seconds , at 03 : 27 : 24 ± 6 UT . 
 = = Encounter data = = 
 The meteoroid grazed Earth 's atmosphere quite gently ( in comparison to , for example , the 1972 Great Daylight Fireball above the United States and Canada ) . It became visible at a height of 103 @.@ 7 km north of Uherský Brod , Czechoslovakia , only approached Earth 's surface to 98 @.@ 67 km northeast of Wrocław , Poland , and disappeared from the sight of the cameras at a height of 100 @.@ 4 km north of Poznań , Poland . It would probably still have been visible until it reached a height of 110 km above the southern Baltic Sea . 
 The meteoroid 's absolute magnitude ( the apparent magnitude it would have at an altitude of 100 km at the observer 's zenith ) was approximately − 6 and did not vary significantly during the encounter . It travelled a distance of 409 km in 9 @.@ 8 seconds during the time it was observed . It was moving with a speed of 41 @.@ 74 km / s , which did not change during the flight . Jiří Borovička and Zdeněk <unk> from the <unk> Observatory in Czechoslovakia estimated that the deceleration caused by the friction of the atmosphere was only 1 @.@ 7 m / s2 near the fireball 's perigee ( closest approach to Earth ) , which meant that its velocity was reduced by only 0 @.@ 012 km / s . This corresponds well with computer simulations provided by D. W. Olson , R. L. <unk> and K. M. Watson at the Southwest Texas State University , who concluded that the meteoroid was practically not decelerated along its trajectory , with the exception of a very short time near perigee , when the deceleration was 1 m / s2 . 
 The software also calculated the fireball 's instantaneous apparent magnitude at the ground . The computation started and ended with heights of approximately 250 km , long before and after the cameras of the European Fireball Network could observe it . Its apparent magnitude started at a value of + 5 @.@ 7 and it became brighter quite quickly . The program gave an apparent magnitude of − 5 @.@ 7 when it was seen by one camera and − 6 @.@ 3 at perigee . The fireball subsequently dimmed , with an apparent magnitude of − 5 @.@ 4 when it was last seen by the cameras and a final calculated value of + 6 @.@ 0 at a height of 257 km . However , these values are not entirely certain , because the program worked with the simplified assumption that the luminous efficacy of the fireball did not change along the track . The starting apparent magnitude is not far from the naked eye visibility limits . For example , faint stars of the magnitude + 6 can can be observed only in dark rural areas approximately 150 km far from big cities . For comparison , this magnitude corresponds to the apparent magnitude of Uranus . At its brightest , it was several times as bright as the maximum brightness of Venus . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 The meteoroid was a type I fireball , i.e. an ordinary chondrite . When it entered Earth 's atmosphere its mass was about 44 kg , which was estimated on the basis of the measured values of its absolute magnitude and velocity . It lost approximately 350 g during the encounter . Computer simulations showed that it started losing mass approximately at the moment it became visible to the cameras of the European Fireball Network , at a height of 100 @.@ 6 km . It lost mass for 25 seconds , until it reached a height of 215 @.@ 7 km . Its surface melted and solidified again after leaving , which means its surface became a typical meteoritic fusion crust . 
 The meteoroid was not dangerous to the life on Earth . Even if it had headed towards lower parts of the atmosphere it would have heated so much that it would have exploded high above the ground and only some small particles ( meteorites ) eventually might have made it to Earth 's surface . 
 = = Orbit = = 
 Because the fireball was recorded by two cameras of the European Fireball Network , it was possible to calculate the trajectory of its flight through the atmosphere , and afterward also the characteristics of both its pre- and post @-@ encounter orbit in the Solar System . The calculations were published by Czech <unk> Pavel <unk> , Zdeněk <unk> , and Jiří Borovička from <unk> Observatory , who specialize in meteor observations . They proved that the encounter changed the meteoroid 's orbit significantly . For example , its aphelion ( the farthest it travels from the Sun ) and orbital period were lowered to almost half of their original values . 
 = = Similar events = = 
 Although entries of meteoroids into Earth 's atmosphere are very common , recording a similar flight through the upper layers of the atmosphere is quite rare . Probably the first one reliably verified happened on 20 July 1860 above the American state of New York . The Czechoslovak – Polish fireball is sometimes compared to the 1972 Great Daylight Fireball above Utah , the United States , and Alberta , Canada , which is the first scientifically observed and studied event of this type . The 1972 fireball was more than a thousand times more massive and it got 40 km closer to Earth 's surface . Observational data from both of them helped to develop a method for computing the grazing trajectories of such bodies , which was later used when calculating the trajectory of another Earth @-@ grazing meteoroid , observed on 29 March 2006 above Japan . 
 = 2011 White House shooting = 
 The 2011 White House shooting occurred on November 11 , 2011 , when Oscar Ramiro Ortega @-@ Hernandez , an unemployed 21 @-@ year @-@ old man who was obsessed with U.S. President Barack Obama , fired a semi @-@ automatic rifle at the White House , the official residence of the U.S. Presidency in Washington , D.C. At least seven bullets hit the second floor . Neither the president nor First Lady Michelle Obama were home at the time , although their younger daughter , Sasha , and the first lady 's mother , Marian Shields Robinson , were . No one was injured . It took four days for the Secret Service to realize that bullets had struck the White House . Michelle Obama learned of the shooting from an usher , then summoned Mark J. Sullivan , director of the Secret Service , to find out why the first family had not been informed . 
 In September 2013 , Ortega @-@ Hernandez pleaded guilty to one count of property destruction and one count of discharging a firearm during a crime of violence , thereby avoiding the charge of attempting to assassinate the President . In March 2014 , he was sentenced to 25 years ' imprisonment . In September 2014 , The Washington Post published an investigative report detailing errors that the Secret Service made on the night of the shooting that led to the crime going undiscovered . A House of Representatives hearing followed and Julia Pierson , director of the Secret Service , resigned the following week . It was the first shooting at the White House since Francisco Martin Duran 's attempted assassination of President Bill Clinton in 1994 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Oscar Ramiro Ortega @-@ Hernandez , an unemployed 21 @-@ year @-@ old man , left his home in Idaho Falls , Idaho on October 23 , three weeks prior to the shooting . He told his friends and family that he was going to Utah for a business trip ; his family reported him missing on October 31 after he failed to return . According to friends , Ortega @-@ Hernandez had become increasingly paranoid before leaving , saying that the United States government was controlling citizens and that President Barack Obama " had to be stopped " . The mother of Ortega @-@ Hernandez 's former fiancée stated that he had been well @-@ mannered for the four years she had known him , but had recently started making bizarre statements . On July 8 , he had told an acquaintance that Obama was planning to put GPS tracking devices into children and that the world would end in 2012 . In September , he made a video for Oprah Winfrey , explaining that he was Jesus and asking to appear on her television show . On his 21st birthday in October , he made a 45 @-@ minute speech on various topics including a warning of the dangers of secret societies . Ortega @-@ Hernandez had a 2 @-@ year @-@ old son with his former fiancée ; it is unknown when or why they separated . 
 Ortega @-@ Hernandez arrived in Washington on November 9 with 180 rounds of ammunition and a Romanian @-@ made <unk> semiautomatic rifle that he had purchased from a gun shop in Idaho . On the morning of the shooting , he was reported for suspicious behavior in a local park . Police questioned him , but he refused to let police search his car . After photographing him , police officers let him go as they had no cause to make an arrest . 
 = = Shooting and response = = 
 On November 11 , Ortega @-@ Hernandez parked his vehicle on Constitution Avenue , 750 yards ( 690 m ) directly south of the White House . He aimed his semi @-@ automatic rifle from the car 's passenger seat and fired . Gunfire was reported around 9 pm . One bullet hit an antique window on the White House 's second floor near the first family 's formal living room ; however , it did not penetrate the bulletproof glass on the inside . One bullet lodged in a window frame , and others ricocheted off the roof , causing small pieces of wood and concrete to fall to the ground . At least seven bullets struck the second floor , causing $ 97 @,@ 000 worth of damage . A woman in a taxi nearby witnessed the shooting and wrote on Twitter , " Driver in front of my cab <unk> and fired 5 gun shots at the White House . It took the police a while to respond . " President Obama , his wife Michelle , and their oldest daughter Malia were not home at the time of the shooting , although their younger daughter Sasha and Michelle 's mother Marian Shields Robinson were . When the shooting occurred , Malia was coming home and was expected to arrive at any moment . 
 Secret Service agents initially rushed to respond . Snipers scanned the South Lawn , looking for an assailant . A supervisor then decided that the noises were backfires from a nearby construction site and told the agents , " No shots have been fired ... stand down " , to the surprise of several officers . According to Carol D. Leonnig , agents who thought the building had been fired upon " were largely ignored " , with one reporting she had been afraid to doubt her superior 's assertion . By the end of the night , it was confirmed that a shooting had occurred , although the Secret Service believed that gunfire was not aimed at the White House , but rather was the result of a gang fight nearby . A Secret Service dispatcher called emergency services and gave incorrect descriptions of both vehicles and suspects ; police were told to look for two black men on Rock Creek Parkway . It took four days for the Secret Service to realize that bullets had struck the White House . The evidence was only noticed when a housekeeper discovered broken glass and pieces of cement on the Truman Balcony around midday on November 15 . 
 President Obama was visiting Australia and Indonesia when the discovery was made . Michelle Obama had returned to the White House on the morning of November 15 , going to sleep shortly after arriving . An usher went to check on her later that day and began talking about the shooting , assuming she already knew about the incident . According to Leonnig , the first lady was " furious " , wondering why the director of the Secret Service , Mark J. Sullivan , who had accompanied her on her flight back to Washington , had not told her about it . Leonnig also stated that Sullivan was subsequently summoned to a meeting with the first lady , during which she raised her voice so loudly she could be heard through the closed door . Sullivan disputes this report , though he declined to give any details regarding the conversation . A detailed inspection of the White House for evidence or damage and interviews with key witnesses began later that afternoon . Leonnig also stated that president Obama was angered over the flawed response and the failure to notify the first lady . According to one presidential aide , " the shit really hit the fan " when Obama returned from his travels five days later . 
 Three years later , in September 2014 , Carol D. Leonnig from the The Washington Post released an investigative report describing the details of the Secret Service 's " bungled " response following the shooting . The Secret Service responded to the criticism , stating that the shots were fired from a quarter @-@ mile away , resulting in echoes obfuscating their origin , and that initial witness accounts stated that the shots were fired at another vehicle from a black vehicle . An agent who asked to remain anonymous stated , " I 'm not saying this was our shining moment , but we never stopped looking for [ the gunman ] . " A former agent stated that the Secret Service needed to change its ways in order to prevent " complacency " and stop future attacks . As a direct result of the attack , additional security measures , such as personnel changes and physical improvements including additional surveillance cameras , were implemented at the White House . It was the first shooting at the White House since Francisco Martin Duran 's fired shots at President Bill Clinton from the fence overlooking the north lawn on October 29 , 1994 . 
 A week after The Washington Post released their report , Julia Pierson , who took over as director of the Secret Service from Sullivan in March 2013 , testified at a United States House of Representatives hearing regarding security breaches at the White House . Pierson was criticised by Committee Chairman Darrell Issa regarding several security breaches . Issa stated , " The fact is , the system broke down ... when Oscar Ortega @-@ Hernandez successfully shot at the White House on November 2011 . " Upon hearing that an agent was unwilling to doubt her superior 's assertion , Representative Elijah Cummings stated to Pierson that it was " very disturbing to know that Secret Service agents in the most protective agency in the world feel more comfortable ... coming to members of this committee and telling things than coming to you and members in the agency . " Pierson acknowledged that the incident was " extremely " troubling . As a result of the 2011 shooting and other controversies , Pierson resigned from her position on October 1 , 2014 . 
 = = Arrest and trial = = 
 Leonnig described Ortega @-@ Hernandez 's arrest as " sheer luck " . He crashed a black 1998 Honda Accord , registered in his name , several blocks from the White House shortly after the shooting . He abandoned his vehicle with his firearm still inside , along with three loaded magazines , nine spent shell casings , and brass knuckles . On November 13 , the United States Park Police obtained a warrant for Ortega @-@ Hernandez 's arrest based on weapons charges regarding his abandoned rifle , although he was still not suspected of shooting at the White House . Around the same time , Secret Service agents learned from his friends and family that he was obsessed with President Obama , and the agents began canvassing Washington in an attempt to find him . When the damage to the White House was discovered on November 15 , Ortega @-@ Hernandez became the prime suspect for the shooting . On November 16 , he was arrested in a hotel in Indiana , Pennsylvania , after an employee there recognized him and contacted police . 
 Federal prosecutors launched an investigation to determine if he had acted out of hatred for Obama . Writings by Ortega @-@ Hernandez and testimonies from those who knew him revealed that he believed that he was Jesus , and that President Obama was the Antichrist and the Devil . Ortega @-@ Hernandez was not found to be affiliated with any extremist groups . In September 2013 , Ortega @-@ Hernandez pleaded guilty to two of the nineteen charges against him : one count of destruction of property and one count of discharging a firearm during a crime of violence . As part of his plea bargain , the remaining charges were dropped , including the charge of attempting to assassinate the President , which carried a maximum penalty of life imprisonment . On March 31 , 2014 , Ortega @-@ Hernandez was sentenced to 25 years imprisonment by Judge Rosemary M. Collyer . His lawyers had asked for a 10 @-@ year sentence , stating Ortega @-@ Hernandez was suffering from depression and stress . Prosecutors had asked for the maximum sentence of 27 ½ years . He is serving his sentence at United States Penitentiary , Beaumont , with a release date of October 24 , 2033 . 
 = London Bridge Is Falling Down = 
 " London Bridge Is Falling Down " ( also known as " My Fair Lady " or " London Bridge " ) is a traditional English nursery rhyme and singing game , which is found in different versions all over the world . It deals with the depredations of London Bridge and attempts , realistic or fanciful , to repair it . It may date back to bridge rhymes and games of the late Middle Ages , but the earliest records of the rhyme in English are from the seventeenth century . The lyrics were first printed in close to their modern form in the mid @-@ eighteenth century and became popular , particularly in Britain and the United States in the nineteenth century . 
 The modern melody was first recorded in the late nineteenth century and the game resembles arch games of the Middle Ages , but seems to have taken its modern form in the late nineteenth century . It has a Roud Folk Song Index number of 502 . Several theories have been advanced to explain the meaning of the rhyme and the identity of the " fair lady " of the refrain . The rhyme is one of the most well known in the world and has been referenced in a variety of works of literature and popular culture . 
 = = Lyrics = = 
 There is considerable variation in the lyrics of the rhyme . The most frequently used first verse is : 
 In the version quoted by Iona and Peter Opie in 1951 the full lyrics were : 
 The rhyme is constructed of quatrains in trochaic tetrameter catalectic , ( each line made up of four metrical feet of two syllables , with the stress falling on the first syllable in a pair ; the last foot in the line missing the unstressed syllable ) , which is common in nursery rhymes . In its most common form it relies on a double repetition , rather than a rhyming scheme , which is a frequently employed device in children 's rhymes and stories . The Roud Folk Song Index , which catalogues folk songs and their variations by number , classifies the song as 502 . 
 = = Melody = = 
 A melody is recorded for " London Bridge " in an edition of John Playford 's The Dancing Master published in 1718 , but it differs from the modern tune and no lyrics were given . An issue of Blackwood 's Magazine in 1821 noted the rhyme as a being sung to the tune of " Nancy Dawson " , now better known as " Nuts in May " and the same tune was given in Richard Thomson 's Chronicles of London Bridge ( 1827 ) . 
 Another tune was recorded in Samuel Arnold 's Juvenile Amusements in 1797 . E. F. Rimbault 's Nursery Rhymes ( 1836 ) has the same first line , but then a different tune . The tune now associated with the rhyme was first recorded in 1879 in the US in A. H. <unk> 's Illustrated National Songs and Games . 
 = = The game = = 
 The rhyme is often used in a children 's singing game , which exists in a wide variety of forms , with additional verses . Most versions are similar to the actions used in the rhyme " Oranges and Lemons " . The most common is that two players hold hands and make an arch with their arms while the others pass through in single file . The " arch " is then lowered at the song 's end to " catch " a player . In the United States it is common for two teams of those that have been caught to engage in a tug of war . In England until the nineteenth century the song may have been accompanied by a circle dance , but arch games are known to have been common across late medieval Europe . 
 Five of nine versions published by Alice Gomme in 1894 included references to a prisoner who has stolen a watch and chain . This may be a late nineteenth century addition from another game called " Hark the Robbers " , or " Watch and Chain " . This rhyme is sung to the same tune and may be an offshoot of " London Bridge " or the remnant of a distinct game . In one version the first two verses have the lyrics : 
 = = Origins = = 
 Similar rhymes can be found across Europe , pre @-@ dating the records in England . These include " <unk> <unk> Op og Ned " from Denmark , " Die <unk> <unk> " from Germany , " pont <unk> " from sixteenth @-@ century France ; and " Le porte " , from fourteenth @-@ century Italy . It is possible that the rhyme was acquired from one of these sources and then adapted to fit the most famous bridge in England . 
 One of the earliest references to the rhyme in English is in the comedy The London <unk> , printed in 1657 , but probably written about 1636 , in which the dairy woman <unk> states that she had " danced the building of London @-@ Bridge " at the Whitsun Ales in her youth , although no words or actions are mentioned . Widespread familiarity with the rhyme is suggested by its use by Henry Carey in his satire <unk> <unk> ( 1725 ) , as : 
 The oldest extant version could be that recalled by a correspondent to the Gentleman 's Magazine in 1823 , which he claimed to have heard from a woman who was a child in the reign of Charles II ( r . 1660 – 85 ) and had the lyrics : 
 The subsequent verses followed this form , each repeating in the lines below in place of " London bridge is broken down " : 
 The earliest printed English version is in the oldest extant collection of nursery rhymes , Tommy Thumb 's Pretty Song Book , printed by John Newbery in London ( c . 1744 ) , with the following text : 
 A version from James Ritson 's Gammer <unk> 's Garland ( 1784 ) is similar but replaces the last verse with : 
 = = Meaning = = 
 The meaning of the rhyme is not certain . It may simply relate to the many difficulties experienced in bridging the River Thames , but a number of alternative theories have been put forward . 
 = = = Viking attack theory = = = 
 One theory of origin is that the rhyme relates to the supposed destruction of London Bridge by Olaf II of Norway in 1014 ( or 1009 ) . The nineteenth @-@ century translation of the Norse saga the Heimskringla , published by Samuel Laing in 1844 , included a verse by Óttarr <unk> , that looks very similar to the nursery rhyme : 
 However , modern translations make it clear that Laing was using the nursery rhyme as a model for his very free translation , and the reference to London Bridge does not appear at the start of the verse and it is unlikely that this is an earlier version of the nursery rhyme . Some historians doubt that the attack ever took place . 
 = = = Child sacrifice theory = = = 
 The theory that the song refers to the burying , perhaps alive , of children in the foundations of the bridge was first advanced by Alice Bertha Gomme ( later Lady Gomme ) in The Traditional Games of England , Scotland and Ireland ( 1894 – 1898 ) and perpetuated by the usually sceptical Iona and Peter Opie . This was based around the idea that a bridge would collapse unless the body of a human sacrifice were buried in its foundations and that the watchman is actually a human sacrifice , who will then watch over the bridge . However , there is no archaeological evidence for any human remains in the foundations of London Bridge . 
 = = = Age and damage theory = = = 
 Until the mid @-@ eighteenth century the Old London Bridge was the only crossing on the Thames in London . It was damaged in a major fire in 1633 , but in the fire of 1666 this damage acted as a fire break and prevented the flames from further damaging the bridge and crossing to the south side of the Thames . With its 19 narrow arches , it impeded river traffic and flow . Central piers were removed to create a wider navigational span . Widening and the removal of its houses was completed in 1763 , but it remained relatively narrow and needed continual and expensive repairs . In the early nineteenth century it was decided to replace the bridge with a new construction . New London Bridge was opened in 1831 and survived until it was replaced in 1972 . It was then transported and reconstructed in Lake Havasu City , Arizona . 
 = = = " Fair lady " identity = = = 
 Several attempts have been made to identify the ' fair lady ' , ' lady gay ' , or lady ' lee / lea ' of the rhyme . They include : 
 Matilda of Scotland ( c . 1080 – 1118 ) Henry I 's consort , who between 1110 and 1118 was responsible for the building of the series of bridges that carried the London @-@ Colchester road across the River Lea and its side streams between Bow and Stratford . 
 Eleanor of Provence ( c . 1223 – 91 ) , consort of Henry III who had custody of the bridge revenues from 1269 to about 1281 . 
 A member of the Leigh family of Stoneleigh Park , Warwickshire , who have a family story that a human sacrifice lies under the building . 
 The River Lea , which is a tributary of the Thames . 
 = Rain ( Beatles song ) = 
 " Rain " is a song by the English rock band the Beatles first released in June 1966 as the B @-@ side of the " Paperback Writer " single . Both songs were recorded during the sessions for the album Revolver though neither appears on that album . 
 Written by John Lennon although credited to Lennon – McCartney , " Rain " has been called the Beatles ' finest B @-@ side , noted for its slowed @-@ down rhythm track and backwards vocals , both of which were a hint of things to come on Revolver , released two months later . 
 Three promotional films were made for the song " Rain " . These videos , along with other Beatles videos at the time , sparked George Harrison to say during the Beatles Anthology , " So I suppose , in a way , we invented MTV . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
