 = = = Trailers and shorts = = = 
 Halo 3 was officially announced via a cinematic trailer rendered in real @-@ time , shown at Microsoft 's press conference at E3 2006 on May 9 . The trailer is set in the dry plains of Africa , with the ruins of a space elevator and other damage visible . The Master Chief is slowly revealed walking through smoke and dust , occasionally obscured by distorted images of the artificial intelligence Cortana transmitting a message composed of portions of the character 's lines in the Cortana Letters , as well as a line from the poem " The Hollow Men " . The distorted voice of Cortana was a deliberate clue to the character 's predicament in Halo 3 , with a Bungie staff member stating , " We don 't know what has happened to her ... We don 't know it 's Cortana . It could be any sort of bizarre , almost Satanic sort of voice . Something seems wrong . " The trailer featured music by Martin O 'Donnell , with the addition of a piano and brass section to the classic Halo theme . 
 Advertising company McCann Erickson created a second trailer that was aired only once on December 4 , 2006 . The video used a mix of computer @-@ created graphics and live action ; computer graphics were produced by Digital Domain and directed by Joseph Kosinski . The spot , dubbed " Starry Night " , was seen by 7 @.@ 9 million viewers in its broadcast and watched more than 3 @.@ 5 million times on YouTube by September 2007 . The final trailer , shown during E3 2007 on July 11 , consisted of actual campaign cinematics and gameplay . 
 The video teasers for Halo 3 included a series of videos directed by Neill Blomkamp , the proposed director of a possible Halo film produced by Peter Jackson . Unlike previous trailers and videos , the shorts were the first to depict the Halo universe in a live @-@ action setting . The production was a collaboration between Weta Workshop , Neill Blomkamp and Bungie . When asked about the shorts , Neill said that he hoped that it would help to interest movie studios in his currently inactive movie project , since it lost its studio support in October 2006 . GameTrailers released a compilation of the three videos edited together , titling it Landfall . 
 The first live action video , titled Arms Race , was originally shown at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2007 . It was followed up by another short , Combat , which featured Covenant and human vehicles and weapons . The final video in the series aired on October 4 , 2007 and was used by Discovery Channel to promote their reality show Last One Standing . The short ties the events depicted to the beginning of Halo 3 , which begins as the Master Chief plummets to Earth . 
 = = = " Believe " campaign = = = 
 The last major advertising campaign before and during Halo 3 's release was a series of videos marketed with the tagline " Believe " , beginning September 11 , 2007 . These videos , with an estimated cost of $ 10 million , were directed by Rupert Sanders ( known for video game advertisements ) and made to depict a generic representation of a single battle in Halo 3 . Live @-@ action videos featured elderly war veterans at the " Museum of Humanity " reminiscing about the Human @-@ Covenant war and the role the Master Chief played . The Believe website allowed visitors to pan the length of a massive diorama over 1 @,@ 200 square feet ( 110 m2 ) in size and over twelve feet tall , with handcrafted human and Covenant figures represented at one @-@ twelfth scale . According to Microsoft , the unusual presentation of a model rather than computer graphics was chosen to look at " the themes that lie at the heart of the Halo trilogy — war , duty , sacrifice , and most importantly the heroism of Master Chief . " 
 The diorama was built through a collaboration between Los Angeles , California @-@ based New Deal Studios and Stan Winston Studios . Director Rupert Sanders had actors stand in for the marines , capturing their facial expressions and using them as the basis of the miniatures . Character assets from Bungie , including alien models and armor , were recreated and rebuilt for reuse . The twisted city ruins the diorama is set in were inspired by bombed @-@ out Afghanistan suburbs . Special attention was paid to creating a photo @-@ realistic setting which was recognizably Halo . 
 = = Public beta testing = = 
 On April 10 , 2007 , Bungie announced that a beta test of the multiplayer component of Halo 3 would run from May 16 to June 6 , open to select members of the public . Players could enter the beta in several ways . Testers were selected from those who signed up on the <unk> website following the " Starry Night " commercial , or from the first 13 @,@ 333 players to register after playing three hours of Halo 2 on Xbox Live . Players could also buy a specially @-@ marked copy of the Xbox 360 title Crackdown , which allowed players to download the beta upon its release . 
 The public portion of the beta consists of matchmaking play on three multiplayer maps : Valhalla , High Ground and <unk> . The public beta also contained a limited version of the " saved films " feature , which allows players to save and watch their played games . The day the public beta began , problems were reported from owners of Crackdown that they could not download the beta . Bungie announced that the Microsoft team found a solution and that the issue would be resolved shortly ; a patch was distributed for Crackdown that fixed the problem . Bungie also extended the beta until June 10 to compensate for the issue . According to <unk> West , global group product manager , allowing users into the beta created " a psychological investment " in the game . " The idea was basically to make the beta launch huge and let the tastemakers make the launch for you ... to really drive it beyond the gaming press . " The beta caused a spike in preorders for the retail version of the game . 
 = = Alternate reality game = = 
 A component of Halo 3 's marketing was an alternate reality game or ARG called " Iris " . Alternate reality games , which involve cross @-@ media gameplay and player participation , had been previously used for the promotion of Halo 2 in the form of the influential and award @-@ winning I Love Bees . Soon after the Halo 3 public beta ended , a user named " <unk> " appeared in the official Halo 3 forums on Bungie.net and began posting . A Circuit City advertisement was leaked onto the web days earlier , revealing the web address of an interactive comic which could be manipulated to reveal the IP addresses of another series of sites . One website was the home of the " Society of the Ancients " a group supposedly interested in evidence of Forerunner artifacts left on Earth . Another featured a Forerunner object which gradually revealed text logs and video clips . 
 = = Merchandise and promotions = = 
 The launch of Halo 3 coincided with the release of various games , action figures , and collectible toys . <unk> developed a <unk> collectible miniatures game entitled Halo ActionClix which was released on September 18 , 2007 . The tabletop game features miniature figures from the Halo universe , including characters and vehicles . Halo ActionClix figures were occasionally bundled with the game in promotional packs , and Gamestation stores in the United Kingdom offered a Master Chief figurine to the first 1000 pre @-@ orders of the Halo 3 Legendary Edition . 
 While previous Halo action figure series were produced by Joyride Studios , Todd McFarlane produced several sets of Halo 3 @-@ related action figures . In addition to articulated figures released throughout 2008 , McFarlane also released 12 " inarticulate and more detailed figurines in November . Other companies which produced Halo 3 figures and statues include Kotobukiya , a Japanese company specializing in high @-@ end statues and replicas , and Weta Collectibles , a division spawned from the famed physical effects company Weta Workshop . Weta Collectibles auctioned four of the statues in their lineup , specially cast in solid sterling silver , for auction on eBay during August . 
 Microsoft collaborated with other companies to produce Halo @-@ themed merchandise and promotions at retailers and vendors . PepsiCo created a variant of Mountain Dew called Game Fuel . 7 @-@ Eleven sold a Slurpee version of the drink . Burger King announced a special promotion starting September 24 , 2007 featuring Halo designs and characters on food wrappings . Microsoft sponsored the # 40 car driven by David Stremme for Chip Ganassi Racing in the Dover 400 Nextel Cup Series . The racecar featured a Halo 3 inspired <unk> featuring the title for the game printed prominently on the hood and rear bumper , as well as large pictures of Master Chief on each of the rear fenders . 
 = = Launch and impact = = 
 More than 10 @,@ 000 retail stores in the United States held midnight launch parties for Halo 's release , in addition to other locations around the globe . Microsoft coordinated its own multiple @-@ city launch parties , and Bungie staff members travelled around the world to host parties , in addition to a launch party held at Bungie 's workplace ; Larry Hryb attended the New York City launch party . Sponsored launches featured prize giveaways and chances for fans to play Halo against celebrities and Bungie team members . The BFI IMAX Theater in London was devoted to Halo 3 , while some areas in the United Kingdom cancelled midnight launches fearing unruliness from the large crowds . 
 Halo 3 was phenomenally successful upon release . The game made $ 170 million in US sales on the first day of release , generating more money in 24 hours than any other American entertainment property up to that point . Halo would make an additional $ 130 million by week 's end and sell 3 @.@ 3 million units by the end of the month . By 2008 , Halo 3 had sold 4 @.@ 8 million units in the United States for a total of 8 @.@ 1 million units worldwide , making it the best @-@ selling game of 2007 in the United States . 
 Critics and publications pointed to the massive marketing and launch of Halo 3 as evidence that video games had " finally hit the mainstream " . Video game critic Steve West of CinemaBlend.com pointed out the Halo 3 phenomenon as evidence of the mainstreaming of video games , stating that " ... Like movies , radio , and television before , games are becoming more and more accepted in the popular culture . " To capitalize on the mainstream attention , Joystiq sister site <unk> noted , " Microsoft contends that such a [ marketing ] push is necessary to maintain the appearance of ' a big budget , mass media event ' . " 
 At the PRWeek awards Microsoft won the " Technology Campaign of the Year " along with Edelman for Halo 3 's launch . At the 2008 ANDY Awards , the " Believe " campaign won the " <unk> " , the grand prize . Halo 3 's advertising also won five " gold cubes " , one " silver cube " and two distinctive merit certificates at the Art Directors Club Annual Awards Ceremony , most of the awards relating to the Believe campaign . 
 = Poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko = 
 Alexander Litvinenko was a former officer of the Russian Federal Security Service ( FSB ) and KGB , who fled from court prosecution in Russia and received political asylum in the United Kingdom . 
 On 1 November 2006 , Litvinenko suddenly fell ill and was hospitalized . He died three weeks later , becoming the first confirmed victim of lethal polonium @-@ 210 @-@ induced acute radiation syndrome . Litvinenko 's allegations about the misdeeds of the FSB and his public deathbed accusations that Russian president Vladimir Putin was behind his unusual malady resulted in worldwide media coverage . 
 Subsequent investigations by British authorities into the circumstances of Litvinenko 's death led to serious diplomatic difficulties between the British and Russian governments . During the 2014 – 2015 trial the Scotland Yard representative witnessed that " the evidence suggests that the only credible explanation is in one way or another the Russian state is involved in Litvinenko 's murder " . Another witness stated that Dmitry Kovtun has been speaking openly about the plan to kill Litvinenko that was intended to " set an example " as a punishment for a " traitor " . The main suspect in the case , a former officer of the Russian Federal Protective Service ( FSO ) , Andrey Lugovoy , remains in Russia . As a member of the Duma , he now enjoys immunity from prosecution . Before he was elected to the Duma , the British government tried to have him extradited without success . 
 At the same time , Litvinenko 's father , now residing in Italy , believes Boris Berezovsky and Alexander Goldfarb were behind the murder . Berezovsky was found dead at his home in England on 23 March 2013 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Alexander Litvinenko was a former officer of the Russian Federal Security service who escaped prosecution in Russia and received political asylum in Great Britain . In his books , Blowing up Russia : Terror from Within and Lubyanka Criminal Group , Litvinenko described Russian president Vladimir Putin 's rise to power as a coup d 'état organised by the FSB . He alleged that a key element of the FSB 's strategy was to frighten Russians by bombing apartment buildings in Moscow and other Russian cities . He accused Russian secret services of having arranged the Moscow theater hostage crisis , through their Chechen agent provocateur , and having organised the 1999 Armenian parliament shooting . He also stated that the terrorist Ayman al @-@ Zawahiri was under FSB control when he visited Russia in 1997 . 
 Upon his arrival in London , he continued to support the Russian oligarch in exile , Boris Berezovsky , in his media campaign against the Russian government . 
 In the UK , Litvinenko became a journalist for a Chechen separatist site , <unk> . He wrote two books , Blowing up Russia : Terror from Within and Lubyanka Criminal Group , in which he accused the Russian secret services of staging the Russian apartment bombings and other terrorist acts to bring Vladimir Putin to power . 
 Just two weeks before his death , Litvinenko accused Putin of ordering the assassination of Anna Politkovskaya . 
 = = Illness and poisoning = = 
 On 1 November 2006 , Litvinenko suddenly fell ill . Earlier that day he had met two former KGB officers , Andrey Lugovoy and Dmitry Kovtun . Lugovoy is a former bodyguard of Russian ex @-@ Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar ( also reportedly poisoned in November 2006 ) and former chief of security for the Russian TV channel ORT . Kovtun is now a businessman . Litvinenko had also had lunch at Itsu , a sushi restaurant on Piccadilly in London , with an Italian officer and " nuclear expert " , Mario Scaramella , to whom he reportedly made allegations regarding Romano Prodi 's connections with the KGB . Scaramella , attached to the Mitrokhin Commission investigating KGB penetration of Italian politics , claimed to have information on the death of Anna Politkovskaya , 48 , a journalist who was killed at her Moscow apartment in October 2006 . He passed Litvinenko papers supposedly concerning her fate . On 20 November , it was reported that Scaramella had gone into hiding and feared for his life . 
 For several days after 1 November , Litvinenko experienced severe diarrhoea and vomiting . At one point , he could not walk without assistance . As the pain intensified , Litvinenko asked his wife to call an ambulance for assistance . For several weeks , Litvinenko 's condition worsened as doctors searched for the cause of the illness . Surrounded by friends , Litvinenko became physically weak , and spent periods unconscious . A photograph was taken of Litvinenko on his deathbed and released to the public . " I want the world to see what they did to me , " Litvinenko said . 
 = = = Poison = = = 
 After being moved from his local hospital in north London to University College Hospital in central London for intensive care , his blood and urine samples were sent to the UK 's Atomic Weapons Establishment ( AWE ) for testing . Scientists at AWE tested for radioactive poison using gamma spectroscopy . No gamma rays were detected , however , a small spike was noticed at an energy of 803 kilo @-@ electron volts ( keV ) . The BBC reported that by coincidence another scientist , who had worked on Britain 's early atomic bomb programme decades before , happened to overhear a discussion about the small spike and recognised it as the gamma ray signal from polonium @-@ 210 , which was a critical component of early nuclear bombs . On the evening of 22 November , shortly before his death , his doctors were informed the poison was likely to be polonium @-@ 210 . Further tests on a larger urine sample using spectroscopy designed to detect alpha radiation confirmed the result the following day . 
 Unlike most common radiation sources , polonium @-@ 210 emits very little gamma radiation but large amounts of alpha particles that do not penetrate even a sheet of paper or the epidermis of human skin , thus being invisible to normal radiation detectors . This explained why tests conducted by doctors and Scotland Yard at the hospital with Geiger counters were negative . Both gamma rays and alpha particles are classified as ionizing radiation which can cause radiation damage . An alpha @-@ emitting substance can cause significant damage only if ingested or inhaled , acting on living cells like a short @-@ range weapon . Hours before his death , Litvinenko was tested for alpha @-@ emitters using special equipment . 
 Shortly after his death , the UK 's Health Protection Agency ( HPA ) said tests had established that Litvinenko had significant amounts of the radionuclide polonium @-@ 210 ( 210Po ) in his body . British and US government officials said the use of 210Po as a poison had never been documented before , and it was probably the first time anyone had been tested for the presence of 210Po in their body . The poison was in Litvinenko 's cup of tea . Those who had contact with Litvinenko may also have been exposed to radiation . 
 = = = 210Po content in the body of Litvinenko = = = 
 The symptoms seen in Litvinenko appeared consistent with an administered activity of approximately 2 GBq ( 50 mCi ) which corresponds to about 10 micrograms of 210Po . That is 200 times the median lethal dose of around 238 <unk> or 50 nanograms in the case of ingestion . 
 = = = Thallium – initial hypothesis = = = 
 Scotland Yard initially investigated claims that Litvinenko was poisoned with thallium . It was reported that early tests appeared to confirm the presence of the poison . Among the distinctive effects of thallium poisoning are hair loss and damage to peripheral nerves , and a photograph of Litvinenko in hospital , released to the media on his behalf , indeed showed his hair to have fallen out . Litvinenko attributed his initial survival to his cardiovascular fitness and swift medical treatment . It was later suggested a radioactive isotope of thallium might have been used to poison Litvinenko . Dr. Amit <unk> , one of Litvinenko 's physicians , said " His symptoms are slightly odd for thallium poisoning , and the chemical levels of thallium we were able to detect are not the kind of levels you 'd see in toxicity . " Litvinenko 's condition deteriorated , and he was moved into intensive care on 20 November . Hours before his death , three unidentified circular @-@ shaped objects were found in his stomach via an X @-@ ray scan . It is thought these objects were almost certainly shadows caused by the presence of Prussian blue , the treatment he had been given for thallium poisoning . 
 = = Death and last statement = = 
 Late on 22 November , Litvinenko 's heart failed ; the official time of death was 9 : 21 pm at University College Hospital in London . 
 The autopsy took place on 1 December . Litvinenko had ingested polonium @-@ 210 , a poisonous radioactive isotope . Mario Scaramella , who had eaten with Litvinenko , reported that doctors had told him the body had five times the lethal dose of polonium @-@ 210 . Litvinenko 's funeral took place on 7 December at the Central London mosque , after which his body was buried at Highgate Cemetery in North London . 
 On 25 November , an article attributed to Litvinenko was published by the Mail on Sunday Online entitled Why I believe Putin wanted me dead ... 
 In his last statement he said about Putin : 
 … this may be the time to say one or two things to the person responsible for my present condition . You may succeed in silencing me but that silence comes at a price . You have shown yourself to be as barbaric and ruthless as your most hostile critics have claimed . You have shown yourself to have no respect for life , liberty or any civilised value . You have shown yourself to be unworthy of your office , to be unworthy of the trust of civilised men and women . You may succeed in silencing one man but the howl of protest from around the world will reverberate , Mr Putin , in your ears for the rest of your life . May God forgive you for what you have done , not only to me but to beloved Russia and its people . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 = = = Initial steps = = = 
 Greater London 's Metropolitan Police Service Terrorism Unit has been investigating the poisoning and death . The head of the Counter @-@ Terrorism Unit , Deputy Assistant Commissioner Peter Clarke , stated the police " will trace possible witnesses , examine Mr. Litvinenko 's movements at relevant times , including when he first became ill and identify people he may have met . There will also be an extensive examination of CCTV footage . " The United Kingdom Government COBRA committee met to discuss the investigation . Richard <unk> from the United States FBI stated " when requested by other nations , we provide assistance " – referring to the FBI now joining the investigation for their expertise on radioactive weapons . The Metropolitan Police announced on 6 December 2006 that it was treating Litvinenko 's death as murder . Interpol has also joined the investigation , providing " speedy exchange of information " between British , Russian and German police . 
 = = = Polonium trails = = = 
 Detectives traced three distinct polonium trails in and out of London , at three different dates , which according to the investigation suggests Andrey Lugovoy and Dmitry <unk> took two failed attempts to administer polonium to Litvinenko before the final and successful one . The first attempt took place on 16 October 2006 when radioactive traces were found in all places visited by the FSB operatives before and after their meeting with Litvinenko , where they administered the poison to his tea which he never drank . Apparently , Lugovoy and Kovtun did not fully realize they were handling a radioactive poison either and journalist Luke Harding described their behaviour as " idiotic , verging on suicidal " – while handling a leaky container , they stored it in their hotel rooms , used regular towels to clean up leaks and eventually disposed the poison in the toilet . On 17 October , perhaps realizing they contaminated their rooms , they prematurely checked out and moved to another hotel and left London the next day . Another unsuccessful assassination attempt took place on 25 October when they flew to London again . They left radioactive traces again in their hotel prior to meeting Litvinenko , but did not administer the poison , perhaps due to security cameras in the meeting room , and disposed of the poison into their room 's toilet and left London . 
 The third attempt of poisoning Litvinenko took place at around 5 pm of 1 November in the Millennium Hotel in Grosvenor Square . The bus he travelled in to the hotel had no signs of radioactivity – but large amounts had been detected at the hotel . Polonium was subsequently found in a fourth @-@ floor room and in a cup in the Pine Bar at the hotel . After the Millennium bar , Litvinenko stopped at the office of Boris Berezovsky . He used a fax machine , where the radioactivity was found later . At 6 pm Akhmed Zakayev picked Litvinenko up and brought him home to Muswell Hill . The amount of radioactivity left by Litvinenko in the car was so significant , the car was rendered unusable . Everything that he touched at home during the next three days was contaminated . His family was unable to return to the house even six months later . His wife was tested positive for ingesting polonium but did not leave a secondary trail behind her . This suggested that anyone who left a trail could not have picked up the polonium from Litvinenko ( possibly , including Lugovoy and Kovtun ) . The patterns and levels of radioactivity they left behind suggested that Litvinenko ingested polonium , whereas Lugovoy and Kovtun handled it directly . The human body dilutes polonium before excreting it in sweat , which results in a reduced radioactivity <unk> were also traces of Po @-@ 210 found at the Hey Jo / <unk> bar , Dar Marrakesh restaurant , and Lambeth @-@ Mercedes taxis . 
 Besides Litvinenko , only two people left the polonium trails : Lugovoy and Kovtun who were school friends and worked previously for Russian intelligence in the KGB and the GRU respectively . These people handled the radioactive material directly and did not ingest it , because they left more significant traces of polonium than Litvinenko . 
 Lugovoy and Kovtun met Litvinenko in the Millennium hotel bar twice , on 1 November ( when the poisoning took place ) , and earlier , on 16 October . Trails left by Lugovoy and Kovtun started on 16 October , in the same sushi bar where Litvinenko was poisoned later , but at a different table . It was assumed that their first meeting with Litvinenko was either a rehearsal of the future poisoning , or an unsuccessful attempt at the poisoning . 
 Traces left by Lugovoy were also found in the office of Berezovsky that he visited on 31 October , a day before his second meeting with Litvinenko . Traces left by Kovtun were found in Hamburg , Germany . He left them on his way to London on 28 October . The traces were found in passenger jets <unk> and <unk> from Moscow to Heathrow on 25 and 31 October , as well as flights <unk> and <unk> from Heathrow to Moscow on 28 October and 3 November . 
 Andrey Lugovoy has said he flew from London to Moscow on a 3 November flight . He stated he arrived in London on 31 October to attend the football match between Arsenal and CSKA Moscow on 1 November . When the news broke that a radioactive substance had been used to murder Litvinenko , a team of scientists rushed to find out how far the contamination had spread . It led them on a trail involving hundreds of people and dozens of locations . 
 British Airways later published a list of 221 flights of the contaminated aircraft , involving around 33 @,@ 000 passengers , and advised those potentially affected to contact the UK Department of Health for help . On 5 December they issued an email to all of their customers , informing them that the aircraft had all been declared safe by the UK 's Health Protection Agency and would be re @-@ entering service . 
 = = = British extradition request = = = 
 British authorities investigated the death and it was reported on 1 December that scientists at the Atomic Weapons Establishment had traced the source of the polonium to a nuclear power plant in Russia . On 3 December , reports stated that Britain had demanded the right to speak to at least five Russians implicated in Litvinenko 's death , and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov asserted that Moscow was willing to answer " concrete questions . " Russian Prosecutor @-@ General Yuri Chaika said on Tuesday 5 December that any Russian citizen who may be charged in the poisoning will be tried in Russia , not Britain . Moreover , Chaika stated that UK detectives may ask questions to Russian citizens only in the presence of Russian prosecutors . 
 On 28 May 2007 the British Foreign Office submitted a formal request to the Russian Government for the extradition of Andrey Lugovoy to the UK to face criminal charges relating to Litvinenko 's murder . 
 = = = Extradition declined = = = 
 The Russian General Prosecutor 's Office declined to extradite Lugovoy , citing that extradition of citizens is not allowed under the Russian constitution ( Article 61 of the Constitution of Russia ) . Russian authorities later said that Britain has not handed over any evidence against Lugovoy . Professor Daniel <unk> , former Secretary General of the Council of Europe , commented that the Russian Constitution actually " opens the door " for the extradition , and Russia ratified three international treaties on extradition ( on 10 December 1999 ) ; namely , the European Convention on Extradition and two Additional Protocols to it . Yury <unk> , Ambassador of the Russian Federation , pointed out that when the Russian Federation ratified the European Convention on Extradition it entered a declaration concerning Article 6 in these terms : " The Russian Federation declares that in accordance with Article 61 ( part 1 ) of the Constitution of the Russian Federation , a citizen of the Russian Federation may not be extradited to another state . " The same protections are extended to the citizens of France and Germany , both of which refuse to extradite their citizens . 
 = = = BBC programme = = = 
 On 7 July 2008 , a British security source told the BBC 's Newsnight programme : " We very strongly believe the Litvinenko case to have had some state involvement . There are very strong indications . " The British government claimed that no intelligence or security officials were authorised to comment on the case . 
 = = = Litvinenko Inquiry = = = 
 In January 2016 , a UK public inquiry , headed by Sir Robert Owen , found that Andrey Lugovoy and Dmitry Kovtun were responsible for the poisoning of Litvinenko . The inquiry also found that there was a strong probability that Lugovoy and Kovtun were acting under the direction of the FSB , and that their actions were probably approved by both Nikolai <unk> , Director of the FSB , and President Vladimir Putin . 
 = = Possibly related events = = 
 On 2 March 2007 , Paul Joyal , a former director of security for the U.S. Senate intelligence committee , who the previous weekend alleged on national television that the Kremlin was involved in the poisoning of Litvinenko , was shot near his Maryland home . An FBI spokesman said the agency was " assisting " the police investigation into the shooting . Police would not confirm details of the shooting or of the condition of Joyal . A person familiar with the case said he was in critical condition in hospital . It was reported that while there were no indications that the shooting was linked to the Litvinenko case , it is unusual for the FBI to get involved in a local shooting incident . A person familiar with the situation said NBC had hired bodyguards for some of the journalists involved in the program . 
 = = Polonium @-@ 210 = = 
 = = = Possible motivation for using polonium @-@ 210 = = = 
 Philip Walker , professor of physics at the University of Surrey said : " This seems to have been a substance carefully chosen for its ability to be hard to detect in a person who has ingested it . " Oleg Gordievsky , the most senior KGB agent ever to defect to Britain , made a similar comment that Litvinenko 's assassination was carefully prepared and rehearsed by Russian secret services , but the poisoners were unaware that technology existed to detect traces left by polonium @-@ 210 : " Did you know that polonium @-@ 210 leaves traces ? I didn ’ t . And no one did . ... what they didn ’ t know was that this equipment , this technology exists in the West – they didn ’ t know that , and that was where they miscalculated . " 
 Nick Priest , a nuclear scientist and expert on polonium who has worked at most of Russia 's nuclear research facilities , says that although the execution of the plot was a " bout of stupidity " , the choice of polonium was a " stroke of genius " . He says : " the choice of poison was genius in that polonium , carried in a vial in water , can be carried in a pocket through airport screening devices without setting off any alarms " , adding , " once administered , the polonium creates symptoms that don 't suggest poison for days , allowing time for the perpetrator to make a getaway . " Priest asserts that " whoever did it was probably not an expert in radiation protection , so they probably didn 't realize how much contamination you can get just by opening the top ( of the vial ) and closing it again . With the right equipment , you can detect just one count per second " . 
 Filmmaker and friend of Litvinenko Andrei Nekrasov has suggested that the poison was " sadistically designed to trigger a slow , tortuous and spectacular demise " . Expert on Russia Paul Joyal suggested that " A message has been communicated to anyone who wants to speak out against the Kremlin .... If you do , no matter who you are , where you are , we will find you , and we will silence you , in the most horrible way possible " . 
 = = Theories = = 
 Many theories regarding the Litvinenko poisoning circulated after his death . Circumstances led to the suspicion that he was killed by the Russian secret service . Viktor <unk> , a deputy chairman of the Russian Parliament 's security committee for the Communist Party of the Russian Federation , said that he " can ’ t exclude that possibility . " He apparently referred to a recent Russian counter @-@ terrorism law that gives the President the right to order such actions . An investigator of the Russian apartment bombings , Mikhail <unk> , wrote in a letter from prison that an FSB team had organised in 2002 to kill Litvinenko . He also reported FSB plans to kill relatives of Litvinenko in Moscow in 2002 , although these have not been carried out . State Duma member Sergei <unk> commented on 24 November 2006 : " The deserved punishment reached the traitor . I am confident that this terrible death will be a serious warning to traitors of all colors , wherever they are located : In Russia , they do not pardon treachery . I would recommend citizen Berezovsky to avoid any food at the commemoration for his accomplice Litvinenko . " 
 Many publications in Russian media suggested that the death of Litvinenko was connected to Boris Berezovsky . Former FSB chief Nikolay <unk> , for whom Litvinenko worked , said that the incident " looks like [ the ] hand of Berezovsky . I am sure that no kind of intelligence services participated . " This involvement of Berezovsky was alleged by numerous Russian television shows . 
 Shortly after the incident Russian government dismissed theories of FSB involvement in the assassination using the argument that Litvinenko was " not important " and " mentally unstable " , implying that the government had no interest in killing such an insignificant figure . Eduard <unk> observed that the same argument was raised after assassination of Anna Politkovskaya , and described Litvinenko death as " very public execution " . 
 An explanation put forward by the Russian Government appeared to be that the deaths of Litvinenko and Politkovskaya were intended to embarrass President Putin . Other theories included involvement of rogue FSB members or suggestions that Litvinenko was killed because of his research of certain Russian corporations or state officials , or as a political intrigue to undermine president Putin . 
 = = Suspects = = 
 Andrey Lugovoy 
 A former Federal Protective Service of Russia officer and millionaire who met with Litvinenko on the day he fell ill ( 1 November ) . He had visited London at least three times in the month before Litvinenko 's death and met with the victim four times . Traces of polonium @-@ 210 have been discovered in all three hotels where Lugovoy stayed after flying to London on 16 October , and in the <unk> restaurant in Dover Street , Mayfair , where Lugovoy is understood to have dined before 1 November ; and aboard two aircraft on which he had travelled . He has declined to say whether he had been contaminated with polonium @-@ 210 . The Crown Prosecution Service has charged him with murder and has sent an extradition request to Russia that includes a summary of the evidence , but the only third party to have seen the extradition request , American journalist Edward Epstein , has described the substantiation as " embarrassingly thin " . 
 Dmitry Kovtun 
 A Russian businessman and ex @-@ KGB agent who met Litvinenko in London first in mid @-@ October and then on 1 November , the day Litvinenko fell ill . On 7 December Kovtun was hospitalized , with some sources initially reporting him to be in a coma . On 9 December , German police found traces of radiation at a Hamburg flat used by Kovtun . The following day , 10 December , German investigators identified the detected material as polonium @-@ 210 and clarified that the substance was found where Kovtun had slept the night before departing for London . British police also report having detected polonium on the plane in which Kovtun travelled from Moscow . Three other points in Hamburg were identified as contaminated with the same substance . On 12 December Kovtun told Russia 's Channel One TV that his " health was improving " . 
 Kovtun was under investigation by German detectives for suspected plutonium smuggling into Germany in October . Germany dropped the case against Kovtun on November 2009 ; 
 Vyacheslav <unk> : A business partner of Andrey Lugovoy . 
 Vladislav 
 The Times stated that the police have identified the man they believe may have poisoned Litvinenko with a fatal polonium dose in a cup of tea on the fourth @-@ floor room at the Millennium Hotel to discuss a business deal with Dmitry Kovtun and Andrey Lugovoy before going to the bar . These three men were joined in the room later by the mystery figure who was introduced as Vladislav , a man who could help Litvinenko win a lucrative contract with a Moscow @-@ based private security firm . 
 Vladislav is said to have arrived in London from Hamburg on 1 November on the same flight as Dmitry Kovtun . His image is recorded by security cameras at Heathrow airport on arrival . He is described as being in his early 30s , tall , strong , with short black hair and Central Asian features . Oleg Gordievsky , an ex @-@ KGB agent , has said that this man was believed to have used a Lithuanian or Slovak passport , and that he left the country using another EU passport . He has also said Vladislav started his preparations in early 2006 , " some time between February and April " , that he " travelled to London , walked everywhere , and studied everything . " 
 Businessman and politician Boris Berezovsky said in a police interview that " Sasha mentioned some person who he met at Millennium Hotel " , but would not " remember whether [ his name ] was Vladimir or Vyacheslav . " Litvinenko 's friend Alex Goldfarb writes that according to Litvinenko , " Lugovoy brought along a man whom [ Litvinenko ] had never seen before and who had ' the eyes of a killer . ' " 
 Igor the Assassin 
 The code name for a former KGB assassin . He is said to be a former <unk> officer born in 1960 who is a judo master and walks with a slight limp . He allegedly speaks perfect English and Portuguese and may be the same person who served Litvinenko tea in the London hotel room . 
 = = Other persons related to the case = = 
 Yegor Gaidar 
 The sudden illness of Yegor Gaidar in Ireland on 24 November 2006 , the day of Litvinenko 's death , has been linked to his visit to the restaurant where polonium was present and is being investigated as part of the overall investigation in the UK and Ireland . , Other observers noted he was probably poisoned after drinking a strange @-@ tasting cup of tea . Gaidar was taken to hospital ; doctors said his condition was not life @-@ threatening and that he would recover . This incident was similar to the poisoning of Anna Politkovskaya on a flight to <unk> . Afterwards , Gaidar claimed that it was enemies of the Kremlin who had tried to poison him . 
 Mario Scaramella 
 The United Kingdom 's Health Protection Agency ( HPA ) announced that significant quantities of polonium @-@ 210 had been found in Mario Scaramella although his health was found to be normal . He was admitted to hospital for tests and monitoring . Doctors say that Scaramella was exposed to a much lower level of polonium @-@ 210 than Litvinenko , and that preliminary tests found " no evidence of radiation toxicity " . According to the 6 pm Channel 4 news ( 9 December 2006 ) the intake of polonium he suffered would only result in a dose of 1 mSv . This would lead to a 1 in 20 @,@ 000 chance of cancer . According to The Independent , Scaramella alleged that Litvinenko was involved in smuggling radioactive material to Zürich in 2000 . 
 Boris <unk> , a KGB defector residing in London , stated that Evgeni <unk> , another former KGB officer residing in France , continued collaboration with the FSB , infiltrated Litvinenko 's and Scaramella 's circles of trust and misinformed the latter . 
 Igor Ponomarev 
 Igor Ponomarev was a Russian diplomat whose death was called a possible murder by Paolo <unk> . 
 Marina Litvinenko 
 UK reports state Litvinenko 's widow tested positive for polonium , though she is not seriously ill . The Ashdown Park hotel in Sussex has been evacuated as a precaution , possibly to do with Scaramella 's previous visit there . According to the 6 pm Channel 4 ( 9 December 2006 ) news the intake of polonium she suffered would only result in a dose of 100 mSv , leading to a 1 in 200 chance of cancer . 
 Akhmed Zakayev 
 The forensic investigation also includes the silver Mercedes outside Litvinenko 's home believed to be owned by his close friend and neighbour Akhmed Zakayev , then foreign minister of the separatist government in exile of <unk> . Reports now state that traces of radioactive material were found in the vehicle . 
 British police 
 Two London Metropolitan Police officers tested positive for 210Po poisoning . 
 Bar staff 
 Some of the bar staff at the hotel where the polonium @-@ contaminated teacup was found were discovered to have suffered an intake of polonium ( dose in the range of 10s of mSv ) . These people include Norberto Andrade , the head barman and a long @-@ time ( 27 years ) worker at the hotel . He has described the situation thus : 
 " When I was delivering gin and tonic to the table , I was obstructed . I couldn 't see what was happening , but it seemed very deliberate to create a distraction . It made it difficult to put the drink down . 
 " It was the only moment when the situation seemed unfriendly and something went on at that point . I think the polonium was sprayed into the teapot . There was contamination found on the picture above where Mr Litvinenko had been sitting and all over the table , chair and floor , so it must have been a spray . 
 " When I poured the remains of the teapot into the sink , the tea looked more yellow than usual and was thicker – it looked gooey . 
 " I scooped it out of the sink and threw it into the bin . I was so lucky I didn 't put my fingers into my mouth , or scratch my eye as I could have got this poison inside me . " 
 = = Chronology = = 
 = = = Background history = = = 
 7 June 1994 : A remote @-@ controlled bomb detonated aiming at chauffeured Mercedes 600 with oligarch Boris Berezovsky and his bodyguard in the rear seat . The driver died but Berezovsky left the car unscathed . Litvinenko , then with the organized @-@ crime unit of the FSB , was an investigating officer of the assassination attempt . The case was never solved , but it was at this point that Litvinenko befriended Berezovsky . 
 17 November 1998 : At a time that Vladimir Putin was the head of the FSB , five officers including Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Litvinenko accuse the Director of the Directorate for the Analysis of Criminal Organizations Major @-@ General <unk> <unk> and his deputy , 1st Rank Captain Alexander <unk> , of ordering them to assassinate Boris Berezovsky in November 1997 . 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 = = = = October 2006 = = = = 
 7 October : The Russian journalist and Kremlin critic Anna Politkovskaya is shot in Moscow . 
 16 October : Andrey Lugovoy flies to London . 
 16 – 18 October : Former KGB agent Dmitry Kovtun visits London , during which time he eats two meals with Litvinenko , one of them at the Itsu sushi bar ( see 1 November 2006 ) . 
 17 October : Litvinenko visits " <unk> Management " , a security firm in Cavendish Place , with Lugovoy and Kovtun . 
 19 October : Litvinenko accuses President Putin of the Politkovskaya murder . 
 28 October : Dmitry Kovtun arrived in Hamburg , Germany from Moscow on an Aeroflot flight . Later German police discovered that the passenger seat of the car that picked him up at an airport was contaminated with polonium @-@ 210 . 
 31 October : Dmitry Kovtun comes to London from Hamburg , Germany . German police found that his ex @-@ wife 's apartment in Hamburg was contaminated with polonium @-@ 210 . 
 = = = = November 2006 = = = = 
 1 November : Just after 3 pm , at the Itsu sushi restaurant on <unk> , Litvinenko meets the Italian security expert Mario Scaramella , who hands alleged evidence to him concerning the murder of Politkovskaya . Around 4 : 15 pm , he comes to the office of Boris Berezovsky to copy the papers Scaramella had given him and hand them to Berezovsky . Around 5 pm he meets with the former KGB agents Andrey Lugovoy , Dmitry Kovtun and Vyacheslav <unk> in the Millennium Hotel in London . He later becomes ill . 
 3 November : Litvinenko is brought into Barnet General Hospital . 
 11 November : Litvinenko tells the BBC he was poisoned and is in very bad condition . 
 17 November : Litvinenko is moved to University College Hospital and placed under armed guard . 
 19 November : Reports emerge that Litvinenko has been poisoned with thallium , a chemical element used in the past as a rat poison . 
 20 November : Litvinenko is moved to the Intensive Care Unit . The police take statements from people with close relation to Litvinenko . A Kremlin speaker denies the Russian government is involved in the poisoning . 
 22 November : The hospital announces that Litvinenko 's condition has worsened substantially . 
 23 November : 9 : 21 pm : Litvinenko dies . 
 24 November : Litvinenko 's dictated deathbed statement is published . He accuses President Vladimir Putin of being responsible for his death . The Kremlin rejects the accusation . The HPA announces that significant amounts of polonium @-@ 210 have been found in Litvinenko 's body . Traces of the same substance are also found at Litvinenko 's house in North London , at Itsu and at the Millennium Hotel . 
 24 November : Sergei <unk> , State Duma member from the <unk> , in his Duma address he commented on the death of Litvinenko with the following words : The deserved punishment reached the traitor . I am sure his terrible death will be a warning to all the traitors that in Russia the treason is not to be forgiven . I would recommend to citizen Berezovsky to avoid any food at the commemoration for his crime accomplice Litvinenko 
 24 November : The British police state they are investigating the death as a possible poisoning . 
 28 November : Scotland Yard announces that traces of polonium @-@ 210 have been found in seven different places in London . Among them , an office of the Russian billionaire Boris Berezovsky , an avowed opponent of Putin . 
 29 November : The HPA announces screening of the nurses and physicians who treated Litvinenko . The authorities find traces of a radioactive substance on board British Airways planes . 
 30 November : Polonium @-@ 210 traces are found on a number of other planes , most of them going to Moscow . 
 = = = = December 2006 = = = = 
 1 December : An autopsy is performed on the body of Litvinenko . Toxicology results from Mr Litvinenko 's post @-@ mortem examination revealed two " spikes " of radiation poisoning , suggesting he received two separate doses . Scaramella tests positive for polonium @-@ 210 and is admitted into a hospital . Litvinenko 's widow also tests positive for polonium @-@ 210 , but was not sent to the hospital for treatment . 
 2 December : Scotland Yard 's counter @-@ terrorist unit have questioned Yuri Shvets , a former KGB spy who emigrated to the United States in 1993 . He was questioned as a witness in Washington in the presence of FBI officers . Shvets claimed that he has a " lead that can explain what happened " . 
 6 December : Scotland Yard announced that it is treating his death as a murder . 
 7 December : Confused reports state that Dmitry Kovtun was hospitalized , the reason has not yet been made clear . 
 7 December : Russian Office of the Prosecutor General has opened a criminal case over poisoning of Litvinenko and Kovtun by the articles " Murder committed in a way endangering the general public " ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) and " Attempted murder of two or more persons committed in a way endangering the general public " . 
 8 December : Kovtun is reported to be in coma . 
 9 December : German police find traces of radiation at Hamburg flat used by Kovtun . 
 9 December : UK police identify a single cup at the Pines Bar in the Millennium Hotel in Mayfair which was almost certainly the one used to administer the poison . 
 11 December : Andrey Lugovoy is interrogated in Moscow by UK Scotland Yard and General Procurator 's office of the Russian Federation . He refuses to reveal any information concerning the interrogation . 
 12 December : Dmitry Kovtun tells a Russian TV station that his " health [ is ] improving " . 
 24 December : Mario Scaramella was arrested in Naples on his return from London , on apparently unrelated charges . 
 27 December : Prosecutor General of Russia Yury Chaika accused Leonid <unk> , a former Vice President of <unk> , exiled in Israel and wanted by Russian authorities for a long time , of involvement in the poisoning , a charge dismissed by the latter as a nonsense . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 = = = = February 2007 = = = = 
 5 February : Boris Berezovsky told the BBC that on his deathbed , Litvinenko said that Lugovoy was responsible for his poisoning . 
 6 February : The text of a letter written by Litvinenko 's widow on 31 January to Putin , demanding that Putin work with British authorities on solving the case , was released . 
 8 February 2007 : Update to HPA ( Health Protection Agency ) investigation of polonium 210 incident . 
 = = = = May 2007 = = = = 
 21 May : Sir Ken Macdonald QC ( Director of Public Prosecutions of England and Wales ) say that Lugovoy , should face trial for the " grave crime " of murdering Litvinenko . 
 22 May : Macdonald announces that Britain will seek extradition of Lugovoy and attempt to charge him with murdering Litvinenko . The Russian government states that they will not allow the extradition of any Russian citizens . 
 28 May : The British Foreign Office formally submits a request to the Russian Government for the extradition of Lugovoy to the UK to face criminal <unk> Constitution of Russia forbids extradition of Russian citizens to foreign countries ( Article 61 ) , so the request can not be fulfilled . 
 Extradition requests had been granted in the past ( For example , in 2002 Murad <unk> has been handed to Turkmenistan . , <unk> 's extradition was later found unlawful by the Russian courts and he was awarded 20 @,@ 000 Euros in damages to be paid by the Russian government by the European Court of Human Rights . ) Article 63 does not explicitly mention Russian citizens , and therefore does not apply to them , but only to foreign nationals living in Russia . Article 61 supersedes it for the people holding the Russian citizenship . 
 31 May : Lugovoy held a news conference at which he accused MI6 of attempting to recruit him and blamed either MI6 , the Russian mafia , or fugitive Kremlin opponent Boris Berezovsky for the killing . 
 = = = = July 2007 = = = = 
 16 July : The British Foreign Office confirms that , as a result of Russia 's refusal to extradite Lugovoy , four Russian diplomats are to be expelled from the Russian Embassy in London . 
 17 July : Russia 's deputy foreign minister , Alexander <unk> , threatens to expel 80 UK diplomats . 
 19 July : The Russian Foreign ministry spokesman , Mikhail <unk> , announced the expulsion of four UK diplomats from the British Embassy in Moscow . 
 = = = = October 2007 = = = = 
 27 October : Stephen Wright and David Williams of the British Daily Mail newspaper reported that Alexander Litvinenko was an MI6 agent and was receiving a retainer of £ 2000 per month when he was murdered and that the current head of MI6 Sir John Scarlett was involved in his recruitment , quoting unnamed " diplomatic and intelligence " sources . Such claims have been denied by Marina Litvinenko and Oleg Gordievsky . 
 = = = = December 2008 = = = = 
 In a 16 December 2008 interview , when asked by the Spanish newspaper El País if Litvinenko could have been killed in the interests of the Russian state , Lugovoy – wanted by British police on suspicion of the murder of Litvinenko – replied that he would order the assassination of anyone , for example , President Saakashvili of Georgia and the KGB defector Gordievsky , in the interests of the Russian state . 
 = = Comparisons to other deaths = = 
 = = = Deaths from ingesting radioactive materials = = = 
 According to the IAEA in 1960 a person ingested 74 MBq of radium ( assumed to be 226Ra ) and this person died four years later . Harold McCluskey survived 11 years ( eventually dying from cardio respiratory failure ) after an intake of at least 37 MBq of 241Am ( He was exposed in 1976 ) . It is estimated that he suffered doses of 18 Gy to his bone mass , 520 Gy to the bone surface , 8 Gy to the liver and 1 @.@ 6 Gy to the lungs ; it is also claimed that a post mortem examination revealed no signs of cancer in his body . The October 1983 issue of the journal Health Physics was dedicated to McCluskey , and subsequent papers about him appeared in the September 1995 issue . 
 = = = Similar suspicious deaths and poisonings = = = 
 Comparisons have been made to the alleged 2004 poisoning of Viktor Yushchenko , the alleged 2003 poisoning of Yuri Shchekochikhin and the fatal 1978 poisoning of the journalist Georgi Markov by the Bulgarian Committee for State Security . The incident with Litvinenko has also attracted comparisons to the poisoning by radioactive ( unconfirmed ) thallium of KGB defector Nikolay <unk> and journalist Shchekochikhin of Novaya Gazeta ( the Novaya Gazeta interview with the former , coincidentally , prepared by Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya , who was later found shot to death in her apartment building ) . Like Litvinenko , Shchekochikhin had investigated the Russian apartment bombings ( he was a member of the Kovalev Commission that hired Litvinenko 's friend Mikhail <unk> as a legal counsel ) . 
 KGB defector and British agent Oleg Gordievsky believes the murders of <unk> <unk> , Shchekochikhin , and Politkovskaya and the incident with Litvinenko show that the FSB has returned to the practice of political assassinations , which were conducted in the past by Thirteenth Department of the KGB . A comparison was also made with Roman <unk> who was responsible for personal protection of Anatoly Sobchak and Putin , and who died in Russia in 2004 from poisoning by an unknown radioactive substance . 
 Officers of FSB " special forces " liked to use Litvinenko photos for target practice in shooting galleries , according to Russian journalist Yulia Latynina . 
 = Upper Brook Street Chapel , Manchester = 
 The Upper Brook Street Chapel , also known as the Islamic Academy , the Unitarian Chapel and the Welsh Baptist Chapel , is a former chapel with an attached Sunday School on the east side of Upper Brook Street , Chorlton @-@ on @-@ Medlock , Manchester , England . It is said to be the first neogothic Nonconformist chapel , having been constructed between 1837 and 1839 . It was designed by Sir Charles Barry , who later went on to design the Palace of Westminster . 
 A listed building since 3 October 1974 ( currently Grade II * ) , it is owned by Manchester City Council and is on the Buildings at Risk Register , rated as " very bad " . It was partially demolished in 2006 . The Victorian Society recently placed the building on a list of ten most threatened buildings in England and Wales . 
 = = History = = 
 The chapel was designed by Sir Charles Barry , shortly before he designed the Palace of Westminster . It was constructed between 1837 and 1839 out of sandstone , with a slate roof . It is in English neogothic style . The building has seven narrow bays , with buttresses and a lancet in each bay . The west end has a giant moulded archway , with an arched doorway at the ground floor with a window above . On the east end there is a rose window . The corners are square , with pinnacles . The inside of the chapel had galleries on three sides , and a ribbed , vaulted ceiling . The attached two @-@ storey Sunday School is in the same style as the chapel , and has a triple @-@ gabled north side , with large arched windows on the first floor . It also has a canted apse on the west end , and a lean @-@ to porch . The building was listed on 3 October 1974 , and is currently classed as Grade II * . 
 The building marked a charge in the style of Nonconformist worship locations . Previously these were mostly built with brick , and were plain , with the grander tending towards Greek architecture . Said to be the first neogothic Nonconformist chapel , Manchester 's Unitarian Chapel was preceded by the Congregationalists ' Congregational Chapel in March , Cambridgeshire , which was constructed in 1836 and is also in the neogothic style . Chapels built following the construction of these two resembled parish churches more than the former style . 
 = = Occupancy = = 
 The chapel replaced the Mosley Street Chapel ( built 1789 , demolished 1836 ) upon its completion for baptisms , burials and marriages . It was originally constructed for the Unitarians . The chapel was used for burial rites until 1882 , the chapel had a graveyard from the outset , to both the north and south sides of the chapel . Restrictions were placed on this in 1856 and prohibited in 1882 except for the removal of remains from graves on the north side to brick vaults on the south side of the chapel . <unk> were performed until at least 1912 , and marriages until at least 1916 . Ministers at the chapel include John James Tayler ( until 1853 ) , William Henry Herford ( 1866 – 70 ) , Philip Wicksteed ( circa 1890 ) , John Trevor ( 1890 – 91 , left to start The Labour Church ) and Edward Walker Sealy ( <unk> ? ? ? ) . 
 The chapel was sold in 1928 due to changes in the district , and was subsequently used as a Welsh Baptist Chapel . The chapel was then used as a Jehovah 's Witnesses Kingdom Hall in the early 1970s . The most recent use of both the chapel and former Sunday School was for the Islamic Academy of Manchester between 1974 and 2006 , when it was used as a mosque , teaching centre and for outreach work in the Asian community . The chapel is currently vacant , with the Islamic Academy occupying the Sunday School . The building has been owned by Manchester City Council since the 1970s , who purchased land alongside Upper Brook Street with the aim of constructing a large motorway into Manchester , which was never realised . 
 = = Current status and future = = 
 Parts of the chapel were demolished at the start of 2006 on safety grounds , with scaffolding holding up some other sections . As of March 2008 the building has very little roof , with the walls , floors and ceilings in poor condition . The annex was also declared unsafe , but has since been reoccupied . 
 A spokesperson for Manchester City Council said : " The Welsh Baptist Chapel is in poor condition due to the low standard of its original construction . It has been empty for some years while attempts have been made to achieve a sympathetic redevelopment of the site and secure the building 's long @-@ term future . " An unsuccessful bid to the Heritage Lottery Fund for funding to repair the building was made by the Islamic Academy in 2003 . In 2001 and 2005 the City Council commissioned structural advice regarding the building , prior to removing most of the roof , with the agreement of English Heritage . The building is in need of £ 500 @,@ 000 for emergency repairs , as well as an extra £ 700 @,@ 000 to make it fully functional . 
 The chapel is currently on the Buildings at Risk Register , rated as " very bad " . The Victorian Society recently placed the building on a list of ten most threatened buildings in England and Wales . 
 In October 2010 Manchester City Council revealed that it was in discussion with a developer to renovate the building and bring it back into use . In August 2013 the council received a planning application from the Church Converts ( Manchester ) to repair the building and convert it into apartments ; the application was granted in February 2014 . The redevelopment by <unk> Developments will consist of 73 private apartments in both the chapel and the sunday school , with the <unk> due to be completed by Summer 2017 . 
 = Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway = 
 The Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ( GNP & BR ) , also known as the Piccadilly tube , was a railway company established in 1902 that constructed a deep @-@ level underground " tube " railway in London . The GNP & BR was formed through a merger of two older companies , the Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway ( B & PCR ) and the Great Northern and Strand Railway ( GN & SR ) . It also incorporated part of a tube route planned by a third company , the District Railway ( DR ) . The combined company was a subsidiary of the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) . 
 The B & PCR and the GN & SR were established in 1896 and 1898 respectively , but construction of both railways was delayed while funding was sought . In 1902 the UERL , which already controlled the DR , took control of both companies and quickly raised the funds , mainly from foreign investors . A number of different routes were planned , but most were rejected by Parliament . 
 When it opened in 1906 , the GNP & BR 's line served 22 stations and ran for 14 @.@ 17 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 80 mi ) between its western terminus at Hammersmith and its northern terminus at Finsbury Park . A short 720 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 362 ft ) branch connected Holborn to the Strand . Most of the route was in a pair of tunnels , with 1 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 68 mi ) at the western end constructed above ground . Within the first year of opening it became apparent to the management and investors that the estimated passenger numbers for the GNP & BR and the other UERL lines were over @-@ optimistic . Despite improved integration and cooperation with the other tube railways , the GNP & BR struggled financially . In 1933 it and the rest of the UERL were taken into public ownership . Today , the GNP & BR 's tunnels and stations form the core central section of the London Underground 's Piccadilly line . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 = = = = Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway , 1896 = = = = 
 In November 1896 notice was published that a private bill was to be presented to Parliament for the construction of the Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway ( B & PCR ) . The line was planned to run entirely underground between Air Street near Piccadilly Circus and the south end of Exhibition Road , South Kensington . The route was to run beneath Piccadilly , Knightsbridge , Brompton Road and Thurloe Place , with intermediate stations at Dover Street , Down Street , Hyde Park Corner , Knightsbridge and Brompton Road . A short branch to the east of the South Kensington terminus was planned to a depot south of Brompton Road at the end of Yeoman Row . Electricity to operate the trains was to be provided from a generating station to be built about a mile south of the South Kensington terminus on the north bank of the River Thames at Lots Road , West Brompton . Following parliamentary approval , the bill received royal assent as the Brompton & Piccadilly Circus Railway Act , 1897 on 6 August 1897 . 
 = = = = District Railway deep @-@ level tube , 1896 = = = = 
 Also announced in November 1896 was a bill to be presented by the District Railway ( DR ) for a tube railway to be constructed beneath its existing sub @-@ surface line between Gloucester Road and Mansion House stations . The DR operated a steam railway , running in cut and cover tunnels , and planned to ease congestion along its heavily used route by constructing an express line with just a single intermediate station at Charing Cross ( now Embankment ) . The express line was to surface west of Gloucester Road and connect to the DR 's existing line at Earl 's Court . Since , like the B & PCR , the DR 's deep tube line would be operated with electric trains , the DR planned to build a generating station adjacent to its Walham Green station ( now Fulham Broadway ) . The bill received assent on 6 August 1897 as the Metropolitan District Railway Act , 1897 . 
 = = = = Great Northern and Strand Railway , 1898 = = = = 
 In November 1898 the Great Northern and Strand Railway ( GN & SR ) was announced as a tube railway , to run from Wood Green to Stanhope Street , north of the Strand . The GN & SR was backed by the Great Northern Railway ( GNR ) , the main line railway operating from King 's Cross station . The GNR saw the new company as a means of relieving congestion on its route . The GN & SR was to run beneath the GNR 's main line from Wood Green station ( now Alexandra Palace ) to Finsbury Park station . It was then planned to run south @-@ west through Holloway to King 's Cross , and then south to Bloomsbury and Holborn . Intermediate stations were planned at the GNR 's Hornsey , Harringay and Finsbury Park stations , and at Holloway , York Road , King 's Cross , Russell Square and Holborn . A power station was planned next to the GNR 's tracks at Gillespie Road . When the London County Council planned the construction of Kingsway and Aldwych , Stanhope Street was scheduled for demolition so the southern terminus was relocated to the junction of the two new roads . The bill was enacted on 1 August 1899 as the Great Northern and Strand Railway Act , 1899 . 
 = = = Search for finance , 1896 – 1903 = = = 
 Although the three companies had permission to construct their railways , they still had to raise the capital for the construction works in a competitive market . 
 By 1899 , there were five other tube railway companies with permission to construct railways that were raising funds – the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway ( BS & WR ) , the Charing Cross , Euston and Hampstead Railway ( CCE & HR ) , the Great Northern and City Railway ( GN & CR ) , the Central London Railway ( CLR ) and the City and Brixton Railway . The already operating City & South London Railway ( C & SLR ) was also looking for money for extensions to its existing route and numerous other proposed , but unapproved underground railway companies were also seeking investors . 
 Foreign investors came to the rescue of the DR , B & PCR and GN & SR : American financier Charles Yerkes , who had been <unk> involved in the development of Chicago 's tramway system in the 1880s and 1890s , saw the opportunity to make similar investments in London . In March 1901 he and his backers purchased a majority of the shares of the DR and , in September 1901 , took over the B & PCR and the GN & SR . With the companies under his control , Yerkes established the UERL to raise funds to build the tube railways and to electrify the DR. The UERL was capitalised at £ 5 million with the majority of shares sold to overseas investors . Further share issues followed , which raised a total of £ 18 million by 1903 ( equivalent to approximately £ 1 @.@ 74 billion today ) for use across all of the UERL 's projects . 
 = = = Planning the route , 1898 – 1905 = = = 
 = = = = B & PCR bill , 1899 = = = = 
 During the progress of their 1896 bills through parliament , the DR and the B & PCR established a relationship through a successful joint campaign of opposition to a competing proposal from the City & West End Railway . This was for a tube railway running from Hammersmith to Cannon Street , which would have duplicated parts of the DR 's and the B & PCR 's approved routes . In late 1898 , this common interest led to the purchase of the B & PCR by the DR. In November 1898 a bill for the B & PCR was announced , which sought permission for short extensions at each end of its route : at its eastern end , from Piccadilly Circus to Cranbourn Street and , at the western end , connections between the B & PCR 's tunnels and those of the DR 's deep tube line . Parliament rejected the eastern extension , but permitted the connection between the two lines and approved a capital injection from the DR into the B & PCR . The bill received royal assent on 9 August 1899 as the Brompton & Piccadilly Circus Railway ( Extensions ) Act , 1899 . 
 = = = = DR and B & PCR bills , 1900 = = = = 
 In November 1899 the DR published a notice of a bill for the 1900 parliamentary session . The company was still unable to proceed with the construction of its proposed deep line , and the new bill included provisions for extensions of time for this line and for those of the B & PCR . The bill included construction and operation of the power station at the Lots Road site previously chosen by the B & PCR . The B & PCR also published notice for a bill requesting an extension of time , but this was later withdrawn and the extension request in the DR bill was used . The time extensions were granted in the Metropolitan District Railway Act , 1900 , which received assent on 6 August 1900 . 
 = = = = B & PCR bill , 1901 = = = = 
 In November 1900 the B & PCR published a notice of a bill for the 1901 session , in which it sought permission for two extensions . The first , eastward , took a more northerly route than the rejected 1899 extension to Cranbourn Street : it was to run via Shaftesbury Avenue , Hart Street ( now Bloomsbury Way ) , Bloomsbury Square , Theobalds Road and Rosebery Avenue , to Angel , Islington where it terminated under Islington High Street . Where the line crossed other tube routes , stations were planned : at Cambridge Circus to interchange with the planned CCE & HR , and at Museum Street near to the CLR 's recently opened British Museum station . The second extension took the line south @-@ west from South Kensington , via Fulham Road , to connect to the DR 's line south of Walham Green station ( now Fulham Broadway ) . The bill also included provisions for the B & PCR to take over responsibility for construction of the section of the DR 's deep @-@ level line from South Kensington to Earl 's Court , and for a further extension of time . 
 The opening of the CLR on 30 July 1900 had stimulated interest in underground railways , and the B & PCR 's bill was submitted to Parliament at the same time as a large number of other bills for tube lines in the capital . To review these bills , Parliament established a joint committee under Lord Windsor . Only the part of B & PCR 's first extension as far as Museum Street was considered by the committee . The section to The Angel was held back , pending the findings of a separate committee which was investigating problems of vibration experienced on the CLR . The extension to Fulham was not discussed . By the time the committee had produced its report , the parliamentary session was almost over so the promoters of the bills were asked to resubmit them for the following 1902 session . 
 = = = = B & PCR , GN & SR and DR bills , 1902 = = = = 
 In November 1901 the B & PCR published details of its bill for the 1902 session . The extension to The Angel was dropped , and a different route eastwards from Piccadilly Circus was planned . Once again this ran to Cranbourn Street , but it continued under Long Acre and Great Queen Street to meet and connect to the GN & SR 's tunnels at Little Queen Street ( now the northern part of Kingsway ) just south of the GN & SR 's planned Holborn station . The B & PCR planned stations at Wardour Street , Cranbourn Street and Covent Garden . 
 At Wardour Street station a branch was to leave the main route and head south @-@ east , to connect to the DR 's deep @-@ level line east of its station at Charing Cross . Wardour Street station was planned to have platforms on both branches . The south @-@ west extension to Walham Green was retained with minor alterations . The new route was to branch from the original route east of Brompton Road station , which was to have platforms on both routes . Stations were planned along Fulham Road at its junctions with College Street ( now <unk> Street ) , Neville Street , Drayton Gardens , Redcliffe Gardens , Stamford Bridge and Maxwell Road . The route would interchange with the DR at Walham Green before coming to the surface and running parallel with the DR as far as Parsons Green , beyond which the line was to connect to the DR. The requests for an extension of time and for the powers to build the DR deep @-@ level line from South Kensington to Earl 's Court were re @-@ presented . As the B & PCR and the GN & SR were now in common ownership , the bill also sought powers to enable the companies to merge and for the B & PCR to change its name . 
 At the same time , the GN & SR published details of its bill for the 1902 session . The GN & SR sought powers for a short extension of about 350 metres ( 1 @,@ 148 ft ) from its southern terminus , to Temple station on the DR 's existing sub @-@ surface line where an interchange was planned . The GN & SR also sought permission to abandon the section of its route north of Finsbury Park , and to transfer its powers and obligations to the B & PCR as part of the merger . The DR also announced a bill for 1902 which included provisions to transfer responsibility for part or all of its deep @-@ level line to the B & PCR . 
 The B & PCR bill was again examined by a joint committee under Lord Windsor . The GN & SR bill was examined by a separate committee under Lord Ribblesdale . The B & PCR 's eastward extension to Holborn to connect to the GN & SR was permitted , but the extension to Parsons Green was rejected following objections from hospitals in the Fulham Road , which were concerned that vibrations from trains might affect their patients . The B & PCR link from Piccadilly Circus to Charing Cross was rejected on the grounds that it involved sharp turns and steep gradients to avoid public buildings in the area . The merger with the GN & SR and name change were permitted . The GN & SR 's extension to Temple was rejected following objections from the Duke of Norfolk who owned the land under which it would have run . The abandonment of the route north of Finsbury Park was permitted . 
 The bills received royal assent as the Great Northern and Strand Railway Act , 1902 and the Metropolitan District Railway Act , 1902 on 8 August 1902 , and as the Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway Act , 1902 on 18 November 1902 . 
 = = = = GNP & BR and DR bills , 1903 = = = = 
 In November 1902 the newly merged company announced two bills for the 1903 parliamentary session under the GNP & BR name . The first bill requested minor powers which included the purchase of additional land for stations , and sought minor amendments to previous Acts . 
 The second bill sought permission for extensions east and west from the approved route . The eastern extension was to diverge from the main route immediately west of Piccadilly Circus station , which was to be expanded to have east and westbound platforms on both lines . The extension was then to pass under Leicester Square to a station at Charing Cross . Continuing eastwards under Strand , the tunnels were to cross under the branch from Holborn , with an interchange at Strand station . The line was then to continue under Fleet Street to Ludgate Circus , where a station was to be constructed to interchange with the London , Chatham and Dover Railway 's Ludgate Hill station ( since demolished ) . It would then proceed south under New Bridge Street , and east under Queen Victoria Street , to connect to the DR 's proposed deep @-@ level line west of Mansion House station . The western extension was to diverge from the approved route at Albert Gate , east of Knightsbridge station . This station was to have additional platforms on the new branch line which would head west under Knightsbridge , Kensington Road and Kensington High Street , with stations at the Royal Albert Hall , the DR 's High Street Kensington station and Addison Road . The tunnels were then to follow Hammersmith Road to the DR 's Hammersmith station . There they would turn north under Hammersmith Grove and east under Goldhawk Road , to terminate on the south side of Shepherd 's Bush Green near to the CLR 's Shepherd 's Bush terminus . 
 The DR also publicised two further bills for the 1903 session . The first included provisions to formalise the agreement for the GNP & BR to build the section of the deep @-@ level line between South Kensington and West Kensington , including the deep @-@ level platforms at Earl 's Court . The second bill sought permission to extend the deep @-@ level line from its eastern end at Mansion House by following beneath the existing sub @-@ surface tracks to Whitechapel , where the line would connect to the existing sub @-@ surface lines to Mile End . 
 Neither extension bill was debated . In February 1903 , Parliament had established a Royal Commission on London Traffic to assess the manner in which transport in London should be developed . While the Commission deliberated , any review of bills for new lines and extensions was postponed . Both bills were later withdrawn by their promoters . The powers bills were approved as the Metropolitan District Railway Act , 1903 on 21 July 1903 and the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ( Various Powers ) Act , 1903 on 11 August 1903 . 
 = = = = GNP & BR bills , 1905 = = = = 
 The Royal Commission investigations continued from 1903 to early 1905 , concluding with the issue of a report in June 1905 . No bills were submitted for the 1904 parliamentary session , but in November 1904 the GNP & BR announced two bills for the 1905 session . 
 The first dealt with the Strand branch : it confirmed the layout of the junction between the branch and the main route at Holborn , and sought powers to extend the branch south under the River Thames to the London and South Western Railway 's ( L & SWR 's ) terminus at Waterloo station . The extension included moving Strand station to the corner of Surrey Street , and constructing a single tunnel from there to the BS & WR 's Waterloo station which would be provided with additional lifts to serve the GNP & BR 's platforms . The branch was to be operated as a shuttle with trains passing at Strand station . The junction layout and short extension to re @-@ site Strand station were permitted , but not the extension to Waterloo . The bill received royal assent on 4 August 1905 as the Great Northern Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ( Various Powers ) Act , 1905 . 
 The second bill again proposed extensions to the east and west , modifying the 1903 plans . In the east , the route was the same as the previous proposal as far as Ludgate Circus . Then , instead of heading south under New Bridge Street and east into Queen Victoria Street to connect to the DR deep level route , the 1905 proposal followed under Carter Lane and Cannon Street to a station at the junction of Queen Street and Watling Street , a short distance north @-@ east of the DR 's Mansion House station . The route then followed Queen Victoria Street to Lombard Street where an interchange was to be provided with the C & SLR and the CLR at Bank station . The route continued under Cornhill and Leadenhall Street to end at Aldgate High Street , adjacent to the DR 's Aldgate station . 
 To the west , the 1903 proposed extension from Knightsbridge to Hammersmith via Kensington High Street remained , but it was to continue beyond Hammersmith under King Street , the final station being at the junction of King Street , Goldhawk Road and Chiswick High Road . The tunnels were to continue beyond the final station for a further 350 metres ( 1 @,@ 148 ft ) under Chiswick High Road , to end at the junction with Homefield Road . The loop north from Hammersmith to Shepherd 's Bush was dropped ; instead a more direct route to Shepherd 's Bush was proposed as a branch from the Hammersmith extension at Addison Road . It was to run under Holland Road to Shepherd 's Bush Green , with a station being constructed opposite the CLR station there . It would then continue west under Uxbridge Road to Acton Vale , where a depot was to be built on the surface between Agnes Road and Davis Road . To cover the cost of the proposed extensions , powers to raise further capital of £ 4 @.@ 2 million were sought . The review of the bill in Parliament was delayed as the Royal Commission was still sitting during the first half of 1905 ; the bill was withdrawn by the GNP & BR in July 1905 , as insufficient time then remained for completion the parliamentary process before the end of the session . 
 = = = Construction , 1902 – 1906 = = = 
 With the funds available from the UERL , construction began in July 1902 at Knightsbridge , before the formal approval of the merger of the B & PCR and GN & SR . Work proceeded quickly , enabling the UERL to record in its annual report in October 1904 that 80 per cent of the tunnels had been completed and that track laying was about to begin . Stations were provided with surface buildings designed by architect Leslie Green in the UERL house @-@ style . This consisted of two @-@ storey steel @-@ framed buildings faced with red glazed terracotta blocks , with wide semi @-@ circular windows on the upper floor . Except for Finsbury Park , where the platforms were close enough to the surface to be accessed by stairs , and Gillespie Road where a long ramp was used , each of the stations with platforms in tube tunnels was provided with between two and four lifts and an emergency spiral staircase in a separate shaft . 
 Works on the main route were largely complete by the Autumn of 1906 , and after a period of test running the railway was ready to open in December 1906 . As a result of the electrification and resignalling of the DR 's surface and sub @-@ surface tracks in 1905 , the capacity of the existing route was sufficiently increased that the construction of deep @-@ level tunnels east of South Kensington was unnecessary , and the powers were allowed to lapse . 
 = = Opening = = 
 The official opening of the GNP & BR by David Lloyd George , President of the Board of Trade , took place on 15 December 1906 . Progress on the Strand branch was delayed , and it opened in November 1907 . From its opening , the GNP & BR was generally known by the abbreviated names Piccadilly Tube or Piccadilly Railway , and the names appeared on the station buildings and on contemporary maps of the tube lines . 
 The railway had stations at : 
 Finsbury Park 
 Gillespie Road ( now Arsenal ) 
 Holloway Road 
 Caledonian Road 
 York Road ( closed 17 September 1932 ) 
 King 's Cross ( now King 's Cross St. Pancras ) 
 Russell Square 
 Holborn 
 Strand ( later Aldwych , opened 30 November 1907 , closed 30 September 1994 ) 
 Covent Garden ( opened 11 April 1907 ) 
 Leicester Square 
 Piccadilly Circus 
 Dover Street ( now Green Park ) 
 Down Street ( opened 15 March 1907 , closed 25 May 1932 ) 
 Hyde Park Corner 
 Knightsbridge 
 Brompton Road ( closed 29 July 1934 ) 
 South Kensington ( opened 8 January 1907 ) 
 Gloucester Road 
 Earl 's Court 
 Barons Court 
 Hammersmith 
 The service was provided by a fleet of carriages manufactured for the UERL in France and Hungary . These carriages were built to the same design used for the BS & WR and the CCE & HR , and operated as electric multiple unit trains without the need for separate locomotives . Passengers boarded and left the trains through folding lattice gates at each end of cars ; these gates were operated by Gate @-@ men who rode on an outside platform and announced station names as trains arrived . The design became known on the Underground as the 1906 stock or Gate stock . Trains for the line were stabled at the Lillie Bridge depot in West Kensington . 
 = = Co @-@ operation and consolidation , 1906 – 1913 = = 
 Despite the UERL 's success in financing and constructing the railway in only seven years , its opening did not bring the financial success that had been expected . In the Piccadilly Tube 's first twelve months of operation it carried 26 million passengers , less than half of the 60 million that had been predicted during the planning of the line . The UERL 's pre @-@ opening predictions of passenger numbers for its other new lines proved to be similarly over @-@ optimistic , as did the projected figures for the newly electrified DR – in each case , numbers achieved only around fifty per cent of their targets . 
 The lower than expected passenger numbers were partly due to competition between the tube and sub @-@ surface railway companies , but the introduction of electric trams and motor buses , replacing slower , horse @-@ drawn road transport , took a large number of passengers away from the trains . The problem was not limited to the UERL ; all of London 's seven tube lines and the sub @-@ surface DR and Metropolitan Railway were affected to some degree . The reduced revenues generated from the lower passenger numbers made it difficult for the UERL and the other railways to pay back the capital borrowed , or to pay dividends to shareholders . 
 From 1907 , in an effort to improve their finances , the UERL , the C & SLR , the CLR and the GN & CR began to introduce fare agreements . From 1908 , they began to present themselves through common branding as the Underground . The W & CR was the only tube railway that did not participate in the arrangement as it was owned by the mainline L & SWR . 
 The UERL 's three tube railway companies were still legally separate entities , with their own management , shareholder and dividend structures . There was duplicated administration between the three companies and , to streamline the management and reduce expenditure , the UERL announced a bill in November 1909 that would merge the Piccadilly , the Hampstead and the Bakerloo Tubes into a single entity , the London Electric Railway ( LER ) , although the lines retained their own individual branding . The bill received royal assent on 26 July 1910 as the London Electric Railway Amalgamation Act , 1910 . This took effect on 1 July that year . 
 In October 1911 , the Piccadilly tube platforms at Earl 's Court station became the first on the Underground network to be served by escalators when a link between the District and Piccadilly platforms was created . 
 In November 1912 , a bill was publicised under the LER name that included a plan to extend the Piccadilly tube tracks westwards from Hammersmith to connect to the L & SWR 's Richmond branch tracks . The District line already ran trains over this route , and the Piccadilly tube service would provide additional connections . The bill received assent as the London Electric Railway Act , 1913 on 15 August 1913 . The advent of World War I prevented work on the extension starting . Post @-@ war , a shortage of funds and other priorities meant that the extension was postponed until the early 1930s . 
 = = Move to public ownership , 1923 – 1933 = = 
 Despite improvements made to other parts of the network , the Underground railways continued to struggle financially . The UERL 's ownership of the highly profitable London General Omnibus Company ( LGOC ) since 1912 had enabled the UERL group , through the pooling of revenues , to use profits from the bus company to subsidise the less profitable railways . However , competition from numerous small bus companies during the early 1920s eroded the profitability of the LGOC and had a negative impact on the profitability of the whole UERL group . 
 In an effort to protect the UERL group 's income , its chairman Lord Ashfield lobbied the government for regulation of transport services in the London area . Starting in 1923 , a series of legislative initiatives were made in this direction , with Ashfield and Labour London County Councillor ( later MP and Minister of Transport ) Herbert Morrison , at the forefront of debates as to the level of regulation and public control under which transport services should be brought . Ashfield aimed for regulation that would give the UERL group protection from competition and allow it to take substantive control of the LCC 's tram system ; Morrison preferred full public ownership . After seven years of false starts , a bill was announced at the end of 1930 for the formation of the London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) , a public corporation that would take control of the UERL , the Metropolitan Railway and all bus and tram operators within an area designated as the London Passenger Transport Area . The Board was a compromise – public ownership but not full nationalisation – and came into existence on 1 July 1933 . On this date , the LER and the other Underground companies were liquidated . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 For a history of the line after 1933 see Piccadilly line 
 The original GNP & BR route was extended at both ends in the early 1930s . In the north , a new route was constructed to Wood Green , Southgate and Cockfosters . In the west , the extension from Hammersmith approved in 1913 was finally carried out . The extension paralleled the District line 's route to Acton and Hounslow , and took over the District line 's route to Uxbridge . In 1977 , the Hounslow branch was extended to Heathrow Airport . The Strand branch was closed in 1994 . Today , the GNP & BR 's tunnels form the core of the Piccadilly line 's 73 @.@ 97 @-@ kilometre ( 45 @.@ 96 mi ) route . 
 York Road , Down Street and Brompton Road stations were closed in the early 1930s due to low usage , but in the lead @-@ up to World War II the underground passageways at Down Street and Brompton Road were considered useful as protected deep shelters for critical government and military operations . Down Street was fitted out for use by the Railway Executive Committee and the War Cabinet . Brompton Road was used as a control centre for anti @-@ aircraft operations , and after the war was used by the Territorial Army . Between September 1940 and July 1946 , the Strand branch was temporarily closed , its tunnels used to store exhibits from the British Museum as well as serving as an air @-@ raid shelter . 
 = New York State Route 228 = 
 New York State Route 228 ( NY 228 ) is a state highway in Schuyler County , New York , in the United States . It runs for 12 @.@ 47 miles ( 20 @.@ 07 km ) in a northeast to southwest direction from an intersection with NY 224 in the village of Odessa to a junction with NY 227 in the hamlet of Perry City within the town of Hector . NY 228 has a short overlap with NY 79 in the Hector community of Mecklenburg . The route was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York ; however , it initially ended at NY 79 in Mecklenburg , from where NY 79 went north to Perry City . NY 79 was realigned to head west from Mecklenburg in the early 1960s , at which time the NY 228 designation was extended northward over NY 79 's former routing . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 228 begins at an intersection with NY 224 in Odessa . It progresses northward from NY 224 as the two @-@ lane Mecklenburg Road , crossing nearby railroad tracks and entering a more pronounced rural area north of town . The road gradually curves to the northeast , passing by brief wooded areas on its way into the hamlet of Catharine , where NY 228 intersects with County Route 10 ( CR 10 ) . At this point , NY 228 turns northward to follow CR 10 's right @-@ of @-@ way out of the hamlet . Just outside Catharine , NY 228 begins to parallel the western shoreline of nearby Cayuta Lake , which ends about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north of the community . After Cayuta Lake , the road winds its way northward along the base of a largely undeveloped valley to reach the town of Hector and its hamlet of Smith Valley . Here , the valley and NY 228 curve northeastward , following Taughannock Creek through eastern Schuyler County . 
 The route remains on a northeast – southwest alignment to the hamlet of Mecklenburg , where the highway passes some residences ahead of intersections with CR 6 and NY 79 . NY 79 and NY 228 overlap for one block before NY 228 splits to the northeast at the northern edge of the community . The overlap with NY 79 is the busiest section of NY 228 , serving an average of 2 @,@ 556 vehicles per day as of 2009 . Outside of Mecklenburg , the road crosses more rural areas in the town of Hector as it heads generally northeastward along Taughannock Creek and approaches the Tompkins County line . The route pulls to within a tenth @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 2 km ) of the line at the hamlet of Perry City , where NY 228 ends at an intersection with NY 227 . Also present at the junction is CR 3 , a short route leading east to CR 142 at the Tompkins County line . NY 227 enters the intersection from the west ; however , it leaves to the north on NY 228 's right @-@ of @-@ way . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1911 , the New York State Legislature created Route 46 , an unsigned legislative route extending from Coopers Plains in Steuben County to Trumansburg in Tompkins County via Watkins Glen . East of Watkins Glen , Route 46 proceeded generally northeastward through Burdett , Reynoldsville and Mecklenburg on its way to Trumansburg . On March 1 , 1921 , the Route 46 designation was reassigned to another highway in Allegany and Steuben counties as part of a partial renumbering of the legislative route system . The section of pre @-@ 1921 Route 46 between Mecklenburg and Perry City went unnumbered until the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , when it became part of NY 79 . 
 At Mecklenburg , NY 79 connected to NY 228 , another route assigned in the renumbering that ran southwest from Mecklenburg to NY 224 in Odessa . The road that became NY 228 was state @-@ maintained south of Cayuta Lake by 1926 , while the remainder of the highway was rebuilt as a state road c . 1930 . NY 228 went unchanged until the early 1960s when NY 79 was rerouted to follow a previously unnumbered highway west of Mecklenburg instead . The former routing of NY 79 from Mecklenburg to Perry City became an extension of NY 228 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Schuyler County . 
 = Eidsvoll Verk Station = 
 Eidsvoll Verk Station ( Norwegian : Eidsvoll Verk stasjon ) is a railway station located on the Gardermoen Line at <unk> near Eidsvoll Verk in Eidsvoll , Norway . The station was taken into use in 1999 when the commuter trains to Eidsvoll started using the Gardermoen Line . It was designed by Arkitektskap and built in concrete , with details in metal and wood , and is sunk into the ground . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Oslo Commuter Rail , operated by the Norwegian State Railways , serves Eidsvoll Verk twice per hour with lines L12 Eidsvoll - Oslo S - Drammen - Kongsberg , and R11 Eidsvoll - Oslo S - Larvik / Skien . The service has only one northbound station , Eidsvoll , 5 minutes away . Travel time to Oslo Airport is 5 minutes , and to Oslo Central Station , 30 minutes . The public transport authority Ruter operates bus services to the station , including a correspondence from Eidsvoll Verk via the station to Dal . There is also a taxi stand at the station . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The station is designed in the same style as the rest of the Gardermoen Line and the Airport Express Train . The station consists of two side platforms lowered 7 @.@ 5 metres ( 25 ft ) in the terrain . The walls are covered in ramps and stairs to liven up the concrete walls with metal detailing . Above the station is a walkway built in wood ; its curved shape was designed to fit in with the hilly landscape . On the west side is a bus stop , on the east side is a park and ride facility . 
 The station is unmanned and without a station building , but the platforms have sheds and ticket machines . It is located south of Eidsvoll Station and north of Oslo Airport Station on the Gardermoen Line , 63 kilometres ( 39 mi ) from Oslo Central Station . 
 = = History = = 
 Eidsvoll Verk was built along with the rest of the Gardermoen Line for the opening of Oslo Airport , Gardermoen in 1998 . The station was designed by Arkitektskap , with construction starting in 1997 . The station opened on 27 September 1998 , but the commuter train service along the line did not start until 1999 , when the Romerike Tunnel opened . In 2008 , the parking lot was expanded with an additional 36 parking spaces . 
 = Ithan Creek = 
 Ithan Creek ( also known as Ithan Run ) is a tributary of Darby Creek in Delaware County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 4 @.@ 2 miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) long and flows through Radnor Township and Haverford Township . The creek 's watershed has an area of 7 @.@ 39 square miles ( 19 @.@ 1 km2 ) and is highly developed . It has three named tributaries : Browns Run , <unk> Run , and Meadowbrook Run . 
 Ithan Creek is within the Piedmont Uplands physiographic province . The creek was historically the site of several mills and has been subjected to numerous floods over the years . In 1902 , a sewage company began dumping raw sewage into the creek , but this practice was stopped in 1905 . The creek is in approved trout waters . It is the site of Ithan Valley Park , a small park with hiking and fishing opportunities and the Radnor Valley Country Club . 
 = = Course = = 
 Ithan Creek rises in a small valley just south of U.S. Route 30 in the community of Wayne , Pennsylvania . It flows west for several tenths of a mile before receiving its first tributary , Browns Run , from the right and turning south . The creek passes under Pennsylvania Route 320 and receives two small unnamed tributaries from the left . It flows alongside Interstate 476 and crosses it once . After a short while , it receives <unk> Run from the right near the community of Rosemont , Pennsylvania . It flows alongside the interstate for several tenths of a mile before passing under it again . Shortly thereafter , Ithan Creek enters Haverford Township , Pennsylvania and receives its largest tributary , Meadowbrook Run . It passes under Darby Road and meets its confluence with Darby Creek . 
 Ithan Creek joins Darby Creek 17 @.@ 9 miles ( 28 @.@ 8 km ) upriver of its mouth . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Ithan Creek is 184 feet ( 56 m ) above sea level . The elevation of the creek 's source is 399 feet ( 122 m ) above sea level . 
 Ithan Creek is within the Piedmont Uplands physiographic province . The Piedmont Uplands section has generally old , hard upland rocks that eroded from the Appalachian Mountains . The rocks in the watershed date to the Precambrian Era and Lower Paleozoic Era . The surficial geology mainly consist of felsic gneiss and mafic gneiss formations , with small amounts of serpentinite near the mouth of the creek . <unk> mica schist is exposed along the creek . According to a report by the Geological Society of Pennsylvania , the exposures are rare in the vicinity of Ithan Creek . 
 Two soil associations exist in the Ithan Creek watershed . The Neshaminy @-@ Lehigh @-@ Glenlg soil association is present in a small part of the watershed . It consists of silty , well drained , gravelly , and deep soil that rests on gabbro and granodiorite bedrock . The Chester @-@ Glenlg @-@ Manor soil association is prevalent through the middle of the watershed . It consists of silty , channery , and shallow to deep soil that rests on brown schist and gneiss bedrock . Most of the watershed is considered to have slightly erodible soil . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of Ithan Creek has an area of 7 @.@ 39 square miles ( 19 @.@ 1 km2 ) . Its source is in the United States Geological Survey quadrangle of Valley Forge , but its mouth is in the quadrangle of Lansdowne . Ithan Creek 's watershed has a diversity of land uses , including residential ( high density and low density ) , transportation facilities , offices , college campuses , and historic sites . Its culverts from Sproul Road to Iven Avenue are not sized correctly to manage moderate floods . There are brick structures located alongside the creek that are in poor condition . Major roads in the watershed include Interstate 476 , U.S. Route 30 , and Pennsylvania Route 320 . Ithan Creek is not considered to be impaired . 
 = = History = = 
 Ithan Creek was entered into the Geographic Names Information System on August 2 , 1979 . Its identifier in the Geographic Names Information System is <unk> . 
 The village of Ithan along the creek was the first European settlement in modern @-@ day Radnor Township in the seventeenth century . In 1826 , an official report stated the following about mills on the creek : 
 On Ithan creek in Radnor , a mill seat , on land of the heirs of Andrew Steel , deceased . On Ithan creek , in Radnor , a grist @-@ mill and saw @-@ mill , head and fall about twenty @-@ three feet , owned and occupied by John and David Evans . Near the head of Ithan creek , in Radnor , a grist mill and saw @-@ mill , head and fall about sixteen feet , grinds from eight to ten thousand bushels of grain per annum , and about fifty tons gypsum per annum , saw @-@ mill employed occasionally , owned and occupied by Jesse Brooke . 
 On August 5 , 1843 , heavy rains caused massive flooding on Ithan Creek . About a quarter million dollars of damage in property was assessed , and several lives were lost . Bridges on Ithan Creek sustained a damage of about $ 475 . 
 The Wayne Sewerage Company was incorporated on December 1 , 1902 and constructed and maintained sewers in Radnor township . It purchased an eleven @-@ acre tract along the creek to build a sewer system and built an engine house with boilers to purify sewage . After it was purified , the water would be released into Ithan Creek where , the company claimed , it posed no threat to human health . Despite this , on December 4 , 1905 , the State Board of Health filed a lawsuit against the company alleging raw sewage was being illegally dumped into the creek . As a result , a judge sided with the Board of Health and a new plant was constructed . 
 Several bridges have been built across Ithan Creek . A concrete tee beam bridge with a length of 27 @.@ 9 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) carries Sproul Road over the creek and was built in 1922 . A 25 @.@ 9 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) bridge of the same type was built in 1930 and carries Conestoga Road over the creek . In 1932 , a 40 feet ( 12 m ) concrete arch bridge was constructed that carries Darby Road across Ithan Creek . A concrete slab bridge with a length of 27 @.@ 9 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) carries Clyde Road across the creek and was built that same year . Built in 1964 , a 27 @.@ 9 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) prestressed box beam carries Bryn Mawr Avenue over Ithan Creek . Three years later , two concrete slab bridges were constructed to allow the Mid @-@ County Expressway to cross the creek , both being 29 @.@ 9 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) across . 
 The creek flooded substantially after Tropical Storm Nicole on September 30 , 2010 . A majority of households surveyed after the storm reported flooding in their basements . As a result , several watershed drainage recommendations were proposed . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The creek is approved trout waters . Brown trout have been recorded to naturally reproduce in the creek . On the banks of the stream , populations of white @-@ tailed deer are overabundant . 
 The Ithan @-@ Darby Creek Wetlands is listed on the Delaware County Natural Areas Inventory . It is a " notable significance " site . At the floodplain at the confluence of Ithan Creek and Darby Creek , the main trees species include silver maple , black willow , boxelder , and red maple . In the wetlands at this site , the main tree species include scattered black willow and silver maple . There are also patches of silky dogwood and wild rose , which are surrounded by assorted wetland plants such as herbs , grasses , sedges , and rushes . <unk> , <unk> , <unk> @-@ pye weed , and mountain mint can sometimes be seen in the wetland , and a variety of invasive species are a concern . Most of the original forest cover has been removed to allow for farming and residential development . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Ithan Valley Park is a 19 @-@ acre park that is adjacent to the creek . It contains a hiking trail and has fishing opportunities . Radnor Valley Country Club is a golf course that borders the creek . Formerly crossing the creek , it was redesigned in 1968 to run north @-@ south along the creek due to construction of Interstate 476 . 
 = Daredevil ( film ) = 
 Daredevil is a 2003 American superhero film written and directed by Mark Steven Johnson . Based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name , the film stars Ben Affleck as Matt Murdock , a blind lawyer who fights for justice in the courtroom and out of the courtroom as the masked vigilante Daredevil . Jennifer Garner plays his love interest Elektra Natchios ; Colin Farrell plays the merciless assassin Bullseye ; David Keith plays Jack " The Devil " Murdock , a washed up fighter and Matt 's father ; and Michael Clarke Duncan plays Wilson Fisk , also known as the crime lord Kingpin . 
 The film began development in 1997 at 20th Century Fox and Columbia Pictures , before New Regency acquired the rights in 2000 . Johnson shot the film primarily in Downtown Los Angeles despite the Hell 's Kitchen , Manhattan setting of the film and comics . Rhythm and Hues Studios were hired to handle the film 's CGI . Graeme Revell composed the Daredevil score which was released on CD in March 2003 , whereas the various artists soundtrack album , Daredevil : The Album , was released in February . 
 Though reviews of the film were mixed , the movie became the second @-@ biggest February release to that time . A spin @-@ off film , Elektra , was released in 2005 to critical and commercial failure . 
 In 2004 , an R @-@ rated director 's cut of Daredevil was released , reincorporating approximately 30 minutes of the film , including an entire subplot involving a character played by Coolio . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Matt Murdock is a blind lawyer in New York City 's Hell 's Kitchen neighborhood , where he runs a firm with best friend Franklin " Foggy " Nelson . As a child , Matt was blinded by a toxic waste spill . The accident enhanced Matt 's other senses and gave him sonar to " see " via sonic vibrations . Matt 's father , boxer Jack " The Devil " , was killed after refusing to turn in a fixed fight for the mobster who had employed him earlier . After his father 's death , Matt promised to stop all crime that controlled Hell 's Kitchen , New York as the vigilante crime @-@ fighter " Daredevil " . 
 Matt meets Elektra Natchios , daughter of Nikolas Natchios , a businessman who has dealings with Wilson Fisk , a rich executive who is also the criminal leader known as the Kingpin . When Nikolas tries to end his relationship with Fisk , the mobster hires the Irish hitman Bullseye , who has preternatural aim , to kill him . Matt tries to stop Bullseye , but Bullseye ultimately succeeds in killing Nikolas and framing Matt in the process . Elektra vows to exact revenge , while reporter Ben Urich discovers his secret identity . Believing Matt to have done good things for Hell 's Kitchen , Urich tells Matt that Bullseye is going after Elektra next . 
 Matt tracks Bullseye , but is attacked by Elektra , who plans to use her own training in martial arts to avenge her father 's death . She defeats and injures Matt ; when she manages to remove his mask , she discovers Matt 's secret identity and innocence . Forced to fight Bullseye alone , Elektra is overpowered and killed by the hitman . A wounded Matt makes his way to a church , where he is looked after by his confidante , Father Everett , who knows his secret identity . After recovering slightly , Matt fights Bullseye , who had followed him to the church . Bullseye discovers that loud noise is Matt 's weakness and prepares to kill him with a spiked piece of wood after incapacitating him . Matt blocks the attack and hears an FBI sniper stationed on the neighboring building preparing to fire . As the bullet is fired , Matt moves out of the bullet 's path and pulls Bullseye 's hands into it . When Bullseye pleads for mercy , Matt throws him from the church 's steeple . Bullseye lands on the hood of Urich 's car , severely injured but alive . 
 Upon discovering Fisk is the Kingpin and Bullseye 's employer , Matt makes his way to Fisk 's office . There , Matt and Fisk begin a fierce fight ; however , Fisk proves to be a surprisingly powerful combatant due to his size and brute strength , and he dominates Matt for most of the fight . Lying on the floor , Matt questions Fisk as to why he killed the people Murdock loved , including Jack Murdock years before : Fisk replies it was just business , for he had worked under Fallon at the time he killed Jack , and Elektra was " at the wrong place at the wrong time . " Angered , Matt regains his strength and breaks Fisk 's legs , but refrains from killing him , instead allowing him to be arrested by the police , who have discovered his criminal connections . Before being taken away , Fisk — who had also discovered Matt 's secret identity after overpowering him — swears revenge on Matt , who points out that Fisk cannot reveal Matt 's secret identity because the humiliation of having been beaten by a blind man will cause him to be perceived as weak by other prison inmates . Having gained closure over his father 's murder , Matt returns to his day @-@ to @-@ day routine , and meets Urich one last time , in which Urich assures him he will not publish his article about Matt 's true identity . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , Bullseye , having been moved to a prison hospital and severely bandaged after his confrontation with Matt , is shown to still have his perfect aim after he impales a fly with a syringe needle and says " Bullseye . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ben Affleck as Matt Murdock / Daredevil 
 An attorney @-@ at @-@ law with a disability who was blinded as a youth in an accident with bio @-@ waste that drastically heightened his remaining senses and gave him a " sonar @-@ sense " , which allowed him to perceive his surroundings , and makes a silent promise with his father to " stick up for the long shots " . His father is killed not long after and at that moment , he vows to seek justice . At night , he becomes a devil @-@ modeled vigilante who takes justice into his hands . Affleck was cast in October 2001 . Vin Diesel was considered to portray Daredevil before him , but he opted to take a role in another film . In a February 2011 interview , Guy Pearce said that he was offered the role but turned it down , stating that " comic @-@ strip stuff isn ’ t really my cup of tea , really . " Matt Damon also revealed that he was offered the role . He claimed that he and Ben " loved that comic book but I just didn 't quite believe in the script or the director at the time . " Colin Farrell was also considered until Affleck signed . As a fan , Affleck made sure he had read every single issue of Daredevil , commenting that it was about taking what he knew as a fan and faithfully getting it on the screen . Joe Quesada considered it " serendipity in action " that Affleck is the lead role , as when he and Kevin Smith did the Guardian Devil series , they had modeled it on Affleck . Affleck said Daredevil was his favorite comic book as a kid , and explained why he took the role by saying " Everybody has that one thing from childhood that they remember and that sticks with them . This story was that for me . " Additionally , he said , " I didn 't want someone else to do it , because I was afraid that they would go out and do it different from the comic and screw it up . " Scott Terra as Young Matt Murdock 
 As a youth , he has trouble with local bullies and a close bond with his father . This changes in different ways after the accident . Terra was officially announced as a part of the cast in March 2002 . 
 Jennifer Garner as Elektra Natchios 
 The daughter of billionaire Nikolas Natchios and the love interest of Matt Murdock . At a very young age , she witnessed the murder of her mother , and since then her father has had her become highly trained in martial arts . For the role of Elektra , many actresses were looked into with considerations including Penélope Cruz , Salma Hayek , Natalie Portman , Lucy Liu , Jessica Alba , and Katie Holmes . A short @-@ list was eventually made , giving the choices of Jennifer Garner , Jolene Blalock , Mía Maestro and Rhona Mitra , with Garner finally becoming the actress to land the role . Garner said of the character , " I think she 's strong and cool and beautiful and smart . She 'd be a good role model . " Garner noted the costume would be different , as Elektra in comics often wears red satin but in the film wears black leather . Garner explained , " [ T ] he red would never have worked for hiding a harness , and I know this sounds ridiculous , but you have to protect your skin a little bit . They throw me around so much on the rooftop [ that ] I got cut through the leather , so imagine if I hadn 't had anything . " 
 Michael Clarke Duncan as Wilson Fisk / Kingpin 
 By appearance , he is an overweight corporate head that takes the name Wilson Fisk , but in fact he is the sole person running organized crime , under the moniker of Kingpin . Kingpin is the murderer of Matt 's father , and the man responsible for the hiring of Bullseye , with intention of having the Natchios family murdered . Michael Clarke Duncan signed on for the role in January 2002 , though he had been attached far earlier . When Duncan was cast , he weighed 290 pounds . He was asked to gain 40 pounds for the role in order to fit the physique of Kingpin . In order to do this , he would lift weights for 30 minutes a day , and power @-@ lifted with one or two reps a day , as well as eating whatever he wanted . Despite this , Duncan 's biggest concern was that he is black , while Kingpin has always been portrayed as white . Also , Duncan provided the voice for Kingpin in Spider @-@ Man : The New Animated Series . He spoke on the fan 's loyalty to the source material by saying " they watch movies to say , ' Hey , that 's not like the comic book . ' But I want them to get past that and just see the movie for what it is and see me for what I am — an actor . " 
 Colin Farrell as Bullseye 
 An assassin with perfect accuracy and deep @-@ rooted pride of it who is hired by Kingpin to kill Nikolas and Elektra Natchios , but when Daredevil gets involved and causes him to miss his target , he makes it his own personal vendetta to take Daredevil down . Farrell was attached to the role in December 2001 . Mark Steven Johnson credits Joe Quesada with talking him out of using the traditional Bullseye costume for the film , and Farrell was encouraged to keep his Irish accent as this version of Bullseye is from Ireland . Farrell had to read Frank Miller 's Daredevil comics to understand Bullseye " because the expression on the character 's faces in the comic books , and just the way they move sometimes , and the exaggerations of the character I 'm playing [ … ] he 's so over @-@ the @-@ top that you do draw from that . But it 's not exactly a character you can do method acting for ... you know , running around New York killing people with paper clips . " 
 Jon Favreau as Franklin " Foggy " Nelson 
 Matt Murdock 's legal partner and best friend , he is also used as a form of comic relief . Favreau joined the cast in February 2002 . Favreau would later go on to direct the Marvel @-@ produced Iron Man and its sequel , Iron Man 2 while also appearing as Happy Hogan . 
 Joe Pantoliano as Ben Urich 
 An investigative journalist whose articles notably relate to Daredevil , and the Kingpin . During the film , he goes on to uncover a lot of information about the two . Pantoliano was cast in March 2002 . 
 David Keith as Jack Murdock 
 Father of Matt Murdock and a boxer , he is murdered by the Kingpin when he does not take a fall for a fight . Keith was officially announced as a part of the cast in March 2002 . 
 Leland Orser as Wesley Owen Welch 
 The number two of Wilson Fisk , but he does not like to be involved in the activities of the Kingpin . Orser previously co @-@ starred with Jon Favreau in 1998 in Very Bad Things . 
 Lennie Loftin as Detective Nick <unk> 
 A NYPD cop who considers Daredevil an urban legend . 
 Erick Avari as Nikolas Natchios 
 The father of Elektra , who is murdered by Bullseye on behalf of the Kingpin . 
 Ellen Pompeo as Karen Page 
 The secretary at Matt Murdock and Franklin Nelson 's law firm . 
 Derrick O 'Connor as Father Everett 
 A priest of Matt Murdock 's local church , where he sometimes goes to find solace . 
 Stan Lee , Frank Miller , and Kevin Smith , each notable for their work on the Daredevil comics , also have cameo roles throughout the film . Mark Margolis has an uncredited role as Fallon , a mobster who once employed Fisk as a hitman . The director 's cut version also features Jude <unk> and Coolio in a sub @-@ plot removed from the theatrical version . <unk> Reed appears uncredited as a thug in Josie 's Bar . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 1997 , 20th Century Fox optioned the rights from Marvel Enterprises , and Chris Columbus was chosen to direct the film . In 1998 , Marvel was facing bankruptcy . During this time 20th Century Fox allowed the option to expire , so Disney began negotiations in order to acquire the rights . In 1999 , the negotiations failed to work out so Marvel set the project up with Sony 's Columbia Pictures . During this time , Chris Columbus and Carlo <unk> co @-@ wrote a script together , before Mark Steven Johnson got signed to write the screenplay . By 2000 , Sony decided to cancel the project , as the two companies reportedly could not come to an agreement over Internet rights . 
 New Regency entered negotiations with a more satisfying offer , attaining the character rights from Marvel in 2000 to produce the film , with 20th Century Fox handling the distribution . Mark Steven Johnson was rehired and his script was turned in during 2001 , which was praised by Ain 't It Cool News ' Harry Knowles . Prior to shooting , producer Gary Foster said that in comparison to other comic book @-@ based films before it , this film would be " more character @-@ driven ... darker ... edgier , " while Marvel Studios executive Kevin Feige felt the script was one of the strongest comic scripts Marvel had received . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Fox wanted to start filming in Canada in order to save money . This plan was contended by Johnson , and the film 's cinematographer , Ericson Core , after they found a preferred area for shooting around downtown Los Angeles ' Arcade Building . Core noted that the appeal came from the " beautiful , old brick buildings and great rooftops , " which they felt was perfect for a depiction of Hell 's Kitchen , Manhattan , in comparison to the studio 's choice where the filming would be done in Montreal or Vancouver . Due to their insistence , coupled with Ben Affleck 's disinterest in filming in Canada ( after having filmed there for his previous film , The Sum of All Fears ) they were able to change the studio 's mind . 
 When the look of the film was being decided , Mark Steven Johnson opted to use direct scenes from the Daredevil comics . Joe Quesada 's artistic take in Guardian Devil ( Daredevil vol . 2 , # 1- # 8 ) was an influence on the film , with Johnson noting that they would " literally take out a scene from the comic book that Joe did [ … ] Here 's Daredevil on the cross , you know , it 's that scene from ' Guardian Devil ' . You just shoot that . " Throughout the film , Ben Affleck had to wear " cataract milky @-@ blue " contacts , which would effectively make him blind . This was considered great by Johnson , as it would aid his performance . 
 The sound plays an integral part in the film , as the superhero relies on it in order to form his ' sonar sense ' . Post @-@ production sound was done by supervising sound editor John Larsen and sound designer Steve <unk> and is heard taking place immediately after Matt 's optic nerve is seen mutating . The mutating of the nerve was done by Rhythm and Hues Studios , who also worked on the sonar @-@ sense which became referred to as the " shadow world " . Shadow world was made using just CGI except in a scene where Elektra and Matt Murdock are in the rain , which was done using CGI over film . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score to Daredevil was written by Graeme Revell , and released on March 4 , 2003 . He was attracted to the focus of " human @-@ ness " on Daredevil , torn emotionally and physically by his superhero status . Avi Arad asked Revell to concentrate more on the emotions of Daredevil and Elektra , while Mark Steven Johnson wanted to stay clear from any gothic and action movie clichés . Revell tried to avoid too much individual motifs but some characters would have an identifiable sound , like Bullseye would have guitar undertones , while Kingpin would have bass beats . Guitarist Mike Einziger of Incubus collaborated with Revell for any additional rock elements . Revell thoroughly enjoyed working with Johnson , describing the director as " positive " and " responsive " when it came to experimenting ( as opposed to feeling " locked in a box of preconceptions " ) which he felt lead to " cool stuff " . Varèse Sarabande put together the score record . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Aside from expected TV commercials during such TV hits as Friends and Law & Order , as well as one in the second quarter of the Super Bowl , there was also a tie @-@ in with Kraft , an in @-@ store promotion at Wal @-@ Mart , a marketing campaign with Hamilton Watch Company , who designed the watch Matt wears in the film , and a weeklong Daredevil segment on Entertainment Tonight . As part of an online form of marketing , a viral e @-@ mail drive was started , where participants would be entered in a contest where they could win prizes such as Daredevil T @-@ shirts , Game Boy Advance games , and cufflinks . To enter the drawing , the user had to book tickets for the film online , then pass an e @-@ mail on to someone else . The idea was to encourage online ticket booking , which at the time was seen as a growing trend . The Game Boy Advance Daredevil game was released on February 14 , 2003 , and was created by Encore , a subsidiary of Navarre Corporation . The soundtrack to the film , Daredevil : The Album , was released in February 2003 . 
 = = = Censorship = = = 
 Due to the film 's violent scenes , the Film Censorship Board of Malaysia banned Daredevil in that country . 20th Century Fox unsuccessfully appealed to Malaysia 's censorship board to change its decision , hoping to release the film in Malaysia on February 27 , 2003 . The deputy prime minister told the press films were banned if containing what the board felt was " excessive violence and sexual material or elements which can create chaos in the community " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film opened theatrically on February 14 , 2003 , on 3 @,@ 471 screens in North America and took first place in its opening weekend , grossing $ 45 @,@ 033 @,@ 454 . At the time , it became the second biggest February release , behind Hannibal . By the second weekend the film saw a 55 @.@ 1 % decline in takings but managed to maintain the number one spot , beating new release Old School by $ 639 @,@ 093 . By the third weekend release , Daredevil saw a further 38 @.@ 5 % drop in sales , and so fell to third place at the box office . The film grossed over $ 102 million in North America , and over $ 76 million in the rest of the world , totalling the film 's worldwide takings at just over $ 179 million , grossing over double its budget of $ 78 million . Avi Arad addressed the top spot success by saying " we are five for five with record @-@ breaking box office successes [ with Blade , X @-@ Men , Blade II then Spider @-@ Man ] and have two more Marvel releases slated for this summer [ which are X2 : X @-@ Men United and Hulk ] . It 's a testament to the broad appeal of these characters before mainstream audiences outside of the core comic fans . These super heroes have been successful within the Marvel pantheon for decades ; it only makes sense that their translations to the big screen are just as fruitful . " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Daredevil received mixed reviews from critics . The review @-@ aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 44 % of critics gave the film positive feedback , based on 221 reviews , with the critical consensus reading , " While Ben Affleck fits the role and the story is sporadically interesting , Daredevil is ultimately a dull , brooding origin story that fails to bring anything new to the genre . " On the website Metacritic the film has an average score of 42 out of 100 , based on 35 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Film critic Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film 3 out of a possible 4 stars and called the film good , despite noting the almost typical superhero background . Of the actors , he stated that Ben Affleck and Jennifer Garner were suitable for their roles , while Michael Clarke Duncan 's presence alone was menacing . He said , " I am getting a little worn out describing the origin stories and powers of superheroes [ … ] Some of their movies , like this one , are better than others . " The Houston Chronicle 's Bruce Westbrook considered it " the best Marvel movie to date , it 's as well @-@ written and character @-@ driven as some of today 's Oscar contenders , and its story doesn 't stall with hollow flamboyance . " The Austin Chronicle 's Kimberly Jones praised the film , the actors , and felt that though an unproven director , " Johnson has just signed his meal ticket with this marriage of big brains , big brawn , and – most happily – big heart . " 
 Empire 's Kim Newman gave the film 3 out of 5 stars , and felt people " will like the characters more than the film , " before adding that there are enough strong moments to guarantee a good viewing . The Guardian 's Peter Bradshaw stated that the film held " unconvincing touches " but was more enjoyable than Spider @-@ Man and as dark as Tim Burton 's Batman . BBC film critic Nev Pierce believed the film had spectacular set @-@ pieces , but felt there was no strong narrative arc to keep the viewer interested . The Wall Street Journal 's Joe Morgenstern considered the film to be neither original nor great but felt it maintained " many grace notes and interesting oddities . " The Globe and Mail 's Rick Groen said the film was " not woeful , not wonderful , merely watchable . " The Philadelphia Inquirer 's Steven Rea thought the film brought a variance of humor and violence , but felt it didn 't work as well as it could have . James Berardinelli felt it was merely a satisfactory superhero film . TV Guide 's Frank Lovece said Daredevil " makes clear that superhero films are the next evolutionary generation of action movies : Now that Schwarzenegger @-@ styled heroes have upped the action ante as far as the human body can go and remain even marginally believable , it 's up to superheroes ... to take it further . " He also felt it was " a movie for grown @-@ ups , not kids . " 
 Particularly negative reviews included that of The New York Times ' Elvis Mitchell , who said the film was " second @-@ rate and ordinary , " while Variety 's Todd McCarthy considered it " a pretender in the realm of bona fide superheroes . " Entertainment Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman gave the film a " C- " , criticizing the story as " sloppy " and " slipshod " , saying , " Daredevil is the sort of half @-@ assed , visually lackadaisical potboiler that makes you rue the day that comic @-@ book franchises ever took over Hollywood . " Time Out 's Trevor Johnston praised Ben Affleck , feeling he " persuades us of the pain of <unk> and supersensitive hearing , " but also felt writer / director Johnson 's construction fails all involved in the film . Slate 's David Edelstein believed Johnson copied a lot of Batman , and concluded by saying " that 's not so bad : The movie looks best when it looks like other , better movies . " The Chicago Tribune 's Michael Wilmington thought the film grabs the attention , but felt it does not reward it . The New York Post 's Lou Lumenick panned the film , describing it as a " mind @-@ numbing , would @-@ be comic @-@ book franchise , which often seems as blind as its hero -- not to mention deaf and dumb . " Character co @-@ creator Stan Lee himself felt , " [ T ] hey just wrote the whole thing wrong . They made him too tragic . " Ben Affleck won the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actor for his work in the movie , as well as for Gigli and Paycheck . 
 = = = Director 's cut = = = 
 A director 's cut of the film was announced for a spring 2004 DVD release . This version contained new additions like previously unseen footage and a removed subplot , and was to be a bit darker with an R rating . The film , released in 2 @.@ 35 : 1 widescreen format , was released with DTS and Dolby Digital sound . The new version of the film has newly recorded commentary to accompany it , featuring Mark Steven Johnson and Avi Arad . A " Making of Director 's Cut " featurette also accompanied the film . The release date of the DVD was later pushed back to November 30 , 2004 . On September 30 , 2008 the director 's cut was released on Blu @-@ ray . The DVD release of the director 's cut removed the bonus material included on the theatrical cut 's DVD release , but that content was restored for the Blu @-@ ray release ( although the Blu @-@ ray release only contains the director 's cut ) . 
 One of the biggest changes to the film was the addition of a subplot involving a drug addict played by Coolio . While this subplot was missing from the theatrical version of the film , it is present in the novelization by Greg Cox , published in 2003 . 
 Producer Kevin Feige commented on this version of the film , believing " the people who had other opinions [ of Daredevil ] will be won over by this new version . " Reviewers like Empire 's Danny Graydon seemed to reaffirm this opinion by considering this version a " considerable improvement on the original version , " notably preferring the more violent undertones , a lesser focus on the romance , and the equal focus of Daredevil and his lawyer alias Matt Murdock and the subplot involving Coolio . Some critics continued to feel Affleck was unsuitable as Daredevil and that Duncan portrayed the Kingpin in an over @-@ the @-@ top manner . IGN 's Jeff Otto and Andy Patrizio also deemed this version an improvement over the original . They felt this version was more loyal to the Frank Miller feel of the Daredevil world , with more focus on themes such as Murdock 's struggle with his Catholic upbringing . On the whole they felt the film would be far more pleasing to the fans , and overall better than the theatrical release . 
 = = Reboot = = 
 Feige had stated on potential future Daredevil films , " there are many more stories to be told with old <unk> and we 'd love to tell them someday . " Avi Arad has also said that a sequel will begin development once the rights go from 20th Century Fox to Marvel Studios . Director Mark Steven Johnson showed interest in returning to direct with the Born Again storyline , as well as suggesting Mr. Fear as a possible villain . 
 During 2004 , Ben Affleck shot a cameo role for the spin @-@ off film , Elektra , at the request of Daredevil co @-@ star Jennifer Garner . In October 2004 , Affleck stated he would only return in the lead role if Fox would renegotiate to tell the darker stories of Daredevil , and showed interest in a Kevin Smith graphic novel which included Mysterio , as well as the Born Again storyline . However , in November 2006 , Affleck stated that he would never reprise the role , having felt " by playing a superhero in Daredevil , I have inoculated myself from ever playing another superhero ... Wearing a costume was a source of humiliation for me and something I wouldn 't want to do again soon . " Despite this , Affleck would later sign on to portray another superhero , Bruce Wayne / Batman , in Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice . 
 In July 2006 , Michael Clarke Duncan showed interest in returning for the role of the Kingpin , but stated that he would not be willing to gain weight as he felt " comfortable " being down to 270 pounds . However , he jokingly showed willingness to change his mind if he was offered $ 20 million . Duncan suggested that the character is portrayed to have been training a lot in jail in order to become faster in combat against Daredevil , also working as a way to fit his weight loss into the story . Duncan would later go on to reprise his role as the Kingpin in an episode of the animated series : Spider @-@ Man : The New Animated Series . 
 In July 2008 , Jason Statham expressed interest in appearing as Daredevil in the future . Statham requested " just give me the chance , I would love to be Daredevil . " Frank Miller commented in agreement " I think he should be Daredevil too . " In October 2008 , 20th Century Fox executive Tom Rothman said " a Daredevil reboot is something we are thinking very seriously about . " Rothman added that " what it really needs is , it needs a visionary at the level that Chris Nolan was . It needs someone , it needs a director , honestly , who has a genuine vision . " By February 2010 , 20th Century Fox and New Regency were looking to develop the reboot with News Corp. , with Peter Chernin producing and David Scarpa writing the script . On March 15 , 2011 , it was announced that filmmaker David Slade would be directing the reboot , but he later had to drop out due to other obligations . Fringe writer and producer Brad Caleb Kane was hired to pen the Slade @-@ directed film . On September 3 , 2012 , Duncan died , precluding him from reprising his role as Kingpin . 
 Later , it was announced that should a sequel or reboot not start filming by October 10 , 2012 , the rights to the Daredevil franchise would revert from Fox back to Marvel . In early August 2012 , Fox scrambled to find a replacement for David Slade , who dropped out of the director 's chair due to scheduling conflicts . The studio briefly met with Joe Carnahan , for the job — however , Carnahan said on Twitter that his pitch , described as a hard @-@ boiled ' 70s thriller , had gone up in smoke . Several sources commented that Fox had given up on the reboot , and were prepared to let the rights revert to Marvel and their parent company , The Walt Disney Company . On April 23 , 2013 , Kevin Feige confirmed that the rights for Daredevil returned to Marvel Studios and Disney , opening the possibility of including the character into the Marvel Cinematic Universe . That speculation was confirmed with the announcement of an original Netflix Daredevil television series , which premiered on the streaming service in April 2015 , with English actor Charlie Cox in the title role . 
 = Interstate 695 ( Maryland ) = 
 Interstate 695 ( I @-@ 695 ) is a 51 @.@ 46 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 82 @.@ 82 km ) full beltway Interstate Highway extending around Baltimore , Maryland , USA . I @-@ 695 is officially designated the McKeldin Beltway , but is colloquially referred to as either the Baltimore Beltway or 695 . The route is an auxiliary route of I @-@ 95 , intersecting that route southwest of Baltimore near Arbutus and northeast of the city near White Marsh . It also intersects other major roads radiating from the Baltimore area , including I @-@ 97 near Glen Burnie , the Baltimore – Washington Parkway ( Maryland Route 295 , MD 295 ) near Linthicum , I @-@ 70 near Woodlawn , I @-@ 795 near <unk> , and I @-@ 83 in the <unk> area . The 19 @.@ 37 @-@ mile ( 31 @.@ 17 km ) portion of the Baltimore Beltway between I @-@ 95 northeast of Baltimore and I @-@ 97 south of Baltimore is officially MD 695 , and is not part of the Interstate Highway System , but is signed as I @-@ 695 . This section of the route includes the Francis Scott Key Bridge that crosses over the Patapsco River . The bridge and its approaches are maintained by the Maryland Transportation Authority ( MdTA ) while the remainder of the Baltimore Beltway is maintained by the Maryland State Highway Administration ( MDSHA ) . 
 The Baltimore Beltway was first planned in 1949 by Baltimore County ; the state eventually took over the project and it became part of the Interstate Highway System planned in 1956 . The length of the route from MD 2 south of Baltimore clockwise to U.S. Route 40 ( US 40 ) northeast of the city opened in stages from 1955 to 1962 , providing an Interstate bypass of Baltimore . It was the first beltway in the United States to be built as part of the Interstate Highway System . Plans were made to finish the remainder of the route , with a diversion to the Windlass Freeway and the Patapsco Freeway , opened in 1973 , following the cancellation of a more outer route that was to partly follow what is today MD 702 ( Southeast Boulevard ) . The Outer Harbor Crossing over the Patapsco River , which was dedicated to Francis Scott Key , who wrote The Star @-@ Spangled Banner , and its approaches were finished in 1977 , completing the route around Baltimore . The approaches to the bridge were originally two lanes to accommodate a tunnel that was originally proposed to run under the river ; in subsequent years , they were upgraded to a four @-@ lane configuration compliant with Interstate Highway standards , allowing for this portion of route to be signed as I @-@ 695 rather than MD 695 . There are future plans for I @-@ 695 that include high @-@ occupancy toll lanes to ease traffic . In addition , the northeastern interchange with I @-@ 95 has been reconstructed to accommodate express toll lanes that were added to I @-@ 95 ( completed in 2014 ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Curtis Creek to I @-@ 95 = = = 
 Starting at the zero milepost in Baltimore , I @-@ 695 , which at this point is officially called MD 695 and is maintained by the Maryland Transportation Authority , is four lanes wide . The route passes over Curtis Creek on a pair of drawbridges here , which have 58 feet ( 18 m ) of vertical navigational clearance and provide access for tall ships to a U.S. Coast Guard base further upstream . Continuing west through industrial areas into Anne Arundel County , the route encounters the northern terminus of MD 10 ( Arundel Expressway ) at a directional interchange , where maintenance switches to the Maryland State Highway Administration . The interchange includes access to the next interchange , with MD 2 ( Ritchie Highway ) , a major north – south route between Baltimore and the southern suburbs , in Glen Burnie . This interchange has access to northbound MD 2 in both directions and from northbound MD 2 to the westbound direction . Beyond MD 2 , I @-@ 695 encounters I @-@ 895 Spur , a short connector to I @-@ 895 ( Harbor Tunnel Thruway ) ; this interchange provides access to southbound MD 2 from both directions and to the eastbound direction from southbound MD 2 . Immediately past this interchange , I @-@ 695 comes to an interchange with the northern terminus of I @-@ 97 , which terminates on the Beltway . At this point , the route officially becomes I @-@ 695 . 
 The route continues west as a six @-@ lane freeway , heading west into residential areas of Linthicum . It interchanges with MD 648 ( Baltimore Annapolis Boulevard ) , where 132 @,@ 330 vehicles travel I @-@ 695 every day , before turning northwest and intersecting MD 170 ( Camp Meade Road ) . The route encounters the Baltimore – Washington Parkway ( MD 295 ) at a cloverleaf interchange where the route ’ s signage changes from east – west to north – south at this interchange . It turns more to the north from here and heads into commercial areas , interchanging with MD 168 ( Nursery Road ) and Hammonds Ferry Road . Past this interchange , the route crosses the Patapsco River into Baltimore County and soon encounters a partial interchange with I @-@ 895 ( Harbor Tunnel Thruway ) with access only from the southbound direction of I @-@ 695 to I @-@ 895 northbound and from I @-@ 895 southbound to the northbound direction of I @-@ 695 . Past this interchange , I @-@ 695 heads north , interchanging with Hollins Ferry Road in Lansdowne before passing under CSX ’ s Baltimore Terminal Subdivision and coming to an interchange with US 1 Alt . ( Washington Boulevard ) in Arbutus . A short distance later , I @-@ 695 comes to a <unk> interchange with I @-@ 95 . 
 = = = I @-@ 95 to I @-@ 70 = = = 
 I @-@ 695 widens to nine lanes past interchange with I @-@ 95 , with five lanes in the southbound direction and four lanes in the northbound direction . Running northwest , it crosses over Amtrak ’ s Northeast Corridor and comes to a partial interchange with US 1 ( Southwestern Boulevard ) , with a southbound exit and northbound entrance . From here , it continues northwest through residential areas of Catonsville to an interchange with MD 372 ( Wilkens Avenue ) . Narrowing to eight lanes total , with four lanes in each direction , beyond MD 372 , the route continues through suburban neighborhoods before coming to an interchange with MD 144 ( Frederick Road ) . At this point , I @-@ 695 narrows to seven lanes , with three southbound lanes and four northbound lanes . It continues north and interchanges with Edmondson Avenue before turning northwest and intersects US 40 ( Baltimore National Pike ) near the defunct Westview Mall , now a big @-@ box complex . Beyond US 40 , I @-@ 695 continues north through residential areas , narrowing to six lanes , with three lanes in each direction , before coming to a four @-@ level stack interchange with I @-@ 70 in Woodlawn . 
 = = = I @-@ 70 to I @-@ 83 = = = 
 The Baltimore Beltway narrows from seven to six lanes within the interchange , which contains braided ramps providing access to the next interchange , MD 122 ( Security Boulevard ) , located near the Security Square Mall and the headquarters of the Social Security Administration . Continuing north , the road widens to eight lanes again and continues through a mix of suburban homes and business parks in <unk> . I @-@ 695 interchanges with MD 26 ( Liberty Road ) east of <unk> and resumes north , narrowing to six lanes . It intersects the southern terminus of I @-@ 795 ( Northwest Expressway ) , which serves as a bypass of MD 140 in the Owings Mills area . The Baltimore Metro 's line to Owings Mills passes under I @-@ 695 within the interchange and runs in the median of I @-@ 795 as far as that town . At the I @-@ 795 interchange , the signage of route changes from north – south to east – west . 
 From here , I @-@ 695 heads northeast as an eight lane road and enters <unk> , where it intersects MD 140 ( Reisterstown Road ) at a single @-@ point urban interchange . A short distance later , the road comes to a partial interchange with MD 129 ( Park Heights Avenue ) , with an eastbound exit and westbound entrance . I @-@ 695 heads east to another partial interchange with Stevenson Road , which has a westbound exit and eastbound entrance . The Baltimore Beltway passes through heavily forested land as it encounters Greenspring Avenue . Past this interchange , I @-@ 695 continues northeast through woodland before coming to an interchange with I @-@ 83 ( Jones Falls Expressway ) . The interchange includes connections to MD 25 ( Falls Road ) , which heads into the open countryside north of Baltimore . Within this interchange , I @-@ 83 forms a concurrency with I @-@ 695 and the roadway widens to ten lanes , with six for the Beltway and four for I @-@ 83 . After running concurrently , I @-@ 83 splits from I @-@ 695 by heading north on the Harrisburg Expressway at a directional interchange . 
 = = = I @-@ 83 to I @-@ 95 = = = 
 Beyond I @-@ 83 , I @-@ 695 turns northeast as a six lane road and heads into Towson , interchanging with MD 139 ( Charles Street ) . The Baltimore Beltway heads through residential and commercial areas before coming to interchanges with MD 45 ( York Road ) near The Shops at Kenilworth and MD 146 ( Dulaney Valley Road ) . Continuing east , the Baltimore Beltway passes to the north of Goucher College and comes to an interchange with Providence Road . I @-@ 695 turns southeast through residential areas past Providence Road and comes to an interchange with MD 542 ( Loch Raven Boulevard ) and Cromwell Bridge Road . The road continues towards <unk> , where it comes to a cloverleaf interchange with MD 41 ( Perring Parkway ) within commercial areas . The Baltimore Beltway continues through residential areas into Carney , coming to another cloverleaf interchange with MD 147 ( Harford Road ) . Continuing east into White Marsh , the route encounters the western terminus of MD 43 ( White Marsh Boulevard ) , a limited @-@ access at @-@ grade boulevard that provides access to White Marsh Mall , US 1 and I @-@ 95 . 
 I @-@ 695 turns south past MD 43 and interchanges with US 1 ( Belair Road ) south of White Marsh . The road continues southeast to an interchange with I @-@ 95 ( John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway ) a short distance after US 1 in Rossville . This interchange with I @-@ 95 ( to east of Baltimore city ) is a fully directional interchange where the carriageways of both routes crossed over each other onto the opposite side , then crossed over each other again ; at the site of each crossover , left @-@ hand entrance and exit ramps were provided to eliminate the need for directional flyovers . In 2008 , interchange reconstruction at the I @-@ 95 interchange removed the left @-@ hand entrance from northbound I @-@ 95 to westbound I @-@ 695 with the remaining left @-@ hand entrances to be removed by August 2009 as part of the construction of the I @-@ 95 Express Toll Lane Project ; all exits and entrances were now on the right , and I @-@ 95 's opposing roadways no longer crossed each other ( but I @-@ 695 's still did ) . 
 = = = I @-@ 95 to Curtis Creek = = = 
 Continuing south , the Baltimore Beltway officially becomes MD 695 again , despite being signed as I @-@ 695 , and soon encounters MD 7 ( Philadelphia Road ) . Between I @-@ 95 and MD 7 , the route ’ s changes from east – west to north – south . Immediately after MD 7 , the route interchanges with US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) northwest of Essex near The Centre at Golden Ring . After US 40 , I @-@ 695 crosses over CSX ’ s Philadelphia Subdivision and comes to a partial directional interchange with MD 702 ( Southeast Boulevard ) . At this interchange , I @-@ 695 turns south onto the Windlass Freeway , crossing over the Northeast Corridor again within the interchange . 
 Running south along the Windlass Freeway , parallel to the Northeast Corridor , I @-@ 695 , now narrowed to four lanes , turns west before making a sharp turn to the south , crossing over the railroad line twice . The road becomes the Patapsco Freeway and continues south to an interchange with MD 150 ( Eastern Avenue ) and MD 157 ( Merritt Boulevard ) near the Eastpoint Mall . A short distance later , I @-@ 695 comes to an interchange with MD 151 ( North Point Boulevard ) . From here , the route continues southeast along the Back River into residential and industrial Dundalk , interchanging with Cove Road . The route turns south , with the median briefly widening to include trees , before coming to another interchange with MD 151 . Past MD 151 , the Baltimore Beltway continues southwest through industrial areas , with maintenance switching to the Maryland Transportation Authority at the crossing of a CSX rail line . It comes to an interchange with MD 157 ( Peninsula Expressway ) and MD 158 ( Bethlehem Boulevard ) before heading west . The route runs past the Sparrows Point Industrial Complex before crossing over Bear Creek and interchanging with unsigned MD 695A ( <unk> Highway ) south of the Dundalk Marine Terminal , with an eastbound exit and westbound entrance . 
 Beyond this interchange , the route comes to two @-@ way toll plaza and has a U @-@ turn ramp from the southbound direction to the northbound direction intended to provide southbound motorists access to MD 695A . This ramp , known as MD 695C , also provides access to northbound I @-@ 695 from MD 695A by way of Authority Drive . After this , the route ascends onto the Francis Scott Key Bridge , which carries I @-@ 695 over the lower Baltimore Harbor and Patapsco River . Unlike the Fort McHenry or Harbor Tunnels , HAZMAT trucks are allowed to cross the Key Bridge . After crossing the Patapsco River over the bridge the route touches down within the Baltimore city limits and continues west past Thoms Cove through Hawkins Point 's industrial areas . It comes to an interchange with Quarantine Road , which provides access to MD 173 , south of Curtis Bay . By this point , the route ’ s signage changes from north – south to east – west . Past this interchange , the Baltimore Beltway continues west and returns to the Curtis Creek drawbridges . 
 = = = Exit numbering = = = 
 As opposed to I @-@ 495 ( Capital Beltway ) around Washington , D.C. , on which exit numbers are generally arranged by mileposts counterclockwise starting at the southern crossing of the Potomac River , the exit numbers for the Baltimore Beltway are arranged consecutively clockwise starting at Interchange # 1 at Quarantine Rd , west of the Francis Scott Key Bridge crossing of the Patapsco River . 
 = = History = = 
 The Baltimore County Planning Commission first conceived the Baltimore Beltway as a county @-@ level roadway project in 1949 ; by 1953 the project was taken over by the state due to slow progress at the county level . The project was included as part of the Interstate Highway System by 1956 , increasing the speed of construction due to federal funds available . 
 The first part of the Baltimore Beltway to be completed was in December 1955 between MD 25 ( Falls Road ) and the Harrisburg Expressway ( present @-@ day I @-@ 83 ) . In 1956 , the next portion of the road between the Harrisburg Expressway and MD 45 ( York Road ) opened . Several more segments of the Baltimore Beltway would be built in the following years , with the section from MD 168 ( Nursery Road ) to the Glen Burnie Bypass ( present @-@ day I @-@ 97 ) opening in 1957 ; the portions from MD 45 to MD 542 ( Loch Raven Boulevard ) , MD 7 ( Old Philadelphia Road ) to US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) , and from MD 168 to US 40 ( Baltimore National Pike ) opening in 1958 ; the segment from MD 2 ( Ritchie Highway ) to the Glen Burnie Bypass completed in 1960 ; the portion from US 1 ( Belair Road ) to MD 7 finished in 1961 ; and the portions from MD 542 to US 1 and from US 40 to MD 25 finished in 1962 . At this time , the original length of the Baltimore Beltway , from MD 2 in the south clockwise to US 40 in the northeast , was fully completed and opened to traffic , providing the first Interstate @-@ grade bypass of Baltimore and the first beltway in the United States built under the Interstate Highway System . A segment of the road completed in 1973 ran from MD 10 to MD 2 , heading toward the Outer Harbor Crossing . 
 = = = Windlass and Patapsco freeways = = = 
 At the northeastern terminus , the Baltimore Beltway was planned to extend southeast along the Back River Neck peninsula and turn south to cross the river near the Essex Skypark Airport , heading towards an outer crossing of the Patapsco River . Part of this alignment was completed south of US 40 in 1972 with a further extension to MD 150 opening as the Southeast Freeway ( designated MD 702 ) by 1975 . However , the Baltimore Beltway was diverted to two freeways not planned to be part of it . The first was the Windlass Freeway ( MD 149 ) , a route planned to run from I @-@ 95 at Moravia Road northeast to Chase , paralleling US 40 to the south . The other freeway that was incorporated into the Baltimore Beltway was the Patapsco Freeway , a short connector from the Windlass Freeway southeast to the originally @-@ planned Baltimore Beltway . Only the segment of the Windlass Freeway between MD 702 the planned intersection with the Patapsco Freeway south to MD 151 ( North Point Boulevard ) were constructed , opening to traffic in 1973 . 
 Ramp stubs for the planned Windlass Freeway are present at the proposed west end at I @-@ 95 and Moravia Road , and at the present east end at the Southeast Freeway . The junction of the Windlass and Patapsco Freeways was originally built with provisions for extensions of each , but this has since been reconstructed . 
 = = = Outer Harbor Crossing = = = 
 The Outer Harbor Crossing is the name given to the segment of the Baltimore Beltway that is maintained by the Maryland Transportation Authority . It consists of the segment of I @-@ 695 between Exit 40 ( MD 151 ) and Exit 2 ( MD 10 ) , which includes the Francis Scott Key Bridge . The route was originally planned as a two @-@ lane freeway on a four @-@ lane right @-@ of @-@ way , with a two @-@ lane outer harbor tunnel across the Patapsco River . When the tunnel was advertised for construction in 1970 , the bids were so high that the decision was made to construct a four @-@ lane bridge instead . The bridge was to feature two @-@ lane approach roads on both sides . 
 Construction on the Outer Harbor Crossing , including the bridge , started in 1972 and was completed on March 23 , 1977 , completing the full Baltimore Beltway . The bridge was named the Francis Scott Key Bridge in honor of Francis Scott Key , who wrote " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner , " the national anthem of the United States . By the early 1980s , the southern approach to the Key Bridge was dualized , with a second roadway constructed along with a second drawbridge over Curtis Creek . The northern approach was left as a two @-@ lane viaduct in the Sparrows Point area until a four @-@ lane surface freeway was constructed along this portion , with interchanges reconfigured , following an $ 89 @.@ 5 million project completed in January 2000 . The Outer Harbor Crossing , as well as the entire Baltimore Beltway east of I @-@ 95 , was first signposted as MD 695 because portions of it were a two @-@ lane expressway not up to Interstate Highway standards . Improvements to the road have allowed the entire Baltimore Beltway to be signed as I @-@ 695 , even though all of I @-@ 695 between the junction of I @-@ 95 northeast of Baltimore and I @-@ 97 is officially considered MD 695 by the MDSHA . 
 = = = 1999 footbridge collapse = = = 
 On June 8 , 1999 , a tractor @-@ trailer carrying a backhoe that exceeded the maximum height requirement struck a pedestrian footbridge over the Baltimore Beltway just northwest of the I @-@ 95 junction near Arbutus . The footbridge collapsed onto the inner loop of the Beltway . One driver was killed when his SUV struck the collapsed bridge ; six others were injured , three critically . The incident occurred during the afternoon rush hour . The footbridge had been closed to pedestrians since November 1996 due to complaints about vandalism and crime . 
 = = = McKeldin Beltway = = = 
 The Beltway was dedicated in honor of former Governor Theodore R. McKeldin in May 2005 . McKeldin was responsible for the construction of the Beltway and other state highways during his term . Most Marylanders still refer to the highway as the " Baltimore Beltway , " " 695 , " or ( mostly among Baltimore metro area residents ) simply " The Beltway , " like its Washington counterpart . 
 = = Future = = 
 In March 2009 , construction began on the reconstruction of the bridge that carries MD 139 ( Charles Street ) over I @-@ 695 . The bridge will be decorative , featuring ornamental street lights . As part of the MD 139 project , the interchange will be reconstructed and the traffic circle at the MD 139 / I @-@ 695 ramps will be removed and replaced with a traffic signal . This project is expected to cost $ 50 million and be completed in 2012 . 
 At Exit 33 ( I @-@ 95 / John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway ) , both highways had crossed over themselves so that all through traffic was on the left side of the road with left @-@ hand entrance / exit ramps connecting the crossover sections . This interchange is currently being replaced by a more conventional flyover ramp interchange , as part of the I @-@ 95 expansion project under construction since 2007 , eliminating the left @-@ turn ramps and I @-@ 95 's double crossovers . So far , several ramps have been completed , with the ramp from northbound I @-@ 95 to eastbound I @-@ 695 completed in September 2008 , the ramp from westbound I @-@ 695 to northbound I @-@ 95 completed in October 2008 , the ramp from northbound I @-@ 95 to westbound I @-@ 695 completed in November 2008 ( eliminating the left @-@ hand exit ) , and the ramp from eastbound I @-@ 695 to southbound I @-@ 95 was completed in May 2009 . The ramps from southbound I @-@ 95 to both westbound and eastbound I @-@ 695 were completed in June 2009 and the ramp from westbound I @-@ 695 to southbound I @-@ 695 was completed in July 2009 and the ramp from eastbound I @-@ 695 to northbound I @-@ 95 opened in August 2009 . In addition to rebuilding these ramps , the project will also add four ramps to service the high @-@ occupancy toll lanes being added to I @-@ 95 . 
 There are long @-@ term plans to add express toll lanes to I @-@ 695 to ease traffic congestion along the route . In addition , there are also plans to widen the portion of I @-@ 695 between I @-@ 83 and I @-@ 95 to the north of Baltimore . This road , which is to be widened to eight lanes , is currently in the design phase . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 Exits are numbered sequentially ( unlike other interstates in Maryland which use a milepost @-@ based system ) , and in a clockwise ( inner loop ) direction , in accordance with AASHTO guidelines . 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 MD 695A runs along <unk> Highway , a two @-@ lane undivided road that begins at I @-@ 695 exit 44 and heads northwest through residential and industrial areas in Dundalk , Baltimore County to the Baltimore city line . The route provides access to the Dundalk Marine Terminal from I @-@ 695 . MD 695A is 1 @.@ 93 mi ( 3 @.@ 11 km ) long . 
 MD <unk> runs along <unk> Road from MD 695A north to Dundalk Avenue in Dundalk , Baltimore County . The route is 0 @.@ 10 mi ( 0 @.@ 16 km ) long . 
 MD 695C runs along Authority Drive from MD 695A southwest to I @-@ 695 in Dundalk , Baltimore County , looping under the route at the Francis Scott Key Bridge to merge onto northbound I @-@ 695 . MD 695C serves as part of a U @-@ turn ramp to provide access to MD 695A from southbound I @-@ 695 and to provide access to northbound I @-@ 695 from MD 695A . The route is 1 @.@ 23 mi ( 1 @.@ 98 km ) long . 
 = The Boat Race 1911 = 
 The 68th Boat Race took place on 1 April 1911 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race . Umpired by former Cambridge rower Frederick I. Pitman , Oxford won by two @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 18 minutes 29 seconds , taking their overall lead in the competition to 37 – 30 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2015 , broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1910 race by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , and led overall with 36 victories to Cambridge 's 30 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were H. R. Barker ( who rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1908 and 1909 races ) , G. C. Bourne ( who had rowed for the university in the 1882 and 1883 races ) , and Harcourt Gilbey Gold ( Dark Blue president for the 1900 race and four @-@ time Blue ) . Cambridge were coached by Stanley Bruce ( who had rowed in 1904 ) , William Dudley Ward ( who had rowed in 1897 , 1899 and 1900 races ) , Raymond Etherington @-@ Smith ( who had rowed in 1898 and 1900 ) and H. W. Willis ( who had previously coached Oxford in 1907 ) . For the eighth year the umpire was old Etonian Frederick I. Pitman who rowed for Cambridge in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 The race was watched from the Oxford launch by the Prince of Wales and his brother Prince Albert . It was also the first time the launches were accompanied by aeroplanes . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 7 @.@ 5 lb ( 79 @.@ 4 kg ) , 3 @.@ 625 pounds ( 1 @.@ 6 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Six of the Cambridge crew had previous Boat Race experience , including R. W. M. Arbuthnot and J. B. <unk> , who were taking part in their third event . Oxford 's boat contained three rowers who had previously participated three times in the event , in Duncan Mackinnon , Robert Bourne and Stanley Garton . Six of the Dark Blues were studying at Magdalen College , five of whom had rowed to victory in the Grand Challenge Cup at the Henley Royal Regatta the previous July . Three participants in the race were registered as overseas Blues : Oxford 's Charles Littlejohn was Australian , while Cambridge 's Pieter Voltelyn Graham van der Byl and cox C. A. Skinner hailed from South Africa . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . Umpire Pitman started the race at 2 : 36 p.m. in a light breeze which helped create an unusually strong spring tide . Oxford made the better start , with their stroke Bourne out @-@ rating his opposite number by two stroke per minute . At Craven Steps , the Dark Blues were three @-@ quarters of a length ahead which they held past the Mile Post . At this point Oxford pushed on to be clear by the Crab Tree pub and a further length ahead by Harrods Furniture Depository . By the time the crews passed below Hammersmith Bridge , the Dark Blues were two and a half lengths ahead and reduced their rating yet continued to pull away . 
 By Chiswick Steps , Oxford were four lengths clear and further ahead at Barnes Bridge . Cambridge 's determination meant that they reduced the deficit over the last few minutes of the race . Oxford won by two and three @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 18 minutes 29 seconds . It was Oxford 's third consecutive victory and took the overall record to 37 – 30 in their favour . The winning time was the fastest in the history of the race . 
 = André Kertész = 
 André Kertész ( French : [ <unk> ] ; 2 July 1894 – 28 September 1985 ) , born Kertész Andor , was a Hungarian @-@ born photographer known for his groundbreaking contributions to photographic composition and the photo essay . In the early years of his career , his then @-@ unorthodox camera angles and style prevented his work from gaining wider recognition . Kertész never felt that he had gained the worldwide recognition he deserved . Today he is considered one of the seminal figures of photojournalism . The Estate of André Kertész is represented by Bruce Silverstein Gallery New York , NY 
 Expected by his family to work as a stockbroker , Kertész pursued photography independently as an autodidact , and his early work was published primarily in magazines , a major market in those years . This continued until much later in his life , when Kertész stopped accepting commissions . He served briefly in World War I and moved to Paris in 1925 , then the artistic capital of the world , against the wishes of his family . In Paris he worked for France 's first illustrated magazine called VU . Involved with many young immigrant artists and the Dada movement , he achieved critical and commercial success . 
 Due to German persecution of the Jews and the threat of World War II , Kertész decided to emigrate to the United States in 1936 , where he had to rebuild his reputation through commissioned work . In the 1940s and 1950s , he stopped working for magazines and began to achieve greater international success . His career is generally divided into four periods , based on where he was working and his work was most prominently known . They are called the Hungarian period , the French period , the American period and , toward the end of his life , the International period . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Andor Kertész was born on 2 July 1894 in Budapest to the middle @-@ class Jewish family of Lipót Kertész , a bookseller , and his wife , Ernesztin Hoffmann . Andor , known as " Bandi " to his friends , was the middle child of three sons , including Imre and Jenő . When Lipót died in 1908 from tuberculosis , the widowed Ernesztin was without a source of income to support their three children . Ernesztin 's brother , Lipót Hoffmann , provided for the family and acted much like a father to the boys . The family soon moved to Hoffman 's country property in <unk> . Kertész grew up in a leisurely pace of life and pastoral setting that would shape his later career path . 
 Hoffman paid for his middle nephew 's business classes at the Academy of Commerce until his 1912 graduation , and arranged his hiring by the stock exchange soon after . Unlike his older brother Imre , who worked at the exchange in Budapest for all his life , Kertész had little interest in the field . He was drawn to illustrated magazines and to activities like fishing and swimming in the Danube River near his uncle 's property . 
 Kertész 's first encounters with magazine photography inspired him to learn photography . He was also influenced by certain paintings by Lajos <unk> and Gyula <unk> , as well as by poetry . 
 = = = Hungarian period = = = 
 After earning enough money , Kertész quickly bought his first camera ( an ICA box camera ) in 1912 , despite his family 's protests to continue his career in business . In his free time , he photographed the local peasants , gypsies , and landscape of the surrounding Hungarian Plains ( the <unk> ) . His first photograph is believed to be " Sleeping Boy , Budapest , 1912 " . His photographs were first published in 1917 in the magazine <unk> Újság , during World War I , while Kertész was serving in the Austro @-@ Hungarian army . As early as 1914 ( for example , " Eugene , 1914 " ) , his distinctive and mature style was already evident . 
 In 1914 , at the age of 20 , he was sent to the frontline , where he took photographs of life in the trenches with a lightweight camera ( a <unk> <unk> ) . Most of these photographs were destroyed during the violence of the Hungarian Revolution of 1919 . Wounded in 1915 by a bullet , Kertész suffered temporary paralysis of his left arm . 
 He was sent for convalescence to a military hospital in Budapest , but was later transferred to Esztergom , where he continued to take photographs . These included a self @-@ portrait for a competition in the magazine <unk> <unk> . His most famous piece of this period was " Underwater Swimmer , Esztergom , 1917 " , the only surviving work of a series of a swimmer whose image is distorted by the water . Kertész explored the subject more thoroughly in his series of " Distortions " photographs during the early 1930s . 
 Kertész did not heal soon enough to return to combat , and with peace in 1918 , he returned to the stock exchange . There he met his future wife <unk> Salomon ( later changed to Elizabeth Saly ) , who also worked at the exchange . He began to pursue her romantically . During this period of work and throughout his whole career , he used Elizabeth as a model for his photographs . Kertész also took numerous photographs of his brother Jenő . Kertész left his career at the exchange to try agricultural work and beekeeping during the early 1920s . This venture was brief given the political turmoil that accompanied the revolution and coming of communism . 
 After returning to the stock exchange , Kertész decided to emigrate , to study at one of France 's photographic schools . His mother dissuaded him , and he did not emigrate for several years . Working during the day at the exchange , he pursued photography the rest of the time . 
 In 1923 , the Hungarian Amateur Photographer 's Association selected one of his photographs for its silver award , on the condition that he print it by the <unk> process . Kertész disliked this , so turned down the medal . Instead , he was given a diploma from the association . On its 26 June 1925 , the Hungarian news magazine <unk> Újság used one of his photographs for its cover , giving him widespread publicity . By that time , Kertész was determined to photograph the sights in Paris and join its artistic culture . 
 = = = French period = = = 
 Kertész emigrated to Paris in September 1925 , leaving behind his mother , his unofficial fiancee Elizabeth , both brothers , and his uncle Hoffman , who died shortly afterward . Jenő later emigrated to Argentina . Elizabeth Kertész remained until her future husband was well enough established in Paris that they could marry . Kertész was among numerous Hungarian artists who emigrated during these decades , including François Kollar , Robert Capa , Emeric Fehér , <unk> , and Julia Bathory . Man Ray , Germaine Krull and Lucien <unk> also emigrated to Paris during this period . 
 Initially Kertész took on commissioned work for several European magazines , gaining publication of his work in Germany , France , Italy and Great Britain . Soon after arriving in Paris , Kertész changed his first name to André , which he kept for the rest of his life . In Paris he found critical and commercial success . In 1927 Kertész was the first photographer to have a one @-@ man exhibition ; Jan <unk> presented 30 of his photographs at the " Sacre du Printemps Gallery " . Kertész had become connected with members of the growing Dada movement . Paul Dermée dubbed him " Brother Seer " and " Brother Seeing Eye " during his first solo exhibit , alluding to a medieval monastery where all the monks were blind bar one . Over the next years , Kertész was featured in both solo exhibits and group shows . In 1932 at the Julien Levy Gallery in New York , the price of Kertész 's proofs was set at US $ 20 ( $ 347 in 2016 ) , a large sum of money during the Great Depression . 
 Kertész and other Hungarian artists formed a synergistic circle ; he was featured in exhibits with some of them later in his life . Visiting his sculptor friends , he was fascinated by the Cubism movement . He created photo portraits of painters Piet Mondrian and Marc Chagall , the writer Colette , and film @-@ maker Sergei Eisenstein . In 1928 , Kertész switched from using plate @-@ glass cameras to a Leica . This period of work was one of his most productive ; he was photographing daily , with work divided between magazine commissions through the late 1920s and his personal pieces . In 1930 , at the Exposition Coloniale in Paris , Kertész was awarded a silver medal for services to photography . 
 Kertész was published in French magazines such as Vu and Art et Médecine , for which his work was used for numerous covers . His greatest journalistic collaboration was with Lucien Vogel , the French editor and publisher of Vu . Vogel published his work as photo essays , letting Kertész report on various subjects through images . The photographer was intrigued with the variety of topics assigned by Vogel . 
 In 1933 Kertész was commissioned for the series , Distortion , about 200 photographs of <unk> <unk> and Nadia <unk> , two models portrayed nude and in various poses , with their reflections caught in a combination of distortion mirrors , similar to a carnival 's house of mirrors . In some photographs , only certain limbs or features were visible in the reflection . Some images also appeared in the 2 March issue of the " girly magazine " Le Sourire and in the 15 September 1933 issue of Arts et métiers graphiques . Later that year , Kertész published the book Distortions , a collection of the work . 
 In 1933 Kertész published his first personal book of photographs , Enfants , dedicated to his fiancee Elizabeth and his mother , who had died that year . He published regularly during the succeeding years . Paris ( 1934 ) was dedicated to his brothers Imre and Jenő . Nos Amies les bêtes ( " Our Friends the Animals " ) was released in 1936 and Les <unk> du vin ( " The Cathedrals of Wine " ) in 1937 . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 In the late 1920s , Kertész secretly married a French portrait photographer by the name of <unk> Klein ( she used the name <unk> André ) . The marriage was short @-@ lived and he never spoke about it . 
 In 1930 , he ventured back to Hungary to visit his family . After his return to Paris , Elizabeth followed him in 1931 , despite opposition by her family . Elizabeth and André remained together for the rest of their lives . Despite his mother 's dying in early 1933 , Kertész married Elizabeth on 17 June 1933 . He was said to have spent less time with his artist friends in favor of his new wife . 
 In 1936 they emigrated to New York , where within a decade , they became naturalized citizens . After creating and running a successful cosmetic business for years , in 1977 Elizabeth died of cancer . 
 = = = Pending war = = = 
 Social and political tensions were rising in Europe with the growing strength in Germany of the Nazi Party . Many magazines emphasized stories about political topics and stopped publishing Kertész because of his apolitical subjects . With his commissioned work dropping and persecution of Jews increasing , Kertész and Elizabeth decided to move to New York . He was offered work at the Keystone agency owned by Ernie Prince . In 1936 , Kertész and Elizabeth boarded the SS Washington bound for Manhattan . 
 The couple arrived in New York on 15 October 1936 , with Kertész intent on finding fame in America . They lived at the Beaux Arts Hotel in Greenwich Village . Kertész found life in America more difficult than he had imagined , beginning a period which he later referred to as the " absolute tragedy " . Deprived of his artist friends , he also found that Americans rejected having their photos taken on the street . Soon after his arrival , Kertész approached Beaumont Newhall , director of the photographic department at the Museum of Modern Art ( MoMA ) , who was preparing a show entitled Photography 1839 – 1937 . Offering Newhall some of his Distortions photographs , Kertész bristled at his criticism , but Newhall did exhibit the photographs . In December 1937 Kertész had his first solo show in New York at the PM Gallery . 
 The Keystone agency , who had offered him offsite work , required him to stay in the company 's studio . Kertész tried to return to France to visit , but had no money . By the time he had saved enough , World War II had begun and travel to France was nearly impossible . His struggles with English compounded his problems . Years after learning to speak French in Paris , it was difficult for him to learn another new language . The lack of fluent language added to his feeling like an outsider . 
 Frustrated , Kertész left Keystone after Prince left the company in 1937 . He was commissioned by Harper 's Bazaar for an article on the Saks Fifth Avenue department store in their April 1937 issue . The magazine continued to use him in further issues , and he also took commissions from Town and Country to supplement his income . Vogue invited the photographer to work for the magazine , but he declined , believing it was not appropriate work for him . He chose to work for Life magazine , starting with a piece called The Tugboat . Despite orders , he photographed more than just tugboats , including works on the entire harbor and its activities . Life refused to publish the unauthorized photographs . Kertész resented the constraints on his curiosity . 
 On 25 October 1938 , Look printed a series of Kertész photographs , entitled A Fireman Goes to School ; but credited them mistakenly to Ernie Prince , his former boss . Infuriated , Kertész considered never working with photo magazines again . His work was published in the magazine Coronet in 1937 , but in 1939 he was excluded when the magazine published a special issue featuring its " Most memorable photographs " . He later severed all ties to the magazine and its editor Arnold Gingrich . After being excluded from the June 1941 issue of Vogue , dedicated to photography , Kertész broke off relations with them . He had contributed to more than 30 commissioned photo essays and articles in both Vogue and House and Garden , but was omitted from the list of featured photographers . 
 In 1941 , the Kertész couple were designated as enemy aliens because of World War II ( Hungary was fighting on the side of the Axis powers ) . Kertész was not permitted to photograph outdoors or to have any project related to national security . Trying to avoid trouble because Elizabeth had started a cosmetics company ( <unk> Laboratories ) , Kertész ceased to do commissioned work and essentially disappeared from the photographic world for three years . 
 On 20 January 1944 , Elizabeth became a US citizen ; and Kertész was naturalized on 3 February . Despite competition from photographers such as Irving Penn , Kertész regained commissioned work . He was omitted from the list of 63 photographers which Vogue 's identified as significant in its " photographic genealogical tree " . But , House and Garden commissioned him to do photographs for a Christmas issue . In addition , in June 1944 László Moholy @-@ Nagy , director of the New Bauhaus - American School of Design offered him a position teaching photography . Despite the honor , he turned the offer down . 
 In 1945 , Kertész released a new book , Day of Paris , made up of photographs taken just before his emigration from France . It gained critical success . With his wife 's cosmetic business booming , Kertész agreed in 1946 to a long @-@ term , exclusive contract with House and Garden . Although it restricted his editorial freedom and required many hours in the studio , the pay of at least US $ 10 @,@ 000 per annum ( $ 121 @,@ 000 per year in 2016 ) was satisfactory . All photographic negatives were returned to him within six months for his own use . 
 Kertész worked in the settings of many famous homes and notable places , as well as overseas , where he traveled again in England , Budapest and Paris , renewing friendships and making new ones . During the 1945 – 62 period at House and Garden , the magazine published more than 3 @,@ 000 of his photographs , and he created a high reputation in the industry . With little time for his personal work , Kertész felt starved of being able to exercise more artistic creativity . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 In 1946 , Kertész had a solo exhibition at the Art Institute of Chicago , featuring photographs from his Day of Paris series . Kertész said this was one of his greatest times in the United States . In 1952 , he and his wife moved to a 12th @-@ floor apartment near Washington Square Park , the setting for some of his best photographs since having immigrated to the US . Using a telephoto lens , he took a series of snow @-@ covered Washington Square , showing numerous silhouettes and tracks . In 1955 he was insulted to have his work excluded when Edward Steichen 's The Family of Man show was featured at MoMA . Despite the success of the Chicago show , Kertész did not gain another exhibit until 1962 , when his photographs were shown at Long Island University . 
 = = = International period = = = 
 Toward the end of 1961 , Kertész broke his contract to Condé Nast Publishing after a minor dispute , and started doing his own work again . This later period of his life is often referred to as the " International period " , when he gained worldwide recognition and his photos were exhibited in many countries . In 1962 his work was exhibited in Venice ; in 1963 , he was one of the invited artists of the IV Mostra Biennale Internazionale della <unk> there and he was awarded a gold medal for his dedication to the photographic industry . Later in 1963 , his work was shown in Paris at the Bibliothèque nationale de France . He later visited Argentina to see his younger brother Jenő for the first time in years . Kertész experimented with color photographs , but only produced a few . 
 In 1964 , soon after John <unk> became the photography director at the Museum of Modern Art , he featured Kertész in a solo show . With his work critically acclaimed , Kertész gained recognition in the photographic world as an important artist . The work of Kertész was featured in numerous exhibitions throughout the world in his later life , even into his early nineties . Due to his newfound success , in 1965 Kertész was appointed as a member of the American Society of Media Photographers . 
 His awards rapidly accumulated : 
 1974 , Guggenheim Fellowship ; 
 1974 , Commander of the French Ordre des Arts et des Lettres ; 
 1977 , Mayor 's Award of Honor for Arts and Culture in New York , 
 1980 the Medal of the City of Paris , and the first Annual Award of the Association of International Photography Art Dealers in New York ; and 
 1981 , honorary Doctorate of Fine Arts from Bard College , and the New York Mayor 's Award of Honor for Arts and Culture that year . 
 During this period , Kertész produced a number of new books . He was able to recover some of the negatives he had left in France decades before . 
 Despite his successes , Kertész still felt unrecognised as a photographer . His last years were spent travelling to various locations around the globe for his exhibitions , especially Japan , and rekindling friendships with other artists . To deal with the loss of his wife in 1977 , Kertész fell back on his new network of friends , often visiting them to talk . By this time , he was said to have learned basic English and talked in what his friends called " <unk> " , a mixture of Hungarian , English and French . 
 In 1979 , the Polaroid Corporation gave him one of their new SX @-@ 70 cameras , which he experimented with into the 1980s . Still growing in fame , Kertész was granted the National Grand Prize of Photography in Paris in 1982 , as well as the 21st Annual George Washington Award from the American Hungarian Foundation the same year . 
 = = Legacy and honors = = 
 1983 , honorary Doctorate from the Royal College of Art ; and title of Chevalier de la Légion d 'honneur in Paris , together with an apartment for future visits to the city ; 
 1984 , the Maine Photographic Workshop 's first Annual Lifetime Achievement Award ; 
 1984 , purchase of 100 prints by the Metropolitan Museum of Art , its largest acquisition of work from a living artist ; 
 1985 , Californian Distinguished Career in Photography Award ; 
 1985 , first Annual Master of Photography Award , presented by the International Center of Photography ; and 
 1985 , honorary Doctorate of Fine Arts from Parson 's School of Design of the New School for Social Research . 
 Kertész died peacefully in his sleep at home on 28 September 1985 ; he was cremated and his ashes were interred with those of his wife . 
 = = Critical evaluation = = 
 Throughout most of his career Kertész was depicted as the " unknown soldier " who worked behind the scenes of photography , yet was rarely cited for his work , even into his death in the 1980s . Kertész thought himself unrecognised throughout his life , despite spending his life in the eternal search for acceptance and fame . Though Kertész received numerous awards for photography , he never felt both his style and work was accepted by critics and art audiences alike . Although , in 1927 , he was the first photographer to have a solo exhibition , Kertész said that it was not until his 1946 exhibition at the Art Institute of Chicago , that he first felt he received positive reviews on his work , and often cites this show as one of his finest moments in America . During his stay in America , he was cited as being an intimate artist , bringing the viewer into his work , even when the picture was that of subjects such as the intimidating New York City and even his reproduced work printed after his death received good reviews ; " Kertész was above all a consistently fine photographer " . Kertész 's work itself is often described as predominantly utilising light and even Kertész himself said that " I write with light " . He was never considered to " comment " on his subjects , but rather capture them – this is often cited as why his work is often overlooked ; he stuck to no political agenda and offered no deeper thought to his photographs other than the simplicity of life . With his art 's intimate feeling and nostalgic tone , Kertész 's images alluded to a sense of timelessness which was inevitably only recognised after his death . Unlike other photographers , Kertész 's work gave an insight into his life , showing a chronological order of where he spent his time ; for example , many of his French photographs were from cafés where he spent the majority of his time waiting for artistic inspiration . 
 Although Kertész rarely received bad reviews , it was the lack of commentary that lead to the photographer feeling distant from recognition . Now , however , he is often considered to be the father of photojournalism . Even other photographers cite Kertész and his photographs as being inspirational ; Henri Cartier @-@ Bresson once said of him in the early 1930s , " We all owe him a great deal . " When he was 90 years old , a person asked him why he was still taking photographs . He replied , " I 'm still hungry . " 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 This list includes material from Capa et al , Corkin & Lifson , <unk> et al , and <unk> et al . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Bibliography 
 This list is compiled from Capa et al , Corkin & Lifson and <unk> et al . 
 = Jeff Tambellini = 
 Jeff Tambellini ( born April 13 , 1984 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey winger currently playing for Djurgårdens IF in the Swedish Hockey League ( SHL ) . Originally selected 27th overall by the Los Angeles Kings in the 2003 NHL Entry Draft , he joined the National Hockey League in 2005 . During his rookie season , he was traded to the New York Islanders . He split his first three professional seasons between the NHL and his clubs ' American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliates , the Manchester Monarchs ( Los Angeles ) and Bridgeport Sound Tigers ( New York ) . In July 2010 , Tambellini signed with the Vancouver Canucks and spent a season with the organization . 
 During his junior career , Tambellini earned MVP honours in the British Columbia Hockey League ( BCHL ) , while also leading the Chilliwack Chiefs to a Fred Page Cup as league champions and a Doyle Cup as Pacific regional champions . In 2002 , he joined the college ranks with the Michigan Wolverines of the Central Collegiate Hockey Association ( CCHA ) . Over three seasons , he won two Mason Cups with Michigan as CCHA champions , while earning several individual honours , including league rookie of the year in 2003 and playoff MVP in 2005 . Internationally , he competed for Canada 's under @-@ 20 team at the 2004 World Junior Championships , earning a silver medal . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior and college = = = 
 Tambellini played one season in the third @-@ tier Pacific International Junior Hockey League ( <unk> ) with the Port Coquitlam <unk> in 1999 – 2000 . He scored 31 goals and 64 points over 41 games , earning <unk> First Team All @-@ Star and Rookie of the Year honours . The following season , he joined the Junior A ranks with the Chilliwack Chiefs of the British Columbia Hockey League ( BCHL ) , recording 51 points over 54 games in his rookie season . 
 In 2001 – 02 , he improved to 117 points ( 46 goals and 71 points ) , receiving the Brett Hull Trophy as the league 's leading scorer along with Matt Ellison of the Cowichan Valley Capitals , who also scored 117 points . He was further distinguished with the Verne Dye Memorial Trophy as the Coastal Conference 's most valuable player . Tambellini went on to help the Chiefs to a Fred Page Cup as league champions , defeating the Vernon Vipers four games to two in the finals . Advancing to the Doyle Cup , the Chiefs beat the Alberta Junior Hockey League ( AJHL ) champion Drayton Valley Thunder by the same series score to capture the regional title . Competing for the Canadian Junior Hockey League ( CJHL ) title , Chilliwack lost in the Royal Bank Cup semifinals . During the tournament , Tambellini was chosen as the CJHL player of the year , beating out Jade Galbraith of the Drayton Valley Thunder and Tim Vokey of the Cornwall Colts . 
 Tambellini left the Chiefs after two seasons to play college hockey with the Michigan Wolverines of the Central Collegiate Hockey Association ( CCHA ) , where he served as an alternate captain . After scoring 45 points over 43 games in his freshman year , he received All @-@ Rookie Team , Second All @-@ Star Team and Rookie of the Year honours in the CCHA . In the playoffs , Tambellini helped the Wolverines to his first of two Mason Cups in his college career as CCHA champions . 
 Going into the 2003 NHL Entry Draft , he was ranked 21st among North American skaters by the NHL Central Scouting Bureau . Scouts listed him as a superior skater and defensively responsible with leadership qualities . He went on to be selected in the first round , 27th overall , by the Los Angeles Kings . 
 Returning to Michigan following his draft , his offensive production declined to 27 points over 39 games . The Wolverines returned to the CCHA finals , but were defeated by the Ohio State Buckeyes . Returning to form in 2004 – 05 , Tambellini notched 24 goals and 57 points over 42 games , earning CCHA First All @-@ Star Team honours . He led the Wolverines to a second Mason Cup championship in three years and was chosen as the CCHA Tournament MVP . Competing in the NCAA tournament , Tambellini was named to the NCAA Midwest Regional All @-@ Tournament and NCAA West Second All @-@ Star Teams . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 On August 15 , 2005 , Tambellini signed an entry @-@ level contract with the Kings , foregoing his senior year with Michigan . In late @-@ September , he was assigned to their American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Manchester Monarchs , following his training camp with Los Angeles . Two months into the season , Tambellini was called up to the Kings , making his NHL debut on November 30 , 2005 , against the Chicago Blackhawks . The Kings lost the game 3 – 2 , while Tambellini earned nine minutes of ice time . After four pointless NHL games , he was sent back down to Manchester . On March 8 , 2006 , Tambellini was traded by the Kings , along with defenceman Denis <unk> , to the New York Islanders , in exchange for forward Mark Parrish and defenceman Brent Sopel . Upon being dealt , he was called up from the AHL and played the remainder of the season with New York . He left Manchester with 25 goals and 56 points in 56 games , which finished the 2005 – 06 AHL season ranked as the third @-@ best points @-@ per @-@ game rate among league rookies . 
 Playing in his third game with the Islanders , he scored his first NHL goal against Martin Brodeur in a 6 – 1 win against the New Jersey Devils on March 14 , 2006 . He finished the campaign with a goal and four points in 21 games with New York . As the Islanders failed to qualify for the playoffs , they assigned Tambellini to their AHL affiliate , the Bridgeport Sound Tigers , for their Calder Cup playoffs . Over seven post @-@ season games , he recorded three points as Bridgeport was eliminated by the Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton Penguins in the first round . 
 Tambellini split the 2006 – 07 season between the Islanders and Sound Tigers . Called up from the AHL on three separate occasions , he recorded two goals and nine points over 23 games with New York . Over 50 AHL games , he led the Sound Tigers with 30 goals and 59 points . The following season , Tambellini set the Sound Tigers single @-@ season scoring record with 76 points in 57 games . His 38 goals ranked second in the league , while his points total was seventh . He was called up to the NHL five times , scoring a goal and four points over 31 games . In the off @-@ season , he was re @-@ signed to a two @-@ year , US $ 1 @.@ 175 million contract on July 16 , 2008 . 
 In 2008 – 09 , he began the campaign in the NHL . With the exception of a two @-@ week assignment with Bridgeport in December 2008 , he spent the entire season with the Islanders . Over 65 NHL games , he scored seven goals and 15 points , while recording three goals in six games with the Sound Tigers . The following season , Tambellini recorded his first NHL hat trick with his father in attendance on October 31 , 2009 , against the Buffalo Sabres . Often made a healthy scratch , he completed the season with 14 points over 36 games , while leading the Islanders in shootout percentage with three goals in five attempts . 
 Becoming an unrestricted free agent in the off @-@ season , Tambellini joined the Vancouver Canucks on July 1 , 2010 . His signed a one @-@ year , two @-@ way deal paying the league @-@ minimum $ 500 @,@ 000 at the NHL @-@ level and $ 105 @,@ 000 at the minor @-@ league level . He had received interest from other teams , but was quick to accept an offer from his hometown NHL team , commenting that he " grew up want [ ing ] to be part of the Vancouver Canucks from age six . " Tambellini scored his first goal as a Canuck on October 22 , 2010 , in a 5 – 1 win against the Minnesota Wild . While earning some time on the team 's second line , he played the majority of the season on the fourth unit , finishing with 9 goals and 17 points over 62 games . Assigned to the team 's AHL affiliate for brief periods in October and November 2010 , he recorded 7 points over 7 games with the Manitoba Moose . A healthy scratch for the majority of the 2011 playoffs , he made his NHL post @-@ season debut in Game 6 of the second round against the Nashville Predators . In total , he dressed in six games with no points during the playoffs as the Canucks advanced to the Stanley Cup Finals for the third time in team history , losing in Game 7 to the Boston Bruins . 
 After becoming an unrestricted free agent once more in the off @-@ season , Tambellini signed for the ZSC Lions of the National League A ( NLA ) in Switzerland . By joining Zurich , he followed after his father and grandfather , who both played for the team during their careers . He was recruited to play overseas by the Lions ' Bob Hartley , who previously coached in the NHL for the Colorado Avalanche and Atlanta Thrashers . Tambellini became the team 's premiere player in his first season with Zurich , leading the team in scoring and averaging more than 25 minutes a game . He described the Swiss league as a competitive level between the AHL and NHL . In his first season in Zurich he won the Swiss Championship and was the topscorer of the Lions . 
 Upon completion of an injury plagued second season with the Lions , Tambellini left as a free agent and signed a one @-@ year contract in Sweden with Modo Hockey of the Swedish Hockey League on March 25 , 2013 . 
 In the 2014 – 15 season , Tambellini skated in 30 games with Fribourg @-@ <unk> of the Swiss @-@ A league , registering five goals and 13 points . He also played in 20 games with <unk> Lakers in the Swedish Hockey League , recording six goals and nine points . On July 5 , 2015 , the Tampa Bay Lightning signed forward Jeff Tambellini to a one @-@ year , two @-@ way contract . Tambellini has skated in 242 NHL games over six season , recording 27 goals and 63 points . He played his last NHL season with the Vancouver Canucks during the 2010 – 11 season . 
 After spending the 2015 – 16 season with the Lightning 's AHL affiliate , the Syracuse Crunch , in which he contributed with 49 points in 65 games , Tambellini returned to Sweden in securing a one @-@ year contract with Djurgårdens IF of the SHL on June 10 , 2016 . 
 = = International play = = 
 Tambellini competed for the Canadian national junior team at the 2004 World Junior Championships , held in Finland . He was the lone NCAA player on Canada 's roster . Playing against Ukraine in the round @-@ robin , he scored his first international goal against goaltender Yevgeniy <unk> in a 10 – 0 win . Helping Canada reach the gold medal game , they lost to the United States by a 4 – 3 score , earning silver . In six games , Tambellini recorded two goals and five points , ranking sixth in team scoring . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Tambellini was born in Calgary , Alberta . His father Steve Tambellini , a retired ice hockey player and former general manager of the Edmonton Oilers , was playing for the Calgary Flames at the time . Steve also played in the NHL with the New York Islanders , Colorado Rockies , New Jersey Devils and Vancouver Canucks . Tambellini 's grandfather , Addie Tambellini , was a member of the Trail Smoke Eaters who were the last Canadian amateur team to win the World Championships in 1961 . While his father became involved with the Canucks first as a player , then as an executive later in his career , Jeff lived in suburban Port Moody , British Columbia , gaining exposure to the NHL environment . After leaving home to begin his own hockey career , Jeff returned to Vancouver in the off @-@ seasons , residing in the downtown Coal Harbour neighbourhood . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 = Pallid sturgeon = 
 The Pallid sturgeon ( Scaphirhynchus albus ) is an endangered species of ray @-@ finned fish , endemic to the waters of the Missouri and lower Mississippi river basins of the United States . 
 Named for its pale coloration , it is closely related to the relatively common shovelnose sturgeon ( <unk> <unk> ) , but is much larger , averaging between 30 and 60 inches ( 76 and 152 cm ) in length and 85 pounds ( 39 kg ) in weight at maturity . This species takes 15 years to mature and spawns infrequently , but can live up to a century . A member of the sturgeon family , <unk> , which originated during the Cretaceous period 70 million years ago , the pallid sturgeon has changed little since then . 
 In 1990 , the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service placed the pallid sturgeon on its endangered species list because few young individuals had been observed in the preceding decade and sightings had greatly diminished ; the species is now rarely seen in the wild . It was the first fish species in the Missouri River drainage area to be listed as endangered , and a loss of its habitat is thought to be responsible for its decline . The vast majority of the Missouri River drainage system has been channeled and dammed , reducing the gravel deposits and slow @-@ moving side channels that are its favored spawning areas . Until the middle of the 20th century , pallid sturgeon were common and anglers found catching such a large fish in fresh water a rewarding experience . The species is considered to be good @-@ tasting , and its eggs have been used as caviar , although less commonly than those of many other sturgeon . 
 Efforts to prevent the species from becoming extinct have had modest success . Pallid sturgeon are actively being raised in a dozen hatcheries and the offspring are being released back to the wild every year . To better understand pallid sturgeon behavior , researchers have implanted global positioning system transmitters to track their movements and help identify possible spawning areas . Federal and state agencies are working together to improve habitat by restoring spawning areas since restoration of these areas is required if the species is to survive in the wild . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 Taxonomists S. A. Forbes and R. E. Richardson classified the pallid sturgeon in 1905 , grouping it in the genus <unk> and the family <unk> , which includes all sturgeon worldwide . Its closest relatives are the shovelnose sturgeon ( <unk> <unk> ) , which is still relatively common , and the critically endangered Alabama sturgeon ( Scaphirhynchus <unk> ) , which may soon become extinct . These three species belong to the subfamily <unk> , which has only one other genus , <unk> , represented by three species found in west @-@ central Asia . 
 The word pallid means " deficient in color " , and compared to other species of sturgeon , the pallid is noticeably paler . The scientific name for the fish is derived from Scaphirhynchus , a Greek word meaning " spade snout " and albus which is Latin for " white " . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = DNA studies = = = 
 To better protect the pallid sturgeon from extinction , research on its DNA and that of other closely related species was conducted to assess the differences within various populations of pallid sturgeon , and the differences between pallid and shovelnose sturgeon . Early DNA research indicated that pallid sturgeon and shovelnose sturgeon were a single species . However , a 2000 study comparing DNA sequences in the three members of the genus Scaphirhynchus ( pallid , shovelnose , and Alabama sturgeon ) showed that the three are distinct species . Between 2001 and 2006 , several studies examined two populations of pallid sturgeon located in the upper Great Plains section of the Missouri River and compared them to a southern population located in the Atchafalaya River in Louisiana . These DNA studies concluded that the northern populations of pallid sturgeon are reproductively isolated and are genetically distinct from the Atchafalaya population . However , the genetic variability among pallid sturgeon was found to be far less than that between them and the shovelnose sturgeon . 
 Another reason for DNA testing was to determine the rates of hybridization between pallid and shovelnose sturgeon . The southern populations have more hybrids than are found in the middle sections of the Missouri River basin , while the northernmost populations have had few reports of hybrids . Hybrids are most common in the Atchafalaya River in Louisiana , and DNA sequencing in these hybrids showed a genetic distinction from pallid sturgeon , but based on the genetic markers assessed , they were genetically indistinguishable from shovelnose sturgeon . Because of this ability of two species to hybridize , some biologists have expressed concern that it is a violation of the Endangered Species Act to protect one species that may not be genetically isolated from another . It is not known if the hybrids are able to reproduce or not , although they appear to be the result of pallid sturgeon eggs being fertilized by shovelnose sturgeon males . 
 = = = Physical characteristics = = = 
 The pallid sturgeon is one of the largest freshwater fish species in North America . They are generally between 30 and 60 inches ( 76 and 152 cm ) in length and weigh as much as 85 pounds ( 39 kg ) . The species is ancient and has remained virtually unchanged for 70 million years , since the Cretaceous period . The pallid sturgeon has a distinctive appearance that has been referred to as " primitive " , " dinosaur @-@ like " and even " ugly " . Although visually similar , the shovelnose sturgeon is much smaller and usually weighs no more than 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 3 kg ) . Pallid sturgeon are much paler in coloration with grayish white backs and sides , while shovelnose sturgeon are brown . Pallid sturgeon turn whiter as they age and younger specimens are easily confused with adult shovelnose sturgeon since they are similar in color . Like the shovelnose sturgeon , their tails are heterocercal , with the top tail fin being longer than the bottom fin , though this is more pronounced in pallid sturgeon . 
 As with other sturgeon , pallid sturgeon lack the scales or bones found in more " modern " species of fish . Instead , they have cartilaginous skeletons with five rows of thick cartilage plates that extend along their sides , undersides , and backs , as well as over most of the head . These thick cartilage plates are covered by the skin and serve as a protective armor . The bony cartilage also extends along the backside , from the dorsal fin to the tail . 
 The pallid sturgeon 's snout and head are longer than that of the shovelnose sturgeon . In both species , the mouth is located well back from the tip of the snout . Lacking teeth , they use their extendable mouths to suck up small fish , mollusks , and other food sources from river bottoms . Both species also have four barbels which descend from the snout near the front of the mouth . The barbels are believed to be sensory features to locate food sources . On pallid sturgeon , the two inner barbels are about half as long as the outer ones , while on the shovelnose sturgeon , all four barbels are the same length . The inner barbels of the pallid sturgeon are positioned in front of the outer ones , but those on the shovelnose sturgeon are all located in essentially a straight line . The length and positioning of the barbels is one of the best ways to distinguish the two species . 
 = = = Reproduction and lifecycle = = = 
 Pallid sturgeon have a long lifespan , living in excess of 50 and perhaps as long as 100 years . They lack bones and scales , which makes it more difficult to establish their age and determine exactly how long they live . As is true for many long @-@ lived species , pallid sturgeon reach reproductive maturity relatively late . Males reach sexual maturity between the ages of 5 and 7 years , while females are believed to become capable of reproduction when they are at least 15 years old . One study of nine females indicated that they begin egg development between the ages of 9 and 12 years , but do not reach reproductive maturity until they are 15 years old . Reproduction does not take place every year ; the average interval between spawnings is three years , although other studies suggest an interval as long as 10 years . Spawning usually takes place May to July . 
 Prior to the construction of dams on the Missouri , pallid sturgeon migrated hundreds of miles upstream to spawn , and sought out rocky or hard surfaces to deposit hundreds of thousands of eggs . One female pallid sturgeon caught in the upper Missouri River was estimated to be carrying 170 @,@ 000 eggs , representing over 11 percent of its total body weight . After fertilization , pallid sturgeon eggs hatch in 5 to 8 days , after which the larvae drift back downstream for several weeks . As the larvae develop tails , they seek out slower @-@ moving waterways and slowly mature over a period of a dozen years . The rate of survival to maturity for pallid sturgeon larvae is extremely low , and of the hundreds of thousands of eggs spawned , only a few live to adulthood . 
 For several decades , no natural reproduction of pallid sturgeon was observed , since all the fish that had been captured were older specimens . In the late 1990s , young pallid sturgeon were discovered living in a restored riparian area of the lower Missouri River . This was the first documented example of wild spawned pallid sturgeon in 50 years . In 2007 , two female pallid sturgeon were also reported to have spawned in the Missouri National Recreational River area located downstream from Gavins Point Dam on the Missouri River . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 The pallid sturgeon 's historical range spanned the entire Missouri River and into the Mississippi River . Historically , the species was rare to nonexistent in the upper Mississippi , probably due to a lack of proper habitat . Currently , the species is considered imperiled throughout its entire range . As of 2008 , pallid sturgeon can still be found throughout their original range , but their population numbers have severely declined from the mid @-@ 20th century . The Missouri and Mississippi rivers from Montana to Louisiana , as well as the Atchafalaya River in Louisiana , continue to harbor an aging population of pallid sturgeon . Pallid sturgeon have never been very common ; as early as 1905 when the species was first identified , they represented only one in five of all sturgeon in the lower Missouri River and as few as one in 500 where the Illinois River meets the Mississippi . Between 1985 and 2000 , the ratio of pallid sturgeon to all sturgeon netted declined from one in about 400 to one in nearly 650 . A 1996 study concluded that between 6 @,@ 000 and 21 @,@ 000 pallid sturgeon remained in their natural habitat at that time . 
 Six areas were studied for wild pallid sturgeon population estimates and recovery recommendations by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service ( USFWS ) between 1990 , when the species was declared endangered , and 2006 . The USFWS has referred to these six areas of wild population studies as " recovery priority management areas " ( <unk> ) . In the northernmost region of the study , known as RPMA 1 , located between the Marias River in Montana and the western reaches of Fort Peck Reservoir , only 45 wild ( nonhatchery ) individuals remain . Of these , no juveniles were observed and the population was declining . In RPMA 2 , located between Fort Peck Dam , the headwaters of Lake <unk> , and the lower Yellowstone River up to the confluence of the Tongue River , Montana , only 136 wild specimens remain . In RPMA 3 , stretching from upstream of the Niobrara River to Lewis and Clark Lake along the Missouri River , no native populations were recorded . All collected specimens appeared to be hatchery @-@ raised . However , these specimens were apparently maturing and adjusting well to this section of the river . Recovery priority management area 4 extends from Gavins Point Dam to the confluence of the Missouri and Mississippi rivers . This region also includes the Platte River . Here , at least 100 unique nonhatchery specimens were collected during the study period . Evidence also indicates some wild reproduction is going on in this region . In RPMA 5 , between the confluence of the Missouri and Mississippi and the Gulf of Mexico , several hundred specimens were documented . Again , some evidence suggests natural reproduction is occurring , as demonstrated by the recovery of a few examples of immature , nonhatchery @-@ raised individuals . The Atchafalaya River basin is designated as RPMA 6 and the findings there were similar to those in <unk> 4 and 5 , but with greater numbers of unique individuals , near 500 in total . 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 Pallid sturgeon prefer moderate to swift river currents and most captured specimens have been recovered in rivers and streams in which the current averages between 0 @.@ 33 and 2 @.@ 9 feet per second ( 0 @.@ 10 and 0 @.@ 88 m / s ) . They also prefer turbid waterways and water depths between 3 and 25 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 and 7 @.@ 62 m ) . The species is more commonly found where sandy substrates are plentiful , but also lives in predominately rocky waterways . Pallid sturgeon prefer swift river currents more often than do shovelnose sturgeon . 
 In a study based in Montana and North Dakota conducted on both the pallid and shovelnose sturgeon , both species were fitted with radio transmitters so researchers could track their swimming habits . Pallid sturgeon were found to prefer wider river channels , <unk> sandbars , and numerous islands , and were most commonly recorded in water depths between 2 and 47 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 and 14 @.@ 33 m ) . The study also showed that the pallid sturgeon moved as much as 13 miles ( 21 km ) per day and up to 5 @.@ 7 miles per hour ( 9 @.@ 2 km / h ) . Pallid sturgeon are believed to have preferred the muddy and generally warmer waters that existed prior to Missouri River dam construction . 
 = = = Food preferences = = = 
 Pallid sturgeon are generally bottom feeders , skimming the sandy reaches of the various rivers and streams in their habitat . Though little is known about the precise eating habits of the species , they are thought to be opportunistic feeders . One study which examined the contents from the stomachs of juvenile pallid sturgeon revealed that their diets were seasonally dependent . Various insects were consumed during some seasons and various fish species during others . These results support the description of the pallid sturgeon 's eating habits as opportunistic . Fish is a more important dietary staple for pallid sturgeon than it is for shovelnose sturgeon . In one study comparing dietary tendencies between adult shovelnose sturgeon and immature pallid sturgeon , the pallid sturgeon was found to consume far greater numbers of small fish such as <unk> ( minnows ) . In another study conducted in the upper Missouri River region , an examination of the stomach contents of hatchery @-@ reared pallid sturgeon showed that 82 % of the wet weight was small fish and the balance was mosquito @-@ like insects , mayflies , and caddis flies and small amounts of detritus and plant material . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Though never believed to be common , pallid sturgeon populations rapidly declined during the late 20th century and the species was listed as endangered on September 6 , 1990 . The U.S. government and most of the states with pallid sturgeon populations have commenced restoration efforts to save the species from extinction . Wild reproduction of pallid sturgeon is rare to nonexistent in most areas ; therefore , human intervention is needed to ensure the survival of the species . Pallid sturgeon were previously considered a prized trophy game fish species , until their numbers declined and they were placed on the endangered species list . All captured pallid sturgeon must now be released back to the wild . The species was known for being very palatable and the roe from females was used as caviar . 
 The route and the environmental characteristics of Missouri River in the northern Great Plains states of North and South Dakota , Nebraska , and Montana have been significantly altered . The resultant changes to the Missouri River in the upper Great Plains from channelization and impoundment prevent upstream migration . The reduced water flow rates and sediment loads have brought an end to the seasonal flooding of the flood plains in the region . Since the construction of the Fort Peck Dam in Montana in 1937 , and subsequent damming and channelization , the Missouri River has lost over 90 % of its wetland and sandbar ecosystems . More than 2 @,@ 000 mi ( 3 @,@ 200 km ) of the Missouri River have been altered and only that stretch of the river above Fort Peck Reservoir in Montana remains relatively unchanged . These alterations of the river have had a detrimental impact on a number of native fish species . In the 13 U.S. states where the pallid sturgeon is found , only a few other fish species are listed as endangered . Although substantial efforts are being implemented to ensure the survival of this species , the rarity of self @-@ sustaining populations of pallid sturgeon ensures that it will remain federally protected for many decades . 
 = = = Species preservation efforts = = = 
 Two populations of pallid sturgeon in the Missouri and Yellowstone rivers of Montana are both at risk of extinction , and current projections are that wild pallid sturgeon populations in Montana will be extinct by 2018 . Though a vigorous stocking effort was implemented in 1996 , until pallid sturgeon females reach reproductive maturity sometime after they are 15 years of age , recovery efforts in Montana will not be readily measurable . The U.S. Bureau of Reclamation has been conducting spring pulse water releases from the Tiber Dam every four to five years to try to recreate a semblance of an annual spring flood to restore and rejuvenate downstream floodplains . These pulse releases are done in an effort to restore suitable habitat for numerous fish species . 
 In Nebraska , a small number of pallid sturgeon have been captured along the lower reaches of the Platte River . Unlike most rivers in the Mississippi @-@ Missouri River System , the Platte River has only a few dams and they are well upstream from its confluence with the Missouri River . The lower Platte River is shallow with numerous sand bars and small islands . Though pallid sturgeon prefer more turbulent and deeper rivers than the Platte , between 1979 and 2003 , over a dozen pallid sturgeon , including some from hatcheries , have been captured from the Platte River . A number of these pallid sturgeon have been fitted with radio transmitters which track their return to the Platte River when water levels and turbidity conditions are favorable . Coinciding with the majority of the pallid sturgeon that have been captured , the period that is generally most favorable is during the spring and early summer . By midsummer , a reduction in water levels and turbidity on the Platte River encourages pallid sturgeon to return to the Missouri River . 
 The lower reaches of the Platte River , a more than 30 @-@ mile ( 48 km ) stretch from the Elkhorn River to its confluence with the Missouri River , has suitable spawning habitat for pallid sturgeon , although no conclusive evidence has been found that spawning is occurring in this region . Along with the lower Yellowstone River , the lower Platte River was identified as one of the best of the remaining regions with the potential for the natural spawning . 
 In Missouri , at the Lisbon Bottoms section of the Big Muddy National Fish and Wildlife Refuge , wild pallid sturgeon larvae were collected in 1998 . These nonhatchery @-@ raised larvae were the first recovered on the lower Missouri River in the previous 50 years . The recovery was made along a side channel of the Missouri River that had been developed to provide suitable habitat for pallid sturgeon and other fish spawning . The side channel was apparently being used by the larva pallid sturgeon for protection from the swifter currents of the Missouri River . 
 In 2007 , the USFWS concluded that hatchery @-@ based reproduction efforts should be continued , along with monitoring of any population changes , to determine the effectiveness of human intervention . The 2007 findings also emphasized the need to determine the most likely areas of spawning , to identify any parasite or disease that may be impacting the reproductive capabilities of pallid sturgeon , and to examine engineering possibilities that may permit recreation of suitable habitats without reducing the USFWS 's ability to protect people from harmful and destructive flooding , and to maintain its ability to provide adequate water impoundment for irrigation and recreation purposes . 
 = The Eolian Harp = 
 The Eolian Harp is a poem written by Samuel Taylor Coleridge in 1795 and published in his 1796 poetry collection . It is one of the early conversation poems and discusses Coleridge 's anticipation of a marriage with Sara Fricker along with the pleasure of conjugal love . However , The Eolian Harp is not a love poem and instead focuses on man 's relationship with nature . The central images of the poem is an Aeolian harp , an item that represents both order and wildness in nature . Along with the harp is a series of oppositional ideas that are reconciled with each other . The Eolian Harp also contains a discussion on " One Life " , Coleridge 's idea that humanity and nature are united along with his desire to try to find the divine within nature . The poem was well received for both its discussion of nature and its aesthetic qualities . 
 = = Background = = 
 Coleridge began writing The Eolian Harp on 20 August 1795 during his engagement to Sara Fricker . Like his previous conversation poem Lines Written at <unk> Bars , the poem discusses both his engagement and his future marriage . Coleridge was inspired to write the poem after a visit to a house in Clevedon that would serve as his and Fricker 's home after their marriage . As Coleridge worked on the poem , he and Fricker were married and they moved to the Clevedon home . During this time , Coleridge held an idealised view of his life with Fricker , and these thoughts work their way into the poem . The poem was published in the 1796 edition of Coleridge 's poems and in all subsequent collections . Of his poems for the 1796 collection , Coleridge felt that The Eolian Harp was his favourite . 
 After the poem 's original creation , it was expanded from its original use of an Aeolian harp as its theme over the months that followed . However , Coleridge did not stop working on it when it was first published . Instead , the poem was expanded and rewritten throughout Coleridge 's life until 1817 . Of the final version , lines 21 – 25 were previously removed between the 1797 and 1815 editions of Coleridge 's poems . Likewise , lines 26 – 33 were altered through the multiple editions . Regardless of the amount of editing , Coleridge believed that the poem served as a model for other poems , especially those in the series called Conversation poems . Of The Eolian Harp as a model for poetry , Coleridge wrote , " Let me be excused , if it should seem to others too mere a trifle to justify my noticing it — but I have some claim to the thanks of no small number of the readers of poetry in having first introduced this species of short blank verse poems — of which Southey , Lamb , Wordsworth , and others have since produced so many exquisite specimens . " 
 = = Poem = = 
 The poem begins by addressing Fricker and discussing the house at Clevedon : 
 My pensive Sara ! thy soft cheek reclined 
 Thus on mine arm , most soothing sweet it is 
 To sit beside our cot , our cot o <unk> 
 With white @-@ flower 'd Jasmin , and the broad @-@ leav 'd Myrtle , 
 ( Meet emblems they of Innocence and Love ! ) 
 And watch the clouds , that late were rich with light , 
 Slow saddening round , and mark the star of eve 
 <unk> brilliant ( such should Wisdom be ) 
 Shine opposite ! How exquisite the scents 
 Snatch 'd from yon bean @-@ field ! and the world so hushed ! 
 The <unk> murmur of the distant Sea 
 Tells us of silence . ( lines 1 – 12 ) 
 As the poem continues , objects are described as if they were women being pursued : 
 And that simplest Lute , 
 Plac 'd length @-@ ways in the clasping casement , hark ! 
 How by the desultory breeze caressed , 
 Like some coy maid half yielding to her lover , 
 It pours such sweet upbraiding , as must needs 
 <unk> to repeat the wrong ! ( lines 12 – 17 ) 
 The poem then introduces Coleridge 's idea of " One Life " , where man and nature are connected : 
 O the one Life within us and abroad , 
 Which meets all motion and becomes its soul , 
 A light in sound , a sound @-@ like power in light , 
 Rhythm in all thought , and joyance every where — 
 Methinks , it should have been impossible 
 Not to love all things in a world so filled ; 
 Where the breeze warbles , and the mute still air 
 Is Music slumbering on her instrument . ( lines 26 – 33 ) 
 Near the end of the poem , the narrator discusses pantheism before reproving himself for it soon after : 
 And what if all of animated nature 
 Be but organic Harps diversely framed , 
 That tremble into thought , as o 'er them sweeps 
 Plastic and vast , one intellectual breeze , 
 At once the Soul of each , and God of all ? ( lines 44 – 48 ) 
 = = Themes = = 
 The poem discusses love , sex , and marriage , but it is not done in the form of a love poem . Instead , it compares love with an Aeolian harp , which is a symbol of poetry . In terms of the relationship described , the desire expressed during an engagement with Fricker is described as innocent . Also , the anticipation of the conjugal union is free of any potential disappointment or any guilt that would result in sex outside of marriage . As such , there is a thematic connection with the poem " Lines Written at <unk> Bars " written on the same subject around the same time . As the poem was completed after Coleridge 's marriage , the themes became similar to the ideas expressed in his Reflections on Having Left a Place of Retirement . Both poems discuss the Clevedon area and the impact of the countryside upon the viewer . Also , they provide information on how Coleridge and Fricker felt during their relationship and marriage . However , Reflections suggests that there are some problems within the relationship . 
 The poem portrays a series of oppositional ideas and how they can be reconciled with each other . The image of a <unk> is contrasted against the image of a lute while they are compared to the image of a coy woman being caressed and then resisting the caresses . This image is compounded with the coy woman being caressed compared to the innocence of Fricker . Nature is also seen in its oppositions , with a wildness within nature being contrasted with order within nature , especially in regards to the effects of an Aeolian harp and Coleridge 's pantheistic feelings about nature . In terms of religion , The Eolian Harp describes the mind 's desire to seek after the divine . Coleridge 's approach is similar to Ralph Cudworth 's in The True Intellectual System of the Universe . In the same theme , he wrote to John Thelwall in a letter dated 14 October 1797 @,@ 
 I can at times feel strongly the beauties , you describe , in themselves & for themselves — but more frequently all things appear little — all knowledge , that can be acquired , child 's play — the universe itself — what but an immense heap of little things ? — I can contemplate nothing but parts , & parts are all little — ! — My mind feels as if it ached to behold & know something great — something one & indivisible — and it is only in the faith of this that rocks or waterfalls , mountains or caverns give me the sense of sublimity or majesty ! — But in this faith all things counterfeit infinity ! 
 The nature images connect back to desire and marriage , especially with an image like the myrtle tree that performs this function in many of Coleridge 's poems . However , Coleridge 's pantheistic feelings on nature are said to receive reproof from Fricker , and Coleridge returns to a more traditional view of God that deals more with faith than finding the divine within nature . 
 The poem discusses his understanding of nature within the concept of " One Life " , an idea that is presented as a resulting from Coleridge 's reflection on his experiences at Clevedon . The conversation poems as a whole are connected to the ideas within The Eolian Harp that deal with understanding the universe . The " One Life " lines added to the 1817 edition interconnect the senses and also connects sensation and experience of the divine with the music of the Aeolian harp . Although the earlier editions do not include the same understanding of perception , there traces of the idea expressed in the earlier editions . Coleridge derived his early understanding from the works of Jakob Böhme , of which he wrote in a 4 July 1817 letter to Ludwig Tieck : " Before my visit to Germany in September , 1798 , I had adopted ( probably from <unk> 's Aurora , which I had conjured over at School ) the idea , that Sound was 
 = Light under the <unk> of Gravitation , and Color = 
 Gravitation under the <unk> of Light : and I have never seen reason to change my faith in this respect . " Along with this view of sensation , Coleridge adopted Böhme 's idea of connecting to God through the will instead of the intellect , and that pantheism should be denied . Coleridge also relies in part on Böhme 's understanding of polarity of opposites in his own views of Polar Logic and man 's attempt to return to Paradise . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 During the mid 20th @-@ century , Virginia Radley states , " the ' Eolian Harp ' itself can be read with pleasure without a redaction of the poem for meaning . It is a poem which comes full circle from Eden to Eden " and that " Perhaps a poem should indeed not mean but be , and , to this point , the ' Eolian Harp ' is a true poem . The images and the personalities are striking enough to deserve approval from a purely belletristic standpoint . But the poem has meaning also . " Following this , M. H. Abrams declared that the idea of the " One Life " within The Eolian Harp , " best epitomize the Romantic constellation of joy , love , and the shared life " . 
 Later , Oswald Doughty argues that the poem is " one of his happiest poems " and " For once Coleridge and his environment blended into a single , harmonious idyllic mood , and the ' blank verse ' poem is permeated with a rare fusion of reflective thought and sensitivity to peaceful , nature beauty " . Richard Holmes simply describes The Eolian Harp as Coleridge 's " beautiful Conversation Poem " . Rosemary Ashton believes that the poem " shows an exact eye for natural detail combined with a sharp ear for rhythms both conversational and yet heightened into poetic form " . She later declared that " Only a few sonnets and ' The Eolian Harp ' [ ... ] display Coleridge 's gift for simplicity rising , as if effortlessly , to sublimity . " 
 = Night of Your Life ( David Guetta song ) = 
 " Night of Your Life " is a song by French DJ and producer David Guetta , featuring guest vocals by American R & B recording artist Jennifer Hudson . Taken from Guetta 's fifth studio album , Nothing but the Beat ( 2011 ) , the song was written by Cristyle Johnson , Anthony Preston , Guetta and Giorgio Tuinfort , whilst production of the song was helmed by Guetta and Tuinfort . " Night of Your Life " was released digitally on August 22 , 2011 , as the third and final promotional single from the album , as part of the iTunes Store 's countdown to the album 's release . 
 Musically , " Night of Your Life " is an uptempo pop and future @-@ soul song , with lyrics that feature Hudson demanding to be worshiped like a queen . Music critics positively reviewed the song , praising Hudson 's vocal performance and noting it as one of the standout tracks from Nothing but the Beat . Critics also compared the song to Rihanna 's " Only Girl ( In the World ) " ( 2010 ) . Commercially , " Night of Your Life " reached the top 10 in Austria and Norway , and the top 20 in Denmark , Finland , Germany and Spain . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Night of Your Life " was written by Cristyle Johnson , Anthony Preston , David Guetta and Giorgio Tuinfort , whilst production of the song was helmed by Guetta and Tuinfort . In an interview with Akshay Bhansali of MTV News , Guetta revealed that he did not know Hudson before collaborating on the song , saying , " I had heard her voice [ before ] and I fell in love with it . It 's a difficult song . You need a really big voice to be able to perform that song . I was like , ' Whoa ! ' She obviously has an amazing voice , and I think it was a really interesting exercise for her and for me . " Guetta further explained that when he collaborates with artists , he likes to " take them out of their boxes " , and creating a dance record with Hudson was " really exciting " for him . On working with Hudson , he said , " She is beautiful in every way : as a person , as a singer , as a human being . She delivered [ the song ] like crazy . " " Night of Your Life " was released for digital download on August 22 , 2011 , as the third and final promotional single from the album , as part of the iTunes Store 's countdown to the album 's release . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Night of Your Life " is an uptempo pop and future @-@ soul song , that features an infectious beat and clapping snares . According to Melinda Newman from HitFix , the opening of the song features beats that are " lightly bouncing around like colorful dancing polka dots " , before the song switches into a " retro @-@ sounding twirler with Hudson belting loud and clear . " The lyrics of " Night of Your Life " feature Hudson demanding that she be worshiped like a queen , singing " Love me / Baby treat me right / Make it an eternity and not only for one night / If you love me , till the end of time / Then I will promise you the night of your life . " Tom Ewing from The Guardian noted the song bears similarities to Rihanna 's " Only Girl ( In the World ) " ( 2010 ) . Genevieve Koski from The A.V. Club wrote that on the song , " Jennifer Hudson manage [ s ] to keep [ her ] head above the waves of synths ... by amping up [ her ] vocals to match the outsized beats . " Kerri Mason from Billboard magazine wrote that the song " takes a structure usually reserved for breathy <unk> — the big @-@ room trance vocal — and adds the firepower of Jennifer Hudson . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Scott Shetler from PopCrush called " Night of Your Life " " one of the most impressive tracks " on Nothing but the Beat , and noted that Hudson " sounds like a dance floor diva " on the song . Eric Henderson from Slant Magazine wrote that the song was " the album 's only comparative highlight " , but called it a " bald rip @-@ off " of Rihanna 's " Only Girl ( In the World ) . " Robert Copsey from Digital Spy noted it as one of the album 's " standouts " , and wrote that " Hudson adds a classy , club classics touch to ' Night of Your Life ' " . Joe Copplestone from PopMatters noted that songs on the album such as " Night of Your Life " and " Titanium " , " recall the power " of Guetta 's previous collaborations with Kelly Rowland on " When Love Takes Over " ( 2009 ) and " Commander " ( 2010 ) . A writer for Daily Herald praised Hudson 's vocals on the track for having " all the right emotion in all the right places . " 
 <unk> from Samesame.com.au called " Night of You Life " a " bangin ' radio ready single " and wrote that on " Night of Your Life " , Hudson delivers " the in control swagger that has become her trademark " . He also mentioned that the song was better than anything from her second studio album , I Remember Me ( 2011 ) . Becky Bain from Idolator wrote that " it 's one of the slickest collaborations " that she 's heard from David Guetta so far . Bain also added that it was " refreshing " to hear Hudson " in a euphoric party mood after her more low @-@ key offerings from her last album , I Remember Me . " Rich Lopez from Dallas Voice gave the song a mixed review , and wrote that it " is amateurish and never lives up to her talent . " Ben Norman from About.com met the song with a mixed review . He believed that its " production was lacking " the most , and not Hudson 's " abilities . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Night of Your Life " debuted at number 27 on the French Singles Chart , before dropping to number 73 the following week . The song debuted at number nine on the Austrian Singles Chart , peaked at number seven the following week , and spent eight non @-@ consecutive weeks on the chart . It also debuted at number nine on the Norwegian Singles Chart , where it remained for two consecutive weeks . " Night of Your Life " reached the top 20 on the singles charts of Denmark , Finland , Germany and Spain . In Sweden , the song debuted at number 51 on the Swedish Singles Chart on September 2 , 2011 , and peaked at number 31 the following week . In the United Kingdom , " Night of Your Life " debuted at number 35 on the UK Singles Chart on September 3 , 2011 . It also charted on the UK Dance Chart , where it peaked at number nine . 
 In the United States , " Night of Your Life " debuted at number 81 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart on the issue dated September 10 , 2011 , selling 27 @,@ 000 digital copies in its first week . In Switzerland , " Night of Your Life " debuted at number 24 on the Swiss Singles Chart on September 11 , 2011 , where it peaked . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , the song entered at number 38 , and dropped off the chart the following week . In Australia , the song debuted on the ARIA Singles Chart at its peak position of number 37 . On the Irish Singles Chart , " Night of Your Life " debuted and peaked at number 46 , and stayed on the chart for one week . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes for Nothing but the Beat . 
 David Guetta – songwriting , production 
 David <unk> – mastering 
 Jennifer Hudson – lead vocals 
 Cristyle Johnson – songwriting 
 Anthony Preston – songwriting 
 Florent Sabaton – mastering 
 Giorgio Tuinfort – songwriting , production 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Chess = 
 Chess is a two @-@ player strategy board game played on a chessboard , a checkered gameboard with 64 squares arranged in an eight @-@ by @-@ eight grid . Chess is played by millions of people worldwide , both amateurs and professionals . 
