 Dekum involved himself in many building projects in downtown Portland . One of his structures , the Dekum Building , which served as headquarters for the city 's government in the 1890s , was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980 . The Portland and Vancouver Railway , financed partly by Dekum , ran along the east side of the Willamette River from East Portland to the Columbia River . Dekum Street in northeast Portland is named after him . 
 Married to Fanny <unk> , Dekum fathered eight children . He was the president of the German Song Bird Society , which imported to Oregon many German songbirds . After suffering great financial loss during the Panic of 1893 , he died in 1894 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dekum was born in <unk> , <unk> , Germany , on November 5 , 1829 . He and his brother and four sisters emigrated to the United States to settle on a farm near Belleville , Illinois . The family later moved to St. Louis , Missouri , where both parents died . After serving as an apprentice confectioner in St. Louis , Dekum and a friend , Frederick Bickel , went gold prospecting in California and Idaho before settling in Portland . 
 = = From fruit to real estate = = 
 In 1853 , the two men established a fruit and confectionery store , Dekum & Bickel , which prospered for the next quarter @-@ century in downtown Portland . <unk> wealth from the " largest wholesale fresh @-@ fruit business in the Northwest " , Dekum joined " the frenzied real @-@ estate speculations of the early 1860s " , and his large holdings included several buildings that bore his name . In 1875 , he and Simeon Reed financed the city 's most expensive building of the time ; it was known as the Dekum and Reed Block . 
 Portland historian Joseph Gaston wrote , " It is an interesting and noteworthy fact that he was connected with the construction of every building in whole or in part between First and Third on Washington street ... " . These projects included the first large brick building on Front Street , the <unk> and Commercial blocks , the Waldo Building , and in 1892 the Dekum Building . 
 The latter , at the southwest corner of Southwest Third Avenue and Washington Street , is eight stories high , was built entirely of Oregon materials , and cost $ 300 @,@ 000 in 1892 dollars . The first three stories of the Romanesque structure are of rough @-@ cut sandstone ; the top five floors are of red brick and unglazed terracotta with floral designs . Decorative machicolations ( openings of the sort used in earlier eras for pouring pitch and dropping rocks on attackers ) appear in the parapet at the top of the building . For eight years starting in 1893 Portland 's government was headquartered in this structure , temporarily dubbed the Council Building . The exterior was renovated in 1987 , and the interior opened to the nearby Hamilton Building in the 1990s . The Dekum Building was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1980 and is part of the Skidmore / Old Town Historic District . 
 = = Banks , companies = = 
 In 1880 Dekum helped establish the Portland Savings Bank , of which he was named president in 1886 , succeeding David P. Thompson . He helped organize the Commercial National Bank of Portland and served as its president . ( The two banks occupied the same building and had overlapping directors , including John <unk> , George H. Williams , and Cyrus A. Dolph , as well as Dekum and Thompson . ) He was at various times president of Columbia Investment Company , Oregon Land and Investment Company , Columbia Fire and Marine Insurance Company , Portland and Vancouver Railway Company , Trinidad Asphalt & Paving Company , and the Portland Exposition Company . In 1885 , Dekum was one of 15 men named to the Portland Water Committee , empowered by the Oregon Legislative Assembly to acquire and operate a municipal water system for the city . 
 = = Portland and Vancouver Railway = = 
 In 1888 Dekum , Richard L. Durham , and John B. David built a narrow gauge railway , the Portland and Vancouver Railway , that began in what was then the separate city of East Portland and went north through the then @-@ separate city of Albina on the way to the Columbia River . The south end of the steam railway was at the east end of the Stark Street ferry between Portland and East Portland on the Willamette River . The north end of the line was at a landing on the Columbia that served ferries traveling between Oregon and Vancouver , Washington . 
 Dekum and Durham , through their Oregon Land and Development Company , invested in developing the Woodlawn District , which was near the railroad in Albina . Most of the railway route ran initially through " virgin timber and scattered clearings " , especially north of Albina , where " the country was quite primitive until the broad bottomlands of the Columbia were reached . " Because the land near the river was subject to annual flooding , the northernmost 8 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 400 m ) of the line was elevated on trestles . In 1892 the line was sold to the Portland Consolidated Street Railway Company , which switched to a bigger gauge to match its other tracks and began to electrify the railway for trolleys . 
 = = Family , other interests = = 
 Dekum was married in 1859 to Fanny <unk> of St. Louis , with whom he had eight children . In Portland , they lived in a three @-@ story house , built in about 1864 , on a tract later defined by Northwest 13th and 14th avenues and Morrison and Yamhill streets , that was at the time well outside the city . The house featured staggered quoins at its corners , a three @-@ bay entrance porch , segmental arched windows , and a conservatory ( sun room ) on the south . Fanny died in 1877 . 
 President of the German Song Bird Society , Dekum contributed money to import German song birds , including thrushes , starlings , and nightingales , to Oregon . According to one report , the society brought a total of about 500 German birds to Oregon at various times and released many of them into the wild , mainly in Portland parks . Although birds from these early importations survived for years by some accounts , they all eventually disappeared . Dekum was also president of the German Aid Society of Portland . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 During the Panic of 1893 , when many banks failed , Dekum 's Portland Savings Bank barely survived . Portland historian E. Kimbark MacColl writes that among Portland bankers 
 the banker who suffered the heaviest loss was Frank Dekum , who died in 1894 , partially from the strain of the depression . With David P. Thompson 's help , he had managed to salvage enough out of the wreckage of the Portland Savings Bank to leave an estate of over $ 1 million , largely in downtown real estate ; his railway holdings had collapsed . Thompson , who had been president of the savings bank from 1880 to 1886 , had sold all his bank stocks before his appointment in 1891 as American Minister to Turkey . Upon his return in 1893 , he was appointed receiver for the bank . 
 Wells Fargo bought Dekum 's other bank , Commercial National Bank of Portland , in January 1894 . Dekum died on October 19 that year and was buried in Lone Fir Cemetery in southeast Portland . Northeast Dekum Street in Portland 's Woodlawn neighborhood is named after him . 
 = SR Leader class = 
 The Leader was a class of experimental 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 6 @-@ 0T articulated steam locomotive , produced in the United Kingdom to the design of the innovative engineer Oliver Bulleid . The Leader was an attempt to extend the life of steam traction by eliminating many of the operational drawbacks associated with existing steam locomotives . It was intended as a replacement for the ageing fleet of M7 class tank engines still in operation on the Southern Railway ( SR ) . Design work began in 1946 and development continued after the nationalisation of the railways in 1948 , under the auspices of British Railways ( BR ) . 
 The Leader project was part of Bulleid 's desire to modernise the steam locomotive based on experience gained with the Southern Railway 's fleet of electric stock . Bulleid considered that attitudes towards the labour @-@ intensity of steam operation had changed during the post @-@ war period , favouring dieselisation and electrification . In an effort to demonstrate the continued potential of steam , Bulleid pushed forward the boundaries of steam @-@ power , allowing it to compete with diesel and electric locomotives in terms of labour @-@ saving and ease of operation . 
 The design incorporated many novel features , such as the use of thermic siphons , bogies and cabs at either end of the locomotive , resulting in its unique — for a steam locomotive — modern diesel @-@ like appearance . Several of its innovations proved to be unsuccessful however , partly accounting for the project 's cancellation in the early 1950s . Five Leader locomotives were begun , although only one was completed . The operational locomotive was trialled on the former Southern Railway network around Brighton . Problems with the design , indifferent reports on performance and political pressure surrounding spiralling development costs , led to all locomotives of the class being scrapped by 1951 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The basis of the Leader originated from a 1944 review of the Southern Railway 's steam locomotive fleet , resulting in a Southern Railway design brief which called for a high @-@ powered locomotive requiring little maintenance to replace the ageing fleet of M7 class tank engines . The brief also stipulated that the locomotive would be used on both passenger and freight trains , requiring high route availability . Bulleid proposed an initial design based on his SR Q1 class locomotive , which had proved easy to maintain in service . As the proposal progressed , Bulleid saw that certain tasks required with conventional steam locomotives could be eliminated by adopting some of the features of the contemporary Southern electric locomotives . However , one of the subsequent designs of a 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 wheel arrangement had an unacceptably high axle @-@ loading of 20 long tons ( 20 @.@ 3 tonnes ; 22 @.@ 4 short tons ) , which increased the risk of damaging the Southern Railway 's track . By developing the proposal further , Bulleid settled for a 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 6 @-@ 0T design of <unk> locomotive , which spread the weight more evenly over the rails and reduced the axle @-@ loading . 
 = = Design = = 
 A series of initial ideas were presented to the Southern Railway management by Bulleid that incorporated double @-@ ended running , giving the locomotive driver maximum visibility in either direction without a boiler or tender obscuring his view . The need for a turntable to turn the locomotive around was therefore eliminated , although the initial designs were rejected by the operating department because of problems with welding technique . The accepted design included two 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 steam bogies with weight @-@ saving sleeve valves and chains to couple the driving axles . The boiler was offset to provide space for a communication corridor , allowing the driver to access both cabs without leaving the locomotive , an arrangement which led to later problems . The firebox , near the centre of the locomotive , was fed by the fireman from a third cab , linked to both driving cabs by the communication corridor . The entire ensemble was placed on a common frame and thus often referred to as an 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 6 @-@ 0T . 
 The Leader prototype was constructed at Brighton railway works , work beginning in 1946 . An initial order for five locomotives was placed straight from the drawing board in 1946 and a further 31 were ordered in 1947 , although , with nationalisation looming , this was merely a gesture . The latter order was cancelled after the Southern Railway was taken into public ownership , to allow trials to be carried out on the prototype . 
 = = = Bogie and cylinder design = = = 
 Each of the two bogies had three cylinders , with the driving wheels connected by chains enclosed in an oil @-@ bath , based upon Bulleid 's chain @-@ driven valve gear on his Pacific locomotives . The valve gear used the unusual sleeve valve arrangement that was also tested on the ex @-@ LB & SCR H1 class Hartland Point in parallel with the construction of the first Leader locomotive . The Leader was the first steam locomotive to use a form of sleeve valve since Cecil Paget 's locomotive of 1908 and the concurrent testing of the principle on Hartland Point hints at the rushed nature of the locomotive 's conception . The locomotive sat on the unusual Bulleid Firth Brown wheels , which were lighter , yet stronger , than the spoked equivalent . 
 The use of sleeve valves and oil baths to lubricate the moving parts of the engine units was inspired by contemporary internal combustion engine practice . This included oscillating gear that gave a 25 @-@ degree axial movement to the sleeves , allowing even lubrication of the moving parts . However , this resulted in an over @-@ complicated mechanism that was difficult to maintain , perpetuating the seizures it was meant to eradicate . This feature was removed from both bogies of the prototype as the trials progressed . Another innovative feature of the steam bogie assembly was the ability to interchange them when faults occurred , an easy operation for maintenance staff when compared to the complexities of overhauling a regular steam locomotive 's motion . 
 The three cylinders of each bogie were cast in mono @-@ block format , each surrounded by two annular inlet steam chests and a single large outlet steam chest . These had the added function of keeping the cylinder heated by hot steam to maintain the temperature and pressure of steam entering the cylinders . However , these castings were difficult to machine accurately . The steam @-@ sealing arrangements needed for this system were also complex , with each of the six cylinders and valve sleeves requiring 24 sealing rings . 
 = = = Boiler , firebox , smokebox and casing design = = = 
 The boiler was the culmination of lessons learned with the Pacifics and was a prolific steam @-@ raiser . All Leader boilers were constructed at Eastleigh , and proved to be the least problematic area of the entire design . The boiler pressure was set at 280 psi ( 1 @.@ 93 MPa ) and each was fitted with four thermic siphons within the firebox to increase the rate of evaporation and improve water circulation . These were previously used to great effect on Bulleid 's Merchant Navy and West Country and Battle of Britain class designs . 
 The Leader had a " dry lining " firebox ; it was not surrounded on top and sides by a " jacket " of water as in normal practice . It was constructed of welded steel and used firebricks instead of water for insulation , which was a novel but troublesome solution to dry @-@ lining the firebox . These had the effect of reducing the grate area from 47 square feet ( 4 @.@ 4 m2 ) to 25 @.@ 5 square feet ( 2 @.@ 37 m2 ) and concentrated the fire in a smaller area . The firehole door was offset to the left of the boiler <unk> and was to provide difficulty for the fireman to add coal to the fire . The firebox was not initially equipped with a firebrick arch , although one was retro @-@ fitted during the summer of 1950 . The arch was problematic as it promoted the tendency for flames to enter the cab at high outputs , a situation made worse by the narrowing of the firebox area . 
 The smokebox had an inherent problem in maintaining a constant vacuum . This was a result of another Bulleid labour @-@ saving innovation , a sliding hatch controlled from the front cab that enabled ash to be cleaned out through a chute onto the track when on the move . The problem lay with ash manifesting itself around the edges of the slide , allowing air to leak into the smokebox , therefore reducing the overall efficiency of the locomotive . The fierce blast from the exhaust also meant that ash and embers were ejected into the atmosphere , creating a potential lineside fire hazard . 
 For ease of maintenance , the boiler , firebox and smokebox were encased in steel sheeting that resembled a modern diesel locomotive , a major departure from traditional steam locomotive design , allowing the engine to be cleaned using a carriage @-@ washing plant . The locomotive was designed to carry 4 tons ( 4 @.@ 06 tonnes ) of coal and 4 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 18 @,@ 000 l ; 4 @,@ 800 US gal ) of water with the coal bunker covered by a tarpaulin to prevent water ingress into the fireman 's cab . Entry into the locomotive was by way of ladders leading up to sliding doors although , due to the bogie design , the climb into the fireman 's cab necessitated clambering over the <unk> casing . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Construction of the first five Leader locomotives began at the Southern Railway 's Brighton railway works in July 1947 . British Railways inherited the Leader project upon nationalisation in 1948 , which was far enough advanced to continue constructing the prototype , as Bulleid was still Chief Mechanical Engineer of the newly formed Southern Region of British Railways . Although work on the other four locomotives stalled , the prototype Leader emerged from Brighton as locomotive No. 36001 in June 1949 . 
 The other four members of the initial order made by the Southern Railway , Nos. 36002 – 5 , were at varying stages of construction by the end of the development period . No. 36002 was almost complete , No. <unk> was without its outer casing , and Nos. <unk> – 5 were little more than sets of frames , although most of their major components had been constructed at Eastleigh and Brighton and were stored ready for fitting . With no prospect of further money being allocated by the Railway Executive for their completion , the unfinished locomotives were put into store at various depots around the former Southern Railway network pending a decision on their future . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 No. 36001 was immediately put into service trials using empty passenger carriage stock in the south @-@ east of England . The official trial records kept at Brighton works reported varying degrees of success and failure on the runs undertaken . However , the results of the trials as reported to British Railways headquarters at Marylebone were " conspicuous by the absence of praise " for the strengths of the Leader , namely the boiler , braking system and total adhesion provided by the two bogies . Several theories have been put forward regarding this state of affairs , the most plausible being that the more conservative members of the railway workforce at Brighton and the Railway Executive felt that the Leader was too revolutionary and were keen to maintain the status quo . 
 = = = Performance of No. 36001 = = = 
 Following trials that lasted over a year , No. 36001 was shown to have several flaws , including heavy coal and water consumption , mechanical unreliability , untenable working conditions for both fireman and driver , loss of steam through the cylinder rings and uneven weight distribution on the bogies . After renewing the cylinder assembly , it was tested around Brighton and Eastleigh using an LNER <unk> car , where good running was experienced at high costs in fuel and effort on the part of the fireman . The Leader was tested against the performance of a U class control locomotive and indicated that the brake release was too slow in service for use on tight schedules despite the brake application being noted as the best used on a Bulleid design . 
 Throughout No. 36001 's trials , the firebrick lining provided a constant problem by continually collapsing into the fire . The firebricks were then replaced with cast iron substitutes that melted in the intense heat of the firebox , which were in turn replaced by thicker 9 inches ( 23 cm ) firebricks . Some of the firemen allotted to the Leader complained about cramped conditions in the centre cab of the locomotive , a situation made worse by flames entering the cab from the firebox at high outputs . It was an enclosed space that was constantly hot and the single fireman 's entrance door on the side of the locomotive was left open during travel to promote ventilation . The door into the fireman 's cab also attracted criticism , as it would have been blocked in the event of the locomotive overturning on that side , preventing the fireman 's escape , so that members of the railway trade union ASLEF threatened to stop their crews from operating the Leader . 
 The offset boiler and coal bunker caused the locomotive 's centre of gravity to be shifted to one side . Experiments had to be undertaken to balance the locomotive by filling the linking corridor with large quantities of scrap metal , replaced in a re @-@ design by a raised floor , covering the weighted material . These modifications resulted in the engine exceeding the total weight limit of 150 tons ( 151 tonnes ) , severely limiting the design 's route availability during testing . A related problem was that despite being a tall locomotive , at 12 feet 11 inches ( 3 @.@ 94 m ) , the cab ceilings were relatively low . The cab at the smokebox end of the locomotive suffered from the same excessive heat as did the fireman 's cab . To circumvent this problem the locomotive was used in reverse , as the rear cab was next to the water tank and coal chute and therefore away from the hot gases circulating inside the smokebox . 
 Despite its problems , the locomotive displayed outstanding steaming characteristics and total traction from the two power bogies on its trial runs . When properly fired , the Leader was capable of keeping up with the schedules , even running ahead on occasions . However , operational difficulties when stopping for water tended to lose any time advantages gained and affected the published performance figures . Despite hauling test trains over the Central Section of the former Southern Railway , the Leader prototype was never used on a revenue @-@ earning service because of the risk of failure of the valve gear and the adverse publicity this would cause for British Railways . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 = = = Southern Railway = = = 
 When the project was under the auspices of the Southern Railway , No. 36001 would have been numbered <unk> . Bulleid advocated a continental style of locomotive nomenclature , based upon his experiences at the French branch of Westinghouse Electric before the First World War and those of his tenure in the rail operating department during that conflict . The Southern Railway number followed an adaptation of the UIC classification system where " C " refers to the number of driving axles – in this case three on each bogie . Since the design has six driving axles , the numbering would have been <unk> – <unk> for the initial batch , the final number being the locomotive identifier . 
 = = = British Railways = = = 
 Operational livery was ex @-@ works photographic grey with red and white lining . The British Railways " Cycling Lion " crest was also used though , after the works photograph , this was painted over without explanation . Numbering was the British Railways standard system , in the 36001 series . If the class had gone into full production , the locomotives would have been painted in British Railways mixed traffic / freight black livery with red , grey and cream lining . 36001 was initially painted in this livery but this preceded the official works photograph and was subsequently repainted in photographic grey livery . 
 = = Operational assessment = = 
 Despite the high expectations attached to the Leader , it was not the motive power revolution that Bulleid intended it to be . No part of the Leader design was perpetuated on the British Railways Standard class locomotives by Robert Riddles , nor did it find favour internationally , with the Garratt articulated locomotives providing a similar function for less maintenance . The whole concept was quietly dropped in 1951 after Bulleid left British Railways to become Chief Mechanical Engineer of <unk> <unk> Éireann ( where he produced <unk> No . <unk> , a peat @-@ burning locomotive to a similar design ) and all five were scrapped . The culmination of the project was a £ 178 @,@ 865 5s 0d ( equivalent to £ 5 @,@ 527 @,@ 041 as of 2015 ) bill for the taxpayer though , when the press reported the story as late as 1953 , it was claimed that £ 500 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 15 @,@ 450 @,@ 294 as of 2015 ) was wasted on the project . R. G. Jarvis , who was placed in charge of the project after Bulleid 's departure , insisted that the locomotive required an entire re @-@ design to solve the problems of the original concept . 
 No members of the Leader class survived the 1950s and only the numberplates of No. 36001 and No. 36002 are known to exist . The <unk> for No. 36001 is located in the National Railway Museum , although a locomotive builder 's plate intended for the locomotive , but never fitted in service , was sold at auction in 2008 . The Leader was a bold attempt at pushing back the boundaries of contemporary steam locomotive design and , if successful , would have prolonged the life of steam on Britain 's Railways . 
 = 3rd Pioneer Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 3rd Pioneer Battalion was an Australian infantry and light engineer unit raised for service during the First World War as part of the all volunteer Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . Formed in Victoria in March 1916 , the battalion subsequently undertook further training in the United Kingdom before arriving in France in late 1916 . It later served on the Western Front in France and Belgium until the end of the war . Assigned to the 3rd Division , the 3rd Pioneer Battalion fought in most of the major battles that the AIF participated in between mid @-@ 1916 and the end of the war in November 1918 . It was subsequently disbanded in early 1919 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and training = = = 
 The 3rd Pioneers were raised in Victoria , in March 1916 , from volunteers drawn from Victoria , Queensland , South Australia , and Western Australia and was subsequently assigned to the 3rd Division . The battalion was formed in the aftermath of the failed Gallipoli campaign when the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) was expanded as part of plans to transfer it from the Middle East to Europe for service in the trenches along the Western Front . This expansion saw several new infantry divisions raised in Egypt and Australia , as well as specialist support units such as machine gun companies , engineer companies , artillery batteries and pioneer battalions . 
 Trained as infantrymen , the pioneers were tasked with light combat engineer functions in the field , with a large number of personnel possessing trades from civilian life . The concept had existed within the British Indian Army before the war , but was adopted by the Australian Army in early 1916 to meet a need for troops with construction and engineering skills to assist with digging trenches , labouring , constructing strong points and undertaking battlefield clearance . As such , they were designated as pioneer units . At the same time , they could be pressed into the line to fight alongside regular infantry where required . 
 A total of five pioneer battalions were raised by the AIF during the war , with one being assigned to each of the five infantry divisions that the Australians deployed to the battlefield in France and Belgium . The battalions consisted of four companies , under a headquarters company . To identify the 3rd Pioneer Battalion 's personnel , they were issued with a purple and white Unit Colour Patch . The colours were in common with other Australian pioneer battalions , while the horizontal oval shape denoted that the unit was part of the 3rd Division . 
 The battalion 's first commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel Robert Law , and upon establishment it was decided that the unit would be an " all States " unit , meaning that personnel would not just be drawn exclusively from one particular state , but would instead draw recruits from all around Australia . The headquarters and ' A ' Company were recruited from Victoria , and was established at Ascot Vale , before moving to Campbellfield in March , while ' B ' Company was composed of New South Welshmen , ' C ' Company came from Queensland and ' D ' Company was a composite sub @-@ unit drawn from South Australia and Western Australia . After the sub @-@ units had formed in their home locations – Liverpool , Bathurst , Brisbane , Blackboy Hill , and Adelaide – the battalion began concentrating at Campbellfield in April 1916 . 
 Detailed training began at Campbellfield shortly after concentration and in May the battalion marched through the streets of Melbourne , before being presented with its unit colour . They were subsequently laid up at St Paul 's Cathedral in Melbourne prior to embarkation . They departed Australia on the transport Wandilla on 6 June 1916 , and endured a seven @-@ week voyage to the United Kingdom , sailing via Cape Town . After arriving in the United Kingdom , the battalion subsequently concentrated with the rest of the 3rd Division around Larkhill on Salisbury Plain , in Wiltshire . Between July and November 1916 , the 3rd Pioneers carried out intensive training to prepare them for their arrival on the Western Front . Finally , on 25 November the battalion entrained at Amesbury bound for Southampton from where they were ferried across the English Channel to Le Havre . 
 = = = Western Front = = = 
 The 3rd Pioneers would subsequently serve on the Western Front from late 1916 until the end of the war . After a brief period of acclimatisation in a " nursery sector " around Armentieres , the battalion 's first major action came around Messines in June 1917 , during which several of the battalion 's companies were assigned to the assaulting companies to dig communication trenches while other troops were assigned general engineering duties such as road clearance , tramway maintenance , anti @-@ aircraft defence and water supply , laying pipes and ensuring that they were maintained throughout the battle . Following this , the battalion 's next major battle of 1917 was the Third Battle of Ypres , before moving back to <unk> in late October 1917 . One member of the battalion , Lance Corporal Walter Peeler , received the Victoria Cross , for his bravery during the Battle of Broodseinde in October 1917 . During the action , Peeler was part of a Lewis Gun team that was supporting the 37th Infantry Battalion ; tasked with providing anti @-@ aircraft defence , when the first wave of the assault was held up , Peeler advanced ahead of the assaulting infantry and destroyed one of the German positions that was causing heavy casualties . He then proceeded to destroy a machine gun position . 
 The battalion wintered around Messines , during which time it provided reinforcements to the Australian engineer tunneling companies , as well as helping to construct and maintain the divisional tramway systems . In early 1918 , the battalion took part in efforts to blunt the German Spring Offensive , serving around Belle , <unk> and Ribemont between March and May 1918 . In the lull that followed the failed German offensive , the Allies sought to regain the initiative , and after being relieved by the 2nd Pioneers around <unk> , the 3rd Pioneers were dispatched to the Somme , taking over from the 4th Pioneers around Villers @-@ Bretonneux . They then took part in the Battle of Hamel before joining the Hundred Days Offensive , which was launched around Amiens in August 1918 . The battalion 's final actions of the war came against the Hindenburg Line , around the St. Quentin Canal in early October 1918 , during which a company of Americans from the US 102nd Engineers were attached to them . The battalion was subsequently withdrawn from the line for reorganisation along with the rest of the Australian Corps after the battle around the St. Quentin Canal , and moved back to the Abbeville area . They did not see further action before the armistice came into effect on 11 November 1918 . 
 After the conclusion of hostilities , the battalion 's strength dwindled as personnel were sent to England and elsewhere for educational courses to prepare them to return to civilian life . The first batch of around 100 personnel left for Australia for demobilisation in February 1919 , and the battalion was formally disbanded the following month . During the war , a total of 1 @,@ 964 men served in the 3rd Pioneer Battalion ; this includes the original enlistments and eight batches of reinforcements . Of these , 140 were killed or died of wounds , 19 died from illness or from accident , 208 were gassed , and 619 were wounded in action . Including Peeler 's VC , a total of 129 honours and awards were bestowed upon members of the battalion : one VC , four Distinguished Service Orders , 16 Military Crosses , 10 Distinguished Conduct Medals , 73 Military Medals , nine Meritorious Service Medals , and three Mentions in Despatches . In addition , three members of the battalion were invested as Members of the Order of the British Empire and one was appointed as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the war , the concept of pioneer battalions was discontinued in the Australian Army . In the immediate aftermath of the war , as plans were drawn up for the shape of the post conflict Army , a proposal was put forth to raise six pioneer battalions in the peacetime Army , but a combination of global disarmament and financial hardship resulted in this plan being scrapped . As a result , pioneer battalions disappeared from the Australian Army order of battle until the Second World War , when four such battalions were raised as part of the Second Australian Imperial Force . According to Alexander Rodger , as a result of the decision not to re @-@ raise pioneer battalions in the interwar years , no battle honours were subsequently awarded to the 3rd Pioneer Battalion – or any other First World War pioneer battalion – as there was no equivalent unit to perpetuate the honours when they were promulgated by the Australian Army in 1927 . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The battalion was commanded by the following officers : 
 Lieutenant Colonel R. Law ( 1916 – 17 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel <unk> Mather ( 1917 – 18 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel H. Grant ( 1918 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel W.H. Sanday ( 1918 ) 
 = Dark Horse ( George Harrison song ) = 
 " Dark Horse " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released as the title track to his 1974 solo album on Apple Records . The song was the album 's lead single in North America , becoming a top @-@ twenty hit in the United States , but it was Harrison 's first single not to chart in Britain when issued there in February 1975 . While the term " dark horse " had long been applied to Harrison due to his success as a solo artist following the Beatles ' break @-@ up in 1970 , commentators recognise the song as Harrison 's rebuttal to a number of possible detractors : those reviewers who criticised the spiritual content of his 1973 album Living in the Material World ; his first wife , Pattie Boyd ; and his former bandmates John Lennon and Paul McCartney . Harrison also used the title for that of his record label , and his 1974 North American tour with Ravi Shankar would come to be known as the Dark Horse Tour . 
 Harrison taped an early version of the song with Ringo Starr in 1973 , intending to finish this recording for the album . The officially released version was recorded during rehearsals for his 1974 concerts , at a time when Harrison 's exhaustion through overwork contributed to him contracting laryngitis and losing his voice . Harrison 's singing was similarly affected throughout the ensuing tour . A number of music critics rate " Dark Horse " as one of Harrison 's finest post @-@ Beatles compositions and believe that the single would have achieved greater success with a cleaner vocal performance . The recording reflects Harrison 's embracing of the jazz @-@ funk musical genre , and features contributions from musicians such as Tom Scott , Jim Horn , Billy Preston , Willie Weeks and Andy Newmark . 
 Harrison played " Dark Horse " throughout both the 1974 tour and his 1991 Japanese tour with Eric Clapton . A live version appears on his 1992 album Live in Japan . Recordings also exist of Harrison performing the song during radio and television appearances in the 1970s , although none of these versions are available on official releases . For the first time since the debut CD releases of Dark Horse and The Best of George Harrison in the early 1990s , " Dark Horse " was remastered in 2014 , along with its parent album , as part of Harrison 's Apple Years reissues . The latter release includes an acoustic demo of the song , which Harrison recorded in 1974 before the onset of laryngitis . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 George Harrison 's 1973 album Living in the Material World had divided music critics , with Stephen Holden of Rolling Stone lauding it as " a pop religious ceremony for all seasons " and " an article of faith , miraculous in its radiance " , while the NME 's reviewer derided the pious nature of the songs and concluded : " So damn holy I could scream . " Although the album was another " massive " commercial success for Harrison , and the general perception remained that he was still the most capable of the four ex @-@ Beatles , Harrison was reportedly stung by this criticism of the overt Vaishnava Hindu spirituality in his music . His purchase of Bhaktivedanta Manor early that year as a UK headquarters for ISKCON – or , colloquially , " the Hare Krishna movement " – led to ridicule in the British press . Author Joshua Greene , a former ISKCON devotee , describes a visit Harrison made to the house in August 1973 when the singer shared his concerns with Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada , the movement 's international leader : " I 'm provoking a bad reaction , " Harrison confided . " The stronger the commitment on my part , the stronger the animosity becomes . " 
 At the same time , Harrison 's marriage to Pattie Boyd was coming to an end , and he would later describe his behaviour during their final years together as " the naughty period , 1973 − 74 " . Biographer Ian Inglis has written of Harrison 's dismay at the more negative reviews for Material World : " It coincided with a period of intense disarray and frequent infidelities in his personal life , and the combination of these two sources of disappointment produced a mood of gloom and cynicism that would invariably work its way into his next musical projects . " 
 Harrison wrote " Dark Horse " in 1973 , apparently as a rebuttal to critics of Living in the Material World . Like a number of reviewers of the Dark Horse album , Inglis also interprets the composition as Harrison 's message of defiance to Boyd . Harrison 's comments on " Dark Horse " in his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine , are as " obscure " as the song 's lyrics , writes theologian Dale Allison . While the term " dark horse " usually refers to an unlikely or surprise winner , Harrison states in I , Me , Mine that he was unaware of that meaning at the time ; his lyrics instead referred to someone who carried out clandestine sexual relationships − that is , a dark horse in Liverpudlian terms . 
 Harrison 's musical biographer , Simon Leng , views " Dark Horse " as its composer addressing his critics by creating a " new persona " . " This ' George ' is a man one step ahead of his detractors , " Leng writes , " triumphing with quicker feet and better gags . Commentators try to pin his character down at peril , for he is likely to change and take the least expected course . " In the song 's choruses , Harrison declares himself " a dark horse / Running on a dark race course " , " a blue moon " , and a " cool jerk " who is " Looking for the source " . Leng paraphrases this self @-@ depiction as meaning " a loner " and " an elusive , cheeky maverick " . 
 While describing the lyrics as " smarmy , if not somewhat defensive " , AllMusic 's Lindsay Planer identifies the song 's opening verse as " seem [ ing ] to address the situation " between Harrison and Boyd : 
 You thought that you knew where I was and when 
 Baby , looks like you 've been fooling you again 
 You thought that you had got me all staked out 
 Baby , looks like I 've been breaking out . 
 Planer suggests that the " searing " verse @-@ two lines " You thought you had got me in your grip / Baby , looks like you was not so smart " are a further example of this interpretation . Like Planer , Inglis recognises a third possible target of Harrison 's scorn – former bandmates John Lennon and Paul McCartney . Inglis observes that in the song 's final verse , Harrison is making it clear to those who have underestimated him in the past that his abilities are not " recent acquisitions " : 
 I thought that you knew it all along 
 Until you started getting me not right 
 Seems as if you heard a little late 
 I warned you when we both was at the starting gate . 
 Leng notes that this Harrison " character " would return in his 1976 composition " This Song " , written as a light @-@ hearted reflection on his " travails in court " during the " My Sweet Lord " plagiarism case . 
 = = Recording = = 
 = = = 1973 basic track = = = 
 Harrison first recorded " Dark Horse " at his Friar Park studio , FPSHOT , in Oxfordshire , in November 1973 . Along with tracks by future Dark Horse Records acts Ravi Shankar and Splinter , Harrison included the song on a tape he compiled for music @-@ business executive David Geffen before departing for India in late January 1974 . This early , unfinished version of " Dark Horse " featured Harrison on acoustic guitar and guide vocal , bassist Klaus Voormann and Ringo Starr on drums , and it is noticeably slower in tempo than the official release . 
 Harrison used the song title as the name for his new record label , launched in May 1974 ( with worldwide distribution through A & M Records ) , for which Shankar and Splinter were the first signings . Harrison then announced that he would be touring the United States – the first US tour by a member of the Beatles since 1966 – with Shankar as co @-@ headliner . 
 = = = Official version = = = 
 By October , when he arrived in Los Angeles to prepare for the tour , a combination of Harrison 's business commitments , his dedication to projects by his Dark Horse acts , and a lifestyle that Leng terms " one drink too many , too frequently " meant that production on Harrison 's Dark Horse album was severely behind schedule . For three weeks , by day Harrison rehearsed with his tour band , which included Tom Scott , Billy Preston , Jim Horn , Robben Ford , Willie Weeks and Andy Newmark , at the A & M studio complex on La Brea Avenue , Hollywood . In the evenings , he added vocals and other overdubs to tracks rush @-@ recorded at Friar Park . He had intended to finish " Dark Horse " in this way but decided instead to re @-@ record the track , since the musicians were having to learn the song for inclusion in the concert setlist . 
 Already exhausted through overwork before arriving in Los Angeles , Harrison lost his voice early on in the rehearsals and contracted laryngitis , the results of which were obvious on the finished songs , particularly " Dark Horse " . Harrison and his tour band recorded the album 's title track live on a sound stage at A & M in late October , with Norm Kinney engineering the session . Lon and Derrek Van Eaton , who , like Preston , were a former Apple Records act now signed with A & M Records , overdubbed backing vocals soon afterwards . 
 This official version of " Dark Horse " is notable for its arrangement , incorporating aspects of funk and jazz , as well as for Harrison 's lead vocal , which he described as sounding like the singer Louis Armstrong . Harrison later told reporters that he quite liked the result , but according to Andy Newmark , Harrison was concerned about how concert @-@ goers would react to his shot vocals . The recording features a trio of flute players , led by Scott ; Billy Preston on electric piano ; and Robben Ford doubling Harrison 's capo @-@ ed acoustic @-@ guitar part , much like Pete Ham had done three years before on " Here Comes the Sun " at the Concert for Bangladesh . The busy rhythm section of " funky stalwarts " Weeks and Newmark contributed to the track sounding more contemporary than Harrison 's recent solo work , which had used the previously preferred team of Voorman , Starr and / or Jim Keltner , although the latter does provide hi @-@ hats here , supporting Newmark 's beat . In addition , Emil Richards played a percussion instrument known as a crochet . 
 = = Release = = 
 Backed with " I Don 't Care Anymore " , " Dark Horse " was issued as the album 's lead single in America ( as Apple 1877 ) , on 18 November 1974 . The single was available in a white sleeve on which the song lyrics and a large dot appeared in blue print . Capitol Records , Apple 's US distributor , sent an edited mix , cutting a minute 's worth from the middle of the song , as a promotional disc for radio stations across America . 
 " Dark Horse " made a strong impact as a single , authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter write , reaching the US top 20 " with ease " . It then peaked at a relatively low number 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 , however , on 11 January 1975 , before disappearing from the chart altogether two weeks later . In Canada , where the tour had begun on 2 November , " Dark Horse " reached number 26 on the RPM 100 . In Britain , the song was released as the second single off Dark Horse , in February 1975 ( as Apple R 6001 ) , with the show @-@ opening " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " on the B @-@ side . The single failed to place at all on the UK Singles Chart , then just a top 50 . 
 Due to the delay in completing the recording , Capitol was unable to issue the Dark Horse album until the second week of December , towards the end of the tour . In the original , LP format , " Dark Horse " appeared as the second track on side two , between " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " , the album 's other single , and the soul @-@ inflected " Far East Man " . In his handwritten sleeve notes , Harrison lists A & M Records secretary and future wife Olivia Arias among the participating musicians , her contribution being " <unk> out " . The couple had first met at the start of Harrison 's hectic few weeks in Los Angeles , and Arias became his constant companion on the tour . 
 " Dark Horse " appeared on the 1976 Capitol compilation The Best of George Harrison but it was omitted from the posthumous , career @-@ spanning Let It Roll : Songs by George Harrison in 2009 . Having last been remastered for Dark Horse 's debut release on CD , in January 1992 , the song was remastered for inclusion on Harrison 's Apple Years 1968 – 75 reissues , released in September 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 On release , Billboard magazine described " Dark Horse " as " a pleasing , acoustic flavored cut " with an " instantly catchy sound that should satisfy AM listeners and more ' critical ' fans " , adding that the use of flutes " spices [ up ] " the recording . The following month , the same magazine 's album review referred to Harrison " riding high " with the title track and noted " lots of FM potential " in the songs on Dark Horse . 
 With the US release coming two weeks into Harrison 's high @-@ profile tour with Shankar , much of the critical reaction there to " Dark Horse " centred on the perilous state of Harrison 's voice . " Dark Hoarse " was a widely used moniker , as several concert reviewers wrote disparagingly of Harrison " croaking " his way through Beatles classics such as " Something " and " In My Life " . Discussing this period of Harrison 's career in an article for Mojo , in November 2014 , Mat Snow writes that " George 's ' 70s honeymoon with the public was over " . 
 In a notably unfavourable review of the album , for Rolling Stone , Jim Miller quoted the chorus of the title track to illustrate his point that the singer 's " quest for illumination populates his lyrics with sermons and awkward mea <unk> " . Miller added that " thanks to Harrison 's no @-@ voice and stilted lyrics , [ ' Dark Horse ' ] quite fails to evoke the self @-@ confident master of ' My Sweet Lord ' or even ' Living in the Material World . ' " Reviewing the album for the NME , Bob Woffinden took exception to Harrison 's lyrics , ridiculing " Dark Horse " as " a putdown of Patti [ Boyd ] , an affirmation of Harrison 's male chauvinism – he was on top of the game all through " . 
 Among more favourable reviews , Michael Gross of Circus Raves defended the Harrison – Shankar tour as having been " plagued by untrue press reports [ while ] creating a new , unbounded music that defied labelling as easily as the men involved defied national boundaries " . Gross wrote that " Dark Horse " " brings back memories of The White Album , as Chuck Findlay , Jim Horn and Scott dart through the intricate melody on flutes " . In Melody Maker , Brian Harrigan found Harrison 's gruff vocal a bonus , writing that he " coaxes a tremendous amount from his normally unimpressive voice " and sings " particularly well " on the title track . Harrigan highlighted " Dark Horse " as " easily the strongest number on the album " , with support musicians Newmark and Preston " playing up a storm " . 
 In their 1975 book The Beatles : An Illustrated Record , NME critics Roy Carr and Tony Tyler similarly approved of Harrison 's husky singing on " Dark Horse " , praising it as " definitely a style to pursue " . Like Carr and Tyler , Nicholas Schaffner rated " Dark Horse " among Harrison 's finest compositions . Writing in The Beatles Forever , Schaffner opined that " Dark Horse " could have been one of Harrison 's most successful singles had he " only waited to recoup his voice before committing it to tape " . Seven years after his unfavourable review in the NME , Woffinden acknowledged that the song would have sounded " really good " had it been " graced with good vocals " and released in a " different context " . 
 = = = Retrospective assessment and legacy = = = 
 Writing for Rolling Stone in 2002 , Greg Kot took issue with Harrison 's strained vocal and viewed the song as " continu [ ing ] in the condescending autobiographical vein " of Material World tracks such as " The Light That Has Lighted the World " . Conversely , author Alan Clayson has written of the song 's " <unk> appeal " , with the lead vocal " a not unattractive cross between McCartney and Rod Stewart " . 
 Simon Leng considers " Dark Horse " to be a " jaunty and pleasing hit " and one of Harrison 's best compositions , but rues the fact that Harrison did not marry up his vocal from an earlier , bluesy demo with the backing he subsequently recorded in LA . Leng reasons that a bigger chart hit would surely have been the result , if the song 's vocal track had not sounded " like the torments of a man swallowing razor blades " . Dale Allison also subscribes to this view , while Harrison biographer Elliot Huntley writes that " Dark Horse " might have made an " excellent stand @-@ alone single " , backed by " So Sad " . This coupling would have provided Harrison with the necessary product to promote on tour , Huntley observes , without " derailing [ his career ] at full speed " , which the rushed and vocally compromised Dark Horse album effectively did . 
 Reviewing Harrison 's 2014 Apple Years reissues for the Chicago Tribune , Mark Caro describes the song as " one of [ Harrison 's ] most sublime creations despite his dark @-@ hoarse vocals " . Shawn Perry of <unk> writes that " the title track [ of Dark Horse ] with Harrison 's scratchy vocal assumes a special personality all its own " , while Paul Trynka , in a review for Classic Rock magazine , describes it as " a fine song … marred by George 's voice , tired , worn and sapped of its usual sweetness " . Andrew Grant Jackson features " Dark Horse " in his book Still the Greatest : The Essential Solo Beatles Songs , and considers that " the huskiness of his voice threatens to distract " , but " the strength of the composition , the uplifting chorus , the ' Stairway to Heaven ' -esque flute by Tom Scott , and the subtly funk keys by Preston nudge it into Harrison 's top tier , though just by a nose . " 
 = = Other versions = = 
 As well as performing the song throughout both the 1974 tour and his 1991 Japanese tour with Eric Clapton , his only other tour as a solo artist , Harrison recorded " Dark Horse " a number of times before and after the officially released studio version . The " laidback " original take , from the November 1973 sessions at FPSHOT , is available unofficially on the Harri @-@ Spector Show bootleg compilation , along with the other selections sent to David Geffen and outtakes from Harrison and Phil Spector 's February 1971 sessions for Ronnie Spector . 
 = = = 1974 Apple Years demo = = = 
 The Apple Years 1968 – 75 box set and Dark Horse reissue includes a previously unreleased version of " Dark Horse " . Recorded as a solo demo , this reading features Harrison on vocals and acoustic guitar , with added backing vocals . Brennan Carley of Spin magazine writes of the " newly unearthed version " being " a bit twangier and more acoustic than Harrison 's final product " and describes his singing as " clearer , less gruff , and more natural " compared to the 1974 release . While viewing " Dark Horse " as " a great personal theme song of sorts " for Harrison , Blogcritics ' Chaz Lipp considers his lead vocal on this " excellent demo " to be an improvement . Trynka similarly writes that this version " puts things right " , with Harrison 's vocal " impassioned , but subtle " . 
 = = = October – December 1974 radio and television performances = = = 
 In October 1974 , shortly before leaving for Los Angeles , Harrison performed " Dark Horse " on acoustic guitar during a radio interview with BBC disc jockey Alan Freeman . The location has been identified as either Apple 's offices on St James 's Street , London , or in front of a fire at Friar Park . During the candid interview , Harrison enthused about Eric Clapton and Ravi Shankar , jokingly referred to John Lennon as " a saint " and " such a bastard " , and claimed that Paul McCartney had " ruined " him as a guitar player . This version of " Dark Horse " is available unofficially on bootlegs such as Pirate Songs . 
 On 30 October , days before the band left for the first show in Vancouver , Harrison and his musicians recorded an abridged live performance of the song for promotional purposes at the A & M sound stage where they were rehearsing . Later in the tour , Harrison found a way to alter his vocal pitch to better cope with the effects of laryngitis , but Simon Leng writes of this performance : " It gives a candid glimpse of the pain [ that ] Harrison 's need to sing was inflicting on him . " At the end of the 1974 tour , Harrison and the tour band filmed another performance of " Dark Horse " , intended for inclusion in the debut series of Saturday Night Live . The filming took place at NBC TV Studios in New York on 19 December , but the network decided to delay the show for a year and the Harrison segment was never aired . 
 = = = November 1976 , Saturday Night Live = = = 
 In November 1976 , while promoting his first album on Dark Horse Records , Thirty Three & 1 / 3 , Harrison finally appeared on Saturday Night Live , performing a number of songs with Paul Simon , as well as a solo version of " Dark Horse " . Although the song does not appear on lists of the tracks taped on 19 November at NBC , Alan Clayson writes of Harrison singing " Dark Horse " , " hunched over a hollow @-@ body Gretsch " , in a blue @-@ lit studio . Harrison and Simon 's duet on " Homeward Bound " later appeared on the Olivia Harrison @-@ inspired charity album Nobody 's Child : Romanian Angel Appeal in 1990 , but nothing else from this 1976 performance has been officially released . 
 = = = 1991 Japanese tour = = = 
 In what Leng terms a " safe " setlist for his 1991 Japanese tour with Clapton , Harrison 's inclusion of " Dark Horse " provided a rare example of a song from his post @-@ All Things Must Pass work from the 1970s , along with the Living in the Material World hit " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " . " Dark Horse " appeared on the Live in Japan album , released in July 1992 . Elliot Huntley has written that it was " a joy " to hear this live version , since : " <unk> by problems with his throat , the catchiness of ' Dark Horse ' positively shines through . " The performance on Live in Japan was recorded at Osaka 's Castle Hall on 11 December 1991 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 George Harrison – vocals , acoustic guitar 
 Billy Preston – electric piano 
 Robben Ford – acoustic guitar 
 Willie Weeks – bass 
 Andy Newmark – drums 
 Jim Keltner – drums 
 Tom Scott – flute 
 Jim Horn – flute 
 Chuck Findley – flute 
 Emil Richards – percussion 
 Derrek Van Eaton – backing vocals 
 Lon Van Eaton – backing vocals 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Tjioeng Wanara = 
 Tjioeng Wanara ( [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Perfected Spelling : <unk> Wanara ) is a 1941 film from the Dutch East Indies ( modern @-@ day Indonesia ) directed and produced by Jo Eng Sek . Starring R Sukran , Elly Joenara , and AB Djoenaedi , it featured more than 500 people in supporting roles . The film follows a young prince named Tjioeng Wanara who must reclaim his throne from the cruel King of Galuh ; it is adapted from the Sundanese legend of the same name . 
 The second production by Star Film , Tjioeng Wanara was released on 18 August 1941 . It was advertised heavily , emphasising the fact that the scholar Poerbatjaraka had served as the historical adviser and that the film was based on Balai Pustaka 's version of the legend . It premiered to commercial success , but received mixed reviews . This black @-@ and @-@ white production , which was screened until at least 1948 , is now thought lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1255 Saka , <unk> <unk> is the King of Galuh , beloved by his people and his wife Naganingroem . The minister Aria Kebonan wants power for himself , and persuades the king to surrender the crown to him . <unk> <unk> warns Aria Kebonan to respect him always and not to bother his wife . He then abdicates to meditate , ultimately ascending to a higher plane of existence . Aria Kebonan , meanwhile , magically gains the king 's appearance , ensuring that the people of Galuh are unaware that they have a new king . 
 Aria Kebonan proves to be an unpopular ruler . One day , he hears that both Naganingroem and the king 's former concubine , Dewi Pangrenjep , are pregnant . With Dewi Pangrenjep , Aria Kebonan plans to eliminate Naganingroem 's son . During childbirth the son is replaced with a dog , while Dewi Pangrenjep takes the newborn and throws him into a river . He is later found and rescued by farmers , who name him Tjioeng Wanara . Dewi Pangrenjep , meanwhile , gives birth to a son , Aria Banga . 
 Years pass , and Tjioeng Wanara grows to be a strong young man . Aria Banga , meanwhile , has taken over the throne and rules with an iron fist , hated and feared by his people . Tjioeng Wanara returns to Galuh and overthrows the king , arresting Aria Kebonan and Dewi Pangrenjep ; Aria Banga , however , is able to escape and establish the kingdom of Majapahit . Tjioeng Wanara rules kindly over his people and later moves his capital to Pajajaran . 
 = = Production = = 
 Tjioeng Wanara was directed and produced by Jo Eng Sek for Star Film . It was the second production by both Jo and the company , following Pah Wongso Pendekar Boediman in 1941 . Poerbatjaraka , a scholar of traditional literature , served as the historical adviser to the production . Cinematography for the black @-@ and @-@ white film was handled by Chok Chin Hsien . By June 1941 production was almost complete . 
 The film starred R Sukran , Elly Joenara , AB Djoenaedi , <unk> Arief , and S Waldy . Waldy had made his film debut in 1940 's Zoebaida for Oriental Film Company , later joining Star for Pah Wongso ; Joenara and Arief had begun their cinema careers in the latter film . Tjioeng Wanara featured the first on @-@ screen performances by Djoenaedi and Sukran . The stars were supported by over 500 extras and actors in bit parts . As such , JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia records the production as the first " colossal " film in the Indies , in terms of scale . 
 Tjioeng Wanara was based on a Sundanese legend of the same name , retold by M. A. Salmoen in a 1938 Balai Pustaka @-@ published edition which was then adapted by Rd Ariffien ; as such , a review in the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad found that the film contained little of the original tale except for the characters ' names . The film featured traditional arts such as the <unk> dance . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Though initially slated for a July 1941 release , Tjioeng Wanara ultimately premiered at the Orion Theatre in Batavia ( now Jakarta ) on 18 August 1941 . It was publicised extensively , often emphasising the role of Poerbatjaraka and using the name of Balai Pustaka , the official publishing house of the Dutch East Indies government known for its printed versions of traditional tales , in advertisements . The film was rated for all ages . 
 The premiere of Tjioeng Wanara was shown to a packed theatre . Reception of the film , however , was mixed . An anonymous review in the Soerabaijasch Handelsblad was positive , considering the film to be successful in its adaptation of the legend , while another , in the same newspaper , recommended it . Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran , however , writes that some viewers considered the film " nothing more than a stage play brought to the silver screen " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Star made four further films before it was closed in 1942 , when the Japanese occupied the Indies ; Jo Eng Sek did not direct again . After writing Tjioeng Wanara , Ariffien left Star Film to work at a circus ; Biran writes that he was disappointed over the work 's poor reception . Joenara , Arief , and Waldy remained in the film industry ; Joenara went on to be a producer , while Arief and Waldy later took up directing . Neither Djoenaedi nor Sukran are recorded as making another film . 
 Tjioeng Wanara was screened as late as June 1948 , though it is now likely lost . Movies in the Indies were recorded on highly flammable nitrate film , and after a fire destroyed much of Produksi Film Negara 's warehouse in 1952 , old films shot on nitrate were deliberately destroyed . As such , American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider suggests that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost . However , Kristanto records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives , and Biran writes that several Japanese propaganda films have survived at the Netherlands Government Information Service . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Babel One = 
 " Babel One " is the twelfth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , and originally aired on January 28 , 2005 . The episode was written by Mike Sussman and André Bormanis , and directed by David Straiton . " Babel One " was the first of a three @-@ part story which continued in the episodes " United " and " The Aenar " . The arc was intended to precede the Romulan War which had been mentioned in previously aired episodes of the franchise , while " Babel One " was a reference to the Star Trek : The Original Series episode " Journey to Babel " . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , Enterprise is escorting a Tellarite Ambassador , when they respond to distress calls from Andorian vessel under attack . Pursuing the mysterious attacking vessel , they begin to uncover a plot to derail cooperative relations between the Tellarites , Andorians and Humans . 
 The guest cast included several actors who had previously appeared in the franchise , including Lee Arenberg , Brian Thompson and Jeffrey Combs . It also featured Molly Brink for the second time as Lieutenant Talas . The episode required extensive make @-@ up for the guest cast , with Brink undergoing more than four and a half hours of work prior to filming for her first day on set as she had to be painted blue head to toe in addition to the normal prosthetics . Reviewers were positive of the episode , calling it an improvement on the previous week 's " Observer Effect " , and praised the ending . Although Nielsen ratings of 1 @.@ 7 / 3 percent showed an improvement over the previous episode , the number of actual viewers was the lowest yet for the series with 2 @.@ 53 million watching the episode on the first broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 It is November 2154 , and Captain Archer and Ensign Sato spend time preparing for the arrival of Ambassador Gral and the Tellarite delegation , by practicing being blunt , complaining , and arguing . En route to the trade summit on " Babel One " , they detect a distress call from the Andorian warship , Kumari , now under attack . Enterprise alters its course to assist , and arrives to find Captain Shran , Lieutenant Talas , and 17 other survivors in escape @-@ pods . Archer goes to meet him in Sickbay , and an angry Shran claims that both the Andorian Ambassador 's and his ship were attacked and destroyed by a powerful Tellarite vessel . 
 Scans of the debris indicate Tellarite weapon signatures , and recovered sensor data shows a Tellarite vessel firing . With both delegations on board , and accusations of duplicity rising between the groups , Archer considers taking the Andorians to their homeworld . At full warp , Enterprise is suddenly attacked by an Andorian ship . When attempts at communicating fail , Archer demands that Shran intervenes — he complies by explaining how to knock out its shields — but the attempt is ineffective . Enterprise is spared only when the attacking ship has to retreat because of a fluctuating power grid . T <unk> then notices that the " Andorian " and " Tellarite " ships have the same energy signature . 
 Shran is unconvinced , and using Talas as a distraction , manages to escape and capture Gral , before order is restored . The alien vessel is then tracked , and it appears to be capable of <unk> disguising itself . Commander Tucker , Lieutenant Malcolm Reed and several MACOs beam aboard the ship , only to find it deserted and without life support . Tucker and Reed become stranded when the vessel warps away , and make their way to an empty bridge . On Romulus , it is revealed that the ship is actually being controlled remotely by a group of Romulans ( led by Admiral Valdore , a scientist called Nijil , and a virtual pilot ) in an attempt to prevent a regional détente . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Mike Sussman and André Bormanis . The duo had previously collaborated on several episodes , the most recent of which season three 's " Hatchery " . Meanwhile , they had written episodes individually , with Sussman writing three episodes so far during season four and Bormanis penning " Awakening " . " Babel One " was directed by David Straiton , his third in season four after the second part of " Storm Front " as well as the stand @-@ alone episode " Daedalus " . 
 Filming began on November 2 , 2004 and lasted until November 10 . The first scene filmed was on the Andorian bridge , which had been used in previous episodes but was made to look battle damaged for this episode . Other sets used included the standing sets to represent the Enterprise , as well as new sets showing the interior of the Romulan vessel . The title of the episode was an intentional reference to the Star Trek : The Original Series episode " Journey to Babel " . The three part story was intended to represent a precursor to the Romulan Wars which had been referenced in " Balance of Terror " and " The Defector " . 
 = = = Casting and make @-@ up = = = 
 The guest cast included a number of Star Trek alumni . Jeffrey Combs returned to his recurring role of Shran , for his second appearance during season four . Joining him as a returning Andorian , was Molly Brink who had previously appeared as Talas in the episode " Proving Ground " . Brian Thompson played the Romulan Valdore , having previously appeared in Star Trek : The Next Generation and Star Trek : Deep Space Nine as well as the film Star Trek Generations . He is better known for portraying the Alien Bounty Hunter in The X @-@ Files and Luke , a vampire who becomes The Master 's " vessel " in Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Another Deep Space Nine actor who portrayed a new character in this episode was Lee Arenberg . He had previously appeared in a variety of roles across the franchise , three times as a Ferengi in The Next Generation and Deep Space Nine ( including one , coincidentally also named Gral , no relation to the Tellarite Gral he plays here ) . He also appeared as a Malon , <unk> , in the Star Trek : Voyager episode " Juggernaut " . 
 The guest cast required a variety of levels of make @-@ up to portray their alien characters . Combs ' make @-@ up took around three and a half hours each day , as did the Tellarite prosthetics . The Andorian female cast members took around four and a half hour each day to get into make @-@ up and costume , but on the first day Brink required further make @-@ up time as that day 's shoot required her to appear in @-@ character in her underwear . This meant that after the normal make @-@ up schedule , she was sprayed blue from head to toe . At the end of that day 's filming , the shower facilities at the studio 's executive gym was used to remove the paint . Meanwhile , the Romulan make @-@ up took three hours to apply , with all the relevant scenes completed in a single day . 
 = = Reception and home media = = 
 " Babel One " was first aired in the United States on UPN on January 28 , 2005 . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 1 @.@ 7 / 3 percent . This means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 7 percent of all households , and 3 percent of all of those watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was an increase in ratings compared to the previous week 's episode , but saw a lower overall number of viewers . " Babel One " was watched by 2 @.@ 53 million viewers , the lowest overall number of viewers to date for a first run episode of Enterprise . 
 Michelle Erica Green in her review for TrekNation enjoyed the interaction between Shran and Graal , and thought it was an improvement over the previous week 's " Observer Effect " . She also compared it to The Original Series episode " Journey to Babel " , which she watched immediately prior to the Enterprise episode . She said that " On the surface " Babel One " has a very similar plot , yet it plays out like an original take on the situation rather than a retread . " Jamahl Epsicokhan at his website Jammer 's Reviews thought that the majority of the episode was " passable " but ultimately ended on a " good note " due to the twist in the ending . However , he criticised the promotional campaign by UPN , as he felt that the trailer for the episode had the " unfortunate effect of making the first 30 minutes of the plot extremely obvious to us , forcing us to watch in frustration while the characters put the pieces together " . He gave the episode a rating of three out of four . 
 The first home media release of the episode was on DVD ; having been released as part of the season four box set on November 1 , 2005 in the United States . The Blu @-@ ray edition was released on April 1 , 2014 . 
 = 2008 – 09 Calgary Flames season = 
 The 2008 – 09 Calgary Flames season was the 29th season for the Calgary Flames , and the 37th for the Flames franchise in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . The Flames finished second in the Northwest Division , and qualified for the 2009 Stanley Cup Playoffs as the fifth seed in the Western Conference , their fifth consecutive appearance in the post season . Their season ended when they were defeated by the Chicago Blackhawks in the Western Conference quarter @-@ finals . 
 The year began with the 2008 NHL Entry Draft , which saw the Flames select forward Greg Nemisz with their first round selection . The Flames made several trades during the draft , acquiring forward Mike Cammalleri from the Los Angeles Kings as part of a three way trade that saw Calgary deal the 17th overall pick to the Anaheim Ducks . They then sent Alex Tanguay to the Montreal Canadiens in exchange for the 25th overall pick , with each team adding lower round picks to the deal . The Flames signed forward Todd Bertuzzi during the off @-@ season , a move that generated controversy amongst a fan base with which he had been previously unpopular . Calgary was also active at the trade deadline , making three deals , including a significant trade to add Olli Jokinen from the Phoenix Coyotes . 
 Jarome Iginla surpassed Theoren Fleury 's franchise record of 830 points during the season , scoring his <unk> point on the same night he recorded his 400th goal against the Tampa Bay Lightning as part of his second career five point game . Iginla also scored his 400th career assist during the season , and scored his first all @-@ star goal in his fifth appearance at the 2009 All @-@ Star Game in Montreal . Eight players made their NHL debuts with the Flames in 2008 – 09 . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 The Flames began the season with five games against divisional opposition . Despite holding leads in four of those games , Calgary won only one game , lost three in regulation , and a fourth in overtime . Goaltender Miikka Kiprusoff became the focus of the team 's early struggles , as his play was argued to be a major cause of the Flames ' inability to hold a lead . Calgary rebounded with a six @-@ game winning streak , during which Kiprusoff allowed only nine goals on 152 shots . The team again struggled to win games at the start of November , losing five games in seven , including a pair of 6 – 1 losses to the Chicago Blackhawks and San Jose Sharks that led head coach Mike Keenan to cancel a planned mini @-@ vacation for the players . The cancellation appeared to be a turning point in the season , as the Flames recorded a mark of 15 – 4 – 3 following the loss , including a dominating 5 – 2 victory over the Sharks at home . The Flames again beat the Sharks , 3 – 2 in San Jose , on January 15 , to end the Sharks streak of 31 games without a home loss in regulation . 
 Rookie Brett Sutter became the 8th member of the Sutter family to play in the NHL on December 23 when he made his debut against the Anaheim Ducks . The son of general manager Darryl Sutter , Brett scored a goal in his first game to help the Flames enter the Christmas break with a one @-@ point lead on the Vancouver Canucks in the Northwest Division . Calgary expanded on that lead to five points after both Jarome Iginla and Mike Cammalleri posted career @-@ high five point nights in a 6 – 4 win over the Edmonton Oilers on New Year 's Eve . 
 The Flames lost one of their original owners early in the new year as Daryl " Doc " Seaman died January 11 , 2009 . Seaman had been one of the original group of six owners who brought the team to Calgary in 1980 and remained with the ownership group until his death . 
 Iginla reached numerous personal milestones throughout the season . He recorded his 400th career assist in an early season game against Colorado . He represented the Flames at the 2009 All @-@ Star Game , his fifth appearance , and recorded his first All @-@ Star goal . On March 1 , Iginla surpassed Theoren Fleury 's franchise record of 830 career points as part of another five point night against Tampa Bay , a game where he also scored his 400th career goal . 
 Injuries became a serious concern for the Flames entering March , as Mark Giordano ( shoulder surgery ) , Rene Bourque ( high ankle sprain ) , Todd Bertuzzi ( knee surgery ) , Brandon Prust ( concussion ) and Daymond Langkow ( hand ) were all on injured reserve to start the month . Looking to improve the team , Sutter completed two significant deals at the March 4 trade deadline , acquiring defenceman Jordan Leopold from the Colorado Avalanche and centre Olli Jokinen from the Phoenix Coyotes . The deals paid immediate dividends , as Jokinen scored twice and Leopold once in a 5 – 1 victory the next night against the Philadelphia Flyers allowing the Northwest Division leading Flames to move ten points ahead of the second place Canucks . 
 The Tim Hortons Brier took over the Saddledome in early March , forcing the Flames on a season long , seven @-@ game road trip , during which the team struggled to a 3 – 4 record that saw them suffer lopsided losses to the Carolina Hurricanes , Atlanta Thrashers and Toronto Maple Leafs ; the Flames surrendered 27 goals in the final five games of the trip . Consequently , the Flames saw their lead for the division shrink to five points barely a week after the victory in Philadelphia . Calgary 's lead fell to one point following consecutive shutout losses to the Pittsburgh Penguins and Columbus Blue Jackets in late March . The Flames and Canucks ended the season in a battle for top spot , as both teams repeatedly took over the division lead heading into the final week of play . 
 Injuries continued to batter the Flames towards the end of the regular season , as defencemen Robyn Regehr ( MCL ) and Cory Sarich ( broken foot ) were both lost in early April . The injuries led the Flames to call up rookies Matt <unk> and John <unk> , the latter of whom had just finished his junior season and had never played a professional game , to make their NHL debuts against the Minnesota Wild . The Flames were forced to play their final games of the regular season with as few as 15 skaters , below the normal 18 , as the team lacked available salary cap space to call up replacements without sending other players down to their minor league affiliate in Quad City . 
 Calgary 's late season collapse ended with Vancouver winning the Northwest Division in the final weekend of the regular season following consecutive victories by the Canucks over the Flames , Los Angeles Kings and Colorado Avalanche while the Flames lost against Vancouver and Edmonton . As a result , the Flames finished the regular season second in the Northwest Division , and fifth in the Western Conference . 
 The Flames finished the regular season having allowed the most shorthanded goals in the League , with 15 . 
 = = = Divisional standings = = = 
 = = = Conference standings = = = 
 bold - qualified for playoffs , y – division winner , p – Presidents ' Trophy <unk> - Central Division , NW - Northwest Division , PA - Pacific Division 
 = = Schedule and results = = 
 = = Playoffs = = 
 The Flames qualified for the 2009 Stanley Cup Playoffs as the fifth seed in the Western Conference , and faced the fourth seeded Chicago Blackhawks in the first round . The two teams met four times in the regular season , all of which resulted in Chicago victories . It was the fourth time the two teams met in the playoffs . Calgary defeated Chicago in 1981 and 1989 , while Chicago prevailed in 1996 . 
 The Western Conference quarter @-@ final series opened in Chicago ; the first Blackhawk playoff games in seven years . The Flames dropped the first two games , each by identical 3 – 2 scores . In both games , they played strong to start the games , earning 1 – 0 and 2 – 0 leads respectively before conceding the advantage . The Flames lost the first game after just 12 seconds of overtime . An angry Flames team returned to Calgary for games three and four , promising to improve their play . They won game three , 4 – 2 , on the strength of Kiprusoff 's 36 @-@ save performance in goal . The first three games of the series were physically intense and occasionally violent , prompting the league to warn both teams to tone down both the verbal attacks they were exchanging as well as to remain within the rules when engaging in scrums after the play ended . TSN commentator Pierre McGuire , stationed between each team 's benches , insisted that Iginla in particular had taken more verbal abuse than he had ever seen . A " fired up " Iginla responded with two goals and an assist in game four as the Flames tied the series with a 6 – 4 victory . 
 Iginla and the Flames were unable to maintain their momentum when the series returned to Chicago for game five . Iginla recorded only one shot , while Miikka Kiprusoff was pulled early in the second period as the Blackhawks easily won the game 5 – 1 . Forward Andre Roy missed the fifth game after being suspended and fined $ 2 @,@ 500 after he initiated contact with Chicago 's Aaron Johnson during the warm @-@ up prior to game four . The Flames ' season came to an end in the sixth game as Nikolai <unk> 's 43 @-@ save performance led the Hawks to a 4 – 1 win over the Flames . It was the first time Chicago had won a playoff series since they last defeated the Flames in 1996 . 
 The Flames revealed the true extent of their injury situation following the loss , noting that Dion Phaneuf , who missed game six , was playing with broken ribs , while Cory Sarich was playing on a fractured ankle . With Rhett Warrener , Mark Giordano and Robyn Regehr all sidelined for the entire series , the Flames had five defencemen either out or playing hurt the entire series . In addition , Craig Conroy , Rene Bourque and Daymond Langkow were all playing despite various ailments . In spite of the Flames ' injury situation , the team 's fourth consecutive first round defeat led to new demands that head coach Mike Keenan be replaced as the team 's head coach . Keenan was fired on May 22 . 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 = = = Skaters = = = 
 Note : Pos 
 = Position ; GP = 
 Games played in ; G 
 = Goals ; A = 
 Assists ; Pts 
 = Points ; PIM = 
 Penalty minutes ; + / - 
 = Plus / minus ; PPG = 
 Power @-@ play goals ; SHG 
 = Short @-@ handed goals ; GWG = 
 Game @-@ winning goals 
 = = = Goaltenders = = = 
 Note : Min , TOI 
 = Minutes played ; W = 
 Wins ; L 
 = Losses ; T , T / OT = 
 Ties ; OTL 
 = Overtime losses ; GA = 
 Goals @-@ against ; GAA 
 = Goals @-@ against average ; SO = 
 Shutouts ; SA 
 = Shots against ; SV = 
 Shots saved ; SV % = Save percentage ; 
 † Denotes player spent time with another team before joining Flames . Stats reflect time with the Flames only . ‡ Traded mid @-@ season 
 Bold / italics denotes franchise record 
 = = Awards and records = = 
 Several players made their NHL debuts with the Flames in 2008 – 09 . Adam Pardy began the season with the Flames , while Warren Peters , Brett Sutter , David Van der Gulik , Kris <unk> , John <unk> and Matt <unk> were each recalled from the Quad City Flames during the season . The latter two made their debuts on the same night , April 3 , after the Flames lost three defencemen in previous games . 2007 first round pick Mikael Backlund played one game with the Flames after leaving his Swedish team before being sent to the Kelowna Rockets of the Western Hockey League . 
 = = = Records and milestones = = = 
 = = Transactions = = 
 The Flames made two trades at the 2008 NHL Entry Draft , sending forward Alex Tanguay to Montreal and acquiring Mike Cammalleri from Los Angeles in two separate deals . Calgary sent the 17th overall selection in the draft to the Kings , and received the 25th overall pick from the Canadiens as part of the trades . 
 Todd Bertuzzi was signed by the Flames as a free agent on July 8 , 2009 . The controversial forward best known for his attack on Steve Moore in 2003 – 04 , had previously been extremely unpopular with Flames fans . Bertuzzi , who had previously been booed by Calgary fans every time he touched the puck was greeted with loud cheers when he was introduced before the Flames ' first exhibition game of the season . 
 The trade deadline on March 4 saw the Flames emerge as one of the most active teams on the day , completing three trades . Calgary acquired defenceman Jordan Leopold from Colorado for Lawrence <unk> , who was picked up on waivers from Vancouver one day prior and never played with Calgary , minor leaguer Ryan Wilson and a draft pick . General Manager Darryl Sutter then completed what was considered the biggest deal of the day , acquiring Olli Jokinen and a third round pick from the Coyotes in exchange for Matthew Lombardi , Brandon Prust and a first round pick . The Flames then ended the day with a minor move , sending minor @-@ league goaltender Kevin Lalande to Columbus for a fourth round pick . 
 = = = Trades = = = 
 = = = Additions and subtractions = = = 
 = = Draft picks = = 
 The Flames entered the 2008 NHL Entry Draft in Ottawa with the 17th overall selection . They dealt that pick to Los Angeles , and acquired the 25th overall selection from Montreal . With that pick , the Flames selected centre Greg Nemisz from the Ontario Hockey League 's Windsor Spitfires . Listed at six @-@ foot @-@ three and 197 pounds , Nemisz is described as being a potential power forward who is not afraid of working hard . Calgary drafted six other players , led by second @-@ round selection Mitch Wahl , whom the Flames project to be a potential top @-@ six forward . 
 Statistics are updated to the end of the 2014 – 15 NHL season . † denotes player was on an NHL roster in 2014 – 15 . 
 = = Farm teams = = 
 = = = Quad City Flames = = = 
 The Quad City Flames entered their second season in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) in 2008 – 09 . The team was dogged throughout the season by rumours that the franchise would relocate to Abbotsford , British Columbia in 2009 – 10 . The owners in Quad Cities acknowledged that the Flames had been considering a change , but expected the franchise would remain in Moline , Illinois . Despite these assurances , Calgary confirmed on March 11 that they had reached an agreement with the owners in Quad Cities to end their affiliation agreement after only two seasons , and announced their intent to move into Abbotsford . The proposed relocation was approved by the AHL board of governors on April 29 , 2009 . 
 On the ice , Quad City finished with a 36 – 31 – 6 – 7 record , fifth in the West Division , and one point shy of making the playoffs . Quad City played its final game on April 11 , 2009 with a 5 – 3 win over the Iowa Chops . Kyle Greentree led the team in scoring , with a franchise high 76 points . 
 = = = Las Vegas Wranglers = = = 
 The Las Vegas Wranglers remained Calgary 's ECHL affiliate for the sixth season , where they finished 2nd in the Pacific division with a 34 – 31 – 2 – 6 record . In the Kelly Cup playoffs , the <unk> defeated the Bakersfield Condors and Stockton Thunder in seven games each to reach the National Conference finals . The season came to an end against the Alaska Aces , who eliminated Las Vegas in four games . 
 As part of their affiliation agreement with Las Vegas , the Flames assigned four players to the Wranglers to begin the season : Gord Baldwin , Hugo Carpentier , Kevin Lalande and Dan Spang . Lalande led the team amongst goaltenders with 21 games played , recording a record of 9 – 8 – 0 – 3 , while Glen Fisher led the team with 11 wins . Dan Riedel , acquired from the Dayton Bombers during the season led the team with 23 goals and 57 points . 
 = New York State Route 319 = 
 New York State Route 319 ( NY 319 ) was a state highway in Chenango County , New York , in the United States . It was 5 @.@ 47 miles ( 8 @.@ 80 km ) long and connected the hamlet of Preston to the nearby city of Norwich . The route began in the hamlet at an intersection with three county @-@ maintained highways and proceeded eastward through the town of Preston to downtown Norwich , where it terminated at an intersection with NY 12 . 
 What became NY 319 was originally built during the early 19th century as the Norwich and Preston Turnpike , one of many privately maintained turnpikes in the state of New York . The state of New York assumed ownership of the turnpike 's routing in the early 20th century , and the Preston – Norwich state highway was designated as NY 319 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . Maintenance of NY 319 was split between the state and the city of Norwich , with the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) handling the part of the route west of the city limits . 
 In 1962 , the New York State Legislature approved a highway maintenance swap that would transfer the state @-@ maintained section of NY 319 to Chenango County when a new alignment was constructed for NY 23 through the northwestern part of the county . The project was completed in July 1984 , at which time the NY 319 designation was completely removed and Chenango County assumed maintenance of the route 's former alignment west of Norwich . The new county road was redesignated County Route 10A ( CR 10A ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 319 began at an intersection with three county routes ( CR 4 , CR 10 , and CR 19 ) in the hamlet of Preston , a small community in the northern portion of the town of the same name . The highway proceeded eastward , climbing the side of a hill approximately 1 @,@ 560 feet ( 480 m ) above sea level at its peak . NY 319 briefly descended to cross a creek then continued climbing , reaching an elevation of 1 @,@ 760 feet ( 540 m ) near Packer – Mason Cemetery . The route slowly descended in elevation from the cemetery , crossing Gilmore Brook on its way into the town of Norwich , where it intersected CR 19 for a second time just east of the town line . Past CR 19 , the highway turned southeastward to descend the side of a ridge overlooking the city of Norwich . 
 At the bottom of the descent , the route turned eastward and crossed over Canasawacta Creek , a tributary of the Chenango River , as it entered the city of Norwich and became known as West Main Street . In Norwich , NY 319 served Emmanuel Episcopal Church and passed through the Chenango County Courthouse District , established in 1975 in the city 's downtown area . In the center of the historic district , NY 319 reached its eastern terminus at its intersection with NY 12 ( Broad Street ) . West Main Street becomes East Main Street at this junction , and the latter continues eastward as NY <unk> , one of New York 's reference routes . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Norwich and Preston Turnpike = = = 
 The town of Norwich was created on January 19 , 1793 , comprising a much larger area than it does today . On April 2 , 1806 , part of the town was split off to form a new town named Preston . A charter on April 8 , 1808 , established the Norwich and Preston Turnpike , a turnpike connecting the town of Preston in the west to the town of Norwich in the east . The Norwich and Preston Turnpike was privately owned and maintained , as most turnpikes in New York were at the time . 
 The routing of the Norwich and Preston Turnpike was taken over by the state of New York in the early 20th century . On December 14 , 1907 , a contract was let to improve a 4 @.@ 86 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 82 km ) long portion of the former turnpike . Construction cost $ 57 @,@ 714 ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 52 million in 2016 ) and was completed by late 1908 . The improved highway was added to the state highway system on November 16 , 1908 , as State Highway 598 ( SH 598 ) . A second contract to improve an additional 0 @.@ 22 miles ( 0 @.@ 35 km ) of the turnpike was let on April 9 , 1910 . Work on this segment cost approximately $ 6 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 152 @,@ 379 in 2016 ) and was completed by mid @-@ 1911 . This section of the turnpike was added to the state highway system on July 22 , 1911 as SH <unk> . The first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 ; however , none of the former Norwich and Preston Turnpike was assigned a designation at that time . 
 = = = Designation and removal = = = 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , several of the routes assigned during the 1920s were renumbered or modified . At the same time , hundreds of state @-@ maintained highways which did not yet have a route number , such as the Preston – Norwich state highway , were assigned one . The road was designated as NY 319 and maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation west of the Norwich city limits and by the city of Norwich within the city . The alignment of NY 319 remained unchanged for the next half @-@ century . 
 Ownership and maintenance of NY 319 west of the Norwich city limits was slated to be transferred from the state of New York to Chenango County as part of a highway maintenance swap approved by the New York State Legislature and signed into law on February 13 , 1962 . However , the swap in maintenance was contingent on the construction and completion of a new alignment for NY 23 in northwestern Chenango County . The new road would extend from the Chenango – Cortland county border in the town of Pitcher to Scotts Corners in the town of Pharsalia , a point 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of the hamlet of North Pharsalia . At the time , NY 23 began at NY 26 in northwest Pharsalia and followed an easterly and southerly routing to Scotts Corners , where it turned eastward onto its modern alignment . The portion of the exchange describing the roads that would be transferred to Chenango County is written in New York State Highway Law as follows , with annotations in parentheses : 
 to enter an official order of abandonment to the county of Chenango of that portion of state highway eight hundred seven ( NY 23 ) easterly and southeasterly from state highways eight thousand one hundred sixty @-@ one and six hundred sixty @-@ three ( NY 26 ) to its intersection with the [ new alignment of NY 23 ] , all of state highways five hundred ninety @-@ eight @-@ a and five hundred ninety @-@ eight ( NY 319 ) 
 The new highway in the towns of Pitcher and Pharsalia was completed in July 1984 , at which time NY 23 was rerouted to follow the highway and the entirety of the pre @-@ approved highway maintenance swap went into effect . Thus , ownership and maintenance of NY 23 's old alignment through Pharsalia and the entirety of NY 319 west of Norwich was transferred to Chenango County . The former alignment of NY 23 became CR 42 while the now county @-@ maintained section of NY 319 was redesignated CR 10A , a spur of the pre @-@ existing CR 10 . The NY 319 designation was also removed from West Main Street in the city of Norwich at this time . 
 = = = Post @-@ designation = = = 
 In 1997 , the bridge that had carried NY 319 over Gilmore Brook in the town of Preston was replaced . The new 29 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 8 @.@ 8 m ) structure handles an average of 1 @,@ 154 vehicles per day . Farther east , the 74 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 23 m ) bridge over Canasawacta Creek was also reconstructed in 1997 . It was built in 1937 and carries an average of 2 @,@ 093 cars per day . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Chenango County . 
 = David McGurk = 
 David Michael McGurk ( born 30 September 1982 ) is an English semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a defender for National League North club Harrogate Town . 
 McGurk started his career with the Darlington youth system and broke into the first team during the 2001 – 02 season . He was eventually loaned out to York City in the Conference National in 2004 . He had two further loan periods with York before joining the club permanently in 2006 , after making 62 appearances for Darlington . He played for the team in the play @-@ offs in his first season and won the club 's Clubman of the Year award in his second season . He played in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium and returned to the stadium for the 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Darlington = = = 
 Born in Middlesbrough , North Yorkshire , McGurk played for Marton Boys from the age of nine up until under @-@ 15 level , when he was approached by Middlesbrough and Sunderland to play games for them . He was invited back to Middlesbrough after playing for them , but was offered a contract by Sunderland and stayed with the club for six months before being released . He was offered a Youth Training Scheme with Darlington and progressed through the club 's youth system . He started his career with the club , making his first team debut on 17 November 2001 against Kidderminster Harriers in the FA Cup first round . He finished his first season , 2001 – 02 , with 13 appearances and signed a professional contract with Darlington on 9 August 2002 . He scored Darlington 's equalising goal against Kidderminster on 17 January 2004 , halting a run of five 1 – 0 defeats out of six games for the team during the 2003 – 04 season , which helped them avoid relegation from the Third Division . He finished the season with 31 appearances and four goals . 
 McGurk joined Conference National team York City on a one @-@ month loan on 16 September 2004 , after the deal had been held up due to the club 's wage budget , where he made seven appearances in the 2004 – 05 season . Despite York hoping to extend his loan , he returned to Darlington following its expiration on 19 October 2005 and played against Swansea City in a 2 – 1 defeat on 17 November , with manager David Hodgson saying he " did very well " . McGurk picked up an injury to his knee cartilage , which was operated on in December 2004 , and after making " excellent progress " in recovering he made his return against Notts County on 12 February 2005 , scoring Darlington 's goal in a 2 – 1 defeat . He was named in the League Two Team of the Week in March 2005 but later that month picked up a cartilage injury . He featured in one more game in the 2004 – 05 season , which he finished with 10 appearances and 2 goals for Darlington . 
 McGurk signed a new one @-@ year contract with Darlington in May 2005 and was soon told he was allowed to leave the club after not being guaranteed first team football for the forthcoming season . He was loaned out to York for a second time on 2 August 2005 on a six @-@ month deal , so his progress could be monitored and could play regular first team football . Darlington manager Hodgson said McGurk could have been brought back to the club when his loan at York ended , which he did having made 24 appearances and scored one goal for York , and it was confirmed that he " will be going nowhere " . He made his first Darlington appearance in 10 months as a replacement for Shelton Martis in a 2 – 1 victory over Peterborough United on 14 January 2006 . However , after making one more appearance for Darlington , he rejoined York on loan until the end of the 2005 – 06 season on 24 January 2006 and he finished the loan with 15 appearances and one goal . Following this " hugely successful " loan spell he made his last appearance of the season with Darlington after starting in a 1 – 1 draw with Wrexham on 6 May 2006 to cover for the suspended Matthew Clarke . 
 = = = York City = = = 
 York manager Billy McEwan hoped to re @-@ sign him following the end of the season and McGurk declared he wanted to join the club permanently . After turning down a new contract at Darlington he signed for York permanently on 28 June 2006 . He suffered from a throat infection in October 2006 , which resulted in an operation , eventually returning to the side in November . He featured in both legs of their play @-@ off semi @-@ final defeat to Morecambe 2 – 1 on aggregate and finished the 2006 – 07 season with 41 appearances . The club exercised their option to extend his contract for another season and was later persuaded by manager Colin Walker to sign an extended contract in January 2008 . He captained the side during Manny Panther 's two @-@ match omission from the squad during the 2007 – 08 season , but Panther regained the captaincy after his return . He was voted by supporters as York 's Clubman of the Year for 2007 – 08 , having made 56 appearances and scored one goal during the season , missing one game . 
 He started the 2008 – 09 season as an ever @-@ present in the team before pulling a calf muscle during an FA Trophy second round match against Oxford United on 13 January 2009 , which ruled him out for three weeks . He was expected to make his return ahead of schedule against Eastbourne Borough on 24 January 2009 , but was not named in the team . His return for the reserve team eventually came in a game against Rotherham United on 4 March 2009 and came on as a 90th minute substitute in the league game against Ebbsfleet United four days later . During the period of his injury , York signed defender Shaun Pejic , whose form alongside Danny Parslow in central defence resulted in McGurk being unable to reaffirm his place in the team . He started in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium on 9 May 2009 , which York lost 2 – 0 to Stevenage Borough . He finished the season with 45 appearances . 
 McGurk and Parslow were appointed as club captains for the 2009 – 10 season , although Parslow would wear the armband throughout the season . He picked up a hamstring injury during a 2 – 1 victory over Gateshead in August 2009 . He captained York during their 2 – 0 victory over Southern Football League Division One Midlands team Bedworth United in the FA Cup fourth qualifying round in October 2009 , which was his 200th appearance for the club . He picked up a knee injury during a 2 – 1 defeat to Forest Green Rovers on 6 March 2010 , making his return as a 77th @-@ minute substitute in a 1 – 0 victory over Mansfield Town on 16 March after missing two games . His first goal in over two years came with the equaliser against Altrincham on 5 April 2010 , which York went on to win 2 – 1 . He signed a new contract with York in April 2010 . He played in both legs of York 's play @-@ off semi @-@ final victory over Luton Town , which finished 2 – 0 on aggregate . He started in the 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final at Wembley on 16 May 2010 , which was lost 3 – 1 to Oxford . He finished the season with 46 appearances and one goal for York . 
 McGurk made his first appearance of the 2010 – 11 season in the opening game , a 2 – 1 defeat to Kidderminster on 14 August 2010 . He handed in a transfer request in November 2010 having expressed his desire to join Luton Town , after they had a number of bids for him rejected and he had turned down a contract extension with York . His transfer request was rejected by manager Gary Mills and McGurk went on to explain he wanted to join Luton as he believed they offered him a better opportunity of achieving his ambition of returning to the Football League . Luton manager Richard Money eventually gave up on signing McGurk due to York demanding what he called a " ridiculous fee " for the player . However , another Luton bid was rejected after the transfer window opened in January 2011 . He received the first red card of his York career after being sent off in the second minute of a 4 – 0 loss at Southport on 29 January 2011 . McGurk signed a new contract with York in March 2011 , which contracted him to the club until June 2013 . An ankle ligament injury suffered in a 2 – 1 victory over Newport County on 9 April 2011 ruled him out for the rest of the season , during which he made 40 appearances . 
 = = = Harrogate Town = = = 
 McGurk retired from professional football in May 2014 as a result of injury problems , but remained playing as a part @-@ timer after signing for Conference North side Harrogate Town on 2 June . He made his debut in a 0 – 0 home draw with Tamworth on the opening day of the 2014 – 15 season on 9 August 2014 . His first goal for the club came on 20 September 2014 in Harrogate 's 3 – 1 away win over Leamington , side footing the ball into the goal from an Adam <unk> cross in the 85th minute . McGurk was voted by supporters as Harrogate 's Player of the Year for 2014 – 15 season , in which he made 36 appearances and scored two goals . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 McGurk plays as a centre @-@ back and is a " reliable performer at the heart of defence " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 23 April 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Individual 
 York City Clubman of the Year : 2007 – 08 
 Harrogate Town Player of the Year : 2014 – 15 
 = Turok 2 : Seeds of Evil = 
 Turok 2 : Seeds of Evil is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Iguana Entertainment and originally released for the Nintendo 64 video game console on October 21 , 1998 . A port of the game was also released for Microsoft Windows shortly afterwards . Turok 2 is the second game in the Turok video game series and a sequel to Turok : Dinosaur Hunter . The game features a single @-@ player mode consisting of six levels where the player assumes the role of Turok as he tries to defeat a powerful alien entity called the Primagen . It also includes a multiplayer mode where various players can compete against each other in several game types . 
 Turok 2 received very positive reviews from video game journalists and sold more than one million copies in the United States . Critics praised the arsenal of weapons and the length of the levels , but opinions were mixed on its inconsistent frame rate . A separate game , also titled Turok 2 : Seeds of Evil , was released for the Game Boy Color in December 1998 . Although set in the same fictional universe , it follows a different storyline . A sequel , Turok 3 : Shadow of Oblivion , was released in 2000 . A remastered version of the game , developed by Night Dive Studios , is planned to be released for the Xbox One . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Turok 2 : Seeds of Evil begins with the new Turok , Joshua <unk> , appearing through a portal to face a blue @-@ skinned woman named Adon . She explains he has been called by the Elders of the Lost Lands , the Lazarus Concordance , to defeat a powerful alien entity called the Primagen . The Primagen is a creature imprisoned long ago in the wreckage of his spacecraft after attempting to conquer a place called the Lost Lands ; a bizarre and barbarian world where " Time has no meaning " . The Primagen seeks to destroy five devices called Energy <unk> and has mobilized several races of creatures in an attempt to destroy them . Turok must locate the Energy <unk> and destroy all forces mobilized to attack them , and then defeat the Primagen himself to end the threat he poses to the Lost Land . To accomplish his quest , Turok must acquire ancient magical powers from Talisman chambers . 
 Throughout the game , a mysterious entity calling itself Oblivion attempts to thwart Turok 's quest by creating false copies of the Talisman chamber portals that lead to areas populated by its servants , the Flesh Eaters . Eventually , Turok faces the Primagen himself . How the Primagen dies and the game 's ending depends on what the player did during the game . If not all of the objectives are completed , the Primagen will collapse from his fatal injuries . When talking to Adon , she thanks Joshua for his efforts , but states that although the Primagen 's body was fatally injured , traces of his psychic powers seem to remain , causing her to wonder if he 's really dead . If all of the objectives are completed , the Primagen will be obliterated by a series of energy blasts from the totems . Adon will give a greater thanks to Joshua and state the Primagen 's body is destroyed and no traces of his powers remain . Once the credits have finished rolling , the player will hear Oblivion say " It is inevitable " . This sets up the plot for the sequel Turok 3 : Shadow of Oblivion . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like its predecessor Turok : Dinosaur Hunter , Turok 2 is a first @-@ person shooter where the player assumes the role of Turok from a first @-@ person perspective . As Turok , the player can run , jump , climb ladders , swim and dive underwater for a limited period of time . The player can also carry an unlimited number of weapons , ranging from bows and arrows to pistols , rifles , a shotgun , a grenade launcher , a flamethrower , a speargun , and more advanced weapons such as the Cerebral Bore , which fires a homing projectile capable of latching onto enemy 's heads , killing them by drilling into their skulls and exploding . Turok has a certain amount of health which decreases when attacked by enemies . If Turok 's health is fully depleted , the player loses one Life Force point and has to continue the game from a previous checkpoint . If the player loses all Life Force points , the game will be over . Ammunition , health , and Life Force suppliers can be collected throughout the game to increase the player 's resources . 
 To progress through the single @-@ player campaign , the player must venture through six expansive levels interconnected by a hub area . In each level , the player must complete a certain set of objectives and then exit the level via a portal . Objectives range from destroying objects to rescuing hostages and defeating enemies , among others . Upon exiting a level , the player must either protect a totem from enemy forces or defeat a boss , or both , depending on which level the player was ; the first three levels require the player to protect a totem , the fourth and fifth levels require the player to protect a totem and then defeat a boss , and the last level requires the player to defeat a boss . Once a particular level has been completed , the player is sent to the hub area , which features six portals to each of the individual levels and a gate that leads to the final boss , the Primagen . 
 Exploration is a very important aspect of gameplay , as all the portals in the hub area , except for the first one , must be unlocked with keys that need to be collected within the levels . The keys that unlock the portals to the second and third levels are found in the first level , the keys that unlock the portal to the fourth level are found in the second level , the keys that unlock the portal to the fifth level are found in the third level , and the keys that unlock the last level are found in the fourth and fifth levels . As a result , the game allows the player to complete certain levels in a nonlinear order . In the Nintendo 64 game , the player 's progress can only be saved in special portals within the levels , while the Microsoft Windows version lets players save the game at any point . In these portals , the player may also fully restore Turok 's health and ammunition once per level . 
 In addition to level keys , every level has one Primagen key . The six Primagen keys unlock the gate to the final boss in the hub area and require the player to use Talismans to collect them . Talismans grant Turok special powers , such as allowing him to jump long distances or walk over lava . To use the power of a Talisman , the player must collect a feather in a level and then take it to the Talisman chamber of that level . There are five Talismans in the game and every level , except for the first one , features a feather and a Talisman Chamber . The Primagen key of one particular level requires the player to use the Talisman of the next level , except the Primagen key of the last level , which requires the player to use all five Talismans . Therefore , the player needs to play some levels more than once to collect all Primagen keys and complete the game . The game also features an automap to help players navigate through the levels . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 In addition to the single @-@ player mode , Turok 2 features a multiplayer mode where various players can compete against each other in several game types . Options such as time limit , map to play on , and character selection can be changed to match player preference . Each character has certain strengths and weaknesses , with some being able to regenerate health . The most notable is the Raptor , which is limited to close @-@ range attacks , but extremely fast and agile . Multiplayer games in the Nintendo 64 version of the game support up to four players via split screen . In contrast , multiplayer games in the Microsoft Windows version support up to 16 players via LAN or internet . 
 The Nintendo 64 version essentially features two game types : Deathmatch , where the objective is to kill as many players or players of the opposing team as possible , and <unk> Tag , in which one random player is transformed into a monkey with no attacks and very little health . This player 's task is to go to a specific point to return to their normal character and transform another random player into the monkey . Players gain points by killing the monkey and lose points if they die as the monkey . The Microsoft Windows version features three game types : Rok Match , which is the same as Deathmatch ; Arena , where two players or teams must battle against each other in an arena setting . The winning player or team will have to face a new opponent . If the player or team loses , they will have to get in line and wait for their next turn to fight again ; and Capture the Flag , where the goal is to capture opposing flags and return it to a team 's base . 
 = = Development = = 
 Turok 2 was developed by Iguana Entertainment and published by Acclaim Entertainment . The game was announced in January 1997 before Dinosaur Hunter was released , under the title Turok : Dinosaur Hunter 2 . The game was completed in 21 months with a team of roughly the same size as that who worked on Dinosaur Hunter , which was composed of 18 people . During development , more staff were brought on board to assist in completing the game . Reportedly , over 10 @,@ 000 hours of game testing was conducted during its creation . The game was originally designed with a <unk> cartridge in mind . When cartridges prices fell , the storage was increased to <unk> allowing the team to add a multiplayer mode . Eventually , the cartridge size was increased again , and was finalised at <unk> . 
 The Cerebral Bore weapon was inspired by the Tall Man 's weapons from the movie Phantasm . The base idea for the weapon was created during a brainstorming session concerning weapon design . The original concept had the weapon " being slow and agonizing " . An artist suggested a Leech gun , which was rejected by project manager , David Dienstbier . However , a " Vampire Gun " was eventually added to the sequel , Turok 3 : Shadow of Oblivion . The game also aimed to offer less distance fog with a wider field of vision so that the gameplay would not feel as claustrophobic as the original . Unlike GoldenEye 007 , the multiplayer levels were designed so that players could have all sort of mobility , including running , jumping , climbing and swimming . According to Dienstbier , this freedom of movement " means that [ players ] have a lot less predictable death match play because [ they ] have far more possible escape routes within each level . " 
 Iguana Entertainment , having received Nintendo 64DD development kits which included the 4MB Expansion Pak , added a high @-@ resolution mode to the game early on in the development timeline . This was demonstrated to Nintendo at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in 1998 , running at a resolution of 640x480 , a technical accomplishment for the Nintendo 64 at the time . Before the official unveiling of the Expansion Pak , IGN asked Dienstbier about the possibility of the game running in the high resolution mode in the leadup to the 1998 Electronic Entertainment Expo . He stated that it ran in the same resolution as the first Turok game . The game was fairly anticipated as retailers worldwide ordered 1 @.@ 75 million copies of the game before launch . It was released in North America on October 21 , 1998 . Acclaim Entertainment missed the original cartridge production slot for the game , forcing a delay from November to December 1998 in the UK . This delay was due to problems in fitting the game on a <unk> cartridge . In Japan , the game was released as Violence Killer : Turok New Generation ( <unk> <unk> NEW <unk> ) . A port of the game was released for Microsoft Windows in 1999 . 
 In 2015 , Night Dive Studios , a company that is known for remastering several classic games , announced that they were developing a remastered version of both Turok 2 and its predecessor , commenting : " We are very excited to have the opportunity to bring this great franchise back to life and to be able to share these great titles with today 's gaming audience . " In March 2016 , the company confirmed that the game would be released for the Xbox One video game console . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Nintendo 64 version of Turok 2 was a critical and commercial success , selling more than one million copies in the United States . Next Generation praised the game , noting that " the artistic range is remarkable " and that " GoldenEye 007 now seems simple " when comparing the artificial intelligence of enemies . Game Revolution highlighted the " tremendous " length of the levels , but also admitted that " You 'll occasionally find yourself running around in circles for hours trying to figure out where to go next . This may be enjoyable for people who like puzzles and long gameplay , but it is aggravating for more action @-@ oriented players . " 
 The game 's large arsenal of weapons was highly praised , as GameSpot reviewer James Mielke remarked that the Cerebral Bore is " possibly the grossest weapon ever conceived " . He also praised the sound effects and the music for being " well suited to the game and never intrusive " . Victor Lucas of Electric Playground stated similar pros , describing the soundtrack as " suspenseful , dynamic and always adrenaline charged . " Despite the overall positive reaction from critics , the game 's frame rate was a consistent complaint . Writing for IGN , Peer Schneider said that " While Turok 1 was an exercise in smoothness , [ Turok 2 ] forgoes framerate for detail so often , some gamers will definitely be put off by the choppiness . " Nevertheless , he praised the multiplayer mode for its use of 3D space and innovative game types . 
 Critical reception for the Microsoft Windows port was mixed . Tal Blevins of IGN criticized the controls for its limited support of keyboard functions and the graphics for their distance fog , which was not common in computer games at the time . Despite this , he praised the save system for letting players save the game at any point . Writing for GameSpot , Elliott Chin criticized the game for its confusing level design and insistence on playing a level again if the player misses a key . In a retrospective review , Martin Watts of NintendoLife stated that Turok 2 " is quite possibly the best third @-@ party effort ever released for Nintendo 64 . " GameSpot awarded Turok 2 the Shooting Game of the Year accolade for 1998 . 
 = = Game Boy Color version = = 
 A separate game developed by Bit Managers , also titled Turok 2 : Seeds of Evil , was released for the Game Boy Color in December 1998 . Although set in the same fictional universe , it follows a different storyline than the console version , involving the <unk> <unk> trying to bring a massive <unk> army to Earth from the Lost World with Joshua <unk> trying to stop them . The gameplay is spread over eight levels and four boss encounters . It involves platform levels that are very similar to the first Game Boy title utilizing familiar weaponry such as the bow and arrow , shotgun and grenade . Other levels have Turok on the back of a <unk> with horizontal shooter gameplay , while another has him riding downriver in a canoe avoiding enemies . 
 The standard platform levels of the game were first created on graph paper , then replicated on a PC level editor before becoming a playable level on the Game Boy hardware . The distinctive music was produced by Alberto José González , who produced music for the other Game Boy @-@ based Turok games . IGN reviewer Peer Schneider gave it a rating of 5 @.@ 0 out of 10 and said that the game is " an E @-@ rated cookie @-@ cutter sidescroller with decent controls and unimpressive visuals . " Total Game Boy reviewed the game with a rating of 40 % and criticized the level design and unrelated gameplay to the Nintendo 64 game . 
 = Typhoon Fitow = 
 Typhoon Fitow , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Quedan , was the strongest typhoon to make landfall in Mainland China during October since 1949 . The 21st named storm of the 2013 Pacific typhoon season , Fitow developed on September 29 to the east of the Philippines . It initially tracked north @-@ northwestward , gradually intensifying into a tropical storm and later to typhoon status , or with winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Fitow later turned more to the west @-@ northwest due to an intensifying ridge to the east , bringing the typhoon over the Ryukyu Islands with peak winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) on October 5 . The next day , the typhoon struck China at Fuding in Fujian province , with a landfall pressure of 955 mbar ( 28 @.@ 2 inHg ) according to the China Meteorological Administration ( CMA ) . Fitow quickly weakened over land , dissipating on October 7 . 
 Across its path , Fitow spurred many airlines to cancel flights and caused other transport disruptions . In Japan , the typhoon damaged 1 @,@ 464 houses and left about 6 @,@ 800 households without power on Miyako @-@ jima . Heavy rainfall in Taiwan flooded houses and caused mudslides that closed two highways . Damage was heaviest in Fujian and Zhejiang provinces in China near where Fitow struck . In the latter province , rainfall peaked at 803 mm ( 31 @.@ 6 in ) in Yuyao , which flooded 70 % of the town with up to 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) of waters ; as a result , the floods were the worst in a century for Yuyao , which disrupted aid distribution in the storm 's aftermath . Across China , Fitow damaged about 95 @,@ 000 houses and left at least 159 @,@ 000 other houses without power . The storm also flooded about 75 @,@ 000 hectares ( 185 @,@ 000 acres ) of fields and killed thousands of fish at fish farms . Damage in the country reached ¥ 63 @.@ 1 billion ( 2013 RMB , $ 10 @.@ 3 billion USD ) , of which ¥ 6 billion ( RMB , $ 1 billion USD ) was from insured losses , the second @-@ costliest event on record . There were also 12 deaths in China , eight of them related to electrocutions . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Fitow were from a persistent area of convection , or thunderstorms , about 310 kilometres ( 195 miles ) north @-@ northeast of Palau , an island in the western Pacific Ocean during mid @-@ late September . At the time , wind shear dislocated the convection to the west of a broad and poorly @-@ defined circulation . Although the system was poorly organized , tropical cyclone forecast models noted the potential for development to occur . The convection gradually consolidated and outflow increased to the west , indicative of increased organization . Early on September 29 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) declared that a tropical depression formed about 310 km ( 195 mi ) to the northeast of Palau . Around the same time , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) also began issuing warnings on the depression , giving it the local name Quedan . Early on September 30 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) initiated advisories on Tropical Depression 22W , noting that the circulation had become increasingly well @-@ defined amid decreasing wind shear . 
 With a ridge to the east , the system tracked to the north @-@ northwest through an area of warm water temperatures . At 1200 UTC on September 30 , the JMA upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Fitow . Although outflow and convection increased in general , the thunderstorm activity diminished over the center due to sinking air . By late on October 1 , however , convection increased over Fitow 's center , and the next day the JMA upgraded it to a severe tropical storm . On October 2 , an eye began developing on satellite imagery , although the rainbands wrapping into the eye were fragmented . It took until midday on October 3 for the JTWC to upgrade Fitow to typhoon status , with 1 – minute sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . By that time , the convection had increased in coverage and intensity , with outflow increased by a trough to the north . The JMA did not follow suit until 1200 UTC on October 4 , by which time the eye had become better defined . 
 After officially becoming a typhoon , Fitow turned more to the northwest due to the ridge building to the east . Despite increasing wind shear , the typhoon continued to intensify due to amplified outflow . Late on October 4 , the JMA upgraded Fitow to peak 10 – minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . Early the next day , the JTWC estimated peak 1 – minute winds of 165 mph ( 105 km / h ) , and shortly thereafter the typhoon passed about 225 km ( 140 mph ) south of Okinawa . By that time , the eye had expanded to 75 km ( 45 mi ) , which initially remained unaffected by the increased wind shear . Also on October 5 , PAGASA issued the final advisory as the storm exited the agency 's area of responsibility . Around 1500 UTC on October 5 , Fitow passed about 40 km ( 65 mi ) north of Miyako @-@ jima , by which time the eye began deteriorating . As the typhoon passed northeast of Taiwan , the ragged eye became cloud @-@ filled and the convection weakened . Late on October 6 , Fitow made landfall just south of Wenzhou in eastern China , at Fuding in Fujian province . Fitow became the strongest China typhoon landfall for the month since 1949 according to the China Meteorological Administration ( CMA ) , with a landfall pressure of 955 mbar ( 28 @.@ 2 inHg ) and sustained winds of 151 km / h ( 94 mph ) . While continuing northwestward near the border of Zhejiang and Fujian provinces , Fitow rapidly weakened , dissipating on October 7 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On the Japanese island of Okinawa , 288 flights at Naha Airport were canceled , affecting 28 @,@ 000 people . Officials also canceled bus , monorail , and ferry services . In South Korea , workers involved with the 2013 Formula One season issued a typhoon alert and began planning contingencies in the event Fitow affected the Korean Grand Prix . Officials in Taiwan issued a storm warning before Fitow passed north of the island . The Taiwan military activated 20 @,@ 000 troops to protect and be on standby . Seventeen ferry services between Taiwan and the offshore islands were terminated , and over 200 flights were canceled . Schools and government offices closed in portions of Taiwan due to the storm . 
 Ahead of the storm , officials in China issued warnings for Zhejiang and Fujian for the potential of high winds and flooding , which was later credited for reducing casualties . The Chinese army was utilized to assist in mitigating against potential flooding . Officials told boat owners to put their property in shelter , totaling 65 @,@ 000 vessels ordered to return to report . Coastal facilities such as seaside bathing centers were closed . Before Fitow struck China , 177 @,@ 000 people evacuated in Fujian and a further 574 @,@ 000 evacuated their houses in Zhejiang , totaling 751 @,@ 000 people . In Shanghai , 42 train or bus rides were canceled , along with 40 canceled flights . Two airports in Zhejiang had 49 canceled flights , with another 20 canceled in Fujian . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In Japan , Fitow produced peak wind gusts of 133 km / h ( 83 mph ) on Miyako @-@ jima , where about 6 @,@ 800 homes lost power . Winds gusted to 193 km / h ( 120 mph ) on <unk> to the north of Okinawa , while 167 km / h ( 104 mph ) gusts were recorded at Kunigami on the northern tip of Okinawa . In Okinawa , the typhoon caused power outages , disrupted transportation , and damaged farms . In Japan , Fitow damaged 1 @,@ 464 homes and injured five people . 
 While passing north of Taiwan , Fitow dropped heavy rainfall reaching 536 mm ( 21 @.@ 1 in ) at a station in Hsinchu County . In the county , the rains forced 224 people to evacuate their houses . Mudslides and the threat for flooding spurred officials to close portions of two provincial highways . The typhoon also produced strong winds that caused power outages for 6 @,@ 900 people . 
 = = = China = = = 
 Throughout eastern China , the high winds and rains knocked down trees and ruined local shrimp and seaweed farms , and overall 75 @,@ 000 hectares ( 185 @,@ 000 acres ) of crops were flooded , including 46 @,@ 800 ha ( 116 @,@ 000 acres ) in Wenzhou . Widespread areas were flooded , forcing residents to travel by boats . Fitow damaged or destroyed about 95 @,@ 000 houses . The typhoon killed 12 people in the country , and left ¥ 63 @.@ 1 billion in damage ( 2013 RMB , $ 10 @.@ 3 billion USD ) . Insured losses from Fitow totaled ¥ 6 billion ( RMB , $ 1 billion USD ) , the second costliest event on record for China . 
 As Fitow made landfall in mainland China , it produced wind gusts of 274 km / h ( 170 mph ) in the <unk> Mountains of Zhejiang , setting a record for the province . The typhoon spread heavy rainfall across eastern China in the Jiangnan region , in conjunction with a plume of cold air . An area 175 @,@ 000 km2 ( 68 @,@ 000 sq mi ) wide received 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of precipitation , while an area of 38 @,@ 000 km2 ( 15 @,@ 000 sq mi ) wide received over 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) of rainfall . Yuyao in Zhejiang reported a peak rainfall total of 803 millimetres ( 31 @.@ 6 in ) , a record for the city , while Ningbo reported a daily average of 390 mm ( 15 in ) over three days , setting a record . A station in Shanghai reported 152 @.@ 9 mm ( 6 @.@ 02 in ) , the highest daily rainfall total since 1961 . The rains increased levels along 17 rivers , rising from 0 @.@ 09 to 2 @.@ 79 m ( 0 @.@ 30 to 9 @.@ 15 ft ) , and Lake Tai rose by 3 @.@ 60 m ( 11 @.@ 8 ft ) . The <unk> River , a tributary of the <unk> river , reached its highest levels on record , reaching a height of 5 @.@ 33 m ( 17 @.@ 5 ft ) in Yuyao . 
 Across eastern China , Fitow left heavy damage due to strong winds , heavy rainfall , and a powerful storm surge . Floodwaters covered about 70 % of the metropolis of Yuyao , reaching 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) in some areas , which cut off power and water supply . The floods were the worst in a century for the city , covering most roadways , and forcing most schools , health facilities , and factories to close . In the city , about 100 @,@ 000 people were forced to evacuate , with 289 temporary shelters opened . Damage in the city alone totaled about ¥ 20 billion ( RMB , $ 3 @.@ 25 billion USD ) . In Ningbo in eastern Zhejiang , Fitow wrecked 26 @,@ 180 houses and damaged local fish farms , killing 51 @,@ 000 tons of fish . The storm forced 18 @,@ 134 factories to shut down , and there were also power and telecommunication outages . 
 In Shanghai , high waters along the Huangpu River damaged a portion of a flood prevention wall . Rainfall caused several matches to be canceled at the 2013 Shanghai Masters . Flooding closed the city zoo and 60 parks , and entered 600 houses . In Cangnan County in Wenzhou , Fitow wrecked 1 @,@ 200 houses , and throughout Wenzhou , two people died – one after being blown off a hill , and the other trapped under collapsed rubble . High winds left 254 @,@ 746 people in Zhejiang without power , and eight people died in the province from electrocutions . Another two people died after driving into a flooded river . Throughout China , Fitow damaged or destroyed 95 @,@ 000 houses . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In Zhejiang , about 10 @,@ 000 utility men worked to restore the widespread power outages . In the days following the storm , about 1 @.@ 24 million people were forced to stay in shelters due to damage . A total of 11 @,@ 732 soldiers or militia members assisted in helping in the storm 's aftermath . Many cleared mudslides from roads , repaired dams , and helped people leave flooded homes . In <unk> in Zhejiang province , thousands of people blocked a highway in protest for not receiving aid , prompting the riot police to break up the gathering . The town did not receive supplies other than water tanks , due to it being designated a " self @-@ rescuing area " according to a local official . Ping An Insurance received insurance claims for 11 @,@ 348 flooded cars in the days after the storm . The storm caused slight delays to shipping in Ningbo and Shanghai . The Chinese Ministry of Finance and Civil Affairs allocated ¥ 118 million ( $ 19 million USD ) in funding for Zhejiang and Fujian provinces after the storm . 
 In general , local governments assisted the affected storm victims by providing food , water , and clothing , even traveling by canoe to distribute aid . However , residents in Yuyao complained about insufficient assistance , as many people were without food or clean water for several days , due to ongoing flooding making distribution difficult . This sparked thousands of people to protest the government , although they dispersed after increased numbers of policemen . Residents were initially required to show food coupons to receive meals , but later anyone with a residence permit could receive the meals ; however , the food distribution was disorganized , and there were reports of people looting for food . By October 18 , the flooding in Yuyao had subsided and roadways had reopened , and power service was gradually restored . Due to the extended disruptions to the city , garbage service was halted . Two people in Yuyao were arrested after spreading false rumors online that reservoir collapsed during the storm , killing 40 people . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 During their 2014 annual session , the ESCAP / WMO Typhoon Committee announced that the name Fitow would be retired from the naming lists . The name Mun was chosen to replace Fitow . 
 = Charolais horse = 
 The Charolais or Charollais is an extinct breed of warmblood horse from the Charolais region of France surrounding the town of Charolles , now in the Saône @-@ et @-@ Loire department of Burgundy , in eastern central France . Like other French warmbloods , it was the result of crossing local agricultural horses with the Thoroughbred , and was known by the name of the region in which it was bred . The Charolais never had a breed @-@ specific studbook . The Charolais and other French warmblood breeds were fused in 1958 to create the national warmblood studbook for a unified breed , the Selle Français . It was originally used as a multipurpose horse for riding , driving , and agriculture . During the late 19th century , additional Thoroughbred blood was added and a new type emerged that was principally used as a light cavalry mount . It was also used for dressage and show jumping . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Charolais breed was small , and most closely physically resembled the Morvan horse , another now @-@ extinct French type . The breed had a short head with small ears and a short , strong neck attached low on the shoulder . The body was short and rounded , with a broad croup and strong legs . They were generally considered to be small and inelegant . They were strong , robust and hardy , the last of these traits especially so before the breeding changes of the 19th century , and were known for their pulling power . 
 The Charolais was appreciated for its gaits and endurance . It was known for its ability as a cavalry horse , and in 1933 was called a perfect war horse . It was also used for dressage and show jumping , and members of the breed competed in international events in these sports . It was considered to be a better <unk> than the Anglo @-@ Norman horse , another French breed . 
 = = History = = 
 The original landrace ancestors of the Charolais include the Cheval Bourguignon ( Burgundy Horse ) , which developed from horses bred in the Burgundy region in the Middle Ages . Although small , Burgandy horses were known for their endurance and robustness . They were used for riding and agriculture , and as coach horses . This type , combined with other blood , developed into the Charolais , which belonged to a group of French breeds called demi @-@ sang or " half @-@ bloods " — crosses between native breeds and Thoroughbreds . Some 19th and early 20th century sources claim that Arabian blood was also added from horses captured from the Saracens after the Battle of Poitiers . 
 Until the mid @-@ 20th century , the Charolais and other demi @-@ sang breeds , such as the Angevin , the <unk> , the Cheval Limousin and the Vendéen , were generally known by the name of the region in which they existed , and did not have individual breed studbooks . As these horses were not separated by breed type , but instead by geography , there were no significant physical characteristics that distinguished the Charolais from other demi @-@ sang types that developed prior to the mid @-@ 19th century . Charolais horses were primarily raised in what is now the Saône @-@ et @-@ Loire department . The areas of Cluny , Charolles , <unk> , Paray @-@ le @-@ <unk> and <unk> were preferred for breeding , due to the clay @-@ limestone soils that favored the development of the equine skeletal structure . 
 Multi @-@ purpose types like the Charolais and the Morvan were slowly supplanted in farmers ' favor by draft horses . The Nivernais breed , in particular , was preferred by farmers and threatened the existence of the Charolais . Thus , the original small multi @-@ purpose strain of Charolais gave way to a type of small draft horse that was next crossed with purebred and crossbred Thoroughbreds until , by 1850 , it had become a horse for cavalry purposes . It was thought by some enthusiasts , however , that this outcrossing reduced the quality of the breed , and many missed the old @-@ style Charolais , which had disappeared due to a lack of demand and use . However , others thought that the <unk> had benefited the Charolais breed : in 1919 , one author stated that the breeding of the Charolais type was in excellent condition , and a report from the time stated that the favorite horse of King Albert I of Belgium was a Charolais named Titanic . 
 Like many other French saddle horse types , in 1958 the Charolais was part of a reorganization of French horse breeding . Multiple demi @-@ sang types , including the Charolais , were merged to create a new national breed called the Selle Français , or French Saddle Horse . The Selle Français has been called " one of the finest sport horses today " , and is seen in international competition in show jumping , as well being used for events such as dressage , three @-@ day eventing and racing . 
 = Suillus pungens = 
 Suillus pungens , commonly known as the pungent slippery jack or the pungent suillus , is a species of fungus in the genus Suillus . The fruit bodies of the fungus have slimy convex caps up to 14 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) wide . The mushroom is characterized by the very distinct color changes that occur in the cap throughout development . Typically , the young cap is whitish , later becoming grayish @-@ olive to reddish @-@ brown or a mottled combination of these colors . The mushroom has a dotted stem ( stipe ) up to 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) long , and 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick . On the underside on the cap is the spore @-@ bearing tissue consisting of minute vertically arranged tubes that appear as a surface of angular , yellowish pores . The presence of milky droplets on the pore surface of young individuals , especially in humid environments , is a characteristic feature of this species . S. pungens can usually be distinguished from other similar Suillus species by differences in distribution , odor and taste . The mushroom is considered edible , but not highly regarded . 
 An ectomycorrhizal species , S. pungens forms an intimate mutualistic relationship between its underground mycelium and the young roots of the associated host tree . The fungus — limited in distribution to California — fruits almost exclusively with Monterey and bishop pine , two trees with small and scattered natural ranges concentrated in the West Coast of the United States . Several studies have investigated the role of S. pungens in the coastal Californian forest ecosystem it occupies . Although the species produces more fruit bodies than other competing ectomycorrhizal fungi in the same location , it is not a dominant root colonizer , and occupies only a small percentage of ectomycorrhizal root tips . The fungus 's propensity to fruit prolifically despite minimal root colonization is a result of its ability to efficiently transfer nutrients from its host for its own use . 
 = = Taxonomy , classification , and phylogeny = = 
 The fungus was first described scientifically by American mycologists Harry D. Thiers and Alexander H. Smith in their 1964 monograph on North American Suillus species . The type collection was made on the campus of San Francisco State University in San Francisco . Smith and Thiers classified S. pungens in section Suilli — a grouping of related species characterized by the presence of either a ring on the stipe , a partial veil adhering to the cap margin , or a " false veil " not attached to the stipe but initially covering the tube cavity . 
 A 1996 molecular analysis of 38 different Suillus species used the sequences of their internal transcribed spacers to infer phylogenetic relationships and clarify the taxonomy of the genus . The results suggest that S. pungens was genetically similar to S. collinitus , S. <unk> , S. pseudobrevipes , S. luteus , S. brevipes , S. weaverae , and certain isolates of S. granulatus . 
 The specific epithet is derived from the Latin pungens , and refers to the pungent aroma of the fruit bodies . The mushroom is commonly known as the " pungent slippy jack " or the " pungent suillus " . It has also been referred to as the " slippery jack " , a common name applied to several Suillus species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of S. pungens is roughly convex when young , becoming plano @-@ convex ( flat on one side and rounded on the other ) to somewhat flat with age , and reaches diameters of 4 – 14 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) . The cap surface is sticky to slimy when moist , becoming shiny when dried . The surface is smooth but is sometimes streaked with the sticky glue @-@ like cap slime when older . The cap color is highly variable in this species , and the cap is often variegated with a mixture of light and dark colors . When young it is dirty @-@ white to olive with pale olive splotches . <unk> caps can retain the color they had when young , or become tawny to orange @-@ yellow to reddish @-@ brown , or a combination of these colors . The cap margin is initially rolled inward and has a cottony roll of white tissue , but becomes naked and curves downward with age . The flesh is 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick , white and unchanging in young fruit bodies , frequently changing to yellow when older . 
 The tubes that comprise the hymenium ( spore @-@ bearing tissue ) on the underside of the cap are up to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) long , adnate when young , becoming decurrent or nearly so with age . In young specimens , they are whitish to pale buff , and are covered with milky droplets that become brown to ochraceous when dried . As specimens mature the color of the pore surface changes to yellowish , and finally to dark yellow . The angular pores , which are 1 – 1 @.@ 5 mm in diameter , are not radially arranged , and do not change color when bruised . The stipe is solid ( rather than hollow ) , 3 – 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) long , and 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick near the top . Its shape is variable : either roughly equal in width throughout , thicker at the base , or somewhat thicker in the middle . Its surface is dry and smooth , and covered with irregularly shaped glandular dots . The dots — minute clumps of pigmented cells — are initially reddish before becoming brownish . The background color of the stipe is initially whitish ( roughly the same color as the tubes ) , but becomes more yellow with age . It does not change color when bruised , and does not have a ring . The flesh of the stipe is white , and does not change color when exposed to air . 
 The spore print is olive @-@ brown to pale cinnamon @-@ brown . Individual spores are thin @-@ walled , hyaline ( translucent ) , and smooth . Their shape is ellipsoid to roughly cylindrical in face view or inequilateral when viewed in profile , and they measure 9 @.@ 5 – 10 by 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 5 μm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells of the hymenium ) are hyaline , club @-@ shaped and four @-@ spored , with dimensions of 33 – 36 by 8 – 10 μm . The thin @-@ walled cystidia are rare to scattered on the tube surface but abundant on the pores , where they usually occur in massive clusters . They appear dark brown when mounted in a dilute ( 3 % ) solution of potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) , and are cylindric to roughly club @-@ shaped , measuring 43 – 79 by 7 – 10 μm . They are usually encrusted with pigment , although some may be hyaline . The tissue comprising the tube is hyaline , and made of divergent to nearly parallel hyphae that are 3 – 5 μm wide . The pileipellis is a tissue type known as an ixotrichodermium ( made of interwoven gelatinized hyphae ) ; it stains brown in KOH , and is made of hyphae that are 4 – 5 μm wide . The stipe cuticle is made of clusters of cystidia similar to those found in the hymenium . Clamp connections are absent in the hyphae of S. pungens . 
 Several chemical tests can be employed in the field to aid in the identification of S. pungens . With an application of a drop of KOH , the flesh will turn vinaceous ( the color of red wine ) , the tubes red , the cap cuticle black , and the stipe cuticle pale vinaceous . With ammonium hydroxide ( NH4OH ) , the flesh becomes very pale vinaceous , and the tubes turn bright red . Iron ( II ) sulfate ( FeSO4 ) turns the flesh gray , the tubes dark gray to black , and the stipe cuticle light gray . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 The mushroom is considered edible , but not choice . Its taste is harsh , nauseating , and weakly acidic ; the odor is strong and ranges from pleasant , resembling bananas , to pungent . When collecting for the table , young specimens are preferred , as older ones " literally seethe with fat , agitated maggots and sag with so much excess moisture that they practically demand to be wrung out like a sponge ! " Michael Kuo 's 100 Edible Mushrooms ( 2007 ) rates the mushroom 's edibility as " bad " and warns that dishes cooked with the mushroom will assume an unpleasant taste . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Suillus pungens is characterized by the very distinct color changes that occur in the cap as it develops . The range of color variation makes it possible to misidentify the species with others whose color overlaps . Suillus pungens has been misidentified as S. placidus because of the white color of the young fruit bodies and the droplets of exudate . S. placidus has a wider distribution , is usually found in association with eastern white pine , is generally smaller , with a maximum cap diameter up to 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) , and has smaller spores , measuring 7 – 9 by 2 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 2 μm . It does not have any distinctive taste or odor . North American S. granulatus is another potential lookalike species , and at maturity it is nearly identical to Suillus pungens . The cap of S. granulatus is variable in color , ranging from pale yellow to various shades of brown , while the pore surface is initially whitish , later becoming yellowish , and similar to S. placidus , its typical host is eastern white pine . Unlike S. pungens , it lacks a characteristic odor and taste . The Californian species Suillus <unk> has veil material attached to the edge of the cap when young . It also lacks the distinctive changes in cap color during development , is associated with lodgepole pine , has smaller spores ( 6 @.@ 6 – 8 @.@ 8 by 2 @.@ 5 – 3 μm ) , and lacks any obvious taste and odor . Another Californian species , Suillus quiescens , newly described in 2010 , may resemble S. pungens , especially at maturity . S. quiescens can be distinguished by its lack of white or olive colors when young and by a less glandular stipe when mature . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 Suillus pungens is an ectomycorrhizal ( EM ) basidiomycete that forms symbiotic relationships almost exclusively with Monterey pine ( Pinus radiata ) and bishop pine ( Pinus muricata ) ; some collections have been made under knobcone pine ( Pinus attenuata ) and ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa ) , but only within the range of Monterey pine . All these trees have small scattered natural ranges largely restricted to California . An EM symbiosis is a mutualistic relationship between an EM fungus and the root tip of a compatible EM plant . The fruit bodies of Suillus pungens grow solitarily , scattered or in groups in humus . They are often found growing near fruit bodies of Chroogomphus vinicolor and Helvella lacunosa . Suillus pungens is often the most abundant Suillus in the San Francisco Bay Area . The type collection was made on the campus of San Francisco State University in San Francisco , where it occurs in abundance during the fall and winter seasons . Although it occurs most frequently in the autumn and winter , it is one of the few species of Suillus that continue to fruit sporadically throughout the year , especially in wet weather . It has also been identified in the southeastern Sierra Nevada and on Santa Cruz Island . 
 A genet is a group of genetically identical individuals that have grown in a given location , all originating vegetatively from a single ancestor . Once established , genets vegetatively spread hyphae out from the root tip into the soil and may connect two or more trees to form a network of mycorrhizae . In field studies , the approximate size of fungal genets is typically estimated by collecting and mapping fruit bodies on a site , determining which fruit bodies are genetically identical by either somatic incompatibility ( a method fungi use to distinguish self from non @-@ self by delimiting their own mycelia from that of other individuals of the same species ) or various molecular techniques , and then determining the distance between identical fruit bodies . In a 1996 study , mycologists Monique Gardes and Thomas Bruns hypothesized that S. pungens , an abundant <unk> in pine forests , would be dominant on the roots of the pine trees . However , by sampling underground ectomycorrhizae in addition to above @-@ ground fruit bodies , they found that the fungus can fruit prolifically while occupying only a small fraction of the ectomycorrhizal root assemblage , which was otherwise dominated by Russula species and <unk> <unk> . Gardes and Bruns hypothesized that the disparity between above- and below @-@ ground representation may be because the fungus invests less energy in vegetative growth and persistence and more in fruiting , or alternatively , because the species is particularly efficient at acquiring carbon from its hosts and so needs to colonize only a few rootlets to obtain enough to allow abundant fruiting . A 1998 study by Pierluigi Bonello and colleagues used single @-@ strand conformation polymorphism analysis to detect minute genetic differences among S. pungens genets , and showed that most of the fruiting occurred from a single large genet . This result indicates that the fungus persists because of extensive vegetative growth , rather than frequent establishment of new genets from spores , and that it uses carbon resources efficiently . The study also described an S. pungens genet with an area of approximately 300 m2 ( 3 @,@ 200 sq ft ) and a span greater than 40 m ( 130 ft ) across , which was at the time the largest EM fungal genet reported . The large S. pungens genet was not detected after wildfire , demonstrating that it did not survive in the absence of a host , and suggesting that spores are the primary means by which the fungus <unk> after a fire . 
 = National Action Plan to Combat Human Trafficking = 
 The National Action Plan to Combat Human Trafficking is a four @-@ year action plan that was established by the Government of Canada on June 6 , 2012 to oppose human trafficking in Canada . In 2004 , the government 's Interdepartmental Working Group on Trafficking in Persons was mandated to create a national anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking plan , but the mandate went unfulfilled despite reminders from politicians and non @-@ governmental organizations ( NGOs ) . Member of Parliament ( MP ) Joy Smith put forward motion C @-@ 153 in February 2007 to put a plan in place , and the House of Commons passed it unanimously . Smith began developing a proposal and released it in September 2010 under the title " Connecting the Dots " . University of British Columbia law professor Benjamin Perrin helped guide Smith 's writing of the proposal . Before the establishment of the NAP @-@ CHT , a variety of people and organizations — including the 2009 and 2010 Trafficking in Persons ( TIP ) Reports of the United States Department of State — criticized Canada for failing to have such a plan . 
 During the 2011 Canadian federal election , Stephen Harper , Prime Minister of Canada , promised to establish the NAP @-@ CHT by 2012 and to invest CA $ 20 million into it . The Plan was established by the Government of Canada on schedule on June 28 , 2012 with a budget of $ 25 million , $ 500 @,@ 000 of which was to be used for supporting victims . The NAP @-@ CHT 's recommendations are divided into four categories called the " 4 Ps " : partnership , prevention , prosecution , and protection . Although Smith recommended that the government investigate ways in which prostitution law in Canada might be altered to emulate Sweden 's Sex Purchase Act , thereby prosecuting those who purchase sexual acts and not those who perform them , the plan does not make any such legislative recommendations . The NAP @-@ CHT replaced the IWG @-@ TIP with the Human Trafficking Taskforce , chaired by Public Safety Canada and mandated with coordinating the plan 's implementation and the generation of annual progress reports , to be made publicly available . 
 The National Action Plan was received positively by many , but not all , Canadian NGOs and law enforcement officials . Natasha Falle , founder and director of Sex Trade 101 , said that , as an organization of sex trafficking victims , they were extremely pleased with the establishment of the NAP @-@ CHT . When the Canadian government announced that the country 's sex industry would no longer be allowed to employ foreign workers because of the risks of exploitation , abuse , and trafficking in that environment , Tim <unk> — leader of the Adult Entertainment Association of Canada — said that he might challenge the policy because he believed that the government was " destroying an industry [ and ] creating a labour shortage . " Bethany Hastie of McGill University , Shae Invidiata of Free @-@ Them , and Andrea Burkhart of ACT Alberta all criticized the plan for focusing too much on law enforcement and not enough on victim services . 
 = = Proposals = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 2004 , the Interdepartmental Working Group on Trafficking in Persons ( IWG @-@ TIP ) , the working group responsible for coordinating the Government of Canada 's efforts against human trafficking , was mandated to create a national anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking plan . On March 31 of that year , the IWG @-@ TIP website was updated to state that it was meeting with academics and non @-@ governmental organizations ( NGOs ) " to discuss various elements of a potential federal anti @-@ trafficking strategy , " but no more updates were forthcoming on the website for the next four years . Politicians and NGOs proceeded to remind the IWG @-@ TIP of its unfulfilled mandate for the eight years following 2004 , and the IWG @-@ TIP continued to promise to establish such a plan . 
 Joy Smith , Member of Parliament ( MP ) for Kildonan — St. Paul with the Conservative Party , put forward motion C @-@ 153 in February 2007 to put in place a Canada @-@ wide action plan to combat human trafficking , and the House of Commons passed the motion unanimously . Thomas <unk> of the Toronto Star said that the unanimity of this decision demonstrated that the Harper government was just as dedicated to opposing human trafficking as was Barack Obama , President of the United States . Early promoters of a Canadian anti @-@ trafficking action plan hoped for up to $ 100 million in funding , which they argued would turn Canada into a world leader in the fight against human trafficking . World Vision Canada began lobbying for a national human trafficking action plan in 2009 . 
 = = = " Connecting the Dots " = = = 
 = = = = Development = = = = 
 In September 2009 , Smith 's Bill C @-@ 268 successfully passed into law as An Act to amend the Criminal Code ( minimum sentence for offences involving trafficking of persons under the age of eighteen years ) . The following September , she released " Connecting the Dots " , a national action plan proposal she had been working on for three years . " Connecting the Dots " sought " to rescue and restore the victims and prosecute the offenders " of human trafficking ; Smith intended it to address both trafficking within Canada and international trafficking into the country . Smith announced several dozen specific recommendations for the proposed plan , one of which was to create an office to regularly evaluate national human trafficking opposition efforts and generate annual reports of their findings . Other recommendations were to increase funding for organizations that support human trafficking victims ; to establish safe houses for victims in every Canadian province ; to increase the use of Canada 's human trafficking laws by educating police , judges , and lawyers about these relatively new laws ; to initiate an extensive public relations campaign on the subject ; and to have the federal government coordinate its activities with provincial governments , Aboriginal leaders , NGOs , law enforcement agencies , and human trafficking survivors . 
 Smith recommended that the Canadian government investigate ways in which prostitution law in Canada might be altered to emulate Sweden 's 1999 Sex Purchase Act , which criminalizes purchasing and attempting to purchase sex in Sweden — whether in the context of brothels , massage parlors , or street prostitution . Human trafficking in Sweden has significantly decreased since the institution of the Sex Purchase Act , and Smith said that Canada " can adapt many concepts from [ the Swedish ] model concerning the demand for the sex trade . " Smith 's proposal recommended that Canada , like Sweden , prosecute those who purchase sexual acts and not those who perform them . Smith 's recommendations were in keeping with a 2007 report released by the Standing Committee on the Status of Women , which stated that prostitutes should be considered exploitation victims and that prostitution has been demonstrated to engender human trafficking . 
 Smith argued that Canadians convicted of child sexual abuse should not be permitted to travel outside Canada , and that Canada should help combat the trafficking of children in other countries . The " Connecting the Dots " document called for the institution of a " Connecting the Dots Day " at elementary schools for students in Grade 6 , which Smith suggested would be the best grade in which to introduce the concept of human trafficking to students because younger children are increasingly at risk of being victimized . She also recommended that the Canada Border Services Agency ( CBSA ) track foreign women who arrive alone in Canada for six months to ensure their safety from traffickers . Smith said that she was " convinced that a federally led national action plan would address [ the ] challenges [ of human trafficking ] by implementing an integrated response to target the traffickers and provide relief and protection for the victims . " She said that the plan needed to be integrated on a national level because human trafficking is a clandestine activity . Smith advocated making the protection of victims central to the plan , and recommended consulting First Nations communities about anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking efforts . University of British Columbia law professor Benjamin Perrin helped guide Smith 's writing of " Connecting the Dots " . 
 = = = = Responses = = = = 
 Smith 's proposal received strong endorsement from organizations that support human trafficking victims and from law enforcement agencies . Marlene Jennings , a Liberal MP , praised Smith 's proposal overall but argued that it did not sufficiently distinguish between human trafficking and prostitution . Smith responded that there is a clear correlation between the two issues . <unk> Cochrane of Citizens for Public Justice said that such a plan " has become an imperative in order to ensure the protection of victims and effectively combat human trafficking , " but that Smith 's proposal had " definite weaknesses that need to be strengthened . " Cochrane praised the document 's suggestions that NGOs be granted funding , that efforts be coordinated with First Nations communities , that awareness @-@ raising campaigns be initiated , and that immigration be regulated . She argued that " Connecting the Dots " was too focused on those who create the demand for sex trafficking and did not sufficiently address victim rehabilitation . Loly Rico of the Canadian Council for Refugees made the same complaint . Rico recommended that the proposal be amended to allow human trafficking victims to become permanent residents of Canada so they would be more effectively protected against being trafficked again . 
 In October 2010 , Tara Teng used her position as Miss BC World to meet with Stephen Harper , Prime Minister of Canada , to discuss the possibility of implementing the NAP @-@ CHT . The day after their meeting , Teng received a letter from Harper stating that he was against human trafficking . Teng was disappointed that he did not have a more substantial response to their meeting , and she said that she " would like to see even more , to be very honest , from him as the person entrusted to protect the Canadian people . " In 2011 , Teng — who was Miss Canada at the time — helped Smith promote the proposal while Teng was interning with Smith through Trinity Western University 's Laurentian Leadership Centre . Smith quoted William Wilberforce , an 18th @-@ century British abolitionist , saying , " Having heard all of this you may choose to look the other way ... but you may never again say that you did not know . " 
 The Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs voiced its support for Smith 's proposal . Ron Evans , the assembly 's Grand Chief , said that Smith 's recommendations " bring attention to the fact that most vulnerable victims of domestic human trafficking and sexual exploitation are First Nations youth . " Ottawa Victim Services executive director Steve Sullivan commended Smith and Perrin on their development of the proposal . Timea Nagy , a former human trafficking victim and the founder of Walk With Me ( an organization that supports human trafficking victims in Toronto ) , said that she " felt a huge amount of relief " when she heard about the proposed NAP @-@ CHT , and said , " It 's time for Canada to have a National Action Plan to Combat Human Trafficking . " 
 Eventually , Smith submitted " Connecting the Dots " to Harper . In March 2012 , she spoke about her proposal at a human @-@ trafficking @-@ themed conference hosted by the Sisters of Loretto at St. Michael 's College . Smith circulated a petition requesting that the House of Commons establish an anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking national action plan . The Office for Systemic Justice , which is part of the Canadian Federation of Sisters of St. Joseph , released a report responding to " Connecting the Dots " , commending Smith on her work and recommending that her proposal incorporate the Delphi Indicators of Human Trafficking , based on the Delphi method . Additional recommendations for the plan were submitted by International Justice Mission ( IJM ) Canada , World Vision , the Alliance Against Modern Slavery ( AAMS ) , Beyond Borders , The Salvation Army , Not for Sale Canada , the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada ( EFC ) , ACT Alberta , and other NGOs . 
 = = Criticism of Canada for lacking such a plan = = 
 Before the establishment of the National Action Plan , a variety of people and organizations — including First Nations , human trafficking victims , law enforcement , and victim service providers — criticized Canada for failing to have such a plan . Charles <unk> , president of the Canadian Police Association , said that despite existing efforts from local law enforcement agencies , Canada lacked and required " a coordinated response to ensure the offenders are prosecuted , and put a stop to this modern day form of slavery . " In October 2008 , John Fenn of Toronto 's Streetlight Support Services expressed his frustration that there was still no national action plan on this subject despite the passing of the corresponding motion the previous year . Fenn said , " Even if we make a muck of the thing if we get started , let 's get started . " Benjamín Santamaria of Project Desert Roses , another Toronto @-@ based organization , voiced the same complaint . 
 In 2009 , the United States Department of State annual Trafficking in Persons ( TIP ) Report was released at a news conference at the American consulate in Vancouver ; it criticized the Government of Canada for failing to have a national action plan to address human trafficking . At the conference , Perrin , who was named in the report as one of the world 's ten anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking heroes , called for Harper " to announce that he will enact a national action plan to combat human trafficking to follow up on the measures that his government has already taken . " Perrin said that Canada 's lack of a plan made the country look bad internationally and prevents the issue from being adequately addressed . Perrin said that the establishment of a national action plan on this issue " should be a priority for our federal government to end this atrocious crime that is flourishing in Canada . " He wrote the book Invisible Chains : Canada 's Underground World of Human Trafficking and said that a national anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking plan is necessary if the country is to be free and just . Perrin said that his book , which was published within three weeks of the release of " Connecting the Dots " , " shows that while traffickers have a plan , Canada doesn 't . " 
 The 2010 TIP report also condemned Canada 's lack of a national action plan , and said that Canada is a destination , source , and transit country for forced prostitution , unfree labour , the prostitution of children , and other forms of human trafficking . The report said that the federal and provincial governments of Canada were not cooperating sufficiently with respect to policing these crimes , and that a strategy for cooperation should be formulated in a national action plan . York Regional Police vice unit Detective Thai Truong agreed with the report 's assessment , and said that " a unified understanding and approach " to human trafficking " does not even exist at the municipal level of policing " in Canada . Also in 2010 , retired Toronto Police Service officer Dave Perry said that Canada 's lack of a national action plan had resulted in the country failing to adequately deal with North Preston 's Finest , a gang that engages in sex trafficking between Nova Scotia and Toronto . Perry had led a police taskforce against the gang in the late 1980s and early 1990s , but he said that without a national action plan , politicians lost interest in the endeavour and funding ran out . Perry stated that a plan would need to be well @-@ funded because traffickers in Canada are making " big , big money ... and the only way you can combat that is with a pretty healthy budget . " 
 York University professor Natalya <unk> , who was part of two research studies about human trafficking in Canada , said that the United States was combatting human trafficking much more effectively than Canada was . <unk> said that Canada 's responses to human trafficking have been sporadic and that , even if a national action plan was implemented , Canada needed to begin engaging with other countries on this issue . In February 2011 , Shae Invidiata of Free @-@ Them — a Canadian organization that raises awareness about human trafficking — said it was " mind blowing [ that ] currently we do not have a national action plan to combat human trafficking in Canada . " 
 = = Preparations by the federal government = = 
 During the 2011 Canadian federal election , Harper promised to establish the NAP @-@ CHT by 2012 and to invest $ 20 million into it . The annual budget of British Columbia 's Office to Combat Trafficking in Persons ( OCTIP ) was reduced by $ 200 @,@ 000 a few months later . OCTIP was Canada 's only provincial government agency responsible for coordinating efforts to address human trafficking . The federal government held a round table to determine the contents of the NAP @-@ CHT . Carleen McGuinty , child protection specialist for the Christian NGO World Vision Canada , said at the discussion that the NAP @-@ CHT should focus on the needs of children and that the plan should not emphasize child sexual abuse to the exclusion of addressing child labour . Smith said that she was confident that Harper would have her review the plan before it was established . The government consulted ACT Alberta , The Salvation Army , and the AAMS in the development of the plan . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 = = = Announcement = = = 
 The plan was established by the Government of Canada on June 6 , 2012 with a four @-@ year budget of $ 25 million , $ 500 @,@ 000 of which was to be used for supporting victims . The establishment was announced simultaneously in three Canadian cities . Smith made the announcement in Vancouver . In Ottawa , the announcement was made by Rona Ambrose , Minister responsible for the Status of Women and Minister of Public Works and Government Services ; and Vic Toews , Minister of Public Safety . Steven Blaney , Minister of Veterans Affairs , was the announcer in Montreal . 
 Ambrose called the plan an " important step to ensure the safety and security of women and girls across Canada who are being targeted for sexual exploitation by violent traffickers " . Toews said that the need to establish the NAP @-@ CHT was demonstrated by the ongoing legal proceedings regarding the <unk> @-@ <unk> criminal organization , Canada 's largest human trafficking case to date . Smith said that the plan was an important step in the process of increasing the number of human @-@ trafficking @-@ related cases that go before court . Smith said that the NAP @-@ CHT would not be independently sufficient to end human trafficking in the country because this crime can only be effectively combatted when the country 's citizens are united against it ; she therefore recommended the establishment of a National Human Trafficking Awareness Day on February 22 to help raise awareness . 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 The plan states that human trafficking " is often described as a modern form of slavery , " but that no one knows how prevalent it is in Canada . The NAP @-@ CHT also says that women and girls are the most common victims of human trafficking . Randy <unk> , MP for Prince Albert , Saskatchewan , said that the goals of the action plan included " enhancing the response of law enforcement and the justice system to cases of missing and murdered Aboriginal women and girls and supporting culturally appropriate victim 's services . " The NAP @-@ CHT document states that there had been 25 human @-@ trafficking @-@ specific convictions in Canada prior to April 2012 , and that 41 people had been victims of those 25 crimes . 
 The plan 's recommendations are divided into four categories called the " 4 Ps " : partnership , prevention , prosecution , and protection . Included in the plan are action items with measurable goals . The plan encompasses support for victims , the increase of law enforcement across the country , and the consolidation of existing anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking efforts . The plan also outlines novel initiatives to more effectively prosecute perpetrators , identify and protect their victims , prevent further crimes , and engage in international partnership . There is a specific commitment to participate in international child protection . The NAP @-@ CHT instituted the Human Trafficking Taskforce , chaired by Public Safety Canada and mandated with coordinating the plan 's implementation and the generation of annual progress reports , which were to be made publicly available . This taskforce replaced the IWG @-@ TIP , which had been tasked solely with information sharing . The new taskforce involves 18 federal government departments . Public Safety Canada called the NAP @-@ CHT " a comprehensive blueprint to guide the Government of Canada 's fight against the serious crime of human trafficking . " 
 It introduced training for police officers and anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking service providers in communities that are particularly susceptible to human trafficking . The plan also includes an increase in training for prosecutors , border guards , and judges . The plan launched a nationally integrated law enforcement team tasked specifically with combatting human trafficking , the first of its kind in Canada . The team combines the forces of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) , CBSA , and local police . Due to difficulties encountered by Canadian law enforcement when investigating human trafficking before the establishment of the NAP @-@ CHT , this model of law enforcement integration , emulating successful teams combatting human trafficking in the United States , was included . This law enforcement integration model is intended to optimize information sharing and facilitate proactive investigation . The NAP @-@ CHT allocates substantial funds to the RCMP Human Trafficking National Coordination Centre ( HTNCC ) , which is based in Ottawa . 
 Also included in the plan is an outline for raising awareness about human trafficking across Canada . The plan specifically mentions <unk> , a campaign of Persons Against the Crime of Trafficking in Humans Ottawa , as being integral to the plan . According to the plan , the CBSA is responsible for informing foreigners about human trafficking because of their increased vulnerability . The plan includes a provision for the government to partner with NGOs that oppose human trafficking . Although Smith said that human trafficking would be more effectively combatted if Canada 's prostitution laws were reformed to align with those of Sweden , criminalizing the purchasing rather than the selling of sex , the NAP @-@ CHT does not make such legislative recommendations . The plan enables immigration officers to issue temporary residence permits to foreigners victimized by human trafficking in Canada , thereby providing these victims with opportunities to receive aid . 
 = = = Implementation = = = 
 The plan came into force on June 28 , 2012 . After the establishment of the national action plan , British Columbia established a provincial action plan informed by the national one to coordinate its anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking efforts with the federal government 's . OCTIP then became involved in implementing the national and provincial action plans . The provincial action plan , published in March 2013 , states that contributing to development of the NAP @-@ CHT through consultation and information sharing was an immediate priority . 
 The month after the plan took effect , the Canadian government announced that the country 's sex industry would no longer be allowed to employ foreign workers because of the risks of exploitation , abuse , and trafficking in that environment . As part of this policy , the Department of Citizenship and Immigration Canada stopped issuing new temporary work permits for foreigners seeking work with escort agencies , massage parlours , and strip clubs . Jason Kenney , Minister of Citizenship and Immigration , said that he hoped that the NAP @-@ CHT would be strengthened by this new policy , and said that its purpose was to protect foreigners " from what they might not know will happen to them when they get to Canada . " That November , Status of Women Canada sought to support the NAP @-@ CHT by soliciting the public for proposals of how to best support community organizations that serve female victims of sex trafficking — the most common victims of this form of trafficking . In late 2012 , Smith launched the Joy Smith Foundation as a follow @-@ up to the NAP @-@ CHT ; this nonpartisan , apolitical foundation is dedicated to raising awareness about human trafficking and providing support to human trafficking victims with counselling , housing , and clothing . 
 The Canadian government spent more than $ 6 million on actions related to the NAP @-@ CHT in 2013 . In September of that year , Kellie Leitch , Minister responsible for the Status of Women and Minister of Labour , announced that the government would give the Women 's Support Network of York Region $ 200 @,@ 000 to initiate a project aimed at eradicating human trafficking in the Regional Municipality of York , and she appealed to the NAP @-@ CHT when making the announcement . In February 2013 , the Toronto City Council decided to coordinate its anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking efforts with the NAP @-@ CHT . That May , during a meeting of the sixty @-@ seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly at United Nations Headquarters in New York City that was convened to discuss the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons , the Canadian delegation spoke about the NAP @-@ CHT . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = To the plan 's establishment = = = 
 The establishment of the plan was received positively by many Canadian NGOs and law enforcement officials . Within a day of its establishment , the plan had received support from the parents of human trafficking victims . <unk> Grant , mother of missing human trafficking victim Jessie Foster , said , " From the bottom of my heart , I would like to thank the government of Canada for their development and launch of the Canadian National Action Plan to Combat the Crime of Human Trafficking , making our country one of the leaders in the fight against this crime . " Around the same time , the EFC voiced its support for the plan , specifically praising the commitments to create a national human trafficking law enforcement taskforce , to raise awareness , to invest in prevention , to care for victims , and to consult with stakeholders on an ongoing basis . The EFC 's policy analyst Julia Beazley said that the organization was " particularly pleased with the proposals aimed at combatting sexual exploitation , and with the focus given to our Aboriginal communities , which are particularly vulnerable to trafficking . " 
 Luis <unk> , United States Ambassador @-@ at @-@ Large to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons , said , " With the announcement of a new national action plan , Canada is showing the international community what an effective anti @-@ trafficking strategy looks like . " Nagy said that she was " absolutely thrilled " with the establishment of the plan . Invidiata said that she and many others " stand proud to be Canadian " because of the announcement of the NAP @-@ CHT 's " important measures to protect our women and children in Canada . " Natasha Falle , founder and director of Sex Trade 101 , said that , as an organization of sex trafficking victims , they were extremely pleased with the establishment of the NAP @-@ CHT . She said that she and the other members of Sex Trade 101 " have been collectively afraid , raped , beaten , sold , discarded [ so ] we are forever grateful to MP Joy Smith for being a voice for those who are not allowed to speak out . " 
 Brian Venables , Divisional Secretary for Public Relations and Development for the British Columbia Division of The Salvation Army , said , " We welcome a plan that enhances the support for the victims of these horrible crimes ... and are pleased to have been part of the plan 's development . " He also praised the plan 's outline of how to educate the public on the subject of human trafficking and how the police and the judiciary should cooperate on the subject . Brian McConaghy of Ratanak International said that he was pleased to see the NAP @-@ CHT established and that the plan 's framework is necessary to protect those at risk of being trafficked . Sister Nancy Brown of Covenant House British Columbia said that her organization was in support of the NAP @-@ CHT and Smith 's efforts to combat human trafficking . The Servants Anonymous Society 's chief financial officer , Dominique <unk> , said that her organization " applauds the Conservative Government for taking the issue of human trafficking seriously and for executing the necessary steps to enact the National Action Plan to Combat Human Trafficking . " 
 A common criticism of the plan is that it is not victim @-@ centric and that its support for victims is insufficient . Bethany Hastie of McGill University said that the HTNCC had a good track record of intelligence assessment and awareness @-@ raising with respect to human trafficking , and she therefore approved of the plan 's funding of the HTNCC . She was critical of the plan 's emphasis on law enforcement , saying that " the crime @-@ fighting focus of the plan has unfortunately detracted from ... victim services . " She said that more attention to victim services was necessary because most Canadian provinces were employing only ad @-@ hoc methods of supporting victims , often omitting important elements such as legal aid and situation @-@ appropriate shelter . A few weeks after the establishment of the NAP @-@ CHT , Dean Allison , MP for Niagara West — Glanbrook , Ontario travelled to Cambodia and Thailand to learn more about human trafficking as part of a parliamentary delegation with World Vision Canada , and he said that his meetings there convinced him " that we are on the right track in Canada with our National Action Plan . " 
 In October 2012 , the Canadian Coalition for the Rights of Children ( CCRC ) said that it approved of Canada 's adoption of the plan , but was reserving judgement on whether the new Human Trafficking Taskforce would be more effective than the body it replaced . The CCRC criticized the NAP @-@ CHT for including " few specific strategies for children and no mention of strengthening respect for children 's rights as part of prevention . " The CCRC also said that the NAP @-@ CHT lacks recognition of the responsibilities Canada has according to the Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children , Child Prostitution and Child Pornography . The coalition therefore recommended that the plan be amended to include mandatory sentencing for traffickers of children , and to provide for collaboration with youth organizations . 
 Also in October 2012 , Jamie McIntosh of IJM Canada said that his organization supports the NAP @-@ CHT , and that the plan 's promises to participate in international child protection would be best fulfilled by apprehending and prosecuting Canadians who engage in child sex tourism and child trafficking in other countries . McIntosh recommended that this work be focused on Cambodia , the Dominican Republic , Mexico , the Philippines , and Thailand because these countries are particularly vulnerable to Canadian traffickers . He also recommended focusing on these countries because Canadians have been caught participating in child sex tourism there ; McIntosh made specific reference to the cases of Kenneth Klassen and Donald Bakker . 
 In response to the plan , Chab Dai Canada initiated the Canadian Freedom Registry Project " to promote and enable the implementation of ... Canada ’ s National Action Plan to Combat Human Trafficking ... focusing specifically on partnership . " Chab Dai sought to research ways to improve anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking activities in Canada and to facilitate information sharing between anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking organisations and the federal and provincial governments . In April 2013 , a troika of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights composed of Brazil , the Philippines , and the Republic of Ireland released a report reviewing Canada as part of that year 's Universal Periodic Review ; the report highlighted the establishment of the NAP @-@ CHT as a positive achievement . UNICEF Canada approved of the establishment of the NAP @-@ CHT , and encouraged Canadians to write letters to politicians asking them to make sure that youth and children are the plan 's foremost priorities . The politicians UNICEF recommended that people write to Harper , Toews , Kenney , and Rob Nicholson , the Minister of Justice . 
 = = = To the plan 's implementation = = = 
 A month after the plan 's establishment , Public Service Alliance of Canada Prairies Regional Executive Vice @-@ President Marianne <unk> wrote an open letter to Brad Trost , MP for Saskatoon — Humboldt , saying that , while she approved of the NAP @-@ CHT , the government was being inconsistent in its treatment of human trafficking because it had recently announced that it would be eliminating four CBSA intelligence officer positions , thereby dismissing four people who were already doing effective anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking work . When it was announced that foreign workers would no longer be issued permits for work in Canada 's sex industry , Tim <unk> , leader of the Adult Entertainment Association of Canada , said that he might challenge the policy because he believed that " strip clubs are a very safe environment " and that the government was " destroying an industry [ and ] creating a labour shortage . " At Toronto 's third annual Walk for Freedom in September 2012 , Shae Invidiata criticized the NAP @-@ CHT for allotting only $ 500 @,@ 000 to victim services , saying , " I 'm very grateful , but we need more . " Smith also said that the $ 500 @,@ 000 allotted to support victims was insufficient . She said that many of these organizations " still struggle to provide basic care for victims of human trafficking " and that there should be a " considerable increase in support from the federal and provincial governments for these organizations . " 
 In June 2013 , on the first anniversary of the plan 's establishment , a variety of NGOs released a joint report about the NAP @-@ CHT . In this report , Don Hutchinson , vice president of the EFC , said that " continuing focused implementation of the Action Plan is essential to Canadians doing our part to put an end to this travesty . " Michael Maidment , director of federal government relations for The Salvation Army , wrote that the plan was important and sends a message to traffickers about the government 's commitment to end human trafficking . Andrea Burkhart , on behalf of ACT Alberta , wrote that victim support funding needed to increase . <unk> <unk> , president of the AAMS , criticized the NAP @-@ CHT for ignoring the country 's " crucial lack of research and data , " writing that " we need sustained research on the nature of human trafficking within and involving Canada . " Nonetheless , she said that her organization was pleased to have been consulted in the development of the plan . 
 That July , Stefan <unk> , a World Vision Canada Senior Policy Advisor for Child Protection , said that World Vision was pleased with the establishment of the NAP @-@ CHT and with Canadian politicians ' level of interest in the plan . He said that " there has been progress in combating human trafficking " as a result of the NAP @-@ CHT , but he criticized the country for not doing more with the new information that the plan has exposed , saying that " we haven 't seen the number of convictions we wanted to see . " <unk> said that the RCMP should collaborate more with law enforcement agencies in Southeast Asia to address the issue of Canadians participating in sex tourism there . 
 In September , Jennifer Lucking of Walk With Me encouraged Canadians to write to their members of parliament to make sure that the promises outlined in the plan come to fruition . In preparation for 2013 Walk for Freedom , Invidiata said she was glad that the NAP @-@ CHT had come into existence , but that the related funds should be released in a different way . 
 = Emile Heskey = 
 Emile William Ivanhoe Heskey ( born 11 January 1978 ) is an English professional footballer who last played as a striker for Championship club Bolton Wanderers . Before joining the club , he made more than 500 appearances in the Football League and Premier League over an 18 @-@ year career , and represented England in international football . He also had a spell for Australian A @-@ League side Newcastle Jets . 
 Born in Leicester , Heskey started his career with Leicester City after progressing through their youth system , making his first team debut in 1995 . After winning the League Cup in 1997 and 2000 he made an £ 11 million move to Liverpool in 2000 , which , at the time , was the record transfer fee paid by the club . At Liverpool , he won multiple honours , including the FA Cup in 2001 . He moved to Birmingham City in 2004 and after their relegation from the FA Premier League signed for Wigan Athletic for a club record £ 5 @.@ 5 million fee in 2006 . He signed for Aston Villa in 2009 and was released in 2012 before signing for Australian A @-@ League side Newcastle Jets . After two years , he returned to England , signing for Championship club Bolton Wanderers . 
 Heskey was an England international at under @-@ 16 , under @-@ 18 , under @-@ 21 , B and senior levels . He made his England debut against Hungary in a 1 – 1 draw in 1999 . He lost his place in the squad after UEFA Euro 2004 , during which he failed to shine and was the subject of much criticism . After a long lay @-@ off from international duty , Heskey was recalled to the England squad for UEFA Euro 2008 qualifiers in September 2007 . He retired from international football following the 2010 FIFA World Cup , having attained 62 caps and scored 7 goals for his country . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Leicester City = = = 
 Heskey was born in Leicester , Leicestershire to a family of Antiguan descent , and his father , Tyrone Heskey , ran the security of nightclubs in Leicester . He was a keen footballer in his childhood and played for <unk> Groby Juniors , a local youth team in Leicester . He stood out amongst his peers and at the age of nine he accepted a place at Leicester City 's football academy . Progressing through their youth system , he made his first team debut at the age of 17 while still a first @-@ year trainee in an FA Premier League match against Queens Park Rangers on 8 March 1995 . Leicester were relegated to the First Division following the end of the 1994 – 95 season and he signed his first professional contract with the club on 3 October 1995 . He became a first team regular in the 1995 – 96 season , making 30 appearances for the club , helping them earn promotion back to the FA Premier League . During this season , Heskey scored his first goal as a professional footballer , which came in a 1 – 0 victory over Norwich City , in a season he managed to score seven goals . 
 During the 1996 – 97 season , his first in the Premier League , Heskey scored 10 goals in 35 appearances , and scored the equaliser in the 1997 League Cup Final against Middlesbrough , which Leicester won in a replay . The following season , 1997 – 98 , saw interest from Leeds United and Tottenham Hotspur for Heskey , as he again managed to score 10 Premier League goals , which made him Leicester 's top scorer that season . However , the 1998 – 99 season saw Heskey score only six top @-@ flight goals , and he was criticised for not scoring enough goals and going to ground too easily . During this season however , he forged an effective strike partnership with Tony Cottee , who benefited from Heskey 's unselfish style of play , which manager Martin O 'Neill claimed kept the club in the Premier League . He went on to win the League Cup again in 2000 with a 2 – 1 win against Tranmere Rovers in the Final . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Heskey joined Liverpool on 10 March 2000 in a long @-@ anticipated £ 11 million move , which , at the time , set the record transfer fee for the Merseyside club . Liverpool manager Gérard Houllier looked forward to working with him , but stated that " at his age he is not the finished product " . The press saw the move as expensive and risky as Heskey was relatively inexperienced and was not a prolific goalscorer . However , he was held in high regard by both the England under @-@ 21 manager , Peter Taylor , and England and Liverpool teammate Michael Owen . Veteran Liverpool striker Ian Rush approved of the signing , noting that Heskey would " give Liverpool a different dimension " , bringing strength to the Liverpool strikeforce and complementing Owen and Robbie Fowler 's pacey play . Heskey made his debut in an FA Premier League clash with Sunderland on 11 March 2000 and scored his first goal in a 3 – 0 victory over Coventry City on 1 April . He finished the 1999 – 2000 season with 12 appearances and three goals for Liverpool . He featured in the 2001 FA Cup Final on 12 May 2001 , starting ahead of Fowler , which Liverpool won 2 – 1 against Arsenal . During the 2000 – 01 season Heskey scored 22 goals for Liverpool as the club won the FA Cup , League Cup and UEFA Cup treble . He also scored Liverpool 's second goal when they beat Bayern Munich 3 – 2 in the 2001 UEFA Super Cup . 
 Heskey was linked with a £ 12 million move to Tottenham in December 2002 , but Houllier insisted he was a part of his long @-@ term plans and he remained at Liverpool . The same year , Heskey made a six @-@ figure donation to aid a consortium led by Gary Lineker in their bid to buy @-@ out his former club , Leicester City , who were experiencing financial difficulties . The 2002 – 03 season saw him score nine goals in 51 appearances for Liverpool and received criticism for his low goal to game ratio , with Houllier claiming that his future at the club was safe . 
 He picked up a hamstring injury during a match against Newcastle United in January 2004 , which ruled him out of action for three weeks . In the 2003 – 04 season Heskey faced increasing competition from Milan Baroš for a place in the Liverpool starting line @-@ up . Nevertheless , he scored 12 goals and secured a place in the England squad for UEFA Euro 2004 . 
 = = = Birmingham City = = = 
 At the end of the 2003 – 04 season , Heskey signed for Birmingham City on a five @-@ year contract for an initial fee of £ 3 @.@ 5 million , which could have risen to £ 6 @.@ 25 million , and would thus have become Birmingham 's most expensive player . He suffered from an ankle injury during a pre @-@ season friendly against CA Osasuna , which put his Premier League debut against Portsmouth in doubt . He was eventually able to play against Portsmouth on 14 August , and the match ended as a 1 – 1 draw . His first goal came with a header in the eighth minute against Manchester City , which was enough to earn a 1 – 0 victory on 24 August . Despite Birmingham 's mediocre 2004 – 05 season , Heskey was named as the club 's Player 's Player of the Season , Fan 's Player of the Season , finished as top goalscorer with 11 goals and won most Man of the match awards . 
 He suffered from an ankle injury against Blackburn Rovers on 19 April 2006 , and after passing a late fitness test , played in a 0 – 0 draw against Everton on 22 April . Birmingham 's 2005 – 06 season , during which Heskey scored only four goals in 34 league appearances , culminated in relegation into the Championship . During this season , Heskey gave inconsistent performances and received abuse from Birmingham fans . Birmingham managing director Karren Brady stated that Birmingham 's relegation meant that the last £ 1 @.@ 5 million of the maximum £ 6 @.@ 25 million fee for signing Heskey from Liverpool would not be payable . 
 = = = Wigan Athletic = = = 
 Heskey was signed by Wigan Athletic for a fee of £ 5 @.@ 5 million on 7 July 2006 . He made his debut for Wigan against Newcastle United on 19 August 2006 , which his new club lost 2 – 1 . On his 500th league appearance , Heskey scored his first goal for Wigan in a 1 – 0 Premier League victory over Reading on 26 August . He scored eight goals in 36 appearances during the 2006 – 07 season , as Wigan avoided relegation on goal difference over Sheffield United , against whom Heskey played well for Wigan on 13 May 2007 , in a game he nearly scored a bicycle kick . He suffered a suspected broken metatarsal in September 2007 , and made his return for Wigan in a 2 – 0 defeat to Arsenal in November . He picked up an ankle injury during Wigan 's 5 – 3 victory against Blackburn in December 2007 . On 14 April 2008 , Heskey scored a 90th minute equalising goal against Chelsea , which damaged their hopes of winning the Premier League . He went on to score Wigan 's equaliser against Tottenham in the following game to give them a 1 – 1 draw , which proved to be his last goal of the 2007 – 08 season , which he finished with four goals in 30 appearances . 
 His first goal of the 2008 – 09 season came in Wigan 's fourth game , a 5 – 0 victory against Hull City at the KC Stadium . He hinted in October 2008 that he would be interested in leaving Wigan to play in the Champions League , with former club Liverpool believed to be interested in signing him in the January transfer window . However , Wigan manager Steve Bruce hoped to persuade him to sign a new contract at the club . Heskey commented on reports of interest from Liverpool by saying " It would be lovely . We 'll see how it goes . " He scored his 100th goal in the Premier League against Portsmouth on 1 November 2008 , which secured a 2 – 1 victory for Wigan . Dave Whelan , the Wigan chairman , hinted that Heskey could be transferred by Wigan in January 2009 , as a fee would be received , whereas he would move on for free in the summer , which came after he had stalled on talks over a new contract . However , Bruce said he would only accept an offer for Heskey if it was " outrageous " . He later said he was confident of keeping Heskey at the club . Heskey picked up a hamstring injury during a match against Bolton Wanderers in December 2008 , which resulted in him missing an FA Cup third round tie against Tottenham . He later said he would stay at Wigan and see out his contract until the summer of 2009 . 
 = = = Aston Villa = = = 
 Heskey signed for Aston Villa for a fee of £ 3 @.@ 5 million on a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract on 23 January 2009 . He made his debut against Portsmouth on 27 January 2009 and scored in this game with a strike from 20 yards ; the first time he has scored on his debut for any club for which he has played . He scored one more goal before the end of the season , with the opening goal in a 1 – 1 draw with West Ham United . He finished the season with 14 appearances and two goals for Villa . 
 He suffered from concussion after minutes into a Peace Cup pre @-@ season friendly game against Málaga CF in July 2009 . Heskey was reported to have said he was considering leaving Villa during the January 2010 transfer window , to help ensure he would be chosen for the England team at the 2010 FIFA World Cup , to which manager Martin O 'Neill responded by saying " There are players at this club with England ambitions . I wouldn 't be overly concerned about all that yet . " However , Heskey later denied he was seeking to leave Villa . O 'Neill told him to " build up a head of steam " in February 2010 , saying he was concerned that Heskey 's injuries were denying him from producing his best form . Heskey finished the 2009 – 10 season with 42 appearances and five goals . 
 His first appearance of the 2010 – 11 season came after starting in a 1 – 1 draw at Rapid Vienna in the Europa League play @-@ off first leg . Under Gérard Houllier , who previously managed Heskey at Liverpool , the striker enjoyed a successful start to the 2010 – 11 campaign including winning goals in the local derbies with Wolverhampton Wanderers and West Bromwich Albion . 
 On 7 May 2011 in Aston Villa 's home game against Wigan , Heskey barged into referee Mike Jones and continued to argue with him because he did not award a free kick for an alleged elbow by <unk> Alcaraz . Heskey received a yellow card for his behaviour and had to be restrained by team @-@ mates such as Brad Friedel and captain Stiliyan Petrov . He played for the remainder of the half , but had to be restrained again in the tunnel at the interval . Caretaker manager Gary McAllister chose to substitute him for Marc Albrighton at half @-@ time , and Heskey was not allowed to remain at the stadium for the rest of the game . Despite his outburst , Heskey received no punishment from either Villa or The Football Association . Teammate Luke Young later said that Heskey was " lucky he didn 't get sent off " . 
 Heskey remained at Villa Park for one more year , during which he scored just once , in an August 2011 win over Blackburn , before he was released in May 2012 after being told he would not be offered a new contract . 
 = = = Newcastle Jets = = = 
 Heskey signed for Australian A @-@ League side Newcastle Jets on 21 September 2012 as their marquee player for the 2012 – 13 season . He made his debut in the Jets ' 2 – 0 home defeat to Adelaide United , in which he was substituted in the 72nd minute for James <unk> . Heskey scored his first A @-@ League goal in a 3 – 2 away win against Sydney FC on 13 October 2012 . In five starts , Heskey put his goal tally up to five , with his goal against Sydney FC , followed by one goal against F3 Derby rivals the Central Coast Mariners , two goals against Melbourne Victory on 26 October and one goal against the Western Sydney Wanderers , which took him to joint top scorer of the league . The match against Melbourne featured " Heskey Cam " , which allowed the viewer to track Heskey 's movements with one camera throughout the match . Having finished the 2012 – 13 season with nine goals in 23 appearances and earning a nomination for the Jets ' Player of the Year award , Heskey signed a new contract for the 2013 – 14 season in April 2013 . After scoring once in 19 appearances in the 2013 – 14 season , Heskey left the Jets to pursue a move to an English club . 
 = = = Bolton Wanderers = = = 
 After a successful trial Heskey signed for Championship club Bolton Wanderers on a short @-@ term contract on 24 December 2014 . He made his debut two days later as a half @-@ time substitute for Robert Hall with Bolton 1 – 0 down at home to Blackburn , but after scoring the equalising goal in the 59th minute Bolton went on to win the match 2 – 1 . His goal was set up by another 36 @-@ year @-@ old forward who the club had re @-@ signed that month , Eiður Guðjohnsen who had played for them 14 years earlier . Heskey was released by Bolton when his contract expired at the end of the 2015 – 16 season . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Youth level = = = 
 Heskey gained his first international recognition after playing for the England under @-@ 16 team , making four appearances and appearing at the 1994 UEFA European Under @-@ 16 Championship . He played alongside Michael Owen in the under @-@ 18 team which finished third in the European Championships in France , and made eight appearances and scored five goals for the team . Heskey went on to gain recognition with the under @-@ 21 team , making his debut after starting in a 0 – 0 draw with Poland on 8 October 1996 ; a year later on 30 May 1997 , he scored against the same side in a 1 – 1 stalemate . After making his final appearance in a 3 – 0 victory over Yugoslavia in a 2000 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Championship qualification play @-@ off on 29 March 2000 , he finished his under @-@ 21 career with 17 caps , in which he scored six goals . He was capped once by the England B team , against Chile on 10 February 1998 , in which he scored a 90th @-@ minute goal in a 2 – 1 defeat . 
 = = = Senior level = = = 
 Heskey was given his first call @-@ up to the senior England team for a friendly against the Czech Republic on 18 November 1998 , but did not play . He made his debut in a friendly against Hungary in Budapest in a 1 – 1 draw on 28 April 1999 and made his first start against Argentina at Wembley Stadium on 23 February 2000 . That showing ensured he was in the England squad for the UEFA Euro 2000 tournament . However , his two substitute performances in the tournament could not help England , as the team were eliminated in the group stage . 
 = = = = 2002 FIFA World Cup = = = = 
 Heskey was selected in the squad for the 2002 FIFA World Cup in South Korea and Japan , and was used as a makeshift option to play in England 's left @-@ wing role in the game against Sweden , but did not perform well out of his regular position . He scored against Denmark in England 's 3 – 0 victory , which saw England reach the quarter @-@ finals of the tournament . He featured in this game , where England were beaten 2 – 1 by the eventual champions Brazil . He and teammate Ashley Cole received abuse from some Slovakia supporters when England played them in a friendly in October 2002 , which led to UEFA opening an investigation into the allegations . Slovakia were eventually forced to play their next home international behind closed doors . 
 = = = = UEFA Euro 2004 = = = = 
 Heskey 's place in the England squad had been placed under scrutiny in 2003 with the emergence of Wayne Rooney into the England squad . However , despite being criticised for his lack of international goals , he continued to be an integral part of the international squad and took over the captaincy from Michael Owen after he was substituted when England beat Serbia and Montenegro 2 – 1 in his hometown of Leicester in June 2003 . Heskey was named in the England squad for UEFA Euro 2004 , but failed to perform well , and was the subject of much criticism . He came on as a substitute while England were leading 1 – 0 against France and fouled Claude Makélélé on the edge of the penalty area , giving away a direct free kick from which France equalised . England eventually lost 2 – 1 . 
 = = = = 2006 FIFA World Cup qualification = = = = 
 Heskey was recalled into the England squad for the 2006 FIFA World Cup qualifiers against Northern Ireland and Azerbaijan in 2005 , after having been dropped following the game against Ukraine in August 2004 . Since the emergence of Peter Crouch in the England squad , the possibility of a recall receded further . 
 = = = = UEFA Euro 2008 qualification = = = = 
 Heskey 's international appearances under manager Steve McClaren were limited , although he was recalled to the England squad in September 2007 for the UEFA Euro 2008 qualifiers as cover for the injured Rooney against Israel and Russia , on the recommendation of Michael Owen , after stating that he wanted to play alongside Heskey . He started the game against Israel and played an important role in the England attack , and by featuring he became the first England player to be capped for England whilst playing for Wigan Athletic . Heskey also started the next match against Russia , fighting off competition from Peter Crouch for a place in the team , during which he created an assist for Owen 's second goal . He was widely praised for his performances in the two matches , with former England international Alan Shearer commenting , " Never in a million years did I expect to be discussing whether Emile Heskey should keep his place ahead of Wayne Rooney but the Wigan striker was outstanding over both games . " 
 = = = = 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification = = = = 
 Heskey was called into manager Fabio Capello 's first squad against Switzerland , but had to withdraw due to an injury . He was called into the squad for a friendly against the Czech Republic in August 2008 and came on as a 46th @-@ minute substitute , in a match that finished 2 – 2 . He featured in the following 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification victories against Andorra and Croatia . Heskey was alleged to have been racially abused during the match against Croatia , with monkey chants being heard from sections of the Croatia support , after which FIFA opened an investigation , and eventually fined the Croatian Football Federation £ 15 @,@ 000 for the incident . He played his 50th game for England in the 2010 World Cup qualifier against Belarus on 15 October 2008 , after which he was credited as helping Wayne Rooney 's improved form in international matches , with the two forming an effective strike partnership and keeping Owen out of the side . He started in a friendly against Spain in February 2009 , which drew an angry reaction by Villa manager Martin O 'Neill , who wanted to know why Capello played Heskey after suffering from an injury . Heskey scored his first goal for England in six years against Slovakia , scoring England 's first in a 4 – 0 victory at Wembley <unk> picked up a hamstring injury during this game , which forced him into withdrawing from the squad . He scored in a 4 – 0 victory over Kazakhstan in a 2010 World Cup qualifier in June 2009 , which was his first competitive goal for England in seven years . 
 = = = = 2010 FIFA World Cup = = = = 
 Heskey was named in England 's preliminary 30 @-@ man squad for the 2010 World Cup on 11 May 2010 and was eventually chosen for the final 23 @-@ man squad on 1 June . Heskey injured England captain Rio Ferdinand during a training session on 4 June , which ruled Ferdinand out of the tournament . He started in England 's opening game , a 1 – 1 draw with the United States and assisted Steven Gerrard 's goal . 
 Heskey retired from international football on 15 July 2010 , at the age of 32 , having scored seven goals in 62 appearances for England . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Heskey plays as a forward with pace , being a powerful <unk> with physical strength and is hard working . His play has been likened to " a blunt instrument with which to bludgeon defences " . His main contributions to the team lie in the way he holds the ball up and draws defenders out , leaving space behind him for another player to score . He has been credited as being an unselfish player who allows other forwards to benefit . He is not a prolific goalscorer but is able to provide a significant number of assists . He has been quoted as saying " Forwards are judged on their goalscoring . But I like to think I bring a lot more to the game and I do get pleasure from assisting " . He impressed the England staff with his versatility , as he can also play down the left wing . However , he has been criticised by the media for his lack of goals ; lapses in his goalscoring have been described as being " hardly uncommon " . In 2008 it was stated that " It is only the perception of his talents that changes " after Heskey stated he was no better or worse than before . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Heskey was the partner of <unk> Pinsent but he left her in 2004 and is now engaged to Chantelle Tagoe . He started seeing Tagoe secretly in 2002 , who worked part @-@ time as a waitress at a lap @-@ dancing bar in Liverpool , while still in a relationship with Pinsent . Following the revelation of his two @-@ year affair with Tagoe , Pinsent broke up with Heskey . He is the father of five children , three of them with former partner Pinsent and two with Tagoe . His fiancée Tagoe was held at knifepoint at their home in Hale , Greater Manchester in July 2008 , while he was at a training session . The thieves burgled the house and stole Heskey 's BMW but neither Tagoe , nor their two children who were in the house , were hurt . Following this , he said Tagoe was " very , very distressed " by the incident . In 2009 , he was rated as owning a personal fortune of £ 12 million . Heskey and other members of the England team supported the Shoe Aid for Africa campaign in 2009 , which was aimed at helping underprivileged children in Africa . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of match played 7 May 2016 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 England score listed first , score column indicates score after each Heskey goal . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Leicester City 
 Football League First Division play @-@ offs : 1995 – 96 
 Football League Cup : 1996 – 97 , 1999 – 2000 
 Liverpool 
 FA Cup : 2000 – 01 
 Football League Cup : 2000 – 01 , 2002 – 03 
 FA Charity Shield : 2001 
 UEFA Cup : 2000 – 01 
 UEFA Super Cup : 2001 
 = And Their Name Was Treason = 
 And Their Name Was Treason is the debut studio album by American rock band A Day to Remember , released on May 10 , 2005 through Indianola Records . It followed their self @-@ released EP , which was produced the previous year . The album was the band 's only release under Indianola ; its success led the group sign to Victory Records . Several songs on the album were written during the band members ' teenage years . Recorded in the producer 's bedroom , the album contains audio excerpts from several films . The band toured in the United States to help promote the album . The album has since sold over 10 @,@ 000 copies . A re @-@ recorded version of the album , titled Old Record , was released in October 2008 by Victory . The band members later admitted that they were forced to do the re @-@ recording at the request of label owner Tony Brummel . The reissue charted at number 16 on the Heatseekers Album Chart in the U.S. 
 = = Background = = 
 A Day to Remember formed when guitarist Tom Denney asked Jeremy McKinnon if he would like to join the band as a vocalist . The pair hung out with drummer Bobby Scruggs , who later joined the band . During this period , both Denney and Scruggs were already in a band ; Denney was in 2 Days 2 Late , while McKinnon played in All for Nothing . The trio wrote a song which McKinnon said " was better than everything our other bands had come up with " . Shortly afterwards the trio decided to form a band which was called End of An Era in its first week of existence . The name was inspired by a movie listing in a TV guide found in Denney 's home . One day at rehearsal , a friend of Scruggs showed up with his girlfriend , who came up with the band 's name A Day to Remember . 
 Scruggs ' friend stayed in the band for a short period . He was fired after several instances of walking off stage mid @-@ performance . According to Denney , the group 's original bassist and rhythm guitarist " didn 't work out " . They were subsequently replaced by guitarist Neil Westfall and bassist Joshua Woodard . At the time , Westfall was also in 2 Days 2 Late , while Woodard was a fan of the band . A Day to Remember practiced in McKinnon 's garage , who was living with his parents at the time . The band released an independent EP which helped them secure a recording contract . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 According to McKinnon , And Their Name Was Treason was recorded " probably within 3 days " , in Andrew Wade 's bedroom at his parents house ( credited in the album booklet as The Wade Studio ) . The members later said they had " no idea " what were they doing when they were recording the album . The album features samples from various films throughout ; " Intro " features a sample from the film Donnie Darko , " 1958 " features a sample from the film The <unk> Saints and " Sound the Alarm " features audio from Shaun of the Dead . Speaking about the lyrical themes on the record , guitarist Tom Denney said that they were " all experiences that [ singer ] Jeremy has had , its all based on life " . 
 A few of the songs were written by the band when they were teenagers , such as " 1958 " , " Heartless " , and " You Should Have Killed Me When You Had the Chance " , the latter being one of the first songs that the band ever wrote . " 1958 " was written about a temporary drummer , who threatened to go McKinnon 's parents house with a baseball bat ; the numbers " 1958 " being the last four digits of his phone number . Denney added that the song " talks about family and us sticking together no matter what . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Initial release and touring = = = 
 Record label Indianola were introduced to the band by their PureVolume account , which was shown to the label by a mutual friend of the band . On February 9 , 2005 , the band got signed to Indianola , which McKinnon later said that the band thought " was the biggest shit in the world " . On the same day , And Their Name Was Treason was announced for release later that year . Samples of three tracks , " 1958 " , " Casablanca <unk> Anyways " , and " If Looks Could Kill " , were posted on the website of The Wade Studio prior to release . Since its release on May 10 , 2005 , And Their Name Was Treason sold over 10 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. with little advertising and no media exposure . The album 's success helped the band sign to Victory for their following album . The group toured in the U.S. in the summer of 2005 to promote the record , along with other bands such as Caldwell and Orion . The tour continued throughout October and November with <unk> and Blessed by a Broken Heart as supporting acts . The group 's travel vehicles were financed by McKinnon 's parents . 
 Shortly before the beginning of one tour , Scruggs told the band he wasn 't going , so Woodard and Westfall recruited Alex Shelnutt . Upon being asked , Shelnutt 's response was " Ask my mom " , as he was 15 at the time . " A Second <unk> " had a music video , directed by Reel Players . It was included on the promotional Welcome to Indianola Records album . The band left Indianola as they thought the label would not be able to take them " to the next level " , as McKinnon commented . 
 = = = Reissue – Old Record = = = 
 In 2008 , both Old Record and the band 's newest release at that time , Homesick ( 2009 ) , were announced . The artwork for Old Record was released a month prior , and then the track list was posted online before the album 's release on October 28 , 2008 , through Victory . The re @-@ release features different cover art , a rearranged track listing and re @-@ recorded instrumentation . Old Record charted at number 16 on the Top Heatseekers Albums chart in the U.S. The re @-@ release came about due to the album 's later unavailability in stores and as McKinnon commented , the band wanted " people to be able to get it " . " Your Way with Words Is Through Silence " was streamed as part of <unk> 's various artists compilation Screaming to Stop Sex Slavery in July 2009 . 
 On December 6 , 2010 , two colored vinyl editions of Old Record were released . In an interview with USA Today in 2011 , McKinnon said that the band " had a bunch of people tell us we 'd sold out — and that was our first album " when they had released And Their Name Was Treason . On July 2 , 2013 , Victory announced that Old Record was to be reissued again on vinyl , in 3 different colors , from July 9 : standard black , and limited edition copies of both pink and clear with black smoke . In an October 2013 interview , McKinnon revealed the band had to re @-@ record the whole album in a couple of days due to pressure from Victory @-@ owner Tony Brummel . McKinnon was " absolutely [ ... ] ashamed " it was released as he thought the band had " butchered it . Because it was two days [ recording ] . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chris H. of AbsolutePunk said the band has made " a big impression " with its debut album and called it " the heaviest " release in their catalogue . According to him , " 1958 " was " the heaviest song on the album " , while " Heartless " was nearly a " perfect way to start the album " with its fast guitars and steady drums pace . Allmusic 's Eduardo Rivadavia mentioned that the album was full of " bite @-@ sized songs " which are combination of " extremely melodic chorus sections " and " depths @-@ of @-@ hell Cookie Monster growling " . Rivadavia went on to say the album is not " better or worse than a thousand emocore albums released during a 12 @-@ month span " . Writing for Scene Point Blank , Kevin Fitzpatrick said the album was " a very frustrating listen " featuring " eighth grade lovesick lyrics " . Although Fitzpatrick said that the guitar work on the album was " passable " , he panned Bobby Scruggs ' drumming for being " sloppy " at times . 
 <unk> writer Björn , mentioned that the band did the album " really well and mosh [ ed ] like crazy " , despite adding that the growls " suffered , grieved [ and were ] sometimes a little desperate " . Fake Train reviewer Ken Hawk said the album was maybe " one of the best fusions of metallic hardcore and melodic punk @-@ rock " , continuing with how the band were able to " spring back @-@ and @-@ forth between booming <unk> mosh breakdowns , melodic guitar thrashing , and driving upbeat rock … flawlessly " in an easy manner . Scene It All 's Anson said the band " finally succeeded in rightfully earning that title " of " <unk> [ ing ] the gap between hardcore and emo " . McKinnon 's voice was praised as using " his voice extremely well [ ... ] He manages to give the lowest screams and yet still can hit the highest notes when it comes to singing . A feat , most singers can 't manage . " 
 Reviewing the album 's reissue for AbsolutePunk , Blake Solomon wrote that Old Record wasn 't " anything to go nuts over " if the listener already owned the original release . He felt that the lyrics were " a bit more honest " compared to its follow @-@ up For Those Who Have Heart ( 2007 ) . Rock Sound added " 1958 " to their unnumbered list of 50 Songs of Hate . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by A Day to Remember . 
 Old Record 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Altes Stadthaus , Berlin = 
 Altes Stadthaus ( " Old City Hall " ) is a former administrative building in Berlin , currently used by the Senate . It faces the Molkenmarkt and is bound by four roads ; Jüdenstraße , Klosterstraße , Parochialstraße , and Stralauer Straße . Designed by Ludwig Hoffmann , chief of construction for the city , it was built in 1902 – 11 at a cost of 7 million marks ( US $ 1 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 ) to supplement the Rotes Rathaus . 
 The building has five courtyards and features many sculptures , including 29 allegorical representations of civic virtues and of Greek deities which are mounted on the tower . A Georg Wrba sculpture of a bear , the symbol of Berlin , is located in the central <unk> ( Bear Hall ) . 
 Originally called the " Neues Stadthaus " ( New City House ) , it became the seat of the Council of Ministers of the GDR after World War II . The building next to it became the center of administration for East Berlin , and was also called " Neues Stadthaus " ; to avoid confusion , Neues Stadthaus became known as " Altes Stadthaus " ( Old city house ) . 
 During World War II , the Allied bombing campaign and fierce fighting in the Battle of Berlin caused severe damage ; the roof was almost completely destroyed as were the statues above the rear entrance , and there was substantial water damage . In the first phase of reconstruction in 1951 , the statue of the goddess of Fortuna was removed , and is assumed to have been smelted in 1962 . The remaining statues , urns , and other carvings on the exterior were removed in 1976 – 77 due to rain damage . It was completely refurbished in the 1990s and exterior restoration required replacement of some 180 sculptural elements , including the allegorical figures of the virtues , giant vases , window embrasures and one of the columns . The original mansard roof was reconstructed in 1998 – 99 . 
 = = Plans for second city hall = = 
 In the 1860s , the population of Berlin was growing rapidly with the influx of around 50 @,@ 000 people a year , creating a large administrative burden . When construction began on the Rotes Rathaus , the city had around half a million inhabitants , but this grew to 800 @,@ 000 by the time of its completion in 1869 . By the 1880s , the city had offices in ten additional buildings near the Rotes Rathaus and since it could not be extended , it was clear that a second administration building was required . 
 In 1893 , the executive committee of the Berlin city council proposed a site on the banks of the river Spree , roughly corresponding to the current location of the Berlin Finance Department and the offices of the Social Association of Germany . The proposal was rejected by the full city council because it would overshadow the city hall . Further proposals were put on hold for several years . After discussing many locations , in 1898 , chief of construction Ludwig Hoffmann became involved and the council agreed on Molkenmarkt . The 32 built @-@ up parcels of land on the site were bought up and cleared . 
 Based on his participation in the debate and his reputation , Hoffmann received the commission to design the new building . Without any kind of competitive bidding or restrictions , he was commissioned to design it with space for approximately 1 @,@ 000 employees . In 1900 , the prosperous city decided the building should feature a tower . Hoffmann 's design was accepted in 1901 , and demolition of the existing buildings began . The cornerstone was laid in 1902 . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Hoffmann created a monumental building with five courtyards to " once and for all incorporate the offices of the municipal administration which have no place in the city hall ; however , it should in addition include the hall for large @-@ scale public events which the city lacks , and also in its exterior be representative of the Berlin of today and thus be [ a ] magnificent building distinguished in its monumentality , " according to the author of a 1914 monograph to him . It is his most important Berlin work . 
 An imposing external feature of the building is the tower , approximately 80 metres ( 260 ft ) tall , which rises from a square base over the central bay facing Judenstraße . Inspired by those designed by Carl von <unk> for the French and German Cathedrals on the <unk> , it consists of a double set of cylinders with encircling columns , . This structure is surmounted by a dome on which a 3 @.@ 25 metres ( 10 @.@ 7 ft ) copper sculpture of the goddess Fortuna , by Ignatius Taschner , stands on a gilded globe . It was originally intended to show that Berlin " is taking an upward path in its development " . 
 The tower is also adorned with many sculptures , including vases and 29 representations of the civic virtues and Greek deities by Taschner , Josef Rauch , Georg Wrba and William <unk> . In the centre of the building is a barrel @-@ vaulted hall three stories high capable of accommodating 1 @,@ 500 people and decorated in Jugendstil style . The walls over the doorways are inscribed with moral sayings , and the room originally had a floor of red Verona marble , six ceremonial candelabra , and three bronze gates , all by Georg Wrba . In addition , the room contains a 400 kilograms ( 880 lb ) bronze bear , the symbol of Berlin , commissioned from Wrba by the city in 1911 , giving the hall its name , <unk> ( Bear Hall ) . Wrba placed the bear in a symbolic setting signifying the bases of European culture ; the height of the plinth on which it stands places the viewer at belly level creating a respectful distance , it stands in a triangle signifying the Trinity and in association with a Solomonic saying and depictions of Greco @-@ Roman deities . 
 The building has an irregular trapezoidal footprint corresponding to that of the group of buildings that formerly occupied the site presenting some difficulties in symmetry . It was also originally enclosed by other buildings , so Hoffmann 's design emphasizes its appearance from close by rather than from a distance . The facades , executed in grey <unk> , are articulated with reference to the principles of Palladian architecture and based on the Palazzo <unk> in Vicenza . A rusticated plinth comprising the first floor and half the height of the mezzanine is surmounted by columns and pilasters in Tuscan order comprising two and a half stories , above which is a mansard roof . The lack of alignment with the stories is an intentional variation from the model . The facades facing the Jüdenstraße , Klosterstraße , Parochialstraße and Stralauer Straße are 82 @.@ 63 metres ( 271 @.@ 1 ft ) , 126 @.@ 93 metres ( 416 @.@ 4 ft ) , 108 @.@ 31 metres ( 355 @.@ 3 ft ) and 94 @.@ 46 metres ( 309 @.@ 9 ft ) long , respectively . The main entrances are in the centre of projecting bays on the Jüdenstraße ( front ) and Klosterstraße ( rear ) facades , with the " Bear Hall " on the axis between them . The side wings forming the facades on the Parochialstraße and Stralauer Straße sides terminate in projecting bays at the ends of these two primary facades . Cross wings and an opening in the main axis between the vestibule on the rear , Klosterstraße side and the " Bear Hall " create five courtyards within the building . The vestibules at the main , Judenstraße entrance and the rear entrance on Klosterstraße are lined with the same stone as the exterior to create a sense that the grand public rooms were also part of the city outside ; in the latter , Hoffmann placed a large wall fountain also of Verona marble . 
 = = Opening = = 
 Construction lasted for nine and a half years , from April 1902 until October 1911 , with the tower construction alone taking three years ( 1908 – 11 ) . Different departments of the city administration moved in at different times with some , such as the police department , moving in as early as March 1908 . The building was formally opened by Mayor Martin Kirschner on October 29 , 1911 . 
 = = During the Weimar Republic and the Third Reich = = 
 Until the 1920s , there were no significant changes to the building . Neither World War I nor the November revolution of 1918 caused damage to it . In 1920 , the administrative burden was considerably increased by the incorporation of several outlying towns and villages into the city of Berlin in the Greater Berlin Act . As a result , some departments and units had to be housed outside the building . In 1929 , the Magistrat commissioned the city planning division to develop a concept for a new administrative building encompassing two city blocks that would also link the Stadthaus to the City Hall . This plan also included the existing main city library and the city savings bank . It would have been part of a <unk> plan to redevelop the area of the Molkenmarkt , including replacement of the old and substandard housing along Am <unk> , an alley leading to the Spree . These plans had to be abandoned in 1931 because of the political and economic situation of Berlin after World War I. 
 After the Nazis came to power in 1933 , the Magistrat revived the urban renewal plan as an appropriate contribution to the " program of national renewal " . However , the Ministry of Transportation was charged with developing a new canal that would require replacing the <unk> bridge and removing a number of buildings . A plan was developed to create an " administrative forum " around the Molkenmarkt , which would include a new centralized mint , the Fire Society Building that today is the Neues Stadthaus , and a residence for a City President but retain the Stadthaus flanked by two large new wings . This plan superseded the former housing concept . The <unk> block was demolished in 1936 and the Fire Society Building was completed in 1938 . By the outbreak of war in 1939 , the Mint and one other government building had also been completed . 
 In World War II the building suffered some damage during the Allied bombing campaign , but was later severely damaged during the Battle for Berlin towards the end of the war . The roof was almost completely destroyed by fire and there was substantial water damage . The statues above the rear entrance , on Klosterstraße , were also destroyed . Assessments estimated that 50 % of the building had suffered damage . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 Shortly after the official surrender of the Wehrmacht on May 8 , 1945 , the Soviet military administration , headed by Nikolai <unk> , looked for capable anti @-@ fascists to form a new public administration . On 19 May <unk> appointed a new 19 @-@ member Magistrat under Arthur Werner as acting Governing Mayor . However , both the Rotes Rathaus and the Stadthaus were so damaged that the Fire Society Building adjacent to the Administration Building became the new seat of the Magistrat , and became known as " Neues Stadthaus " . Since then , the former " new " building has been known as Altes Stadthaus , to distinguish it from that building . 
 The Department of Construction was developing schemes for the building as early as 1948 . The most urgent need was for a new roof . Two alternatives emerged : an accurate reconstruction of the mansard roof , or a flat pitched roof . Timber was in short supply , so a pitched roof requiring 214 square metres ( 2 @,@ 300 sq ft ) of timber was chosen , instead of a mansard roof requiring 930 square metres ( 10 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . Issues of landmark preservation played featured little in the decision and starting from 1948 the roof was partially replaced with a pitched roof . 
 By 1950 , 45 % of the necessary repairs had been made to Altes Stadthaus by a few simple expedients such as emergency roofing . In the immediate post @-@ war years , neither manpower , supplies , nor financing was available to undertake repairs on a larger scale . The reconstruction took place between 1950 and 1955 in five phases ; the first focused on building up the courtyard wing on the Stralauer Straße side while the second phase , completed in early 1952 , focused on the Stralauer Straße / Judenstraße wing and included construction of additional offices on the fourth floor and a 300 @-@ person dining hall with kitchen . However , for a number of reasons most significant of which was that the building was not the seat of government , the remaining three phases were not carried out . In addition , the reconstruction of Wilhelmine architecture was not a high priority , where as housing was and so funding for the restoration work was not included in the economic plan . 
 In effect , the building had become the " third city hall " ; it housed some government departments , such as planning and housing . Although the office space was fully occupied , the " Bear Hall " and the tower rooms remained unused except for some exhibits of plans by the City Construction Supervisor , Hans <unk> , and so were left unheated leading to damp and mould damage . The tower was eventually used by the Stasi . 
 In 1955 , after five years of reconstruction , the Rotes Rathaus was fully operational and departments were able to move back into it from both administration buildings and from other more remote locations . Early in the same year , it was announced that Altes Stadthaus was to be transferred from the Magistrat ( now of East Berlin , West Berlin having established the separate Berlin Senate ) to the Council of Ministers of the GDR , which had been established in 1949 , to house the significantly increased workforce . Altes Stadthaus was planned to be only an interim solution to this problem . Prime Minister Otto <unk> moved his offices into the building later that year , after renovation work to create appropriate accommodations that included furnishings for various official rooms , the planned expansion onto the fourth floor , upgrading of the stairways , ventilation equipment , and electrical work had been completed . Red carpets were laid in hallways and stair landings , and eventually paper shredders were placed in all offices . Between 1958 – 61 , the building was extensively altered . The inner courtyard was covered and the " Bear Hall " was converted into the chamber of the Council of Ministers . The hall capacity was reduced from 1 @,@ 500 to 300 people , the windows and arcades on the long sides were closed off , wood wall moldings and a suspended ceiling installed to create a modern room within the space . The candelabra , bronze door grilles , and marble flooring were removed . In 1959 , the bear statue was also removed and installed in the newly opened East Berlin zoo in Friedrichsfelde . A security zone was created at the front of the building . The public entrance to what was now the " Building of the Council of Ministers " was now on Klosterstraße . The main entrance facing Jüdenstraße , over which the GDR national emblem , the hammer and compass , was installed in place of the arms of the City of Berlin , was only opened on special occasions . The alterations demonstrated the negative opinion in the GDR of Wilhelmine architecture , and cost 2 million marks . 
 The statue of the goddess Fortuna on the dome was removed in the first phase of reconstruction in 1951 and replaced by a 13 metres ( 43 ft ) antenna for broadcast transmissions . After the Television Tower came into service in 1969 , this was in turn replaced by a flagpole flying the national flag . The statue was stored inside the dome until the 1960s but is last mentioned in the records in 1962 and is assumed to have been melted down . The remaining statues , urns , and other carvings on the exterior of the building remained in place until 1976 / 77 , when they were also removed and placed in storage in Friedrichsfelde and other locations , as they had been seriously damaged by rain and frost . 
 In 1974 – 75 , the reception and meeting rooms were further upgraded with extensive use of imported goods from the West . However , over time , Altes Stadthaus became less important to the GDR government . Important events , celebrations and ceremonies took place in the Rotes Rathaus , the Palace of the Republic or the State Council Building . The historical high point in the use of the building under the GDR came in its final phase , when the only freely elected government of East Germany , under Lothar de <unk> relocated there . The provisions of the agreement on German reunification were therefore negotiated there . 
 = = Complete refurbishment in the 1990s = = 
 The GDR emblem was removed from over the main entrance in 1990 , the year of reunification , leaving a dark patch . Following reunification , the Berlin offices of the German Chancellery and the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs moved into the building . In January 1993 , after a legal decision , the Federal Government returned the building to the Federal State of Berlin , which wished to use it for its original purpose of city administration . However , it first urgently required refurbishment ; under the GDR , upkeep had been neglected and the plumbing facilities , for example , dated in part to the 1920s . Access also needed to be provided for the handicapped . 
 Renovation began in 1994 under the direction of architect Gerhard Spangenberg , with the objective of returning the building so far as possible to its original condition while not ignoring the events of the more recent past . The first priority was the removal of iron girders , particle board , and <unk> . Relics of the GDR period deemed worthy of preservation were placed either in the Museum of German History in the former Prussian arsenal or in the House of History in Bonn . The original murals and reliefs , painted over and enclosed during the GDR period , were then restored . The fountain in the Klosterstraße vestibule was accurately recreated . Four bronze bear sculptures by Ignatius Taschner were returned from the Märkisches Museum and reinstalled on replacement stone columns in the Judenstraße vestibule . Exterior restoration of the building required either restoration or replacement with replicas of some 180 sculptural elements from the tower , including the allegorical figures of the virtues , giant vases , window embrasures , and one of the columns , which had bomb damage and had merely been patched . In addition , the original mansard roof was reconstructed in 1998 / 99 on the west , main facade facing Jüdenstraße . The technical facilities were also updated , including ventilation equipment , elevators , lighting , and plumbing . It proved impossible to use the tower for offices because it lacked the second exit required by safety regulations . This was later rectified by the addition of office space in the roof cavity . 
 A replacement 300 kilograms ( 660 lb ) statue of Fortuna was created by restoration expert Bernd @-@ Michael <unk> based on a model made by Joost van der Velden from a miniature . On September 2 , 2004 , it was hoisted to the top of the dome using a tower crane . The replacement of the Fortuna statue was financed by entrepreneur and art patron Peter <unk> at a cost of € 125 @,@ 000 . The restoration of the statues to the tower was delayed by a dispute with one of the contracted companies , which had gone bankrupt . 
 The renovation also included restoration of the " Bear Hall " , which reopened on June 21 , 1999 . After the zoo in Friedrichsfelde had requested and received a copy at a cost of 30 @,@ 000 marks , the bronze bear was transported back to the building in June 2001 . A replica plinth had been constructed for it . 
 The restoration of the building , estimated in 2001 to cost 150 million marks , was largely paid for by the federal and Berlin state governments . Some financing was contributed by British mobile phone company Vodafone , which paid 100 @,@ 000 marks for a giant red advertising banner that concealed the scaffolding around the tower for a year . 
 The building is again the location of the Berlin Senate Department of Internal Affairs , which moved in during 1997 . The registry office for the Borough of Mitte was also located in the building for a while , but has exchanged quarters with the Department of Historic Monuments . The parliament of the borough of Mitte also met there . In 2008 , plans were announced for the Constitutional Protection Division of the State Department of Internal Affairs to also move to the building , after which all divisions of the department would be housed there . As of 2012 , these plans are still being considered in the city council . 
 = Dave Bancroft = 
 David James Bancroft ( April 20 , 1891 – October 9 , 1972 ) was an American baseball shortstop and manager . Nicknamed " Beauty " for his penchant for calling good pitches " beauties " , he played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) from 1915 to 1930 , for the Philadelphia Phillies , New York Giants , Boston Braves , and Brooklyn Robins . 
 Born in Sioux City , Iowa , Bancroft played in minor league baseball from 1909 through 1914 , at which point he was bought by the Phillies . The Giants traded for Bancroft during the 1920 season . After playing for the Giants through the 1923 season , he became player @-@ manager of the Braves , serving in that role for four years . After he was fired by the Braves , Bancroft played two seasons for the Robins and ended his playing career with the Giants the next season . He coached with the Giants , then managed in the minor leagues and the All @-@ American Girls Professional Baseball League . 
 Bancroft was part of the Giants ' World Series championship teams in 1921 and 1922 . He was also a part of the National League pennant @-@ winning teams of 1915 and 1923 . Considered an excellent defensive shortstop and a smart ball player , Bancroft was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee in 1971 . However , his election was not without controversy , as the Veterans Committee included former teammates of Bancroft , resulting in charges of cronyism against the Veterans Committee . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bancroft was born in Sioux City , Iowa , the youngest of three children of Ella ( née Gearhart ) and Frank Bancroft . Frank worked as a news vendor on the Milwaukee Railroad . Bancroft attended Hopkins Grade School and Sioux City High School . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In the summer after his junior year of high school , at the age of 18 , Bancroft began his professional career in 1909 with the Duluth White Sox of the Class @-@ D Minnesota – Wisconsin League . Bancroft did not have immediate success , registering a .210 batting average and .917 fielding percentage in 111 games , but he developed a positive reputation in the league . The Superior Blues acquired Bancroft at midseason , and he remained there through the 1911 season . Bancroft finished the 1911 season with a .273 batting average and 41 stolen bases , and the Blues won the league championship . 
 The Portland Beavers of the Class @-@ AA Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) drafted Bancroft from Superior for the 1912 season . He struggled in 1912 , batting .207 , and was demoted to the Portland Colts of the Class @-@ B Northwestern League in 1913 . After batting .244 for the Colts , he was promoted back to the Beavers in 1914 , where he batted .271 and drew comparisons to former Beavers star shortstop Roger Peckinpaugh as the team won the PCL championship . While with the Beavers , Bancroft earned the nickname " Beauty " , for his habit of referring to pitches as " beauties " while he batted . 
 = = = Major League Baseball = = = 
 = = = = Philadelphia Phillies = = = = 
 Before the 1915 season , the Philadelphia Phillies purchased Bancroft from Portland for $ 5 @,@ 000 ( $ 116 @,@ 957 in current dollar terms ) . Portland 's manager was quoted as saying he did not expect Bancroft would last with the Phillies . In his rookie season , Bancroft finished second in the National League ( NL ) to teammate <unk> Cravath in walks ( 77 ) , third in runs scored ( 85 ) , and tied Fred <unk> for sixth in home runs ( 7 ) . For his ability to hit with power from both sides of the plate , The Pittsburgh Press declared he was developing into " a second Honus Wagner " . The Phillies won their first NL pennant in 1915 , but lost the 1915 World Series to the Boston Red Sox . Bancroft 's offense contributed to the Phillies ' victory in Game 1 , as he had an infield hit leading to the Phillies ' winning run . Though the Phillies batted .182 as a team in the series , Bancroft batted .294 . 
 Bancroft batted third in the Phillies ' lineup in 1916 . However , he slumped to a .212 batting average that season , the lowest of his career . Despite his offensive struggles , he gained recognition for his fielding skills , and an injury to Bancroft late in the season contributed to the Phillies ' poor play late in the season . 
 Bancroft feuded with Cravath , who became the Phillies ' manager in 1919 . Before the 1919 season , Bancroft requested a trade to the Cincinnati Reds , but the trade request was not granted . John McGraw , manager of the New York Giants , coveted Bancroft due to his intelligent and hard @-@ nosed style of playing . Upon McGraw 's urging , the Giants traded Art Fletcher , Bill Hubbell and $ 100 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 181 @,@ 229 in current dollar terms ) to the Phillies for Bancroft on June 7 , 1920 . 
 = = = = New York Giants = = = = 
 With the Giants , Bancroft was an able performer . His 102 runs scored during the 1920 season were second only to new Giants teammate George Burns . On June 1 , 1921 , in a game the Giants won against the Phillies , Bancroft hit for the cycle . His 153 games played in the 1921 season tied for second in the NL with several others , behind only Rogers Hornsby . He also tied teammate Frankie Frisch for second with 121 runs scored , behind only Hornsby , while his 193 hits were eighth @-@ best and his .389 on @-@ base percentage was ninth @-@ best in the NL . However , he only batted .152 in the 1921 World Series , which the Giants won over the New York Yankees in eight games . 
 Bancroft played in all 156 games in the 1922 season . He tied Jack Smith for third with 117 runs scored , finished third with 209 hits , and tied Bob O 'Farrell for second with 79 walks . His .321 batting average was his career @-@ high . He set an MLB record for the most fielding chances by a shortstop in a season ( 984 ) . Though the Giants swept the 1922 World Series from the Yankees in four games , he again had a poor World Series , batting .211 . 
 Serving as team captain , Bancroft began to suffer through leg injuries in 1923 . He was also hospitalized with a case of pneumonia during the season . Bancroft returned by the postseason , but batted <unk> in the 1923 World Series , which the Yankees won in six games . 
 = = = = Boston Braves = = = = 
 With a young Travis Jackson ready to succeed Bancroft as the Giants ' shortstop , and with Bancroft desiring an opportunity to manage , McGraw traded Bancroft to the Boston Braves with Bill Cunningham and Casey Stengel for Joe Oeschger and Billy Southworth after the 1923 season . McGraw was also looking to aid his former star Christy Mathewson , who was then the General Manager of the Braves . 
 Bancroft served as player – manager for the Braves for three seasons , from 1924 through 1927 . Upon becoming manager , he became the youngest manager in the National League ( NL ) . He missed time during the 1924 season with appendicitis . After finishing in last place in the eight @-@ team NL , Bancroft overhauled the Braves ' roster for the 1925 season . However , he lost the services of Rube Marquard and Joe <unk> , and the Braves finished in fifth place . Bancroft suggested that Bob Smith , ineffective as an infielder , become a pitcher ; Smith 's successes as a pitcher benefited the Braves ' starting rotation . The Braves lacked offense going into the 1926 season , but hoped their pitching and defense could lead them into contention . The Braves finished in seventh place in the NL in 1926 and 1927 . 
 = = = = Brooklyn Robins and return to the Giants = = = = 
 Failing to turn the Braves into a winning team , Bancroft requested his release from the team after the 1927 season . He signed with the Brooklyn Robins the same day . Stating that he was happy to no longer have the stress of managing , he played for the Robins for the 1928 and 1929 seasons . During his time with the Robins , he was seen as a possible successor to manager Wilbert Robinson . 
 The Robins released Bancroft after the 1929 season , and he returned to the Giants as assistant manager and coach , serving under McGraw . He ended his MLB playing career in 1930 . He remained as a coach , filling in for McGraw when he was too ill to manage . During the 1930 offseason , he led a team of MLB players on an exhibition trip to Cuba . When McGraw retired in 1932 , the Giants appointed Bill Terry as player @-@ manager . Surprised and disappointed that Terry was chosen over him , Bancroft left the Giants . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 After retiring as a player , Bancroft managed in minor league baseball . He managed the Minneapolis Millers of the Class @-@ AA American Association in 1933 . Though the Millers reached the championship series , he was not retained for the 1934 season , as the Millers sought a player @-@ manager to help the team reduce costs . 
 After the season , Bancroft interviewed for the managerial job with the Cincinnati Reds ; however , the Reds hired O 'Farrell . Bancroft next managed the Sioux City Cowboys of the Class @-@ A Western League in 1936 . He appeared in one game for Sioux City as a player . Bancroft then managed the St. Cloud Rox of the Class @-@ C Northern League in 1947 . In the All @-@ American Girls Professional Baseball League , Bancroft managed the Chicago <unk> in 1948 and South Bend Blue Sox in 1949 and 1950 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Grover Cleveland Alexander , Bancroft 's teammate in Philadelphia , and Hughie Jennings , his coach in New York , considered Bancroft one of the best shortstops in MLB . Sportswriter Frank Graham called Bancroft " the greatest shortstop the Giants ever had and one of the greatest that ever lived . " Bancroft is still considered to be among the top fielders in baseball history . He was also considered one of the fastest shortstops in baseball . In contrast to other great fielding shortstops , Bancroft was noted for his offensive ability . 
 After failing to be elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame by the Baseball Writers ' Association of America ( BBWAA ) , the Veterans Committee elected Bancroft in 1971 . Former Giants teammates Terry and Frankie Frisch , who joined the Veterans Committee in 1967 , aided the elections of several of their former teammates . Terry and Frankie shepherded the selections of Jesse Haines in 1970 , Bancroft and Chick Hafey in 1971 , Ross Youngs in 1972 , George Kelly in 1973 , Jim Bottomley in 1974 , and Freddie Lindstrom in 1976 . Bancroft , along with some of the other selections made by Terry and Frisch , has been considered among the weakest of all inductees . According to the BBWAA , the Veterans Committee was not selective enough in choosing members . Charges of cronyism were levied against the Veterans Committee . This led to the Veterans Committee having its powers reduced in subsequent years . 
 Despite the criticism of players elected to the Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee in this period , Bancroft grades well in terms of sabermetric statistics . He finished fourth in the NL in Wins Above Replacement in 1920 ( 6 @.@ 5 ) and third in 1921 ( 7 @.@ 2 ) and 1922 ( 6 @.@ 0 ) . Bancroft was also inducted in The Des Moines Register 's Iowa Sports Hall of Fame . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bancroft married Edna Harriet <unk> while he played minor league baseball . They had no children and lived in Superior , Wisconsin for the remainder of their lives . 
 After retiring from baseball , Bancroft worked as a warehouse supervisor for Interprovincial Pipeline Company . He retired in 1956 and spent his later years hunting and fishing . Bancroft died on October 9 , 1972 in a hospital in Superior at the age of 81 . 
 = Wanderlei Silva vs. Quinton Jackson = 
 Wanderlei " The Axe Murderer " Silva versus Quinton " Rampage " Jackson is a mixed martial arts trilogy that began in the now @-@ defunct Pride Fighting Championships in Japan . All three fights have been contested at the Light Heavyweight limit of 205 pounds ( 93 kg ) and televised live on pay @-@ per @-@ view . 
 The trilogy features three particularly violent fights in mixed martial arts , with all three contests ending in a knockout or technical knockout . On two occasions , the loser of the fight was rendered unconscious . The second fight in particular has received high acclaim , as it was named the 2004 Fight of the Year by the Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards . The trilogy is also known for the rivalry and bad blood between the two fighters . Indeed , Chris Parry of the Vancouver Sun considers the matches between Wanderlei Silva and Quinton Jackson to be " legendary " for the hatred and violence displayed . <unk> considers Silva vs. Jackson to be among the greatest trilogies in the history of mixed martial arts . 
 The rivalry began in the months leading up to Pride Final Conflict 2003 on November 9 , 2003 , where the first fight took place . Silva was victorious in the first meeting , after landing close to 20 standing knee strikes to Jackson 's face before the contest was halted . Silva once again bested Jackson with a combination of knees in the subsequent rematch at Pride 28 : High Octane , leaving the latter motionless and hanging between the ropes . The third fight took place in the Ultimate Fighting Championship ( UFC ) at UFC 92 : The Ultimate 2008 on December 27 , 2008 . This time , however , it would be Quinton Jackson avenging his two earlier defeats to Silva by knocking him unconscious with a left hook . 
 = = Background = = 
 The rivalry between the two fighters reportedly began around the Pride Middleweight ( 205 lb ) Grand Prix . In an attempt to set up a " tune @-@ up " bout for <unk> Sakuraba , who had just been defeated by Silva , Pride brought in Quinton Jackson , a relative unknown at the time , to face the Japanese fighter . The fight did not go as expected , with the much bigger Jackson overpowering Sakuraba and landing several punches . Sakuraba was eventually victorious via submission , but Jackson established himself as a legitimate contender to Wanderlei Silva 's Pride Middleweight Championship in the process . 
 Following this success , Jackson began to direct several personal insults at Silva , a gesture that infuriated the champion . Silva was in the midst of what would be a 17 @-@ fight unbeaten streak . He captured the championship from Sakuraba at Pride 17 , and defeated him a total of three times . Jackson continued his negative comments towards the champion , and directed his latest insult at Silva 's training camp at the time , the Chute <unk> Academy . 
 These insults culminated in an altercation between the two on March 16 , 2003 , at Pride 25 . Following a victory over Kevin <unk> , Jackson was given the microphone and started talking directly to Silva , who was sitting at ringside , saying " I want you boy . It 's gonna be me and you . " Silva immediately jumped to his feet and made his way into the ring . He was now face @-@ to @-@ face with Jackson , who continued by saying , " You have my belt , you 're keeping it warm for me . " Silva responded by yelling " MY <unk> ! " and giving Jackson a forceful shove . Jackson , visibly upset , advanced towards Silva as dozens of Pride officials intervened . Jackson stood still as he was surrounded by officials , while Silva had to be constantly restrained from charging at Jackson . Jackson later stated that he was instructed by Pride executives to make these comments . He added that Silva 's shove infuriated him , and he was ready to fight Silva immediately . 
 Since then , Jackson has further clarified the origins and the nature of the bad blood between the two . According to Jackson , the rivalry exists because he was one of the few fighters in Japan who was not afraid of Silva outside of the ring . Jackson stated that fighters were afraid to eat or be in an elevator with Silva , but he was not one of them . He added that the bad blood is only coming from Silva 's end . Silva , on the other hand , cited Jackson 's apparent insults towards him on the internet to account for the bad blood in an interview prior to the UFC 92 fight . 
 = = Pride Fighting Championship = = 
 = = = Pride Final Conflict 2003 = = = 
 The first meeting between the two took place in the final round of Pride 's Middleweight tournament at Pride Final Conflict 2003 on November 9 , 2003 . The venue for the fight was the sold @-@ out Tokyo Dome in Tokyo , Japan , with a live audience of 53 @,@ 000 . The two fighters each fought in the same night prior to the finals , with Silva defeating Hidehiko Yoshida , and Jackson defeating Chuck Liddell , respectively . On the line was the Pride 2003 Middleweight Grand Prix Championship . 
 The fight began with Jackson looking to close the distance early . Jackson immediately went for a double @-@ leg takedown , and picked Silva up . Silva then locked his legs , creating a standing closed guard , and applied a guillotine choke . The two stayed in this position until Jackson loosened his own grip , taking the fight to the ground for the first time , with Silva holding onto the chokehold . 
 After going to the ground , Jackson managed to slip out of the choke . Jackson began to attack with ground and pound , dealing strikes to Silva 's body while Silva answered with the same from the bottom . Jackson began to land punches to Silva 's face , and the latter attempted a <unk> @-@ gatame , a variation of an armbar . Silva could not pull off the hold , and Jackson moved into side control shortly after . From here , Jackson threw punches to Silva 's head and followed by landing two knees , again to the head ( which were legal under Pride rules ) . 
 Jackson spent the next 5 minutes working on body strikes from closed guard . The referee then decided to return the fight to stand up due to inactivity . This decision by the referee is seen as controversial by some commentators , such as Dave Meltzer . Jackson has also voiced his displeasure for the stand @-@ up . Sam Caplan , an MMA journalist , added that the Pride referees were employees of the promotion , and Jackson was victim of several " hasty " stand @-@ ups from the officials . Whether he was referring specifically to the fights against Silva is unknown . Shortly following the stand @-@ up , Silva secured a Muay Thai Clinch and landed approximately 20 knee strikes to Jackson 's face and several soccer kicks to the head before the referee called a stop to the contest . Silva was declared the winner by Technical Knockout at 6 : 28 of the 1st round and the Pride 2003 Middleweight Grand Prix Champion . 
 = = = Pride 28 : High Octane = = = 
 The rematch took place on October 31 , 2004 at Pride 28 : High Octane . The venue for the fight was the Saitama Super Arena in Saitama , Japan , with a live audience of 24 @,@ 028 . This time , Silva 's Middleweight Championship was on the line . Jackson became the number one contender after knocking out Ricardo <unk> with a slam at Pride Critical Countdown 2004 . 
 The second fight began with Jackson moving forward and getting into a clinch early . The two exchanged strikes in this position before breaking up . Jackson followed by throwing a brief flurry of punches and landing a knee . About halfway into the first round , Silva threw a flurry of punches and landed several knees from the Muay Thai Clinch before pushing Jackson against the turnbuckle . Jackson scrambled out of the clinch and scored a takedown with a combination of a leg trip and a headlock . Jackson attacked with ground and pound , but to limited damage , while Silva attempted submissions unsuccessfully . The referee then stood the fighters up due to inactivity . 
 Silva re @-@ opened the action standing with a combination of punches and kicks . Jackson answered with a straight right hand , knocking Silva on to the canvas . Jackson followed Silva down and looked to finish the fight in Silva 's closed guard . Jackson moved into side control shortly after and landed a clean knee strike to Silva 's head followed by several punches , again to the head to end the round . 
 The second round began with the two fighters exchanging a flurry of strikes . Silva then attempted a takedown with a combination of a body lock and a trip , but Jackson reversed it into a takedown of his own . The action stayed in Silva 's guard very briefly , until the two scrambled back to their feet . 
 During the subsequent exchange of strikes , Silva landed a direct right hook on Jackson 's face , stunning Jackson and sending him <unk> towards the ropes . Silva closed the distance and secured a Muay Thai clinch . From here , Silva landed approximately 5 knee strikes to Jackson 's head , causing him to fall into the ropes , unconscious and with blood pouring out of his face . Silva was declared the winner by Knockout at 3 : 26 of the 2nd round to remain the Pride Middleweight Champion . 
 Following the second fight , Jackson fought a pair of disappointing performances against the Rua brothers , earning a controversial decision over Murilo and getting brutally TKO 'd by Mauricio . These fights caused the rivalry to " cool down , " because Jackson was no longer promoted as a contender for Silva 's Middleweight Championship . Silva 's unbeaten streak was ended in his next fight , when he lost a split decision to heavyweight kickboxer , Mark Hunt . The streak lasted from August 2000 to December 2004 . The rivalry between Silva and Jackson would be rekindled in the Ultimate Fighting Championship more than 4 years later . 
 = = Ultimate Fighting Championship = = 
 Wanderlei Silva signed with the UFC in August 2007 , and had two fights in the organization , a decision loss to Chuck Liddell at UFC 79 , and a 36 second knockout victory over Keith Jardine at UFC 84 . Quinton Jackson joined the organization in December 2006 , became the UFC Light Heavyweight Champion with a technical knockout of Chuck Liddell at UFC 71 , and successfully defended the belt at UFC 75 against Dan Henderson . Jackson then lost the championship to Forrest Griffin in a decision at UFC 86 . 
 It was announced that the third fight between Wanderlei Silva and Quinton Jackson would take place at UFC 92 . The winner between the two would likely be the next challenger for the UFC 's Light Heavyweight Championship . " Showdown " Joe Ferraro expected the third fight between Silva and Jackson to " steal the show " at UFC 92 , and would " no doubt be one for the ages . " Jason Probst of Sherdog expected the fight to be a " solid fight at worst " and an " epic struggle at best . " Adam Morgan of <unk> predicted another " classic battle " between the two . Kevin <unk> of Yahoo ! Sports added that it would not be a surprise if the contest turned out to be the fight of the year . 
 The fight was announced after a series of personal incidents involving the former UFC Light Heavyweight Champion . Among them were Jackson 's split with former trainer and mentor , Juanito Ibarra , relocation to the UK @-@ based training camp , <unk> , hit and run arrest , and possible jail time . There were questions surrounding Jackson 's mental health , following an apparent episode of delirium on the day of his arrest on July 15 , 2008 . UFC President Dana White attributed the condition to a combination of Jackson not eating and sleeping for four days , while drinking only water and energy drinks . White added that drugs or alcohol were not factors in the incident . Jackson 's personal problems and mental state became central issues for those who analyzed the fight , including for Randy " The Natural " Couture , a fighter noted for his exceptional ability in fight analysis . After consideration of these events , speculation arose as to whether putting Jackson back into action against Silva would be too soon . 
 Wanderlei Silva reiterated his dislike for Jackson in pre @-@ fight interviews , and asserted that his sentiments toward Jackson have not changed since their previous fight . In an interview with <unk> , Silva stated that he was not fighting Jackson for money , but for " pure pleasure . " He again cited Jackson 's apparent insults toward him on the internet to account for the animosity . Jackson on the other hand , insisted that the third fight with Silva was not about avenging his two prior defeats , but was " merely his job . " He also added that the third encounter with Silva was inevitable , especially after Silva signed with the UFC . 
 Silva and Jackson had another brief altercation , this time at the UFC 92 weigh @-@ ins . After both tipping the scales , they participated in an intense staredown for photography . In the course of the staredown , Wanderlei Silva shoved Quinton Jackson before the UFC officials and security quickly intervened . Jackson could be seen smiling and saying something to Silva immediately preceding the scuffle . Jackson followed with his trademark howl and a " throat @-@ slashing " gesture , as Silva was escorted away . 
 = = = UFC 92 : The Ultimate 2008 = = = 
 The third fight between Silva and Jackson took place on December 27 , 2008 at UFC 92 . The venue for the fight was the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas , Nevada , with a live audience of 14 @,@ 166 . 
 The fight began with Jackson taking the center of the cage as Silva circled outside . Jackson opened the action with an overhand right , and immediately moved backwards . Both fighters appeared cautious for the opening minutes of the fight , exchanging strikes and quickly moving away . Silva focused on leg kicks , while Jackson focused on working the jab . 
