 At 3 : 21 of the 1st round , after Wanderlei <unk> and missed a punch with his right hand , Jackson countered with a left hook on Silva 's jaw , sending the latter on to the canvas and rendering him unconscious . Jackson followed with three punches to Silva 's head on the ground , two of which occurred after referee Yves Lavigne attempted to halt the contest . Wanderlei remained on the canvas for several moments , but appeared to be OK as he left the cage under his own power . 
 Following the fight at UFC 92 , Jackson drew criticism from Todd Martin of CBS Sports for ignoring referee Yves Lavigne 's attempt to stop the contest . Martin compared Jackson 's actions to Renato Sobral 's continued choke of David Heath following a tap out , which led to Sobral 's dismissal from the UFC . Martin called for punishment against Jackson , but no action was taken against Jackson for this allegedly unsportsmanlike behavior . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The rivalry between Silva and Jackson has been regarded as " exceptionally violent , " and the fights in the Pride Fighting Championship have been considered to be two of the most brutal matches to ever take place in the organization . Chris Parry of the Vancouver Sun asserted that the two fights in Pride will be remembered as " some of the best fights in this era , " and as " some of the most devastating boxing and kickboxing exchanges seen in years . " The rematch at Pride 28 has been noted as an exciting fight with back @-@ and @-@ forth action , and was also named the 2004 Fight of the Year by the Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards . The first fight at Pride Final Conflict 2003 has also gained fight of the year consideration . 
 Jackson 's next fight was not against the new UFC Light Heavyweight Champion , Rashad Evans , as the pre @-@ fight reports suggested . UFC President Dana White indicated that the original plan was for Jackson to receive an immediate title shot , but Evans requested time off to recover from injuries he sustained from his fight against Forrest Griffin . Instead , Jackson faced Keith Jardine at UFC 96 , and was victorious by unanimous decision . He was then scheduled to face Rashad Evans at UFC 98 , but it was later revealed on March 11 , 2009 that Jackson needed surgery to repair torn ligaments in his jaw , effectively cancelling the bout against Evans . 
 In a post fight interview following UFC 92 , Wanderlei Silva stated that he would be making his return to action in the Summer of 2009 , preferably at UFC 100 . He added that would like to fight Jackson for a fourth and even fifth time if possible . Silva 's next fight was a <unk> contest against Rich Franklin at UFC 99 , in Cologne , Germany on June 13 , 2009 . Silva lost by unanimous decision in a competitive fight . 
 While Silva had an impending fight with Franklin , he was still asked about his future with Jackson . Indeed , in an interview with Fighters Only Magazine , Silva reiterated his desire to fight Jackson for a fourth time , and added that he wants it to be the final fight of his career . He also said that he no longer has problems with Jackson outside of the cage . Silva ended by saying that he spoke with Jackson at UFC 95 in London , England , and the two shook hands . 
 = Operation Cobra = 
 Operation Cobra was the codename for an offensive launched by the First United States Army seven weeks after the D @-@ Day landings , during the Normandy Campaign of World War II . American Lieutenant General Omar Bradley 's intention was to take advantage of the German preoccupation with British and Canadian activity around the town of Caen , in Operation Goodwood , and immediately punch through the German defenses that were penning in his troops while the Germans were distracted and unbalanced . Once a corridor had been created , the First Army would then be able to advance into Brittany , rolling up the German flanks and releasing itself of the constraints imposed by operating in the Norman bocage countryside . After a slow start the offensive gathered momentum , and German resistance collapsed as scattered remnants of broken units fought to escape to the Seine . Lacking the resources to cope with the situation , the German response was ineffectual , and the entire Normandy front soon collapsed . Operation Cobra , together with concurrent offensives by the Second British and First Canadian Armies , was decisive in securing an Allied victory in the Normandy Campaign . 
 Having been delayed several times by poor weather , Operation Cobra commenced on 25 July with a concentrated aerial bombardment from thousands of Allied aircraft . Supporting offensives had drawn the bulk of German armored reserves toward the British and Canadian sector , and coupled with the general lack of men and materiel available to the Germans , it was impossible for them to form successive lines of defense . Units of VII Corps led the initial two @-@ division assault , while other First Army corps mounted supporting attacks designed to pin German units in place . Progress was slow on the first day , but opposition started to crumble once the defensive crust had been broken . By 27 July , most organized resistance had been overcome , and VII and VIII Corps were advancing rapidly , isolating the Cotentin peninsula . 
 By 31 July , XIX Corps had destroyed the last forces opposing the First Army , and Bradley 's troops were finally freed from the bocage . Reinforcements were moved west by Field Marshal Günther von Kluge and employed in various counterattacks , the largest of which ( codenamed Operation Lüttich ) was launched on 7 August between Mortain and Avranches . Although this led to the bloodiest phase of the battle , it was mounted by already exhausted and understrength units , and had little effect other than to further deplete von Kluge 's forces . On 8 August , troops of the newly activated Third United States Army captured the city of Le Mans , formerly the German Seventh Army 's headquarters . Operation Cobra transformed the high @-@ intensity infantry combat of Normandy into rapid maneuver warfare , and led to the creation of the Falaise pocket and the loss of the German position in northwestern France . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the successful Allied invasion of Normandy on 6 June 1944 , progress inland was slow . To facilitate the Allied build @-@ up in France and to secure room for further expansion , the deep water port of Cherbourg on the western flank of the American sector and the historic town of Caen in the British and Canadian sector to the east , were early objectives . The original plan for the Normandy campaign envisioned strong offensive efforts in both sectors , in which the Second Army ( Lieutenant @-@ General Sir Miles Dempsey ) would secure Caen and the area south of it and the First US Army ( Lieutenant General Omar Bradley ) would " wheel round " to the Loire . 
 General Sir Bernard Montgomery — commanding all Allied ground forces in Normandy — intended Caen to be taken on D @-@ Day , while Cherbourg was expected to fall 15 days later . The Second Army was to seize Caen and then form a front to the southeast , extending to Caumont @-@ l 'Éventé , to acquire airfields and protect the left flank of the First US Army as it moved on Cherbourg . Possession of Caen and its surroundings — desirable for open terrain that would permit maneuver warfare — would also give the Second Army a suitable staging area for a push south to capture Falaise , which could be used as the pivot for a swing right to advance on Argentan and then the Touques River . Caen 's capture has been described by historian L. F. Ellis as the most important D @-@ Day objective assigned to Lieutenant @-@ General Crocker 's British I Corps . Ellis and Chester Wilmot called the Allied plan " ambitious " since the Caen sector contained the strongest defences in Normandy . 
 The initial attempt by I Corps to reach the city on D @-@ Day was blocked by elements of the 21st Panzer Division and with the Germans committing most of the reinforcements sent to meet the invasion to the defense of Caen , the Anglo @-@ Canadian front rapidly congealed short of Second Army 's objectives . Operation Perch in the week following D @-@ Day and Operation Epsom ( 26 – 30 June ) brought some territorial gains and depleted its defenders but Caen remained in German hands until Operation Charnwood ( 7 – 9 July ) , when the Second Army managed to take the northern part of the city up to the River Orne in a frontal assault . 
 The successive Anglo @-@ Canadian offensives around Caen kept the best of the German forces in Normandy , including most of the available armor , to the eastern end of the Allied lodgement , but even so First US Army made slow progress against dogged German resistance . In part , operations were slow due to the constraints of the bocage landscape of densely packed banked hedgerows , sunken lanes , and small woods , for which U.S. units had not trained . With no port facilities in Allied hands , all reinforcement and supply had to take place over the beaches via the two Mulberry harbors and was at the mercy of the weather . On 19 June , a severe storm descended on the English Channel , lasting for three days , and causing significant delays to the Allied build @-@ up and the cancellation of some planned operations . The First US Army advance in the western sector was eventually halted by Bradley before the town of Saint @-@ Lô , to concentrate on the seizure of Cherbourg . The defense of Cherbourg consisted largely of four battlegroups formed from the remnants of units that had retreated up the Cotentin peninsula but the port defences had been designed principally to meet an attack from the sea . Organized German resistance ended only on 27 June , when the 9th US Infantry Division managed to reduce the defences of Cap @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Hague , north @-@ west of the city . Within four days , VII Corps ( Major General J. Lawton " Lightning Joe " Collins ) resumed the offensive toward Saint @-@ Lô , alongside XIX Corps and VIII Corps , causing the Germans to move additional armor into the U.S. sector . 
 = = Planning = = 
 The originator of the idea for Operation Cobra remains disputed . According to Montgomery 's official biographer , the foundation of Operation Cobra was laid on 13 June . Planning was immensely aided by detailed Ultra Intelligence which supplied up @-@ to @-@ date decodes of communications between German High Command and Hitler 's generals . Montgomery 's plan at that time called for Bradley 's First Army to take Saint @-@ Lô and Coutances and then make two southward thrusts ; one from Caumont toward Vire and Mortain , and the other from Saint @-@ Lô toward <unk> and Avranches . Although pressure was to be kept up along the Cotentin Peninsula towards La Haye @-@ du @-@ Puits and Valognes , the capture of Cherbourg was not an immediate priority . However , with Cherbourg 's seizure by Collins ' VII Corps on 27 June , Montgomery 's initial timetable was soon outdated and the thrust from Caumont was never adopted . 
 Following the conclusion of Operation Charnwood and the cancellation of First Army 's offensive towards Saint @-@ Lô , Montgomery met with Bradley and Dempsey on 10 July to discuss 21st Army Group 's next move . During the meeting , Bradley admitted that progress on the western flank was very slow . However , he had been working on plans for a breakout attempt , codenamed Operation Cobra , to be launched by the First Army on 18 July . He presented his ideas to Montgomery , who approved , and the directive that emerged from the meeting made it clear that the overall strategy over the coming days would be to draw enemy attention away from the First Army to the British and Canadian sector ; Dempsey was instructed to " go on hitting : drawing the German strength , especially the armour , onto yourself — so as to ease the way for Brad [ ley ] " . To accomplish this , Operation Goodwood was planned , and Eisenhower ensured that both operations would have the support of the Allied air forces with their strategic bombers . 
 On 12 July , Bradley briefed his subordinate commanders on the Cobra plan , which consisted of three phases . The main effort would be under the control of Collins ' VII Corps . In the first phase , the breakthrough attack would be conducted by Major General Eddy 's 9th and Major General Hobbs ' 30th infantry divisions , which would punch a hole in the German tactical zone and then hold the flanks of the penetration while Major General Huebner 's 1st Infantry and Major General Brooks ' 2nd Armored divisions pushed into the depth of the position until resistance collapsed . The 1st Infantry Division " was to take Marigny , with this objective exploited by a stream of General Watson 's 3rd Armored Division armor that would move south toward Coutances . " The 2nd Armored Division — part of " Collins ' exploitation force " of the 2nd Armored Division in the east of the VII Corps sector and the " 1st Infantry Division reinforced by Combat Command B ( <unk> ) of the 3rd Armored division in the west " — would " pass through the 30th Infantry Division sector ... and guard the overall American left flank . " If VII Corps ' efforts were successful the western German position would become untenable , permitting a relatively easy advance to the southwest end of the bocage to cut off and seize the Brittany peninsula . First Army 's intelligence estimated that no German counterattack would occur in the first few days after Cobra 's launch , and that if attacks materialized after that date , they would consist of no more than battalion @-@ sized operations . 
 Cobra was to be a concentrated attack on a 7 @,@ 000 yd ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) front , unlike previous American ' broad front ' offensives , and would have heavy air support . Fighter @-@ bombers would concentrate on hitting forward German defenses in a 250 yd ( 230 m ) belt immediately south of the Saint @-@ Lô – Periers road , while General Spaatz 's heavy bombers would bomb to a depth of 2 @,@ 500 yd ( 2 @,@ 300 m ) behind the German main line of resistance . It was anticipated that the physical destruction and shock value of a short , intense preliminary bombardment would greatly weaken the German defense , so in addition to divisional artillery , <unk> and Corps @-@ level units would provide support , including nine heavy , five medium , and seven light artillery battalions . Over 1 @,@ 000 tubes of divisional and corps artillery were committed to the offensive , and approximately 140 @,@ 000 artillery rounds were allocated to the operation in VII Corps alone , with another 27 @,@ 000 for VIII Corps . 
 In an attempt to overcome the mobility constraints of the bocage that had made offensive operations so difficult and costly for both sides , " Rhino " modifications were made to some M4 Sherman and M5A1 Stuart tanks , and M10 tank destroyers , by fitting them with hedge @-@ breaching ' tusks ' that were capable of forcing a path through the Norman hedgerows . While German tanks remained restricted to the roads , U.S. armor would now be able to maneuver more freely , although in practice these devices were not as effective as often believed . However , by the eve of Cobra , 60 % of First Army 's tanks were so equipped . To preserve operational security , Bradley forbade their use until Cobra was launched . In all , 1 @,@ 269 M4 medium tanks , 694 M5A1 light tanks , and 288 M10 tank destroyers were available . 
 = = = Supporting operations = = = 
 On 18 July , the British VIII and I Corps — to the east of Caen — launched Operation Goodwood . The offensive began with the largest air bombardment in support of ground forces yet , with more than 1 @,@ 000 aircraft dropping 6 @,@ 000 short tons ( 5 @,@ 400 t ) of high explosive and fragmentation bombs from low altitude . German positions to the east of Caen were shelled by 400 artillery pieces and many villages were reduced to rubble , but German artillery further to the south , on the Bourguébus Ridge , was outside the range of the British artillery , and the defenders of <unk> and <unk> were largely unscathed by the bombardment . This contributed to the losses suffered by Second Army , which sustained over 4 @,@ 800 casualties . Principally an armored offensive , between 250 and 400 British tanks were put out of action , although recent examination suggests that only 140 were completely destroyed with an additional 174 damaged . The operation remains the largest tank battle ever fought by the British Army , and resulted in the expansion of the Orne bridgehead and the final capture of Caen . 
 Simultaneously , the II Canadian Corps on Goodwood 's western flank launched Operation Atlantic . Intended to strengthen the Allied foothold along the banks of the Orne River and take Verrières Ridge to the south of Caen , Atlantic made initial gains but ran out of steam as casualties mounted . Having cost the Canadians 1 @,@ 349 men and with the heavily defended ridge firmly in German hands , Atlantic was closed down on 20 July . However , at Montgomery 's urging , " strongly underlined in the Supreme Commander 's communications to Montgomery " , II Canadian Corps 's commander , Lieutenant @-@ General Guy Simonds , launched a second offensive a few days later , codenamed Operation Spring . This had the limited but important aim of tying down German units that might otherwise be transferred to the American sector , although Simonds took the opportunity to make another bid for Verrières Ridge . Again the fighting for Verrières Ridge proved extremely bloody for the Canadians , with 25 July marking the single costliest day for a Canadian battalion — The Black Watch ( Royal Highland Regiment ) of Canada — since the Dieppe Raid of 1942 . A counterstroke by two German divisions pushed the Canadians back past their start lines and Simonds had to commit reinforcements to stabilize the front . However , in conjunction with Goodwood , the Canadian operations caused the Germans to commit most of their armor and additional reinforcements to the British and Canadian sector . Operation Spring — despite its cost — had drawn the 9th SS Panzer Division away from the U.S. sector on the eve of Cobra 's launch . Only two Panzer divisions with 190 tanks now faced Bradley 's First Army . Seven Panzer divisions with 750 tanks were positioned in the Caen area , far away from where Operation Cobra would be launched , as were all the heavy Tiger tank battalions and all three Nebelwerfer brigades in Normandy . 
 = = = Logistics = = = 
 Each division consumed 750 short tons ( 680 t ) of supplies daily . 
 = = Allied offensive = = 
 = = = Preliminary attacks = = = 
 To gain good terrain for Operation Cobra , Bradley and Collins conceived a plan to push forward to the Saint @-@ Lô – Periers road , along which VII and VIII Corps were securing jumping @-@ off positions . On 18 July , at a cost of 5 @,@ 000 casualties , the American 29th and 35th Infantry Divisions managed to gain the vital heights of Saint @-@ Lô , driving back General der <unk> Eugen <unk> 's II Parachute Corps . <unk> 's paratroopers , together with the 352nd Infantry Division ( which had been in action since its D @-@ Day defense of Omaha Beach ) were now in ruins , and the stage for the main offensive was set . Due to poor weather conditions that had also been hampering Goodwood and Atlantic , Bradley decided to postpone Cobra for a few days — a decision that worried Montgomery , as the British and Canadian operations had been launched to support a break @-@ out attempt that was failing to materialize . By 24 July the skies had cleared enough for the start order to be given , and 1 @,@ 600 Allied aircraft took off for Normandy . However , the weather closed in again over the battlefield . Under poor visibility conditions , more than 25 Americans were killed and 130 wounded in the bombing before the air support operation was postponed until the following day . Some enraged soldiers opened fire on their own aircraft , a not uncommon practice in Normandy when suffering from friendly fire . 
 = = = Main attack and breakthrough 25 – 27 July = = = 
 After the one @-@ day postponement , Cobra got underway at 09 : 38 on 25 July , when around 600 Allied fighter @-@ bombers attacked strongpoints and enemy artillery along a 300 yd ( 270 m ) -wide strip of ground located in the St. Lô area . For the next hour , 1 @,@ 800 heavy bombers of the U.S. Eighth Air Force saturated a 6 @,@ 000 yd × 2 @,@ 200 yd ( 5 @,@ 500 m × 2 @,@ 000 m ) area on the Saint @-@ Lô – Periers road , succeeded by a third and final wave of medium bombers . Approximately 3 @,@ 000 U.S. aircraft had carpet @-@ bombed a narrow section of the front , with the Panzer @-@ Lehr @-@ Division taking the brunt of the attack . However , once again not all the casualties were German ; Bradley had specifically requested that the bombers approach the target from the east , out of the sun and parallel to the Saint @-@ Lô – Periers road , in order to minimize the risk of friendly losses , but most of the airmen instead came in from the north , perpendicular to the front line . Bradley , however , had apparently misunderstood explanations from the heavy bomber commanders that a parallel approach was impossible because of the time and space constraints Bradley had set . Additionally , a parallel approach would not in any event have assured that all bombs would fall behind German lines because of deflection errors or obscured aim points due to dust and smoke . Despite efforts by U.S. units to identify their positions , inaccurate bombing by the Eighth Air Force killed 111 men and wounded 490 . The dead included Bradley 's friend and fellow West Pointer Lieutenant General Lesley McNair — the highest @-@ ranking U.S. soldier to be killed in action in the European Theater of Operations . 
 By 11 : 00 , the infantry began to move forward , advancing from crater to crater beyond what had been the German outpost line . Although no serious opposition was forecast , the remnants of Fritz Bayerlein ′ s Panzer Lehr — consisting of roughly 2 @,@ 200 men and 45 armored vehicles — had regrouped and were prepared to meet the advancing U.S. troops , and to the west of Panzer Lehr the German 5th Parachute Division had escaped the bombing almost intact . Collins ' VII Corps were quite disheartened to meet fierce enemy artillery fire , which they expected to have been suppressed by the bombing . Several U.S. units found themselves entangled in fights against strongpoints held by a handful of German tanks , supporting infantry and 88 mm ( 3 @.@ 46 in ) guns — VII Corps gained only 2 @,@ 200 yd ( 2 @,@ 000 m ) during the rest of the day . However , if the first day 's results had been disappointing , General Collins found cause for encouragement ; although the Germans were fiercely holding their positions , these did not seem to form a continuous line and were susceptible to being outflanked or bypassed . Even with prior warning of the American offensive , the British and Canadian actions around Caen had convinced the Germans that the real threat lay there , and tied down their available forces to such an extent that a succession of meticulously prepared defensive positions in depth , as encountered during Goodwood and Atlantic , were not created to meet Cobra . 
 On the morning of 26 July , the U.S. 2nd Armored Division and the veteran 1st Infantry Division joined the attack as planned , reaching one of Cobra 's first objectives — a road junction north of Le Mesnil @-@ Herman — the following day . Also on the 26th , Major General Troy H. Middleton 's VIII Corps entered the battle , led by the 8th and 90th Infantry Divisions . Despite clear paths of advance through the floods and swamps across their front , both divisions initially disappointed the First Army by failing to gain significant ground , but first light the next morning revealed that the Germans had been compelled to retreat by their crumbling left flank , leaving only immense minefields to delay VIII Corps ' advance . By noon on 27 July , the 9th Infantry Division of VII Corps was also clear of any organized German resistance , and was advancing rapidly . 
 = = = Breakout and advance 28 – 31 July = = = 
 By 28 July , the German defenses across the U.S. front had largely collapsed under the full weight of VII and VIII Corps ' advance , and resistance was disorganised and patchy . VIII Corps ' 4th Armored Division — entering combat for the first time — captured Coutances but met stiff opposition east of the town , and U.S. units penetrating into the depth of the German positions were variously counterattacked by elements of the 2nd SS Panzer , 17th SS Panzergrenadier , and 353rd Infantry Divisions , all seeking to escape entrapment . A desperate counterattack was mounted against the 2nd Armored Division by German remnants , but this was a disaster and the Germans abandoned their vehicles and fled on foot . An exhausted and demoralized Bayerlein reported that his Panzer Lehr Division was " finally annihilated " , with its armor wiped out , its personnel either casualties or missing , and all headquarters records lost . 
 Meanwhile , Marshal von Kluge — commanding all German forces on the Western Front ( Oberbefehlshaber West ) — was mustering reinforcements , and elements of the 2nd and 116th Panzer Divisions were approaching the battlefield . The U.S. XIX Corps — led by Major General Charles H. Corlett — entered the battle on 28 July on the left of VII Corps , and between 28 and 31 July became embroiled with these reinforcements in the fiercest fighting since Cobra began . During the night of 29 July near Saint @-@ Denis @-@ le @-@ Gast , to the east of Coutances , elements of the U.S. 2nd Armored Division found themselves fighting for their lives against a German column from the 2nd SS Panzer and 17th SS Panzergrenadier Divisions , which passed through the American lines in the darkness . Other elements of the 2nd Armored were attacked near <unk> and fought for six hours ; however , Bradley and his commanders knew that they were currently dominating the battlefield and such desperate assaults were no threat to the overall American position . When ordered to concentrate his division , Colonel Heinz Günther Guderian — 116th Division 's senior staff officer — was frustrated by the high level of Allied fighter @-@ bomber activity . Without receiving direct support from the 2nd Panzer Division as promised , Guderian stated that his panzergrenadiers could not successfully counterattack the Americans . Advancing southward along the coast , later that day , the U.S. VIII Corps seized the town of Avranches — described by historian Andrew Williams as " the gateway to Brittany and southern Normandy " — and by 31 July XIX Corps had thrown back the last German counterattacks after fierce fighting , inflicting heavy losses in men and tanks . The American advance was now relentless , and the First Army was finally free of the bocage . 
 = = = Operation Bluecoat , 30 July – 7 August = = = 
 On 30 July , to protect Cobra 's flank and prevent the disengagement and relocation of further German forces , the British VIII Corps and XXX Corps launched Operation Bluecoat south from Caumont toward Vire and Mont Pinçon . Operation Bluecoat kept German armoured units fixed on the British eastern front and continued the wearing down of the strength of German armoured formations in the area . The breakthrough in the centre of the Allied front surprised the Germans , when they were distracted by the Allied attacks at both ends of the Normandy bridgehead . By the time of the American breakout at Avranches , there was little to no reserve strength left for Operation <unk> , the German counter @-@ offensive , which had been defeated by 12 August , leaving the 7th Army with no choice but to retire rapidly east of the Orne river , followed by a rearguard by all the remaining armoured and motorised units , to allow time for the surviving infantry to reach the Seine . After the first stage of the withdrawal beyond the Orne , the manoeuvre collapsed for a lack of fuel , Allied air attacks and the constant pressure of the Allied armies and culminated in the encirclement of many German forces in the Falaise pocket . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 At noon on 1 August , the U.S. Third Army was activated under the command of Lieutenant General George S. Patton . Lieutenant General Courtney Hodges assumed command of the First Army and Bradley was promoted to the overall command of both armies , named the U.S. 12th Army Group . Patton wrote a poem containing the words : 
 So let us do real fighting , boring in and gouging , biting . 
 Let 's take a chance now that we have the ball . 
 Let 's forget those fine firm bases in the dreary shell raked spaces , 
 Let 's shoot the works and win ! Yes , win it all ! 
 The U.S. advance following Cobra was extraordinarily rapid . Between 1 August and 4 August , seven divisions of Patton 's Third Army had swept through Avranches and over the bridge at Pontaubault into Brittany . The German army in Normandy had been reduced to such a poor state by the Allied offensives that , with no prospect of reinforcement in the wake of the Soviet summer offensive against Army Group Centre , very few Germans believed they could now avoid defeat . Rather than order his remaining forces to withdraw to the Seine , Adolf Hitler sent a directive to von Kluge demanding " an immediate counterattack between Mortain and Avranches " to " annihilate " the enemy and make contact with the west coast of the Cotentin peninsula . Eight of the nine Panzer divisions in Normandy were to be used in the attack but only four ( one of them incomplete ) could be relieved from their defensive tasks and assembled in time . German commanders immediately protested that such an operation was impossible given their remaining resources but these objections were overruled and the counter @-@ offensive , codenamed Operation Lüttich , commenced on 7 August around Mortain . The 2nd , 1st SS and 2nd SS Panzer Divisions led the assault , although with only 75 Panzer IVs , 70 Panthers , and 32 self @-@ propelled guns between them . Hopelessly optimistic , the offensive threat was over within 24 hours , although fighting continued until 13 August . 
 By 8 August , the city of Le Mans — the former headquarters of the German 7th Army — had fallen to the Americans . With von Kluge 's few remaining battleworthy formations destroyed by the First Army , the Allied commanders realised that the entire German position in Normandy was collapsing . Bradley declared : 
 This is an opportunity that comes to a commander not more than once in a century . We 're about to destroy an entire hostile army and go all the way from here to the German border " . 
 On 14 August , in conjunction with American movements northward to Chambois , Canadian forces launched Operation Tractable ; the Allied intention was to trap and destroy the entire German Seventh and Fifth Panzer Armies near the town of Falaise . Five days later , the two arms of the encirclement were almost complete ; the advancing U.S. 90th Infantry Division had made contact with the Polish 1st Armored Division , and the first Allied units crossed the Seine at Mantes <unk> while German units were fleeing eastward by any means they could find . By 22 August , the Falaise Pocket — which the Germans had been fighting desperately to keep open to allow their trapped forces to escape — was finally sealed , effectively ending the Battle of Normandy with a decisive Allied victory . All German forces west of the Allied lines were now dead or in captivity and although perhaps 100 @,@ 000 German troops succeeded in escaping they left behind 40 @,@ 000 – 50 @,@ 000 prisoners and over 10 @,@ 000 dead . A total of 344 tanks and self @-@ propelled guns , 2 @,@ 447 soft @-@ skinned vehicles and 252 artillery pieces were found abandoned or destroyed in the northern sector of the pocket alone . The Allies were able to advance freely through undefended territory , and by 25 August all four Allied armies ( 1st Canadian , 2nd British , 1st U.S. , and 3rd U.S. ) involved in the Normandy campaign were on the river Seine . 
 = Amanita ocreata = 
 Amanita ocreata , commonly known as the death angel , destroying angel , angel of death or more precisely Western North American destroying angel , is a deadly poisonous basidiomycete fungus , one of many in the genus Amanita . Occurring in the Pacific Northwest and California floristic provinces of North America , A. ocreata associates with oak trees . The large fruiting bodies ( the mushrooms ) generally appear in spring ; the cap may be white or ochre and often develops a brownish centre , while the stipe , ring , gill and volva are all white . 
 Amanita ocreata resemble several edible species commonly consumed by humans , increasing the risk of accidental poisoning . Mature fruiting bodies can be confused with the edible A. <unk> , A. lanei or Volvariella speciosa , while immature specimens may be difficult to distinguish from edible Agaricus mushrooms or puffballs . Similar in toxicity to the death cap ( A. phalloides ) and destroying angels of Europe ( A. virosa ) and eastern North America ( A. bisporigera ) , it is a potentially deadly fungus responsible for a number of poisonings in California . Its principal toxic constituent , α @-@ amanitin , damages the liver and kidneys , often fatally , and has no known antidote . The initial symptoms are gastrointestinal and include colicky abdominal pain , diarrhea and vomiting . These subside temporarily after 2 – 3 days , though ongoing damage to internal organs during this time is common ; symptoms of jaundice , diarrhea , delirium , seizures , and coma may follow with death from liver failure 6 – 16 days post ingestion . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 Amanita ocreata was first described by American mycologist Charles Horton Peck in 1909 from material collected by Charles Fuller Baker in Claremont , California . The specific epithet is derived from the Latin <unk> ' wearing greaves ' from <unk> ' <unk> ' , referring to its loose , baggy volva . Amanita <unk> is a botanical synonym . The mushroom belongs to the same section ( Phalloideae ) and genus ( Amanita ) as several deadly poisonous fungi including the death cap ( A. phalloides ) and several all @-@ white species of Amanita known as " destroying angels " : A. bisporigera of eastern North America , and the European A. virosa . " Death angel " is used as an alternate common name . 
 = = Description = = 
 A. ocreata is generally stouter than the other fungi termed destroying angels . It first appears as a white egg @-@ shaped object covered with a universal veil . As it grows , the mushroom breaks free , though there may rarely be ragged patches of veil left at the cap edges . The cap is initially hemispherical , before becoming more convex and flattening , sometimes irregularly . This may result in undulations in the cap , which may reach up to 12 cm ( 5 in ) in diameter . The colour varies from white , through yellowish @-@ white to shades of ochre , sometimes with a brownish centre . Occasionally parts of the fruiting bodies may have pinkish tones . The rest of the fungus below the cap is white . The crowded gills are free to narrowly adnate . The stipe is 8 – 20 cm ( 3 – 8 in ) high and 1 @.@ 5 – 2 cm ( ½ – ⅔ in ) thick at the apex , and bears a thin white membranous ring . The volva is thin , smooth and sac @-@ like , although may be quite extensive and contain almost half the stipe . The spore print is white , and the subglobose to ovoid to <unk> , amyloid spores are 9 – 14 x 7 – 10 μm viewed under a microscope . There is typically no smell , though some fruiting bodies may have a slight odour , described as that of bleach or chlorine , dead fish or iodine . Like other destroying angels , the flesh stains yellow when treated with potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) . 
 This fungus resembles the edible mushrooms Agaricus arvensis and A. campestris , and the puffballs ( Lycoperdon spp . ) before the caps have opened and the gills have become visible , so those collecting immature fungi run the risk of confusing the varieties . It also resembles and grows in the same areas as the edible and prized Amanita <unk> , which can be distinguished from A. ocreata by its lack of ring , striate cap margin and thick universal veil remnants comprising the veil . The edible Amanita lanei lacks a ring and is more likely to have veil patches remaining on its cap , which is generally darker . Volvariella speciosa has pink spores and no ring or volva . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Appearing from January to April , A. ocreata occurs later in the year than other amanitas except A. <unk> . It is found in mixed woodland on the Pacific coast of North America , from Washington south through California to Baja California in Mexico . It may feasibly occur on Vancouver Island in British Columbia though this has never been confirmed . It forms ectomycorrhizal relationships and is found in association with coast live oak ( Quercus agrifolia ) , as well as hazel ( Corylus spp . ) . In Oregon and Washington , it may also be associated with the Garry oak ( Quercus <unk> ) . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Amanita ocreata is highly toxic , and has been responsible for a number of mushroom poisonings in western North America , particularly in the spring . It contains highly toxic amatoxins , as well as phallotoxins , a feature shared with the closely related death cap ( A. phalloides ) , half a cap of which can be enough to kill a human , and other species known as destroying angels . There is some evidence it may be the most toxic of all the North American <unk> , as a higher proportion of people consuming it had organ damage and 40 % perished . Dogs , too , have been known to consume this fungus in California with fatal results . 
 Amatoxins consist of at least eight compounds with a similar structure , that of eight amino @-@ acid rings ; of those found in A. ocreata , α @-@ amanitin is the most prevalent and along with β @-@ amanitin is likely to be responsible for the toxic effects . The major toxic mechanism is the inhibition of RNA polymerase II , a vital enzyme in the synthesis of messenger RNA ( mRNA ) , microRNA , and small nuclear RNA ( snRNA ) . Without mRNA , essential protein synthesis and hence cell metabolism stop and the cell dies . The liver is the principal organ affected , as it is the first organ encountered after absorption by the gastrointestinal tract , though other organs , especially the kidneys , are susceptible to the toxins . 
 The phallotoxins consist of at least seven compounds , all of which have seven similar peptide rings . Although they are highly toxic to liver cells , phallotoxins have since been found to have little input into the destroying angel 's toxicity as they are not absorbed through the gut . Furthermore , one phallotoxin , phalloidin , is also found in the edible ( and sought @-@ after ) <unk> ( Amanita rubescens ) . 
 = = = Signs and symptoms = = = 
 Signs and symptoms of poisoning by A. ocreata are initially gastrointestinal in nature and include colicky abdominal pain , with watery diarrhea and vomiting which may lead to dehydration , and , in severe cases , hypotension , tachycardia , hypoglycemia , and acid @-@ base disturbances . The initial symptoms resolve two to three days after ingestion of the fungus . A more serious deterioration signifying liver involvement may then occur — jaundice , diarrhea , delirium , seizures , and coma due to fulminant liver failure and attendant hepatic encephalopathy caused by the accumulation of normally liver @-@ removed substances in the blood . Renal failure ( either secondary to severe hepatitis or caused by direct toxic renal damage ) and coagulopathy may appear during this stage . Life @-@ threatening complications include increased intracranial pressure , intracranial hemorrhage , sepsis , pancreatitis , acute renal failure , and cardiac arrest . Death generally occurs six to sixteen days after the poisoning . 
 = = = Treatment = = = 
 Consumption of A. ocreata is a medical emergency that requires hospitalization . There are four main categories of therapy for poisoning : preliminary medical care , supportive measures , specific treatments , and liver transplantation . 
 Preliminary care consists of gastric decontamination with either activated carbon or gastric lavage . However , due to the delay between ingestion and the first symptoms of poisoning , it is commonplace for patients to arrive for treatment long after ingestion , potentially reducing the efficacy of these interventions . Supportive measures are directed towards treating the dehydration which results from fluid loss during the gastrointestinal phase of intoxication and correction of metabolic acidosis , hypoglycemia , electrolyte imbalances , and impaired coagulation . 
 No definitive antidote for amatoxin poisoning is available , but some specific treatments such as intravenous penicillin G have been shown to improve survivability . There is some evidence that intravenous silibinin , an extract from the blessed milk thistle ( <unk> <unk> ) , may be beneficial in reducing the effects of amatoxins , preventing their uptake by hepatocytes , thereby protecting undamaged hepatic tissue . In patients developing liver failure , a liver transplant is often the only option to prevent death . Liver transplants have become a well @-@ established option in amatoxin poisoning . This is a complicated issue , however , as transplants themselves may have significant complications and mortality ; patients require long @-@ term immunosuppression to maintain the transplant . Evidence suggests that , although survival rates have improved with modern medical treatment , in patients with moderate to severe poisoning up to half of those who did recover suffered permanent liver damage . However , a follow @-@ up study has shown that most survivors recover completely without any sequelae if treated within 36 hours of mushroom ingestion . 
 = 1950 USS Missouri grounding incident = 
 The USS Missouri grounding incident occurred 17 January 1950 when the battleship USS Missouri ( BB @-@ 63 ) ran aground while sailing out of Chesapeake Bay . No casualties occurred during the incident ; however , the battleship remained stuck for over two weeks before being freed from the sand . Damage to the ship incurred from the incident required her to return to port and reenter dry dock for repairs . 
 After the battleship was freed a naval court of inquiry was convened to determine the facts surrounding the grounding . In the end , Captain William D. Brown and a handful of other naval officers were found guilty of negligence for their role in the grounding incident . Captain Brown suffered the loss of 250 places on the promotion list , which effectively ended his naval career . 
 Missouri was repaired and reentered service with the active fleet shortly afterward . She would go on to serve in the Korean War before being decommissioned in 1954 . She entered the Puget Sound Reserve Fleet in Bremerton , Washington , where she remained until being reactivated in 1984 as part of the 600 @-@ ship Navy plan put forth by then President Ronald Reagan and his Navy Secretary John Lehman . 
 = = Background = = 
 Missouri was one of the Iowa @-@ class " fast battleship " designs planned in 1938 by the Preliminary Design Branch at the Bureau of Construction and Repair . She was laid down at the Brooklyn Navy Yard on 6 January 1941 , launched on 29 January 1944 and commissioned on 11 June . The ship was the third of the Iowa class , but the fourth and final Iowa @-@ class ship commissioned by the United States Navy . The ship was christened at her launching by Mary Margaret Truman , daughter of Harry S. Truman , then a United States senator from Missouri . 
 Missouri was active in the Pacific Theatre of World War II , escorting the Fast Carrier Task Forces and shelling beachheads for Allied Army and Marine Corps personnel involved in amphibious operations against the Imperial Japanese forces . After the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki the Empire of Japan capitulated to Allied demands , signing the instrument of surrender to the allied powers aboard Missouri on 2 September 1945 . Afterwards , as part of the ongoing Operation Magic Carpet , Missouri departed Japanese waters with homeward @-@ bound GIs . Between 1945 and 1950 the US fleet of battleships had been entirely decommissioned ; however , Missouri was spared this fate due to the influence of President Harry S. Truman , a native Missourian , who refused to allow the battleship to be decommissioned , and against the advice of Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson , Secretary of the Navy John L. Sullivan , and Chief of Naval Operations Louis E. Denfeld , Truman ordered Missouri to be maintained with the active fleet partly because of his fondness for the battleship and partly because the battleship had been christened by his daughter . As a result , Missouri was involved in various training and flag waving exercises at home and abroad between World War II and the Korean War . 
 = = Events leading to the accident = = 
 In October 1949 , amid increasing political scrutiny , Missouri arrived at the Norfolk Naval Shipyard for three months of scheduled maintenance . During this period Captain Harold Page Smith was relieved by Captain William D. Brown . A graduate of Annapolis and veteran of 30 years , Captain Brown had amassed a distinguished record commanding submarines and destroyers , but had never commanded a ship the size of Missouri , and had not been to sea in a command capacity since World War II . Captain Brown formally assumed command of Missouri on 10 December , just ahead of the completion of maintenance work on the battleship . On 23 December , Brown took the battleship out for a brief trip around the Virginia capes and returned to Norfolk on Christmas Eve . Her next scheduled departure was 17 January , at which time Missouri was to sail to Guantanamo Bay for maneuvers . 
 On 13 January , Brown received a manila envelope from Naval Base Headquarters that contained a request from the Naval Ordnance Laboratory . The request was for the battleship to proceed through a channel in which the United States Navy had strewn acoustic cables as part of an ongoing system development project that aimed to identify ships by their propeller signatures . The request was entirely optional , but as the captain was preoccupied with the details of the upcoming sortie to Cuba he gave the letter little attention and instead referred the matter to his operations officer , Commander John R. Millett , who in turn referred the letter to the ship 's navigator , Lieutenant Commander Frank G. Morris . 
 On 14 January , Captain Brown and his operations and navigating officers met to discuss the upcoming cruise to Cuba and the details surrounding this cruise , and also talk briefly about the acoustical test they were to run . The ship was to pass between two orange @-@ and @-@ white @-@ striped buoys that marked the entrance and exit from the range . The range itself was located precariously close to the " danger bearing " — the shoal area in which the safe 50 – 60 feet ( 15 – 18 m ) of water that could accommodate a ship <unk> to only 10 – 20 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 – 6 @.@ 1 m ) . To make matters worse the range through which Missouri was to pass had originally been marked with five buoys , but this number had been reduced to two buoys two days prior to the arrival of Captain Brown . Morris was aware that three of the five buoys had been removed from the range , but had not received authorization to delete the non @-@ existent buoys from the chart . Although informed of this during the conference , Captain Brown and Commander Millett left the conference under the mistaken belief that there were still five buoys marking the acoustical range . 
 = = Grounding = = 
 At 7 : 25 am 17 January 1950 Missouri set sail for the Atlantic Ocean with harbor pilot R. B. McCoy at the helm . Because of the better view afforded on the forward mast structure , the battleship was sailed through the Chesapeake Bay from the eighth level of the battleship 's forward mast structure . At the time she had a full complement of ammunition and water , and her fuel tanks were 95 % full , which brought Missouri 's total displacement to 57 @,@ 000 tons ; she drew 35 feet ( 11 m ) at her bow and 36 feet 9 inches ( 11 @.@ 20 m ) at her stern . At 7 : 49 am , near the Elizabeth River Channel Buoy 3 , the pilot turned control of the battleship over to Captain Brown and departed for shore . The weather was clear and Missouri was now free to run through the acoustic channel . Missouri sailed toward two red markers that Commander George Peckham believed marked the shoal water in the channel . 
 With the departure of R. B. McCoy , Captain Brown assumed full command of Missouri . He ordered the battleship engines brought to two @-@ thirds speed and order a course set for 053 on the recommendation of navigator , Lieutenant Commander Morris . 
 At 8 : 05 am , as Missouri sailed past Fort Wool , Captain Brown turned control of the ship ( known in naval terms as the " conn " of the ship ) over to the officer of the deck and departed for the chart house . His arrival at the chart house caused Ensign E. R. Harris , who had been tracking the battleship 's course on the chart , to move away from the table , resulting in the interruption of the plot . Around the same time Captain Brown informed Commander Peckham that Missouri would soon run an acoustical range . This was the first time that the executive officer had heard about a planned acoustical range run . 
 Approximately two minutes after departing for the chart room , Captain Brown reemerged on the open bridge and reassumed the conn of the battleship . He summoned Lieutenants Hatfield and Arnold , Missouri 's morning and forenoon officers of the watch , respectively , and informed them of the planned run through the acoustical range . As with Commander Peckham , this was the first time that either of these two men had heard anything about the planned acoustical test run . When Captain Brown noted their confused looks , he promptly informed the men to " Go get yourselves informed " , at which point both officers reported to the chart room on level eight . There they learned of the impending run through the acoustical range by looking at the chart with the buoys marking the range ; despite this , both remained confused over aspects of the planned run . 
 At 8 : 10 am Captain Brown ordered a course change to 060 degrees and informed the men that the conn for the battleship would remain on the eighth @-@ level bridge until they cleared the course . This was unusual for Missouri , as the conn was usually shifted to the fourth @-@ level bridge during the transit at the point when a ship passed Fort Wool and Old Point Comfort . The initial course change to 060 was altered to 058 as a result of a strong ocean current that swung Missouri too far to the right during the course correction . 
 It was at this point that the first indication that something was dangerously amiss during the transit occurred . The executive officer , who passed through the chart room while preparing for the shift change , noticed that Missouri was rapidly approaching the shoal water , and promptly told Morris " For God 's sake watch it ! " At the same time a discussion occurred on the eighth @-@ level bridge as to whether it would be advisable for the battleship 's speed to be increased to 15 knots . Morris and Millet differed in opinion on the idea ; the former felt speed should be reduced five knots , and the latter felt that any steady speed held during the transition would be okay . Captain Brown therefore decided to increase speed to 15 knots , and the engine room replied by increasing power . 
 Around the same time , Lieutenant Arnold located a small buoy with orange @-@ and @-@ white stripes 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) away . Initially this buoy was identified as one of the acoustical range markers as a result of the letter " B " painted on it , but this information was not properly relayed to the rest of the crew . Mistakenly believing that this was the marker was for the right side of the range , both Captain Brown and the battleship 's operation 's officer agreed to order the battleship to pass to the left of the marker . By then Missouri was sailing for the danger line marking the separation between the deep water of the channel into the shallow water of the shoals . This was made apparent when a pair of spar buoys marking the entrance to a shallow fishing channel appeared ahead of Missouri . Brown incorrectly identified these markers as the end of the acoustical range , but several of the quartermasters , as well as Commander Peckham , Lieutenant Arnold , and other officers knew this was an incorrect assumption . It was at this point the first recommendation to turn right was made by Morris , the navigator ; Brown declined because of his mistaken belief that the markers for the fish channel were actually the end of the acoustical range . A similar recommendation from Commander Peckham also went unheeded . 
 Around the same time in Missouri 's Combat Information Center ( CIC ) crew members manning the battleship 's navigational radar system noticed that the radar returns indicated that Missouri was steaming for dangerous waters ; however , the CIC crew did not report this information to the captain . Lieutenant John Carr , the officer on duty in the CIC at the time of the grounding , concluded that radar equipment was likely not operating correctly . Carr later explained the decision not to report the radar information by stating , " the standard practice on board ship did not call for radar advice to the bridge in the absence of specific requests . " He also pointed out that the fathometer , a water depth @-@ reading instrument , was out of order and had not been repaired in the yard . 
 At 8 : 15 am Missouri crossed the danger bearing into the shoal water . At this time Commander Peckham sent a message to Captain Brown stating " Ship heading into Danger shoals . Recommend you come right immediately ! " , but this message was relayed by " talkers " ( men charged with relaying messages for officers to different stations ) and the talker who was supposed to pass Peckham 's message to Brown had a tendency to mumble badly . At the same time Peckham was attempting to alert Brown of the impending grounding , Morris again approached Brown and recommended coming right to avoid the shoal water . Captain Brown did not recall being informed of this , and made no reply to Morris . At this point Morris took a bearing on Thimble Shoals , and alarmed at the impending grounding Morris frantically returned to the captain waving his arms and shouting " Come right ! There 's shoal water ahead ! " A disbelieving Captain Brown dismissed Morris pleas by stating that it was his belief that the navigator did not know where they were . To verify Morris ' claims of impending shoal water , Brown asked Commander Millet to check Morris 's position . As a precautionary move , Brown then ordered Quartermaster Travis , Missouri 's helmsman , to alter course to 058 , but this order came too late . 
 At 8 : 17 am , Missouri slid up on a shoal ( or mud bar ) and stuck to the ground . In a last @-@ ditch effort to save the ship , Peckham sent a message to Brown stating " Come right immediately ! Twist ship ! " , but this effort was too little , too late ; Missouri had already run aground . Her hull had traveled approximately 2 @,@ 500 feet ( 760 m ) , which was very nearly the entire length of the shoal , raising the battleship several feet out of the water , and her engines were shut down after the bay sand began to clog the battleship 's intakes in engineering . She had come to rest on an almost even keel on the sandbar within plain sight of a number of admirals of the United States Navy stationed at Hampton Roads , and similar number of high @-@ ranking officers of the United States Army stationed at Fort Monroe . 
 = = Salvage = = 
 By 8 : 30 am a request went out summoning all available tugs to the site of the grounding with the hope that they would be able to free the leviathan before any further damage occurred . An attempt made by Missouri 's sailors on the day of the grounding met with failure , as did an initial attempt to pull Missouri back into deep water with sixteen tugboats . Before the tugs could lend any further assistance , the naval brass postponed the attempt , pending the outcome of further assessment . Missouri had traversed the shoal nearly 2 @,@ 500 feet , and to compound her problem she had run aground during an unusually high tide . To add insult to injury , she had become the butt of a number of bad jokes among the American public , the navy 's rival service branches , and the Soviet Union 's Atlantic fleet , who were quick to pounce upon the dreadnought 's grounding as material for the naval publication Red Fleet . 
 Initially , high @-@ ranking US Navy officials elected to contract a private salvage firm to free the battleship , but Admiral Smith , at the time Commander , Cruisers , Atlantic , and the man who was responsible for issuing Missouri 's orders disagreed with this plan . He reasoned that if the Navy got her on to the shoal , then they should be responsible for getting her off the shoal . Ultimately , he won his case for a US Navy salvage effort , but he was explicitly informed by officials at The Pentagon that his career would ride on his ability to successfully get Missouri back into deep water . To better organize the salvage effort , Smith and a number of men on his staff moved aboard Missouri to supervise her return to deep water . Smith 's supervision also extended to answering the nearly 10 @,@ 000 letters sent to the Navy from concerned citizens offering advice on how to get the battleship back into deep water . 
 Commanding this salvage effort was Rear Admiral Homer N. Wallin . Wallin was the Navy Yard Commandant at Norfolk , and as a captain he had been instrumental in cleaning up the mess left by the Imperial Japanese Navy after the 7 December 1941 air raid that brought the United States into World War II . In total the salvage team that Wallin commanded successfully resurrected 19 of the 21 ships initially declared total losses and helped to refit those ships to serve in the Second World War . Wallin pledged to assist in the salvage effort , and initiated a five @-@ point plan aimed at getting Missouri off the mud and back into the water : 
 Remove as much weight as possible from the battleship , 
 Lift the ship , 
 Remove as much sand as possible from around the battleship , 
 Use the combined power of the area 's tugboats to pull the battleship , 
 Dredge the channel to provide deep water for Missouri to reenter the shipping lanes . 
 Because Missouri had run aground during an unusually high tide , Wallin required a date on which the tide would be roughly comparable to the conditions under which Missouri was grounded in order to free her . The date selected was 2 February , on which there would be another unusually high tide . With time as a factor Wallin took charge of the operation and put his five point plan into motion . With the assistance of Admiral Smith , Wallin was able to assemble a large salvage force which included submarine rescue ships , special salvage ships , divers , and pontoons to add additional buoyancy for the tug boats when the time came to move Missouri . 
 On 19 January Comber , an army dredge , arrived at the site of the Missouri grounding and began the process of sucking mud out of the intended path through which Missouri would be freed . On 22 January Comber was joined by the civilian run dredge Washington in the dredging phase of Wallin 's plan . Around the time the dredging began Missouri 's crew began offloading all non essential items . Both 16 @-@ inch and 5 @-@ inch shells , powder , food , drink , and other materials were removed from the battleship and placed aboard barges and other ships to help lighten Missouri . At the same time the Cimarron @-@ class fleet oilers Chemung and Pawcatuck began the process of offloading Missouri 's fuel . As the fuel was required to operate the generators aboard Missouri its absence resulted in a shift from supplying the power Missouri required with her own generators to relying on the submarine rescue ships for power and water needs . 
 Originally , the weight reduction phase had included removing the anchors from the battleship , but Wallin ordered one of the anchors to be reattached . His reason for doing so was that the anchor would effectively shift Missouri 's center of gravity forward to a narrower part of the battleship , thereby reducing the friction at her widest point . During this time the Bureau of Ships offered valuable technical and salvage advice to both the civilian and military participants in the salvage effort . 
 On 31 January an attempt was made to free Missouri with the assembled collection of tug boats and salvage ships . This attempt was ultimately unsuccessful , owing to an anchor from a previous wreck that had become embedded in Missouri 's hull . The extreme force generated by the tugs caused several two @-@ inch cables made from wire rope to break , and the failed attempt also revealed that Missouri needed to lose more weight if the next attempt was to be successful . In light of this some additional changes were made for the next attempt , which included cutting the anchors and chains off the battleship after they had been readded at Wallin 's request and the inclusion of additional pontoons to help lighten Missouri even more . A second attempt was tentatively scheduled for 1 February . 
 = = Missouri freed = = 
 On 1 February Missouri was finally freed with the assistance of 23 vessels . Five tug boats pulled alongside , six pulled astern , and three swung to the bow to facilitate movement . Additionally , two Gypsy @-@ class salvage vessels , <unk> and Windlass , and seven yard tugs helped keep the other vessels in place . <unk> anchors were also used to expedite the process . About the time that Missouri began to move again she suffered one last incident : while being towed off the shoal she bumped into Windlass , wiping out a portion of Windlass 's side railing . Thankfully , this damage was insignificant , and as the battleship slowly returned to the harbor the band played Missouri Waltz , Anchors Aweigh , and Nobody Knows the Trouble I 've Seen . Crewmen also hoisted battle flags and hoisted signal flags which read " Reporting for Duty " . A Norfolk harbor pilot was responsible for issuing the engine and rudder orders to the battleship , while Missouri 's own navigator issued course orders for the battleship during the tow . 
 With an audience observing the process , Missouri finally returned to the deep water at 7 : 09 am . Following her liberation from the muddy shoal , Missouri was towed back to the naval yard where her incomplete sister ship Kentucky had been removed from dry dock to allow Missouri to undergo repairs , which apart from structural inspection included replacement of some of her double bottom plating that had buckled and ruptured three fuel tanks . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Captain Brown was court martialed as a result of the incident , pleaded guilty , and was relieved of command of Missouri . As a result of his plea he suffered the loss of 250 places on the list of captains awaiting ships . Four others were court martialed , two were cleared of all charges , one received a letter of reprimand , and one was reduced on the promotion list . Despite these setbacks , Missouri was repaired and returned to fleet . She stayed in commission throughout the Korean War , and after the cease @-@ fire agreement was decommissioned into the United States Navy reserve fleets , where she remained until the 1980s . Despite proof to the contrary , rumors continue to circulate that Missouri suffered permanent damage as a result of the grounding incident . 
 Thereafter , the ship was sometimes referred to as the " Muddy Mo , " a takeoff on " Mighty Mo " . 
 = Kyo Kusanagi = 
 Kyo Kusanagi ( <unk> 京 , Kusanagi Kyō ) is a fictional character in SNK 's The King of Fighters fighting game series ; he was first introduced in The King of Fighters ' 94 as the leader of the Japan team . He is one of the iconic characters in the series and appears regularly on publicity material and merchandise . His name and abilities were designed in order to relate him to the Yamata no Orochi legend . Because he was highly popular , and his outfit changed throughout the series , designers created a few clones with his old appearance . 
 Kyo , heir to the Kusanagi clan , is first introduced as a cocky delinquent high school student who can use pyrokinetic powers . In The King of Fighters universe , his clan is one of the three clans that sealed the legendary snake entity , Yamata no Orochi . Because his clan 's past , Kyo fights against the Kusanagi 's enemies , his rival Iori Yagami , the last member of the Yagami clan , and the Orochi 's soldiers . He enters every The King of Fighters tournament representing Japan and uses his clan 's fighting style of kenpo combined with his pyrokinetic ability . Aside from the main series , Kyo also appears in several other media series including spin @-@ offs and crossover video games as well as comic adaptations of the series . 
 Video game journalists have praised his design and fighting style as one of the best of the series . Reviewers note that he is a necessary character in every video game produced from the series and that he has the best winning pose . A variety of Kyo collectibles have been created , including key chains and figurines . 
 = = Conception and creation = = 
 When designing characters for the first King of Fighters game , developers wanted a new , " snazzy " hero who would easily fight against Fatal Fury and Art of Fighting characters . Through most of his development , Kyo was meant to be called <unk> Kirishima ( <unk> <unk> , Kirishima Shō ) , and was dressed in martial arts clothing common in fighting games at the time . But late in production , his name was changed to Kyo Kusanagi in order to relate him to the Yamata no Orochi legend , which was used as the idea for the first story arc . His fighting style was changed as part of the series ' overhaul in The King of Fighters ' 96 . To appease fans , producers also included an older version of Kyo from KOF ' 94 into The King of Fighters ' 97 and placed The King of Fighters ' 95 version of Kyo in The King of Fighters ' 98 , which made both versions of Kyo popular during location tests . Developers of the game decided that Kyo 's main skill would be fire along with the other movesets from the other members of the original Japan Team inspired by the anime Getter Robo . In addition , the three members of the Japan Team had personalities similar to those of the main characters from such anime . Kyo was based on the main character who had a fiery persona . The elements and the personalities are also an homage to a Japanese phrase about giving birth to fire ; it is roughly translated : " lighting strikes the earth which sparks the flame " . According to Kyo 's designer , Ashita no Joe and Devilman were influences too . 
 The idea of having two <unk> at once led to the concept of his clones . During the early stages of the development of The King of Fighters ' 99 , SNK planned to avoid adding Kyo and Iori Yagami to the game , as the story 's focus was meant to center on the new protagonist , K ' . However , they reversed this decision as " they couldn 't leave these popular characters in limbo " . Kyo was redesigned for the game , but some designers wanted to return to his iconic school uniform . When they were nearing the end of their production schedule , staff members could not decide which uniform the Kyo clone should wear . The project head decided to make two clones instead . To save time , the project head drew designs for Kyo @-@ 1 and Kyo @-@ 2 on the character roster . The same event was repeated in The King of Fighters 2002 ; the designers created another clone from Kyo called Kusanagi to include his school uniform design . 
 Although Kyo retains his third outfit in The King of Fighters XII , his moves were modified to his original ones from the first two games of the series . This was done in order to make the character fight in close quarters rather than using projectiles , improving the balance of the roster , and making fights more entertaining . His signature move , the <unk> ( <unk> ) , was given a mid @-@ air variation for The King of Fighters XIII with designers keeping in mind the concept of coolness as well as the small difficulty in performing it . Kyo 's Neo Max technique , the " Ura 121 Shiki : Ama @-@ no @-@ Murakumo ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) " , was the first move of this category to be made for the game . As a result , all the other characters ' Neo Max techniques were made according Kyo 's in order to keep a balance of flashy moves . 
 Kyo 's appears repeatedly in the series at the insistence of the marketers and the main planners . Iori , and other SNK regulars also appear in every game , making it a challenge to decide the storyline for each title . Along with his rival Iori , it has been noted by several of the series ' designers that Kyo is one of the most difficult characters to illustrate because of his popularity among fans . Originally , Kyo 's girlfriend , Yuki , was not meant to be conceptualized , since her first mention ever in the story was in Kyo 's profile as one of his most cherished possessions . Her addition to his profile was done by one of the programmers mostly as a joke since Kyo was more popular with female gamers . 
 For The King of Fighters XIV , Kyo was made slimmer and given a modern redesign . Kyo 's Japanese voice actor , Masahiro Nonaka , related with his character as he was young and reckless until he " grew up " ; in his later appearances he expressed some difficulty accepting Kyo on the same level . Tomoaki Maeno replaced Nonaka for The King of Fighters XIV . Maeno said he was putting all his efforts when Kyo and expected the fandom to enjoy his work . 
 = = Attributes = = 
 Kyo is an overconfident but well @-@ meaning person , more interested in enjoying life than taking on responsibilities . He is quick to dismiss subjects that do not interest him and will often carry out his actions with a devil @-@ may @-@ care attitude . He treasures his friends and family , enjoying their presence and particularly dotes on his girlfriend , Yuki . His strong sense of justice and zeal to fight stronger opponents are what he believes drives him to carry out his destiny . Kyo enters most of The King of Fighters tournaments representing the Japanese team along with teammates Benimaru Nikaido and Goro Daimon . In his fights he uses the clan 's martial art , the Kusanagi @-@ style of <unk> ( Kusanagi @-@ ryū <unk> ) , attacking opponents using flames along with several hits . In later series ' tournaments he would combine fire with a personal style of <unk> . 
 Kyo is one of the last members of the Kusanagi clan who can create fire . 660 years ago , the Kusanagi and Yasakani clans were allies . However , due to the latter 's jealousy over the former 's fame , the Yasakani made a pact with the demon Orochi for more power . Since then , the clans have had a generation long grudge with casualties on both sides . His rivalry with Iori is one of mutual hatred and was not spurred by their clans ' history . When they join forces , it is begrudgingly as a last resort solution to the conflict at hand . Kyo takes his responsibilities to his clan on a more personal level , disregarding ancient legends and predestined events as any reason for his actions . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 In the first The King of Fighters video game , Kyo stars in the famous fighting tournament as the leader of the Japan team along with Benimaru Nikaido and Goro Daimon . They become the champions and defeat the host Rugal Bernstein . In the next video game , the Japan Team once again faces Rugal as well as Kyo 's brainwashed father , Saisyu . While Rugal dies , Saisyu is saved from Rugal 's control . Prior to the events of The King of Fighters ' 96 , one of the Four Heavenly Kings of the legendary creature Orochi , Goenitz , easily defeats Kyo . The current host , Chizuru Kagura , wants to gather Kyo and Iori Yagami on her team to defeat Orochi in the same way as their ancestors and stop Goenitz . In The King of Fighters ' 97 Kyo faces Orochi 's remaining followers and eventually Orochi himself , possessing one of them . However , Kyo and Iori defeat him . In KOF ' 98 , Kyo appears as a playable character on the Japan Team with Benimaru and Daimon . An alternative version of his character , with movesets used in previous games , is also playable . 
 Kyo is a secret character in most versions of The King of Fighters ' 99 , and has no team . In the story , Kyo is kidnapped by the NESTS syndicate to use his DNA to make various clones of himself . He tries to obtain answers personally from his captors entering their base but is forced to retreat when the place around him begins to collapse . Depending on how many points the player has when the game finishes , Kyo can be faced as a bonus fight . He continues his fight against the NESTS alone in The King of Fighters 2000 and in the next game , Kyo reunites with his old teammates , and his student Shingo Yabuki , to make a comeback on the Japan Team . In KOF 2002 , Kyo is a playable character on the original Japan Team . 
 In The King of Fighters 2003 , Chizuru appears to both Kyo and Iori , asking that they form a team to investigate suspicious activities concerning the Orochi seal . During the investigation , the team is ambushed by the fighter Ash Crimson who plans to get their clans ' powers , and steal them from Chizuru . In The King of Fighters XI , Kyo and Iori once again form a team with Shingo filling Chizuru 's spot to stop Ash . However , the growing presence of the Orochi causes Iori to go berserk , forcing him to harm his teammates . Ash then appears and steals Iori 's abilities after defeating him . In King of Fighters XII , Kyo is a playable character , but like each of them , he does not have a team . Kyo reunites with the original members of the <unk> Team in The King of Fighters XIII . Additionally , an alternative version of himself , with different moves called NESTS Style Kyo , is available as downloadable content . 
 He is set to return in the upcoming The King of Fighters XIV with his old comrades , whereas his classic form will appear as a pre @-@ order bonus and downloadable content . 
 A role @-@ playing video game was created with the name of The King of Fighters : Kyo in which Kyo travels around the world to prepare for The King of Fighters tournament until the events of KOF ' 97 . Kyo appears in the spin @-@ off video games of the series Neowave and Maximum Impact series . In Maximum Impact 2 , he is also playable as his classic version from the first games as well as with a new outfit . In each North American edition from Maximum Impact , Kyo is played by Andrew Roth , an English voice actor . During The King of Fighters EX : Neo Blood , Moe Habana , the heir of one of the ten sacred treasures , finds Kyo seriously wounded after his fight against Orochi . After healing him , Moe joins Kyo along with Benimaru to participate in a tournament developed by the criminal Geese Howard , who is searching for the power from Orochi . In the game sequel , The King of Fighters EX2 : Howling Blood , Reiji Okami , another member of the ten sacred treasured , asks Kyo to join him as his teammate in a new tournament so that they can investigate who is interfering with the Orochi seal . 
 Kyo has also appeared in video games outside The King of Fighters series . He is a playable character in the shooter game Sky Stage . In the crossover video games Neo Geo Battle Coliseum and SNK vs. Capcom series , Kyo appears as a playable character ; in the former game he appears with his 99 costume , while in the latter he is in his school uniform . Kyo is also meant to be featured in the card battle video game Lord of Vermillion Re : 2 's Tie @-@ Ups . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Aside from the main series , Kyo has also appeared in other media from The King of Fighters series . In the anime , The King of Fighters : Another Day , he is featured prominently in the fourth chapter . A number of image songs and audio dramas featuring Kyo 's character have been released , including the contents of his own character image album consisting of a number of his theme songs . Kyo also appears in the manhua adaptation of The King of Fighters : Zillion that was created by Andy Seto . This manhua tells Kyo 's and Iori 's story between their fight against Orochi until the one against NESTS . He stars in further <unk> for the games , starting with The King of Fighters 2001 through the King of Fighters 2003 along with the Maximum Impact series . He also has a spin @-@ off manga story based on the events following The King of Fighters ' 95 entitled , The King of Fighters : Kyo created by Masato <unk> , who also did the character design for the eponymous action RPG ( set as a parallel story to the events of The King of Fighters ' 97 ) for the PlayStation . In the The King of Fighters movie Kyo is played by Sean Faris , and is portrayed as Japanese @-@ American . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kyo 's character has received praise and criticism from several video game publications and other media . The website IGN 's writer A.E. Sparrow , has commented that Kyo is one of the most enjoyable characters to play in the King of Fighters series praising the dynamism of his moveset and fighting style . In another review , they considered him to be one of the most useful characters from the games and one of the best ones for " veteran players " . However , they lamented the fact that Kyo has a few appearances in the volume from the manhua The King of Fighters 2003 in comparison to Ash Crimson , who is the greater focus of the series . His recurring interactions with Iori Yagami during fights were called appealing despite the fact English @-@ speaking gamers are not able to understand them ; they add depth to the games , even though some lack a storyline . The ending of Kyo in The King of Fighters ' 97 has been considered by 1UP.com as one of the strangest parts of the story . However , they considered Kyo 's winning pose as the best from the series . On the other hand , <unk> enjoyed Kyo 's ending with Chizuru Kagura and Iori , stating " this [ is how you write a climax to a four @-@ year @-@ long story ] " as it was closing the ending of the Orochi story arc from the series . Damien McFerran of Virtual Console Reviews considered Kyo one of the most excellent creations from The King of Fighters series , as well as the most original one . <unk> M. <unk> of Eurogamer praised Kyo , along with Iori , and considered him a veteran character with one of the most unpredictable appearances in the series . In a retrospective view of the series ' debut , Videogamer.com called Kyo one of the most popular video game characters from Japan . GameSpot has criticized the addition of the Kyo clones in The King of Fighters ' 99 , commenting they do not add new elements to the game since they share most of the moves of the original Kyo . In 2012 , Complex ranked Kyo as the 11th Most Dominant Fighting Game Character praising his special moves and labeling him as a " cool " character . 
 Kyo has been well @-@ received by gamers , with his character appearing in several popularity polls . In Gamest 's 1997 Heroes Collection , Kyo was voted as the staff 's second favorite character , behind his rival Iori . In a 2005 poll made by SNK @-@ Playmore USA , he was voted the sixth fan favorite character with a total of 176 votes . Additionally , in the January 30 , 1995 issue of Gamest magazine in Japan , Kyo was featured at No. 4 in the Top 50 Characters of 1994 . In the character popularity poll on Neo Geo Freak 's website , he was voted as the third favorite character with a total of 2 @,@ 574 votes . For the special endings in The King of Fighters ' 97 , three video games journals , Gamest , Famitsu and Neo Geo Freak , had to create a team composed of three characters from the game so that they would be featured in an image after passing the arcade mode . The Neo Geo Freak 's team created a team composed of Kyo , Mai Shiranui and Billy Kane . The special ending only appears in Japanese versions of the game . In an ASCII Media Works poll in which fans voted on whose video game or manga character they would like to name their children after , Kyo 's name was tenth in the male category . Merchandising based on Kyo 's appearance has also been released . Yutaka released an articulated action figure and a puzzle of Kyo from <unk> ' 97 . With the release of new video games in the series , SNK developed new action figures as well as key @-@ chains . 
 = Tropical Storm Christine ( 1973 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Christine was the easternmost forming Atlantic tropical cyclone on record . Forming as a tropical depression over the country of Guinea on August 25 , 1973 , the system tracked nearly due west for several days before intensifying into a tropical storm on August 28 . However , the National Hurricane Center did not issue their first advisory on the system until its intensity was confirmed by a reconnaissance aircraft on August 30 . Turning slightly northward , Christine gradually intensified , attaining its peak strength on September 2 . At that time , the storm had winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 996 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 41 inHg ) , just below hurricane status . Shortly after , increasing wind shear caused the system to quickly weaken . By September 4 , Christine had been downgraded to a tropical depression as it tracked through the Leeward Islands . After degenerating into a tropical wave , the cyclone 's remnants fully dissipated on September 6 . 
 Although Christine had weakened to a tropical depression by the time it passed through the Leeward Islands , heavy rains from the storm , peaking at 11 @.@ 74 in ( 298 mm ) , caused flooding in Puerto Rico . Over 600 homes were flooded and dozens of families had to be evacuated from several towns . One person died from electrocution after stepping on a downed wire on a flooded street . Minor damage was recorded in the Virgin Islands , mainly downed power lines which left roughly 500 people without telephone service . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Christine originated from a tropical wave over Africa in late @-@ August . As it neared the Atlantic Ocean , the wave spawned a tropical depression at 14 @.@ 0 ° W , over the country of Guinea , on August 25 . The formation of this depression was farther east than any other tropical cyclone on record in the Atlantic hurricane basin , although storms may have gone undetected prior to the start of satellite imagery in the 1960s . This record would not be approached by any other storm until Hurricane Jeanne in 1998 , which formed at 17 @.@ 4 ° W. This was unlike most cyclone producing waves which travel several hundred miles over water before spawning a depression . Tracking nearly due west , the depression moved over water several hours later and bypassed the Cape Verde Islands on August 27 . 
 The following day , the depression intensified into a tropical storm ; however , advisories were not issued by the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) on the system until August 30 because of the lack of reconnaissance aircraft data . It was determined that Christine had become a tropical storm by this time after receiving reports of gale @-@ force winds from a German cargo ship in the vicinity of the storm . The first advisory from the NHC came after a reconnaissance plane found sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 1007 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 74 inHg ) . At that time , Christine was located roughly 1000 mi ( 1 @,@ 500 km ) east of Trinidad . Although the storm was relatively disorganized by this point , satellite imagery showed large outer bands extending hundreds of miles ( kilometres ) from the storm . 
 By August 31 , the storm began to slow and turn towards the west @-@ northwest . The NHC noted that they did not have a firm grip on the storm and were unsure of its future track and intensity . Below average sea surface temperatures ahead of the system would hamper significant development . Continuing on this track , Christine gradually intensified and on September 2 , the storm attained its peak intensity just below hurricane @-@ status while situated roughly 300 mi ( 500 km ) east of Guadeloupe . At this time , a reconnaissance aircraft recorded sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 996 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 41 inHg ) . Shortly after Christine attained this intensity , increasing wind shear caused the storm to weaken as it neared the Leeward Islands . 
 The NHC noted that a trough ahead of Christine would determine the future of the storm . This trough would either merge with the storm and allow significant intensification , or remain separate and cause Christine to dissipate . By September 3 , the low @-@ level circulation had been displaced from all convective activity and Christine weakened to a tropical depression . Several hours after weakening , the depression passed over Antigua with winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . The following day , the system degenerated into a tropical wave near the northeastern coast of the Dominican Republic . The remnants of Christine were monitored by the NHC for several days before dissipating near the trough on September 6 . 
 = = = Observation = = = 
 Throughout its existence , Christine was monitored by astronauts in the Skylab 3 project . During this project , active and passive microwave satellite imagery was used for the first time to determine the wind speed within a tropical cyclone . This was accomplished after the removal of regions of heavy rain from the data , a factor that gives inaccurate wind readings . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On September 2 , the National Hurricane Center issued gale warnings and hurricane watches for Guadeloupe , Desirade , Antigua and Barbuda . Later that day , the gale warnings were expanded southward to include islands north of Dominica . After Christine weakened to a tropical depression , the NHC discontinued all watches and warnings for the Leeward Islands . Schools were closed in Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands as a precaution . Six scientists had to be evacuated from the small island of Aves once the storm posed a threat to them . On St. Thomas , nine emergency shelters were opened , mainly in schools . On September 5 , an emergency meeting was held by disaster officials in Puerto Rico about the threat of flooding from Christine . All residents were urged by government officials to have their disaster kits ready and be prepared to evacuate if told to do so . Firefighters , on and off @-@ duty , were advised about the possibility of evacuations and would be pulled into work if needed . 
 During its passage through the Leeward Islands , Christine produced torrential rainfall , peaking at 11 @.@ 74 in ( 298 mm ) in eastern Puerto Rico . A maximum of 3 @.@ 16 in ( 80 mm ) also fell in the United States Virgin Islands . Rainfall totals on other islands are unknown but are likely similar to those in the U.S. Virgin Islands . The precipitation led to flooding on several islands . One person was killed during the storm after being electrocuted by a downed power line on a flooded road . Public works crews worked throughout the storm to keep roads clear ; however , one road that was under construction became a " sea of mud " as crews could not clear the flood waters fast enough . The towns of Yabucoa , Humacao , Maunabo , Las Piedras and Carolinas sustained flood damage from the storm . In Yabucoa , 40 families were evacuated as 25 homes were damaged . The most substantial flooding took place in Humacao where 60 families were evacuated and 500 homes sustained damage . A total of six bridges , four sewer systems and 14 homes were damaged in Maunabo . An additional 21 people were evacuated from Las Piedras and 41 homes were damaged and in Carolinas , 23 more homes were damaged . Although there was extensive property damage , no monetary value is available . 
 Numerous calls were made to police in the United States Virgin Islands about downed power lines throughout the passage of the depression . High winds , gusting up to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) left roughly 500 people without telephone service on St. Croix . No major damage was reported on any of the affected islands in the wake of Christine . Residents in the drought @-@ stricken regions of Florida were hoping for increased rainfall from the remnant wave of Christine ; however , the system did not reach the United States before dissipating . The storm 's remnants only produced squally weather in Florida on September 7 and 8 . 
 = Geology of Scotland = 
 The geology of Scotland is unusually varied for a country of its size , with a large number of differing geological features . There are three main geographical sub @-@ divisions : the Highlands and Islands is a diverse area which lies to the north and west of the Highland Boundary Fault ; the Central Lowlands is a rift valley mainly comprising Paleozoic formations ; and the Southern Uplands , which lie south of the Southern Uplands Fault , are largely composed of Silurian deposits . 
 The existing bedrock includes very ancient Archean gneiss , metamorphic beds interspersed with granite intrusions created during the Caledonian mountain building period ( the Caledonian orogeny ) , commercially important coal , oil and iron bearing carboniferous deposits and the remains of substantial Paleogene volcanoes . During their formation , tectonic movements created climatic conditions ranging from polar to desert to tropical and a resultant diversity of fossil remains . 
 Scotland has also had a role to play in many significant discoveries such as plate tectonics and the development of theories about the formation of rocks and was the home of important figures in the development of the science including James Hutton ( the " father of modern geology " ) , Hugh Miller and Archibald Geikie . Various locations such as ' Hutton 's Unconformity ' at Siccar Point in Berwickshire and the Moine Thrust in the north west were also important in the development of geological science . 
 = = Overview = = 
 From a geological and geomorphological perspective the country has three main sub @-@ divisions all of which were affected by Pleistocene glaciations . 
 = = = Highlands and Islands = = = 
 The Highlands and Islands lie to the north and west of the Highland Boundary Fault , which runs from Arran to Stonehaven . This part of Scotland largely comprises ancient rocks , from Cambrian and Precambrian times , that were uplifted to form a mountain chain during the later Caledonian orogeny . These foundations are interspersed with many igneous intrusions of more recent age , the remnants of which have formed mountain massifs such as the Cairngorms and Skye Cuillins . A significant exception to the above are the fossil @-@ bearing beds of the Old Red Sandstone found principally along the Moray Firth coast and in the Orkney islands . These rocks are around 400 million years old , and were laid down in the Devonian period . The Highlands are generally mountainous and are bisected by the Great Glen Fault . The highest elevations in the British Isles are found here , including Ben Nevis , the highest peak at 1 @,@ 344 metres ( 4 @,@ 409 ft ) . Scotland has over 790 islands , divided into four main groups : Shetland , Orkney , and the Hebrides , further sub @-@ divided into the Inner Hebrides and Outer Hebrides . 
 The Hebridean archipelago outlier of St Kilda is composed of Paleogene igneous formations of granites and gabbro , heavily weathered by the elements . These islands represent the remnants of a long extinct ring volcano rising from a seabed plateau approximately 40 m ( 130 ft ) below sea level . 
 The geology of Shetland is complex with numerous faults and folds . These islands are Scotland 's most northerly area of Caledonian orogenic rocks and there are outcrops of Lewisian , Dalradian and Moine metamorphic rocks with similar histories to their equivalents on the Scottish mainland . Similarly , there are also Old Red Sandstone deposits and granite intrusions . The most distinctive feature is the ultrabasic ophiolite peridotite and gabbro on Unst and Fetlar , which are remnants of the Iapetus Ocean floor . Much of Shetland 's economy depends on the oil @-@ bearing sediments in the surrounding seas . 
 = = = Midland Valley = = = 
 Often referred to as the Central Lowlands , this is a rift valley mainly comprising Paleozoic formations . Many of these sediments have economic significance for it is here that the coal and iron bearing rocks that fuelled Scotland 's industrial revolution are to be found . This area has also experienced intense vulcanism , Arthur 's Seat in Edinburgh being the remnant of a once much larger volcano active in the Carboniferous period some 300 million years ago . This area is relatively low @-@ lying , although even here hills such as the <unk> and Campsie Fells are rarely far from view . 
 = = = Southern Uplands = = = 
 The Southern Uplands are a range of hills almost 200 km ( 120 mi ) long , interspersed with broad valleys . They lie south of a second fault line running from Ballantrae towards Dunbar . The geological foundations largely comprise Silurian deposits laid down some 4 @-@ 500 million years ago . 
 = = = Post @-@ glacial events = = = 
 The whole of Scotland was covered by ice sheets during the Pleistocene ice ages and the landscape is much affected by glaciation , and to a lesser extent by subsequent sea level changes . In the post @-@ glacial epoch , circa 6100 BC , Scotland and the Faeroe Islands experienced a tsunami up to 20 metres high caused by the Storegga Slides , an immense underwater landslip off the coast of Norway . Earth tremors are infrequent and usually slight . The Great Glen is the most seismically active area of Britain , but the last event of any size was in 1901 . 
 = = Chronology = = 
 = = = Archean and Proterozoic eons = = = 
 The oldest rocks of Scotland are the Lewisian gneisses , which were formed in the Precambrian period , up to 3 @,@ 000 Ma ( million years ago ) . They are among the oldest rocks in both Europe and the World . They form the basement to the west of the Moine Thrust on the mainland , in the Outer Hebrides and on the islands of Coll and Tiree . These rocks are largely igneous in origin , mixed with metamorphosed marble , quartzite and mica schist and intruded by later basaltic dykes and granite magma . One of these intrusions forms the summit plateau of the mountain <unk> in Harris . The granite here is anorthosite , and is similar in composition to rocks found in the mountains of the Moon . 
 Torridonian sandstones were also laid down in this period over the gneisses , and these contain the oldest signs of life in Scotland . In later Precambrian times , thick sediments of sandstones , limestones muds and lavas were deposited in what is now the Highlands of Scotland . 
 = = = Paleozoic era = = = 
 = = = = Cambrian period = = = = 
 Further sedimentary deposits were formed through the Cambrian period ( 542 – 488 Ma ) , some of which , along with the earlier Precambrian sediments , metamorphosed into the Dalradian series . This is composed of a wide variety of materials , including mica schist , biotite gneiss schist , <unk> grit , greywacke and quartzite . The area that would become Scotland was at this time close to the south pole and part of Laurentia . Fossils from the north @-@ west Highlands indicate the presence of trilobites and other primitive forms of life . 
 = = = = Ordovician period = = = = 
 The proto @-@ Scotland landmass moved northwards , and from 460 – 430 Ma , sandstone , mudstone and limestone were deposited in the area that is now the Midland Valley . This occurred in shallow tropical seas at the margins of the Iapetus Ocean . The Ballantrae Complex near Girvan was formed from this ocean floor and is similar in composition to rocks found at The Lizard in Cornwall . Nonetheless , northern and southern Britain were far apart at the beginning of this period , although the gap began to close as the continent of Avalonia broke away from Gondwana , collided with Baltica and drifted towards Laurentia . The Caledonian orogeny began forming a mountain chain from Norway to the Appalachians . There was an ice age in the southern hemisphere , and the first mass extinction of life on Earth took place at the end of this period . 
 = = = = Silurian period = = = = 
 During the Silurian period ( 443 – 416 Ma ) the continent of Laurentia gradually collided with Baltica , joining Scotland to the area that would become England and Europe . Sea levels rose as the Ordovician ice sheets melted , and tectonic movements created major faults which assembled the outline of Scotland from previously scattered fragments . These faults are the Highland Boundary Fault , separating the Lowlands from the Highlands , the Great Glen Fault that divides the North @-@ west Highlands from the Grampians , the Southern Uplands Fault and the Iapetus Suture , which runs from the Solway Firth to Lindisfarne and which marks the close of the Iapetus Ocean and the joining of northern and southern Britain . 
 Silurian rocks form the Southern Uplands of Scotland , which were pushed up from the sea bed during the collision with Baltica / Avalonia . The majority of the rocks are weakly metamorphosed coarse greywacke . The Highlands were also affected by these collisions , creating a series of thrust faults in the northwest Highlands including the Moine Thrust , the understanding of which played an important role in 19th century geological thinking . Volcanic activity occurred across Scotland as a result of the collision of the tectonic plates , with volcanoes in southern Scotland , and magma chambers in the north , which today form the granite mountains such as the Cairngorms . 
 = = = = Devonian period = = = = 
 The Scottish landmass now formed part of the Old Red Sandstone Continent and lay some 25 degrees south of the equator , moving slowly north during this period to 10 degrees south . The accumulations of Old Red Sandstone laid down from 408 to 370 million years ago were created as earlier Silurian rocks , uplifted by the formation of Pangaea , eroded and were deposited into a body of fresh water ( probably a series of large river deltas ) . A huge freshwater lake - Lake Orcadie - existed on the edges of the eroding mountains stretching from Shetland to the southern Moray Firth . The formations are extremely thick , up to 11 @,@ 000 metres in places , and can be subdivided into three categories " Lower " , " Middle " , and " Upper " from oldest to youngest . As a result , the Old Red Sandstone is an important source of fish fossils and it was the object of intense geological studies in the 19th century . In Scotland these rocks are found predominantly in the Moray Firth basin and Orkney Archipelago , and along the southern margins of the Highland Boundary Fault . 
 Elsewhere volcanic activity , possibly as a result of the closing of the Iapetus Suture , created the Cheviot Hills , <unk> Hills , Sidlaw Hills , parts of the Pentland Hills and <unk> Ness on the Angus coast . 
 = = = = Carboniferous period = = = = 
 During the Carboniferous period ( 359 – 299 Ma ) , Scotland lay close to the equator . Several changes in sea level occurred and the coal deposits of Lanarkshire and West Lothian and limestones of Fife and Dunbar date from this time . There are oil shales near Bathgate around which the 19th @-@ century oil @-@ processing industry developed , and elsewhere in the Midland Valley there are <unk> and fire clay deposits that had significance in the early Industrial Revolution . Fossil Grove in Victoria Park , Glasgow contains the preserved remains of a Carboniferous forest . More volcanic activity formed Arthur 's Seat and the Salisbury Crags in Edinburgh and the nearby Bathgate Hills . 
 = = = = Permian period = = = = 
 The Old Red Sandstone Continent became a part of the supercontinent Pangaea in the Permian ( 299 – 251 Ma ) , during which proto @-@ Britain continued to drift northwards . Scotland 's climate was arid at this time and some fossils of reptiles have been recovered . However , Permian sandstones are found in only a few places - principally in the south west , on the island of Arran , and on the Moray coast . Stone quarried from <unk> in Moray has been used in the National Museum and Scottish Parliament buildings in Edinburgh . 
 At the close of this period came the Permian – Triassic extinction event in which 96 % of all marine species vanished and from which bio @-@ diversity took 30 million years to recover . 
 = = = Mesozoic era = = = 
 = = = = Triassic period = = = = 
 During the Triassic ( 251 – 200 Ma ) , much of Scotland remained in desert conditions , with higher ground in the Highlands and Southern Uplands providing sediment to the surrounding basins via flash floods . This is the origin of sandstone outcrops near Dumfries , Elgin and the Isle of Arran . Towards the close of this period sea levels began to rise and climatic conditions became less arid . 
 = = = = Jurassic period = = = = 
 As the Jurassic ( 200 – 145 Ma ) started , Pangaea began to break up into two continents , Gondwana and Laurasia , marking the beginning of the separation of Scotland and North America . Sea levels rose , as Britain and Ireland drifted on the Eurasian Plate to between 30 ° and 40 ° north . Most of northern and eastern Scotland including Orkney , Shetland and the Outer Hebrides remained above the advancing seas , but the south and south @-@ west were inundated . There are only isolated sedimentary rocks remaining on land from this period , on the Sutherland coast near <unk> and , forming the Great Estuarine Group , on Skye , Mull , Raasay and Eigg . This period does however have considerable significance . The burial of algae and bacteria below the mud of the sea floor during this time resulted in the formation of North Sea oil and natural gas , much of it trapped in overlying sandstone by deposits formed as the seas fell to form the swamps and salty lakes and lagoons that were home to dinosaurs . 
 = = = = Cretaceous period = = = = 
 In the Cretaceous ( 146 – 66 Ma ) , Laurasia split into the continents of North America and Eurasia . Sea levels rose globally during this period and much of low @-@ lying Scotland was covered in a layer of chalk . Although large deposits of Cretaceous rocks were laid down over Scotland , these have not survived erosion except in a few places on the west coast such as Loch Aline in Morvern where they form a part of the Inner Hebrides Group . At the end of this period the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event brought the age of dinosaurs to a close . 
 = = = Cenozoic era = = = 
 = = = = Paleogene period = = = = 
 In the early Paleogene period between 63 and 52 Ma , the last volcanic rocks in the British Isles were formed . As North America and Greenland separated from Europe , the Atlantic Ocean slowly formed . This led to a chain of volcanic sites west of mainland Scotland including on Skye , the Small Isles and St. Kilda , in the Firth of Clyde on Arran and Ailsa Craig and at Ardnamurchan . Sea levels began to fall , and for the first time the general outline of the modern British Isles was revealed . At the beginning of this period the climate was sub @-@ tropical and erosion was caused by chemical weathering , creating characteristic features of the Scottish landscape such as the topographical basin of the Howe of Alford near Aberdeen . The vegetation of the period is known from Paleocene sedimentary deposits on Isle of Mull . The rich flora here included temperate @-@ climate tree species such as plane , hazel , oak , <unk> , Metasequoia and ginkgo . 
 = = = = Neogene period = = = = 
 = = = = = Miocene and Pliocene epochs = = = = = 
 In the Miocene and Pliocene epochs further uplift and erosion occurred in the Highlands . Plant and animal types developed into their modern forms . Scotland lay in its present position on the globe . As the Miocene progressed , temperatures dropped and remained similar to today 's . 
 = = = = = Pleistocene epoch = = = = = 
 Several ice ages shaped the land through glacial erosion , creating u @-@ shaped valleys and depositing boulder clays , especially on the western seaboard . The last major incursion of ice peaked about 18 @,@ 000 years ago , leaving other remnant features such at the granite <unk> on the Cairngorm Mountain plateaux . 
 = = = = = Holocene epoch = = = = = 
 Over the last twelve thousand years the most significant new geological features have been the deposits of peat and the development of coastal alluvium . Post @-@ glacial rises in sea level have been combined with isostatic rises of the land resulting in a relative fall in sea level in most areas . In some places , such as Culbin in Moray , these changes in relative sea level have created a complex series of shorelines . A rare type of Scottish coastline found largely in the Hebrides consists of machair habitat , a low lying dune pasture land formed as the sea level dropped leaving a raised beach . In the present day , Scotland continues to move slowly north . 
 = = Geologists in Scotland = = 
 Scottish geologists and non @-@ Scots working in Scotland have played an important part in the development of the science , especially during its pioneering period in the late 18th century and 19th century . 
 James Hutton ( 1726 – 1797 ) , the " father of modern geology " , was born in Edinburgh . His Theory of the Earth , published in 1788 , proposed the idea of a rock cycle in which weathered rocks form new sediments and that granites were of volcanic origin . At Glen Tilt in the Cairngorm mountains he found granite penetrating metamorphic schists . This showed to him that granite formed from the cooling of molten rock , not precipitation out of water as the <unk> of the time believed . This sight is said to have " filled him with delight " . Regarding geological time scales he famously remarked " that we find no vestige of a beginning , no prospect of an end " . 
 John Playfair ( 1748 – 1819 ) from Angus was a mathematician who developed an interest in geology through his friendship with Hutton . His 1802 Illustrations of the <unk> Theory of the Earth were influential in the latter 's success . 
 John MacCulloch ( 1773 – 1835 ) was born in Guernsey and like Hutton before him , studied medicine at Edinburgh University . A president of the Geological Society from 1815 – 17 , he is best remembered for producing the first geological map of Scotland , published in 1836 . ' MacCulloch 's Tree ' , a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) high fossil conifer in the Mull lava flows , is named after him . 
 Sir Charles Lyell ( 1797 – 1875 ) was also from Angus and his Principles of Geology built on Hutton 's ideas . Lyell 's theory of uniformitarianism and his interpretation of geologic change as the steady accumulation of minute changes over enormously long spans of time was a central theme in the Principles , and a powerful influence on the young Charles Darwin . ( Robert FitzRoy , captain of HMS Beagle , loaned Darwin a copy of Volume 1 of the first edition just before they set out on the ' Voyage of the Beagle ' . ) Lyell is buried in Westminster Abbey . 
 Sir Roderick Murchison ( 1792 – 1871 ) was born in Ross and Cromarty and served under Wellesley in the Peninsular War . Knighted in 1846 , his main achievements were the investigation of Silurian rocks published as The Silurian System in 1839 and of Permian deposits in Russia . The Murchison crater on the Moon and at least fifteen geographical locations on Earth are named after him . 
 Hugh Miller ( 1802 – 56 ) from Cromarty was a stonemason and self @-@ taught geologist . His 1841 publication The Old Red Sandstone became a bestseller . The fossils founds in these rocks were one of his fascinations , although his deep religious convictions led him to oppose the idea of biological evolution . 
 James Croll ( 1821 – 90 ) developed a theory of climate change based on changes in the Earth 's orbit . Born near Perth , he was self @-@ educated and his interest in science led to his becoming appointed as a janitor in the museum at the <unk> College and Museum , Glasgow in 1859 . His 1864 paper On the Physical Cause of the Changes of Climate during Glacial <unk> led to a position in the Edinburgh office of the Geological Survey of Scotland , as keeper of maps and correspondence , where Sir Archibald Geikie , encouraged his research . He was eventually to become a Fellow of the Royal Society . 
 Sir Archibald Geikie ( 1835 – 1924 ) was the first to recognise that there had been multiple glaciations , and his 1863 paper On the glacial drift of Scotland was a landmark in the emergent theories of glaciation . He became Director @-@ General of the Geological Survey of the United Kingdom in 1888 and was also well known for his work on vulcanism . 
 Arthur Holmes ( 1890 – 1965 ) was born in England and became Regius Professor of Geology at the University of Edinburgh in 1943 . His magnum opus was Principles of Physical Geology , first published in 1944 , in which he proposed the idea that slow moving convection currents in the Earth 's mantle created ' continental drift ' as it was then called . He also pioneered the discipline of geochronology . He lived long enough to see the theory of plate tectonics become widely accepted , and he is regarded as one of the most influential geologists of the 20th century . 
 = = Important sites = = 
 = = = Siccar Point = = = 
 Siccar Point , Berwickshire is world famous as one of the sites that proved Hutton 's views about the immense age of the Earth . Here Silurian rocks have been tilted almost to the vertical . Younger Carboniferous rocks lie unconformably over the top of them , dipping gently , indicating that an enormous span of time must have passed between the creation of the two beds . When Hutton and James Hall visited the site in 1788 their companion Playfair wrote : 
 " On us who saw these phenomenon for the first time the impression will not easily be forgotten ... We felt necessarily carried back to a time when the <unk> on which we stood was yet at the bottom of the sea , and when the sandstone before us was only beginning to be deposited , in the shape of sand or mud , from the waters of the supercontinent ocean ... The mind seemed to grow giddy by looking so far back into the abyss of time ; and whilst we listened with earnestness and admiration to the philosopher who was now unfolding to us the order and series of these wonderful events , we became sensible how much further reason may sometimes go than imagination may venture to follow . " John Playfair ( 1805 ) Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh , vol . V , pt . III . 
 = = = <unk> Crag = = = 
 The Moine Thrust in Assynt is one of the most studied geological features in the world . Its discovery in the 1880s was a milestone in the history of geology as it was one of the first thrust belts in the world to be identified . Investigations by John Horne and Benjamin Peach resolved a dispute between Murchison and Geikie on the one hand and James Nicol and Charles Lapworth on the other . The latter believed that older Moine rocks lay on top of younger Cambrian rocks at <unk> Crag , and Horne and Peach 's work confirmed this in their classic paper The Geological Structure of the Northwest Highlands of Scotland , which was published in 1907 . A statue to these two pioneers of fieldwork was erected at <unk> near the hotel there which played a prominent part in the annals of early geology . This area is at the heart of the ' North West Highlands Geopark ' . 
 = = = Dob 's Linn = = = 
 Lapworth also had a prominent role to play in the fame of Dob 's Linn , a small gorge in the Scottish Borders , which contains the ' golden spike ' ( i.e. the official international boundary or <unk> ) between the Ordovician and Silurian periods . Lapworth 's work in this area , especially his examination of the complex stratigraphy of the Silurian rocks by comparing fossil graptolites , was crucial in to the early understanding of these epochs . 
 = = = Skye Cuillin = = = 
 The Skye Cuillin mountains provide classic examples of glacial topography and were the subject of an early published account by James Forbes in 1846 ( who had become a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh aged only nineteen ) . He partnered Louis Agassiz on his trip to Scotland in 1840 and although they subsequently argued , Forbes went on to publish other important papers on Alpine glaciers . In 1904 Alfred Harker published The Tertiary Igneous Rocks of Skye , the first detailed scientific study of an extinct volcano . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In the hills to the north of the village of <unk> the mineral <unk> was discovered , from which the element strontium was first isolated by Sir Humphry Davy in 1808 . 
 = = = Staffa = = = 
 The island of Staffa , contains Fingal 's Cave made up of massive rectangular columns of Paleogene basalt and Mackinnon 's Cave , one of the longest sea caves in the world . 
 = = = Schiehallion = = = 
 The Munro Schiehallion 's isolated position and regular shape led Nevil Maskelyne to use the deflection caused by the mass of the mountain to estimate the mass of the Earth in a ground @-@ breaking experiment carried out in 1774 . Following Maskelyne 's survey , Schiehallion became the first mountain to be mapped using contour lines . 
 = = = Rhynie = = = 
 The village of Rhynie in Aberdeenshire is the site of an important sedimentary deposit - Rhynie chert . The bulk of this fossil bed consists of primitive plants that had water @-@ conducting cells and sporangia but no leaves , along with arthropods : Collembola , Opiliones ( harvestmen ) , pseudoscorpions and the extinct , spider @-@ like <unk> . This fossil bed is remarkable for two reasons . Firstly , the age of the find ( early Devonian circa 410 Ma ) makes this one of the earliest sites anywhere containing terrestrial fossils , coinciding with the first stages of the colonisation of land by plants and animals . Secondly , these <unk> are famous for their exceptional state of ultrastructural preservation , with individual cell walls easily visible in polished specimens . For example , stomata have been counted and lignin remnants detected in the plant material . 
 = = = East Kirkton quarry = = = 
 A disused quarry at East Kirkton in the Bathgate Hills is the location where the Carboniferous fossil of <unk> <unk> ( aka ' Lizzie ' ) was found in 1984 . This lizard is one of the earliest known ancestors of the reptiles . The specimen was purchased in part by public subscription and is now on display in the National Museum of Scotland . The site was originally discovered in the early 19th century and has also provided fossil eurypterids , sharks and a variety of primitive <unk> fish . 
 = = = Wester Ross bolide = = = 
 In 2008 the ejected material from a meteorite impact crater was discovered near Ullapool in Wester Ross . Preserved within sedimentary layers of sandstone , this is the largest known bolide impact from what are now the British Isles . 
 = Charles Inglis ( engineer ) = 
 Sir Charles Edward Inglis , OBE , FRS ( / <unk> / ; 31 July 1875 – 19 April 1952 ) was a British civil engineer . The son of a doctor , he was educated at Cheltenham College and won a scholarship to King 's College , Cambridge , where he would later forge a career as an academic . Inglis spent a two @-@ year period with the engineering firm run by John Wolfe @-@ Barry before he returned to King 's College as a lecturer . Working with Professors James Alfred Ewing and Bertram Hopkinson , he made several important studies into the effects of vibration on structures and defects on the strength of plate steel . 
 Inglis served in the Royal Engineers during the First World War and invented the Inglis Bridge , a reusable steel bridging system – the precursor to the more famous Bailey bridge of the Second World War . In 1916 he was placed in charge of bridge design and supply at the War Office and , with Giffard Le Quesne Martel , pioneered the use of temporary bridges with tanks . Inglis retired from military service in 1919 and was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire . He returned to Cambridge University after the war as a professor and head of the Engineering Department . Under his leadership , the department became the largest in the university and one of the best regarded engineering schools in the world . Inglis retired from the department in 1943 . 
 Inglis was associated with the Institution of Naval Architects , Institution of Civil Engineers , Institution of Mechanical Engineers , Institution of Structural Engineers , Institution of Waterworks Engineers and British Waterworks Association ; he sat on several of their councils and was elected the Institution of Civil Engineers ' president for the 1941 – 42 session . He was also a fellow of the Royal Society . Inglis sat on the board of inquiry investigating the loss of the airship R101 and was chair of a Ministry of War Transport railway modernisation committee in 1946 . Knighted in 1945 , he spent his later years developing his theories on the education of engineers and wrote a textbook on applied mechanics . He has been described as the greatest teacher of engineering of his time and has a building named in his honour at Cambridge University . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Charles Inglis was the second son of Dr. Alexander Inglis ( a general practitioner in Worcester ) and his first wife , Florence , the daughter of newspaper proprietor John Frederick Feeney . Alexander Inglis was born in Scotland to a respectable family – his grandfather , John Inglis , was an Admiral in the Royal Navy and had captained HMS Belliqueux at the Battle of Camperdown in 1797 . 
 Charles Inglis was born on 31 July 1875 . He was not expected to survive and was hurriedly baptised in his father 's drawing room ; his mother died from complications eleven days later . His family moved to Cheltenham and Inglis was schooled at Cheltenham College from 1889 to 1894 . In his final year , he was elected head boy and received a scholarship to study the Mathematics Tripos at King 's College , Cambridge . Inglis was 22nd wrangler when he received his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1897 ; he remained for a fourth year , achieving first class honours in Mechanical Sciences . Inglis was a keen sportsman and enjoyed long distance running , walking , mountaineering and sailing . At Cambridge , he nearly achieved a blue for long distance running but was forced to withdraw from a significant race because of a pulled muscle . He was also a follower of the Cambridge University Rugby Union team , watching their matches at Grange Road . 
 After graduation , Inglis began work as an apprentice for the civil engineering firm of John Wolfe @-@ Barry & Partners . He worked as a draughtsman in the drawing office for several months before being placed with Alexander Gibb , who was acting as resident engineer on an extension to the Metropolitan District Railway between Whitechapel and Bow . Inglis was responsible for the design and supervision of all thirteen bridges on the route . It was during this time that he began his lifelong study of vibration and its effects on materials , particularly bridges . 
 = = Early academic career = = 
 In 1901 Inglis was made a fellow of King 's College after writing a thesis entitled The Balancing of Engines , the first general treatment of the subject – which was becoming increasingly important due to the growing speeds of locomotives . In the same year , he received his Master of Arts degree and was accepted as an Institution of Civil Engineers ( ICE ) associate member after winning the institution 's Miller Prize for his student paper on The Geometrical Methods in Investigating Mechanical Problems . Inglis left his employment with Wolfe @-@ Barry , having completed two years of his five @-@ year apprenticeship , to return to King 's College and become an assistant to James Alfred Ewing , professor of mechanism and applied mechanics . Inglis maintained his interest in engine balancing and filed a US patent on 16 April 1902 for an improved engine with the cylinders mounted end to end to balance out the forces acting between them . 
 Professor Ewing left the university in 1903 to become the first Director of Naval Education at the Admiralty but Inglis remained ; he was appointed a university demonstrator in mechanism by Professor Bertram Hopkinson , Ewing 's successor , and worked with him to study the effects of vibration . Inglis was promoted to lecturer of mechanical engineering in 1908 . Hopkinson recognised Inglis ' academic abilities and assigned him the heaviest teaching load of all the staff , covering statics , dynamics , structural engineering theory , materials engineering , drawing , engine balance and the design of steel girders and reinforced concrete . Inglis later recalled that if he wished to learn more on a subject then he volunteered to teach a course on it . From 1911 Inglis became involved in hydraulic engineering and served on the board of the Cambridge University and Town Waterworks Company , serving as deputy chairman from 1924 to 1928 and chairman from 1928 to 1952 . 
 Inglis conducted research into the problem of fracture in the metal plates of ships ' hulls and noticed that the rivet holes along the path of a crack were often deformed into an elliptical shape . This phenomenon led him to investigate the magnification of stress caused at the edges of an elliptical defect ; in 1913 he published a paper of his theories that has been described as his most important contribution to engineering and the first serious modern work on the fracturing of materials . Alan Arnold Griffith later drew on Inglis ' paper for his work on the apparent discrepancy between calculated and actual strengths of materials . Inglis 's 1913 paper has been cited by around 1 @,@ 200 subsequent works . 
 Inglis had married Eleanor Moffat , daughter of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Herbert Moffat of the South Wales Borderers , in 1901 , having met on holiday in Switzerland . They lived at Maitland House , Cambridge , until 1904 , when Inglis built a house he named Balls Grove at nearby Grantchester , where his two daughters were born and the family resided until 1925 . They later moved to 10 Latham Road , which Inglis renamed <unk> after the first known address of his ancestors in Edinburgh . 
 = = Military service = = 
 Inglis was involved with the Cambridge University Officer Training Corps ( <unk> ) , being commissioned a second lieutenant on 24 May 1909 . He served with the <unk> 's engineering detachment and noticed that when the unit was deployed on field days with the rest of the force it often had little to do . To remedy this , Inglis designed a reusable steel bridge , with the intention that it could be erected and dismantled by the unit in a single afternoon . An army general who was inspecting the unit noticed his design and offered advice : " If you 're making anything for the army , keep it simple – no complicated gadgets " . Upon the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 , Inglis volunteered for active service in the British Army and was officially listed as an Assistant Instructor in the School of Military Engineering , with the temporary rank of lieutenant . The army expressed interest in Inglis ' bridge design ; it was approved for use by a panel of army officers that included the general who had first commented on the design , to whom Inglis said " I hope , Sir , you will find I have profited by your advice " . The design remained in service with the British Army until the higher @-@ capacity Bailey bridge was introduced during the Second World War . 
 The Inglis Bridge was designed so that all of its components could be moved by manpower alone ; moreover , it could be erected with few tools in a short span of time – a troop of 40 sappers could erect a 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) bridge in 12 hours . The design was composed of a series of 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) Warren truss bays made from tubular steel sections , to a maximum span of six bays ( 90 feet or 27 metres ) . The design went through three revisions , with the Mark II replacing the original design 's variable @-@ length tubes with identical @-@ length ones and , during the Second World War , the Mark III using higher strength steel but smaller tube diameters , increasing the carrying capacity to 26 long tons ( 26 t ) . In addition to his bridge design , during the war 's course he developed the similar Inglis Tubular Observation Tower . Inglis received a US Patent for his bridge on 25 April 1916 and for the type of joints used in it on 26 June 1917 . 
 In 1916 , Inglis was placed in charge of bridge design and supply at the War Office in which role he was a proponent for the increased use of girder bridges in military applications . It was Inglis that first proved to the army that the heavy components essential to girder bridges did not prevent their rapid assembly in field conditions . This led to the greater use of such bridges , particularly the Inglis Bridge , for tanks later in the war . He received promotion to the rank of captain on the General List of Officers on 6 May 1916 and became a staff captain attached to the War Office on 26 June 1917 . He was promoted to the brevet rank of major as part of the King 's Birthday Honours on 3 June 1918 and later that year worked with Giffard Le Quesne Martel to develop some of the earliest <unk> tanks . Inglis retired from the army on 9 March 1919 , having been rewarded for his military service with an appointment as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire . 
 = = Return to King 's College = = 
 Inglis returned to Cambridge in 1918 and was appointed as the professor of Mechanism and Applied Mechanics ( renamed Mechanical Sciences in 1934 ) . On 25 March 1919 , he was selected to head the Cambridge University Engineering Department as the successor of Hopkinson , who had died in an air crash the previous year . Though he made no radical changes , such as had occurred under his predecessors , under Inglis ' supervision the department became the largest in the university and one of the best engineering schools in the world . He was responsible for expanding the department to meet the increased post @-@ war demand for engineers and for the move from its traditional home at Free School Lane . Inglis acquired the 4 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) <unk> House on Trumpington Street for the department and constructed a 50 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 4 @,@ 600 m2 ) laboratory on the site by 1923 , followed in 1931 by a structure containing lecture theatres and a drawing office . 
 At Cambridge Inglis ' students included Sir Frank Whittle ( developer of the jet engine ) , James N. Goodier ( mechanical engineer and academic ) , Sir <unk> Morgan ( called the " Father of Concorde " ) and Beryl Platt , Baroness Platt ( Conservative peer ) . He was also in contact with Russian railway engineer Yury Lomonosov and lectured to biochemist Albert Chibnall . Despite mentoring some of the best engineers of their generation Inglis was realistic about the actual intentions of many of his students at the time . He once told a new intake class : " Your fathers , gentlemen , have sent you to Cambridge to be educated , not to become engineers . They think , however , that reading engineering is a very good way of becoming educated . In 10 years ' time , however , 90 % of you will have become managers , whether of design , manufacturing , sales , research or even accounts departments in industry . The remaining 10 % of you will have become successful lawyers , novelists , and things of that sort " . Undeterred , Inglis sought to give his students the broadest possible engineering education , covering all fields to prevent them becoming " cramped by premature specialisation " . 
 Inglis had close contacts with industry and was able to establish a professorship in aeronautical engineering and links with a nearby Air Ministry experimental flight station . He was also successful in arranging with the War Office for Royal Engineers officers to study the Engineering Tripos at the university . The university drew praise for the quality of its teaching during Inglis ' tenure , though his department has been criticised for its " comparative neglect of original research " . From 1923 , he was involved with the analysis of vibration and its effects on railway bridges , including a period spent working with Christopher Hinton during the latter 's final year as a student at Cambridge . Inglis was appointed to a sub @-@ committee of the British government 's Department of Scientific and Industrial Research Bridge Stress Committee by Ewing , who was chairman , and became responsible for almost all of the mathematics of the investigation . Inglis derived a theory that allowed for the accurate assessment of the vibrations caused by hammer blow force imparted to the bridge by locomotives , and the committee 's 1928 report included recommendations that the hammer blow force be included in bridge design calculations in the future . During the course of this work Inglis was able to show that the increased oscillation of bridges at train speeds beyond those that corresponded with the natural frequency of the bridge was due to the influence of the locomotive 's suspension – the first time that this phenomenon had been explained . Inglis ' work on bridge vibration has been described as his most important post @-@ war research . He followed up the work by using a harmonic series and Macaulay 's method to approximate the vibration of beams of non @-@ uniform mass distribution or bending modulus . This work is related to the later method used by <unk> and <unk> in the field of <unk> . 
 Inglis was elected an Institution of Civil Engineers member in 1923 and became a member of its council in 1928 . He was very active professionally and also served on the councils of the Institution of Naval Architects , Institution of Structural Engineers and the Institution of Waterworks Engineers ; he was an Institution of Mechanical Engineers honorary member . Inglis was also a prolific writer , publishing 25 books and academic papers on a wide range of engineering topics . He received the ICE 's Telford Medal in 1924 for a paper entitled The Theory of Transverse Oscillations in <unk> and its Relation to Live Load and Impact Allowance . In 1926 , he was appointed to a Royal Commission considering cross @-@ river traffic in London with particular reference to the Waterloo and St Paul 's bridges . Inglis founded the Cambridge Engineers ' Association to promote social activities at the University , and saw Sir Charles Parsons appointed as its first president in 1929 . In the same year , he was awarded the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws by the University of Edinburgh . 
 In 1930 Inglis was appointed to the board of inquiry looking into the crash of the airship R101 , and in the same year was made a Fellow of the Royal Society . He was a member of the London , Midland and Scottish Railway 's Advisory Committee on Scientific Research from 1931 to 1947 and conducted numerous experiments on their behalf in the laboratories at Cambridge . He was able to prove the factors behind hunting oscillation , a violent oscillation of railway carriages , and developed testing equipment to approximate the wear of rail track and wheels in the field . 
 Inglis published the book A Mathematical Treatise on Vibrations in Railway Bridges in 1934 , which was described by a reviewer as " a valuable asset for both the mathematician and engineer " , and also submitted several papers on the matter to the Institution of Civil Engineers ( ICE ) . Inglis delivered the Trevithick Memorial Lecture for the ICE in 1933 , and was elected British Waterworks Association president in 1935 . At around this time , he was appointed to the governing council of Cheltenham College , of which he remained a member for the rest of his life . Inglis was the president of the 1934 International Congress on Theoretical and Applied Mechanics held at Cambridge , one of the series of Congresses that gave rise to the <unk> . He was a proposer for the Royal Society fellowship of Andrew Robertson , the mechanical engineer , in 1936 . 
 = = Second World War and after = = 
 Inglis was due to retire from the university in 1940 , but was persuaded to remain for another three years so that John Baker could be appointed in his stead . Interest in Inglis ' army bridge was rekindled in the Second World War and the Mark III design introduced in 1940 . Inglis applied for a United States patent for the particular type of triangular trusses used in his bridge in 1940 ; which was approved and granted in 1943 . Testing of a prototype of the Mark III revealed a weakness in the top chord of the truss and the subsequent redesign complicated the production process . Whilst the bridge was produced in limited quantities from 1940 it was largely replaced by the Bailey bridge , introduced in 1941 , a fact that disappointed Inglis . The Inglis design remained in service for some time owing to a lack of resources for production of the Bailey bridge and saw service in rear areas and with the 1st Canadian Infantry Division . 
 Inglis was elected as ICE president for the 1941 – 42 session , having been vice @-@ president in 1938 , and gave an inaugural address on the education of engineers that was judged to be one of the best ever given . In his address , he stated that " the soul and spirit of education is that habit of mind which remains when a student has completely forgotten everything he has ever been taught " , a quote which has since been used by several organisations to describe the importance of an engineering education . He delivered the Thomas Hawksley Lecture on " Gyroscopic Principles and Applications " for the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1943 and the fiftieth ICE James Forrest lecture on " Mechanical Vibrations , their Cause and Prevention " in 1944 , being awarded the ICE 's Charles Parsons medal the same year . He gave the Parsons Memorial Lecture to the North @-@ East Coast Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in 1945 in which he presented his Basic Function Method , an alternative to the use of Fourier series for the analysis of vibrations in beams . 
 After his retirement as department head Inglis served as Vice @-@ Provost of King 's College from 1943 to 1947 . He received a knighthood in the 1945 King 's Birthday Honours , and in 1946 was appointed as chair of the committee charged with advising the Minister of War Transport on railway modernisation . Inglis continued to develop his theories on teaching engineering and wrote in the Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1947 on the teaching of engineering mathematics : " Mathematics [ required by engineers ] though it must be sound and incisive as far as goes , need not be of that artistic and exalted quality which calls for the mentality of the real mathematician . It can be termed mathematics of the tin @-@ opening variety , and in contrast to real mathematicians , engineers are more interested in the contents of the tin than in the elegance of the tin @-@ opener employed " . He published the textbook Applied Mechanics for Engineers in 1951 , following which he spent three months as a visiting professor at the University of the Witwatersrand in South Africa . His wife , Lady Eleanor Inglis , died on 1 April 1952 , and Charles died eighteen days later at Southwold , Suffolk . The Cambridge University Engineering Department 's Inglis Building is named in his honour . Inglis has been described as the greatest teacher of engineering of his time . 
 = Woman Seeking Dead Husband : Smokers Okay , No Pets = 
 " Woman Seeking Dead Husband : Smokers Okay , No Pets " is the fourth episode of the first season of the American comedy @-@ drama television series Psych . It was written by writer and co @-@ executive producer Steve Franks , and was directed by Jeff Melman , his only work on the show . The episode originally aired on USA Network in the United States on July 28 , 2006 . The installment features guest appearances by series regulars Kirsten Nelson , Sage Brocklebank , Liam James , and Patricia Idlette among other guests . 
 The series follows Shawn Spencer ( James Roday ) and his colleague and best friend Gus ( Dulé Hill ) , who claim to operate a psychic detective agency . It is actually based on Shawn 's <unk> ability . In the episode , the wife of a dead bank robber is brought to the police station to be warned that her husband 's partners are being released from prison . She hires Shawn and Gus to help her find the money that was stolen and never found . Shawn and Gus search for the money , and find that the husband was not actually dead . Shawn realizes where the money is , and tells the woman , who he later discovers is actually the criminal mastermind . Detective Carlton Lassiter ( Timothy Omundson ) arrests the woman , and Shawn finds the money . 
 " Woman Seeking Dead Husband : Smokers Okay , No Pets " has received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reception from television critics . The installment was considered to be , at its airtime , the best of the first season . According to the Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by 4 @.@ 35 million people during its original broadcast , making up approximately 3 @.@ 04 million households . It received a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 5 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic on a National Broadcasting Corporation ( NBC ) re @-@ airing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Detectives Carlton Lassiter ( Timothy Omundson ) and Juliet O 'Hara ( Maggie Lawson ) bring Raylene Wilcroft ( Anne Marie DeLuise ) into the police station to warn her that her deceased husband 's co @-@ conspirators , who are bank robbers , are being released from prison and she might be in danger . She hires Shawn Spencer ( James Roday ) and Burton " Gus " Guster ( Dulé Hill ) to find the money her husband and the men stole and lost . While Shawn and Gus meet with Raylene and her family , Lassiter and Juliet follow the bank robbers , in the hope that they will lead the police to the money . After conducting a séance in the Psych office , Shawn and Gus visit the cemetery where the husband , David Wilcroft ( Steve Bacic ) is buried . Shawn and Gus find David alive and well at the cemetery , where he tells them that he faked his death after he accidentally lost the money . He , like his partners , has been searching for the money . 
 Shawn and Gus return and inform Raylene that David is still alive and living at the cemetery . Shawn talks to detective Lassiter and tells him of his plan to put the criminals back in prison due to parole violations ; Lassiter denies Shawn 's idea , wanting to find the money and put an end to the case . Determined , Shawn and Gus visit the robber 's hotel room , in order to find evidence to put them back in prison . However , they are caught in the process . In an attempt to save themselves , Shawn tells the men that David wants them to know where the money is and that they shouldn 't harm Raylene ; the robbers inform them that Raylene was actually the mastermind of the plan . Shawn and Gus rush back to the cemetery to find Raylene threatening to shoot David if she doesn 't get the money . Shawn stalls long enough for the robbers , Juliet , and Lassiter to show up , and David and Raylene are arrested . Shawn then " psychically " locates the money . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Woman Seeking Dead Husband : Smokers Okay , No Pets " was the only episode directed by Jeff Melman . The installment was the fourth of the series written by writer and co @-@ executive producer Steve Franks ; he had previously written the season 's first three episodes " Pilot " , " Spellingg Bee " , and " Speak Now or Forever Hold Your Piece " . Franks would not write another episode for the show until the tenth installment , " From the Earth to the Starbucks " . Tracey Jeffery was the episode 's producer ; John J. <unk> , Douglas Steinberg , and Kerry Lenhart were the consulting producers , and Mel Damski , Steve Franks , Kelly <unk> , and Chris Henze were the executive producers . Erin Smith was the production manager . Tracy Hillman was the installment 's associate producer , and Michael McMurray was the director of photography , while James <unk> and Anupam Nigam acted as the editors . The music for the episode was written by Adam Cohen and John Robert Wood . Assistant directors for the installment were Jack Hardy and Roger Russell . 
 Although meant to take place in Santa Barbara , California , the installment , like the majority of Psych 's episodes , was filmed in and around the Vancouver area of British Columbia . According to the show 's creator Steve Franks , about half of the scenes in each episode are filmed in the suburb town of White Rock . Several of the sets , like the Psych office and Henry Spencer 's house , are located along the coast in the White Rock area . Because of the differences between Vancouver and Santa Barbara , the show 's producers were forced to bring in props for each episode , such as nine fake palm trees which had to be trucked to the set every day . The scripts for each Psych episode had to go through several reviews , and often were cut down by as much as a few dozen pages . A large portion of show 's dialogue consists of on @-@ the @-@ spot improvisation by the actors , specifically Roday and Hill . The writers noted that much of the humor in the installments came from improvisation . The episode also included several reoccurring gags on the show , such as an introductory flashback and the inclusion of a pineapple ; both gags were created by the action of one of the actors . 
 All fifteen episodes of Psych 's first season were written with a stand @-@ alone plot , meaning that no episode built off of a previous one . However , the installments were noted that even though they were stand @-@ alone , episodes often built on each other for character development and would occasionally reference each other , creating a feel of continuity . Because of the writing style , the show 's writing team would occasionally move around portions of episodes . The introduction to the second episode , " Spellingg Bee " , was originally part of the script for " Woman Seeking Dead Husband " , but was moved to the other episode due to a need to introduce the character Juliet O 'Hara earlier in the season . The installment featured several guest stars . Kirsten Nelson , Sage Brocklebank , and Liam James all reprised their roles as the reoccurring characters police chief Karen Vick , officer Buzz McNab , and Young Shawn Spencer , respectively . Patricia Idlette made her final appearance as Desk Sergeant Martha Allen . Special guest appearances were made by Steve Bacic , who played David Wilcroft , the supposedly deceased former criminal , and Anne Marie DeLuise , who appeared as Raylene Wilcroft , the wife of Bacic 's character . Maggie Lawson originally auditioned for the show using the scene which was moved to Spellingg Bee ; the use of actual scenes from the episodes for auditioning was common for casting . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The episode was originally broadcast in the United States on July 21 , 2006 , on USA Network as the seventh episode of the show 's first season . It aired at a 10 : 00 P.M. EST / PST time slot , following a new episode of the show Monk . The episode aired under a rating of TV @-@ PG , meaning that some of its content may not be appropriate for young children . The episode was rebroadcast by the National Broadcasting Corporation ( NBC ) on August 7 , 2006 , due to the network 's struggling ratings . The installment was part of the first " mini @-@ season " ; the show took a mid @-@ season break between August 2006 and January 2007 . " Woman Seeking Dead Husband : Smokers Okay , No Pets " runs for approximately 43 minutes , the average length for a Psych episode . 
 " Woman Seeking Dead Husband : Smokers Okay , No Pets " , along with the fourteen other episodes from Psych 's first season were released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States and Canada on June 26 , 2007 . The set includes full audio commentaries for six episodes , deleted scenes for most episodes , blooper reals , audition tapes , character profiles , the international version of the episode " Pilot " , an " Inside the writers ' room " featurette , and other special features . The set is filmed in 1 @.@ 78 : 1 aspect ratio , with English subtitles available , and Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 Surround . The DVD set was released in the United Kingdom and other Region 2 countries on January 9 , 2008 , and was released in Australia on April 30 of the same year . The entire first season has also been released on the iTunes store for digital download , as well as independent downloads of each individual episode . Included on the DVD set was a deleted scene for " Woman Seeking Dead Husband : Smokers Okay , No Pets " . The feature consisted of the single cut scene , approximately 45 seconds of video . The deleted scene contained Juliet and Lassiter talking with each other about being shown @-@ up by Shawn 's ability to solve cases , while they were following the paroled criminals . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , " Woman Seeking Dead Husband : Smokers Okay , No Pets " was viewed by a total of 4 @.@ 35 million people in its original USA Network broadcast . This totaled to approximately 3 @.@ 04 million households which viewed the episode . The NBC rebroadcasting of the episode received a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 5 share in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that on average 2 @.@ 8 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the installment at any given moment , while 5 percent of households watching TV were tuned into it during the time slot . This was a drop in viewership compared to the previous episode , " Speak Now or Forever Hold Your Piece " , which brought in 4 @.@ 69 million viewers and a 1 @.@ 6 rating / 5 share . The viewership was also significantly lower than the following episode , " 9 Lives " , which was seen by 4 @.@ 72 million people and also brought in a 1 @.@ 6 rating / 5 share . 
 Since airing , the installment has received mixed to generally positive reviews . In his review for IGN , contributor Colin Moriarty presented mixed feelings toward the episode , saying that , for the show , " perhaps there 's light at the end of the tunnel after all " . He considered the episode to have " dropped in <unk> behind Monk " , but that it " didn 't have its usual negative connotation this week ... at least , not in full force " . Moriarty stated that the " show seemed to take an interesting and much @-@ desired turn for the better " . He considered the show to be moving away from being predictable , but that its " stride is below average " . Moriarty considered the episode to be more intriguing , and that the characters were developed quite well , especially that of Gus . He continued to question whether the show would be able to last more than one season , but considered the show to be becoming better developed . Moriarty praised two scenes in the episode , Shawn and Gus ' conversation on the way to the graveyard and Shawn snooping in the police file room , as being the funniest of the episode . The installment was given a rating of 7 , or " good " , making it an improvement over the previous two episodes , " Spellingg Bee " and " Speak Now or Forever Hold Your Piece " , as well as tying it for the highest rated episode of the season at the time . 
 In his review for TV Squad , critic Richard Keller generally praised the installment , calling it " the funniest episode of the series so far " . Keller compared James Roday to Ben Stiller , and praised the development of Gus ' character . He also praised the development of detectives Lassiter and O 'Hara . He cited the scene in which Shawn and Gus are trapped by the criminals as an example of why the episode was the funniest to him . However , Keller also had a few complaints with the installment . He criticized the episode 's beginning , where " a seemingly large evergreen forest looming " can be seen , saying that it ruined the illusion of the show taking place in Santa Barbara . He stated that " the whole thing seemed a little bit incomplete " due to the lack of a complete " psychic reveal " at the end of the episode , and that the reduced use of Corbin Bernsen in the installment was an issue . 
 = Scott Neilson = 
 Scott Steven Neilson ( born 15 May 1987 ) is a professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for National League South side Whitehawk . 
 Neilson started his career alongside his brother , Tony , at first Hertford Town and then Ware , before he earned a move to Cambridge City . He made his name in non @-@ league as a goal @-@ scoring winger and he came to the attention of a number of league clubs . He had trials with three of them and eventually won a move to League Two side Bradford City . He scored a goal on his full debut but Bradford soon changed manager and Neilson dropped back into non @-@ league , first out on loan to Cambridge United and then signed by Crawley Town , having spent less than 12 months with Bradford . Neilson spent a short but successful loan spell with Grimsby Town in 2012 , and then joined Luton on a short @-@ term contract in January 2013 before his release a few months later . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Neilson was born on 15 May 1987 in Enfield , London , to David and Amanda Neilson , the latter who was born in Swansea . He has an older brother , Tony . His maternal grandfather was Cliff Jones , the former Tottenham Hotspur and Welsh international footballer , whose father Ivor and brother Bryn were also professional footballers and Welsh internationals . Neilson has also worked as a plumber . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Non @-@ league = = = 
 Neilson was a member of Norwich City 's youth teams at the age of 11 , went on to Charlton Athletic and also won schoolboy honours for Wales . His senior career started at his brother Tony 's club Hertford Town of the Isthmian League in 2005 . He was top goalscorer for the reserves when he made his debut on 25 October in a Isthmian League Associate Members Trophy game against Clapton , before going on to play 15 games in his first season and scoring one goal . In his second season , he played 24 games upping his goal tally by another nine , before he earned a move in December 2006 to Ware – a second club where his brother also played . In one game in January 2008 , Neilson came off the bench to score four goals for Ware against Tilbury in a 5 – 2 victory . The goals went towards Neilson 's total of 23 from 40 games for Ware in the Isthmian League First Division North , helping Ware towards the end @-@ of @-@ season play @-@ offs . However , he left Ware before the end of the season to join Cambridge City in March 2008 for the rest of the club 's Conference South campaign . 
 Neilson 's debut at Cambridge City came three days later in a 3 – 1 defeat to Lewes , when he came off the bench in the second half . He played seven games , starting all but his debut performance , with six games coming in the league . He scored three goals in his seven matches . He also scored in the Cambridge Invitational Cup final as Cambridge recorded a 3 – 0 victory against Histon reserves to lift the cup for a record 12th time . Despite an enforced relegation , Neilson stayed at Cambridge for the following season and signed a new contract in first April and then October 2008 . He played a total of 49 games in his first full season with the Lilywhites , 40 of which were in the league , scoring a total of 11 league goals and two cup goals . He also helped Cambridge defend their Cambridge Invitational Cup crown with a 1 – 0 defeat of CRC . 
 Neilson signed a new one @-@ year contract with Cambridge City in July 2009 . However , his form also attracted a number of league clubs and , at the start of the 2009 – 10 season he had trials with sides Norwich City , Derby County and Bradford City and was offered a trial with Hartlepool United . Neilson scored twice in a reserve game for Bradford as part of his trial , prompting a bid to buy the winger . Bradford 's first bid was turned down but they had an improved bid accepted later the same week . The fee remained undisclosed but included a 25 per cent sell @-@ on fee entitling Cambridge City to a share of any fee Bradford received for selling Neilson on to another club – a year later , another manager Martin Ling revealed the initial fee that Cambridge received to be £ 20 @,@ 000 . Neilson had played a further two league games for Cambridge before his departure . 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 Neilson signed a three @-@ year deal with League Two side Bradford City in August 2009 , and was given a place on the substitutes ' bench for the club 's next game with Torquay United , which Bradford won 2 – 0 with Neilson coming on for Joe Colbeck . Colbeck was sold three days later and so Neilson made his full debut in a Football League Trophy game with Rochdale . Neilson capped his debut with the winning goal in a 2 – 1 victory to send City through to the second round for the first time in four years . At the end of his full first full month with the club , Neilson scored his first league goal in professional football during a 3 – 0 win against Chesterfield , which helped to extend Bradford 's unbeaten run to seven games . The club 's form did not last and following a run of poor results , manager Stuart McCall left in February 2010 to be replaced by Peter Taylor . Neilson played in Taylor 's first game in charge as City lost 2 – 0 to Accrington Stanley . 
 However , Taylor criticised Neilson for his lack of fitness , and as a result the winger did not feature in any of the following three games and was instead loaned out to Cambridge United initially on a month @-@ long loan to act as cover for Antonio Murray and Robbie Willmott , who were suspended and injured respectively . He capped his debut for Cambridge United on 6 March 2010 against Barrow by scoring the only goal of the game to give his new side a 1 – 0 victory . After scoring another two goals , Cambridge extended Neilson 's loan with manager Martin Ling saying he would " assess the situation in the summer " . He played in all 14 of Cambridge 's games during his loan spell and scored three goals helping them finish in the top @-@ half of the table before he returned to Bradford at the end of the Conference Premier season . 
 Neilson returned to the first @-@ team squad at City ahead of their 2010 – 11 season and received praise from his manager , who said : " He 's obviously got very good talent , he can get goals and I think he 'll do well . It 's down to him really . " Neilson played in City 's first game of the League Two campaign – only his second under Taylor – but City lost 3 – 1 to Shrewsbury Town with Neilson replaced by debutant Louis Moult in the second @-@ half . Neilson was substituted at half @-@ time in the club 's next game and then dropped for the next league match , before he was sold to Conference side Crawley Town for officially an undisclosed five @-@ figure sum , although it was reported to be anywhere from £ 15 @,@ 000 to £ 50 @,@ 000 . Neilson had played 30 games for Bradford in all competitions . 
 = = = Crawley Town = = = 
 Neilson said he was " delighted to have joined such an ambitious club " and his new manager Steve Evans revealed the club had been interested in him for some time and Crawley had made several previous bids for the winger , which were all rejected . Neilson made his debut the following day against Cambridge United , the club where he had spent the latter part of the previous season on loan . The game finished 2 – 2 , but Neilson 's mistake allowed Cambridge to begin their fightback from an early two @-@ goal deficit . Crawley soon went on a good run of form to go top of the table – Neilson 's first goal for the club came in a 2 – 0 win at home to Kidderminster Harriers at the start of October to extend that lead over AFC Wimbledon to three points . He followed it up by scoring four goals in the next seven games , including one in the FA Cup on his return to West Yorkshire in a 5 – 0 win against Guiseley . In February , Neilson broke a toe in his left foot . Neilson missed three months of the season , including an FA Cup game against Manchester United at Old Trafford , but returned for the final five games of Crawley 's promotion campaign . He finished with 27 league appearances and scored five goals . 
 On 19 September 2012 he joined Grimsby Town on a three @-@ month loan deal . Towards the end of his stay at Blundell Park , Grimsby manager Paul Hurst admitted his desire to sign Neilson on a permanent deal following an impressive loan spell . Following his final game for the club , a 1 – 0 victory over promotion rivals Wrexham which put Grimsby on top of the table , Hurst admitted that it was unlikely that Neilson would be returning to Grimsby despite making him a good offer . Neilson departed Grimsby on 21 December 2012 having played ten league games , scoring a single goal . 
 = = = Luton Town = = = 
 Neilson signed for Luton Town on a contract until the end of the season following the end of his loan at Grimsby on 24 December 2012 , though he officially joined the club on 1 January 2013 when the transfer window opened . The move also confirmed that Neilson would transfer to a more local side after rejecting a move to Grimsby having not desired relocating himself to the north of England . Neilson 's contract was not extended and he was released by Luton at the end of the 2012 – 13 season after playing in 8 games and scoring once . 
 = = = Grimsby Town = = = 
 Following his release from Luton , Neilson spoke about his desire to return to Grimsby Town . On 13 May 2013 , Neilson signed a one year deal with The Mariners . 
 On 9 February 2015 , Neilson had his contract terminated with Grimsby Town by mutual consent . 
 = = = Whitehawk = = = 
 On 14 February 2015 , Neilson signed for Conference South side Whitehawk on a free transfer . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Neilson is a midfielder , who likes to play on the right wing , but has also been used in a more central role . Despite playing in midfield , Neilson has been known for scoring goals . One of his former teammates Lee Bullock said he was " a winger who looks like he 's got some decent skills " while Paul Carden , his assistant manager at Cambridge United , said : " You can see he 's an intelligent player and very quick ... he catches the eye because he can go past people and is good with the ball at his feet . " Neilson , however , was also told to improve his crossing ability and criticised for his lack of fitness by former manager Peter Taylor . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He comes from a footballing family being the grandson of Cliff Jones and great @-@ grandson of Ivor Jones , both former Welsh internationals . 
 Neilson is a keen supporter of Arsenal football club . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Updated to 26 April 2013 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Cambridge City 
 Cambridge Invitational Cup : 2008 , 2009 
 = Iwane Matsui = 
 Iwane Matsui ( <unk> <unk> , Matsui Iwane , July 27 , 1878 – December 23 , 1948 ) was a general in the Imperial Japanese Army and the commander of the expeditionary force sent to China in 1937 . He was convicted of war crimes and executed by the Allies for his involvement in the Nanking Massacre . 
 Born in Nagoya , Matsui chose a military career and served in combat during the Russo @-@ Japanese War ( 1904 – 05 ) . He volunteered for an overseas assignment there shortly after graduating from the Army War College in 1906 . As Matsui rose through the ranks , he earned a reputation as the Japanese Army 's foremost expert on China , and he was an ardent advocate of pan @-@ Asianism . He played a key role in founding the influential Greater Asia Association . 
 Matsui retired from active duty in 1935 but was called back into service in August 1937 at the start of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War to lead the Japanese forces engaged in the Battle of Shanghai . After winning the battle Matsui succeeded in convincing Japan 's high command to advance on the Chinese capital city of Nanking . The troops under his command who captured Nanking on December 13 were responsible for the notorious Nanking Massacre . 
 Matsui finally retired from the army in 1938 . Following Japan 's defeat in World War II he was convicted of war crimes at the International Military Tribunal for the Far East ( IMTFE ) and executed by hanging . He and other convicted war criminals were enshrined at Yasukuni Shrine in 1978 , an act that has stirred controversy . 
 = = Early life and military career , 1878 – 1906 = = 
 Iwane Matsui was born in Nagoya on July 27 , 1878 . He was the sixth son of <unk> Matsui , an impoverished samurai and former retainer to the daimyo of Owari during the Tokugawa shogunate . After completing elementary school , his parents insisted that he continue his education , but Matsui worried about his father 's debts and did not want to burden him financially . Though he was a short , thin , and sickly young man , Matsui opted for a career in the Army , because in Japan at that time military schools charged the lowest tuition fees . 
 Matsui enrolled in the Central Military Preparatory School in 1893 and in 1896 was accepted into the Imperial Japanese Army Academy . Matsui was an excellent student and graduated second in his class in November , 1897 . His classmates included the future generals <unk> Masaki , Nobuyuki Abe , Shigeru <unk> , and Sadao Araki . 
 In 1901 , Matsui was admitted into the Army War College , an elite institution which accepted only about ten percent of annual applicants . Matsui was still taking classes there in February , 1904 , when the College closed due to the outbreak of the Russo @-@ Japanese War . He was immediately sent overseas where he served in Manchuria as a company commander in a combat unit of the 6th Regiment . During the Battle of <unk> , he was wounded in action and most in his company were killed . At war 's end , Matsui resumed his studies at the Army War College , and graduated at the top of his class in November , 1906 . 
 = = The " China expert " , 1906 – 31 = = 
 Matsui had a lifelong interest in Chinese civilization . His father was a scholar of Chinese classics and Matsui studied the Chinese language during his military education . Matsui was a fervent admirer of the recently deceased Sei Arao ( 1858 @-@ 1896 ) , a " continental adventurer ' ( <unk> rōnin ) and pan @-@ <unk> army officer from his hometown who had served in China . Arao believed that China and Japan , as the two strongest powers in Asia , had to forge a close trading and commercial partnership under Japanese hegemony to resist Western imperialism , an idea which Matsui incorporated into his own worldview . After graduating from the Army War College , Matsui immediately requested to be stationed in China . Only one other officer had made this request , since a posting in China was considered undesirable at the time . Matsui 's stated ambition was to become " a second Sei Arao " . 
 At first the Army General Staff gave Matsui an assignment in France , but in 1907 he got his wish to go to China , where he worked as an aide to the military attaché and did intelligence work . Matsui worked in China between 1907 and 1911 , and then again as resident officer in Shanghai between 1915 and 1919 . In 1921 Matsui was posted to Siberia as a staff officer , but returned in 1922 to China where he served until 1924 as an advisor to Zhang Zuolin in the Manchurian city of Harbin and did intelligence work for Japan 's Kwantung Army . 
 Due to his extensive experience in China Matsui became recognized as one of the most important of the Japanese Army 's " China experts " , and he was well known in the Army for his love of things Chinese and his hobby of writing Chinese poetry . His work took him throughout China , and he came to know many prominent Chinese soldiers and politicians . Matsui formed an especially warm friendship with Sun Yat @-@ sen , the first president of the Republic of China . In 1907 when a young Chinese soldier named Chiang Kai @-@ shek wanted to study abroad , Matsui helped him find a place to stay in Japan . 
 = = = Head of intelligence = = = 
 Matsui quickly rose through the ranks and in 1923 was promoted to the rank of major general . Between 1925 and 1928 he would serve in the influential post of Chief of the Intelligence Division of the Army General Staff . He was the first " China expert " to be appointed to that position and would have a major influence determining Japan 's foreign policies toward China . 
 As Chief of the Intelligence Division , Matsui was a strong supporter of Chiang Kai @-@ shek , who was attempting to end the civil war in China and unify the country under his leadership . Matsui hoped that Chiang would succeed and form a strong partnership with Japan to resist both Western influence in Asia and communism . However , Matsui 's tenure in office was punctuated by a series of crises . Against Matsui 's advice the Japanese government sent troops to the Chinese city of Jinan in 1928 to protect Japanese property and civilians , but they ended up clashing with the Chinese Army . Matsui headed to Jinan to help settle the affair , but while he was still there Japanese army officers assassinated Zhang Zuolin , the warlord leader of Manchuria . Matsui , who had been a supporter of Zhang , immediately left for Manchuria to find out what had happened . He demanded that the officers responsible for the assassination be punished . 
 In December 1928 Matsui left his post as Chief of the Intelligence Division in order to make an official , year @-@ long trip to Europe . Matsui was interested in France as well as China ; he spoke fluent French and had already done work for the Japanese Army in both France and French Indochina . 
 = = Matsui 's pan @-@ Asian vision , 1931 – 37 = = 
 Sino @-@ Japanese relations plummeted in September 1931 when the Kwantung Army invaded Manchuria . At the time Matsui was back in Japan commanding the 11th Division , but at the end of the year he was sent to Geneva , Switzerland , to attend the World Disarmament Conference as an army plenipotentiary . 
 At first Matsui condemned the invasion as the work of renegade army officers , but he was equally stung by what he believed were unfair denunciations of Japan itself by Chinese delegates to the League of Nations . Matsui suspected that the Western powers and the League of Nations were deliberately attempting to provoke conflict between Japan and China . Matsui believed that the 30 million <unk> had been relieved by the Japanese invasion and conquest , which he called ' the Empire 's sympathy and good faith ' and that the solution to the larger regional problem was for the nations of Asia to create their own " Asian League " , which would " extend to the 400 million people of China the same help and deep sympathy that we have given Manchuria " . 
 After returning to Japan in late 1932 , Matsui abruptly appeared at the office of the Pan @-@ Asia Study Group , a Tokyo @-@ based think tank , and presented its members with a bold plan to expand their small organization into an international mass movement . Matsui persuaded them to adopt his ideas , and in March 1933 the study group was rechristened the Greater Asia Association ( <unk> Dai @-@ <unk> Kyōkai ) , described by the historian Torsten Weber as " the single most influential organization to propagate pan @-@ Asianism between 1933 and 1945 . " The goal of the Greater Asia Association was to promote " the unification , liberation , and independence of the Asian peoples " , and Matsui would use the organization as a powerful vehicle to promote his " Asian League " concept both in Japan and abroad . The writings he published with the Association were widely read by Japan 's political and military elites . 
 In August 1933 Matsui was dispatched to Taiwan to command the Taiwan Army , and then on October 20 was promoted to the rank of general , the highest rank in the Japanese Army . While in Taiwan , he took the opportunity to set up a branch of the Greater Asia Association , which declared Matsui its " honorary advisor " . He then returned to Japan in August 1934 to take a seat on Japan 's Supreme War Council . 
 Meanwhile , Sino @-@ Japanese relations continued to deteriorate and Matsui too was gradually souring toward the Nationalist government of Chiang Kai @-@ shek , the same government he had strongly promoted back when serving as Chief of the Intelligence Division . In the first issue of the Greater Asia Association 's official bulletin , put out in 1933 , Matsui denounced China 's leaders for having " sold out their own country of China and betrayed Asia " due to their allegedly pro @-@ Western attitudes . Over time he gravitated toward a group within the Army General Staff led by General <unk> Nagata , which was advocating that Japan use military force to overthrow Chiang Kai @-@ shek . 
 Matsui 's career came to an abrupt end in August 1935 when Nagata , a member of the so @-@ called " Control Faction " , was assassinated by a member of the rival Imperial Way Faction . By this point Matsui was fed up with the ruthless factional infighting that had divided the Japanese Army , and so he decided that he would take responsibility for the scandal and resign from active duty in the Army . 
 = = = A general in the reserves = = = 
 Now that he was a reservist , Matsui had more time to pursue his pan @-@ Asian project . Between October and December 1935 he toured the major cities of China and Manchukuo speaking to Chinese politicians and businessmen about pan @-@ Asianism and setting up a new branch of the Greater Asia Association in Tianjin . Upon his return to Japan in December 1935 he became President of the Greater Asia Association . In February and March 1936 , amid ongoing tension with China , Matsui made a second trip to China , this time on a government @-@ sponsored goodwill tour . Matsui met personally with Chiang , and though he found little common ground with him , they at least were united in their anti @-@ communism . Matsui came out of the meeting believing that joint anti @-@ communism could be the basis for Sino @-@ Japanese cooperation in the future . Then in December 1936 , following the Xi 'an Incident , Chiang agreed to join with the Communist Party of China to resist Japan , a move that Matsui viewed as a personal betrayal . 
 = = At war in China , 1937 – 38 = = 
 In July 1937 , following the Marco Polo Bridge Incident , full @-@ scale war broke out between Japan and China . Initially limited to northern China , the fighting spread in August to Shanghai . The Japanese government decided to send two divisions of reinforcements to drive the Chinese Army from Shanghai , which would be organized as the Shanghai Expeditionary Army ( SEA ) . Due to a shortage of active duty generals , the Army General Staff opted to pull someone from the reserves to lead the new army and on August 15 Matsui was officially appointed commander of the SEA . The reason why Matsui was selected is not entirely clear , but his reputation as a " China expert " was likely a major factor . The historian Ikuhiko Hata argues that at the time the Army General Staff was hoping to seek a settlement with China once Shanghai had been secured for Japan , and Matsui , because of his close friendships with China 's leaders , was seen as an ideal candidate to conduct the negotiations . Matsui declared that his mission would be " to make the Chinese people recognize that Japanese troops are the real friends of China " , and likewise stated that " I am going to the front not to fight an enemy but in the state of mind of one who sets out to pacify his brother . " However , one of his old acquaintances in the Chinese Army remarked in The New York Times that " There can be no friendship between us while there is war between China and Japan . " 
 While sailing to Shanghai Matsui adopted a plan drawn by the Japanese Navy to divide the SEA between two landing sites north of Shanghai , Wusong and <unk> , and then use the former force to attack Shanghai directly and the latter force to encircle the Chinese Army . On August 23 Matsui oversaw the landing operation from aboard his flagship the Yura . The initial landings went well , but increasingly intense fighting ensued on land and casualties mounted . Matsui had never believed that he had been given enough soldiers to handle the job and was continuously pressing the high command for more reinforcements . He himself was not able to go ashore in Shanghai until September 10 , but that was the same day on which the Army General Staff informed him that three additional divisions would be deployed under his command . Still , even this infusion of new troops proved insufficient to dislodge the Chinese . He had mistakenly judged at the beginning of October that the Chinese Army was about to withdraw from Shanghai and had ordered concentrated infantry charges on the Chinese positions in the expectation that the campaign would be wrapped up before November . In fact the SEA was still battering Chinese defensive lines at <unk> and Suzhou Creek at that point . The turning point of the campaign did not come until November 5 when an entirely new army , the 10th Army led by Heisuke Yanagawa , landed south of Shanghai and forced the Chinese Army to make a hasty retreat . The battle was won at the cost of over 9 @,@ 000 Japanese dead . 
 The fighting also took a toll on Chinese civilians , and even at the height of the battle Matsui took a special interest in the plight of Chinese refugees . In October he ordered that improvements be made to living conditions in Chinese refugee camps and later he made a large personal donation of $ 10 @,@ 000 to the French humanitarian Father Jacquinot to help him in establishing a " safety zone " for Chinese civilians in Shanghai . 
 = = = The road to Nanking = = = 
 On November 7 Matsui was appointed commander of the Central China Area Army ( CCAA ) , a new position created to provide unified leadership to the SEA and the 10th Army . Matsui continued to command the SEA as well until Prince Asaka was appointed to take over from him on December 2 . Nonetheless , the Army General Staff was keen on keeping the war as contained as possible and so at the same time that it created the CCAA it also laid down an " operation restriction line " forbidding the CCAA from leaving the vicinity of Shanghai . 
 However , Matsui had made it clear to his superiors even before he had left Japan in August that he was determined to capture the capital city of China , Nanking , which lay 300 kilometers west of Shanghai . Matsui forcefully asserted that the war with China would not end until Nanking was in their control , and he envisaged that the fall of Nanking would result in the total collapse of Chiang Kai @-@ shek 's government . After Chiang 's fall Matsui hoped to play a role in forming a new government in China which , according to his own conception , would be a democracy that would better serve the interests of both Japan and the people of China . However , the historian Tokushi Kasahara also sees personal motives behind Matsui 's insistence on capturing Nanking . Kasahara suspects that Matsui , as an aging general with a relatively undistinguished military record , desperately wanted to crown his career with one last battlefield victory like the capture of the Chinese capital . 
 Ultimately though , it was Heisuke Yanagawa 's 10th Army which , on November 19 , abruptly crossed the operation restriction line and began advancing on Nanking . In response to this flagrant act of insubordination , Matsui , it is claimed , made some effort to restrain Yanagawa , but he also insisted to the high command that marching on Nanking was the right course of action . On December 1 the Army General Staff finally came around and approved an operation against Nanking , though by then many of Japan 's units in the field were already well on their way . 
 Matsui had gotten his way , but he still understood that his troops were tired from the fighting in Shanghai . He therefore decided to advance slowly with the aim of securing the city within two months . Nevertheless , his subordinates refused to play along and instead raced with one another to be the first to Nanking . Matsui revised his plans only upon discovering that his own armies were well ahead of their scheduled operational targets . It is again argued that Matsui was unable to restrain the men under his command , and that , since Matsui was an elderly general pulled from retirement , most of his younger and <unk> subordinates had little respect for his orders and assumed that he would be back in the reserves and shortly out of their way . Matsui 's command problems were made further complicated by the fact that , between December 5 and December 15 , he was frequently bedridden due to bouts of malaria , which he had first shown symptoms of on November 4 . Though ill , he forced himself to press on with his duties , issuing orders from his sickbed . On December 7 he moved his command post from Shanghai to Suzhou in order to be closer to the frontlines , and on December 9 he ordered that a " summons to surrender " be dropped by airplane over Nanking . Because the Chinese Army defending Nanking did not respond , the next day Matsui approved an all @-@ out attack on the city . The CCAA suffered significant casualties fighting along the mountainous terrain just north of the city because Matsui had forbidden his men from using artillery there to prevent any damage from coming to its two famous historical sites , Sun Yat @-@ sen Mausoleum and Ming Xiaoling Mausoleum . Although the Chinese garrison defending Nanking collapsed under pressure of the Japanese attack within a few days , instead of formally surrendering the Chinese soldiers simply threw away their uniforms and weapons and then merged with the city 's civilian population . The Japanese occupied Nanking on the night of December 12 / 13 . Japanese soldiers in the city then massacred prisoners of war and engaged in random acts of murder , looting , and rape which are collectively known as the Nanking Massacre . 
 = = = The Nanking Massacre = = = 
 Matsui and his staff officers in the CCAA had been especially intent on ensuring that the property and citizens of third party nations were not harmed in order to avoid causing an international incident ; they had foreseen the possibility that their troops might disobey orders upon entering Nanking , as many of them were poorly disciplined reservists . To forestall this possibility , Matsui tacked a lengthy addendum entitled " Essentials for Assaulting Nanking " onto the comprehensive operational orders that he passed down to all units on December 7 . In " Essentials " Matsui instructed each of his divisions to only allow one of their regiments into the city itself in order to reduce the Japanese Army 's contact with Chinese civilians , and he reminded all his subordinates that criminal acts like looting or arson would be severely punished , though in the court martial ledger for December 20 , Matsui , taking note of raping and looting incidents , wrote that ' the truth is that some such acts are unavoidable ' . Ultimately , Matsui 's orders were again disobeyed . Most of the buildings and civilian homes outside Nanking had been burned down by the Chinese Army to deprive the Japanese of shelter , so Matsui 's subordinate commanders decided on their own that they had no choice but to station all their men within the city itself . 
 Nevertheless , Matsui 's instructions said nothing about treatment of Chinese POWs . Matsui would inadvertently contribute to the atrocity in a major way when he demanded on December 14 that his triumphal entrance into Nanking be scheduled for the early date of December 17 . At the time his subordinates in Nanking objected because they were still in the process of scrambling to apprehend all the former Chinese soldiers hiding in the city and had no facilities in which to hold them . Regardless , Matsui held firm , and in many cases his men responded to the conundrum by ordering that all their prisoners be executed immediately after capture . Most of the large @-@ scale massacres that took place within Nanking occurred in the days immediately prior to Matsui 's entrance into the city . 
 On December 16 Matsui spent the day recovering from his malaria at the <unk> hot springs east of Nanking , and then the next day he rode into Nanking itself at the head of a large victory parade . It is not clear to what extent Matsui was aware of the atrocities perpetrated in Nanking . His former Chief of Staff in the SEA later testified that Matsui had been informed of " a few cases of plunder and outrage " shortly after entering the city , and Matsui 's own field diary also mentions being told that Japanese troops had committed acts of rape and looting . Matsui commented in his field diary , " The truth is that some such acts are unavoidable . " When a representative from the Japanese Foreign Ministry came to investigate the matter , Matsui admitted that some crimes had occurred and he blamed his subordinate commanders for allowing too many soldiers into the city in violation of his orders . After the war , Matsui 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp Yoshiharu Sumi claimed that not long after the capture of Nanking Matsui caught wind of a plan by some of his subordinates to massacre Chinese POWs and upon hearing of this he immediately put a stop to it . However researchers have since discovered that Sumi 's testimony contained a large number of inaccuracies . 
 Matsui left Nanking on December 22 and returned to Shanghai , though reports of scandalous incidents perpetrated by Japanese soldiers in Nanking continued to filter in to his headquarters over the following month . When Matsui returned to Nanking on February 7 , 1938 , for a two @-@ day tour he assembled his subordinates , including Prince Asaka and Heisuke Yanagawa , and harangued them for failing to prevent " a number of abominable incidents within the past 50 days " . 
 = = = Final days in China = = = 
 The capture of Nanking had not led to the surrender of the Nationalist Government as Matsui had predicted and the war with China continued . Undeterred , Matsui began planning out new military operations in places like Xuzhou and Zhejiang Province soon after he had returned to Shanghai . The other big task occupying his time in January and February 1938 was his plan to establish a new Chinese government in Central China . Matsui was bound and determined to press forward with his ambition to found a new regime to rival Chiang Kai @-@ shek 's Nationalist Government , and though he did not finish the job before leaving office , the Reformed Government of the Republic of China would eventually come into being in March 1938 . However , the leaders of Japan 's Army General Staff showed scant interest in his plan to create a new government in China and they also repeatedly refused to approve any new military campaigns under his command . By the beginning of February Matsui was contemplating suicide to protest their lack of enthusiasm . 
 By then , there was already a movement within the Army General Staff to have Matsui removed from his post . Reports of the atrocities in Nanking had reached the Japanese government and some within the Army General Staff blamed Matsui for mishandling the crisis and causing Japan international embarrassment . Some even wanted him court @-@ martialed for negligence . Even so , the Japanese government was not planning on dismissing Matsui solely because of the Nanking Massacre . The Foreign Ministry was displeased by anti @-@ Western statements Matsui had made after becoming CCAA commander , including his comment that he did not recognize the neutrality of foreign concessions in Shanghai , and the Army General Staff was concerned about Matsui 's severe personality conflicts with his subordinate commanders , which were interfering with the chain of command . The Army Minister Hajime Sugiyama told General Shunroku Hata that the inability of Matsui and his subordinates to coordinate and cooperate with one another was the reason he was being removed . 
 On February 10 Matsui received a messenger from the Army General Staff who informed him , much to Matsui 's chagrin and disappointment , that he would soon be relieved of command and replaced with Shunroku Hata . Ultimately , the Army General Staff did not punish Matsui but they did shake up the whole field command in China and Matsui was just one of eighty senior officers , including Asaka and Yanagawa , who were all recalled at the same time . 
 = = Life in retirement , 1938 – 46 = = 
 Matsui sailed out of Shanghai on February 21 , 1938 and landed back in Japan on February 23 . Though the time and place of his return to Japan had been kept secret by the military , reporters quickly caught wind of his return and soon Matsui was being greeted everywhere he went by cheering crowds . Later that year Matsui bought a new home in Atami in Shizuoka Prefecture and from then until 1946 he would spend his winters living in Atami and his summers living at his old house on Lake Yamanaka . 
 In spite of retiring from the military , Matsui hoped to get another job in China working with the Japanese @-@ sponsored government there . Ultimately , he instead accepted the position of Cabinet Councillor , an advisory post , in June 1938 . He continued to serve in this capacity until January 1940 when he resigned to protest Prime Minister Mitsumasa Yonai 's opposition to an alliance with Nazi Germany . 
 It was also in 1940 that Matsui commissioned the construction of a statue of Kannon , the bodhisattva of mercy , and then had a special temple built in Atami to enshrine it . He named it the Koa Kannon , which means the " Pan @-@ Asian Kannon " , and he consecrated it in honor of all the Japanese and Chinese soldiers who perished during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . At the time the newspaper New York Times praised Matsui 's act , noting that " few Western generals have ever devoted their declining years to the memory of the men who died in their battles . " Henceforth , on every single day that Matsui spent in Atami for the rest of his life he would pray in front of the Koa Kannon once early in the morning and once in the evening . 
 Throughout this time Matsui remained active in the pan @-@ Asian movement . Although the Greater Asia Association was reorganized several times between 1942 and 1945 , at no point did Matsui ever cease to serve as either the President or Vice President of the organization . Following Japan 's entrance into World War II in December 1941 , Matsui strongly advocated that Japan grant independence to the new territories it had occupied during the war and then form an alliance of Asian states to combat the Allied Powers . Between June and August 1943 Matsui undertook a tour of Asia , including China , Indochina , Singapore , Thailand , Burma , Malaysia , Indonesia , and the Philippines in order to promote his ideas . Matsui met with Wang Jingwei in China and with Subhas Chandra Bose , the head of the Indian National Army , in Singapore . He also caused a diplomatic incident in Indochina , which was still nominally under French colonial rule , when he delivered a speech demanding that it be granted full independence . Matsui 's efforts played a key role in the creation and consolidation of the Greater East Asia Co @-@ Prosperity Sphere , which was the culmination of Matsui 's lifelong vision of an " Asian League " united against the West . 
 In addition to the Greater Asia Association , Matsui also served throughout the war as President of the Association for the National Defense Concept , a virulently anti @-@ Western and anti @-@ Semitic organization founded in February 1942 to support the Japanese war effort . In 1945 as the Allies bore down on the Philippines Matsui declared over the radio that Japan would never withdraw from the Philippines " even though Tokyo should be reduced to ashes . " Soon after he also stated his plans to speak at a lecture meeting on August 20 opposing any surrender . Nevertheless , on August 15 , 1945 , at his home in Atami Matsui heard Emperor Hirohito announce that Japan had surrendered unconditionally to the Allies . 
 The Allied occupation of Japan began soon after . On November 19 the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers issued an arrest warrant for Matsui on suspicion of war crimes . Matsui was ill with pneumonia at the time and so was given until March to recover . One of Matsui 's final acts before going to prison was to ask his wife to adopt their longtime maid <unk> as their daughter . He also converted from <unk> to Buddhism and asked that his wife do the same . On March 6 , 1946 , he checked himself in to Sugamo Prison . 
 = = On trial in Tokyo , 1946 – 48 = = 
 On April 29 , 1946 , Iwane Matsui became one of twenty @-@ eight individuals formally indicted before the International Military Tribunal for the Far East ( IMTFE ) , a tribunal established by the Allies of World War II to try Japanese war criminals . The prosecution charged Matsui with Class A war crimes or " crimes against peace " , alleging that he had participated in a conspiracy to wage aggressive war against other countries , and also with Class B / C war crimes or " conventional war crimes " , alleging that he was responsible for the Nanking Massacre of 1937 to 1938 . 
 Matsui had told friends before going to Sugamo Prison that at the IMTFE he planned to defend not only himself but also Japan 's wartime conduct as a whole . Matsui insisted that Japan had acted defensively against aggression by foreign powers and that Japan 's war aims were to liberate Asia from Western imperialism . Concerning the origins of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War , Matsui called it " a fight between brothers within the ' Asian family ' " and stated that the war was fought against the Chinese , not " because we hate them , but on the contrary because we love them too much . It is just the same in a family when an elder brother has taken all that he can stand from his ill @-@ behaved younger brother and has to chastise him in order to make him behave properly . " 
 On the matter of the Nanking Massacre , Matsui admitted that he was aware of a few isolated crimes committed by individual soldiers , including acts of rape , looting , and murder , but he adamantly denied that any large @-@ scale massacres had occurred in the city . Still , Matsui admitted to the IMTFE that he bore " moral responsibility " for the wrongdoing of his men . He denied that he bore " legal responsibility " because , he claimed , it was the military police of each division who were in charge of prosecuting individual criminal acts , not the army commander . However , Matsui also testified that he had urged that any offenders be sternly punished , a statement which , the prosecution quickly noted , implied that he did have some level of legal responsibility . 
 Ultimately the IMTFE dismissed most of the accusations laid against Matsui . Of the thirty @-@ eight counts he was charged with , Matsui was found not guilty of thirty @-@ seven , including all charges relating to Class A war crimes . The judges rejected Matsui 's membership in the Greater Asia Association as being evidence that he was involved in the " conspiracy " to wage wars of aggression . 
 Nonetheless , for his role in the Nanking Massacre , he was convicted and sentenced to death under Count 55 , charging defendants with having " deliberately and recklessly disregarded their legal duty to take adequate steps to secure the observance and prevent breaches " of the laws of war . The IMTFE delivered the following verdict on November 12 , 1948 . 
 The Tribunal is satisfied that Matsui knew what was happening . He did nothing , or nothing effective to abate these horrors . He did issue orders before the capture of the city enjoining propriety of conduct upon his troops and later he issued further orders to the same purport . These orders were of no effect as is now known , and as he must have known ... He was in command of the Army responsible for these happenings . He knew of them . He had the power , as he had the duty , to control his troops and to protect the unfortunate citizens of Nanking . He must be held criminally responsible for his failure to discharge this duty . 
 Historian Yuma <unk> notes that this verdict represents " one of the earliest precedents for command responsibility in the history of international law . " 
 Shortly after hearing the verdict Matsui confided to his prison chaplain , <unk> <unk> , his feelings about the atrocities in Nanking and the rebuke he delivered to his subordinates on February 7 , 1938 . He blamed the atrocities on the alleged moral decline of the Japanese Army since the Russo @-@ Japanese War , and said , 
 The Nanking Incident was a terrible disgrace ... Immediately after the memorial services , I assembled the higher officers and wept tears of anger before them , as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief ... I told them that after all our efforts to enhance the Imperial prestige , everything had been lost in one moment through the brutalities of the soldiers . And can you imagine it , even after that , these officers laughed at me ... I am really , therefore , quite happy that I , at least , should have ended this way , in the sense that it may serve to urge self @-@ reflection on many more members of the military of that time . 
 On the night of December 22 , 1948 , Matsui met fellow condemned inmates Hideki Tojo , Akira <unk> , and Kenji <unk> at the prison chapel . As the oldest member of the group , Matsui was asked to lead them in shouting three cheers of banzai to the Emperor . Then he led the group up to the gallows where they were all hanged simultaneously shortly after midnight on the morning of December 23 , 1948 . 
 Soon after Matsui was executed , he was cremated and the US Army took away his ashes to prevent a memorial from being created . However , unbeknownst to them , some of the ashes had been hidden by the owner of the crematorium . He later brought these ashes to the shrine Matsui had founded , the Koa Kannon , and they remain there to this day . In 1978 , all seven war criminals executed by the IMTFE , including Iwane Matsui , were officially enshrined in Yasukuni Shrine in a secret ceremony conducted by head priest <unk> Matsudaira . This event did not become publicly known until the following year . 
 = = Assessments and perception = = 
 In Japan the majority of the historical literature on Iwane Matsui 's life focuses on his role in the Nanking Massacre . He has both sympathizers , who depict him as " the tragic general " who was unjustly executed , and detractors , who assert that he had the blood of a massacre on his hands . Among his detractors are the historian Yutaka Yoshida , who believes that Matsui made six serious mistakes which contributed to the massacre . First , he insisted on advancing on Nanking without ensuring proper logistical support which forced his men to rely on plunder . Second , he established no policies to protect the safety of Chinese POWs . Third , he permitted an excessively large number of soldiers to enter the city of Nanking . Fourth , he did not cooperate sufficiently with the International Committee for the Nanking Safety Zone . Fifth , he insisted that his triumphal entrance into Nanking be held at an early date , a demand which his subordinate commanders responded to by increasing the speed and severity of their operations . Finally , he spent too much time on political maneuvering and neglected his duties as commander . The historian Keiichi Eguchi and the researcher Toshio Tanabe likewise find that Matsui bears responsibility for urging the government to march on Nanking , which led directly to the massacre . Tanabe concurs with Yoshida that Matsui should have put in place policies to protect Chinese POWs and should not have ordered a premature triumphal entrance into the city of Nanking . 
 Nevertheless , other historians like Masahiro Yamamoto have argued that the death sentence was too severe a penalty for Matsui 's crime of mere negligence in failing to stop the massacre . The journalist Richard Minear also points out that Matsui 's penalty was disproportionately severe compared to the other convicted defendants . Kuniaki Koiso was found guilty on four counts and Mamoru Shigemitsu was found guilty on five counts , in both cases including one count of negligence , and both were given prison sentences . Matsui , by contrast , was found guilty of only one count of negligence but was sentenced to death . The historian Tokushi Kasahara argues that the prosecution at the IMTFE did not attempt seriously to investigate all those who were involved in the Nanking Massacre , and instead just decided to make Matsui the sole scapegoat for the whole atrocity . 
 Matsui has a somewhat infamous reputation in China today . The popular nonfiction author Takashi Hayasaka asserts that he often heard Matsui referred to as " the Hitler of Japan " by Chinese citizens during his travels in the city of Nanking because of Matsui 's connection to the Nanking Massacre . However , Matsui 's name was not always notorious in China for this reason . In 1945 the Communist Party of China denounced Matsui as a war criminal because of his propaganda work for an ultranationalist group , rather than for the Nanking Massacre . Historian Masataka Matsuura notes that the focus within current scholarship on Matsui 's role in the Nanking Massacre has distracted from the fact that his pan @-@ Asianism was the defining characteristic of his life . 
 = = Writings in English = = 
 The Japanese Army and the Dispute in the Far East ( Geneva : <unk> , 1932 ) 
 An Asiatic League of Nations ( Tokyo : Office of the Greater Asia Association , 1937 ) 
 = Megadeth = 
 Megadeth is an American thrash metal band from Los Angeles , California . The group was formed in 1983 by guitarist Dave Mustaine and bassist David Ellefson , shortly after Mustaine 's dismissal from Metallica . A pioneer of the American thrash metal scene , the band is credited as one of the genre 's " big four " with Anthrax , Metallica and Slayer , responsible for thrash metal 's development and popularization . Megadeth plays in a technical style , featuring fast rhythm sections and complex arrangements . Themes of death , war , politics and religion are prominent in the group 's lyrics . 
 In 1985 , the band released its debut album on the independent label Combat Records . The album 's moderate commercial success caught the attention of bigger labels , which led to Megadeth signing with Capitol Records . Their first major @-@ label album , Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? , was released in 1986 and influenced the underground metal scene . Despite its prominence in thrash metal , frequent disputes between its members and substance abuse issues brought Megadeth negative publicity during this period . 
 After the lineup stabilized , the band released a number of platinum @-@ selling albums , including Rust in Peace ( 1990 ) and Countdown to Extinction ( 1992 ) . These albums , along with touring worldwide , helped bring public recognition to Megadeth . The band temporarily disbanded in 2002 when Mustaine suffered an arm injury and re @-@ established in 2004 without bassist Ellefson , who had taken legal action against Mustaine . Ellefson settled with Mustaine out of court and rejoined the group in 2010 . Megadeth has hosted its own music festival , Gigantour , several times since mid @-@ 2005 . 
 As of 2014 , Megadeth has sold 50 million records worldwide , earned platinum certification in the United States for five of its fifteen studio albums , and received eleven Grammy nominations . The band 's mascot , Vic Rattlehead , regularly appears on album artwork and , since 2010 , in live shows . The group has experienced controversy over its musical approach and lyrics , including canceled concerts and album bans . MTV has refused to play two of the band 's videos that the network considered to condone suicide . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1983 – 84 : Formation = = = 
 Dave Mustaine was the lead guitarist for Metallica when the band formed in 1981 . He was a member for nearly a year and helped compose some of the group 's early songs . However , before Metallica began recording its debut album , Mustaine was expelled over substance abuse and conflicts with James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich . Two months later , Mustaine and bassist David Ellefson formed Megadeth in Los Angeles . Mustaine wanted the new band to play faster and heavier music than Metallica . According to Mustaine , the name " Megadeth " represents the annihilation of power . It is a misspelling of the term <unk> , meaning one million deaths by nuclear explosion . The name came from a pamphlet by California senator Alan Cranston that Mustaine found on the floor of a bus after being fired from Metallica . It read : " The arsenal of <unk> can 't be rid no matter what the peace treaties come to . " 
 Despite his enthusiasm , Mustaine had trouble finding other members to fill out the lineup . He and Ellefson examined about 15 drummers , hoping to find one who understood meter changes in music . In the meantime , Kerry King from Slayer filled in on rhythm guitar . They eventually selected Lee Rausch as drummer , and settled on Mustaine as lead vocalist after six months of searching . Mustaine was also the band 's primary songwriter , lead , and rhythm guitarist . In 1984 , Megadeth recorded a three @-@ song demo tape featuring Mustaine , Ellefson , and Rausch . The demo featured early versions of " Last Rites / Loved to Death " , " The Skull Beneath the Skin " , and " Mechanix " , all of which appeared on the band 's debut album . After several performances in 1984 , Megadeth replaced Rausch with jazz fusion drummer Gar Samuelson . Guitarist Chris Poland joined the group that December . After considering several labels , Mustaine signed the band to Combat Records , a New York @-@ based Independent record label that offered Megadeth the highest budget to record and tour . 
 = = = 1985 : Killing Is My Business ... and Business Is Good ! = = = 
 In 1985 , Combat Records gave the band $ 8 @,@ 000 to record and produce its debut album . After spending $ 4 @,@ 000 of the budget on drugs , alcohol , and food , the band fired the original producer and finished the recording themselves . Despite its low fidelity sound , Killing Is My Business ... and Business Is Good ! was relatively successful in underground metal circles on its release that summer and attracted major @-@ label interest . Music writer Joel McIver praised its " blistering technicality " and stated that the album " raised the bar for the whole thrash metal scene , with guitarists forced to perform even more accurately and powerfully " . The front cover marked the debut of band mascot Vic Rattlehead , who regularly appeared on subsequent album artwork . 
 Killing Is My Business ... and Business Is Good ! features " Mechanix , " a song Mustaine wrote during his time with Metallica . Though Mustaine told the band after his dismissal not to use the music he had written , Metallica recorded a different version of the song entitled " The Four Horsemen " , with a slower tempo and a melodic middle section . The album also included a cover of Nancy Sinatra 's " These Boots Are Made for Walkin ' , " at a faster tempo and with altered lyrics . Megadeth 's version generated controversy during the 1990s , when its writer , Lee Hazlewood , called Mustaine 's changes " vile and offensive " . Under threat of legal action , the song was removed from pressings released from 1995 to 2001 . In mid @-@ 1985 , on a bill with Exciter , Megadeth played its first North American tour : the Killing for a Living Tour . Poland was in the band as the tour began , but abruptly left and was replaced by touring guitarist Mike Albert . Poland rejoined Megadeth in October , shortly before the group began its second album for Combat . 
 = = = 1986 – 87 : Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? = = = 
 According to Mustaine , the band was under pressure to deliver another successful album : " That sophomore offering is the ' be @-@ all or end @-@ all ' of any band . You either go to the next level , or it 's the beginning of the nadir . " The songs were developed relatively quickly in an old warehouse south of Los Angeles before recording began . Mustaine composed the music , with the other members adding arrangement ideas . Megadeth 's second album was produced on a $ 25 @,@ 000 budget from Combat Records . Dissatisfied with its financial limitations , the band left Combat and signed with Capitol Records . Capitol bought the rights to the upcoming album , and hired producer Paul Lani to remix the earlier recordings . Released in late 1986 , Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? has clearer production and more sophisticated songwriting . Mustaine wanted to write socially conscious lyrics , unlike mainstream heavy metal bands who sang about " hedonistic pleasures " . The album was noted for its political commentary and helped Megadeth expand its fanbase . The title track was the album 's lead single and was accompanied by a music video that received regular airplay on MTV . 
 In February 1987 , Megadeth was the opening act on Alice Cooper 's Constrictor tour , and the following month the band began its first headlining world tour in the United Kingdom . The 72 @-@ week tour was supported by Overkill and Necros , and continued in the United States . During the tour , Mustaine and Ellefson considered firing Samuelson for his drug abuse . According to Mustaine , Samuelson had become too much to handle when intoxicated . Drummer Chuck Behler traveled with Megadeth for the last dates of the tour as the other band members feared Samuelson would not be able to continue touring . Poland occasionally quarreled with Mustaine , and was accused of selling band equipment to buy heroin . As a result , Samuelson and Poland were asked to leave Megadeth in 1987 . That year , 16 @-@ year @-@ old guitarist Jeff Loomis of Sanctuary auditioned for the band . Mustaine complimented Loomis ' playing but considered him too young to join . Poland was initially replaced by Jay Reynolds of Malice , but as the band began working on its next record , Reynolds was replaced by his guitar teacher , Jeff Young , when Megadeth was six weeks into the recording of its third album . 
 = = = 1988 – 89 : So Far , So Good ... So What ! = = = 
 With a major @-@ label budget , the Paul Lani @-@ produced So Far , So Good ... So What ! took over five months to record . The album was plagued with problems during production , partially due to Mustaine 's struggle with drug addiction . Mustaine later said : " The production of So Far , So Good ... So What ! was horrible , mostly due to substances and the priorities we had or didn 't have at the time . " Mustaine clashed with Lani on several occasions , beginning with Lani 's insistence that the drums be recorded separately from the cymbals , an unheard @-@ of process for rock drummers . Mustaine and Lani became estranged during the album 's mixing , and Lani was replaced by Michael Wagener , who remixed the album . 
 So Far , So Good ... So What ! was released in January 1988 and was well received by fans and critics . The album featured a cover version of the Sex Pistols ' " Anarchy in the U.K. " ; Mustaine changed the song 's lyrics , later saying that he had simply heard them incorrectly . To support the album , Megadeth embarked on a world tour , opening for Dio in Europe and then joining Iron Maiden 's Seventh Tour of a Seventh Tour in the United States . In August , the band appeared at the Monsters of Rock festival at Castle Donington in the United Kingdom , performing to an audience of more than 100 @,@ 000 . One show featured a guest appearance by Metallica drummer ( and Mustaine 's former bandmate ) Lars Ulrich . The band was added to the Monsters of Rock European tour , but left after the first show due to Ellefson 's drug problems , for which he was treated immediately . 
 Shortly after the Monsters of Rock appearance , Mustaine fired Behler and Young and canceled Megadeth 's scheduled Australian tour . " On the road , things escalated from a small border skirmish into a full @-@ on raging war " , Mustaine later recalled . " I think a lot of us were inconsistent [ on the 1988 tour ] because of the guy we were waiting for after the show . " During the tour , Mustaine noticed problems developing with Behler and brought in drummer Nick Menza as Behler 's drum technician . As with Samuelson , Menza was expected to take over if Behler could not continue the tour . Menza replaced Behler in 1989 . Young 's dismissal resulted from Mustaine 's suspicions that he was having an affair with Mustaine 's girlfriend , an allegation Young denied . 
 The band was unable to quickly find a suitable replacement for Young . At this time , Megadeth recorded a cover version of Alice Cooper 's " No More Mr. Nice Guy " which appeared on the soundtrack to the Wes Craven horror movie Shocker . The video was directed by Penelope Spheeris , who recalled the filming as a " Herculean task " as Mustaine was unable to play guitar because of his drug addiction . In June 1988 , Megadeth appeared in Spheeris ' documentary The Decline of Western Civilization Part II : The Metal Years . The documentary chronicled the Los Angeles heavy metal scene of the late 1980s with a focus on glam metal . Mustaine remembered the film as a disappointment , as it aligned Megadeth with " a bunch of shit bands " . During the March 1989 auditions for a new lead guitarist , Mustaine was arrested for driving under the influence and possession of narcotics after crashing into a parked vehicle occupied by an off @-@ duty police officer . Mustaine entered court @-@ ordered drug rehabilitation shortly afterwards , and became drug @-@ free for the first time in ten years . 
 = = = 1990 – 91 : Rust in Peace = = = 
 With Mustaine sober , Megadeth continued searching for a new lead guitarist . Among those who auditioned were Lee Altus of Heathen and Eric Meyer of Dark Angel . Meyer was invited to join the band after Poland 's departure , but chose to remain with Dark Angel . Guns N ' Roses guitarist Slash had been jamming with Mustaine and Ellefson , and although it seemed that he might join Megadeth , he remained with Guns N ' Roses . Dimebag Darrell of Pantera was offered the job , but refused to join without his brother , Pantera drummer Vinnie Paul . As Megadeth had already hired Menza , Darrell declined to join the band . 
 Marty Friedman filled the guitarist position at the recommendation of Ron <unk> , a member of Capitol management . <unk> had heard Dragon 's Kiss , a solo recording by Friedman when he was in <unk> . Mustaine and Ellefson were satisfied with Friedman 's style and thought he understood Megadeth 's music . With Friedman in the group , the band completed what fans consider the definitive Megadeth lineup . The revitalized band entered Rumbo Studios in March 1990 with co @-@ producer Mike Clink to begin Megadeth 's most critically acclaimed album to date , Rust in Peace . For the first time the band 's members remained sober in the studio , alleviating many problems which plagued previous albums . Clink was the first producer to complete a Megadeth album without being fired . Its recording was documented in <unk> Pieces , a home video released in 1991 with six music videos and an interview with the band . 
 Released in September 1990 , Rust in Peace debuted at number 23 in the United States and number eight in the United Kingdom . Mustaine had developed a writing style with a rhythmically complex , progressive edge , and the songs had longer guitar solos and frequent tempo changes . Described as a genre @-@ defining work by Decibel , the album solidified Megadeth 's reputation in the music industry . It features the singles " Holy Wars ... The Punishment Due " and " Hangar 18 " , both of which were accompanied by music videos and became live staples . Rust in Peace received a Grammy nomination in 1991 for Best Metal Performance , and was the group 's third album to go platinum when certified in December 1994 . 
 Early in 1990 , Slayer proposed a major tour featuring American thrash metal bands . Megadeth accepted , joining Slayer , Testament , and Suicidal Tendencies for the successful European Clash of the Titans tour . An American leg began the following year featuring Megadeth , Slayer , and Anthrax , with Alice in Chains as a supporting act . The tour was considered a multi @-@ headliner , as the three main bands alternated time slots . In addition to the Clash of the Titans tour , Megadeth played with Judas Priest in North America late in 1990 and appeared at the second Rock in Rio festival in January 1991 . 
 = = = 1992 – 93 : Countdown to Extinction = = = 
 The recording sessions for Megadeth 's fifth studio album began in January 1992 at Enterprise Studios in Burbank , California . Max Norman was chosen to produce the album , as the band was pleased with his mixing of Rust in Peace . Megadeth spent nearly four months in the studio with Norman , writing and recording what became the band 's most commercially successful effort , Countdown to Extinction . The album , whose title was suggested by Menza , features songwriting contributions from each band member . Ellefson explained that the band changed its approach to songwriting for this album , beginning to write more melodic songs . 
 Released in July 1992 , Countdown to Extinction entered the Billboard 200 chart at number two and was certified double platinum in the United States . The album 's overseas success helped the band to develop a larger following outside the US . It received a nomination for Best Metal Performance at the 1993 Grammy Awards , and its title track won a Genesis Award from the Humane Society in 1993 for raising awareness for animal rights issues . Ellefson later said that he and Friedman were disappointed that Megadeth did not win the Grammy : " It was such a bizarre moment , because it was as if the amount of work it had taken to ramp up to that hopeful night was literally gone in a second . " 
 A world tour in support of the album was launched in late 1992 , with Pantera and White Zombie as supporting acts . The tour included a North American leg in early 1993 , with Stone Temple Pilots as the opening act . One month into the leg , the remaining shows , including dates in Japan , were canceled when Mustaine returned to substance abuse , ending up in a hospital emergency room . After seven weeks in rehab , Mustaine emerged sober again and the band returned to the studio to record " Angry Again " . The song featured the soundtrack of the 1993 film Last Action Hero and received a Grammy nomination in 1994 . 
 During mid @-@ 1993 , Megadeth performed at a number of shows with Metallica in Europe . The first was at Milton Keynes Bowl in England , and included Diamond Head . In July , Megadeth was added as the opening act for Aerosmith 's Get a Grip Tour , but was removed from the bill after three shows . Aerosmith said that Megadeth was " dumped " because of Mustaine 's erratic behavior , while Capitol Records said it was due to " artistic restrictions " . After the canceled US tour , Megadeth returned to the studio to record " 99 Ways to Die " , which appeared on The Beavis and Butt @-@ head Experience , a compilation album released in November featuring songs interspersed with commentary by the main characters of the animated series Beavis and Butt @-@ head . The song was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 1995 Grammy Awards . During these sessions , Megadeth recorded a cover version of Black Sabbath 's " Paranoid " , which appeared on the Black Sabbath tribute album Nativity in Black ; it was nominated for a Grammy the following year . 
 = = = 1994 – 95 : Youthanasia = = = 
 In early 1994 , Megadeth reunited with producer Max Norman for the follow @-@ up to Countdown to Extinction . With three band members living in Arizona , initial work began at Phase Four Studios in Phoenix . A few days into pre @-@ production , problems with Phase Four 's equipment forced the band to look for another studio . Mustaine insisted on recording in Arizona , but no suitable recording facility could be found . At Norman 's request , the band built its own recording studio in Phoenix in a rented warehouse , later called " Fat Planet in Hangar 18 " . During the studio 's construction , much of the pre @-@ production songwriting and arrangements were done at Vintage Recorders in Phoenix . At Norman 's suggestion , the tracks on Youthanasia had a slower tempo than previous albums , at about 120 beats per minute . The band abandoned the progressive approach from its previous albums and focused on stronger vocal melodies and more accessible , radio @-@ friendly arrangements . For the first time , Megadeth wrote and arranged the entire album in the studio , including basic tracks recorded live by the entire band . The album 's recording was video recorded and released as <unk> : The Making of Youthanasia in 1995 . 
 After eight months of studio work , Youthanasia was released in November 1994 . It debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 and charted in several European countries . The album was certified gold in Canada the day it was released , and was certified platinum in the US two months later . Megadeth hired fashion photographer Richard Avedon to enhance the band 's image . Avedon had the band members exchange their jeans and T @-@ shirts for a more conscious appearance . To promote Youthanasia , the band played a Halloween show in New York City called " Night of the Living Megadeth " , which was broadcast live on MTV . In November , the band performed twice on the Late Show with David Letterman , playing " Train of Consequences " on the first appearance and " À Tout le Monde " on the second . 
 An eleven @-@ month tour began in South America in November 1994 . In 1995 , Megadeth played in Europe and North America with several opening acts , including Corrosion of Conformity , Korn and Fear Factory . The tour culminated with an appearance at the Monsters of Rock festival in Brazil , co @-@ headlining with Alice Cooper and Ozzy Osbourne . In January 1995 , Megadeth appeared on the soundtrack of the horror movie Demon Knight with the song " Diadems " . In July , Megadeth released Hidden Treasures , an extended play featuring songs which originally appeared on movie soundtracks and tribute albums . 
 = = = 1996 – 98 : Cryptic Writings = = = 
 After the extensive world tour in support of Youthanasia , Megadeth took time off late in 1995 . Mustaine began work on <unk> , a side project with vocalist Lee Ving of Fear . The duo hired drummer Jimmy DeGrasso , who had played with Alice Cooper on the South American Monsters of Rock tour earlier that year . Marty Friedman built a studio in his new home in Phoenix and completed his fourth solo album , released in April 1996 . In September 1996 , Megadeth went to London to work on songs for the next album . The songwriting was closely supervised by new manager Bud Prager , who contributed musical ideas and lyrics ; many lyrics and song titles were changed at his request . Regarding Prager 's influence , Mustaine later wrote : " I figured maybe this guy [ Prager ] could help me get that intangible number one record I so badly wanted . " The album , recorded in Nashville , was Megadeth 's first collaboration with country pop producer Dann Huff , who had met Mustaine in 1990 . 
 Cryptic Writings was released in June 1997 . The album peaked at number ten on the Billboard 200 , and was eventually certified gold in the United States . Its lead single , " Trust " , became Megadeth 's highest charting song on the Mainstream Rock Tracks at number five , and was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 1998 Grammy Awards . Although all four singles from the album entered the top 20 on Billboard 's Mainstream Rock Tracks chart , press response to the album was mixed . The album featured a diverse set of songs which the Los Angeles Times described as a " rousing balance " between older material and experimental songs . Asked about the album 's eclecticism , Mustaine said that Cryptic Writings was divided into thirds . One part was based around faster , more aggressive material , another was " radio @-@ orientated music like Youthanasia " , and the final third was more melodic . 
 After more than a year since the band 's last concert , Megadeth returned as a live act in June 1997 , beginning a world tour with the Misfits and touring in the United States with Life of Agony and Coal Chamber . In July , the band participated in Ozzfest ' 98 but , halfway through the tour , Menza reportedly discovered a tumor on his knee and left to undergo surgery . Jimmy DeGrasso , who had collaborated with Mustaine in <unk> , was hired to replace Menza for the remainder of the tour . Though initially meant to be a temporary replacement , DeGrasso joined the band permanently after the tour . Mustaine later said that he dismissed Menza from the band because he believed the drummer had lied about having cancer . 
 = = = 1999 – 2000 : Risk = = = 
 Following the band 's mainstream radio success with Cryptic Writings , Megadeth again worked with Dann Huff on its eighth studio album . The band began writing in January 1999 , supervised by manager Bud Prager , who was credited with co @-@ writing five of the album 's twelve songs . With high expectations following the chart success of " Trust " , Prager convinced Mustaine to grant Huff even more control over the album 's recording , a decision Mustaine later regretted . 
 Risk , released in August 1999 , was a critical and commercial failure and led to backlash from many longtime fans . Although its two predecessors incorporated rock elements alongside a more traditional heavy metal sound , Risk was virtually devoid of metal . About the band 's musical direction , Dave Mustaine said : " We hit the nadir of our career with Risk , and I vowed after that we were going to get back to our roots . It took a little bit of time to do that . " Despite this , Risk was certified gold in the United States . The album 's lead single , " Crush ' Em " , appeared on the soundtrack for Universal Soldier : The Return and was used as an entrance theme for NHL hockey games and professional wrestling events . 
 On July 22 , 1999 , former drummer Gar Samuelson died of liver failure at age 41 in Orange City , Florida . Three days later , during Megadeth 's performance at Woodstock 1999 , Mustaine dedicated " Peace Sells " to Samuelson 's memory . That month , Megadeth also recorded a cover version of the Black Sabbath 's " Never Say Die " for the second Nativity in Black tribute album . The band began a world tour in support of Risk in September , playing with Iron Maiden during the European leg . Three months into the tour , Friedman announced his resignation from Megadeth , citing musical differences . Mustaine later said : " I told [ Marty ] after Risk that we had to go back to our roots and play metal , and he quit . " In January 2000 , guitarist Al Pitrelli , formerly of Savatage and the Trans @-@ Siberian Orchestra , became Friedman 's replacement . 
 In April , Megadeth returned to the studio to work on its ninth studio album . A month into production , the band received an offer to join the Maximum Rock tour with Anthrax and Mötley Crüe . Megadeth put the recording on hold and toured North America during the second quarter of 2000 . Early in the tour , Anthrax was removed from the bill , allowing Megadeth to play an extended co @-@ headlining set . The tour , however , had poor ticket sales . 
 = = = 2000 – 01 : The World Needs a Hero = = = 
 After 15 years with Capitol Records , Megadeth left the label in July 2000 . According to Mustaine , the departure was due to ongoing tensions with Capitol management . Capitol returned the band 's newest recordings and released a greatest hits album , Capitol Punishment : The Megadeth Years , with two new tracks : " Kill the King " and " Dread and the Fugitive Mind " . In November , Megadeth signed with Sanctuary Records . The band returned to the studio in October to finish its next album , The World Needs a Hero , which was near completion when Megadeth joined the Maximum Rock tour six months earlier . Following the negative response to Risk , Mustaine fired Bud Prager and produced the album himself . The songs were written by Mustaine alone , except for " Promises " , which had contributions from Pitrelli . Two days before the release of The World Needs a Hero , Megadeth appeared in an episode of VH1 's Behind the Music showcasing Mustaine , Ellefson , several past members , and Mustaine 's old Metallica bandmates James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich . 
 The World Needs a Hero was released in May 2001 , and debuted at number sixteen on the Billboard 200 . It was banned in Malaysia when the national government determined that the album 's artwork was " unsuitable for the nation 's youth " . Consequently , the band canceled its August 2 concert in Kuala Lumpur . The album marked Megadeth 's return to a more aggressive sound after the stylistic variations of its previous two albums , but critics felt it fell short of expectations . Mustaine compared the album to a huge ship at sea , turning and trying to right itself to get back on course . Its lead single , " Moto Psycho " , reached number 22 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock chart . 
 A European tour with AC / DC in support of The World Needs a Hero began in mid @-@ 2001 , followed by an American tour with Iced Earth and Endo in September . Mustaine allowed fans to choose the setlist in each American city . However , the tour was cut short following the September 11 attacks ; all dates were canceled , including a DVD shoot in Argentina . The band instead played two shows in Arizona on November 16 and 17 , which were filmed and released as Megadeth 's first live release , Rude Awakening . That year , Killing Is My Business ... and Business Is Good ! was remixed and remastered ; the reissue featured modified artwork and several bonus tracks . 
 = = = 2002 – 03 : Breakup = = = 
 In January 2002 , Mustaine was hospitalized for the removal of a kidney stone and was administered pain medication that triggered a relapse of his drug addiction . Following his stay , Mustaine checked himself into a treatment center in Texas , where he suffered a peculiar injury causing severe nerve damage to his left arm . The injury , induced by falling asleep with his left arm over the back of a chair , caused compression of the radial nerve . He was diagnosed with radial neuropathy , which left him unable to grasp or even make a fist with his left hand . 
 On April 3 , Mustaine announced in a press release that he was disbanding Megadeth as his arm injury rendered him unable to play guitar . For the next four months , he had physical therapy five days a week , and slowly began to " re @-@ teach " his left hand . To fulfill contract obligations to Sanctuary , Megadeth released the compilation album Still Alive ... and Well ? The first half of the album contains live tracks recorded at the Web Theatre in Phoenix , and the second half has studio recordings from The World Needs a Hero . 
 Following nearly a year of recovery , including physical and electroshock therapy , Mustaine began work on what was to have been his first solo album . The new material was recorded with session musicians Vinnie Colaiuta and Jimmie Lee <unk> in October 2003 . The project was put on hold when Mustaine agreed to remix and remaster Megadeth 's eight @-@ album back catalog on Capitol Records , re @-@ recording portions that were missing or altered without his knowledge in the original mixing . 
 = = = 2004 : The System Has Failed = = = 
 In May 2004 , Mustaine returned to his solo project . Contractual obligations to the band 's European label , EMI , resulted in the recording 's release as a Megadeth album . Mustaine reformed the band and contacted the fan @-@ favorite Rust in Peace lineup to re @-@ record backing tracks . While drummer Nick Menza agreed to return , both Marty Friedman and David Ellefson were unable to come to an agreement with Mustaine . Menza was sent home shortly after rehearsals began , a few days before the start of a tour supporting Megadeth 's upcoming album . Mustaine said Menza was insufficiently prepared for the physical demands of a US tour , and " it just didn 't work out " . This was the first album without Ellefson . Chris Poland , who played lead guitar on Megadeth 's first two albums , was hired to contribute guitar solos to the new album , working with Mustaine for the first time since the 1980s . Poland opted to serve only as a session musician , wanting to remain focused on his jazz fusion project <unk> . 
 The System Has Failed was released in September 2004 . Critics heralded it as a return to form ; Revolver gave the album a favorable review , calling it " Megadeth 's most vengeful , poignant and musically complex offering since 1992 's Countdown to Extinction " . The album marked a shift toward the band 's earlier sound ; journalist Amy Sciarretto of CMJ New Music Report wrote that the album contained " neo @-@ thrash riffing with biting , politically charged lyrics " . The System Has Failed debuted at number eighteen on the Billboard 200 and was led by " Die Dead Enough " , which reached number 21 on the US Mainstream Rock chart . Mustaine announced that the album would be the band 's last and would be followed by a farewell tour , after which he would focus on a solo career . 
 Megadeth began the Blackmail the Universe world tour in October , enlisting touring bassist James MacDonough of Iced Earth and guitarist Glen Drover of Eidolon and King Diamond . Five days before the first show , Menza was replaced by Shawn Drover , who remained with the band as a regular member . The band toured the US with Exodus and Europe with Diamond Head and Dungeon . In June 2005 , Capitol released a greatest @-@ hits compilation , Greatest Hits : Back to the Start , featuring remixed and remastered versions of songs chosen by fans from Megadeth 's Capitol albums . 
 = = = 2005 – 06 : Gigantour = = = 
 In mid @-@ 2005 , Mustaine organized an annual heavy metal festival tour , Gigantour . Megadeth headlined the inaugural tour with acts such as Dream Theater , Nevermore , Anthrax , and Fear Factory . Performances at the Montreal and Vancouver shows were filmed and recorded for a live DVD @-@ and @-@ CD set released in the second quarter of 2006 . On October 9 , following the successes of The System Has Failed and the Blackmail the Universe world tour , Mustaine announced to a sold @-@ out crowd at the Pepsi Music Rock Festival in Argentina that Megadeth would continue to record and tour . The concert , held at Obras Sanitarias stadium in Buenos Aires in front of 25 @,@ 000 fans , was filmed and released on DVD as That One Night : Live in Buenos Aires in 2007 . 
 In February 2006 , bassist James MacDonough left the band over " personal differences " . He was replaced by James LoMenzo , who had worked with David Lee Roth , White Lion and Black Label Society . The new Megadeth lineup made its live debut headlining the Dubai Desert Rock Festival in the United Arab Emirates with Testament . In March , Capitol released a two @-@ disc DVD , Arsenal of Megadeth , which included archive footage , interviews , live shows , and many of the band 's music videos . Due to licensing issues , soundtrack and non @-@ Capitol videos were not included . The second Gigantour began during the third quarter of 2006 ; Megadeth again headlined , this time with Lamb of God , Opeth , Arch Enemy and Overkill . The 2006 tour included three dates in Australia , supported by Soulfly , Arch Enemy and Caliban . 
 = = = 2007 – 08 : United Abominations = = = 
 In May 2006 , Megadeth announced that its eleventh studio album , United Abominations , was near completion . Originally scheduled for release in October , Mustaine said that the band was " putting the finishing touches on it " and postponed its release to May of the following year . He commented on the release : " Metal needs a really good old @-@ school record again . I believe I have delivered . " United Abominations was the band 's first album to feature Glen Drover , Shawn Drover , and James <unk> . It also has a newer version of " À Tout le Monde " entitled " À Tout le Monde ( Set Me Free ) " . The 2007 version is a duet with Cristina Scabbia of Lacuna Coil ; it was recorded at a slightly faster tempo than the original and contains an extended solo . 
 Released in May 2007 , United Abominations debuted at number eight on the Billboard 200 , selling 54 @,@ 000 copies in the first week . In March , Megadeth began a North American tour opening for the newly reformed Heaven & Hell . The band played with Down for Canadian shows and with Machine Head for the US dates . A European summer festival tour followed . Late in the year , Megadeth returned to the United States to headline its Tour of Duty . In November , the band brought Gigantour to Australia with a lineup including Static @-@ X , DevilDriver and Lacuna Coil . 
 In January 2008 , Glen Drover quit Megadeth , stating that he was tired of the frequent touring and wanted to spend more time with his family . He also cited personal issues with other band members . Drover was replaced by Chris Broderick , formerly of Nevermore and Jag Panzer . Broderick was initially asked by Mustaine 's management company at the end of 2007 if he would be interested in auditioning for Megadeth . After an informal meeting at Mustaine 's house , Broderick was introduced as the band 's new guitarist . Mustaine complimented Broderick 's playing skills and called him " the best guitarist Megadeth has ever had " . Broderick 's former Nevermore bandmate , Van Williams , congratulated Megadeth on " getting one hell of a good player , more importantly they 're getting a great guy to hang out with and a true friend " . 
 The new lineup made its live debut at the Helsinki Ice Hall on February 4 . The 2008 Gigantour , with 29 North American dates , began shortly afterwards . Mustaine wanted a shorter lineup , allowing each band a chance to perform well . The third tour featured In Flames , Children of Bodom , Job for a Cowboy and High on Fire . Megadeth continued the Tour of Duty in South America and Mexico in May and June . A compilation album , Anthology : Set the World Afire , was released in September 2008 . 
 = = = 2009 – 10 : Endgame = = = 
 In February 2009 , Megadeth and Testament were scheduled on the European " Priest Feast " tour , with Judas Priest as headliners . At this time , Metallica , who had been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , invited Mustaine to attend the ceremony . Mustaine was informed that he would not be inducted to the Hall of Fame because such honors were granted only to those members who received recording credit on a Metallica album . Mustaine congratulated the group respectfully , and honored his commitment to the European tour with Judas Priest . In April , Megadeth and Slayer co @-@ headlined the Canadian Carnage . This was the first time they had performed together in more than 15 years . Machine Head and Suicide Silence opened for the four shows that occurred later in June . 
 In May , Megadeth finished recording its twelfth album , Endgame . According to Mustaine , the name paid homage to Alex Jones ' 2007 film of the same name . The release date for Endgame was announced on the Megadeth official website , and Metal Hammer was the first to review the album track @-@ by @-@ track . Megadeth began its Endgame tour in October , and finished it in December . The tour featured a number of supporting acts , including Machine Head , Suicide Silence , and Warbringer . In January 2010 , Megadeth was set to embark on the American Carnage tour with Slayer and Testament , but the tour was postponed due to Tom Araya 's back surgery . Several weeks later , Megadeth 's " Head Crusher " was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 2010 Grammy Awards , the band 's eighth Grammy nomination in 19 years . 
 In March , Megadeth embarked on the Rust in Peace 20th Anniversary Tour , which took place in North America and had support from Testament and Exodus . During the tour , Megadeth played Rust in Peace in its entirety . Prior to the start of the tour , original bassist Ellefson rejoined Megadeth after eight years . In an interview for Classic Rock , he stated that Shawn Drover contacted him , informing him that bassist LoMenzo was leaving the band , saying " if ever there was a time for you and Dave [ Mustaine ] to talk , now is it " . 
 = = = 2010 – 12 : Thirteen = = = 
 Megadeth , along with Metallica , Slayer , and Anthrax , collectively known as the " big four " of thrash metal , agreed to perform on the same bill during mid @-@ 2010 . These performances were part of the Sonisphere Festival and were held in a number of European countries . One such performance in Sofia , Bulgaria , was filmed and released as a video album entitled The Big Four : Live from Sofia , Bulgaria . These shows continued the following year in the United States . The first took place in Indio , California , and was the only scheduled show in the United States at the time , although a second American production was held at Yankee Stadium in New York City shortly afterwards . 
 In July 2010 , after the European " big four " shows , Megadeth and Slayer commenced the first leg of the American Carnage Tour , where Megadeth played Rust in Peace in its entirety , while Slayer performed its album Seasons in the Abyss , both of which were released in 1990 . From these shows onward , Vic Rattlehead started making sustained onstage appearances , to improve the visual facet of Megadeth 's live performances . Shortly afterward , the two bands united with Anthrax for the Jägermeister Music Tour in late 2010 . During the final show of the tour , Kerry King joined Megadeth on stage at the Gibson Amphitheatre in Hollywood to perform Megadeth 's " Rattlehead " . It was the first time that King had performed onstage with Megadeth as the latter 's early shows in 1984 . Megadeth and Slayer again shared the stage for the European Carnage Tour in March and April 2011 . Megadeth also headlined the fourth annual Rockstar Mayhem Festival in July and August the same year . 
 In September , the band released the DVD album Rust in Peace Live , recorded at the Hollywood Palladium in Los Angeles . Later that month , Megadeth released " Sudden Death " for the video game Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock . The song was commissioned by the publishers of the Guitar Hero franchise , who wanted the track to feature dark lyrics and multiple guitar solos . It was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 2011 Grammy ceremony . 
 Megadeth returned to its own Vic 's Garage studio to record its thirteenth album , to be produced by Johnny K , because Andy Sneap , the producer of Megadeth 's previous two albums , was unavailable . The album was titled Thirteen and featured previously released tracks such as " Sudden Death " and " Never Dead " . The album was released in November 2011 , and charted at number eleven on the Billboard 200 ; its lead single " Public Enemy No. 1 " received a Grammy nomination for Best Hard Rock / Metal Performance , but did not win . Shortly after the album was released , Dave Mustaine stated that , after a four @-@ year hiatus , there would be a new Gigantour tour in early 2012 . The lineup consisted of Motörhead , Volbeat , and Lacuna Coil alongside Megadeth . After the conclusion of Gigantour , Rob Zombie and Megadeth announced a nine @-@ date co @-@ headlining US tour scheduled for May 2012 . 
 = = = 2012 – 14 : Super Collider = = = 
 In September 2012 , it was announced that the band would re @-@ release Countdown to Extinction in honor of the album 's 20th anniversary . To mark the occasion , Megadeth launched a tour in which the band performed the album live in its entirety . One such performance , filmed at the Pomona Fox Theater , was released as a live album called Countdown to Extinction : Live the following year . Additionally , another track from Thirteen , " Whose Life ( Is It Anyways ? ) " , was nominated for Best Hard Rock / Metal Performance at the 2013 Grammy Awards , but lost to Halestorm 's " Love Bites ( So Do I ) " . 
 In August , the band announced the recording of its fourteenth album with producer Johnny K. At the start of 2013 , Megadeth left Roadrunner Records for Mustaine 's newly founded label , Tradecraft , distributed through Universal Music Group . The album , Super Collider , was released in June and debuted at number six on the Billboard 200 , the band 's highest chart position since 1994 's Youthanasia . Critical reaction to the album , however , was largely negative . Shortly after the release of Super Collider , Mustaine stated that he had already started thinking about a fifteenth Megadeth album . He said this had been spurred by the death of Slayer guitarist Jeff Hanneman , which gave him a sense of mortality . Mustaine elaborated : " You know , time is short . Nobody knows how long they 're gonna live . You see what happened with Jeff Hanneman , so I wanna write as much as I can while I can . " 
 The 2013 edition of Gigantour featured Black Label Society , Hellyeah , Device , and Newsted as opening bands . At the final show , Jason Newsted , Metallica 's former bassist , joined Megadeth onstage to perform " Phantom Lord " , a song Mustaine had co @-@ written during his stint with Metallica . Early in 2014 , Megadeth was slated to play the Soundwave festival in Australia , but pulled out over a disagreement with tour promoter A. J. <unk> concerning the band 's sideshows with Newsted . Icon , an eleven @-@ song compilation of Megadeth 's Capitol @-@ era material , was released as part of Universal Music 's Icon series in February . 
 = = = 2014 – present : Dystopia = = = 
 The band encountered several setbacks through the second half of 2014 . The August concert in Tel Aviv was canceled due to an armed conflict between Israel and Gaza . Megadeth was scheduled to appear on Motörhead 's <unk> cruise in late September , but withdrew because of Mustaine 's complications following his cervical spine surgery . In late November , Drover quit the band after ten years , wanting to pursue his own musical interests . This was quickly followed by the departure of Broderick , due to artistic and musical differences . Ellefson denied rumors that Megadeth would disband , and said he and Mustaine would continue working on new music . Lamb of God drummer Chris Adler and guitarist Kiko Loureiro of Angra performed on Megadeth 's fifteenth studio album . Mustaine said that one of the reasons for Broderick 's and Drover 's departure was the frustration caused by Megadeth 's fan base demanding a reunion with Friedman and Menza . 
 In October 2015 , Megadeth streamed " Fatal Illusion " off the album Dystopia , which was released in January 2016 . In support of Dystopia , Megadeth embarked on a North American tour in February and March with Suicidal Tendencies , Children of Bodom and Havok . Menza died from a heart attack in May while performing with <unk> at a jazz club in Los Angeles . Mustaine announced that Adler , who performed double duty drumming , was no longer in the band because of scheduling conflicts between Megadeth and Lamb of God . He was replaced by Dirk Verbeuren from Soilwork , on Adler 's recommendation . A second US tour is planned for September and October with Amon Amarth , Suicidal Tendencies , Metal Church , and Havok . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 Mustaine has made numerous inflammatory statements in the press , usually regarding issues with former Metallica bandmates . The feud stemmed from his ejection from the band , how it was conducted , and disagreements on songwriting credits . Mustaine expressed his anger in the movie Some Kind of Monster , in a scene he later disapproved of as he felt he was mischaracterized , and that it did not represent the full extent of what happened during the meeting . 
 During a live performance of " Anarchy in the U.K. " at a 1988 show in Antrim , Northern Ireland , Mustaine drunkenly and confusedly dedicated the song to " the cause " of " giving Ireland back to the Irish ! " Before the final song , Mustaine said , " This one 's for the cause ! " This elicited a riot and fighting between Catholics and Protestants among the audience . The band had to travel in a bulletproof bus for the remainder of the tour of Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland . Mustaine later said that he had been misled by T @-@ shirt bootleggers about the meaning of the expression " the cause " . This incident served as inspiration for the song " Holy Wars ... The Punishment Due " . 
 Controversial and misinterpreted lyrics have caused complications for the band . In 1988 , MTV deemed that the song " In My Darkest Hour " encouraged suicide and banned the video . The station banned the video for " À Tout le Monde " for the same reason , though Mustaine said the song was written from the perspective of a dying man saying his last words to his loved ones . According to him , MTV considered the videos for " Skin o ' My Teeth " and " Symphony of Destruction " a " little bit too harsh " and refused to play them as well . 
 During a world tour in 2001 , the Malaysian government canceled the band 's show in the nation 's capital because the authorities had a negative perception of the group 's image and music . The government pointed the band 's mascot Vic Rattlehead as inappropriate and told the members that they would be arrested if they performed . Dave Mustaine responded : " I recognize what the Malaysian government is trying to do , and it is admirable of them trying to protect the young people in the country . But it just shows the degree of ignorance and apathy that the government has toward the problem . " 
 In 2003 , after recovering from an arm injury that threatened to end his career , Mustaine became a born again Christian . Minor controversy was sparked by Mustaine 's announcement that Megadeth would not play certain songs live due to his new identification as a Christian . In May 2005 , Mustaine allegedly threatened to cancel shows in Greece and Israel with extreme metal bands Rotting Christ and Dissection due to the bands ' anti @-@ Christian beliefs . This caused the two bands to cancel appearances . 
 In July 2004 , Ellefson sued Mustaine for $ 18 @.@ 5 million in Manhattan Federal Court . Ellefson alleged that Mustaine short @-@ changed him on profits including tour merchandise and publishing royalties . The suit was dismissed in 2005 , and Mustaine filed a countersuit alleging that Ellefson had used the band 's name in an advertisement for musical equipment ; the suit was settled out of court . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Influences and style = = = 
 Traditional heavy metal bands such as UFO and Black Sabbath , new wave of British heavy metal ( NWOBHM ) bands such as Motörhead , Iron Maiden , and Diamond Head , and punk rock bands such as the Sex Pistols and Ramones had a significant influence on Megadeth 's sound . Hard rock bands such as AC / DC and Led Zeppelin were also influential on the group 's guitar style . Although the music has roots in punk , university professor Jason Bivins wrote that Megadeth followed the basic blueprint of Motörhead and Iron Maiden . He described the style as a mix of " the instrumental virtuosity of the NWOBHM with the speed and aggression of hardcore punk " , while also drawing lyrical inspiration from the horror @-@ obsessed punk band Misfits . Mustaine has also listed albums by the Beatles as recordings that influenced him . 
 Mustaine is the band 's primary songwriter . He develops songs starting with a particular riff that , with modifications , becomes the central part of the song . He has said that song fragments are composed separately , and then the band makes a compact structure from them . Drummer Shawn Drover stated that Mustaine had saved many riffs over the years and that some recent material is based on those demo recordings . Ellefson stated that the band constantly creates new material , and that making a recording begins with exchanging ideas after which the band enters the studio and discusses the concept , direction , artwork , and song titles . The lyrics are usually written after the music is arranged . Discussing the band 's lyrics , Mustaine said that many of the themes are derived from literature , such as the novels of George Orwell . 
 The music of Megadeth and its underground metal contemporaries from the 1980s featured harsh vocals , double bass drum patterns , staccato riffing , tremolo picking , and screeching lead guitar work ; albums from this period were produced on low budgets . After forming Megadeth , Mustaine followed the thrash metal style of his previous band , Metallica , with more emphasis on speed and intensity . Megadeth 's music is characterized by its neat instrumental performance , featuring fast rhythm sections , complex arrangements , and " snarling " vocals . When asked to describe Megadeth 's guitar style , Mustaine answered : " When you go to a show and see a guitar player who just stands there , that 's a guitar player . A thrash guitar player is a guy who plays like he wants to beat the guitar 's guts out . " Most of the songs are recorded in standard guitar tuning as Mustaine believes it to provide a superior melody to alternative methods of tuning . 
 During the band 's early days , Mustaine was the rhythm guitarist , while Chris Poland played lead . Although Poland performed only on Megadeth 's first two albums , music journalists Pete Prown and Harvey P. Newquist credit him with making the music more colorful because of his jazz influences . According to former Metal Maniacs editor Jeff Wagner , the band 's songwriting techniques peaked with the fourth album , Rust in Peace , which he described as a " flurry of precision and fluidity , making good on Megadeth 's claim to being the world 's state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art speed metal band " . Musicologist Glenn Pillsbury stated the guitar work on the album was a mixture of Mustaine 's " controlled chaos " and the " technical brilliance " of Marty Friedman . Studio efforts released in the mid- and late 1990s featured songs with compact structures and less complicated riffing . 
 Megadeth 's lyrics often focus on death , war , politics , and religion . The lyricism centers on nihilistic themes , but occasionally deals with topics such as alienation and social problems . The earliest releases featured themes such as occultism , graphic violence , and Satanism . Nuclear warfare and government conspiracy were preoccupations on albums such as Rust in Peace and Countdown to Extinction . During Megadeth 's commercial peak , Mustaine elaborated on more personal themes such as addiction and intimate relationships . For the lyrics on Cryptic Writings , Mustaine said that he wanted to write songs that had more appeal to a wider audience . The title of United Abominations is a satiric play on the name of the United Nations ; Mustaine criticized the organization 's ineffectiveness on a number of songs on that album . Later albums contained lyrics in a similar vein . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Having sold over 50 million units worldwide as of 2014 , Megadeth is one of the few bands from the 1980s American underground metal scene to have achieved mass commercial success . Along with contemporaries Metallica , Slayer , and Anthrax , Megadeth is regarded as one of the core founding groups of thrash metal . These bands are often referred to as the " big four " of thrash metal , responsible for the genre 's development and popularization . Loudwire ranked Megadeth the third best thrash metal band of all time , praising the group 's " provoking lyrics and mind @-@ warping virtuosity " . CMJ New Music Report called the band 's debut album a seminal release and a representative of " the golden age of speed metal " . Similarly , Billboard called the band 's second album Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? a " landmark of the thrash movement " whose lyrics it found still relevant . MTV also recognized the band as an influential metal act , highlighting the technical aspect of the early albums . 
 Megadeth is considered one of the most musically influential groups that originated in the 1980s . As part of the early American thrash metal movement , the band 's music was a direct influence on death metal . Sociologist Keith Kahn @-@ Harris wrote that the mainstream success of Megadeth was one of the reasons for the expansion of extreme metal to countries where it had previously been unknown . The band 's sound and album artwork influenced a number of thrash metal bands in the 21st century , including Toxic Holocaust and Warbringer . According to Nielsen SoundScan , Megadeth has sold 9 @.@ 2 million copies of its albums in the United States between 1991 and 2014 . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Genesis Awards : 
 1993 : Doris Day Music Award – Countdown to Extinction 
 Loudwire Music Awards : 
 2011 : Metal Album of the Year – Thirteen 
 2011 : Metal Song of the Year – " Public Enemy No. 1 " 
 Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards : 
 2007 : Riff Lord – Dave Mustaine 
 2015 : Golden God – Dave Mustaine 
 Revolver Golden Gods Awards : 
 2009 : Golden God – Dave Mustaine 
 = = Members = = 
 Dave Mustaine – lead vocals , guitar ( 1983 – 2002 , 2004 – present ) 
 David Ellefson – bass , backing vocals ( 1983 – 2002 , 2010 – present ) 
 Kiko Loureiro – guitar , backing vocals ( 2015 – present ) 
 Dirk Verbeuren – drums ( 2016 – present ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Fears in Solitude = 
 Fears in Solitude , written in April 1798 , is one of the conversation poems by Samuel Taylor Coleridge . The poem was composed while France threatened to invade Great Britain . Although Coleridge was opposed to the British government , the poem sides with the British people in a patriotic defense of their homeland . The poem also emphasizes a desire to protect one 's family and to live a simple life in harmony with nature . The critical response to the poem was mixed , with some critics claiming that the work was " alarmist " and anti @-@ British . 
 = = Background = = 
 Coleridge , a radical and Jacobin , was an early supporter of the French revolution and believed that it would bring much @-@ needed political change to Europe and to Great Britain . However , the actions of the French government after the beginning of the revolution , especially their invasion of other nations , caused him to lose faith in their cause . Although Coleridge was opposed to the British government under prime minister William Pitt , he supported the British nation and the national defense when France threatened to invade Britain ; the belief held by many Britons was that France would invade the Irish kingdom , which was experiencing rebellion at the time . 
 These fears of an invasion manifested in April 1798 , and Britons began to arm themselves . In April , Coleridge traveled to his childhood home at Ottery and then went to visit William and Dorothy Wordsworth ; during this time Coleridge wrote " Fears in Solitude : Written in April 1798 , During the Alarm of an Invasion " . Fears in Solitude was first published in a small pamphlet collection that included Frost at Midnight and France : An Ode It was eventually printed seven times in various collections . One of the later printings of the poem , by Daniel Stuart , removed lines that directly attacked Pitt and the British government . This change reflected Coleridge 's own changing political views from radical to more conservative beliefs . 
 = = Poem = = 
 The poem begins with a Quantocks setting before moving onto politics : 
 A green and silent spot , amid the hills , 
 A small and silent dell ! O 'er <unk> place 
 No singing skylark ever poised himself . ( lines 1 – 3 ) 
 The poem continues by pointing out that the best life is a simple life and that there are men that live with nature : 
 And he , with many feelings , many thoughts , 
 Made up a meditative joy , and found 
 Religious meanings in the forms of Nature ! ( lines 22 – 24 ) 
 However , some of the British are like a plague that spreads their poor behavior to other nations : 
 Like a cloud that travels on , 
 Steamed up from Cairo 's swamps of pestilence , 
 Even so , my countrymen ! have we gone forth 
 And borne to distant tribes slavery and pangs , 
 And , deadlier far , our vices , whose deep taint 
 With slow perdition murders the whole man , 
 His body and his soul ! ( lines 47 – 53 ) 
 Although he attacks the corruption of British politicians , the narrator supports Britain : 
 O native Britain ! O my Mother Isle ! 
 How <unk> thou prove <unk> else but dear and holy 
 To me , who from thy lakes and mountain @-@ hills , 
 Thy clouds , thy quiet dales , thy rocks and seas , 
 Have drunk in all my intellectual life , 
 All sweet sensations , all ennobling thoughts , 
 All adoration of the God in nature , 
 All lovely and all honourable things , 
 Whatever makes this mortal spirit feel 
 The joy and greatness of its future being ? ( lines 183 – 192 ) 
 The poem ends with the narrator praising his home at Nether Stowey and nature : 
 And now , beloved Stowey ! I behold 
 Thy church @-@ tower , and , <unk> , the four huge elms 
 <unk> , which mark the mansion of my friend ; 
 And close behind them , hidden from my view , 
 Is my own lowly cottage , where my babe 
 And my babe 's mother dwell in peace ! With light 
 And quickened footsteps <unk> I tend , 
 Remembering thee , O green and silent dell ! 
 And grateful , that by nature 's quietness 
 And solitary musings , all my heart 
 Is softened , and made worthy to indulge 
 Love , and the thoughts that yearn for human kind ( lines 222 – 233 ) 
 = = Themes = = 
 The politics within the poem emphasizes the problems within British politics and expresses Coleridge 's views that the conservatives were warmongering and that there was corruption within the government . Although he feels this way , he still feels loyalty to the country and wants the British to be safe regardless of their problems . His other poem on the same topic , France : an Ode , describes how his view about the French revolution changed over time , especially with France 's invasion of Switzerland . 
 The images of the poem operate in a circular pattern , and the poem begins and ends with the Stowey dell where Coleridge lived . The peaceful home at the beginning is a parallel to the " Valley of Seclusion " in Coleridge 's Reflections on Having Left a Place of Retirement , which is a quiet place that allows for a pleasant life . The ideas about nature also found in " The Eolian Harp " are brought up , following Coleridge 's familiar <unk> view . The poem also includes Coleridge 's views on the unity of mankind and nature and the fear that an invasion would destroy this unity . To safeguard it , the narrator protects his family and the dell , along with the rest of Britain . There is also an emphasis on simple living , and the poem 's conclusion , a return to the dell , represents a return of Coleridge to his own family . 
 The gothic elements of the poem connect it to many of his other works , including The Rime of the Ancient Mariner , " Ballad of the Dark Ladie " , France : An Ode , Frost at Midnight , The Nightingale , " Three Graves " , and " Wanderings of Cain " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 A letter sent to Coleridge from his friends Robert and Edith Southey described the poem as " beautiful " . There were four contemporary reviews of the original pamphlet collection including Fears in Solitude . The Critical Review believed that the poetry expressed alarmism . The British Critic thought he was anti @-@ Britain . A review in the December Monthly Visitor emphasized the " beautiful lines " starting with line 129 until the end . Another review , in the January 1799 Monthly Mirror , claims , " The author 's Fears are , perhaps , not highly honourable to his feelings as a Briton , nor very complimentary to the national character . " 
 The Victorian poet Algernon Charles Swinburne , in the Preface to the 1875 edition of Christabel , argues , 
 Compare the nerveless and hysterical verses headed ' Fears in Solitude ' ( exquisite as is the overture , faultless in tone and colour , and worthy of a better sequel ) with the majestic and masculine sonnet of Wordsworth [ ... ] for , great as he is , I at least cannot hold Wordsworth , though so much the stronger and more admirable man , equal to Coleridge as a mere poet – speaks with a calm force of thought and resolution ; Coleridge wails , appeals , <unk> , <unk> in a flaccid and querulous fashion without heart or spirit . This debility of mind and manner is set off in strong relief by the loveliness of landscape touches in the same poem . 
 In a September 1889 Fortnightly Review article called " Coleridge as a Poet " , Edward Dowden writes , " Coleridge still declaims against the sins of England , and protests against the mad idolatry of national wrong @-@ doing [ ... ] yet utters himself before the close with all the filial loyalty of a true son of England , and he declares in a noble strain of eloquence how the foundations of his patriotism have been laid in the domestic affections " . 
 During the 20th @-@ century , Virginia Radley points out that " The most serious charge that can be brought against the poem is that it is not poetry as Coleridge generally conceived poetry to be . In fact , it is the one poem in this group that may mean but is not [ ... ] Like ' France ' too , the poem suffers from a lack of ' heart ' . " George Watson declares that the poem " shows how precarious Coleridge 's new achievement was . It is a shameless return to the older , effusive manner , evidently written in a white heat of patriotic indignation against the degradation of English public opinion during the French wars , and it is only by stretching charity that it can be considered a conversation poem at all . " 
 Following this , Geoffrey <unk> states , " though disproportionate in qualities of thought and feeling ( and one of the less successful therefore of the major ' annus mirabilis ' poems ) , [ Fears in Solitude ] exemplifies the problems Coleridge had to wrestle with in assimilating didacticism to the requirements of poetic organization . " Richard Holmes claims Fears in Solitude as " one of the most difficult of [ Coleridge 's ] Conversation Poems " . The ending , to Holmes , is " evoked with the magic , pastoral power of a Samuel Palmer picture " . 
 = Polikarpov ITP = 
 The Polikarpov ITP ( Istrebitel <unk> <unk> ; Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ; Heavy Cannon Fighter ) was a Soviet fighter prototype designed during World War II . Development was prolonged by the evacuation of the design bureau forced by the German advance on Moscow in the fall of 1941 . By the time the second prototype was finished the Soviets had fighters with equivalent or better performance already in production and the program was cancelled . 
 = = Development = = 
 In November 1940 , Nikolai Polikarpov proposed a heavy cannon @-@ armed fighter for bomber escort duties and ground attack missions . The new ITP was designed around either the 1 @,@ 230 kW ( 1 @,@ 650 hp ) Klimov M @-@ 107P or the Mikulin AM @-@ 37 inline engines . Two armament configurations were planned . The first consisted of a 37 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) cannon firing through the propeller hub and two synchronized 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) ShVAK cannon mounted on each side of the fuselage nose . The 37 mm cannon was provided with 50 rounds and the ShVAK had 200 rounds each . The second configuration substituted an additional ShVAK with 200 rounds for the 37 mm cannon . It had racks for eight unguided RS @-@ 82 rockets underneath the wings . 
 The ITP was a low @-@ wing , mixed construction monoplane with a wooden monocoque fuselage made from ' shpon ' , molded birch plywood . The two @-@ spar metal wing was built in three sections with automatic leading edge slats . The engine radiators were built into the wing center section with intakes in the wing roots while the oil cooler was located under the engine . The curved , one @-@ piece windshield lacked a flat front panel which gave the pilot a rather distorted view . The conventional undercarriage , including the tailwheel , was fully retractable . It carried 624 litres ( 137 imp gal ; 165 US gal ) of fuel in tanks between the spars of the wing center section . The rear fuselage , cockpit and tail resembled that of the Polikarpov I @-@ 185 . 
 The first ITP prototype ( M @-@ 1 ) was completed in October 1941 with a 1 @,@ 300 @-@ horsepower ( 970 kW ) M @-@ 107P engine . Due to German attacks , the aircraft was evacuated to Novosibirsk and did not make its first flight until 23 February 1942 . The M @-@ 107P engine proved unreliable and was changed to a M @-@ 107A in late 1942 . The 37 mm gun was deleted in exchange for another 20 mm gun mounted on the side of the fuselage . Flight testing was not completed because the airframe was used for ground static testing , but the estimated maximum speed at 6 @,@ 300 metres ( 20 @,@ 669 ft ) was 655 km / h ( 407 mph ) with a time to 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 404 ft ) of 5 @.@ 9 minutes . 
 The second ITP prototype ( M @-@ 2 ) was built in 1942 and fitted with a Mikulin AM @-@ 37 engine which also proved unreliable and was replaced with a 1 @,@ 345 kW ( 1 @,@ 800 hp ) Mikulin AM @-@ 39 that December . It first flew on 23 November 1943 but the manufacturer 's flight tests were not completed until June 1944 . Since several other aircraft with about the same level of performance were already available , it was not placed into production . 
 = = Specifications ( M @-@ 2 ) = = 
 Data from Gordon , Soviet Airpower in World War 2 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 9 @.@ 2 m ( 30 ft 2 in ) 
 Wingspan : 10 m ( 32 ft 10 in ) 
 Wing area : 16 @.@ 5 m2 ( 178 sq ft ) 
 Empty weight : 2 @,@ 910 kg ( 6 @,@ 415 lb ) 
 Gross weight : 3 @,@ 570 kg ( 7 @,@ 871 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Mikulin AM @-@ 39 liquid @-@ cooled V @-@ 12 , 1 @,@ 268 kW ( 1 @,@ 700 hp ) 
 Propellers : 3 @-@ bladed 
 Performance 
 Range : 980 km ( 609 mi ; 529 nmi ) 
 Service ceiling : 11 @,@ 500 m ( 37 @,@ 730 ft ) 
 Time to altitude : six minutes to 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) 
 Wing loading : 216 kg / m2 ( 44 lb / sq ft ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 3 × 20 mm ShVAK cannons , 200 rpg 
 Rockets : 8 × unguided RS @-@ 82 
 = César Cielo = 
 César Cielo Filho ( Portuguese pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] , born 10 January 1987 ) is a Brazilian competitive swimmer who specializes in sprint events . He is the most successful Brazilian swimmer in history , having obtained three Olympic medals , winning six individual World Championship gold medals and breaking two world records . 
 Cielo is the current world record holder in the 100 @-@ metre and 50 @-@ metre freestyle ( long course ) . His gold medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics , in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle competition , is Brazil 's only Olympic gold in swimming to date . In 2008 , he broke the NCAA record in the 50 @-@ yard ( 46 m ) freestyle ( 18 @.@ 47 seconds ) and in the 100 @-@ yard ( 91 m ) freestyle ( 40 @.@ 92 seconds ) . Cielo became the fastest swimmer in the world in the two distances , and was named NCAA Swimmer of the Year for the second year in a row . 
 = = Early life = = 
 César Cielo was born on January 10 , 1987 in Santa Bárbara d <unk> , São Paulo , Brazil . The son of pediatrician César Cielo and physical education teacher <unk> Cielo , Cielo began his athletic career at small swimming clubs in his native state . As a young teenager , Cielo trained under coach Mario Francisco <unk> at the Esporte Clube <unk> , where his mother taught swimming . When he was 13 , Cielo started training in Piracicaba at the Clube de Campo de Piracicaba under coach Reinaldo Rosa . At 16 years old , he transferred to Esporte Clube Pinheiros in São Paulo to train under coach Alberto Silva and Brazilian swimming legend Gustavo Borges . As a gift while at Esporte Clube Pinheiros , he received the swimsuit used by Borges in Athens 2004 . 
 Cielo was a childhood friend of André Schultz . When Cielo was a child , his father formed a group to organize and encourage swimming at Esporte Clube <unk> . Werner Schultz , André Schultz 's father , also belonged to the group . They began to create competitions and take the boys on trips . At one point , there were 500 people practicing swimming at the club , in a city , which almost 20 years later , has less than 200 @,@ 000 inhabitants . Werner Schultz constructed a swimming pool with two Olympic lanes in the courtyard of his house , where Cielo used to train . Since childhood , Cielo could not bear to lose . Maria Schultz , mother of André Schultz , said , " He could not bear to lose . Several American coaches say this : that good swimmers like to win , and exceptional not afford to lose . Such is the case of <unk> . " Cielo was so eager for victory that during the 1996 Summer Olympics , at nine years old , he was already studying his main reference , Russian Alexander Popov , through videos , noting details like his starts ( block outputs ) and turnarounds . 
 Cielo started competing in backstroke . In the region at the time , Guilherme Guido stood out as the opponent to beat . Guido defeated Cielo repeatedly in freestyle , while Cielo won the backstroke events . However , at a certain point , Guido began to lose to freestyle opponents , and began competing in backstroke events . He defeated Cielo , who then decided not swim backstroke anymore . At age 15 , Cielo attended a series of trainings in Florida , USA , and returned home , willing to defeat Guido . When Cielo and Guido were reunited in a 100m freestyle contest , Guido fell behind and lost . From then on , Guido focused on backstroke , reversing positions with Cielo . 
 = = Collegiate career = = 
 In 2005 , Cielo received a scholarship from Auburn University in the United States . He studied international trade with a specialization in Spanish . While there , Cielo competed for the eight @-@ time NCAA National Champion Auburn Tigers swimming and diving team . At Auburn , he was trained by Brett Hawke , an Australian Olympic finalist swimmer in Athens . Hawke helped Cielo with his last months of preparation for the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . Cielo was also tutored by short @-@ distance specialist Fernando Scherer in 2008 . At Auburn , Cielo 's scholarship contract was very strict , prohibiting him from drinking alcohol or taking girlfriends on a night out . 
 Cielo holds the NCAA and U.S. Open record for the 50 @-@ yard ( 46 m ) freestyle , set at the 2008 NCAA Division 1 Swimming and Diving Championships . At Auburn , Cielo won six National Championship events , including sweeping the 50 and 100 freestyle championships in 2007 . Cielo gave up his fourth and final year of NCAA eligibility to become a professional swimmer . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = 2004 Short Course Swimming Championships = = = 
 Cielo participated in his first major international tournament , the 2004 FINA World Swimming Championships ( 25 m ) , in the city of Indianapolis , in October 2004 . At the age of 17 , he won the silver medal in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle event . On a team with Guilherme Guido , Kaio Almeida and Eduardo Fischer , he finished 4th in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre medley , breaking the South American record with a time of 3 : 33 @.@ 02 . He also finished 6th in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , 10th in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , and 19th in the 50 @-@ metre backstroke . 
 = = = 2006 – 2007 = = = 
 Cielo competed in the 2006 FINA World Swimming Championships ( 25 m ) in Shanghai , where he finished 5th in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle ( only 17 hundredths of a second away from winning a medal ) and in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle events . He also competed in the 4 × 200 @-@ metre freestyle , where he broke the South American record with a time of 7 : 06 : 09 , along with Rodrigo Castro , Thiago Pereira and Lucas <unk> . In December , he began to stand out on the national scene , by breaking the South American record of Fernando Scherer in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle ( 48 @.@ 69 seconds ) which had stood since 1998 . Cielo 's time was 48 @.@ 61 seconds , beating the record by 0 @.@ 08 seconds . At that moment , Cielo 's was the fourth fastest time in the 2006 world ranking . 
 Afterward , Cielo went to the 2006 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Victoria , Canada , where he finished 6th in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , 7th in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , 7th in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre medley , and was disqualified at the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle . 
 Cielo was a finalist in the 2007 World Aquatics Championships in Melbourne , in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle ( 4th place , only 4 hundredths behind Eamon Sullivan , the bronze medalist , and 8 hundredths behind gold medalists Filippo <unk> and Brent Hayden ) , 50 @-@ metre freestyle ( 6th ) and 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle ( 8th ) . He also took 9th place in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre medley . At that time , Cielo had established himself as the fastest Brazilian sprinter , by breaking the Fernando Scherer 's South American record in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle . In that event 's semifinal , Cielo swam for 22 @.@ 09 seconds , improving on Fernando Scherer 's time , from in August 1998 , by nine hundredths of a second . He also broke his South American record in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 48 @.@ 51 seconds , and the South American record of the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 3 : 17 @.@ 03 , on a team with Thiago Pereira , Nicolas Oliveira and Rodrigo Castro . 
 At the 2007 Pan American Games in Rio de Janeiro , Cielo won three gold medals in the 50 @-@ metre , 100 @-@ metre , and 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle events , and a silver medal in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre medley . In the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , he won the event with a time of 21 @.@ 84 seconds , beating the Pan American Games record , and becoming the first swimmer from South America to swim it in under 22 seconds . Cielo began to get close to the world record in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , a time of 21 @.@ 64 seconds , which at the time belonged to legendary swimmer Alexander Popov . He also broke the Pan Am Games and South American record in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 3 : 15 @.@ 90 , along with Fernando Silva , Eduardo <unk> and Nicolas Oliveira . It the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , he broke the Pan Am Games record with his time of 48 @.@ 79 seconds , and in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre medley , he broke the South American record with a time of 3 : 35 @.@ 81 , along with Thiago Pereira , Henrique Barbosa and Kaio Almeida . 
 In November 2007 , at the Italy Grand Prix , Cielo broke the short @-@ course South American record for the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 47 @.@ 00 seconds . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 In February 2008 , at the Missouri Grand Prix , Cielo improved his South American record in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 48 @.@ 49 seconds . In April , at the Ohio Grand Prix , he broke the record again , with a time of 48 @.@ 34 seconds , also defeating Michael Phelps . 
 A month before the Olympics , in July 2008 , he broke his South American record in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 21 @.@ 75 seconds . 
 Afterward , Cielo went to the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , where he broke the Americas record in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle heats , with a time of 47 @.@ 91 seconds . Although the Brazilian team was disqualified , Cielo 's record was allowed to stand . In the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , Cielo qualified for the final , taking eighth place in the heats , with a time of 48 @.@ 07 seconds . Cielo excelled in the early part of the first semifinal , making his turn in second place , at 22 @.@ 62 seconds , but finishing fifth . In the final , Cielo adopted a different tactic , turning third , slower ( 22 @.@ 74 seconds ) than in the semifinals , and saving energy for the finish , which resulted in his winning the bronze medal and breaking the South American record with a time of 47 @.@ 67 seconds ( tied with American swimmer Jason Lezak ) . Alain Bernard won the gold medal and Eamon Sullivan won the silver . Shortly after winning the bronze medal , Cielo gave a statement to the Brazilian press , stating categorically : " Now I 'm going to win the 50m " . In the 50 @-@ metre freestyle event , Cielo set the Olympic record , that Alexander Popov had set in the 1992 Summer Olympics , during the heats ( 21 @.@ 47 seconds , equaling Garrett Weber @-@ Gale 's Americas record ) and in the semifinals ( 21 @.@ 34 seconds ) . He lowered this further in the finals , again breaking the Olympic record with a time of 21 @.@ 30 seconds , winning the gold medal and missing the world record by 0 @.@ 02 seconds . With this , he became the first Brazilian Olympic swimming champion . Until Cielo 's Olympic gold , the best Brazilian Olympic swimming result had been obtained by Ricardo Prado , who won the silver medal in the 400 @-@ metre individual medley at the 1984 Summer Olympics , and previously Gustavo Borges , who won the silver medal in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle at the 1992 Summer Olympics and in the 200 @-@ metre freestyle at the 1996 Summer Olympics . 
 After the Olympics , in October , in the first stage of the 2008 FINA Swimming World Cup , held in Belo Horizonte , Brazil , Cielo equaled the short @-@ course South American record in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 21 @.@ 32 seconds . 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 Cielo trained at the Esporte Clube Pinheiros until 2009 . He worked with Coach <unk> at Pinheiros from 15 to 22 years old . On May 2009 , Cielo broke the South American record in the 50 @-@ metre butterfly , but the record lasted only a few minutes . Cielo achieved a time of 23 @.@ 49 seconds competing for the Maria Lenk Trophy but , in the next heat , Guilherme Roth swam a time of 23 @.@ 46 seconds and established a new continental record . In the final , Cielo regained the record with a time of 23 @.@ 42 seconds . In the same competition , he broke the South American record for the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 47 @.@ 60 seconds . 
 At the 2009 US World Championship Trials in Indianapolis , Cielo swam a time of 21 @.@ 14 seconds in the B final of the 50 @-@ metre freestyle ( the A final was limited to Americans ) . His time was the fastest time among all competitors , and set a new Americas record . It was also the 2nd fastest time in the event 's history , 0 @.@ 20 seconds behind Frédérick Bousquet 's world record . 
 At the 2009 World Aquatics Championships in Rome , Cielo led the Brazilian 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle relay team to a 4th @-@ place finish , along with Nicolas Oliveira , Guilherme Roth and Fernando Silva . In this event , he opened with a time of 47 @.@ 39 seconds in the heats ( a South American and Championship record ) and a time of 47 @.@ 09 seconds in the final , only 0 @.@ 04 seconds from beating Eamon Sullivan 's world record , and earning the second fastest time in the history of the 100 @-@ metre freestyle . In the 100 @-@ metre freestyle final , the Brazilian swimmer won the gold medal , defeating the Olympic champion Alain Bernard and breaking the world record with a time of 46 @.@ 91 seconds , entering into the select pantheon of swimmers who won an Olympic gold , a World Championships gold , and a World Record . In the 50 @-@ metre freestyle final , Cielo defeated world record holder Frédérick Bousquet and won the gold medal with a time of 21 @.@ 08 seconds , beating the competition record and the Americas record . Cielo became the third swimmer to achieve this feat in a single World Championship , after Anthony Ervin and Alexander Popov . Popov , Ervin , and Cielo each won Olympic and World Championship gold medals in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle in succession . When he finished the 4 × 100 @-@ metre medley , a contest where the first four relays in the race beat the US world record from the 2008 Summer Olympics , Cielo led Brazil to fourth place , along with Guilherme Guido , Henrique Barbosa and Gabriel <unk> , very close to winning the event 's bronze and silver medals . His two gold medals at the World Championships led Brazil to the best performance in the history of the competition . 
 Cielo became the sixth Brazilian to achieve a world record in the long course , after Maria Lenk , Manuel dos Santos , José <unk> , Ricardo Prado and Felipe França . It was the 13th world record made by a Brazilian swimmer . 
 On 18 December 2009 , in São Paulo , Cielo broke the world record in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 20 @.@ 91 seconds , at a championship hosted at Esporte Clube Pinheiros , his club in Brazil and where he had trained since 2003 . It was the last official event allowing the use of super @-@ suits in Brazil . A day later , he established the best time in the world , 1 : 26 @.@ 12 , in the 4 × 50 @-@ metre freestyle . The time was not considered a world record because this event is not part of the Olympics and World Championships . 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 In 2010 , Cielo changed clubs . He began the year receiving proposals from several teams in Brazil and elsewhere , but he chose to sign with Flamengo , under the chairmanship of former swimmer <unk> Amorim , with a mission to contribute to the strengthening of swimming in Rio de Janeiro and other big Brazilian clubs . On June 27 , 2010 , he became the first swimmer in the world to break the Alexander Popov 's world record in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , without the help of technological swimsuits . He earned a time of 21 @.@ 55 seconds , wearing only shorts , and won the Paris Open . 
 At the 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Irvine , California , the Brazilian started by winning a gold in the 50 @-@ metre butterfly , beating the championship record . He hoped to also win gold in the 50 @-@ metre and 100 @-@ metre freestyle , but settled for silver in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , and bronze in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle . When interviewed after the contest , Cielo said there could have been some flaw in his training program , resulting in a lack of stamina . 
 In September 2010 , at the Jose Finkel Trophy , Cielo broke the short @-@ course South American record for the 100 @-@ metre freestyle twice : first with a time of 46 @.@ 13 seconds in the semifinal , and again with 45 @.@ 87 seconds in the final . 
 At the December 2010 FINA Short Course World Swimming Championships in Dubai , Cielo , along with Nicholas Santos , Nicolas Oliveira and Marcelo <unk> , won the bronze medal in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 3 : 05 @.@ 74 , setting a South American record and leaving behind the US team . In the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , Cielo twice broke the Americas record , earning 20 @.@ 61 seconds in the heats , and winning the gold medal with a time of 20 @.@ 51 seconds , a new Americas and Championship record , just 0 @.@ 21 seconds slower than Roland Schoeman 's world record . ( Schoeman broke the world record using super @-@ suit technology in 2009 , when it was still allowed , while Cielo made his time without a super @-@ suit . ) His time became the third fastest of any ever achieved in the event , and a world textile best . In the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , Cielo also won the gold with a time of 45 @.@ 74 seconds , a South American and championship record . With that , Cielo , at 23 years old , managed to unify the world titles of the two events : the 50 @-@ metre and the 100 @-@ metre freestyle in both the long and short courses . Completing his participation in the Short Course Worlds , Cielo led the Brazilian 4 × 100 @-@ metre medley relay team of Guilherme Guido , Felipe França Silva and Kaio de Almeida to win the bronze medal . The team broke the South American record with a time of 3 : 23 @.@ 12 . 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
 In May 2011 , Cielo tested positive for the banned substance furosemide . Furosemide is a diuretic often used to help lose weight but it is also a masking agent which may hide the presence of other drugs . Cielo was one of four Brazilian swimmers who tested positive for the substance and was given a warning by Brazil 's national swimming federation . Cielo claimed the positive drug test was a result of a cross @-@ contamination . FINA appealed Cielo 's case to the Court of Arbitration for Sport ( CAS ) and CAS upheld the warning for Cielo . CAS claimed that a caffeine supplement had been contaminated , causing the failed drug test . CAS was convinced that the furosemide found was not aimed at improving athletic performance or masking the use of some other performance @-@ enhancing substance . 
 The CAS decision allowed Cielo to compete in the 2011 World Aquatics Championships in Shanghai , as he was cleared to compete three days before the competition began . This generated controversy among other competitors . Notably , Kenyan swimmer Jason Dunford flashed a " thumbs down " to the audience after Cielo 's win in the 50 @-@ metre butterfly ( Dunford finished seventh in the race ) . 
 Further controversy followed when Cielo made a slit @-@ eyed gesture into the cameras after winning the 50 meter freestyle . The gesture was called " insensitive and offensive " towards the Chinese hosts . 
 At the 2011 World Aquatics Championships in Shanghai , Cielo won the gold medal in the 50 @-@ metre butterfly with a time of 23 @.@ 10 seconds . Days later in the same competition , Cielo won a second gold medal in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle . In the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , Cielo earned a time of 48 @.@ 01 seconds , the best time of his life without the use of technological swimsuits , but ended in the fourth position , one @-@ hundredth of a second away from winning a bronze and six hundredths away from silver . The winner of the 100 @-@ metre freestyle was James Magnussen , an Australian who surprised the world a few days earlier with his time of 47 @.@ 49 seconds in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle . 
 At the 2011 Pan American Games in Guadalajara , Cielo won four gold medals : in the 50 and 100 @-@ metre freestyle , and in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle and medley relay . He broke the Pan @-@ American record in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle ( 21 @.@ 58 seconds ) , the 100 @-@ metre freestyle ( 47 @.@ 84 seconds ) , and in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle ( 3 : 14 @.@ 65 ) . His highlight for the competition was his time of 47 @.@ 84 seconds in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , the best time of his life without the use of a technological swimsuit . 
 In 2011 , Cielo announced the creation of <unk> 16 – the " Going for 2016 Gold " Project . The initiative , designed to serve as Brazilian swimming 's " elite squad " , gathered Cielo , who would be leading the project , and six other swimmers – André Schultz , Leonardo de Deus , Nicholas Santos , Henrique Rodrigues , Tales <unk> and <unk> <unk> – all selected for potential medals in the 2016 Summer Olympics , in Rio de Janeiro . The idea would be to prepare the swimmers also for the main competition in the coming years . For two years , the innovative program , which proposed a system of high level training without relying on the infrastructure of big clubs , worked . But the difficulty of finding sponsors and the change of attitude of the clubs made the training group lose almost all its members . In 2013 , Cielo was the only one left in the project , but highlighted its continuity , with changes in the project , receiving new members and getting new sponsors . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 On April 25 , 2012 , participating in the Maria Lenk Trophy in Rio de Janeiro , Cielo finished the 50 @-@ metre freestyle race in 21 @.@ 38 seconds , earning the best time of the year in the event , and getting close to the best time in the event 's history without using super @-@ suits ( 21 @.@ 36 seconds made by Frédérick Bousquet ) . A day later , he broke the Americas record for the 50 @-@ metre butterfly , with a time of 22 @.@ 76 seconds beating the previous record , 22 @.@ 87 seconds set by Nicholas Santos . It was a world textile best . 
 At the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , Cielo finished 6th in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 47 @.@ 92 seconds . The gold went to Nathan Adrian ( 47 @.@ 52 seconds ) , followed by James Magnussen ( 47 @.@ 53 seconds ) and Brent Hayden ( 47 @.@ 80 seconds ) . At the 50 @-@ metre mark , Cielo had the fastest split with a time of 22 @.@ 60 seconds . In the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , where Cielo was the favorite to win gold , he ranked first in the semifinal , tied with Cullen Jones , with a time of 21 @.@ 54 seconds . But in the final , he finished with a worse time than in the semifinal round , but managed to earn his third Olympic medal , a bronze , with a time of 21 @.@ 59 seconds . The winner was Frenchman Florent Manaudou with a time of 21 @.@ 34 seconds . Cielo 's Olympic record of 21 @.@ 30 seconds set in 2008 still held . 
 On August 20 , at the Jose Finkel Trophy in São Paulo , Cielo broke the short @-@ course South American record in the 4 × 50 @-@ metre freestyle , with a time of 1 : 25 @.@ 28 . 
 At the end of the year , Cielo had an operation on both knees . Since 2007 , the Brazilian had suffered patellar <unk> in both knees . Cielo was in constant pain , and the injury started to hurt his training and performance . The nadir was at the 2012 London Olympics , where Cielo was already struggling at the start . In September , he had an operation on the patellar tendon . " He had a chronic wear of the patellar tendon , which generated an inflammatory process that bothered him greatly . In London , Cielo has lost much of the leg muscles because this inflammatory process . He came to lose two inches in circumference on each leg for a period of ten days . As the inflamed knee , he lost output quality . An output was once the best in the world ended up much like those of their adversaries " said Gustavo <unk> , Cielo 's doctor . 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 The new leadership of Flamengo , elected in 2012 , decided not to follow Amorim 's plans , and Cielo left the club in 2013 . In February 2013 , American Scott Goodrich took over Cielo 's training . Under a contract until the end of 2016 , <unk> was the next head coach of the group . 
 In April 2013 , Cielo confirmed his place in the 2013 World Aquatics Championships , in Barcelona , in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , with the second best time in the world of the year : 21 @.@ 57 seconds . He also qualified for the 50 @-@ metre butterfly . Due to his operation in both knees , Cielo did not compete in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle and the Brazilian relays . In the competition , Cielo became two @-@ time World Champion of the 50 @-@ metre butterfly . The semifinals were the strongest stage of the race , with five swimmers earning times below 23 seconds . Cielo went to the final in second place with a time of 22 @.@ 86 seconds , behind his compatriot Nicholas Santos . In the final , the athletes ' performance was not the same , but Cielo showed more consistency and won the gold with a time of 23 @.@ 01 seconds . In the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , Cielo reached the final with the third fastest time , 21 @.@ 60 seconds , tied with Nathan Adrian . Florent Manaudou and Anthony Ervin qualified for the final as favorites , with strong times of 21 @.@ 37 and 21 @.@ 42 seconds respectively , in the second semifinal . But , in a final with a high technical level in which three Olympic champions ( Manaudou , Cielo and Ervin ) were competing , Cielo earned the best time of his life without a high @-@ tech suit ( and an unofficial world fastest time swum in textile ) , 21 @.@ 32 seconds , becoming the first three @-@ time World Champion of the event . Manaudou and Ervin did not even reach the podium . It was Cielo 's sixth gold medal in individual events at the World Championships . With this result , Cielo overcame Alexander Popov and became the sprinter with more individual golds in World Championship history . Only four male swimmers have won more gold individual medals in World Championships than Cielo : Aaron Peirsol ( 7 ) , Grant Hackett ( 7 ) , Ryan Lochte ( 9 ) and Michael Phelps ( 15 ) . Regarding his gold medal in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , Cielo assured his fans that it was the most important gold of his career , declaring at the World Championships : " It was certainly different from all others . Each medal has a different feeling . This was the most special of my life . From London , all I had to overcome ... it was very exciting " . Cielo 's results were considered a " redemption " , because of low expectations entering the 2013 World Championships due to the troubled period following the London Olympics , when he underwent surgery on both knees , left his club and changed his coach . 
 = = = 2014 = = = 
 On April 23 , 2014 , participating in the Maria Lenk Trophy competition in São Paulo , Cielo finished the 50 @-@ metre freestyle race in 21 @.@ 39 seconds , earning the best time of the year in the event . Two days later , he won the 50 @-@ metre butterfly with a time of 23 @.@ 01 , also a world @-@ leading time . On April 26 , he won the 100 @-@ metre freestyle with a time of 48 @.@ 13 , third in the world rankings behind only James Magnussen ( 47 @.@ 59 ) and Cameron McEvoy ( 47 @.@ 65 ) . 
 On September 3 , 2014 , participating in the José Finkel Trophy ( short course ) competition in <unk> , Cielo finished the 50 @-@ metre freestyle race in 20 @.@ 68 seconds , earning the best time of the year in the event . Three days later , he won the 100 @-@ metre freestyle with a time of 46 @.@ 08 , also a world @-@ leading time . On September 5 , he finished second in the 50 @-@ metre butterfly with a time of 22 @.@ 46 , third in the world rankings behind only Chad Le Clos and Nicholas Santos 
 At the 2014 FINA World Swimming Championships ( 25 m ) in Doha , Qatar , Cielo won three gold and two bronze medals , into the best Brazilian participation of all time , where the country won the competition for the first time . In the Men 's 4 × 50 metre medley relay , formed by Cielo , Felipe França , Nicholas Santos and Guilherme Guido , considered the " Dream Team " by Cielo himself ( formed only by medalists or world champions in their respective individual events ) , Brazil won the gold shattering the world record with a time of 1 : 30 @.@ 51 . In the Men 's 50 metre freestyle , Cielo went to the final in first place with a time of 20 @.@ 80 seconds , but in the final , he had problems with his start and at the turn , finishing with a time of 20 @.@ 88 and getting the bronze . His rival , the French Florent Manaudou , won the gold beating the world record . Cielo also helped the Brazilian 4 × 50 metre mixed freestyle relay ( formed by Cielo , João de Lucca , <unk> Medeiros and Larissa Oliveira ) to win the bronze medal , beating the South American record with a time of 1 : 29 @.@ 17 , only 4 hundredths of Russia , which won the silver medal . In this race , Cielo opened with a time of 20 @.@ 65 , showing that could have done a better time in the 50 @-@ metre freestyle final . On the last day of the competition , Cielo won the rematch against Manaudou , in the Men 's 100 metre freestyle , where Manaudou was also favorite , but was defeated by Cielo , who won the gold with a time of 45 @.@ 75 . Cielo also closed the competition with a flourish , leading the Brazilian quartet to an unprecedented gold in the traditional Men 's 4 × 100 metre medley relay , with a time of 3 : 21 @.@ 14 , South American record . Cielo took the relay in fourth place and surpassed everyone with an incredible split time of 44 @.@ 67 . 
 = = = 2015 = = = 
 Cielo didn 't participate in the 2015 Pan American Games in Toronto , Canada , targeting the World Championships , who would happen after some days . 
 At the 2015 World Aquatics Championships in Kazan , Brazil finished 4th in the Men 's 4 × 100 metre freestyle , in a relay composed by Bruno Fratus , Marcelo <unk> , Matheus Santana and João de Lucca . César Cielo didn 't swim in the final - despite being a participant in the championship , he was suffering with shoulder pain . According to the doctor of the Brazilian Aquatic Sports Confederation ( <unk> ) , Gustavo <unk> , Cielo had an inflammation of the <unk> tendon . The injury is considered common in the athletes , and it was being treated with physiotherapy . Due to the problem , in the Men 's 50 metre butterfly , Cielo struggled though the heats and the semifinals , but slumped to 6th in the final . On August 5 , Cielo left the competition due to the increase of his injury . 
 = = = 2016 = = = 
 In April 2016 , at the Maria Lenk Trophy , held in Rio de Janeiro , Cielo failed to qualify for the 2016 Summer Olympics . In the 100 @-@ metre freestyle , Cielo swam 48 @.@ 97 in the heats and chose not to participate in the final . Thus , Cielo finished with the seventh time in Brazil , and was officially off the 4 × 100 free . In the 50 @-@ metre freestyle , Cielo won the heats with 21 @.@ 99 , staying temporarily with the Brazil 's second vacancy . However , in the final , Ítalo Duarte finished second , with a time of 21 @.@ 82 . Cielo finished third , with a time of 21 @.@ 91 . Brazil 's Olympic vacancies were with Bruno Fratus and Ítalo Duarte . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Cielo dated Priscila Machado , Miss Brasil 2011 , for eight months . In October 2012 , he was photographed with his new girlfriend , model Kelly <unk> . Cielo married <unk> , and their son , Thomas , was born in September 2015 . 
 Alongside his career in the sport , Cielo is also a businessman , schedules other athletes and manages since December 2010 a restaurant called Original da Granja , located in São Paulo , which guarantees sponsorships . 
 = = Career best times = = 
 = = = Long course ( 50 meter pool ) = = = 
 = = = Short course ( 25 meter pool ) = = = 
 = = Records progression = = 
 = = = Long course ( 50 meter pool ) = = = 
 50m freestyle 
