 = = = Tropical Storm Nine = = = 
 A surface trough persisted across the central Atlantic Ocean on September 2 . Over the next few days , the system moved slowly northeastward , independent of any frontal systems . On September 6 , nearby ships indicated that the a closed circulation had developed , marking the genesis of the system as a tropical depression . Accelerating to the northeast , the storm reached peak winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) on September 7 . By the next day , the system became extratropical , and soon after was absorbed by a larger extratropical storm to the north . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Florence = = = 
 A tropical storm formed in the Bay of Campeche on September 11 . Given the name Florence , the storm moved generally west @-@ southwestward with a small radius of maximum winds . Hurricane Hunters reported winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , although winds were initially ( before reanalysis confirmed it was a tropical storm ) estimated to have reached minimal hurricane force , or 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Before the storm moved ashore , officials in Veracruz evacuated residents from low @-@ lying areas , and overall about 90 @,@ 000 people left their homes . On September 12 , Florence moved ashore between Tuxpan , and Nautla , Veracruz and quickly dissipated . The hurricane flooded coastal cities with up to 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of water , cutting off communications throughout the state . Damage was heaviest around Poza Rica , primarily from the destruction of banana plantations . Monetary damage was estimated around $ 1 @.@ 5 million , and there were five reported deaths . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Eleven = = = 
 A low pressure area was present north of the Yucatán Peninsula on September 14 . Nearby ship observations indicated that a tropical depression developed the next day in the central Gulf of Mexico , although the system 's large structure meant it could have been a subtropical cyclone . The system moved slowly westward , bringing winds of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) to the coast of Louisiana . It is estimated that the storm reached peak winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) on September 16 , based on reports from ships and the Hurricane Hunters . On the next day , the system began weakening over water , dissipating on September 18 without moving ashore . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Gilda = = = 
 On September 24 , Tropical Storm Gilda developed in the central Caribbean Sea about halfway between Jamaica and Colombia . A small storm , it moved westward throughout its duration . On September 26 , Gilda attained peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) while nearing northeastern Honduras . The storm paralleled the coastline a short distance offshore , maintaining its intensity before hitting and later weakening over Belize on September 27 . It re @-@ emerged in the Gulf of Mexico before making another landfall near Tampico as a tropical depression on September 29 . While moving just offshore the coast of Honduras , Gilda dropped intense rainfall , which flooding about 680 mi2 ( 1760 km2 ) of land along the Chamelecón and Ulúa rivers . The waters caused the widespread destruction of banana plantations and houses , leaving about 3 @,@ 000 people homeless . Honduras President Juan Manuel Gálvez appealed for aid from the United States . In response , U.S. Air Force planes flew food , medicine , rafts , and water purification tablets to the most affected regions . A total of 29 people were killed in Honduras . When Gilda made its landfall in Belize , it left little property damage and no deaths . 
 = = = Hurricane Thirteen = = = 
 A tropical depression formed in the Central Atlantic on September 25 . It drifted east @-@ northeastward , eventually becoming a tropical storm on September 29 . The storm curved to the west and west @-@ southwest , becoming a hurricane on October 2 . It turned to the northeast on October 3 , and reached a peak of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) winds about halfway between Bermuda and the Azores . By that point it began accelerating , and late on October 6 the hurricane became extratropical over the Northeastern Atlantic . Early the next day it was last observed to the south of Iceland . The hurricane was not named due to its presence in the eastern Atlantic and not being a threat to land . 
 = = = Unnumbered Tropical Depression = = = 
 On October 2 , a tropical depression moved westward from the coast of Cuba into the Gulf of Mexico . It moved westward without intensifying beyond winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) , moving ashore about 40 mi ( 65 km ) north of Brownsville , Texas . The depression weakened as it moved across southern Texas and dropped heavy rainfall . Brownsville recorded over 3 in ( 75 mm ) in a 45 minute period , as well as about 6 in ( 150 mm ) in six hours . The rainfall rates of about an inch per hour was the heaviest since June 1950 . The depression also moved ashore with high waves and tides . 
 When the system reached the Big Bend region on October 5 it reintensified slightly . Around that time , the United States Navy conducted a rocket test from White Sands , New Mexico ; this was despite that such tests were rarely performed when the skies were cloudy . The rocket took an unintended photograph of the depression from an altitude of about 100 miles ( 160 km ) , which became the first such large @-@ scale image of a tropical cyclone . The depression later moved into New Mexico and dropped additional rainfall , interacting with an approaching cold front . Flooding was reported around Roswell , as well as along the Pecos River system . Rainfall in the state peaked at 9 @.@ 8 in ( 250 mm ) in Canton , New Mexico . The system dissipated on October 7 . 
 = = = Hurricane Hazel = = = 
 Hurricane Hazel was the deadliest and costliest hurricane of the season . The storm killed as many as 1 @,@ 000 people in Haiti before striking the United States near the border between North and South Carolina , as a Category 4 hurricane . After causing 95 fatalities in the U.S. , Hazel struck Canada as an extratropical storm , raising the death toll by 81 people , mostly in Toronto . 
 Hazel formed on October 5 just east of the Windward Islands and intensified into a Category 1 hurricane while crossing the southeastern Caribbean Sea . After making a hard turn northward ( similar to 2012 's Hurricane Sandy ) , it rapidly intensified as it approached Haiti , reaching Category 3 intensity before landfall . In Haiti , Hazel destroyed 40 % of the coffee trees and 50 % of the cacao crop , affecting the economy for several years to come . It fluctuated in intensity before making landfall as a Category 4 hurricane in the Carolinas , which destroyed most waterfront dwellings near its point of impact . It affected several more states , including Delaware , Maryland , New Jersey , New York , Pennsylvania , Virginia , and West Virginia , bringing gusts near 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and causing $ 308 million in damage . 
 When Hazel arrived in Ontario , rivers and streams passing through the Greater Toronto Area overflowed their banks , causing severe flooding . As a result , many residential areas located in floodplains , such as the Raymore Drive area , were subsequently converted to parkland . In Canada alone , over C $ 135 million ( 2009 : $ 1 @.@ 1 billion ) of damage was incurred . Hazel was particularly destructive in Toronto , as a result of a combination of a lack of experience in dealing with tropical storms and the storm 's unexpected retention of power . Hazel had traveled 680 mi ( 1 @,@ 090 km ) over land , but while approaching Canada , it had merged with an existing powerful cold front . The storm stalled over the Greater Toronto Area , and although it was now extratropical , it remained as powerful as a category 1 hurricane . To help with the cleanup , 800 members of the military were summoned , and a Hurricane Relief Fund was established that distributed $ 5 @.@ 1 million ( 2009 : $ 41 @.@ 7 million ) in aid . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Fifteen = = = 
 On November 16 , a tropical depression developed about halfway between the Lesser Antilles and the Azores . It moved to the west , intensifying into a tropical storm and reaching peak winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) ( however , due to limited data , it is possible that the storm remained a tropical depression ) . The storm maintained that intensity on November 21 when it began weakening , dissipating later that day . 
 = = = Hurricane Alice ( December ) = = = 
 The final storm of the season , Alice , developed on December 30 from a trough of low pressure in the central Atlantic Ocean in an area of unusually favorable conditions . The storm moved southwestward and gradually strengthened to reach hurricane status . It persisted into the following calendar year , passing through the Leeward Islands on January 2 . Alice reached peak winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) before encountering cold air and turning to the southeast . It dissipated on January 6 over the southeastern Caribbean Sea . 
 Alice produced heavy rainfall and moderately strong winds across several islands along its path . Saba and Anguilla were affected the most , with total damage amounting to $ 623 @,@ 500 ( 1955 USD ) . Operationally , lack of definitive data prevented the U.S. Weather Bureau from declaring the system a hurricane until January 2 . It received the name Alice in early 1955 , though re @-@ analysis of the data supported extending its track to the previous year , resulting in two tropical cyclones of the same name in one season . It was one of only two storms to span two calendar years , along with Tropical Storm Zeta in 2005 @-@ 06 . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms ( tropical storms and hurricanes ) that formed in the North Atlantic in 1954 . The list was the same as 1953 with the exception of Gilda , which replaced Gail due to the name 's confusion with the term gale . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The name Carol was re @-@ used in the 1965 season , but was retroactively retired when the modern naming system was introduced . Edna was reused in 1968 and retired . Hazel was not re @-@ used and was retired . 
 = Dolebury Warren = 
 Dolebury Warren ( also known as Dolebury Camp ) is a 90 @.@ 6 hectares ( 224 acres ) biological Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) and ancient monument near the villages of Churchill and Rowberrow in North Somerset , part of South West England . It is owned by the National Trust , who acquired the freehold in 1983 , and managed by the Avon Wildlife Trust . 
 Standing on a limestone ridge on the northern edge of the Mendip Hills , it was made into a hill fort during the Iron Age and was occupied into the Roman period . The extensive fort covers 9 @.@ 1 hectares ( 22 acres ) with single or double defensive ramparts around it . The name Dolebury Warren comes from its use during the medieval or post medieval periods as a rabbit warren . The topography and differing soil types provide a habitat for an unusually wide range of plants , attracting a variety of insects , including several species of butterfly . 
 = = Geology and location = = 
 The site is at the top of a Carboniferous Limestone ridge on the northern edge of the Mendip Hills . It forms part of the Black Down <unk> where the limestone has been exposed because of erosion of the overlying Triassic Dolomitic Conglomerate . The soil depth varies considerably , owing to the slope within the site and the effects of its exposure to the wind . 
 Dolebury Warren overlooks the villages of Churchill and Rowberrow and provides good visibility across the surrounding lower lying areas as far as the Bristol Channel . The highest point , at the eastern end of the site is 183 metres ( 600 ft ) OD , with the hillfort being up to 50 metres ( 160 ft ) below this . It is the starting point for the Limestone Link , a 36 miles ( 58 km ) long @-@ distance footpath which ends at Cold Ashton in Gloucestershire . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fort covers an area of 9 @.@ 1 hectares ( 22 acres ) and commands views over the surrounding countryside . The hill fort is <unk> on three sides and a single rampart on the southern side which is protected by a steep slope . It is almost rectangular with the longest axis from east to west being 487 metres ( 1 @,@ 598 ft ) long and 200 metres ( 660 ft ) from north to south , surrounded by a rampart which is around 4 metres ( 13 ft ) high and 12 metres ( 39 ft ) wide . It was protected by a limestone rampart with a ditch and counterscarp on all sides but the South . There is an <unk> entrance on the West and an annexe of 0 @.@ 4 hectares ( 0 @.@ 99 acres ) protecting the easier Eastern approach . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The name Dolebury means the idol hill from the Old English <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Early = = = 
 Hill forts developed in the Late Bronze and Early Iron Age , roughly the start of the first millennium BC . The reason for their emergence in Britain , and their purpose , has been a subject of debate . It has been argued that they could have been military sites constructed in response to invasion from continental Europe , sites built by invaders , or a military reaction to social tensions caused by an increasing population and consequent pressure on agriculture . The dominant view since the 1960s has been that the increasing use of iron led to social changes in Britain . Deposits of iron ore were located in different places to the tin and copper ore necessary to make bronze , and as a result trading patterns shifted and the old elites lost their economic and social status . Power passed into the hands of a new group of people . Archaeologist Barry Cunliffe believes that population increase still played a role and has stated " [ the forts ] provided defensive possibilities for the community at those times when the stress [ of an increasing population ] burst out into open warfare . But I wouldn 't see them as having been built because there was a state of war . They would be functional as defensive strongholds when there were tensions and undoubtedly some of them were attacked and destroyed , but this was not the only , or even the most significant , factor in their construction " . 
 Various artefacts have been uncovered representing the long period of occupation of the site at Dolebury Warren . These include flintwork from the Palaeolithic , bronze spearheads , Bronze Age pottery , and Roman pottery and coins . There is evidence of occupation of the site during the Iron Age . The defences and Celtic field systems there date back to the 7th century − 3rd century BCE , though they might mask earlier developments . The hillfort was occupied until approximately <unk> , though it is possible that it was reoccupied in the Roman and post @-@ Roman periods . The archeological consultant Peter Leach has suggested there may even have been a Roman Temple built within the hillfort , while aerial photographs suggest the probable remains of an Iron Age or Roman coaxial field system . Local historian Robin <unk> also suggests that Dolebury may have re @-@ emerged as an important centre of population in the 5th century . 
 = = = Medieval = = = 
 In the medieval or post @-@ medieval period , the remains of the hillfort were used as a rabbit warren which was used to breed rabbits , providing valuable meat and fur . Many warrens were surrounded by banks or walls to prevent the rabbits from escaping ; escaped rabbits caused damage to nearby farmland and meant a loss in profit . The warren at Dolebury is completely enclosed by the substantial ramparts of the Iron Age hill fort and thus provided an ideal location to breed rabbits . The presence of pillow mounds and vermin traps demonstrate man 's management of the site for husbandry . Ridge and furrow agriculture has also been identified , from aerial photographs , within the fort . Some of these structures , along with earlier Iron Age features , have been damaged by subsequent quarrying which may have been for lead , ochre or calamine . The site was described by John Leland in the 16th century . A three @-@ storey building , believed to be the warrener 's house and possibly a watch tower , surrounded by a garden , was in ruins by 1830 . 
 = = = 19th and 20th centuries = = = 
 The site was visited in the early 19th century by John Skinner and surveyed in 1872 by Charles William Dymond . In 1906 the Mendip Lodge Estate , which included Dolebury Warren , was sold . It was first scheduled as an ancient monument in 1929 . In 1935 Dolebury Camp was bought by Miss V. Wills of the W.D. & H.O. Wills tobacco company to prevent development . Dolebury Warren was notified as a Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1952 . The freehold of 92 @.@ 657 hectares ( 228 @.@ 96 acres ) was acquired by the National Trust in 1983 from A. G. Gosling , D. F. Gosling and J. M. Kent , and is managed by the Avon Wildlife Trust . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The site of the fort and warren is now grassy slopes which attract a wide range of wild flowers and butterflies . The differing soil types provide suitable habitats for both <unk> and lime @-@ loving plants . Kidney vetch ( <unk> <unk> ) , harebell ( Campanula rotundifolia ) and woolly thistle ( Cirsium <unk> ) thrive on the dry stony soils . Heath bedstraw ( Galium <unk> ) and wood sage ( <unk> <unk> ) are found in more acidic areas . The higher areas support bell heather ( Erica cinerea ) , western gorse ( Ulex gallii ) and common heather ( Calluna vulgaris ) . Trees and shrubs include the <unk> tree ( Viburnum lantana ) , <unk> rose ( Viburnum <unk> ) , whitebeam ( Sorbus aria ) , privet ( <unk> vulgare ) and dogwood ( <unk> sanguinea ) . 
 Scarce plants found at the warren include knotted pearlwort ( <unk> nodosa ) , and slender bedstraw ( Galium <unk> ) . Butterflies recorded here include the small blue ( <unk> minimus ) , marbled white ( <unk> <unk> ) , dingy skipper ( <unk> <unk> ) , grizzled skipper ( <unk> <unk> ) , small pearl @-@ bordered fritillary ( Boloria selene ) , and wall brown ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = Ray Funnell = 
 Air Marshal Raymond George ( Ray ) Funnell , AC ( born 1 March 1935 ) is a retired senior commander of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He served as Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) from 1987 until 1992 . A graduate of RAAF College , he began his career flying CAC Sabre jet fighters in Australia and South East Asia in the 1950s and 1960s . From 1972 to 1975 he commanded No. 6 Squadron , during which time the General Dynamics F @-@ 111C swing @-@ wing bomber entered Australian service . He held senior staff posts in the early 1980s . In 1986 , he was promoted to air marshal and became the inaugural Vice Chief of the Defence Force . Appointed CAS in July 1987 , Funnell was closely involved in the development and dissemination of air power doctrine . He retired from the RAAF in October 1992 following his term as CAS , and was founding Principal of the Australian College of Defence and Strategic Studies from 1994 to 1998 . Since then he has served on various Federal Government committees on immigration and detention . 
 = = Early career and rise to senior command = = 
 Raymond George ( Ray ) Funnell was born on 1 March 1935 in Brisbane , Queensland , and educated at Brisbane State High School . He joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) Air Training Corps in January 1949 , and received a flying training scholarship . In 1951 , aged 16 , he learnt to fly with the Royal Queensland Aero Club . In January 1953 he entered RAAF College as an air cadet , graduating with distinction in 1956 . He married his wife Suzanne in 1958 ; the couple had two sons . Funnell spent much of his early career flying CAC Sabre jet fighters at RAAF Bases Williamtown , New South Wales , and Butterworth , Malaysia , as well as Ubon , Thailand , and Labuan , East Malaysia . As a flight lieutenant in the early 1960s , he instructed on the de Havilland Vampire with No. 1 Applied Flying Training School at RAAF Base Pearce , Western Australia . In 1966 he served as commanding officer of No. 79 Squadron at Ubon . 
 Squadron Leader Funnell attended RAAF Staff College , Canberra , from January to December 1967 . He subsequently served in various staff positions with the RAAF and on exchange with the United States Air Force . In 1971 he became the first RAAF officer to attend the US Air War College , and received a master 's degree in political science from Auburn University . Promoted to wing commander , from 1972 to 1975 he was commanding officer of No. 6 Squadron at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland . His tenure witnessed the introduction of the General Dynamics F @-@ 111C swing @-@ wing bomber to Australian service . On 8 / 9 April 1974 , Funnell flew an F @-@ 111 around Australia to commemorate the 1924 circumnavigation of the continent by Wing Commander Stanley Goble and Flight Lieutenant Ivor McIntyre in a Fairey III seaplane . From 1975 to 1978 he was head of the Military Planning Staff for the Australian Defence Force Academy project . He also served as honorary aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Governor @-@ General Sir John Kerr . Funnell was awarded the National Medal for long service in 1977 , and a clasp the following year . 
 = = Senior command = = 
 Promoted to air commodore , Funnell was appointed Chief of Staff at Headquarters Operational Command in Glenbrook , New South Wales , in 1979 . He attended the Royal College of Defence Studies , London , in 1981 and the following year was appointed Director @-@ General of the Military Staff Branch in the Department of Defence , Canberra . In November 1983 he was promoted air vice marshal and became Chief of Air Force Operations and Plans . He was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia ( AO ) on 10 June 1985 . The same year , he took up the position of Assistant Chief of the Defence Force ( Policy ) . On 6 June 1986 , he was promoted to air marshal and appointed the first Vice Chief of the Defence Force ; the role made him responsible for Australian Defence Force policy and planning , as well as operations . 
 On 3 July 1987 , Funnell succeeded Air Marshal Jake Newham as Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) , becoming the first graduate of RAAF College to attain the position ; he was also the first incumbent to possess a master 's degree . Known for his intellectual curiosity and commitment to the study of air warfare , Funnell ordered the establishment in 1989 of a permanent think @-@ tank and educational institution , the Air Power Studies Centre ( later the Air Power Development Centre ) , and donated the R.G. Funnell library to RAAF Staff College . The Air Power Manual , the RAAF 's first self @-@ produced treatise on aerial war fighting , was completed by a development team sponsored by Funnell , and published in 1990 . Funnell also championed the publication of The Decisive Factor , based on the writings of Air Vice Marshal Henry Wrigley , who was credited with laying the foundations for the RAAF 's modern air power doctrine . 
 As CAS , Funnell focused on turning the RAAF into the " air power element of a cohesive , integrated defence force " . His tenure saw the continuation of a shift in the RAAF 's ' centre of gravity ' from the south to the north of Australia . RAAF Base Curtin , in North Western Australia , and RAAF Base Tindal , in the Northern Territory , were opened and development proceeded on RAAF Base Scherger in Far North Queensland . At the same time , bases in the south , including Point Cook , Laverton and support units in capital cities , were rationalised . The Air Force was in the process of re @-@ equipping its Mirage III fighter squadrons with the F / A @-@ 18 Hornet when Funnell became CAS , and he had to contend with a shortage of pilots that was exacerbated by the extra training time required for the new aircraft . In September 1988 , he flew one of the RAAF 's recently acquired Pilatus PC @-@ 9 turboprop trainers in the Bicentenary Round Australia Air Race . He considered it fitting that the CAS should make the journey , as Stanley Goble had held the same position when he circumnavigated Australia for the first time in 1924 . His term coincided with the 1990 – 91 Gulf War ; the RAAF 's contribution included transporting Australian hostages and medical staff from the Middle East . Funnell was appointed a Companion of the Order of Australia ( AC ) on 12 June 1989 for his service as CAS , and awarded the US Commander of the Legion of Merit in 1991 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Funnell retired from the RAAF following completion of his term as CAS on 1 October 1992 , and was succeeded by Air Marshal Barry Gration , one of his classmates from the 1953 intake at RAAF College . Funnell 's five @-@ year term as CAS was the longest since that of Air Marshal George Jones , who served ten years in the post from 1942 to 1952 . In 1993 , Funnell became Director of the National Defence College project . From 1994 until 1998 , he served as the inaugural Principal of the Australian College of Defence and Strategic Studies , which subsequently evolved into the Australian Defence College . He became a consultant in 1999 , and was awarded the Centenary Medal for " humanitarian and defence services " on 1 January 2001 . From 2001 to 2009 , he was a member of the Minister 's Advisory Council on People Smuggling , and the Immigration Detention Advisory Group ( <unk> ) . He publicly disavowed the Australian contribution to the 2003 invasion of Iraq but , once battle was joined , opposed the withdrawal of troops and cautioned against anti @-@ war demonstrations . Funnell served as Deputy Chair of the Council for Immigration Services and Status Resolution ( <unk> ) from 2009 to 2011 , and became Deputy Chair of the Federal Minister 's Council on Asylum Seekers and Detention ( <unk> ) in 2012 . His recreational activities include motorcycling , photography , walking and bicycling . 
 = Catherine de ' Medici 's court festivals = 
 Catherine de ' Medici 's court festivals were a series of lavish and spectacular entertainments , sometimes called magnificences , laid on by Catherine de ' Medici , the queen consort of France from 1547 to 1559 and queen mother from 1559 until her death in 1589 . As queen consort of Henry II of France , Catherine showed interest in the arts and theatre , but it was not until she attained real political and financial power as queen mother that she began the series of tournaments and entertainments that dazzled her contemporaries and continue to fascinate scholars . Biographer Leonie Frieda suggests that " Catherine , more than anyone , inaugurated the fantastic entertainments for which later French monarchs also became renowned " . 
 For Catherine , these entertainments served a political purpose that made them worth their colossal expense . She presided over the royal government at a time when the French monarchy was in steep decline . With three of her sons on the throne in succession and the country torn by religious civil war , Catherine set out to show not only the French people but foreign courts that the Valois monarchy was as prestigious and magnificent as it had been during the reigns of Francis I and her husband Henry II . At the same time , she believed these elaborate entertainments and sumptuous court rituals , which incorporated martial sports and tournaments of many kinds , would occupy her feuding nobles and distract them from fighting against each other to the detriment of the country and the royal authority . 
 It is clear , however , that Catherine regarded these festivals as more than political and pragmatic exercises : she revelled in them as a vehicle for her creative gifts . A highly talented and artistic woman , Catherine took the lead in devising and planning her own musical @-@ mythological shows . Though they were ephemeral , her " magnificences " — as the contemporary commentator Pierre de <unk> , seigneur de Brantôme , called them — are studied by modern scholars as works of art . Historian Frances Yates has called Catherine " a great creative artist in festivals " . She employed the leading artists and architects of the day to create the necessary dramas , music , and scenic effects for these events , which were usually dedicated to the ideal of peace and based on mythological themes . 
 It is difficult for scholars to piece together the exact form of the entertainments , but clues have been gleaned from the written accounts , scripts , artworks , and tapestries that derived from these famous occasions . Though such sources must be treated with caution , since they contain demonstrable inaccuracies and contradictions , they provide evidence of the richness and scale of Catherine de ' Medici 's court festivals . 
 = = Entertainments = = 
 Catherine de ' Medici 's investment in magnificent entertainments was part of a conscious political programme . She recalled the belief of her father @-@ in @-@ law , King Francis I , that the court needed to be physically active and constantly entertained . She also declared her intention to imitate the Roman emperors , who kept their subjects from mischief by occupying them with games and amusements . She therefore adopted a policy of distracting her nobles from fighting among themselves by laying on irresistible entertainments and sports for them at court . 
 Catherine also maintained about eighty alluring ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting at court , whom she allegedly used as tools to seduce courtiers for political ends . These women became known as her " flying squadron " . Catherine did not hesitate to use the charms of her ladies as an attraction of the court . In 1577 , for example , she threw a banquet at which the food was served by topless women . In 1572 , the Huguenot Jeanne d ’ <unk> , Queen of Navarre , wrote from the court to warn her son Henry that Catherine presided over a " vicious and corrupt " atmosphere , in which the women made the sexual advances and not the men . In fact , Charlotte de Sauve , one of the most notorious members of the " flying squadron " , first seduced and then became a mistress of Henry of Navarre on Catherine 's orders . On the other hand , Brantôme , in his Memoirs , praised Catherine ’ s court as " a school of all honesty and virtue " . 
 In the tradition of sixteenth @-@ century royal festivals , Catherine de ' Medici 's magnificences took place over several days , with a different entertainment each day . Often individual nobles or members of the royal family were responsible for preparing one particular entertainment . Spectators and participants , including those involved in martial sports , would dress up in costumes representing mythological or romantic themes . Catherine gradually introduced changes to the traditional form of these entertainments . She forbade heavy tilting of the sort that led to the death of her husband in 1559 ; and she developed and increased the prominence of dance in the shows that climaxed each series of entertainments . As a result , the ballets de cour , a distinctive new art form , emerged from the creative advances in court entertainment devised by Catherine de ' Medici . 
 = = = Fontainebleau = = = 
 In January 1564 , Catherine and the young Charles IX embarked on a royal progress that was to last nearly two and a half years . They were accompanied by what has been described as a city on the move , including the King ’ s Council and foreign ambassadors who Catherine hoped would report to their governments on the splendour of the train , offsetting any idea that the French monarchy was on the verge of bankruptcy . The royal household included Catherine ’ s courtiers and " flying squadron " , as well as her musicians and nine essential dwarves who travelled in their own miniature coaches . The party carried with it all the equipment and paraphernalia required for the festivals , feasts , masques , and <unk> entrées planned to take place along the route . These included portable triumphal arches and the royal barges . 
 Catherine had ordered that at the Château de Fontainebleau , each important noble should host a ball . She herself held a banquet in a meadow at the château 's dairy , where her courtiers dressed as shepherds and shepherdesses . That evening , the court watched a comedy in the great ballroom , which was followed by a ball where 300 " beauties dressed in gold and silver cloth " performed a choreographed dance . 
 At Fontainebleau , Catherine arranged entertainments that lasted for several days , including fancy @-@ dress jousting and chivalrous events in allegorical settings . On Mardi Gras , the day after the banquet in the meadow , knights dressed as Greeks and Trojans fought over scantily clad damsels trapped by a giant and a dwarf in a tower on an enchanted island . The fighting climaxed with the tower losing its magical properties and bursting into flames . In another spectacle , singing sirens swam past the king , and Neptune floated by in a chariot drawn by seahorses . 
 = = = Bayonne = = = 
 As the high point of the royal progress , Catherine scheduled a meeting with her daughter Elisabeth , the third wife of Philip II of Spain . Catherine was so determined to make a magnificent impression on the Spanish court that she indulged in a spending spree that was extravagant even by her own standards . To help pay for the planned pageantry and entertainments , she borrowed 700 @,@ 000 écus from the Gondi bank . Catherine had assumed she would also be meeting King Philip himself , but early in the tour , he sent word that he would not be attending . He was outraged that Catherine , whom he called " Madame La Serpente " , had received an embassy from the Sultan of Turkey . He also objected to her Edict of Amboise ( 1563 ) , which had offered concessions to the Huguenots . In short , French religious policy disgusted him . In his place he sent " the severe and ferocious " Duke of Alba , with orders to convince Catherine that persecuting , imprisoning , and torturing Huguenots was the way to deal with heretics , not making treaties with them . In the event , Catherine left Alba befuddled by her darting mind . He found her far more interested in discussing marriage alliances and in showing him what the French court could lay on in the way of fabulous entertainments . 
 Elisabeth and her Spanish entourage had arrived at the Bidasoa river on the Spanish border with a huge escort of French Catholic nobles on 14 June 1565 . She then rode into Saint @-@ Jean de Luz , where Catherine greeted her tearfully with embraces and kisses . During the reception ceremonies , ten of Catherine ’ s soldiers dropped dead from standing too long in the heat in their armour . The next day , Elisabeth made a dazzling entry into Bayonne on a horse whose harness was studded with gems worth 400 @,@ 000 ducats . 
 The encounter between the two courts was marked by ritual exchanges of costly gifts and a sustained display of ballets , jousts , mock battles , and decorative arts . Several accounts of the Bayonne entertainments survive . One spectacle , mounted on the Bidasoa river , is a particularly famous example of Catherine ’ s entertainments as ephemeral works of art . The entertainments began with a banquet on the Île d ’ <unk> . As guests were ferried on decorated boats to the island , they passed , among other spectacles , Arion riding two dolphins , <unk> spearing an artificial whale that spouted red wine , and six tritons sitting on a giant turtle , blowing conch shells . Charles IX was transported on a barge dressed to look like a floating fortress . The banquet was followed by a ballet of nymphs and satyrs . Brantôme reported that the " magnificence was such in everything that the Spaniards who are very contemptuous of all others save their own swore that they had never seen anything finer " . 
 The next day , King Charles and his brother Henry took part in a tournament , leading teams dressed as British and Irish knights . The theme of the tournament , " virtue and love " , was represented by two chariots , one containing ladies dressed as the five virtues , the other carrying Venus and Cupid and many mini @-@ cupids . In the tournament itself , little balls of fire were lobbed among the horses as they crossed . The royal grandstand was hung with gold @-@ and @-@ silk tapestries illustrating the triumph of Scipio , which Giulio Romano had designed for Francis I. Brantôme recalled in his memoirs that " the Spanish lords and ladies greatly admired it , never having seen anything like it in the possession of their king " . Another French spectator recorded , " Strangers of all nations were now forced to recognise that in these things France had surpassed , with these parades , bravado , glories and magnificences , all other nations and even herself " . 
 Catherine believed she had showed Spain that the French monarchy , far from being financially ruined and at war with its nobles , remained a glorious force to be reckoned with , capable of financing displays on a stunning scale , backed by a unified court . The point was lost on the grim Duke of Alba , however . His letters reveal his frustration that Catherine ’ s spectacles kept interrupting the serious business of discussing how to make war on the Protestants . In the end , the Spanish decided the whole meeting been a waste of time , since Catherine had refused to change her policy towards the Huguenots in the slightest . The Huguenots , however , believed that their banishment from the talks between the two negotiating teams meant that Catherine had struck a secret deal with the Spanish to persecute them . 
 = = = Royal wedding = = = 
 The celebrations following the marriage of Catherine ’ s daughter Marguerite to the Protestant Henry of Navarre in Paris on 18 August 1572 , were based on Huguenot themes . The match was controversial because Marguerite was marrying a Huguenot . The pope refused to grant a dispensation for the marriage , and the different faiths of the bridal couple made for an unusual wedding service . After a nuptial lunch , four days of balls , masques and banquets ensued . 
 Despite the tension between Catholic and Huguenot forces in the city , the festivities proceeded in a good @-@ natured fashion , though the themes of the entertainments may seem " very near to the bone " , in retrospect . The night after the wedding , a magnificent masked ball was held , which included the performance of a pantomime <unk> , called the " paradise of love " . King Charles and his two brothers defended twelve angelic nymphs against the Huguenots . They despatched the Huguenots , led by Henry of Navarre , into a hell where , according to an observer , " a great number of devils and imps were making infinite <unk> and noise " . The nymphs then danced a ballet . There followed combat between knights , accompanied by explosions of gunpowder . The king and his brothers climaxed proceedings by rescuing the Huguenots from hell , which was separated from paradise by a river on which floated the ferryman Charon in his boat . 
 The remaining festivities were called off after an assassination attempt on the Huguenot leader Admiral Coligny , who was shot from a house by an <unk> on 22 August and wounded in the elbow and hand . The day before , the king and his brothers had dressed as Amazons to fight Navarre and his friends , who wore turbans and golden robes in the role of Turks . Fighting broke out for real between the Catholics and Huguenots in the St. Bartholomew 's Day massacre , which began on 24 August when Charles IX ordered the slaughter of all the Huguenot leaders in Paris , provoking massacres of Huguenots throughout France . Henry of Navarre was given the choice of death , life imprisonment , or conversion to Catholicism . He chose Catholicism and was spared . 
 = = = Tuileries = = = 
 A year after the massacre , in August 1573 , Catherine hosted another lavish set of entertainments , this time for the Polish ambassadors who had arrived to offer the throne of Poland to her son , Henry , Duke of Anjou . Sports were laid on , including tournaments , mock combats , tilting at the <unk> , and running at the ring . Catherine held a grand ball or " festin " at the Tuileries palace , which Jean Dorat described in his illustrated <unk> <unk> . Sixteen nymphs , representing each of the French provinces , danced an intricate ballet , distributing devices to the spectators in the process . Brantôme called this performance " the finest ballet that was ever given in this world " and praised Catherine for bringing France so much prestige with " all these inventions " . The chronicler Agrippa d <unk> recorded that the Poles marvelled at the ballet . Frances Yates has pointed out that the Italian influence on the French ballet de cour owed much to Catherine : 
 It was invented in the context of the chivalrous pastimes of the court , by an Italian , and a Medici , the Queen Mother . Many poets , artists , musicians , choreographers , contributed to the result , but it was she who was the inventor , one might perhaps say , the producer ; she who had the ladies of her court trained to perform these ballets in settings of her devising . 
 = = = Joyeuse magnificences = = = 
 A spectacular fête was held during the reign of Catherine ’ s son Henry III to celebrate the marriage of his sister @-@ in @-@ law , Marguerite of Lorraine , to his favourite , Anne , Duke of Joyeuse , on 24 September 1581 . Entertainments were laid on almost every day for two weeks after the wedding , in what art historian Roy Strong has called " the climax of Valois festival art " . The chief artist employed to design the magnificences was Antoine Caron , who was aided by the sculptor Germain Pilon . Among the writers were Dorat , Ronsard , and Philippe <unk> ; and the music was written by Claude Le Jeune and the Sieur de Beaulieu , among others . A programme for an entertainment with a sun – moon theme announced that " twelve torch bearers will be men and women disguised as trees ... the golden fruits of which will carry lamps and torches " . The visual decorations included two arcades , one shining as a sun , to represent the king , the other as a moon , to represent the newlyweds . The arcades were linked to an amphitheatre overhung with artificial heavens of planets and constellations , and allusions to Catherine ’ s personal emblem , the rainbow . Into this amphitheatre , the king was to enter in a chariot , dressed as the sun . 
 Another of the Joyeuse magnificences was the Ballet Comique de la Reine , devised and presented by Queen Louise , who directed her own team of writers and musicians . The text was by Nicolas de La <unk> , the music by the Sieur de Beaulieu , the sets by Jacques <unk> , and the overall director was Balthasar de <unk> . 
 The theme of the entertainment was an invocation of cosmic forces to come to the aid of the monarchy , which at that time was threatened by the rebellion not only of Huguenots but of many Catholic nobles . Men were shown as reduced to beasts by Circe , who held court in a garden at one end of the hall . Louise and her ladies danced ballets , and the Four Cardinal Virtues appealed to the gods to descend to earth and defeat the powers of Circe . With a thunderclap , Jupiter descended sitting on an eagle , accompanied by " the most learned and excellent music that had ever been sung or heard " . Jupiter transferred Circe ’ s power to the royal family , protected France from the horrors of civil war , and blessed King Henry with the wisdom to govern . At the end of the show , Catherine de ' Medici made Queen Louise give Henry a gold medal depicting a dolphin . The gesture expressed Catherine 's desire that the couple would have a male heir ( a dauphin ) to continue the dynasty . 
 = Tekno Team 2000 = 
 Tekno Team 2000 was a professional wrestling tag team that competed in the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) from 1995 to 1996 . The team was composed of Travis and Troy . Although the team started off with a strong push from the WWF , they did not continue their initial success . Tekno Team 2000 also left the WWF temporarily to make several appearances in the United States Wrestling Association ( USWA ) . After returning to the WWF , the team continued to lose matches and was eventually disbanded . 
 = = History = = 
 Originally Chad Fortune and Erik Watts were football teammates for the University of Louisville . In 1994 , they reunited and began wrestling as a tag team . They would debut in Minnesota for the AWA losing to Wayne Bloom and Mike Enos . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation = = = 
 Wearing " futuristic " silver and maroon ring outfits , they debuted in the WWF as a babyface tag team that was " ahead of its time " . As part of the " New Generation " of the WWF , they were said to be " determined to bring the New Generation into the 21st Century " . Building on their youthful appearance , Troy and Travis were featured in pin @-@ up pictures in the World Wrestling Federation Magazine . 
 Tekno Team 2000 made their WWF debut during a house show at Madison Square Garden on March 19 , 1995 . They defeated The Heavenly Bodies ( Tom Prichard and Jimmy Del Ray ) and repeated the result the following night at Boston Garden . Their WWF television debut took place on the May 27 , 1995 episode of WWF Superstars ; they defeated Barry Horowitz and the Brooklyn Brawler . They were booked to appear in a series of matches against The Heavenly Bodies . Del Ray was not able to appear in several of the matches , so he was replaced by <unk> and Barry Horowitz in several of the matches . Tekno Team 2000 won all of the matches in this series . The WWF teased a storyline in which Tekno Team 2000 was being scouted by Ted DiBiase to join the Million Dollar Corporation , but they did not join the group . Their success led Pro Wrestling Illustrated to rank them among the top ten tag teams in the world . 
 On July 2 , Troy and Travis served as lumberjacks in the lumberjack match between Diesel and Sid at In Your House 2 : The Lumberjacks . During the match , Sid attacked Troy and Travis . While he was distracted , other wrestlers attacked Sid and helped Diesel to win the match . 
 = = = USWA Tennessee = = = 
 Watts has stated that the WWF intended to have Tekno Team 2000 win the WWF Tag Team Championship after two months in the promotion . After Watts ' father , Bill Watts , began booking matches , the team was later sent to developmental territories to improve their skills . They returned to USWA in Tennessee , where they had wrestled a tag team match together in April 1995 under their real names . Competing as Tekno Team 2000 , they defeated PG @-@ 13 on September 18 . They began losing matches , however , while facing PG @-@ 13 , The Heavenly Bodies , and The Bushwhackers . On October 30 , Troy and Travis reversed their fortunes and defeated King Cobra and <unk> . 
 = = = Return to World Wrestling Federation = = = 
 In 1996 , Troy and Travis resumed competition in the WWF . They lost to The <unk> on the May 6 episode of Monday Night Raw . During Tekno Team 2000 's return , however , the WWF instructed The <unk> to help make Troy and Travis look good to the fans . Five days later , Tekno Team 2000 lost to The Smoking Gunns on WWF Superstars . Their final appearance came in a loss to The <unk> on the June 3 episode of Monday Night Raw . Watts and Fortune were released from their WWF contracts in the summer of 1996 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 After disbanding the team , Watts and Fortune competed for independent promotions . They later formed a team while wrestling in Japan . In 2001 , they reunited in Dusty Rhodes ' Turnbuckle Championship Wrestling , teaming together under their real names . Watts later found work with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling , and Fortune retired from wrestling to drive monster trucks . Tekno Team 2000 was included during a video montage of poor gimmicks during the tenth anniversary of Monday Night Raw in January 2003 . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Double @-@ team finishing moves 
 Simultaneous vertical suplex / diving crossbody combination 
 = Separate Vocations = 
 " Separate Vocations " is the eighteenth episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on February 27 , 1992 . In the episode , the Springfield Elementary School makes the students take career aptitude tests . When Lisa discovers that she is best suited to become a homemaker , her dreams of becoming a professional musician are shattered and , as a result , she becomes a troublemaker in school . Meanwhile , Bart discovers that he is best suited to become a policeman ; this significantly improves his grades and behavior and he is chosen to be the school 's new hall monitor . 
 The episode was written by George Meyer and directed by Jeffrey Lynch . American actor and television personality Steve Allen guest starred in the episode as the electronically altered voice of Bart in a fantasy sequence . The episode features cultural references to films such as Bullitt , The Wild One , and Beverly Hills Cop , and the television series The Streets of San Francisco . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen Rating of 14 @.@ 8 and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . Nancy Cartwright received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for her performance as Bart in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After taking career aptitude tests ( scored by a malfunctioning computer ) , Lisa discovers that the occupation she is best suited for is homemaker , while Bart 's test shows that he should be a policeman . Lisa is heartbroken over the result and is determined to prove the test wrong . She consults a music teacher for his opinion , but he tells her that , having inherited her father 's stubby fingers , she can never be a professional saxophone player . Lisa is therefore required by the test to spend the day doing chores with her mother Marge , while Bart goes on a ride @-@ along with the police . 
 Lisa hates her role as a homemaker and , realizing that her future dreams have been shattered , loses interest in being a good student . Bart enjoys spending time with the police , and he even ends up stopping Snake Jailbird during a car chase . When Principal Skinner discovers Bart 's new interest in law enforcement , he enlists him as a hall monitor . Bart starts handing out demerits to his classmates for minor infractions and has order restored to the school . Meanwhile , Lisa becomes a sulky , rebellious student with no interest in school . She hangs out with the bad girls in the bathroom , makes snippy comments at Miss Hoover , gets disciplined by Skinner , and her grades drop as a result . The girls are impressed with Lisa 's recent bad behavior and offer her a cigarette . Though hesitant to accept , she takes it and tells them that she will smoke it in class . 
 One day , while she is in detention for another snippy comment , Lisa secretly steals all of the Teachers ' Editions of the schoolbooks and reveals the teachers ' incompetence . When the books turn up missing , it is up to Bart to find out who stole them . He finds the books in Lisa 's locker and realizes she is the culprit . Closing her locker , Lisa confesses to the crime and reveals she stole them because she was rebelling against her chosen occupation as a homemaker . She also tells Bart that before he became a hall monitor , he used to enjoy the simple freedom of rebellion . He admits so , but also tells Lisa that even he had his limits and that she could face expulsion for her actions . When Skinner finds the books , he is overjoyed , but then asks who stole them . Bart takes the blame and returns to his life as a bad student and detention hall regular . 
 When Milhouse takes him to Skinner 's office for punishment , Lisa asks Bart why he took the blame for her and not let her take the fall . He tells Lisa he did not want her ruining her future as she had the brains and talent to do what she wanted . Bart encourages her to keep pursuing her future dreams as a professional saxophone player and promises to be there for her when she needs his help again ( as well as borrowing money from her ) . Lisa is touched by Bart 's deeds and returns to her old life as a good student . As he spends his time in detention , Lisa plays her saxophone outside his classroom to comfort him . While hearing her play her sax , Bart makes encouraging comments that Lisa has a great future as a professional saxophone player regardless of what anyone else says . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by George Meyer and directed by Jeffrey Lynch . Mike Reiss , show runner of The Simpsons with Al Jean at the time , said Meyer wrote most of the episode by himself without help from the show 's other writers . Few changes were made to the first draft that he pitched to the producers ; it was near identical to the final script . The episode was inspired by the vocational tests taken by several members of the show 's staff when they went to school ; Reiss , for example , said he was told he would become a librarian . Jean said " one of the first things that sold us on doing the episode " was the idea of Bart becoming a policeman . He said it was " a funny , realistic depiction of what a kid like Bart might wind up to become , and it wasn 't something you would immediately think of . " Jean said the episode deals with the emotion that many adults feel when they grow older and realize that they are not going to achieve the dreams they once had . " [ It 's about ] how people in life cope with that problem . Maybe Lisa , at eight years old , is a little bit young to worry about that , but that 's what we were trying to explore here . " 
 In one sequence where Bart imagines himself testifying in court , with his voice electronically altered . The altered voice was provided by American actor and television personality Steve Allen . Series creator Matt Groening said that he and some of the writers who were old enough to remember Allen 's TV show from the 1950s – 60s were thrilled to have him guest @-@ star , especially John Swartzwelder . It took nine takes for Allen to pronounce Bart 's catchphrase " ¡ Ay , caramba ! " correctly , to the point where the staff began to get slightly frustrated with him . There was a discussion amongst the writing team of whether the episode should end with a joke or have a " sweet " ending . Reiss said " With the better angels in our nature , we went with the sweet ending [ of Lisa playing her saxophone for Bart ] . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The music school that Lisa visits has a sign out front with a picture of a diapered baby Ludwig van Beethoven on it . When Principal Skinner is questioning Lisa about her newfound sense of irresponsibility , he asks " What are you rebelling against ? " She responds " <unk> got ? " , like Marlon Brando 's character Johnny <unk> did in the film The Wild One . She also has a toothpick in her mouth , like Johnny had in the film . The fifth graders that Lisa talks to in the school washroom are smoking Laramie cigarettes . 
 The car chase scene with Snake is a reference to the car chase scene in the 1968 film Bullitt . Music similar to the soundtrack of the television series The Streets of San Francisco is heard in the scene . Alf Clausen , a composer on The Simpsons who had previously worked on several police shows , wrote the music for the scene . In another reference to The Streets of San Francisco and other Quinn Martin productions , a voice @-@ over and caption proclaims the name of act two of the episode , " Act II - Death Drives a Stick " , after the episode 's first act break in the middle of the Snake car chase . In the sequence where Bart imagines himself testifying in court , his face is obscured with a blue dot ; this is a references to the television coverage of the rape trial of William Kennedy Smith , in which the woman who accused Smith of raping her was obscured with a blue dot over her face . The way the scene changes from Bart and Skinner talking in Skinner 's office to them searching through the lockers is a reference to the same style of scene change used in the 1960s Batman television series , in which a close @-@ up of Batman 's face with dramatic music in the background is shown for a brief moment before the scene changes . The song heard when Bart and Skinner search through the lockers for the Teachers ' Editions is a variation of Harold Faltermeyer ’ s " Axel F " from the film Beverly Hills Cop . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 In the last scene of the episode , Bart is seen writing " I will not expose the ignorance of the faculty " on the blackboard as a punishment for exposing the ignorance of the teachers by removing the Teachers ' Editions . In his book The Small Screen : How Television <unk> Us to Live in the Information Age , Brian L. Ott describes this scene as one of the " key ways The Simpsons appeals to audience , which tends to be younger , by critiquing authority figures , and in particular educators . " Toby Daspit and John Weaver write in their book Popular Culture and Critical Pedagogy : Reading , Constructing , Connecting that the writers of The Simpsons are " particularly interested " in questions about authority and the abuses of powers in school . Another scene from the episode sees Ms. Hoover telling the students to stare at the blackboard for ten minutes until class is over . Daspit and Weaver write that it is " the absolute power that teachers have over students ' every action that allows for the image to be presented on The Simpsons . It would be comforting to tell ourselves that this is simply parody run amok , that the writers are stretching reality to make a point , but the discussants in the study [ of The Simpsons in this book ] had memories of a reality very much like the one presented in this program . " One of the discussants said she believes everyone has experienced similar situations in their school years , and she thinks the thought that " an educator could ever do something so useless and pointless with the children 's time " is " frightening " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Separate Vocations " finished 29th in the ratings for the week of February 24 – March 1 , 1992 , with a Nielsen Rating of 14 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 13 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . Bart 's voice actor , Nancy Cartwright , received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance in 1992 for her performance in the episode . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , thought the episode displayed The Simpsons " at its best – not only hilarious but daringly outspoken on a whole range of issues – the failures of the education system , police abuses of power , the stifling of children 's creativity . " Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict said " Separate Vocations " represent The Simpsons " at its apex as a well tuned talent machine grinding out the good stuff with surprising accuracy and skill . " Gibron added that the episode shows that " even in territory they 're not used to ( Bart as a safety patrol , Lisa as a cursing class cut up ) , the Simpsons ' kids are funny and inventive . " Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed gave the episode a four out of five rating and commented that the script 's " departure from the traditional roles assigned to Bart and Lisa makes for a fresh experience with many laughs . " Meyers thought the highlight of the episode was Bart 's ride in the police car . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson thought the theme of the episode was unoriginal , but commented that Bart 's " rapid embrace of fascism " and Lisa 's " descent into hooliganism " provide " a number of funny opportunities , and ' Separate Vocations ' exploits them well . Though it ’ s not one of the year ’ s best shows , it seems like a good one for the most part . " 
 = Jochen Rindt = 
 Karl Jochen Rindt ( [ <unk> <unk> ̩ <unk> ] ; 18 April 1942 – 5 September 1970 ) was a German @-@ born racing driver who represented Austria during his career . In 1970 , he became the only driver to posthumously win the Formula One World Drivers ' Championship , after being killed in practice for the Italian Grand Prix . 
 Rindt started motor racing in 1961 , switching to single @-@ seaters in 1963 , earning success in both Formula Junior and Formula Two . In 1964 , Rindt made his debut in Formula One at the Austrian Grand Prix , before securing a full drive with Cooper for 1965 . After mixed success with the team , he moved to Brabham for 1968 and then Lotus in 1969 . It was at Lotus where Rindt found a competitive car , although he was often concerned about the security of the notoriously unreliable Lotus vehicles . He won his first Formula One race at the 1969 United States Grand Prix . 
 In 1970 , Rindt took five victories before his fatal accident , earning enough points to win the Drivers ' World Championship . Overall , he competed in 62 Grands Prix , winning six and achieving 13 podium finishes . He was also successful in sports car racing , winning the 1965 24 Hours of Le Mans , paired with Masten Gregory in a Ferrari 250LM . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Jochen Rindt was born on 18 April 1942 in Mainz , Germany , to an Austrian mother and German father . His parents were killed in a bombing raid in Hamburg during the Second World War when he was one year old . He was thus raised by his grandparents in Graz , Austria , where he grew up . Rindt 's mother had been a successful tennis player in her youth and later studied law , like her father , who was a lawyer . His parents owned a spice mill in Mainz , which was inherited by Rindt . His grandfather opted for Rindt to maintain German citizenship , but Rindt drove his entire career under an Austrian racing licence . In an interview , he described his heritage as a " terrible mixture " and , when asked if he felt more Austrian or German , said that he felt " like a European " . Rindt had one half @-@ brother , Uwe , through his mother . 
 The young Rindt has been described by his brother and friends as a " laddish child " , often performing tricks for his friends . While on a skiing holiday , he broke his femoral neck , leading to several surgeries that left one leg 4 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) shorter than the other . As a result of this , Rindt limped slightly for the rest of his life . When Rindt was sixteen years old , he got a moped and started racing his friends on motocross tracks . His time in school was troubled and he got excluded from schools more than once . He said : 
 In the end I got thrown out and went to England to learn English . I learned to drive while I was in England but I was too young to get a licence . When I went back home I broke my leg skiing but I decided I was more than capable of driving myself – even though I had one leg in plaster . I actually drove without a licence for 18 months and then got caught the day before I was eligible to collect it . 
 Obtaining a licence was put into further jeopardy because he had collected eight recorded <unk> with the police during his youth . In 1960 , he received his first car , a Volkswagen Beetle , through his parents ' spice mill company in Mainz . His interest in motorsport was really sparked when he visited the 1961 German Grand Prix at the Nürburgring with school friends , including fellow future Formula One driver Helmut Marko . In the same year , Rindt 's idol , the German Wolfgang von Trips , died in an accident at the 1961 Italian Grand Prix . However , Rindt still opted to go into the sport and started racing touring cars around that time . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Rindt drove his first race at the <unk> in 1961 , in an Abarth Simca 2000 . After missing the official application period , he only entered after prominent intervention from a friend from Graz . During the race , he was black flagged for his dangerous driving style , signalling his disqualification . He did not immediately come into the pits however , since he was unaware of the regulations . Rindt entered several rallies with his Simca , but was unable to score good results , until he was provided with a race @-@ prepared Alfa Romeo GT 1300 at cost price and with free servicing , by a local dealer in which he achieved eight victories , almost all the races he entered . 
 In 1963 , he switched to Formula Junior with the assistance of Kurt Bardi @-@ Barry , a wealthy owner of a travelling agency and one of Austria 's leading drivers at the time . Barry handed his one year old Cooper <unk> to Rindt and the two formed a partnership , driving to races together . He was fastest in practice for his first race in <unk> , a race that Barry won , but took victory in only his second attempt at <unk> . In the race , Rindt had taken advantage of an accident in the early stages . While most drivers slowed for the incoming ambulance , he raced ahead between straw bales and the ambulance to take the lead . He was notorious for his dangerous style , almost crashing into the crowd of spectators at a race in the streets of Budapest . 
 = = = Formula Two = = = 
 Rindt was highly successful in Formula Two racing , amassing a total of 29 victories . He once again entered the series in partnership with Barry , driving Brabham cars . With engines provided from Cosworth that were notoriously different in performance , Rindt reacted to getting a slower engine by declaring : " Then I just brake two metres later . " He entered his first F2 race in April 1964 at the Preis von Wien at Aspern , retiring from both heats . The international motor racing world first took notice of him on 18 May 1964 , when Rindt won the London Trophy race at the Crystal Palace circuit in a Brabham <unk> ahead of Graham Hill . 
 Like many other drivers at the time , Rindt continued to race in Formula Two races next to his duties in Formula One , with his last F2 appearance being the <unk> der Salzburg in August 1970 . In 1967 , he dominated Formula Two , winning nine races in his Brabham <unk> . However , as a graded driver , his results did not count towards the championship , handing the title to Jacky Ickx . Still , his performances led him to be called " king of Formula 2 " by the racing press . He had a long @-@ standing relationship with Roy <unk> , with whose team he drove until it closed at the end of 1969 . 
 = = = Sports cars = = = 
 Next to single @-@ seater racing , Rindt also took up sports car racing in the mid @-@ 1960s . His greatest result came at the 1965 24 Hours of Le Mans . Sharing the drive of a Ferrari 250LM with American Masten Gregory for the North American Racing Team , Rindt won the event . Both drivers had not been delighted to run the race in a seemingly uncompetitive car . As Motor Sport magazine put it in an 1998 article , both did not appear to show much interest in the race , and instead " more a case of ' hope it breaks soon ' so they could draw their money and split " . At the start , when the drivers had to run to their cars , Rindt entered his vehicle with a forward roll that allowed him to get his foot on the throttle instantly , taking an early lead . However , the pair experienced considerable trouble in the early part of the race , with the car not starting again during Gregory 's first pit stop . Later , the engine failed partially and Gregory brought the car into the pits on only six of twelve cylinders . At this point , Rindt had already changed back into his civilian clothes , expecting the race to be over for them . However , after thirty minutes of repairs , the car restarted and Rindt and Gregory agreed to drive the rest of the event " flat out " , with full speed and risk . Rindt drove most of the night , advancing from 18th to third position by the dawn of morning . Gregory persuaded Rindt to let him drive the closing part of the race , suspecting that his young teammate might not drive moderately enough to nurse the car to the finish , losing a potential victory . Jacky Ickx later recalled that the two had indeed driven " like maniacs " . However , the car survived , handing the pair what Ickx called an " unexpected victory " . 
 Later the same year , Rindt drove , again in a Ferrari 250LM , at the 500 kilometre race at Zeltweg . He was able to win ahead of the better powered Ferrari of Mike Parkes due to a special lever that manually activated the brake lights . Using the tool shortly before his actual braking point , Rindt was able to force Parkes to brake earlier than him and allowed himself to stay ahead . 
 Rindt started at Le Mans a total of four times . Apart from his 1965 victory , he never finished the race . At his debut in 1964 , sharing a Ferrari 250LM with David Piper , the car retired too early for Rindt even to take the wheel . In 1966 , his Ford GT40 ( shared with Innes Ireland ) suffered an engine failure . A year later , he drove a Porsche 907 with Gerhard Mitter until their camshaft failed . 
 = = = Formula One = = = 
 = = = = Cooper and Brabham ( 1964 – 1968 ) = = = = 
 Rindt got his Formula One debut at his home race , the 1964 Austrian Grand Prix , in a loaned Brabham <unk> supplied by the Rob Walker Racing Team . He retired on the 58th lap with a broken steering column in what was to be his only Grand Prix of the season . 
 For the 1965 Formula One season , Rindt got a permanent drive with Cooper , paired with Bruce McLaren . He did not have immediate success , as the former top team was struggling at the time . In his first race with the team , in South Africa , he suffered a broken wire to the transistor . The damage was repaired only to break again , leaving Rindt to retire on track . His best result was a fourth place at the German Grand Prix at the Nürburgring . He ended the season with four points , 13th in the championship . 
 For 1966 , Cooper introduced the T81 chassis and used nine year old Maserati V12 engines , which were powerful but overweight . The car was still competitive as many teams struggled with the new 3 @-@ litre engine formula . Rindt became team leader as McLaren left , at least until 1964 world champion John Surtees joined from Ferrari . At the second race of the year , the Belgian Grand Prix , Rindt overcame an engine failure in practice to qualify second , next to Surtees on the front row of the grid . In a race marred by heavy rain , he overtook Surtees for the lead on lap four . He spun multiple times on the wet track and suffered from a limited @-@ slip differential , but held onto the lead until lap 21 , when Surtees <unk> him and won . It was Rindt 's first ever podium finish in Formula One however , in what Motor Sport magazine called a " very courageous " drive . Overall , he achieved three podium positions , handing him third place in the championship at the end of the year . 
 1967 was less successful , as Rindt only finished two races , the Belgian and Italian Grands Prix , both in fourth place . Six points meant that he ended the season in 13th place in the championship . 
 In 1968 , Rindt , who had received offers from all teams except for Lotus and Honda , moved to Brabham , who had been world champions in the two previous seasons . However , his season was not what he had hoped for because of technical problems . Brabham 's Repco V8 engine was not competitive against the now widely used Cosworth DFV and Rindt finished just two races , both in third place . At the season opener in South Africa on New Year 's Day , Rindt placed third , being elevated by a late retirement from Jackie Stewart and closing on second placed Graham Hill towards the end . It was the last race and victory for Jim Clark , a close friend of Rindt 's , who died three months later at a Formula Two race at Hockenheim . Rindt was deeply affected by the loss of Clark , telling Austrian journalist Heinz <unk> : " If Jim Clark is not safe , what can happen to us ? " His second podium finish came under treacherous conditions of heavy rain and fog at the Nürburgring at the German Grand Prix , a race dominated by Stewart , who finished four minutes ahead of second placed Hill . Rindt had closed on Hill in the latter stages of the race after the Englishman had spun , and finished just four seconds behind after a close battle during the last lap . His eight points placed him twelfth in the championship at the end of the season . 
 During these years , he also raced in the Indianapolis 500 in both 1967 and 1968 , but finished no better than 24th . In an interview in 2014 , Heinz <unk> recalled Rindt speaking about Indianapolis in 1967 : " In Indianapolis , I always feel like I am on my way to my own funeral . " At another occasion , he said about the track : " It is catastrophic , I only drive there because of the money . " 
 = = = = Team Lotus ( 1969 – 1970 ) = = = = 
 For the 1969 season , Rindt again switched teams , joining 1968 world champions Lotus , pairing up with defending drivers ' champion Graham Hill . Rindt had not felt comfortable with the move , citing the Lotus cars ' notorious unreliability . In fact , in a twenty @-@ month period between 1967 and 1969 , the team had incurred 31 accidents . Hill alone was involved in nine crashes between 1968 and 1970 , which led him to joke : " Every time I am being overtaken by my own wheel , I know I am in a Lotus . " On signing with Lotus and their team owner Colin Chapman , Rindt 's friend and de facto manager Bernie Ecclestone , who had negotiated the deal , commented that although they knew that perhaps a better proposition would have been to drive for Brabham , they were always concerned about the fact that they knew Lotus were going to be quick , and Rindt wanted to win the championship . Rindt 's hesitation about Lotus is underlined by the often repeated quotation : " At Lotus , I can either be world champion or die . " Because of his doubts , Rindt did not sign the contract with Lotus until shortly before the 1969 Spanish Grand Prix . 
 Rindt 's scepticism about Lotus appeared to be right when both he and Hill suffered high speed crashes at the Spanish Grand Prix at Montjuïc . In both instances , the high , suspension mounted wings broke off , causing accidents that many felt could have killed either driver . The effect of the failure lifted Rindt off the track and into the barriers , crashing into the stationary car of Hill , who had his accident at the same spot . Although he walked away from the scene with only a broken nose , one marshal lost an eye and another suffered a broken foot . Rindt was furious with Chapman over the failure , and told a reporter after the accident : " I place the blame on him [ Chapman ] and rightfully so , because he should have calculated that the wing would break . " In an interview on Austrian television one day later , he was even more articulate : " These wings are insanity [ ein <unk> ] in my eyes and should not be allowed on racing cars . [ ... ] But to get any wisdom into Colin Chapman 's head is impossible . " Asked whether he had lost trust in Lotus after the accident , he replied : " I never had any trust in Lotus " , going on to describe his relationship with the team as " purely business " . His accident left him sidelined for the Monaco Grand Prix , a race that Hill won . 
 Jackie Stewart later described Rindt 's 1969 season as the year that he " came of age " . At the end of the year , Motor Sport magazine called him " [ t ] he only driver to challenge Stewart seriously throughout the season " , albeit placing only fourth in the championship . He suffered from the poor reliability of the Lotus <unk> , retiring from seven races , second only to Jackie Oliver . At the British Grand Prix , Rindt fought a close battle with Stewart for the lead , both being 90 seconds ahead of third @-@ placed Jacky Ickx . The race was decided in Stewart 's favour only when Rindt had to go into the pits because part of his bodywork had started to rub on his tyre . He would finish fourth . Rindt took his first ever Grand Prix win at the penultimate race of the season at Watkins Glen , winning the highest ever prize money in Formula One at the time : $ 50 @,@ 000 . His victory was however overshadowed by a serious accident of his teammate Hill , who crashed when one of his tyres punctured at high speed , suffering major leg injuries . 
 For 1970 , Rindt was partnered at Lotus by John Miles , as Graham Hill left the team to drive for Rob Walker 's costumer franchise , establishing Rindt as the clear team leader . At the first Grand Prix of the season in South Africa , he qualified on the second row in fourth , but eventually retired with an engine failure after being entangled in a first lap incident with Chris Amon and Jack Brabham , who would go on to win his last ever Grand Prix . At the following race , the Spanish Grand Prix , Lotus introduced their new Lotus 72 , a revolutionary design . Instead of the conventional front radiator , it featured two radiators at each side of the driver 's cockpit . Further innovations included torsion bar brakes in place of the widely used coil @-@ springs , with all four brakes now mounted inboard . During its first ever practice session , the left semi @-@ axis of the car broke , sending Rindt into a spin . In addition , the car proved ineffective in the race , with Rindt retiring after nine laps . 
 With the Lotus 72 " not as good as we had imagined it " , the car was sent back to the factory to be re @-@ built and Rindt used the old Lotus 49 for the next race in Monaco . However , the 49 needed to be used with the new 72 @-@ type tyres , causing the car to be unstable . Seemingly unaffected by this , Rindt produced what his race engineer Herbie Blash called " the race of his life " . From eighth on the grid , he worked his way through the field on a track notorious for lack of overtaking opportunities . In the closing stages , he was second , steadily closing the gap on leader Jack Brabham . On the very last lap , at <unk> hairpin , the final corner of the circuit , Brabham made a mistake : he braked too late , touched the <unk> and went straight ahead into the straw balls , allowing Rindt through to take his first victory of the season . Rindt used the Lotus 49 one last time at the Belgian Grand Prix , a race at which he heavily criticised the organisers for installing guardrails that had several metre gaps in between them . He had originally started practice in the remodelled 72 , but the car came to a halt early in the session with a broken lower wishbone , forcing Rindt to switch cars once more . Even with engine troubles during the rest of practice , he still managed to qualify on the front row , but later retired with another engine failure . 
 At the Dutch Grand Prix , Rindt eventually used the new Lotus 72 , better sorted after anti @-@ dive and anti @-@ squat had been removed . After being only tenth in first practice , he set pole position in the second session . He suffered another accident however , when he braked too late , misjudging his new brake discs , crashing head @-@ on into the barriers , forcing his mechanics to repair the car overnight . Rindt went on to take his maiden victory in the Lotus 72 , but it was not a joyful occasion for him : On lap 23 , his close friend Piers Courage , with whom he had eaten dinner just the night before , died in a fiery crash . Rindt was heavily shaken by the loss of yet another fellow driver and contemplated retirement . 
 After the success of Zandvoort , Rindt gained confidence in the new Lotus 72 , describing it as " the best racing car that exists at the moment " . Yet , bad luck continued to follow him . During practice for the French Grand Prix , Rindt had opted to drop his new all @-@ enveloping Bell @-@ Star crash helmet , finding it too hot . He went back to using his open @-@ front helmet , only to be hit in the face by a stone from another car , causing a deep cut on his right cheek . Furthermore , he suffered a steering failure on his car . Furious over yet another mechanical problem , he stormed into the Lotus pits and yelled at Colin Chapman : " If this happens again and I survive , I will kill all of you ! " Still , Rindt was able to win the race , taking the lead in the championship . The next race was the British Grand Prix at Brands Hatch . Jacky Ickx established an early lead ahead of Brabham and Rindt , but when Ickx 's transmission failed , Rindt seized the opportunity to pass Brabham for the lead . Brabham was then able to regain the top spot on lap 69 as Rindt missed a gear and looked the certain winner , only to repeat his misfortune of Monaco : On the last lap , he ran out of fuel , allowing Rindt to take his third win in a row . His victory was cast into doubt however shortly after the race when Chief Scrutineer Cecil Mitchell found the rear aerofoil not at the regulated height . Rindt was provisionally disqualified , only to be reinstated as winner after three hours of deliberation . 
 The German Grand Prix was originally set to take place at its traditional venue , the Nürburgring . The Grand Prix Drivers ' Association ( GPDA ) , represented by Rindt and Graham Hill , demanded changes made to the circuit to increase safety , including Armco barriers along the entire 22 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 14 @.@ 2 mi ) of the Nordschleife . No agreement was reached and the Grand Prix moved to Hockenheim , where Rindt took his fourth victory in succession . The race was another classic two @-@ way fight , this time between Rindt and Ickx , who exchanged the lead several times . This meant that he could have secured the drivers ' title at his home event at the Austrian Grand Prix . To the delight of the crowd , he set the Lotus 72 on pole position , but retired from the race with an engine failure . The title decision was therefore postponed to the next race in Monza . 
 = = = = Death and legacy = = = = 
 The paddock next moved to the Italian Grand Prix at Monza , a track known for being very fast with cars often using the slipstream of drivers in front to achieve faster speeds . Because of this many teams opted to drop the rear wings mounted on the cars in order to increase their pace . Lotus and Rindt followed the lead of Stewart in the Tyrrell run March and Denny Hulme of McLaren in an attempt to reduce drag . The more powerful flat @-@ 12 Ferraris of Jacky Ickx and Clay Regazzoni had been up to 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) faster than the Lotus at the previous race in Austria . Rindt 's team mate John Miles was unhappy with the wingless setup in Friday practice , reporting that the car " wouldn 't run straight " . Rindt reported no such problems , and Chapman recalled that Rindt reported the car to be " almost 800 rpm faster on the straight " without wings . 
 On the following day , Rindt ran with higher gear ratios fitted to his car to take advantage of the reduced drag , increasing the car 's potential top speed to 205 mph ( 330 km / h ) . On his fifth lap , he crashed heavily at the approach to the Parabolica corner . Hulme , who was following Rindt at the time , described the accident as follows : 
 Jochen was following me for several laps and slowly catching me up and I didn 't go through the second Lesmo corner very quick so I pulled to the one side and let Jochen past me and then I followed him down into the Parabolica , [ ... ] we were going very fast and he waited until about the 200 metres to put on the brakes . The car just sort of went to the right and then it turned to the left and turned out to the right again and then suddenly just went very quickly left into the guardrail . 
 Upon impact , a joint in the crash barrier parted , the suspension dug in under the barrier , and the car hit a stanchion head @-@ on . The front end of the car was destroyed . Although the 28 @-@ year @-@ old Rindt was rushed to hospital , he was pronounced dead . Rindt was in the habit of using only four points on the five point harness then available and did not wear the crotch straps , as he wanted to be able to get out of the car quickly in the event of fire . As a result , upon impact he slid under the belts and suffered fatal throat injuries . Later investigations found that the accident was initiated by a failure of the car 's right front brake shaft , but that Rindt 's death was caused by poorly installed crash barriers . Rindt was pronounced dead on the way to hospital and Lotus withdrew all cars from the race , including the Lotus 72 entered by Rob Walker . The Grand Prix went ahead and Clay Regazzoni took his maiden victory , but celebrations were muted . Incidentally , Rindt was killed at the same spot at which his idol Wolfgang von Trips had died nine years earlier . There was a lengthy investigation into Rindt 's death in Italy , leading to a trial against Colin Chapman . However , he was cleared of all charges in 1976 . The destroyed Lotus 72 remained in Italy after the trial , going to a scrapyard near Monza . In 1985 , a real estate agent found the wreckage and bought it from the authorities , later trading it in 1993 for a Lola Formula 3 car . Since then , the car rests in a garage near Milan . 
 Rindt was buried at the central cemetery ( Zentralfriedhof ) in Graz on 11 September 1970 . At his funeral , Joakim Bonnier held the eulogy , saying : 
 To die doing something that you loved to do , is to die happy . And Jochen has the admiration and the respect of all of us . The only way you can admire and respect a great driver and friend . Regardless what happens in the remaining Grands Prix this year , to all of us , Jochen is the World Champion . 
 At the time he died Rindt had won five of that year 's ten Grands Prix , which meant that he had a strong lead in the Drivers ' Championship . After winning the next race in Canada , Jacky Ickx moved within 17 points of Rindt in the Championship , giving him a chance to win the title given he won the two remaining races . However , at the United States Grand Prix , a race won by Rindt 's replacement at Lotus , Emerson Fittipaldi , Ickx placed only fourth , making Rindt motor racing 's only posthumous world champion . The championship trophy was handed to his widow Nina from the hands of Jackie Stewart on 18 November 1970 in a ceremony near the Place de la Concorde in Paris . 
 The memory of Rindt was held up in many ways . The early season BARC 200 Formula Two race was renamed the Jochen Rindt Memorial Trophy for as long as the series existed . In 2000 , on the 30th anniversary of his death , the city of Graz unveiled a bronze plate in remembrance of Rindt , with wife Nina and daughter Natasha present . The penultimate corner at the Red Bull Ring in Austria is named after Rindt . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In March 1967 , Rindt married Nina Lincoln , a Finnish model and daughter of racing driver Curt Lincoln , whom he had raced against in the early part of his career . After becoming engaged , Lincoln had originally broken up with Rindt and sent the engagement ring back . Rindt then put it back into the box with a note telling her to keep it until she changed her mind , which she did upon receiving the package , later explaining : " I like men who know what they want . " The couple moved to Switzerland , near <unk> , where they built a house together . The <unk> had one daughter , Natasha , who was two years old at the time of her father 's death . Nina Rindt married two more times after Rindt 's death , first Philip Martyn , with whom she had another daughter , and then Alexander Hood , 4th Viscount Bridport , making her Lady Nina Hood Bridport . The couple had a son , Anthony . Their daughter Natasha later worked with Bernie Ecclestone for several years after he had taken over the commercial rights of Formula One . 
 Rindt had met Bernie Ecclestone during his time at Cooper and the two became friends . Noticing his commercial talent , Rindt allowed Ecclestone to manage his professional contracts , without ever officially employing him as a manager . Ecclestone said of the relationship : " I was never his manager , we were good friends . I helped him with any help he ever needed . " After Rindt 's accident , it was Ecclestone who carried his bloody helmet back to the pit lane . 
 In Formula One , Rindt had several friendly relationships with other drivers , most notably Jackie Stewart . The two first met at a Formula Two event in 1964 and soon became friends , often going on holiday together and living close to one another in Switzerland . Until his death , they were sometimes accompanied by Jim Clark . Rindt got involved in Stewart 's fight for increased safety in Formula One racing , being one of the leading figures of the GPDA . For his role in the safety campaign , Rindt was antagonised by fellow drivers and the press alike , with reporters <unk> calling Stewart , Rindt and Joakim Bonnier the " Geneva connection " , due to their residence in Switzerland . Stewart said that it took Rindt some time to understand the <unk> of the situation but after that , he was a " good ally " . After Rindt 's death , his wife Nina stayed close with the Stewarts and can be seen visiting them at the 1971 Monaco Grand Prix in the Roman Polanski produced film Weekend of a Champion . 
 Privately , Rindt was known to family and friends as an often reckless driver when on public roads . During the early years of his career , he would take his Jaguar E @-@ Type out to the streets of Vienna , where he lived , and drift through the streets . He sparked public criticism in 1968 when he flipped over a Mini Cooper during a demonstration run at an <unk> event in <unk> , while his then pregnant wife was on board . 
 His success in racing highly popularised motorsport in Austria , with Helmut <unk> calling him " the driving instructor of the nation " . In 1965 , Rindt put together the first exhibition of racing cars in Austria , the Jochen @-@ Rindt @-@ Show in Vienna . It was an immediate success , with 30 @,@ 000 visitors on the first weekend alone . Using his connections , he brought in his friend Joakim Bonnier and former Mercedes Grand Prix manager Alfred Neubauer as opening speakers , with other drivers such as Jackie Stewart attending . The show soon became an annual event and later moved to the German city of Essen in 1970 , shortly after Rindt 's death , and remains there as the Essen Motor Show . Rindt , with the help of Ecclestone , was able to successfully promote himself , including lucrative sponsorship and advertising contracts . Following his ascent in racing , two race tracks were built in Austria , the <unk> ( now Red Bull Ring ) , for whom Rindt worked as a consultant , and the <unk> . Rindt 's popularity was further increased through the TV show Motorama , which he hosted . The monthly programme focussed on both tips for driving on public roads as well as reports from Grands Prix , with Rindt interviewing fellow drivers himself . 
 = = Racing record = = 
 = = = Complete Formula One World Championship results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ; races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = = = Non @-@ Championship Formula One results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ) ( Races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = = = Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results = = = 
 = = = Complete Indianapolis 500 results = = = 
 = = = Film sources = = = 
 Reuß , Eberhard ( Director ) ( 2010 ) . Jochen <unk> <unk> Sommer [ Jochen Rindt 's Last Summer ] ( Documentary ) ( in German ) . SWR . 
 <unk> , Christian ( Director ) ( 2010 ) . Jochen Rindt <unk> [ Jochen Rindt Lives ] ( Documentary ) ( in German ) . <unk> . 
 = Kevin Bieksa = 
 Kevin Francesco Bieksa ( born June 16 , 1981 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman for the Anaheim Ducks of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . After a three @-@ year career in the Ontario Junior Hockey League ( OPJHL ) with the Burlington Cougars , Bieksa was awarded a scholarship to Bowling Green State University . He was a one @-@ time All @-@ CCHA honourable mention during his four @-@ year tenure with the Falcons of the Central Collegiate Hockey Association ( CCHA ) . He graduated from the university with a bachelor 's degree ( B.A. ) in finance , and was a two @-@ time CCHA All @-@ Academic honourable mention in 2003 and 2004 . 
 Following his freshman year , Bieksa was selected 151st overall by the Canucks in the 2001 NHL Entry Draft and joined their minor league affiliate , the Manitoba Moose of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , upon graduating . He earned AHL All @-@ Rookie Team honours in his first and only full season with the Moose , before joining the Canucks as a regular member in 2005 – 06 . He is known as a physical and aggressive defenceman . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Minor hockey = = = 
 Bieksa grew up in Grimsby playing minor hockey for the local Jr . Kings program of the OMHA 's Niagara District BB @-@ E league before graduating to the Stoney Creek Warriors of the OMHA South Central AAA League . He played part of the 1997 – 98 season with the Stoney Creek Warriors of the OHA Golden Horseshoe <unk> and the <unk> Burlington Cougars before being drafted by Don Cherry and the Mississauga IceDogs in the 19th round of the 1998 OHL Draft . Bieksa wasn 't signed by the Ice Dogs and pursued an NCAA scholarship three years later . 
 = = = Junior and university = = = 
 Bieksa began a three @-@ year Junior A career with the Burlington Cougars of the Ontario Junior Hockey League ( OJHL ) in 1997 – 98 . He recorded 37 points over 48 games in his second season with the Cougars and 33 points in his third . Bieksa was drafted into the major junior Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) by the Mississauga IceDogs , but opted to play college hockey in the NCAA instead . 
 In 2000 – 01 , Bieksa joined the Bowling Green Falcons of the Central Collegiate Hockey Association ( CCHA ) . After a 13 @-@ point regular season in 35 games as a freshman , he helped the Falcons become the lowest @-@ seeded team in League history ( ninth ) to advance to the CCHA semifinals . He scored his team 's lone goal in a 2 – 1 defeat to Michigan State University before the Falcons were eliminated . 
 In the 2001 off @-@ season , Bieksa was drafted by the Vancouver Canucks with the 151st pick in the 2001 NHL Entry Draft . He returned to Bowling Green to complete his four @-@ year college career after being drafted , recording 15 points in 2001 – 02 . Bieksa was named an alternate captain to D 'Arcy <unk> prior to his third season and subsequently improved to a college career @-@ high eight goals and 25 points in 2002 – 03 . Bieksa was chosen by Falcons fans as the recipient of the W. G. Grinder 's Grinder Award and was a co @-@ recipient of the team 's Jim Ruehl Award as the best defensive player with Jordan <unk> . He was also given his first of two consecutive honourable mentions as a CCHA All @-@ Academic . 
 Playing in his fourth and final college season in 2003 – 04 , he scored seven goals and 22 points in 38 games , while leading his team in shots on goal . He earned an honourable mention to the All @-@ CCHA Team and received the Falcons ' Howard Brown Award as the coaches ' selection for best player . 
 = = = Manitoba Moose = = = 
 Following his college career , Bieksa signed an amateur tryout contract with the Manitoba Moose , the Canucks ' American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , on March 24 , 2004 . During his tryout , he was involved in an off @-@ ice incident with teammate Fedor Fedorov . According to then @-@ Canucks General Manager Brian Burke , several Moose players had gone out together when Bieksa accidentally spilled Fedorov 's beer . While Bieksa apologized and offered to buy him another beer , Fedorov challenged him to a fight outside of the establishment , resulting in Bieksa knocking him down with one punch . In recounting the story , Burke has recalled wanting to sign him the next day upon hearing of the incident . Bieksa went on to appear in four games with the Moose to close out the 2003 – 04 season , notching two assists . He remained with the Moose in 2004 – 05 and scored his first professional goal on the powerplay in a 3 – 2 shootout victory against the Cleveland Barons on November 11 , 2004 . Bieksa finished his first full professional season with 12 goals and 39 points in 80 games . He was chosen as the AHL Rookie of the Month for March after recording two goals , 11 points and a + 11 rating in 13 games and was named to the AHL All @-@ Rookie Team after his first full professional season . His 39 points broke Kirill Koltsov 's team mark of 32 for points by a defenceman , set the previous season . Canucks Assistant General Manager Steve Tambellini lauded Bieksa for his quick adjustment and development from college hockey to the AHL . During the campaign , he was given the nickname " Juice " by Moose goaltender Alex Auld , a moniker that continued into his NHL career with the Canucks . Bieksa described the origin of the nickname as a " funny story that 's been escalated to the point where it 's bigger than it should be " and was based around him " drinking juice . " 
 Bieksa entered the Canucks ' 2005 – 06 training camp as a projected competitor to be the team 's sixth defenceman . However , three days into prospects camp , he suffered a high ankle sprain after colliding into the boards with another defenceman . He was reassigned to the Moose on October 3 , 2005 , and missed the first month and a half of the 2005 – 06 season . While sidelined , Bieksa was named an alternate captain to Mike Keane by Moose Head Coach Alain Vigneault on October 29 . He made his return to the lineup on November 11 against the Rochester Americans . In his second game back , he notched two goals and an assist on November 15 against the Grand Rapids Griffins in a 6 – 5 shootout loss . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks = = = 
 With 16 points through 20 games with the Moose , Bieksa was called up by the Canucks and played his first NHL game on December 19 , 2005 , against the Los Angeles Kings . He was called for a roughing penalty ten seconds into his first shift and played 10 minutes and 45 seconds total in a 4 – 3 shootout loss to the Kings . The following month , he notched his first NHL point , an assist to Markus Näslund , in a 3 – 2 win against the Chicago Blackhawks on January 5 , 2006 . He remained with the Canucks until near the end of the season , as he was reassigned to the Moose on April 8 to make room for the return of Ed Jovanovski from injury . Bieksa finished the season with six assists in 39 games for the Canucks , averaging 16 minutes of ice @-@ time per game . On August 17 , 2006 , he was re @-@ signed by the Canucks to a two @-@ year , one @-@ way , $ 1 @.@ 05 million contract . 
 Early in the 2006 – 07 season , he scored his first NHL goal on October 13 , 2006 , against Vesa Toskala in a loss to the San Jose Sharks . Bieksa rapidly developed into one of the Canucks ' top blueliners and finished the season leading all team defencemen with 30 assists , 42 points and 134 penalty minutes , while also tallying a career @-@ high 12 goals . Paired with stay @-@ at @-@ home defenceman Willie Mitchell , he was also regularly given a shutdown role against opposing teams ' top forwards . At the end of his first full NHL season , he was awarded the Canucks ' Babe Pratt Trophy as best defenceman and Fred J. Hume Award as the unsung hero . Bieksa went pointless over nine games in his first Stanley Cup playoffs in 2007 . He suffered two stomach oblique muscle tears during Game 6 of the opening round against the Dallas Stars , sidelining him for five games , before the Canucks were eliminated by the Anaheim Ducks in the second round . 
 The Canucks acknowledged Bieksa 's breakout season , signing him to a three @-@ year , $ 11 @.@ 25 million contract extension , on July 9 , 2007 . The first year of the deal , in 2008 – 09 , saw Bieksa make $ 4 @.@ 25 million , while the remaining two years were set at $ 3 @.@ 5 million . He had one more season left on his original contract at $ 550 @,@ 000 . 
 A relative unknown in his first couple of seasons in the NHL , his last name , which is pronounced phonetically ( Bee @-@ ek @-@ sa ) , was frequently mispronounced by sports newscasters and hockey broadcasters such as Bob Cole and Harry Neale of Hockey Night in Canada . It has even been misspelled on scoreboards . 
 A month into the 2007 – 08 season , Bieksa suffered a severe calf laceration in a game against the Nashville Predators on November 1 , 2007 . After battling with forward Vernon Fiddler against the boards , Fiddler 's skate slashed Bieksa across the back of his right calf . Bieksa was helped to the bench , leaving a trail of blood behind him on the ice . Although originally expected to miss two months , he ended up missing more than half the season with 47 games . Before returning to the lineup , he was assigned to the Moose for a one @-@ game conditioning stint . Bieksa managed 12 points in 34 games with a team @-@ worst – 11 rating . 
 He continued rehabilitating his calf in the off @-@ season , after the Canucks failed to qualify for the playoffs , admitting that his leg had not fully recovered upon his return . However , injury troubles continued early in 2008 – 09 , as just two games into the season , Bieksa injured his knee while attempting to hit Wayne Primeau in an October 11 , 2008 , game against the Calgary Flames ; he was out of the lineup for a week . On November 4 , he was re @-@ injured after taking a puck off his skate against the Nashville Predators . Bieksa played through the injury for two games before learning that he had suffered a bone fracture in his left foot . He returned to the lineup after missing seven games . Despite missing ten games in total , Bieksa established a career @-@ high 32 assists and 43 points , first among team defencemen . 
 Without a no @-@ trade clause in his contract with the Canucks and seen as an emerging offensive defencemen throughout the NHL , Bieksa was routinely the subject of trade rumours . In the 2009 off @-@ season , one such trade rumour was central in a feud between general managers Mike Gillis of Vancouver and Brian Burke of the Toronto Maple Leafs . On a Leafs TV documentary on the 2009 NHL Entry Draft that aired in September 2009 , a segment involves Burke speculating that the Canucks had offered Bieksa to the Tampa Bay Lightning in a package that included forward Alexandre Burrows and a first @-@ round draft @-@ choice in exchange for Tampa Bay 's second @-@ overall selection . The documentary was immediately pulled from airing again and the Maple Leafs received a warning from the League . 
 Bieksa suffered the second serious cut to his leg in three seasons in 2009 – 10 . During a game against the Phoenix Coyotes on December 29 , 2009 , he bodychecked opposing forward Petr <unk> , whose skate cut into his left leg , above the ankle . It was revealed six days later that Bieksa sustained severed tendons in his ankle . He was sidelined for three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months , missing 27 games . The injury marked the second time in three years that he missed significant time due to a skate cut on his leg . As a result , he was limited to 55 games , notching three goals and 22 points . On the last game of the regular season , he scored his first two @-@ goal game in the NHL in a 7 – 3 win against the Calgary Flames on April 10 , 2010 . Playing the sixth @-@ seeded Los Angeles Kings in the opening round of the 2010 playoffs , Bieksa scored his first NHL post @-@ season goal in the series ' sixth and deciding game . His goal against Kings goaltender Jonathan Quick tied the score at 2 – 2 in the third period , en route to a 4 – 2 Canucks win . The Canucks were then eliminated by the Chicago Blackhawks the following round for the second consecutive year . Bieksa finished the playoffs with three goals and eight points in 12 games to lead team defencemen in scoring . 
 Following the defensive acquisitions of Keith Ballard and Dan Hamhuis in the off @-@ season , Bieksa was once again involved in trade rumours . Despite being several million dollars over the salary cap , General Manager Mike Gillis asserted after signing Hamhuis that the Canucks were " keeping Bieksa . " Regardless , in order to get under the salary cap , Bieksa seemed the strongest candidate to be traded . He was among six defencemen with a salary over $ 3 million , was set to become an unrestricted free agent after the subsequent season , had seemingly fallen out of favour with Head Coach Alain Vigneault and did not have a no @-@ trade clause in his contract . On a July 2010 airing of TSN 's Off the Record , Bieksa conceded that he expected to be shopped around by the Canucks , stating " I can put two and two together . The Province newspaper at one time reported that up to 10 teams were in talks with Vancouver for acquiring Bieksa . The situation changed later in July after Canucks defenceman Sami Salo suffered a torn achilles tendon while playing floorball in his native Finland ; the injury put the Canucks back under the salary cap and speculation about a Bieksa trade quieted . 
 During the 2010 – 11 season , Bieksa 's offensive production decreased , but he was lauded by the media and Head Coach Alain Vigneault for improving his defensive game . He had often been criticized in the past for making high @-@ risk plays that resulted in scoring chances for the opposing team , but his play improved to become more responsible in the defensive zone . In February 2011 , he suffered a fractured bone in his foot . Playing in a game against the Minnesota Wild , Bieksa sustained the injury while blocking a shot . While he finished the game and initial x @-@ rays came back negative , a subsequent CT @-@ scan revealed the fracture . He became the sixth Canucks defenceman injured at the time . After missing 15 games , he returned to the lineup in late @-@ March . Playing on a shutdown defensive pairing with Dan Hamhuis , his season @-@ ending + 32 plus @-@ minus established a personal best by 31 points ( his previous career @-@ high was a + 1 in 2006 – 07 ) and ranked second in the NHL , one point behind Boston Bruins defenceman Zdeno Chára . Complementing his strong defensive play , he recorded six goals and 22 points in 66 games . 
 With the Canucks winning the Presidents ' Trophy for the first time in franchise history , the team entered the 2011 playoffs as the first seed in the West . After helping Vancouver advance past the Chicago Blackhawks and Nashville Predators in the first two rounds , Bieksa scored a double @-@ overtime winner in Game 5 of the third round against the San Jose Sharks to send the Canucks to the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time since 1994 . The goal came after fellow Canucks defenceman Alexander Edler 's dump @-@ in had bounced off a stanchion along the boards . With Sharks goaltender Antti Niemi unaware of the puck 's location , Bieksa took a slapshot from the blueline to win the game . Facing the Boston Bruins in the Finals , the Canucks were defeated in seven games . Bieksa finished the playoffs with 10 points over 25 games . His five goals led all playoff defencemen , while his average ice time of 25 minutes and 40 seconds per game was first among Canucks players . It was revealed after the Canucks ' elimination that several players had been playing with injuries , including Bieksa , who had suffered a bruised medial collateral ligament . 
 Having played the final year of his existing contract , Bieksa addressed his pending unrestricted free agency by telling the media he was ready to re @-@ sign for less than market value in order to remain with the Canucks . Shortly thereafter , on June 27 , 2011 , Bieksa signed a five @-@ year , $ 23 million contract extension . The deal came with a no @-@ trade clause and was reported to be front @-@ loaded , with Bieksa making $ 7 million in his first year , followed by $ 4 @.@ 5 million , $ 5 million , $ 4 million and $ 2 @.@ 5 million annual salaries . 
 = = = Anaheim Ducks = = = 
 On June 30 , 2015 , the Vancouver Canucks traded Bieksa to the Anaheim Ducks in exchange for a second @-@ round pick in the 2016 NHL Entry Draft . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Bieksa is known as a two @-@ way defenceman with the Canucks , capable of playing in all situations . Throughout his NHL career , he has been placed on shutdown pairing with such defensive partners as Willie Mitchell and Dan Hamhuis . Offensively , he regularly jumps into the rush and has led the Canucks in defensive scoring in 2006 – 07 and 2008 – 09 . His play is characterized by aggressive and competitive components . He also earned a reputation as a fighter early in his career in the AHL . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bieksa was born in Grimsby , Ontario , on June 16 , 1981 , to Al Bieksa and Angela Lombardo . He has two brothers , Marty and Bryan , two stepsisters , Terri Lynn and Jennifer , and a stepmother , Lori . His father works in the Ontario Federation of Labour and coached his three sons during minor hockey . Bieksa began playing minor hockey in Grimsby before joining AAA teams from Stoney Creek , Ontario . After attending Blessed Trinity Secondary School in his hometown , he graduated from Bowling Green State University in 2004 with a bachelor 's degree in finance and a 3 @.@ 42 grade point average ( GPA ) . 
 During Bieksa 's tenure with both the Manitoba Moose and Vancouver Canucks , he became close friends with teammate Rick Rypien , who committed suicide in August 2011 after years of clinical depression . Bieksa was the first Canucks teammate that Rypien confided in regarding his mental health ; when Rypien took his first personal leave of absence from the Canucks in the 2008 – 09 NHL season , Bieksa took him into his home to live with his family . Having a close relationship with Rypien , Bieksa was involved in many of the ceremonies following his death . He was a pall bearer for Rypien 's casket at his funeral in Alberta and he later presented Rypien 's family with one of the forward 's game @-@ worn Canucks jerseys during the team 's pre @-@ game ceremony in Rypien 's honour in October 2011 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = CCHA = = = 
 = = = Bowling Green Falcons team awards = = = 
 = = = AHL = = = 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks team awards = = = 
 = = Records = = 
 Manitoba Moose franchise record ; most points by a rookie defenceman - 39 in 2004 – 05 ( surpassed Kirill Koltsov , 32 in 2003 – 04 ) 
 = Thomas Ellison = 
 Thomas Rangiwahia Ellison , also known as Tom Ellison or <unk> <unk> ( c . 1867 – 2 October 1904 ) was a New Zealand rugby union player and lawyer . He led the first New Zealand representative rugby team organised by the New Zealand Rugby Football Union ( NZRFU ) on their 1893 tour of Australia . Ellison also played in the 1888 – 89 New Zealand Native football team on their epic 107 @-@ match tour , scoring 113 points , and 43 tries with the side . 
 Born in Otakou , Otago Heads , Ellison was educated at Te Aute College , where he was introduced to rugby . After moving to Wellington , Ellison played for the Poneke Football Club , and was selected to play for Wellington province . He was recruited into Joe Warbrick 's privately organised Native football team in 1888 , and continued to play for both Poneke and Wellington on his return from that tour . In 1892 , he started to refine and popularise the wing @-@ forward system of play , which was a vital element of New Zealand rugby 's success until 1932 . At the first NZRFU annual general meeting in 1893 , he proposed that the playing colours of the New Zealand side should be predominantly black with a silver fern — a playing strip that would give the team their famous name of All Blacks . He retired from playing rugby after captaining the 1893 New Zealand side to New South Wales and Queensland , but continued in the sport as a coach and administrator . Ellison was the author of a coaching manual , The Art of Rugby Football , published in 1902 . 
 As well as being one of the first Māori admitted to the bar , practising as a solicitor , and later as a barrister , Ellison also stood unsuccessfully for the Southern Maori parliamentary seat several times . After contracting tuberculosis in 1904 , he was briefly institutionalised before dying later that year . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas Rangiwahia Ellison was born in Otakou at Otago Heads , to <unk> <unk> Ellison and Nani Weller , sometime between 1866 and 1868 . He was named after his paternal grandfather , and his middle name , Rangiwahia , was given in honour of his great @-@ uncle . Ellison was Māori : of Ngāi Tahu and <unk> Mamoe tribal heritage through his mother , and of Te <unk> Awa heritage through his father . Introduced to rugby at the age of around 14 by his cousins at Otakou , Ellison later wrote of his first game : 
 ... we were all there for a game , and immediately started on that poor , unprotected ball ( which , by the way , consisted of the bladder only ) . What our main object was I cannot say , but mine was to see more of that ball , and to know more about football , and , before the game was over , which did not last long , I did see more of the ball , as I ripped it in the first scrum ; but my other object remained unsatisfied . 
 After completing his education at Otakou Native School , Ellison was awarded a scholarship in 1882 to attend the famous Māori secondary school Te Aute College in the Hawke 's Bay . He started playing organised rugby there , and during his final two years played in the school team that won the Hawke 's Bay senior club championship . Later in life Ellison claimed that at Te Aute he learned , " nearly all I ever knew of forward play " . 
 After moving to Wellington , Ellison joined the Poneke Football Club in 1885 . The Poneke team played junior club rugby at the time , but were promoted to the senior competition after winning all their matches that year . Following their promotion the side won the Wellington club championship each year from 1886 to 1889 . Ellison was selected to play for the Wellington provincial team in 1885 , and continued to be selected for Wellington until 1892 . He eventually earned 23 caps — a large number for the time . Initially Ellison played as a forward or on the wing , but later played half @-@ back . 
 = = New Zealand Native football team = = 
 In early 1888 Joe Warbrick attempted to organise a private party of Māori players to tour Great Britain — later known as the New Zealand Native football team . A cousin of Ellison 's , Jack Taiaroa , who had toured with the New Zealand team that travelled to New South Wales in 1884 , helped Warbrick recruit players for his proposed tour . It was most likely because of Taiaroa that Ellison was persuaded to join Warbrick 's Natives team . Warbrick eventually assembled a side that included both Māori and non @-@ Māori New Zealand @-@ born players , and several players born overseas . The final team consisted of 26 players , and toured New Zealand before departing to Melbourne . They then toured Great Britain , Australia , and finally New Zealand again — the trip lasted 14 months . Ellison played mostly as a forward throughout the tour , and played at least 83 of the team 's 107 matches ; including a minimum of 58 in Britain . 
 Ellison played all of the Natives ' three internationals — against Ireland , Wales , and England . The Ireland match was the first international of the tour , two months after their arrival in the British Isles . The fixture was played at Lansdowne Road , Dublin , on 1 December 1888 , with Ellison in the forwards . Ireland led 3 – 0 at half @-@ time , but the Natives improved considerably in the second @-@ half , scoring four tries . The third try scored was by Ellison after a counter @-@ attack by George Williams . The try was not converted , but the strong finish from the New Zealanders gave the team a 13 – 4 victory . The Irish press were surprised by the loss and strongly criticised their team , but Ireland went on to defeat Wales later that season . The match against Wales was later that month , 22 December , in Swansea . Again Ellison played in the forwards , and the Natives dominated for significant periods of the match . Ellison made several strong runs , and at one point crossed the try @-@ line only to be carried back into play . They failed to score , however , and Wales were victorious 5 – 0 ( one conversion and two tries to nil ) . 
 One of the most notable events of the Natives ' tour occurred during the match against England at Blackheath . Owing to a dispute over the formation of the International Rugby Football Board , England had not played an international in nearly two years . This contributed to at least twelve of their team lacking international experience — however many of their players were from strong club and county sides . The match was notable for a dispute between the New Zealanders and the match referee — Rowland Hill . Early in the second half Ellison attempted to tackle the English player Andrew Stoddart , and in the process managed to rip his shorts off . The Natives ' players promptly formed a circle around Stoddart to allow him to replace his clothing without being exposed to the gazes of the crowd . While this was happening one of the English players , Frank Evershed , picked up the ball and scored a try . The New Zealanders protested , believing that play had stopped after claiming Stoddart had called " dead ball " . Hill awarded the try however , causing several of the Native players to leave the field in protest . The aggrieved players were eventually persuaded to return , but not before Hill had restarted play . Ellison was very critical of Hill ; particularly because Hill was also Secretary of England 's Rugby Football Union . Writing after the tour , Ellison said of the incident : " gross as these errors were , they were insignificant when compared with another that Mr Hill committed at the outset of the game , viz , refereeing at all in that game " . 
 The team was generally very well received outside London , and especially in north , where rugby was dominated by the working @-@ class . Reaction to the team in the south , where the public school establishment controlled the game , was less positive , and the sportsmanship of the team was criticised . Despite this , Ellison clearly enjoyed the experience of touring with the team , and in 1902 he wrote — " I shall never forget the trip , notwithstanding the extremely heavy programme of fixtures we had to go through . Perhaps the most delightful part of our experiences was tasted not so much on the field of play as off it " . 
 Thomas Eyton , one of the promoters of the tour , said of Ellison 's contribution — " His knowledge of the finer points of the game , his weight , strength and activity rendered his services invaluable . " Ellison participated in most of the Natives ' matches , scoring 113 points , and 43 tries on tour ; this included 23 tries in Britain and Ireland , four in New South Wales , five in Queensland , and ten in New Zealand . 
 = = Wing @-@ forward = = 
 After completion of the tour , Ellison continued to play for Poneke and Wellington . While playing with his club , Ellison implemented the use of a wing @-@ forward and seven @-@ man scrum positional system . It is not known exactly who invented the position of wing @-@ forward , but Ellison claimed in The Art of Rugby Football that he had developed it ; historian Greg Ryan claims the position was developed in northern England , and that Ellison only refined it after discovering it during the Natives ' tour . The distinctive feature of wing @-@ forward play was their role of feeding the ball into the scrum , and subsequently holding onto one of the hookers while the ball progressed through the scrum to the half @-@ back . With the wing @-@ forward bound to the side of the scrum , the opposing half @-@ back would then have to manoeuvre past them to tackle the player with the ball ; this would increase the amount of time the half @-@ back would have in possession of the ball before their opposite could tackle them . Ellison claimed that he devised the position while playing for Poneke after he " ... found it impossible for the smartest of referees to detect and amply penalize off @-@ side interferences of opponents bent on spoiling my passes ... " . 
 Regardless of the origins of the position , Ellison was instrumental in promoting its adoption throughout New Zealand . Although it is unclear whether the wing @-@ forward was used during the 1893 tour of Australia , by the time of the All Blacks ' first Test match , played during their 1903 Australian tour , the position was engrained within the New Zealand style of play . The use of a wing @-@ forward provoked controversy both in New Zealand , and later in the British Isles after the All Blacks toured there in 1905 ; wing @-@ forwards were often accused of off @-@ side obstruction of the opposition half @-@ back . According to Ellison however , if the position was implemented properly , then there would be no cause for complaint . The wing @-@ forward continued as a vital component of New Zealand rugby until long @-@ standing complaints from the unions of the Home Nations resulted in the position being outlawed by the International Rugby Football Board in 1932 . 
 = = Later rugby career = = 
 In 1892 , the New Zealand Rugby Football Union ( NZRFU — later renamed New Zealand Rugby Union ) was formed by the majority of New Zealand 's provincial rugby unions . Ellison was a Wellington provincial administrator , and in 1893 at the inaugural NZRFU annual general meeting proposed the playing strip for the first officially sanctioned New Zealand side — black cap , black jersey with white fern , white knickerbockers and black stockings . The white knickerbockers were eventually replaced with black shorts , and the uniform itself was based upon that worn by the Native team Ellison had toured with . The black uniform inspired the moniker All Blacks — a name which has been adopted by the New Zealand national team since their 1905 – 06 Northern Hemisphere tour . 
 The first NZRFU sanctioned New Zealand team was formed to tour New South Wales and Queensland in 1893 , and Ellison was selected as their captain . Three other members of the New Zealand Natives ' team were also selected for the side . Ellison played seven matches on the tour , including matches against New South Wales and Queensland . The team won ten of their eleven matches — the one loss being to New South Wales in Sydney . In addition to scoring two tries , Ellison kicked six conversions and a goal from a mark to give him 23 points for the tour — the second highest of any player . The tour was the end of his participation in the sport as a player . 
 Ellison 's complete playing record comprised 117 matches , 68 of which were first @-@ class games . He scored a total of 160 career points , including 51 tries . Ellison continued involvement with rugby as a provincial administrator , provincial referee , and manager . As an administrator , he proposed that players be financially compensated for wages missed while on long tours ; this was in 1898 — nearly a century before rugby relinquished its amateur status . This proposal applied specifically to tours that travelled outside New Zealand ; writing at the time regarding the amateur regulations , Ellison said " I think that these laws were never intended to apply to extended tours abroad . " In 1902 he published The Art of Rugby Football , a coaching manual on rugby that also included accounts of his experiences as a player . According to journalist Hayden Meikle the book was one of rugby 's " pioneering texts " , while Greg Ryan wrote that the book " remains a classic work on early rugby strategy . " 
 = = Professional and personal life = = 
 Outside of his involvement in rugby , Ellison was a lawyer , and was one of the first Māori admitted to the bar . He practised as an interpreter for the Land Courts and as a solicitor ; later , he worked as a barrister in the practices of Brandon & Hislop in <unk> . Ellison was also involved in politics , and stood unsuccessfully for the Southern Maori parliamentary seat several times against Tame Parata , as well as working for government consideration of Ngāi Tahu land claims . He married Ethel May Howell , a daughter of John Howell , on 22 March 1899 ; the couple had three children , only one of whom survived infancy , daughter <unk> who died in 1989 . In 1904 Ellison was struck down with tuberculosis , and was admitted to Porirua Lunatic Asylum before dying on 2 October that same year . Ellison was buried in Otakou , Otago Heads , following the original plan of a burial at Karori . Representatives of Ellison 's parents intercepted the body in Porirua , and his wife and Public Trustee then agreed for him to be buried at Otakou . There his gravestone reads " One of the greatest rugby footballers New Zealand ever possessed " . 
 Ellison 's influence on New Zealand rugby is such that Māori researcher Malcolm Mulholland stated he was " arguably the player who contributed the most to New Zealand rugby " . In 1916 , when discussing the question of the greatest player New Zealand had produced , the pseudonymous " <unk> " wrote : " I am prepared to say that the late T. R. Ellison ... was the greatest of them all . " He went on to say : 
 When occasion demanded , T R. Ellison could take a place among the backs — half or three @-@ quarter — and was a fine coach . He could not only plan out great , deep , wily , and pretty schemes , but personally carry them through to triumphant execution . He could take his place in the front of a <unk> , and hook the ball with the best of them ; his tremendous strength enabled him to burst through a pack , and then , when he was clear of the wreckage , and was well in the open , he was a perfect demon . 
 Ellison has been inducted into the Māori Sports Hall of Fame , and in 2005 was listed as one of New Zealand 's Top 100 History Makers . The New Zealand Native Football team was inducted into the International Rugby Board Hall of Fame in 2008 , the first side awarded the honour . 
 = = = Books and articles = = = 
 = = = News = = = 
 = = = Web = = = 
 = Joyce Kilmer = 
 Joyce Kilmer ( born as Alfred Joyce Kilmer ; December 6 , 1886 – July 30 , 1918 ) was an American writer and poet mainly remembered for a short poem titled " Trees " ( 1913 ) , which was published in the collection Trees and Other Poems in 1914 . Though a prolific poet whose works celebrated the common beauty of the natural world as well as his Roman Catholic religious faith , Kilmer was also a journalist , literary critic , lecturer , and editor . While most of his works are largely unknown , a select few of his poems remain popular and are published frequently in anthologies . Several critics — including both Kilmer 's contemporaries and modern scholars — have disparaged Kilmer 's work as being too simple and overly sentimental , and suggested that his style was far too traditional , even archaic . Many writers , including notably Ogden Nash , have parodied Kilmer 's work and style — as attested by the many parodies of " Trees " . 
 At the time of his deployment to Europe during World War I , Kilmer was considered the leading American Roman Catholic poet and lecturer of his generation , whom critics often compared to British contemporaries G. K. Chesterton ( 1874 – 1936 ) and Hilaire Belloc ( 1870 – 1953 ) . He enlisted in the New York National Guard and was deployed to France with the 69th Infantry Regiment ( the famous " Fighting 69th " ) in 1917 . He was killed by a sniper 's bullet at the Second Battle of the Marne in 1918 at the age of 31 . He was married to Aline Murray , also an accomplished poet and author , with whom he had five children . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years and education : 1886 – 1908 = = = 
 Kilmer was born December 6 , 1886 in New Brunswick , New Jersey , the fourth and youngest child , of Annie Ellen Kilburn ( 1849 – 1932 ) , a minor writer and composer , and Dr. Frederick Barnett Kilmer ( 1851 – 1934 ) , a physician and analytical chemist employed by the Johnson and Johnson Company and inventor of the company 's baby powder . He was named Alfred Joyce Kilmer after two priests at Christ Church in New Brunswick : Alfred R. Taylor , the curate ; and the Rev. Dr. Elisha Brooks Joyce ( 1857 – 1926 ) , the rector . Christ Church is the oldest Episcopal parish in New Brunswick and the Kilmer family were parishioners . Rector Joyce , who served the parish from 1883 to 1916 , baptised the young Kilmer , who remained an Episcopalian until his 1913 conversion to Catholicism . Kilmer 's birthplace in New Brunswick , where the Kilmer family lived from 1886 to 1892 , is still standing , and houses a small museum to Kilmer , as well as a few Middlesex County government offices . 
 Kilmer entered Rutgers College Grammar School ( now Rutgers Preparatory School ) in 1895 at the age of 8 . During his years at the Grammar School , Kilmer was editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the school 's paper , the Argo , and loved the classics but had difficulty with Greek . He won the first Lane Classical Prize , for oratory , and obtained a scholarship to Rutgers College which he would attend the following year . Despite his difficulties with Greek and mathematics , he stood at the head of his class in preparatory school . 
 After graduating from Rutgers College Grammar School in 1904 , he continued his education at Rutgers College ( now Rutgers University ) from 1904 to 1906 . At Rutgers , Kilmer was associate editor of the <unk> , the campus newspaper , and a member of the Delta Upsilon fraternity . However , he was unable to complete the curriculum 's rigorous mathematics requirement and was asked to repeat his sophomore year . Under pressure from his mother , Kilmer transferred to Columbia University in New York City . 
 At Columbia , Kilmer was vice @-@ president of the Philolexian Society ( a literary society ) , associate editor of Columbia Spectator ( the campus newspaper ) , and member of the Debating Union . He completed his Bachelor of Arts ( A.B. ) degree and graduated from Columbia on May 23 , 1908 . Shortly after graduation , on June 9 , 1908 , he married Aline Murray ( 1888 – 1941 ) , a fellow poet to whom he had been engaged since his sophomore year at Rutgers . The Kilmers had five children : Kenton Sinclair Kilmer ( 1909 – 1995 ) ; Michael Barry Kilmer ( 1916 – 1927 ) ; Deborah ( " Sister Michael " ) Clanton Kilmer ( 1914 – 1999 ) who was a Catholic nun at the Saint Benedict ’ s Monastery ; Rose Kilburn Kilmer ( 1912 – 1917 ) ; and Christopher Kilmer ( 1917 – 1984 ) . 
 = = = Years of writing and faith : 1909 – 1917 = = = 
 In the autumn of 1908 , Kilmer was employed teaching Latin at Morristown High School in Morristown , New Jersey . At this time , he began to submit essays to Red Cross Notes ( including his first published piece , an essay on the " Psychology of Advertising " ) and his early poems to literary periodicals . Kilmer also wrote book reviews for The Literary Digest , Town & Country , The Nation , and The New York Times . By June 1909 , Kilmer had abandoned any aspirations to continue teaching and relocated to New York City , where he focused solely on developing a career as a writer . 
 From 1909 to 1912 , Kilmer was employed by Funk and Wagnalls , which was preparing an edition of The Standard Dictionary that would be published in 1912 . According to Hillis , Kilmer 's job " was to define ordinary words assigned to him at five cents for each word defined . This was a job at which one would ordinarily earn ten to twelve dollars a week , but Kilmer attacked the task with such vigor and speed that it was soon thought wisest to put him on a regular salary . " 
 In 1911 , Kilmer 's first book of verse was published , entitled Summer of Love . Kilmer would later write that " ... some of the poems in it , those inspired by genuine love , are not things of which to be ashamed , and you , understanding , would not be offended by the others . " 
 In 1912 , Kilmer became a special writer for the New York Times Review of Books and the New York Times Sunday Magazine and was often engaged in lecturing . He moved to Mahwah , New Jersey , where he resided until his service and death in World War I. By this time he had become established as a published poet and as a popular lecturer . According to Robert Holliday , Kilmer " frequently neglected to make any preparation for his speeches , not even choosing a subject until the beginning of the dinner which was to culminate in a specimen of his oratory . His constant research for the dictionary , and , later on , for his New York Times articles , must have given him a store of knowledge at his fingertips to be produced at a moment 's notice for these emergencies . " 
 When the Kilmers ' daughter Rose ( 1912 – 1917 ) was stricken with poliomyelitis ( also known as infantile paralysis ) shortly after birth , they turned to their religious faith for comfort . A series of correspondence between Kilmer and Father James J. Daly led the Kilmers to convert to Roman Catholicism , and they were received in the church in 1913 . In one of these letters Kilmer writes that he " believed in the Catholic position , the Catholic view of ethics and aesthetics , for a long time , " and he " wanted something not intellectual , some conviction not mental – in fact I wanted Faith . " Kilmer would stop " every morning for months " on his way " to the office and prayed for faith , " claiming that when " faith did come , it came , I think , by way of my little paralyzed daughter . Her lifeless hands led me ; I think her tiny feet know beautiful paths . You understand this and it gives me a selfish pleasure to write it down . " 
 With the publication of " Trees " in the magazine Poetry in August 1913 , Kilmer gained immense popularity as a poet across the United States . He had established himself as a successful lecturer — particularly one seeking to reach a Catholic audience . His close friend and editor Robert Holliday wrote that it " is not an unsupported assertion to say that he was in his time and place the laureate of the Catholic Church . " Trees and Other Poems ( 1914 ) was published the following year . Over the next few years , Kilmer was prolific in his output , managing an intense schedule of lectures , publishing a large number of essays and literary criticism , and writing poetry . In 1915 he became poetry editor of Current Literature and contributing editor of Warner 's Library of the World 's Best Literature . In 1916 and 1917 , before the American entry into World War I , Kilmer would publish four books : The Circus and Other Essays ( 1916 ) , a series of interviews with literary personages entitled Literature in the Making ( 1917 ) , Main Street and Other Poems ( 1917 ) , and Dreams and Images : An Anthology of Catholic Poets ( 1917 ) . 
 = = = War years : 1917 – 1918 = = = 
 In April 1917 , a few days after the United States entered World War I , Kilmer enlisted in the Seventh Regiment of the New York National Guard . In August , Kilmer was assigned as a statistician with the U.S. 69th Infantry Regiment ( better known as the " Fighting 69th " and later re @-@ designated the 165th Infantry Regiment ) , of the 42nd " Rainbow " Division , and quickly rose to the rank of sergeant . Though he was eligible for commission as an officer and often recommended for such posts during the course of the war , Kilmer refused , stating that he would rather be a sergeant in the Fighting 69th than an officer in any other regiment . 
 Shortly before his deployment to Europe , the Kilmers ' daughter Rose had died , and twelve days later , their son Christopher was born . Before his departure , Kilmer had contracted with publishers to write a book about the war , deciding upon the title Here and There with the Fighting Sixty @-@ Ninth . The regiment arrived in France in November 1917 , and Kilmer wrote to his wife that he had not written " anything in prose or verse since I got here — except statistics — but I 've stored up a lot of memories to turn into copy when I get a chance . " Kilmer did not write such a book ; however , toward the end of the year , he did find time to write prose sketches and poetry . The most notable of his poems during this period was " Rouge Bouquet " ( 1918 ) which commemorated the deaths of two dozen members of his regiment in a German artillery barrage on American trench positions in the Rouge Bouquet forest north @-@ east of the French village of Baccarat . At the time , this was a relatively quiet sector of the front , but the first battalion was struck by a German heavy artillery bombardment on the afternoon of March 7 , 1918 that buried 21 men of the unit , killing 19 ( of which 14 remained entombed ) . 
 Kilmer sought more hazardous duty and was transferred to the military intelligence section of his regiment , in April 1918 . In a letter to his wife , Aline , he remarked : " Now I 'm doing work I love – and work you may be proud of . None of the drudgery of soldiering , but a double share of glory and thrills . " According to Hillis , Kilmer 's fellow soldiers had accorded him much respect for his battlefield demeanour — " He was worshipped by the men about him . I have heard them speak with awe of his coolness and his nerve in scouting patrols in no man 's land . This coolness and his habit of choosing , with typical enthusiasm , the most dangerous and difficult missions , led to his death . " 
 = = = Death and burial = = = 
 During the Second Battle of Marne there was heavy fighting throughout the last days of July 1918 . On July 30 , 1918 , Kilmer volunteered to accompany Major " Wild Bill " Donovan ( later , in World War II , the founder of the Office of Strategic Services , forerunner to the Central Intelligence Agency ) when Donovan 's battalion ( 1 – 165th Infantry ) was sent to lead the day 's attack . 
 During the course of the day , Kilmer led a scouting party to find the position of a German machine gun . When his comrades found him , some time later , they thought at first that he was peering over the edge of a little hill , where he had crawled for a better view . When he did not answer their call , they ran to him and found him dead . According to Father Francis P. Duffy : “ A bullet had pierced his brain . His body was carried in and buried by the side of Ames . God rest his dear and gallant soul . ” A sniper 's bullet likely killed him immediately . According to military records , Kilmer died on the battlefield near <unk> Farm , beside the <unk> River near the village of <unk> @-@ et @-@ <unk> , in France , on July 30 , 1918 at the age of 31 . For his valor , Kilmer was posthumously awarded the Croix de Guerre ( War Cross ) by the French Republic . 
 Kilmer was buried in the Oise @-@ Aisne American Cemetery and Memorial , near <unk> @-@ en @-@ <unk> , Aisne , Picardy , France . A cenotaph erected to his memory is located on the Kilmer family plot in Elmwood Cemetery , in New Brunswick , New Jersey . A Memorial Mass was celebrated at St. Patrick 's Cathedral in Manhattan on October 14 , 1918 . 
 = = Criticism and influence = = 
 = = = " Trees " = = = 
 Joyce Kilmer 's reputation as a poet is staked largely on the widespread popularity of one poem — " Trees " ( 1913 ) . It was first published in the August 1913 issue of Poetry : A Magazine of Verse which had begun publishing the year before in Chicago , Illinois and was included as the title poem in a collection of poems Trees and Other Poems ( 1914 ) . According to Kilmer 's oldest son , Kenton , the poem was written on February 2 , 1913 when the family resided in Mahwah , New Jersey . 
 It was written in the afternoon in the intervals of some other writing . The desk was in an upstairs room , by a window looking down a wooded hill . It was written in a little notebook in which his father and mother wrote out copies of several of their poems , and , in most cases , added the date of composition . On one page the first two lines of ' Trees ' appear , with the date , February 2 , 1913 , and on another page , further on in the book , is the full text of the poem . It was dedicated to his wife 's mother , Mrs. Henry Mills Alden , who was endeared to all her family . 
 Many locations including Rutgers University ( where Kilmer attended for two years ) , University of Notre Dame , as well as historians in Mahwah , New Jersey and in other places , have boasted that a specific tree was the inspiration for Kilmer 's poem . However , Kenton Kilmer refutes these claims , remarking that , 
 Mother and I agreed , when we talked about it , that Dad never meant his poem to apply to one particular tree , or to the trees of any special region . Just any trees or all trees that might be rained on or snowed on , and that would be suitable nesting places for robins . I guess they 'd have to have upward @-@ reaching branches , too , for the line about ' lifting leafy arms to pray . ' Rule out weeping willows . " 
 The popular appeal of this simple poem is likely the source of its endurance despite the continuing negative opinion of the poem 's merits from scholars and critics . According to Robert Holliday , Kilmer 's friend and editor , " Trees " speaks " with authentic song to the simplest of hearts " and that " ( t ) he exquisite title poem now so universally known , made his reputation more than all the rest he had written put together . That impeccable lyric which made for immediate widespread popularity . " Its popularity has also led to parodies of the poem — some by noted poets and writers . The pattern of its first lines ( I think that I shall never see / A poem lovely as a tree . ) is of seemingly simple rhyme and meter and easy to mimic along with the poem 's choice of metaphors . One of the best known parodies is " Song of the Open Road " by American humorist and poet Ogden Nash ( 1902 – 1971 ) : 
 I think that I shall never see 
 A billboard lovely as a tree . 
 Indeed , unless the billboards fall , 
 I 'll never see a tree at all . 
 = = = Influences upon Kilmer 's verse = = = 
 Kilmer 's early works were inspired by , and were imitative of , the poetry of Algernon Charles Swinburne , Gerard Manley Hopkins , Ernest Dowson , Aubrey Beardsley , and William Butler Yeats ( and the Celtic Revival ) . It was later through the influence of works by Coventry Patmore , Francis Thompson , and those of Alice Meynell and her children Viola Meynell and Francis Meynell , that Kilmer seems to have become interested in Catholicism . Kilmer wrote of his influences : 
 I have come to regard them with intense admiration . Patmore seems to me to be a greater poet than Francis Thompson . He has not the rich vocabulary , the decorative erudition , the Shelleyan enthusiasm , which distinguish the Sister Songs and the Hound of Heaven , but he has a classical simplicity , a restraint and sincerity which make his poems satisfying . 
 Because he was initially raised Episcopalian ( or Anglican ) , Kilmer became literary editor of the Anglican weekly , The Churchman , before his conversion to Catholicism . During this time he did considerable research into 16th and 17th century Anglican poets as well as metaphysical , or mystic poets of that time , including George Herbert , Thomas Traherne , Robert Herrick , Bishop Coxe , and Robert Stephen Hawker ( the eccentric vicar of the Church of Saint Morwenna and Saint John the Baptist at <unk> in Cornwall ) — the latter whom he referred to as " a coast life @-@ guard in a cassock . " These poets also had an influence on Kilmer 's writings . 
 Critics compared Kilmer to British Catholic writers Hilaire Belloc and G. K. Chesterton — suggesting that his reputation might have risen to the level where he would have been considered their American counterpart if not for his untimely death . 
 = = = Criticism of Kilmer 's work = = = 
 Kilmer 's death at age 31 removed from him the opportunity to develop into a more mature poet . Because " Trees " is often dismissed by modern critics and scholars as simple verse , much of Kilmer 's work ( especially his literary criticism ) has slipped into obscurity . Only a very few of his poems have appeared in anthologies , and with the exception of " Trees " — and to a much lesser extent " Rouge Bouquet " ( 1917 – 1918 ) — almost none have obtained lasting widespread popularity . 
 The entire corpus of Kilmer 's work was produced between 1909 and 1918 when Romanticism and sentimental lyric poetry fell out of favor and Modernism took root — especially with the influence of the Lost Generation . In the years after Kilmer 's death , poetry went in drastically different directions , as is seen especially in the work of T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound . Kilmer 's verse is conservative and traditional , and does not break the formal rules of poetics — he can be considered as one of the last poets of the Romantic era . His style has been criticized for not breaking free of traditional modes of rhyme , meter , and theme , and for being too sentimental to be taken seriously . 
 = = Works = = 
 1911 : Summer of Love ( poetry ) 
 1914 : Trees and Other Poems ( poetry ) 
 1916 : The Circus and Other Essays ( essays ) 
 1917 : Main Street and Other Poems . ( poetry ) 
 1917 : The Courage of Enlightenment : An address delivered in Campion College , Prairie du Chien , Wisconsin , to the members of the graduating class , June 15 , 1917 . 
 1917 : Dreams and Images : An Anthology of Catholic Poets . ( poetry anthology , edited by Kilmer ) 
 1917 : Literature in the Making by some of its Makers ( criticism ) 
 1918 : Poems , Essays and Letters in Two Volumes Volume One : Memoir and Poems , Volume Two : prose works ( collected works ) ( published posthumously , edited by Robert Cortes Holliday ) . 
 1919 : Kilmer 's unfinished history of the Fighting 69th ( 165th Infantry ) is posthumously printed in Father Duffy 's Story by Francis P. Duffy ( New York : Doran , 1919 ) . 
 1921 : The Circus and Other Essays and Fugitive Pieces ( published posthumously ) 
 = Hurricane Norbert ( 1984 ) = 
 Hurricane Norbert marked the first time a core of a hurricane was fully mapped in three @-@ dimensions . First forming on September 14 , 1984 west of the Mexican coast , Norbert gradually intensified , reaching hurricane intensity two days after formation . On September 22 , Norbert peaked in strength as a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . While intensifying , Norbert meandered . It moved east , then north , then west , then south , then back towards the east , and finally towards the northeast . After fluctuating in intensity for two more days , Norbert rapidly weakened . It turned towards the northwest and made landfall in southern Baja California Norte as a tropical storm . The combination of Norbert and several other storms left thousands homeless throughout Mexico . The remnants of Hurricane Norbert produced moderate rain over Arizona . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical depression first developed on September 14 over the Pacific Ocean west of the Mexican coast . Six hours later , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Norbert . Gradually strengthening , Norbert meandered in the weak steering currents for several days . The rate of intensification accelerated early on September 16 , and shortly thereafter Norbert became a hurricane . 
 On September 17 , Norbert turned from the east to the north , and upon attaining Category 2 status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale at 1800 UTC the next day , Norbert began to turn back to the west . Several hours later , Norbert was upgraded to a major hurricane ( Category 3 or higher ) . While maintaining its intensity for two and a half days , Norbert then turned to the south and after slight strengthening , back to the east . At 0000 UTC , September 21 , Norbert reached its peak intensity of 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) . Meanwhile , a deep layer ridge over the Rocky Mountains was replaced by an upper @-@ level trough , which extended south of Cabo San Lucas . This change in the steering patterns caused Hurricane Norbert to eventually turn to the northwest . 
 Norbert fluctuated in intensity ; six hours after its peak Norbert weakened back into a Category 3 hurricane , only to regain Category 4 strength on three separate occasions during the next 48 hours . On September 23 , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft was flown into Norbert and measured a 9 @.@ 9 mi ( 15 @.@ 9 km ) eye and a closed eyewall . On September 24 , while located 300 mi ( 480 km ) south @-@ southwest of Cabo San Lucas , Norbert re @-@ intensified into a Category 4 hurricane for the fourth time . Another aircraft reconnaissance flew into the hurricane and observed that the heaviest precipitation was located east of the center of circulation . It also had an asymmetrical wind field . Repeated penetrations were made into the eyewall , and scientists mapped the storm 's three @-@ dimensional ( 3 @-@ D ) wind field . This marked the first time that the core of a hurricane was completely mapped in 3 @-@ D. The aircraft was also equipped with Doppler weather radar . 
 Although the hurricane 's motion accelerated , by 0000 UTC September 25 , Norbert was only a mid @-@ level Category 2 hurricane . Later that day , the third and final Hurricane Hunter aircraft flew into Hurricane Norbert , finding a larger eye than the first flight , with a diameter of 16 mi ( 26 km ) . After weakening back into a tropical storm early on September 26 , the system moved ashore near Point Abreojos in the central portion of the Baja California Peninsula while a high @-@ end tropical storm . While the Monthly Weather Review suggests that the cyclone dissipated on September 27 over the peninsula , it was last noted as a tropical depression over Arizona thus becoming one of the eight tropical cyclones to survive into the state . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Hurricane Norbert was described as " big and ugly " by meteorologists . Planes were advised to use caution while navigating in the area . The Mazatlan government marine operator warned shipping to exercise extreme caution from Jalisco to Baja California Sur . The Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center noted the possibility of heavy rains and flooding across portions of the Baja California Peninsula . Throughout Mexico , a combination of Norbert and several other storms left many people without a home and hotels nearly empty . Scattered and light rainfall fell across portions of Baja California Norte and Sonora , with rainfalls totals of 2 @.@ 38 in ( 60 mm ) and 2 @.@ 44 in ( 62 mm ) at Bento Juarez and <unk> @-@ San <unk> respectively . In all , rainfall data was reported at 284 locations across Mexico . Upon entering Arizona , sustained winds of 20 to 30 mph ( 30 to 50 km / h ) were recorded in the Tucson metropolitan area . Due to its rapid motion , only moderate rainfall occurred throughout south @-@ central to northeast Arizona , with most locations reporting between 1 to 2 in ( 25 to 51 mm ) of rain . However , Kitt Peak reported a 30 @-@ hour storm rainfall total of 4 @.@ 15 in ( 105 mm ) . Lower than normal pressures were also recorded . Across New Mexico , flash flood warnings were posted due to heavy rainfall . 
 = Average Joe = 
 The terms average Joe , ordinary Joe , Joe <unk> , Joe <unk> ( for males ) and ordinary , average , or plain Jane ( for females ) , are used primarily in North America to refer to a completely average person , typically an average American . It can be used both to give the image of a hypothetical " completely average person " or to describe an existing person . Parallel terms in other languages for local equivalents exist worldwide . 
 Today , statistics by the United States Department of Commerce provide information regarding the societal attributes of those who may be referred to as being " average " . While some individual attributes are easily identified as being average , such as the median income , other characteristics , such as family arrangements may not be identified as being average . 
 In 2001 , for example no single household arrangement constituted more than 30 % of total households . Married couples with no children were the most common constituting 28 @.@ 7 % of households . It would nonetheless be inaccurate to state that the average American lives in a childless couple arrangement as 71 @.@ 3 % do not . Other " average " characteristics are easier to identify . 
 In terms of social class , the average American may be described as either being middle or working class . As social classes lack distinct boundaries the average American may have a status in the area where the lower middle and upper working class overlap . Overall the average American , age 25 or older , made roughly $ 32 @,@ 000 per year , does not have a college degree , has been , is , or will be married as well as divorced at least once during his or her lifetime , lives in his or her own home in a suburban setting , and holds a white @-@ collar office job . 
 " Average Joes " are common fodder for characters in television or movies , comics , novels or radio dramas . On television , examples of " average Joes " include Doug Heffernan ( King of Queens ) , Alan Harper ( Two and a Half Men ) and Homer Simpson ( The Simpsons ) . In the film Dodgeball : A True Underdog Story , the protagonist , Peter , owns a gym for those who don 't want an intensive workout , and the patrons of the gym are all somewhat overweight . The gym is named Average Joe 's Gymnasium . 
 In real life , as chronicled in his bestseller The Average American : The Extraordinary Search for the Nation 's Most Ordinary Citizen , Kevin O 'Keefe successfully completed a nationwide search for the person who was the most statistically average in the United States during a multi @-@ year span starting in 2000 . Newsweek proclaimed of the book , " The journey toward run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill has never been so remarkable . " 
 = = Families = = 
 As the United States is a highly diverse nation , it should not be surprising that there is no single prevalent household arrangement . While the " nuclear family " consisting of a married couple with their own children is often seen as the average American family , such households constitute less than a quarter of all households . Married couples without children are currently the plurality constituting 28 @.@ 7 % of households , compared to 24 @.@ 1 % for nuclear families . 
 Another 25 @.@ 5 % of households consisted of single persons residing alone . Recent trends have shown the numbers of nuclear families as well as childless married couples decrease . In 1970 , 40 @.@ 3 % of US households consisted of nuclear families with childless couples making up 30 @.@ 3 % of households and 10 @.@ 6 % of households being arranged in " Other family types . " 
 By 2000 the percentage of nuclear families had decreased by 40 % , while the number of other family types had increased by 51 % . The percentage of single households has also steadily increased . In 1970 , only 17 % of households consisted of singles . In 2000 that figure had increased by 50 % with singles constituting 25 @.@ 5 % of households . The most drastic increase was among the percentage of households made up of single males , which nearly doubled from 5 @.@ 6 % in 1970 to 10 @.@ 7 % in 2000 . 
 Today , one can no longer refer to the nuclear family as the average American household , neither can one identify the current plurality of married couples without children as " the average . " Recent statistics indeed indicate that there is no average American family arrangement , but that American society is home to a wide and diverse variety of family arrangements . The one thing the data does indicate is that the average Joe most likely does not reside in a nuclear 4 @-@ person family . 
 " The nuclear family ... is the idealized version of what most people think of when they think of " family ... " The old definition of what a family is ... the nuclear <unk> no longer seems adequate to cover the wide diversity of household arrangements we see today , according to many social scientists ( Edwards 1991 ; Stacey 1996 ) . Thus has arisen the term postmodern family , which is meant to describe the great variability in family forms , including single @-@ parent families and child @-@ free couples . " - Brian K. Williams , Stacey C. Sawyer , Carl M. <unk> , Marriages , Families & Intimate Relationships , 2005 . 
 A statement that can be made , however , is that most Americans will marry at least once in their lifetime with the first marriage most commonly ending in divorce . Today a little over half ( 52 @.@ 3 % ) of US household include a married couple , showing a significant decrease since 1970 when 70 @.@ 6 % of households included a married couple . Current trends indicate that people in the US are marrying later and less often with higher divorce rates . 
 Despite the declining prevalence of marriage , more than three @-@ quarters of Americans will marry at least once in their lifetime . The average age for marriage for a male was 26 @.@ 8 and 25 @.@ 1 for a female . Americans are also likely to remarry after their first divorce . In 1990 , 40 % of all marriages were <unk> . All together one can conclude that while there is no prevalent average household arrangement , most Americans ( the average Joe ) will get married and divorced once with a considerable number of Americans remarrying at least once . 
 = = Income = = 
 Income in the United States is most commonly measured either by individual or household . In 2005 the median personal income , the amount earned by the average Joe or average Jane , is largely determined by who is or who is not included in the statistics . Personal income statistics are given in accordance to a variety of demographic characteristics . The median income for all 233 million persons over the age of 15 was $ 28 @,@ 567 . 
 By only including those above age 25 , the vast majority of students and all working adolescents are excluded . The median income for the people above the age 25 was $ 32 @,@ 140 in 2005 . Of those with incomes , over the age of 25 , almost three quarters , 73 @.@ 31 % , the median income was clocked at $ 39 @,@ 336 in 2005 . This figure excludes those employed part @-@ time , students , working teenagers , retirees and the unemployed . Depending on whether or not those working part @-@ time are included , the average American makes between $ 32 @,@ 000 and $ 39 @,@ 000 . 
 In 2005 , 42 % of all households and 76 % of households in the top quintile had two or more income earners . As a result , there was a considerable discrepancy between household and personal income . Recent studies , such as the one conducted by Harvard professor Elizabeth Warren , have shown that the average American household needs two incomes in order to live what is commonly perceived as a middle @-@ class lifestyle . 
 The median income per household member was clocked at $ 24 @,@ 672 in 2005 . This means that the average Joe earns roughly $ 32 @,@ 000 a year , lives in a household with an income of $ 46 @,@ 000 with $ 24 @,@ 000 of gross annual income per member . Personal income changes considerably over the life @-@ time of the average American , from $ 28 @,@ 000 at age 25 to about $ 42 @,@ 000 at the age of 65 . Yet , very young and old persons would commonly not be considered to be average Americans . 
 <unk> : US Census Bureau , 2006 
 = = = Income at a glance = = = 
 = = Education = = 
 The US population seems almost equally divided between those who have and those who have not attended college . While only a minority of Americans , 27 @.@ 6 % , have graduated from college with a Bachelor 's degree or more , a slight majority , 53 % , of Americans had " some college " education . As only 36 @.@ 2 % had an Associates degree or more , with only roughly 9 % having a graduate degree . On the other end of the strata , 14 @.@ 8 % of persons did not graduate from high school . 
 It is fair to assume that the average Joe / Jane is neither a college graduate nor a high school drop @-@ out . It is , however , difficult to determine whether or not the average American has some college education as the population is split between those who did and did not attend college . Over the past half century the educational attainment of the US population has significantly increased . 
 The income of an individual with some college education was also similar to the overall mean personal income . The mean personal income for someone with some college education was $ 31 @,@ 054 , compared to $ 32 @,@ 140 for the overall population , age 25 or older with earnings . The mean income for a high school graduate , on the other hand , was considerably below the national mean personal income estimated at $ 26 @,@ 505 . 
 Overall , despite a slight decrease in the percentage of high school graduates and significantly slower growth of college graduate , the average American is more educated today than ever before , having graduated from high school and likely , though not necessarily , attended college . 
 <unk> : US Census Bureau , 2005 
 = = Social class = = 
 In terms of social class the average American may be referred to as being either a member of the middle or working class . The discrepancy is largely the result of differing class models and definitions of what constitutes a member of the middle class . Currently the vast majority of Americans self @-@ identify themselves as middle class , yet some experts in the field such Michael Zweig of Stony Brook University or Dennis Gilbert of Cornell University have brought forth different theories . As most Americans are neither professionals nor managers and lack college degrees the average American may be described as being either or both , lower middle and working class . 
 " Everyone wants to believe they are middle class . For people on the bottom and the top of the wage scale the phrase connotes a certain Regular Joe cachet . But this eagerness to be part of the group has led the definition to be stretched like a bungee cord " - Dante Chinni , the Christian Science Monitor 
 Occupational autonomy is a key factor in regards to class positions . Professionals and managers who are exclusively labeled as middle class and often as upper middle class , conceptualize , create and consult in their jobs . Due to their great expertise they enjoy a high degree of autonomy in the work place . 
 The American economy , however , does not require a labor force consisting solely of professionals . Instead it requires a greatly diverse and specialized labor force . Thus the majority of Americans complete assigned tasks with considerably less autonomy and creative freedom than professionals , leading to theory that they may better be described as being members of the working class . 
 = = Occupation = = 
 Most Americans today are white collar salaried employees who work in varied environments , including offices , retail outlets , and hospitals . Roughly one quarter ( 23 @.@ 4 % ) of Americans were employed in the traditional blue collar fields that require hard physical labor with another 14 % employed in the service industry . Office administrators or more colloquial , secretaries , were the largest single occupation in the United States . In 2004 there were 4 @.@ 1 million secretaries with a median income of $ 34 @,@ 970 , near the national median of $ 32 @,@ 000 . 
 Overall those employed in office administrative and support , service and sales occupations constituted 38 @.@ 6 % of the labor force . Those employed in business and professional as well as professional support occupations ( e.g. nurses ) made up 38 @.@ 0 % of the labor force . Combined white collar employees including service workers such as restaurant serves and hotel maids constituted 76 @.@ 6 % of the labor force . If service workers are excluded 62 @.@ 8 % were employed in white collar occupations . 
 Educational attainment varied greatly depending on occupational field with 68 % of those in the professional and professional support fields having a bachelor 's degree or higher , compared to only 31 @.@ 6 % of those employed in sales and 11 @.@ 6 % of those in the service sector . Considering the fact that the average American does not have a bachelor 's degree , he or she is most likely employed in the service , sales , and office support fields with many working in the professional support and business fields as well . All together the American economy and labor force have changed greatly since the middle of the <unk> century with most workers today being employed in office and service occupations . 
 = = Homeownership = = 
 According to US Department of Commerce data the vast majority , 67 % of housing units in the United States were owner occupied , had three or fewer bedrooms with one or less occupant per room ( including kitchen , dining room , living room , etc ... ) and were mortgaged . The overwhelming majority , 85 % , of all housing units had three or fewer bedrooms while 15 % of all housing had 4 or more bedrooms . The plurality of housing units , 40 % , had three bedrooms . The vast majority , 67 % , of housing units were mortgaged with 52 % households spending 25 % or less of their annual income on mortgage payments . 
 The median value of a housing unit in the US was $ 167 @,@ 500 in 2005 with the median mortgage payment being clocked at $ 1 @,@ 295 . The average size of a household was 2 @.@ 5 persons with almost all housing units , 97 % , having 1 or fewer occupants per room . However , the term " room " does not exclusively refer to bedrooms , but includes the kitchen , dining room , family room , bath rooms and any other rooms a house might have . While 85 % of American homes had 3 or fewer bedrooms the median number of total rooms per housing units was 5 @.@ 3 in 2005 . Considering these statistics one can conclude that the average American resides in his or her own home , pays roughly $ 1 @,@ 000 per month in mortgage payments for a three or less bedroom house with no more than one occupant per room . 
 US Census Bureau data from 2002 identified a series of housing characteristics for units owner @-@ occupied units inhabited by households with average incomes , ranging from $ 40 @,@ 000 to $ 60 @,@ 000 . The median square footage for homes occupied by middle income households was 1 @,@ 700 with 52 % of such homes having two or more bathrooms . The median value of these homes was $ 112 @,@ 000 with the median year of construction being 1970 . Middle income households tended to spend roughly 18 % of their monthly income on housing . Considering these statistics it is likely that many average Americans reside in 1 @,@ 700 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 160 m2 ) homes , priced slightly above $ 100 @,@ 000 with two or more bathrooms that were built in the late 1960s and early 1970s . However , the taken income is slightly above average . 
 = Geology of the Grand Canyon area = 
 The geology of the Grand Canyon area includes one of the most complete and studied sequences of rock on Earth . The nearly 40 major sedimentary rock layers exposed in the Grand Canyon and in the Grand Canyon National Park area range in age from about 200 million to nearly 2 billion years old . Most were deposited in warm , shallow seas and near ancient , long @-@ gone sea shores in western North America . Both marine and terrestrial sediments are represented , including fossilized sand dunes from an extinct desert . There are at least 14 known unconformities in the geologic record found in the Grand Canyon . 
 Uplift of the region started about 75 million years ago during the Laramide orogeny ; a mountain @-@ building event that is largely responsible for creating the Rocky Mountains to the east . In total , the Colorado Plateau was uplifted an estimated 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . The adjacent Basin and Range province to the west started to form about 18 million years ago as the result of crustal stretching . A drainage system that flowed through what is today the eastern Grand Canyon emptied into the now lower Basin and Range province . Opening of the Gulf of California around 6 million years ago enabled a large river to cut its way northeast from the gulf . The new river captured the older drainage to form the ancestral Colorado River , which in turn started to form the Grand Canyon . 
 Wetter climates brought upon by ice ages starting 2 million years ago greatly increased excavation of the Grand Canyon , which was nearly as deep as it is now by 1 @.@ 2 million years ago . Volcanic activity deposited lava over the area 1 @.@ 8 million to 500 @,@ 000 years ago . At least 13 lava dams blocked the Colorado River , forming lakes that were up to 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) deep . The end of the last ice age and subsequent human activity has greatly reduced the ability of the Colorado River to excavate the canyon . Dams in particular have upset patterns of sediment transport and deposition . Controlled floods from Glen Canyon Dam upstream have been conducted to see if they have a restorative effect . Earthquakes and mass wasting erosive events still affect the region . 
 = = Deposition of sediments = = 
 = = = Vishnu Basement Rocks = = = 
 At about 2 @.@ 5 and 1 @.@ 8 billion years ago in Precambrian time , sand , mud , silt , and ash were laid down in a marine basin adjacent to an orogenic belt . From 1 @.@ 8 to 1 @.@ 6 billion years ago at least two island arcs collided with the proto @-@ North American continent . This process of plate tectonics compressed and grafted the marine sediments in the basin onto the mainland and uplifted them out of the sea . Later , these rocks were buried 12 miles ( 19 km ) under the surface and pressure @-@ cooked into metamorphic rock . The resulting Granite Gorge Metamorphic Suite , which is part of the Vishnu Basement Rocks , consists of the metasedimentary Vishnu Schist and the metavolcanic Brahma and Rama Schists that were formed 1 @.@ 75 billion to 1 @.@ 73 billion years ago . This is the resistant rock now exposed at the bottom of the canyon in the Inner Gorge . 
 As the volcanic islands collided with the mainland around 1 @.@ 7 billion years ago , blobs of magma rose from the subduction zone and intruded the Granite Gorge Metamorphic Suite . These plutons slowly cooled to form the Zoroaster Granite ; part of which would later be metamorphosed into gneiss . This rock unit can be seen as light @-@ colored bands in the darker garnet @-@ studded Vishnu Schist ( see 1b in figure 1 ) . The intrusion of the granite occurred in three phases : two during the initial Vishnu metamorphism period , and a third around 1 @.@ 4 billion years ago . The third phase was accompanied by large @-@ scale faulting , particularly along north — south faults , leading to a partial rifting of the continent . The collision expanded the continent from the Wyoming – Colorado border into Mexico and almost doubled the crust 's thickness in the Grand Canyon region . Part of this thickening created the 5 @-@ to @-@ 6 @-@ mile ( 8 to 10 km ) high ancestral Mazatzal Mountains . 
 Subsequent erosion lasting 300 million years stripped much of the exposed sediments and the mountains away . This reduced the very high mountains to small hills a few tens to hundreds of feet ( tens of meters ) high . Geologist John Wesley Powell called this major gap in the geologic record , which is also seen in other parts of the world , the Great Unconformity . Other sediments may have been added but , if they ever existed , were completely removed by erosion . Such gaps in the geologic record are called unconformities by geologists . The Great Unconformity is one of the best examples of an exposed nonconformity , which is a type of unconformity that has bedded rock units above igneous or metamorphic rocks . 
 = = = Grand Canyon Supergroup = = = 
 In late Precambrian time , extension from a large tectonic plate or smaller plates moving away from Laurentia thinned its continental crust , forming large rift basins that would ultimately fail to split the continent . Eventually , this sunken region of Laurentia was flooded with a shallow seaway that extended from at least present @-@ day Lake Superior to Glacier National Park in Montana to the Grand Canyon and the Uinta Mountains . The resulting Grand Canyon Supergroup of sedimentary units is composed of nine varied geologic formations that were laid down from 1 @.@ 2 billion and 740 million years ago in this sea . Good exposures of the supergroup can be seen in eastern Grand Canyon in the Inner Gorge and from Desert View , Lipan Point and Moran point . 
 The oldest section of the supergroup is the Unkar Group . It accumulated in a variety of fluvial , deltaic , tidal , nearshore marine , and offshore marine environments . The first formation to be laid down in the Unkar Group was the Bass Formation . <unk> gravels initially accumulated in shallow river valleys . They later lithified into a basal conglomerate that is known as the <unk> Member of the Bass Formation . The Bass Formation was deposited in a shallow sea near the coast as a mix of limestone , sandstone , and shale . <unk> later altered the bulk of the limestone into dolomite . It is 120 to 340 feet ( 37 to 100 m ) thick and grayish in color . Averaging 1250 million years old , this is the oldest layer exposed in the Grand Canyon that contains fossils — stromatolites . <unk> Shale is made of thin beds of marginal @-@ marine @-@ derived mudstones , sandstones , and shale that , together , are 445 to 985 feet ( 136 to 300 m ) thick . This formation indicates a short @-@ lived regression ( retreat ) of the seashore in the area that left mud flats . Today it is very bright orange @-@ red and gives the Red Canyon its name . <unk> Quartzite is a resistant marine sedimentary quartzite that was eroded to form <unk> that later became islands in Cambrian time . Those islands withstood wave action long enough to become re @-@ buried by other sediments in the Cambrian Period . Dox Formation is over 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) thick and is made of sandstone with some interbedded shale beds and mudstone that were deposited in fluvial and tidal environments . Ripple marks and other features indicate it was close to the shore . Outcrops of this red to orange formation can be seen in the eastern parts of the canyon . Fossils of stromatolites and algae are found in this layer . At 1070 ± 70 million years old , the Cardenas Basalt is the youngest formation in the Unkar Group . It is made of layers of dark brown basaltic rocks that flowed as lava up to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) thick . 
 Nankoweap Formation is around 1050 million years old and is not part of a group . This rock unit is made of coarse @-@ grained sandstone , and was deposited in a shallow sea on top of the eroded surface of the Cardenas Basalt . The Nankoweap is only exposed in the eastern part of the canyon . A gap in the geologic record , an unconformity , follows the Nankoweap . 
 All formations in the <unk> Group were deposited in coastal and shallow sea environments about 1000 to 700 million years ago . The <unk> Formation is a mainly greenish formation composed of interbedded sandstone , limestone , and shale . Fossilized stromatolites are found in the <unk> . The <unk> Formation consists of black shale and red to purple mudstone with some limestone . Isolated pockets of reddish sandstone are also found around Carbon Butte . Stromatolites are found in this layer . The <unk> Formation is made of tan @-@ colored sandstone with some small sections of shale . 
 About 800 million years ago the supergroup was tilted 15 ° and block faulted in the Grand Canyon Orogeny . Some of the block units moved down and others moved up while fault movement created north — south @-@ trending fault @-@ block mountain ranges . About 100 million years of erosion took place that washed most of the <unk> Group away along with part of the Unkar Group ( exposing the <unk> Quartzite as previously explained ) . The mountain ranges were reduced to hills , and in some places , the whole 12 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) of the supergroup were removed entirely , exposing the basement rocks below . Any rocks that were deposited on top of the Grand Canyon Supergroup in the Precambrian were completely removed . This created a major unconformity that represents 460 million years of lost geologic history in the area . 
 = = = Tonto Group = = = 
 During the Paleozoic era , the western part of what would become North America was near the equator and on a passive margin . The Cambrian Explosion of life took place over about 15 million years in this part of the world . Climate was warm and invertebrates , such as the trilobites , were abundant . An ocean started to return to the Grand Canyon area from the west about 550 million years ago . As its shoreline moved east , the ocean began to concurrently deposit the three formations of the Tonto Group . 
 Tapeats Sandstone averages 525 million years old and is made of medium- to coarse @-@ grained sand and conglomerate that was deposited on an ancient shore ( see 3a in figure 1 ) . Ripple marks are common in the upper members of this dark brown thin @-@ bedded layer . Fossils and imprint trails of trilobites and brachiopods have also been found in the Tapeats . Today it is a cliff @-@ former that is 100 to 325 feet ( 30 to 100 m ) thick . Bright Angel Shale averages 515 million years old and is made of mudstone @-@ derived shale that is interbedded with small sections of sandstone and shaly limestone with a few thin beds of dolomite . It was mostly deposited as mud just offshore and contains brachiopod , trilobite , and worm fossils ( see 3b in figure 1 ) . The color of this formation is mostly various shades of green with some brownish @-@ tan to gray parts . It is a slope @-@ former and is 270 to 450 feet ( 82 to 137 m ) thick . <unk> is responsible for the green coloration of the Bright Angel . Muav Limestone averages 505 million years old and is made of gray , thin @-@ bedded limestone that was deposited farther offshore from calcium carbonate precipitates ( see 3c in figure 1 ) . The western part of the canyon has a much thicker sequence of Muav than the eastern part . The Muav is a cliff @-@ former , 136 to 827 feet ( 41 to 252 m ) thick . 
 These three formations were laid down over a period of 30 million years from early @-@ to @-@ middle Cambrian time . Trilobites followed by brachiopods are the most commonly reported fossils in this group but well @-@ preserved fossils are relatively rare . We know that the shoreline was transgressing ( advancing onto land ) because finer grade material was deposited on top of coarser @-@ grained sediment . Today , the Tonto Group makes up the Tonto Platform seen above and following the Colorado River ; the Tapeats Sandstone and Muav Limestone form the platform 's cliffs and the Bright Angel Shale forms its slopes . Unlike the Proterozoic units below it , the Tonto Group 's beds basically lie in their original horizontal position . The Bright Angel Shale in the group forms an <unk> ( barrier to groundwater seeping down ) , and thus collects and directs water through the overlying Muav Limestone to feed springs in the Inner Gorge . 
 = = = Temple Butte , Redwall , and Surprise Canyon = = = 
 The next two periods of geologic history , the Ordovician and the Silurian , are missing from the Grand Canyon sequence . Geologists do not know if sediments were deposited in these periods and were later removed by erosion or if they were never deposited in the first place . Either way , this break in the geologic history of the area spans about 65 million years . A type of unconformity called a <unk> was formed . <unk> show erosional features such as valleys , hills and cliffs that are later covered by younger sediments . 
 Geologists do know that deep channels were carved on the top of the Muav Limestone during this time . Streams were the likely cause , but marine scour may be to blame . Either way , these depressions were filled with freshwater limestone about 385 million years ago in the Middle Devonian in a formation that geologists call the Temple Butte Limestone ( see 4a in figure 1 ) . Marble Canyon in the eastern part of the park displays these filled purplish @-@ colored channels well . Temple Butte Limestone is a cliff @-@ former in the western part of the park where it is gray to cream @-@ colored dolomite . Fossils of animals with backbones are found in this formation ; bony plates from freshwater fish in the eastern part and numerous marine fish fossils in the western part . Temple Butte is 100 to 450 feet ( 30 to 137 m ) thick ; thinner near Grand Canyon Village and thicker in western Grand Canyon . An unconformity representing 40 to 50 million years of lost geologic history marks the top of this formation . 
 The next formation in the Grand Canyon geologic column is the cliff @-@ forming Redwall Limestone , which is 400 to 800 feet ( 120 to 240 m ) thick ( see 4b in figure 1 ) . Redwall is composed of thick @-@ bedded , dark brown to bluish gray limestone and dolomite with white chert nodules mixed in . It was laid down in a retreating shallow tropical sea near the equator during 40 million years of the early @-@ to @-@ middle Mississippian . Many fossilized crinoids , brachiopods , bryozoans , horn corals , nautiloids , and sponges , along with other marine organisms such as large and complex trilobites have been found in the Redwall . In late Mississippian time , the Grand Canyon region was slowly uplifted and the Redwall was partly eroded away . A Karst topography consisting of caves , sinkholes , and subterranean river channels resulted but were later filled with more limestone . The exposed surface of Redwall gets its characteristic color from rainwater dripping from the iron @-@ rich <unk> of the Supai and Hermit shale that lie above . 
 Surprise Canyon Formation is a sedimentary layer of purplish @-@ red shale that was laid down in discontinuous beds of sand and lime above the Redwall ( see 4c in figure 1 ) . It was created in very late Mississippian and possibly in very earliest Pennsylvanian time as the land subsided and tidal estuaries filled river valleys with sediment . This formation only exists in isolated lenses that are 50 to 400 feet ( 15 to 122 m ) thick . Surprise Canyon was unknown to science until 1973 and can be reached only by helicopter . Fossil logs , other plant material and marine shells are found in this formation . An unconformity marks the top of the Surprise Canyon Formation and in most places this unconformity has entirely removed the Surprise Canyon and exposed the underlying Redwall . 
 = = = Supai Group = = = 
 An unconformity of 15 to 20 million years separates the Supai Group from the previously deposited Redwall Formation . Supai Group was deposited in late Mississippian , through the Pennsylvanian and into the early Permian time , some 320 million to 270 million years ago . Both marine and non @-@ marine deposits of mud , silt , sand and calcareous sediments were laid down on a broad coastal plain similar to the Texas Gulf Coast of today . Around this time , the Ancestral Rocky Mountains rose in Colorado and New Mexico and streams brought eroded sediment from them to the Grand Canyon area . 
 Supai Group formations in the western part of the canyon contain limestone , indicative of a warm , shallow sea , while the eastern part was probably a muddy river delta . This formation consists of red siltstones and shale capped by tan @-@ colored sandstone beds that together reach a thickness of 600 to 700 ft ( around 200 m ) . Shale in the early Permian formations in this group were oxidized to a bright red color . Fossils of amphibian footprints , reptiles , and plentiful plant material are found in the eastern part and increasing numbers of marine fossils are found in the western part . 
 Formations of the Supai Group are from oldest to youngest ( an unconformity is present at the top of each ) : <unk> ( see 5a in figure 1 ) is a slope @-@ forming gray limestone with some red chert bands , sandstone , and purple siltstone that is 100 to 300 feet ( 30 to 90 m ) thick . <unk> ( see 5b in figure 1 ) is a <unk> and slope @-@ forming pale red sandstone and red shale that averages 300 feet ( 90 m ) thick in Grand Canyon . <unk> ( see 5c in figure 1 ) is a ledge- and slope @-@ forming pale red sandstone and siltstone that is 100 to 200 feet ( 30 to 60 m ) thick . Esplanade ( see 5d in figure 1 ) is a ledge- and cliff @-@ forming pale red sandstone and siltstone that is 200 to 800 feet ( 60 to 200 m ) thick . An unconformity marks the top of the Supai Group . 
 = = = Hermit , Coconino , Toroweap , and Kaibab = = = 
 Like the Supai Group below it , the Permian @-@ aged Hermit Formation was probably deposited on a broad coastal plain ( see 6a in figure 1 ) . The alternating thin @-@ bedded iron oxide , mud and silt were deposited via freshwater streams in a semiarid environment around 280 million years ago . Fossils of winged insects , cone @-@ bearing plants , and ferns are found in this formation as well as tracks of vertebrate animals . It is a soft , deep red shale and mudstone slope @-@ former that is approximately 100 to 900 feet ( 30 to 274 m ) thick . Slope development will periodically undermine the formations above and <unk> to house @-@ sized blocks of that rock will cascade down onto the Tonto Platform . An unconformity marks the top of this formation . 
 Coconino Sandstone formed about 275 million years ago as the area dried out and sand dunes made of quartz sand invaded a growing desert ( see 6b in figure 1 ) . Some Coconino fills deep <unk> in the underlying Hermit Shale and the desert that created the Coconino lasted for 5 to 10 million years . Today , the Coconino is a 57 to 600 feet ( 17 to 183 m ) thick golden white to cream @-@ colored cliff @-@ former near the canyon 's rim . Cross bedding patterns of the frosted , fine @-@ grained , well @-@ sorted and rounded quartz grains seen in its cliffs is compatible with an eolian environment . Also fossilized are tracks from lizard @-@ like creatures and what look like tracks from millipedes and scorpions . An unconformity marks the top of this formation . 
 Next in the geologic column is the 200 @-@ foot ( 60 m ) -thick Toroweap Formation ( see <unk> in figure 1 ) . It consists of red and yellow sandstone and shaly gray limestone interbedded with gypsum . The formation was deposited in a warm , shallow sea as the shoreline transgressed ( invaded ) and regressed ( retreated ) over the land . The average age of the rock is about 273 million years . In modern times it is a ledge- and slope @-@ former that contains fossils of brachiopods , corals , and mollusks along with other animals and various terrestrial plants . The Toroweap is divided into the following three members : Seligman is a slope @-@ forming yellowish to reddish sandstone and siltstone . Brady Canyon is a cliff @-@ forming gray limestone with some chert . Wood Ranch is a slope @-@ forming pale red and gray siltstone and dolomitic sandstone . An unconformity marks the top of this formation . 
 One of the highest , and therefore youngest , formations seen in the Grand Canyon area is the Kaibab Limestone ( see 6d in figure 1 ) . It erodes into <unk> cliffs that are 300 to 400 feet ( 90 to 100 m ) thick and was laid down in latest early Permian time , about 270 million years ago , by an advancing warm , shallow sea . The formation is typically made of sandy limestone sitting on top of a layer of sandstone . This is the cream to grayish @-@ white rock that park visitors stand on while viewing the canyon from both rims . It is also the surface rock covering much of the Kaibab Plateau just north of the canyon and the Coconino Plateau immediately south . Shark teeth have been found in this formation as well as abundant fossils of marine invertebrates such as brachiopods , corals , mollusks , sea lilies , and worms . An unconformity marks the top of this formation . 
 = = = Mesozoic deposition = = = 
 Uplift marked the start of the Mesozoic and streams started to <unk> the newly dry land . Streams flowing through broad low valleys in Triassic time deposited sediment eroded from nearby uplands , creating the once 1 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 300 m ) -thick Moenkopi Formation . The formation is made from sandstone and shale with gypsum layers in between . Moenkopi outcrops are found along the Colorado River in Marble Canyon , on Cedar Mountain ( a mesa near the southeastern park border ) , and in Red Butte ( located south of Grand Canyon Village ) . Remnants of the Shinarump Conglomerate , itself a member of the Chinle Formation , are above the Moenkopi Formation near the top of Red Butte but below a much younger lava flow . 
 Formations totaling over 4 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 to 1 @,@ 500 m ) in thickness were deposited in the region in the Mesozoic and Cenozoic but were almost entirely removed from the Grand Canyon sequence by subsequent erosion . The geology of the Zion and Kolob canyons area and the geology of the Bryce Canyon area records some of these formations . All these rock units together form a super sequence of rock known as the Grand Staircase . 
 = = Cenozoic regional uplift and erosion of the canyon = = 
 = = = Uplift and nearby extension = = = 
 The Laramide orogeny affected all of western North America by helping to build the American cordillera . The Kaibab Uplift , Monument <unk> , the Uinta Mountains , San Rafael Swell , and the Rocky Mountains were uplifted , at least in part , by the Laramide orogeny . This major mountain @-@ building event started near the end of the Mesozoic , around 75 million years ago , and continued into the Eocene period of the Cenozoic . It was caused by subduction off the western coast of North America . Major faults that trend north – south and cross the canyon area were reactivated by this uplift . Many of these faults are Precambrian in age and are still active today . Streams draining the Rocky Mountains in early Miocene time terminated in landlocked basins in Utah , Arizona and Nevada but there is no evidence for a major river . 
 Around 18 million years ago , tensional forces started to thin and drop the region to the west , creating the Basin and Range province . Basins ( grabens ) dropped down and mountain ranges ( horsts ) rose up between old and new north – south – trending faults . However , for reasons poorly understood , the beds of the Colorado Plateaus remained mostly horizontal through both events even as they were uplifted about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) in two pulses . The extreme western part of the canyon ends at one of the Basin and Range faults , the Grand Wash , which also marks the boundary between the two provinces . 
 Uplift from the Laramide orogeny and the creation of the Basin and Range province worked together to <unk> the gradient of streams flowing west on the Colorado Plateau . These streams cut deep , eastward @-@ growing , channels into the western edge of the Colorado Plateau and deposited their sediment in the widening Basin and Range region . 
 According to a 2012 study , there is evidence that the western Grand Canyon could be as old as 70 million years . 
 = = = Colorado River : origin and development = = = 
 Rifting started to create the Gulf of California far to the south 6 to 10 million years ago . Around the same time , the western edge of the Colorado Plateau may have sagged slightly . Both events changed the direction of many streams toward the sagging region and the increased gradient caused them to <unk> much faster . From 5 @.@ 5 million to 5 million years ago , headward erosion to the north and east consolidated these streams into one major river and associated tributary channels . This river , the ancestral Lower Colorado River , started to fill the northern arm of the gulf , which extended nearly to the site of Hoover Dam , with estuary deposits . 
 At the same time , streams flowed from highlands in central Arizona north and across what is today the western Grand Canyon , possibly feeding a larger river . The mechanism by which the ancestral Lower Colorado River captured this drainage and the drainage from much of the rest of the Colorado Plateau is not known . Possible explanations include headward erosion or a broken natural dam of a lake or river . Whatever the cause , the Lower Colorado probably captured the landlocked Upper Colorado somewhere west of the Kaibab Uplift . The much larger drainage area and yet steeper stream gradient helped to further accelerate downcutting . 
 Ice ages during the Pleistocene brought a cooler and wetter pluvial climate to the region starting 2 to 3 million years ago . The added precipitation increased runoff and the erosive ability of streams ( especially from spring melt water and flash floods in summer ) . With a greatly increased flow volume the Colorado cut faster than ever before and started to quickly excavate the Grand Canyon 2 million years before present , almost reaching the modern depth by 1 @.@ 2 million years ago . 
 The resulting Grand Canyon of the Colorado River trends roughly east to west for 278 miles ( 447 km ) between Lake Powell and Lake Mead . In that distance , the Colorado River drops 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) and has excavated an estimated 1 @,@ 000 cubic miles ( 4 @,@ 200 km3 ) of sediment to form the canyon . This part of the river bisects the 9 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) -high Kaibab Uplift and passes seven plateaus ( the Kaibab , Kanab , and <unk> plateaus bound the northern part of the canyon and the Coconino bounds the southern part ) . Each of these plateaus are bounded by north to south trending faults and monoclines created or reactivated during the Laramide orogeny . Streams flowing into the Colorado River have since exploited these faults to excavate their own tributary canyons , such as Bright Angel Canyon . 
 = = = Volcanic activity in the western canyon = = = 
 Volcanic activity started in <unk> volcanic field ( in the western Grand Canyon ) about 3 million years ago . Over 150 flows of basaltic lava dammed the Colorado River at least 13 times from 725 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 years ago . The dams typically formed in weeks , were 12 to 86 miles ( 19 to 138 km ) long , 150 to 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 46 to 610 m ) high ( thicker upstream and thinner downstream ) and had volumes of 0 @.@ 03 to 1 @.@ 2 cubic miles ( 0 @.@ 13 to 5 @.@ 00 km3 ) . 
 The longevity of the dams and their ability to hold Colorado River water in large lakes has been debated . In one hypothesis water from the Colorado River backed up behind the dams in large lakes that extended as far as Moab , Utah . Dams were overtopped in short time ; those that were 150 to 400 feet ( 46 to 122 m ) high were overtopped by their lakes in 2 to 17 days . At the same time , sediment filled the lakes behind the dams . Sediment would fill a lake behind a 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) -high dam in 10 @.@ 33 months , filled a lake behind an 1 @,@ 150 @-@ foot ( 350 m ) -high dam in 345 years , and filled the lake behind the tallest dam in 3000 years . Cascades of water flowed over a dam while waterfalls migrated up @-@ river along it . Most lava dams lasted for around 10 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 years . However others have proposed that the lava dams were much more ephemeral and failed catastrophically before overtopping . In this model dams would fail due to fluid flow through fractures in the dams and around dam abutments , through permeable river deposits and alluvium . 
 Since the demise of these dams the Colorado River has carved a maximum of about 160 feet ( 49 m ) into the rocks of the Colorado Plateau 
 = = Ongoing geology and human impact = = 
 The end of the Pleistocene ice ages and the start of the Holocene began to change the area 's climate from a cool , wet pluvial one to dryer semi @-@ arid conditions similar to that of today . With less water to cut , the erosive ability of the Colorado was greatly reduced . Mass wasting processes thus began to become relatively more important than they were before . <unk> cliffs and further widening the Grand Canyon and its tributary canyon system occurred . An average of two debris flows per year reach the Colorado River from tributary canyons to form or expand rapids . This type of mass wasting is the main way the smaller and steeper side canyons transport sediment but it also plays a major role in excavating the larger canyons . 
 In 1963 Glen Canyon Dam and other dams farther upstream started to regulate the flow of the Colorado River through Grand Canyon . Pre @-@ dam but still historic flows of the Colorado through Grand Canyon ranged from 700 to 100 @,@ 000 cubic feet ( 20 to 2 @,@ 832 m3 ) per second with at least one late 19th century flood of 300 @,@ 000 cubic feet ( 8 @,@ 500 m3 ) per second . Discharge from Glen Canyon Dam exceeds 48 @,@ 200 cubic feet ( 1 @,@ 360 m3 ) per second only when there is danger of overtopping the dam or when the level of Lake Powell otherwise needs to be lowered . An interim conservation measure since 1991 has held maximum flows at 20 @,@ 000 cubic feet ( 570 m3 ) per second even though the dam 's power plant can handle 13 @,@ 200 cubic feet ( 370 m3 ) per second more flow . 
 Controlling river flow by use of dams has diminished the river 's ability to scour rocks by substantially reducing the amount of sediment it carries . Dams on the Colorado River have also changed the character of the river water . Once both muddy and warm , the river is now clear and averages a 46 ° F ( 8 ° C ) temperature year @-@ round . Experimental floods approaching the 48 @,@ 200 cubic feet ( 1 @,@ 360 m3 ) per second level mentioned above have been carried out in 1996 and 2004 to study the effects on sediment erosion and deposition . 
 Grand Canyon lies on the southern end of the Intermountain West seismic belt . At least 35 earthquakes larger than 3 @.@ 0 on the Richter Scale occurred in the Grand Canyon region in the 20th century . Of these , five registered over 5 @.@ 0 on the Richter Scale and the largest was a 6 @.@ 2 quake that occurred in January 1906 . Major roughly north — south trending faults that cross the canyon are ( from west to east ) , the Grand Wash , Hurricane and Toroweap . Major northeast @-@ trending fracture systems of normal faults that intersect the canyon include the West Kaibab and Bright Angel while northwest @-@ trending systems include the Grandview — Phantom . Most earthquakes in the region occur in a narrow northwest @-@ trending band between the Mesa Butte and West Kaibab fracture systems . These events are probably the result of eastward @-@ migrating crustal stretching that may eventually move past the Grand Canyon area . 
 = = Trail of Time and Yavapai Geology Museum = = 
 The Trail of Time is an outdoor geology exhibit and nature trail on the South Rim of Grand Canyon National Park . Each meter walked on the trail represents one million years of Grand Canyon 's geologic history . Bronze markers on the trail mark your location in time . The trail begins at Yavapai Geology Museum at 2 billion years ago , and ends at <unk> 's Visitor Center . Along the way are samples of the Canyon 's rocks , as you would encounter them going from the river up to the rim , and displays explaining the geologic history of the Canyon . The trail opened in late 2010 . 
 The Yavapai Geology Museum include three @-@ dimensional models , photographs , and exhibits which allow park visitors to see and understand the complicated geologic story of the area . The museum building , the historic Yavapai Observation Station ( built 1928 ) , located one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) east of Market Plaza , features expansive canyon views . A bookstore offers a variety of materials about the area . 
 = Gary Roberts ( ice hockey ) = 
 Gary R. Roberts ( born May 23 , 1966 ) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey player who played 21 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Calgary Flames , Carolina Hurricanes , Toronto Maple Leafs , Florida Panthers , Pittsburgh Penguins and Tampa Bay Lightning . Renowned for his physical fitness during his career , Roberts has become a high performance trainer for players at all levels of the sport . 
 Roberts was member of Memorial Cup and Minto Cup winning teams as Canadian junior hockey and box lacrosse champions , respectively . He was a first round selection of the Calgary Flames , 12th overall , at the 1984 NHL Entry Draft and played ten seasons in Calgary . Roberts was a member of the Flames ' 1989 Stanley Cup championship team and made two of his three NHL All @-@ Star Game appearances as a representative of the team . A serious neck injury forced him to miss the majority of two seasons , and while his return earned him the 1996 Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy for perseverance and dedication to the game , he was forced into retirement following the 1995 – 96 season . 
 After sitting out a full season , Roberts successfully returned to the NHL in 1997 as a member of the Carolina Hurricanes , with whom he played three seasons . <unk> in Toronto , Florida and Pittsburgh followed , and Roberts ended his career in 2009 as a member of the Tampa Bay Lightning . He played 11 seasons following his comeback , finishing with 1 @,@ 224 games played , 438 goals and 910 points . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Roberts was born on May 23 , 1966 , in Toronto , Ontario , but grew up in Whitby . His best friend growing up was future NHL teammate Joe Nieuwendyk ; the pair played minor hockey together in the winter , and box lacrosse in the summer . Roberts played Junior A lacrosse with the Whitby Warriors in the mid @-@ 1980s , with whom he won a Minto Cup , the Canadian junior championship . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 In junior hockey , Roberts was drafted into the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) . He joined the Ottawa 67 's in 1982 – 83 and scored 20 points in 53 games . Roberts improved to 57 points in his second season and added 17 points in 13 playoff games . The 67 's reached the OHL final and defeated the Kitchener Rangers to win the J. Ross Robertson Cup . The victory advanced the 67 's to the 1984 Memorial Cup tournament where Ottawa reached the final . They again faced Kitchener , who were the tournament hosts , and won the national championship with a 7 – 2 victory . Following the season , the Calgary Flames selected Roberts with their first round selection , 12th overall , at the 1984 NHL Entry Draft . 
 Returned by the Flames to Ottawa for his third junior season in 1984 – 85 , Roberts served as the team 's captain . He recorded 106 points , including 44 goals , and was named to the OHL 's second All @-@ Star Team . Entering a rebuilding phase , the 67 's were quickly eliminated from the playoffs , after which the Flames assigned Roberts to their American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Moncton Golden Flames . In his first professional stint , Roberts scored four goals and added two assists in seven games . Roberts returned to Ottawa for a final junior season in 1985 – 86 , a season in which he played with the Canadian junior team at the 1986 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships . Roberts finished second on the team with six goals for the silver medal @-@ winning Canadians . In the OHL , he split the season between the last place 67 's and , following a trade , the Guelph Platers . Roberts finished with 84 points combined between the two teams , and helped the Platers record a 15 – 3 – 2 record in the playoffs and lead Guelph past the Belleville Bulls to win the OHL championship . He scored four goals in four games at the 1986 Memorial Cup , and the Platers defeated the Hull Olympiques , 6 – 2 in the final . Roberts ended his junior career as a two @-@ time Memorial Cup champion . 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 In his first professional season , 1986 – 87 , Roberts shuttled between Calgary and Moncton . He was recalled to the Flames three times during the season and scored his first NHL goal in his NHL debut on November 11 , 1986 , against the Vancouver Canucks . He recorded 15 points in 32 games with Calgary and added 38 points in 38 AHL games with Moncton . In his first full season in Calgary , 1987 – 88 , Roberts improved to 28 points in 74 NHL games , while his 282 penalty minutes were ultimately the highest total of his career , and the first of five consecutive seasons which he recorded over 200 minutes in penalties . Roberts joined the Flames as a grinder ; He played a physical style and frequently engaged opponents in fights , but credited Nieuwendyk with helping him establish his place as a power forward and offensive threat with the team . Playing on a line with Nieuwendyk and Håkan Loob , Roberts scored 22 goals in 1988 – 89 . He added 12 points in the 1989 Stanley Cup Playoffs , including two goals in the Flames ' 5 – 3 victory in the fourth game of the Smythe Division final that eliminated the Los Angeles Kings . Roberts and the Flames went on to defeat the Montreal Canadiens in the final to earn the franchise 's first Stanley Cup championship . 
 Developing into an offensive leader , Roberts scored more goals ( 39 ) in 1989 – 90 than he had points ( 38 ) the previous season . He scored his first career hat trick in a 6 – 2 win over the Edmonton Oilers on March 30 , 1990 . After regressing to 22 goals and 53 points in 1990 – 91 , Roberts set career highs in 1991 – 92 with 53 goals and 90 points . Both totals led the Flames and 53 goals remains the second highest single @-@ season total in Flames history , behind Lanny McDonald 's 66 goals in 1982 – 83 . He played in his first NHL All @-@ Star Game in 1992 , and became one of the first two players in NHL history to score 50 goals and record 200 penalty minutes in the same season ( along with Kevin Stevens of the Pittsburgh Penguins ) . 
 Roberts tied a Flames franchise record with goals in eight consecutive games in 1992 – 93 , a streak that came to an end when he suffered a quadriceps injury that caused him to miss 25 games . He finished the season with 79 points in 58 games , and appeared in his second All @-@ Star Game . Healthy for most of the 1993 – 94 season , Roberts led the Flames with 41 goals . He missed the final two weeks due to damage to nerves in his neck , an injury he had experienced previously in his career . The injury worsened in the lockout @-@ shortened 1994 – 95 season as he appeared in only eight games . Degeneration of the nerves in his neck left Roberts unable to lift a 2 pounds ( 0 @.@ 91 kg ) dumbbell above his shoulder with his left arm . 
 The injury was considered career threatening and required two surgeries , in March and October 1995 , to repair . After missing the first half of the 1995 – 96 season , Roberts made his return on January 10 , 1996 , against the Hartford Whalers . The fans greeted him with a standing ovation and he responded by scoring a goal and throwing several bodychecks in the game . Although he played only 35 games , Roberts scored 22 goals and had 42 points . His return and performance earned him the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy for perseverance and dedication to the game . The problems with his neck failed to abate however , and on June 17 , 1996 , Roberts elected to retire from the NHL at the age of 30 . 
 = = = Carolina and Toronto = = = 
 Several months after retiring , Roberts was put in touch with Dr. Michael Leahy , a chiropractor from Colorado , whose " active release technique " of physiotherapy led to an immediate improvement in his mobility . Determined to try and resume his career , Roberts then spent most of the next year with a physical therapist learning a new training regimen . After sitting out the entire 1996 – 97 season , Roberts announced his return to the NHL . He remained a member of the Flames , but the team agreed to trade him to an Eastern team to reduce strain due to travel . The Flames dealt Roberts , along with goaltender Trevor Kidd , to the Carolina Hurricanes on August 25 , 1997 , in exchange for Andrew Cassels and Jean @-@ Sebastien Giguere . 
 In his return season of 1997 – 98 , Roberts recorded 49 points in 61 games . He dropped to 42 points in 1998 – 99 , but finished fifth in team scoring to help Carolina win a Southeast Division championship . He scored his first playoff goal in five years in Carolina 's first round series against the Boston Bruins , though the Hurricanes ultimately lost the series in six games . Roberts scored 53 points in 1999 – 2000 before leaving Carolina as a free agent . 
 Returning to Canada , Roberts signed a three @-@ year contract with the Toronto Maple Leafs worth $ 8 million . He chose his hometown Maple Leafs because he felt they had a better opportunity to win the Stanley Cup than Carolina did . He recorded 53 points in 2000 – 01 and his 29 goals led the team . A 48 @-@ point season followed in 2001 – 02 and he assumed leadership of the Maple Leafs during the 2002 Stanley Cup Playoffs after team captain Mats Sundin suffered a season @-@ ending injury . Roberts led Toronto past their first round opponent , the New York Islanders , in an occasionally violent seven game series . The Maple Leafs reached the Eastern Conference final , where they ultimately lost to Carolina . Roberts led Toronto in playoff scoring with 19 points in 19 games . 
 Playing a physical style again took its toll on Roberts ' upper body , and he required surgery on both shoulders following the season . As a result , he missed the first four and a half months of the 2002 – 03 season ; he appeared in only 14 games for Toronto . The Maple Leafs signed him to a one @-@ year contract extension shortly after he returned from the injury . Roberts reached a career milestone midway through the 2003 – 04 season , as he played his 1,000th NHL game on January 13 , 2004 , a 4 – 1 victory over the Calgary Flames . He finished the season with 48 points in 72 games and played in his third All @-@ Star Game . 
 = = = Florida , Pittsburgh and Tampa Bay = = = 
 While the NHL was shut down due to a labour dispute in 2004 – 05 , the National Lacrosse League ( NLL ) ' s Calgary Roughnecks selected Roberts in the sixth round of the 2004 NLL Draft , partially as a public relations stunt . He declined the chance to play professional lacrosse . When NHL play resumed in 2005 – 06 , Roberts and Nieuwendyk each signed a two @-@ year deal with the Florida Panthers . The pair , who were teammates in Toronto as well as Calgary , hoped to end their careers together in Florida . It did not happen , as chronic back pain forced Nieuwendyk 's retirement in December 2006 . 
 Roberts did not last much longer in Florida as , following a 40 @-@ point season in 2005 – 06 , the Panthers sought to trade him to the Pittsburgh Penguins late in the 2006 – 07 season . Several members of the Penguins , including Mario Lemieux and general manager Ray Shero , sought to convince Roberts to agree to the deal as he was initially unsure about leaving Florida but ultimately agreed to the trade . The deal was completed at the February 27 , 2007 , trade deadline as Pittsburgh sent prospect Noah Welch to Florida in exchange for Roberts . He was brought in to add a leadership presence to a young Penguins team . He finished the regular season with 13 points in 19 games in Pittsburgh and helped the Penguins reach the playoffs for the first time in six years . 
 Injuries again hampered Roberts in 2007 – 08 . He missed time early in the season due to a viral infection , then broke his left fibula in a game against the Buffalo Sabres . He was praised for skating off the ice without assistance despite the injury , but missed over two months of action while his leg healed . Appearing in only 38 games during the regular season , Roberts returned from the injury in time to score two goals and lead Pittsburgh to a victory in the first game of its opening round playoff series against the Ottawa Senators . At 41 years , 322 days old , he became the oldest player in NHL history to score more than one goal in a post @-@ season game . He added two assists in ten additional playoff games for the Penguins . 
 Pittsburgh opted not to re @-@ sign Roberts to a new contract following the season and traded both he and Ryan Malone – who was also a pending free agent – to the Tampa Bay Lightning in exchange for a third round draft pick on June 28 , 2008 . The deal gave Tampa Bay a brief window in which they had exclusive rights to negotiate a contract . He agreed to a one @-@ year contract with the Lightning . Another injury , to his elbow , caused Roberts to miss 33 games of the 2008 – 09 season . He played only 30 games and recorded seven points . The Lightning placed him on waivers as the 2009 trade deadline approached , but no team claimed him . Nine days after playing his final NHL game , an 8 – 6 win in Calgary where he recorded an assist , Roberts announced his retirement on March 10 , 2009 . 
 = = Fitness and training = = 
 Roberts entered his first NHL training camp with the Flames in 1984 believing his summer lacrosse schedule was enough to keep him in proper hockey game shape . Coach Bob Johnson disagreed and hauled him in front of his peers as an example of someone who had not committed to being a hockey player . He was initially upset , but grew to realize that Johnson was correct , particularly in that he was not particularly focused on his fitness . The criticism inspired Roberts to dedicate himself to personal training , and carried a reputation for being obsessed with nutrition and physical fitness throughout his career . He credited his fitness and nutrition regimen with helping him extend his career another 13 years after his first retirement . 
 As a player , Roberts helped train his peers during off @-@ seasons . He was a member of the Dallas Stars ' staff as the team 's player development consultant during the 2010 – 11 NHL season . One of Roberts ' early disciples , Tampa 's Steven Stamkos , developed into a 50 goal player in his first season after training with Roberts and led to numerous players seeking to train with him . His growing reputation as a personal trainer led to the creation of the Gary Roberts High Performance Centre and Fitness Institute in North York , Ontario where he trains junior and professional players , including several in the NHL . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Roberts has been married twice and has three children . He and his first wife Tamra have a daughter , Jordan , though the couple were divorced while Roberts played in Toronto . With his second wife , Michelle , he has two sons and a daughter : Noah , Sam , and Sydney Michelle assists her husband at the training centre . Roberts hosts an annual charity golf tournament in Uxbridge , Ontario , in support of Canadian Tire 's <unk> program , which helps young people get involved in sports . He is an honoured member of the Whitby Sports Hall of Fame , inducted in 2010 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Globalization and women in China = 
 The study of the impact of globalization on women in China examines the role and status of Chinese women relative to the political and cultural changes that have taken place in the 20th century as a consequence of globalization . Globalization refers to the interaction and integration of people , products , cultures and governments between various nations around the globe ; this is fostered by trade , investment , and information technology . Globalization affected women 's rights and the gender hierarchy in China , in aspects of domestic life such as marriage and primogeniture , as well as in the workplace . These changes altered the quality of life and the availability of opportunities to women at different junctures throughout the modern globalization process . 
 The dynamics of gender inequity are correlated with the ideological principles held by the ruling political regime . The imperial era was dominated by the social paradigm of Confucianism , which was a pervasive philosophy throughout the Orient . Confucian ideals emphasized morality , character , social relationship , and the status quo . Confucius preached jen ( humanity ) and the equality and <unk> of all people ; Neo @-@ Confucianists and Imperial leaders used his beliefs in social hierarchy , particularly in the family setting , for the physical and social oppression of women . As the Chinese government began to re @-@ assimilate themselves into the global community in the late 19th to early 20th century , it shifted away from conventional Confucian ideals and women ’ s role in society changed as well . After Mao Zedong established the People ’ s Republic of China in 1949 , a change in traditional gender roles came about . Mao ’ s death marked the beginning of the current communist administration and an influx of international communications in the areas of commerce , politics and social ideals . Since the 1980s , under the new communist party , the women ’ s rights movement has gained momentum and has become a national issue and a sign of modernization . 
 In rural areas , women traditionally work alongside their family to produce crops like tea and rice . In urban areas , women work in factories , living away from home . Most of these factory workers are young girls that send their income to their families . To help maintain the rights of women in factories , labor unions and organizations were built . In their homes , women take care of their children and cook . 
 = = Western bias = = 
 Western scholarship has historically used ideas of subordinance and victimization to characterize traditional Chinese womanhood . These beliefs were largely constructed on the basis of ideological and political agendas , and were widely accepted despite their <unk> . Early European writings pertaining to Chinese women were produced by missionaries and ethnologists at the conclusion of the 19th century . The goal of the missionaries was to “ civilize China , ” and highlighting weakness and victimization provided for the continuance of their work . This belief prompted scholars to use female subordination as a means to validate Western ideas about Chinese culture and Confucian principles . 
 In the 1970s , as the feminist movements were forming , they began to affect the literature surrounding women in China . Studies on Chinese women from this period were concerned with women ’ s liberation , and were sympathetic to the feminist movement . This sentiment largely influenced the topics and methodology of the research . With this shift in perspective , the focus of discourse remained on subordination , patriarchal oppression , and victimization . These studies examined such issues as foot binding and the chastity of widows . Literature formulated by feminist writers did nothing to dispel the myth of the weak , subservient woman . These works provided a new bias that had not before been articulated . Feminists believed that Chinese women were a part of a “ universally subordinated womanhood " . This line of thinking illustrates the cultural superiority inherently felt by Western women . Writings on Chinese woman rarely account for differences in time , ethnicity , class , region or age , preferring to describe the status of women as a static , unitary fixture of Chinese culture , despite the political and geographic boundaries that defined different regions and the economic and social changes that occurred throughout history . 
 = = History of female oppression = = 
 = = = Traditional roles and Confucianism = = = 
 From the Han Dynasty ( 206 BC @-@ 220 CE ) until the modern period ( 1840 – 1919 ) , scholars and rulers developed a male @-@ dominated patriarchal society in China . Confucianism was at the root of the development of the patriarchal society in China , and emphasized the distinctions between the sexes and the roles they have within the family . These ideologies continued through the Tang dynasty ( 618 @-@ 907 ) , and girls were taught from a very young age to be submissive to their fathers , then to their husbands , and later to their sons . During the Song Dynasty ( 960 @-@ 1297 ) , Confucian scholars further developed the patriarchal tradition with more restrictions for females , including foot binding for girls at a very young age . 
 = = = Married life = = = 
 The traditional Chinese marriage system is organized by the parents of the groom and bride in order to obtain alliances between the two families to ensure the continuance of the family line . There were three types of marriages that emerged in the late Chou Dynasty ( 951 @-@ 960 ) . In these three marriages , the Chinese woman 's main function was to produce children . The first marriage was called a capture marriage , in which the groom would go to his prospective bride 's house at dusk to " kidnap " her . The second type of marriage was called a purchase marriage , in which women were paid for by their husbands . Once women were purchased , they became their husband 's possession and could be traded or sold . The third type of marriage was the arranged marriage , which was accomplished by a matchmaker who acted as a go @-@ between for both families . If there was not a matchmaker , the marriage could be deemed unacceptable and the husband had the right to dissolve the marriage . The married woman 's role at home depended upon the social rank of her spouse , but the prime mission of married women , regardless of their social status , was to bear a son in order to carry on the family name . In addition , a married woman was to be obedient to her in @-@ laws as if they were her own parents . 
 The marriage law of 1950 was issued after the founding of the People 's Republic of China in 1949 . It declared the abolition of the feudal marriage system characterized by arranged and forced marriage , male superiority , and the disregard for the interests of children . This law also asserted the rights of adults to divorce , which embraced the free @-@ choice marriage , and helped transfer power from the older to the younger generations . 
 = = = May Fourth Movement = = = 
 The " New Culture " movement began in China around 1916 following the unsuccessful activities of the 1911 Revolution to establish a republican government , and continued through the 1920s . The May Fourth Movement , which took place on May 4 , 1919 , was a demonstration led by students at the National Peking University against the government , in which they protested the abolition of Confucianism and changes in the traditional value system . Many believed that the solution to China 's problems would be to adopt Western notions of equality and democracy . Since the movement stressed group efforts and propaganda , women were involved in numerous collective tasks such as publication , drama production , and fund raising , which helped them gain more social contact with men and win respect . 
 = = Domestic life of a Chinese woman = = 
 = = = Foot binding = = = 
 Foot binding is the process in which the arch of a woman 's feet is broken and the toes are wrapped up against the foot to create a smaller looking foot with an acute arch . These " fists of flesh " were seen as attractive and arousing for men and the practice was passed down as a prerequisite to marriage from mother to daughter across generations . Special shoes were made to accentuate the small size of the women 's feet . This process was painful and often confined women to their rooms . Few lower class women were able to have their feet bound because they needed to be able to walk normally to accomplish house work . Bound feet came to be an indication of high class and wealth for women . Chinese male reformers during the imperialism period recognized the liberation of the Chinese women as something necessary for their own sake . The humiliation that China had gone through on an international level was turned on the Chinese “ women ” . Naturally , the foot binding was recognized as “ national shame , ” and people found it as a serious problem to be disappeared , thus raging anti @-@ footbinding campaigns in the 1890s to the 1900s . Moreover , the new government that came in after the 1911 revolution banned foot binding practice . Thus , it started to disappear in the coastal areas in 1900 to 1920 . However , the practice was still popular within the interior areas of China till the 1930s and even in the 1950s . The practice has been outlawed multiple times since its inception in the 13th century . It was finally banned as the Communists came to power around 1949 . 
 = = = Trafficking of women = = = 
 Women are sold through gangs of women traffickers who kidnap and transport young women and girls across large distances from their homes . Their papers and documentation are taken from them . These women are purchased by men who bar them from leaving the home for fear of the women escaping . Some of these women feel a sense of duty to the family once they have committed to them and had children . They also have no means of escape . This practice has been banned by the government since Mao Zedong and the Communists came to power . Men who buy wives are subject to time in jail , and those convicted for trafficking women face execution . 
 = = = Confucianism and Communism = = = 
 Under Confucianism the typical family was patriarchal because men have the capability to pass on the family name and carry on the lineage of the ancestors ; women were expected to be subservient . As the Communist regime changed the structure of Chinese society through economic reform , the structure of the Chinese family was altered . " The Four Olds " ( <unk> ) - old ideas , old habits , old customs , old cultures - were discouraged and were replaced by Communist ideology particularly during the Cultural Revolution . The economy was shifted to total government control with few chances to own private property and communal property . Collectivization destroyed " clan @-@ based " systems and had a great effect on motivation of workers and family loyalties . 
 The traditional social structure was further degraded by the Cultural Revolution . The Red Guards turned members of a family against one another as they sought out " class enemies " to be sent for " re @-@ education , " ultimately resulting in a loss of family ties . Women were elevated to equal status as men through a series of laws which prohibited practices such as arranged marriages , <unk> , dowries , and child betrothals . Under these marriage laws , women enjoyed joint property in marriage and could file for a divorce . 
 As a result of Communist rule in China , the social status of women improved greatly . Women were empowered to work outside the home . Communist rule also brought about the end of practices such as foot binding , child marriages , prostitution , and arranged marriages . China has seen a decrease in domestic violence due to government @-@ supported grassroots programs to counter these practices . Women in rural areas remain largely uneducated . 
 = = = Population control = = = 
 During the reform period , the Communist regime in China regulated birth control . The party legalized abortion in 1953 and then created public birth control study groups in 1954 . There was a push for a limit on childbirth in 1956 , which had no immediate effect on the population . In 1979 , the One Child Policy was implemented and is still in effect today . 
 Another instance of population control is the prevalence of female infanticide . Due to the One Child Policy , most families want a boy rather than a girl . Since the 1980s , roughly 200 @,@ 000 female infants would be killed per year because of the preference for male children and the advancement in technologies such as ultrasound , which help to find out the sex of the fetus . In addition to female infanticide , girls are being unregistered or are abandoned by their families , which stops them from receiving education and legal benefits the government offered . These methods of controlling population have resulted in a huge gender gap in China . 
 = = Chinese women in the workplace = = 
 = = = History of working women = = = 
 In the imperial era , women were prohibited from having official positions . It was unimaginable for women to hold these positions because during this time women underwent foot bindings , which prevented them from doing any sorts of physical labor . They held jobs that required minimal physical activity like domestic chores and producing textiles to sell or use . 
 During Mao 's rule ( 1949 – 1976 ) , Chinese women were needed for their manual labor for farming and for urban industrialization . To compensate for their hard work , they were provided access to education and politics . The Chinese government supported women 's education . The percentage of girls attending school was 96 @.@ 2 % compared to below 20 % before the People 's Republic ( 1949 ) . The Chinese government has tried to decrease the amount of women illiterates while promoting adult and vocational schools . The amount of illiterates has gone down from 90 % in 1949 and 32 % from 1993 . In the first 30 years of Communist rule women 's discrimination was decreasing , but they did not have jobs that had real decision @-@ making power . 
 Now in the present day , there are more employed Chinese women . They receive the same amount of money for the same amount of work that they do . The Chinese government has made great efforts to achieve a high level of economic status for women . Since 1949 , with the founding of the People ' Republic , the rate for employed women has risen . Chinese women account for 44 % of the work force and 34 @.@ 5 % account for the women 's work force in the world . 
 = = = Rural areas = = = 
 The key role women have in farming is to maintain ownership of the main sources of production in rural areas . In traditional <unk> women were not allowed to own land . Land was inherited through the sons , and if there was no son in the family , it was taken by a close male relative . In less populated areas , women do more agricultural work than men because of shifting cultivation . In more populated areas , men do more work than women because extensive plough cultivation is used . During the busy periods of planting , transporting , and harvesting , women are brought onto the field to work rather than working in the house . Female involvement is high in the double @-@ cropping rice area . Women also play a role in tea cultivation . Other types of work women perform in the countryside include pig and poultry rearing , spinning , weaving , basket @-@ making , and other handicrafts . This type of work supplements agricultural income . 
 = = = Urban areas = = = 
 China 's economic policies laid the basis of the industrialization drive in export @-@ oriented development , and its reliance on low @-@ wage manufacturing to produce consumer goods for the world market . Young migrant women left their homes in rural settings to work in urban industrial areas . Work included export @-@ oriented industrialization , manufacturing in electronics and toy assembly , sewing in garment production , and mixed assembly and sewing in the footwear industry . Hong Kong and Shenzhen were cities established as centers of export @-@ oriented industrialization , and migrant women workers have made up 70 % of Shenzhen 's three million people . 
 Private sector employers are reluctant to hire women because Chinese law requires that the employer cover maternity leave and childbirth costs . 
 = = = = Reasons for migrant labor = = = = 
 A recent phenomenon , the migration of rural Chinese workers began in 1984 when the Regulations of Permanent Residence Registration became less punitive and allowed people to move to find employment . People left rural areas to escape poverty , and females left due to the lack of local opportunities for women . In the cities , women could find new , low @-@ paid factory @-@ based jobs that did not require highly skilled workers . According to national statistics , the ratio of male to female migrant workers averages 2 : 1 , and an estimated 30 @-@ 40 million of the migrant women work in the cities , namely Hong Kong and Shenzhen . 
 In 2003 , 70 % of the 5 @.@ 5 million migrant workers were females in the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone . In the <unk> district of Shenzhen , females comprised 80 % of the workforce with the average age of 23 . Young female workers are preferred over older females or males for several reasons . First , as married women are less mobile , female migrant workers are younger and more likely to be single than their male counterparts . Young rural women are preferred for these jobs primarily because they are less likely to get pregnant , and are able and willing to withstand longer working hours , have “ nimble fingers , and will be less experienced in asking for their statutory rights . In many cases , migrant women sign contracts stating that they will not get pregnant within their period of employment . ” 
 In the interest of the family , rural females are sent to find urban employment over male counterparts , mainly to supplement familial income at home and to support the males , who are more likely to attend college . The male standard of education in China is higher ; particularly when a family is under financial stress , females are more likely to drop out of school to generate income for the family . Because females have lesser impact on the family ’ s long @-@ term financial stability , their rights for opportunities development are consequently unequal . 
 This new system allowed rural residents to migrate , it did not allow them to change their residence or accept any benefits in the cities . This resulted in a growing population of migrant laborers without the minimal benefits of residency including medical care , housing , or education . Many migrants , particularly less educated , younger women are unaware of their rights . Today , up to 90 % of migrants work without contracts , in violation of the Chinese labour law . 
 = = = = Degradation = = = = 
 Women factory workers are known as " <unk> " ( working girls ) . They are traditionally young women migrants who experience a segmented labor market in informal and low @-@ wage employment sectors . Workers in export @-@ oriented factories receive minimum wage and minimum overtime pay , they pay for meals and lodging at the factory , and they pay fines for breaking factory rules . The average daily wage , for a 12 @-@ hour day in a toy factory , in the mid @-@ 1990s was $ 1 @.@ 10 USD for migrant women workers in Shenzhen . 
 These conditions create " maximum surplus appropriation " ; workers ' daily lives revolve around factory production and are dependent on the regional economy . The state disallows local unionization and has the All @-@ China Federation of Trade Unions ( ACFTU ) as the legitimate forum of worker representation . Without the right to form unions and with the state sanctioned ACFTU , migrant women workers find it hard to effectively gain suitable rights and treatment from the factory management . The 2003 statistics from the People 's University show 90 % of migrants work without contracts , directly violating the Chinese Labour Law . According to the ACFTU , migrant workers are owed over 100 billion Yuan in back wages . 
 Organizations are now attempting to assist and empower female migrant workers through training and education on their labor @-@ related rights . Legal clinics have begun to assist female migrants in filing claims against employers and local labor bureaus . One case of female worker exploitation in the Hua Yi garment factory in Beijing resulted in mistreatment by management as well as withholding pay for at least 24 women . After filing complaints , in collaboration with the Center for Women 's Law Studies and Legal Services of Beijing University , the women received 170 @,@ 000 Yuan in back wages and compensation . 
 Relations between workers and employers represent both the immediate need of manufacturing plants for large quantities of low wage laborers , and the insecurities young workers face in relocating long distances to life in factory dormitories . Hiring single young women serve needs of management . The employment of young females allow management to exhibit maximum control and authority over the labor force . Compared to older women and male workers , young single women are susceptible to the authority and demands of management . The common manipulation of " factory as family " by owners and managers suggests how workers hold a subliminal status within the factory environment . Uneven power relations inside the factory result in demands from management for personal services from women workers , from hair washing to sex . 
 = Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball = 
 The Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team is the intercollegiate men 's basketball program representing the University of Michigan . The school competes in the Big Ten Conference in Division I of the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) . The Wolverines play home basketball games at the Crisler Center in Ann Arbor , Michigan on the university campus . Michigan has won an NCAA Championship — under coach Steve Fisher — as well as two National Invitation Tournaments ( NIT ) and 14 Big Ten Conference championships . In addition , it has won an NIT tournament and a Big Ten Conference Tournament that was vacated due to NCAA sanctions . The team is currently coached by John Beilein . 
 During the 1990s Michigan endured an NCAA violations scandal , described as involving one of the largest amounts of illicit money in NCAA history , when Ed Martin loaned Chris Webber , Robert Traylor , Louis Bullock , and Maurice Taylor a reported total of $ 616 @,@ 000 . Due to NCAA sanctions , records from the 1992 Final Four , the 1992 – 93 , 1995 – 96 , 1996 – 97 , 1997 – 98 , and 1998 – 99 seasons have been vacated . This includes a total of 113 victories and 4 losses , of which 49 wins occurred in conference games . It also includes the following postseason records NCAA : 7 – 4 , NIT : 5 – 0 , and Big Ten : 4 – 1 . This reflects vacating games played in the 1992 Final Four ; the 1997 NIT championship ; the 1993 , 1996 , and 1998 NCAA Tournament appearances ; and the 1998 Big Ten Tournament championship . Throughout this article asterisks denote awards , records and honors that have been vacated . 
 Michigan has had 26 All @-@ Americans selected 33 times . Eight of these have been consensus All @-@ Americans : Cazzie Russell ( two @-@ times ) , Rickey Green , Gary Grant , Chris Webber , Trey Burke , as well as Harry Kipke , Richard Doyle and Bennie Oosterbaan ( two @-@ times ) who were retroactively selected by the Helms Foundation . Four All @-@ Americans have been at least two @-@ time honorees : Bennie Oosterbaan , Bill Buntin , Russell , and Henry Wilmore . Russell was a three @-@ time All @-@ American . 
 Michigan basketball players have been successful in professional basketball . Fifty @-@ five have been drafted into the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) ; twenty @-@ five of those were first round draft picks , including both Cazzie Russell and Chris Webber who were drafted first overall . The 1990 NBA Draft in which Rumeal Robinson was selected 10th , Loy Vaught was selected 13th , and Terry Mills was selected 16th made Michigan the third of only ten schools that have ever had three or more players selected in the first round of the same draft . Five players have gone on to become NBA champions for a total of 9 times and eight players have become NBA All @-@ Stars a total of 18 times . Rudy Tomjanovich coached both the 1994 and 1995 NBA Finals Champions . Not only has Glen Rice won both an NBA and NCAA championship , he is also one of only nine basketball players to have won a state high school championship , NCAA title and NBA championship . 
 = = Michigan 's history = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1908 – 19 ) = = = 
 As a result of public and alumni demand for a basketball team , Michigan fielded a team of members of the then @-@ current student body and achieved a 1 – 4 record for the 1908 – 09 season . However , after three years of demanding a basketball program , the student body did not attend the games and the program was terminated due to low attendance . Basketball returned in 1917 in what was considered the inaugural season of varsity basketball . The team was coached by Elmer Mitchell who instituted the intramural sports program at Michigan . The team finished 6 – 12 overall ( 0 – 10 , Big Ten ) . The following year Mitchell led the team to a 16 – 8 ( 5 – 5 ) record . 
 = = = Mather era ( 1919 – 28 ) = = = 
 E. J. Mather coached the team to three Big Ten titles in his nine seasons as coach . After inheriting Mitchell 's team , which he led to a 10 – 13 overall ( 3 – 9 , Big Ten ) record during the 1919 – 20 season , he led the team to an 18 – 4 overall ( 8 – 4 , Big Ten ) record during the 1920 – 21 season . This 1921 team won its first eight and last eight games to tie the Wisconsin Badgers and Purdue Boilermakers for the Big Ten title . The team won back @-@ to @-@ back championships in 1925 – 26 and 1926 – 27 . The 1926 squad , which was captained by Richard Doyle who became the team 's first All @-@ American , tied with Purdue , the Iowa Hawkeyes and Indiana Hoosiers for the conference championship . The 1927 team had a new All @-@ American , Bennie Oosterbaan , and won the school 's first back @-@ to @-@ back championships and first outright championship with a 14 – 3 overall ( 10 – 2 , Big Ten ) record . Mather died after a lengthy battle with cancer in August 1928 . 
 = = = Veenker era ( 1928 – 31 ) = = = 
 George F. Veenker compiled the highest overall and highest Big Ten winning percentages of any coach in school history during his three years as coach . He earned 1st ( tied ) , 3rd and 2nd ( tied ) finishes during his three seasons , which included the 1928 – 29 conference championship . During Veenker 's first season his team compiled a 13 – 3 overall ( 10 – 2 , Big Ten ) record to win the conference , and Veenker continues to be the only coach in school history to win a conference championship in his first season . The championship team , which finished tied with Wisconsin , was captained by the schools third All @-@ American Ernie McCoy . Veenker resigned to become the Iowa State Cyclones football head coach . 
 = = = Cappon era ( 1931 – 38 ) = = = 
 Franklin Cappon had a long history of association with Michigan athletics starting with his service as a four @-@ time letterman in football and basketball from 1919 to 1923 . In 1928 , he became assistant football and basketball coach and in 1929 he served as Fielding H. Yost 's assistant Athletic Director . Although the highlight of Cappon 's tenure as coach was a 16 – 4 ( 9 – 3 ) third place 1936 – 37 Big Ten finish , he coached John Townsend who in his 1937 – 38 senior season became last All @-@ American for at least 10 years . The team finished third in two other seasons with less impressive records of 10 – 8 overall ( 8 – 4 , Big Ten ) in 1932 – 33 and 15 – 5 overall ( 7 – 5 , Big Ten ) 1935 – 36 , and Cappon 's overall record was 78 – 57 overall ( 44 – 40 , Big Ten ) . A notable captain during the Cappon era was 1933 – 34 captain Ted Petoskey , a two @-@ time football All @-@ American end and eventual Major League Baseball player . 
 = = = Oosterbaan era ( 1938 – 46 ) = = = 
 In 1938 Michigan coaching duties were assumed by one of its greatest athletes . Bennie Oosterbaan had been an All @-@ American in both football and basketball and held various coaching positions at Michigan in both of those sports as well as baseball . In basketball , he implemented a fast @-@ paced attack as coach , and his teams ' best overall record was 13 – 7 in 1939 – 40 . That season he tied with his final season for his best Big Ten record at 6 – 6 . He resigned after eight seasons to concentrate on his football coaching duties . 
 = = = Cowles era ( 1946 – 48 ) = = = 
 Under Ozzie Cowles , during the 1947 – 48 season , Michigan ended the longest ( 19 years ) consecutive year period without a conference championship in school history . They also became the first contestants in the NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament during Cowles second of two seasons . The 1947 – 48 team posted a 16 – 6 overall ( 10 – 2 , Big Ten ) record . This team also posted the first undefeated home performance in school history with a 9 – 0 overall ( 6 – 0 , Big Ten ) record . 
 = = = McCoy era ( 1948 – 52 ) = = = 
 Ernie McCoy became the second former All @-@ American Wolverine player to coach the team . Like Oosterbaan before him , he became a football and baseball coach at Michigan . He also served as assistant Athletic Director under Fritz Crisler . During his four seasons as basketball coach , Michigan 's best finish was during the 1948 – 49 season when they finished 15 – 6 overall ( 7 – 5 , Big Ten ) and earned a third place Big Ten Conference finish . He coached Michigan 's first All @-@ Big Ten basketball players that season in Pete Elliot and captain Bob Harrison who were both selected to the first team . Harrison returned the following season as the first repeat first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten basketball player and Elliot was a second @-@ team honoree . McCoy served as a football scout at the same time . 
 = = = Perigo era ( 1952 – 60 ) = = = 
 Bill Perigo took over the Michigan coaching job after having served three seasons as Western Michigan basketball coach . Despite previous success as a conference basketball champion coach at Western and subsequent success as a Michigan High School Athletic Association ( MHSAA ) champion basketball coach , his Michigan teams endured several mediocre seasons . His best Big Ten records came in 1956 – 57 and 1958 – 59 when his teams compiled 8 – 6 conference records . The latter team was tied for second in the conference and was 15 – 7 overall ( 8 – 6 , Big Ten ) . It also had Perigo 's only first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten athlete in M. C. Burton . Team captain and two @-@ time football consensus All @-@ American Ron Kramer was third @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten in 1957 after being second @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten in both 1955 and 1956 . 
 = = = Strack era ( 1960 – 68 ) = = = 
 Dave Strack , a former team 1945 – 46 captain , had become the freshman basketball team coach in 1948 and later had become a variety assistant to Perigo . He led the team to three consecutive Big Ten Championships from 1963 – 66 and a third @-@ place finish in the 1964 NCAA tournament . During 1964 – 65 the team compiled a 24 – 4 overall ( 13 – 1 , Big Ten ) record while completing an undefeated 11 – 0 overall ( 7 – 0 , Big Ten ) home season . Strack earned United Press International ( UPI ) National Coach of the Year honors . The team ended the season listed number one in both the UPI and Associated Press ( AP ) national rankings . He recruited All @-@ Americans Russell and Buntin to anchor his mid @-@ 1960s teams . Tomjanovich also became a Wolverine at the end of Strack 's career and became second team All @-@ Big Ten in 1968 subsequent later stardom . The 1964 team , which went 23 – 5 overall ( 11 – 3 , Big Ten ) , tied with Ohio State with sophomore Russell and junior Buntin . In 1965 , Buntin became the first Wolverine to be drafted by the NBA . In 1966 , Russell led the team to its third straight conference championship and NCAA selection on his way to National Player of the Year honors . 
 = = = Orr era ( 1968 – 80 ) = = = 
 In Johnny Orr 's twelve seasons , he twice ( 1973 – 74 and 1976 – 77 ) earned Big Ten Coach of the Year honors with Big Ten championships . His teams earned four consecutive NCAA selections from 1974 – 77 . The 25 – 7 overall ( 14 – 4 , Big Ten ) 1976 team lost to an undefeated Indiana team in the NCAA championship game , and Orr earned National Association of Basketball Coaches Coach of the Year honors that season . The 26 – 4 overall ( 16 – 2 , Big Ten ) 1977 team finished first in both the AP and UPI national rankings , and Orr won Basketball Weekly National Coach of the Year honors . During Orr 's tenure , six players earned a total of seven All @-@ American recognitions , which is the most of any Michigan coach . Steve Grote became Michigan 's only three @-@ time first @-@ team Academic All @-@ American from 1975 – 77 and with a second team All Big Ten as well as three honorable mentions was the first four @-@ time All @-@ Big Ten honoree . 
 = = = Frieder era ( 1980 – 89 ) = = = 
 Bill Frieder , who had been an assistant coach for seven years , took over from Orr in 1980 . He coached the school 's first post @-@ season basketball champions during the 1983 – 84 season and the following two teams were back @-@ to @-@ back conference champions . The 1983 – 84 team compiled a 24 – 9 overall ( 11 – 7 , Big Ten ) record on their way to a NIT championship victory over Notre Dame . The 1984 – 85 team went 26 – 4 overall ( 16 – 2 , Big Ten ) , which earned Frieder Big Ten and AP National Coach of the Year honors . The 1985 – 86 team , which finished 28 – 5 overall ( 14 – 4 , Big Ten ) , started the season with sixteen victories to make a total of thirty @-@ three consecutive regular season victories . Frieder earned five of Michigan 's six consecutive NCAA births from 1985 – 90 , currently the longest streak in program history . Roy Tarpley led the 1985 team as Big Ten MVP . Frieder resigned , upon request , immediately prior to the 1989 NCAA tournament to assume the coaching job for the Arizona State Sun Devils men 's basketball team . 
 = = = Fisher era ( 1989 – 97 ) = = = 
 Steve Fisher assumed the coaching position immediately before the 1989 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament from Frieder after having served and led the team to six straight victories and the championship . Fisher also signed the most famous recruiting class known as the Fab Five ( Chris Webber , Juwan Howard , Jalen Rose , Jimmy King and Ray Jackson ) . He would take these players to the NCAA championship game as Freshmen and Sophomores . In their sophomore 1992 – 93 season they compiled a 31 – 5 overall ( 15 – 3 , Big Ten ) record , which has since been vacated . Fisher also won the 1997 NIT tournament with a team that compiled a 25 – 9 overall ( 11 – 5 ) record . Many of Fisher 's accomplishments were tarnished by NCAA sanctions . He left the job due to the University of Michigan basketball scandal . 
 = = = Ellerbe era ( 1997 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Brian Ellerbe assumed the title of interim coach less than five months after becoming an assistant coach . He was named full @-@ time coach following the 25 – 9 ( 11 – 5 ) 1997 – 98 season in which he led the team to victories over Iowa , Minnesota and Purdue to capture the Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament championship . His subsequent teams never finished better than seventh in the conference . 
 = = = Amaker era ( 2001 – 07 ) = = = 
 Tommy Amaker inherited a team that imposed sanctions on itself after his first year at the helm of the program . Nonetheless , he coached the team to the postseason three times including both an NIT championship in 2004 and a runner @-@ up finish in 2006 . During the 2005 – 06 , when the team compiled a 22 – 11 overall ( 8 – 8 , Big Ten ) record , he led them to their first national ranking in eight years when they reached the # 20 position . Despite his successes , the team never won a Big Ten Championship and never made the NCAA tournament , which led to his firing after six seasons . 
 = = = Beilein era ( 2007 – present ) = = = 
 John Beilein 's 10 – 22 overall ( 5 – 13 , Big Ten ) inaugural season featured the most losses in Michigan 's history and ended with a March 14 , 2008 performance that was the Big Ten Conference Tournament 's lowest scoring output until 2011 . However , in Beilein 's second season , the team posted impressive non @-@ conference victories over top @-@ five ranked opponents UCLA and Duke . Beilein led Michigan to the 2009 NCAA Tournament , its first appearance since 1998 and the first that was not vacated since 1995 . After upsetting Clemson in the first round , the Wolverines were eliminated by Oklahoma in Round 2 by a final score of 73 – 63 . Following a disappointing 15 – 17 season in 2009 – 10 , the Wolverines bounced back to return to the NCAA Tournament in 2011 , advancing to the round of 32 before losing to top @-@ seeded Duke , 73 – 71 . The 2010 – 11 Wolverines , who swept rival Michigan State for the first time since 1997 , finished the season 21 – 14 . In the 2011 – 12 season Michigan split the season series with both Ohio State and Michigan State and went on to be co @-@ Big Ten champs along with the Buckeyes and Spartans . It was the first Big Ten title for Michigan since 1986 . The Wolverines finished the regular season 23 – 8 ( 13 – 5 ) . Michigan was ranked 5th in both the AP Top 25 and USA Today Coaches Poll to begin the 2012 – 13 season . For the first time since November 30 , 1992 , Michigan was ranked number one in the AP Poll on Monday , January 28 , 2013 . Michigan had been in the top 10 in both the AP and USA Today Coaches Poll for the entire season , holding each place at least once . The team also made program history for best season start at 21 – 2 . Coach Beilein is 189 – 123 overall in his tenure with the Wolverines . On March 31 , 2013 , The Wolverines defeated Florida by a score of 79 – 59 to make their first Final Four appearance since the 1992 – 93 season . The Wolverines then defeated Syracuse by a score of 61 – 56 in the Final Four . In the 2013 National Championship game , the Wolverines lost against Louisville by the score of 82 – 76 . 
 = = Championships = = 
 = = = NCAA National Championships = = = 
 = = = Big Ten Regular Season Championships = = = 
 § – Conference Co @-@ champions 
 = = = Big Ten Tournament Championships = = = 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 Duke – Michigan basketball rivalry 
 Michigan – Michigan State basketball rivalry 
 Michigan – Ohio State basketball rivalry 
 = = = Record against Big Ten opponents = = = 
 Totals through March 12 , 2016 
 = = Fab Five = = 
 The Fab Five , the 1991 recruiting class of five freshman starters , were Chris Webber , Juwan Howard , Jalen Rose , Jimmy King , and Ray Jackson . They were notable for having gone to the championship game of the 1992 and 1993 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament as freshmen and sophomores , for having started the trend of wearing baggy gym shorts , which was later popularized by Michael Jordan , and for wearing black athletic socks . Due to the Ed Martin scandal , the records from their 1992 Final Four appearance and the entire following season have been forfeited . Although Webber was the only member of the Fab Five officially implicated with the scandal , the reputation of the whole group has been tarnished . Webber ( 1993 ) , Howard ( 1994 ) and Rose ( 1992 , 1994 ) were college basketball All @-@ <unk> and both King ( 1995 3rd team and 1993 & 1994 honorable mention ) and Jackson ( 1995 2nd team & 1994 honorable mention ) achieved All @-@ Big Ten honors . All but Jackson played in the NBA . They were the subject of Mitch Albom 's book entitled Fab Five : Basketball , Trash Talk , the American Dream , which at one point was under development by Fox Television as a made @-@ for @-@ television movie . In March 2011 ESPN broadcast a documentary , Fab Five , that was the network 's highest @-@ rated in its history . 
 = = Ed Martin scandal = = 
 During the University of Michigan basketball scandal the Big Ten Conference , National Collegiate Athletic Association , Federal Bureau of Investigation , Internal Revenue Service , and United States Department of Justice investigated the relationship between the University of Michigan , its men 's basketball teams and basketball team booster Ed Martin . The program was punished for NCAA rules violations , principally involving payments booster Martin made to several players to launder money from an illegal gambling operation . It is one of the largest incidents involving payments to college athletes in American collegiate history . It was described as one of the three or four worst violations of NCAA bylaws in history up to that time by the NCAA infractions committee chairman and the largest athlete payment scandal ever by ESPN . 
 The case began when the investigation of an automobile rollover accident during Mateen Cleaves ' 1996 Michigan Wolverines recruiting trip revealed a curious relationship between Martin and the team . Several Michigan basketball players were implicated over the next few years and by 1999 several were called before a federal grand jury . Four eventual professional basketball players ( Chris Webber , Maurice Taylor , Robert Traylor and Louis Bullock ) were discovered to have borrowed a total of $ 616 @,@ 000 from Martin . During the investigation , Webber claimed not to have had any financial relationship with Martin . Eventually he confessed to having accepted some of the money he was charged with having borrowed . For his perjury during a federal grand jury investigation , he was both fined in the legal system and briefly suspended by National Basketball Association after performing public service . 
 In 2002 , the University punished itself when it became apparent that its players were guilty by declaring itself ineligible for post season play immediately , returning post season play monetary rewards , vacating five seasons of games , removing commemorative banners , and placing itself on a two @-@ year probation . The following year , the NCAA accepted these punishments , doubled both the probation period and the post @-@ season ineligibility , penalized the school one scholarship for four seasons , and ordered disassociation from the four guilty players until 2012 . The <unk> formally ended on May 8 , 2013 . The additional year of post @-@ season ineligibility was overturned on appeal . 
 The punishment cost the 17 – 13 2002 – 03 team its post @-@ season eligibility , cost past teams the 1997 National Invitation Tournament and the 1998 Big Ten Tournament championships as well as 1992 and 1993 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament Final Four recognition . It cost Traylor his MVP awards in the 1997 NIT and 1998 Big Ten Tournament , as well as Bullock 's standing as the school 's third all @-@ time leading scorer and all @-@ time leader in 3 @-@ point field goals . Steve Fisher lost his job as Michigan head coach as a result of the scandal . 
 = = Coaching records = = 
 = = Honored players and coaches = = 
 Below are lists of important players and coaches in the history of Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball . It includes lists of major awards and retired numbers . The honors include : Helms Foundation Player of the Year , UPI Player of the Year , Sporting News Player of the Year , Naismith Trophy , Wooden Award , Associated Press Player of the Year , NABC Player of the Year , Oscar Robertson Trophy , NCAA Final Four MOP , National Invitation Tournament MVP , Big Ten Tournament MVP , Chicago Tribune Silver Basketball , Big Ten Player of the Year , All @-@ America , Wayman Tisdale Award , Bob Cousy Award , UPI Coach of the Year , Henry Iba Award , NABC Coach of the Year , AP Coach of the Year . 
 = = = Retired numbers = = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = = Postseason = = 
 = = = NCAA Tournament results = = = 
 The University of Michigan has an all @-@ time 52 – 24 * ( 45 – 21 ) record overall and 1 – 5 * ( 1 – 3 ) championship game record in the NCAA Tournaments in 26 * ( 22 ) appearances . Glen Rice holds the NCAA single @-@ tournament scoring record with 184 points in 1989 . The 1992 Final Four and all 1993 , 1996 , & 1998 games have been forfeited due to NCAA sanctions . Michigan has been the NCAA tournament runner @-@ up more times ( 5 ) than any other team . 
 = = = NCAA Tournament seeding history = = = 
 The NCAA began seeding the NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament with the 1979 edition . The 64 @-@ team field started in 1985 , which guaranteed that a championship team had to win six games . 
 = = = NCAA Tournament round history = = = 
 = = = NIT results = = = 
 In 10 * ( 9 ) National Invitation Tournament appearances , Michigan is 25 * – 7 ( 20 – 7 ) overall all @-@ time and 3 * – 1 ( 2 – 1 ) in the championship game . 16 * – 0 ( 14 – 0 ) at Crisler Arena and 8 * – 2 ( 6 – 2 ) at Madison Square Garden . The 1997 tournament was forfeited due to NCAA sanctions . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 National records 
 Most different players to make a Three @-@ point field goal in game : 9 vs. Eastern Michigan , December 13 , 2008 ( tied Dartmouth , 1993 ) 
 Combined team rebounds : 152 , Michigan ( 57 ) vs. Indiana ( 95 ) March 11 , 1961 
 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Championship Tournament records 
 Single @-@ game rebounds ( Since 1973 ) : 26 — Phil Hubbard , Michigan vs. Detroit , RSF , 3 @-@ 17 @-@ 1977 
 Single @-@ year points 184 — Glen Rice , Michigan , 1989 ( 6 games ) 
 Single @-@ year field goals made 75 — Glen Rice , Michigan , 1989 ( 6 games ) 
 Single @-@ year three @-@ point field goals made 27 — Glen Rice , Michigan , 1989 ( 6 games ) 
 Career three @-@ point field goals percentage ( Minimum 30 made ) 56 @.@ 5 % ( 35 @-@ 62 ) — Glen Rice , Michigan , 1986 @-@ 89 ( 13 games ) 
 Single @-@ game points , Both Teams 264 — Loyola Marymount ( 149 ) vs. Michigan ( 115 ) , 2nd R , 3 @-@ 18 @-@ 1990 
 Fewest single @-@ game three point field goals made , team ( in a final four ) : 0 , * Michigan vs. Kentucky , NSF , 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 1993 ( ot ) 
 Fewest single @-@ game three point field goals attempted , team ( final four ) : 4 , * Michigan vs. Kentucky , NSF , 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 1993 ( ot ) 
 Single @-@ game assists ( in a championship game ) : 11 , Rumeal Robinson , Michigan vs. Seton Hall , 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 1989 ( ot ) 
 Fewest single @-@ game three point field goals made , team ( championship game ) : 1 , * Michigan vs. Duke , CH , 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 1992 
 Fewest single @-@ game free throws made ( in a win ) , team : 0 , * Michigan vs. Tennessee , 3 @-@ 18 @-@ 2011 
 Lowest single @-@ game three point field goal percentage , team ( championship game ) : 9 @.@ 1 % ( 1 @-@ 11 ) , * Michigan vs. Duke , CH , 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 1992 
 Biggest margin of victory in 8 vs. 9 match @-@ up : 30 , * Michigan vs. Tennessee , 3 @-@ 18 @-@ 2011 
 Single @-@ year two @-@ game assists ( final four ) : 23 , Rumeal Robinson , Michigan , 1989 
 Selected former NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Championship Tournament records 
 Single @-@ game free throws made ( final four ) : 15 , Bill Buntin , Michigan vs. Kansas State , <unk> , 3 @-@ 21 @-@ 1964 ( broken 3 @-@ 20 @-@ 1965 ) 
 Fewest single @-@ game three point field goals made , team ( final four ) : 1 , * Michigan vs. Duke , CH , 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 1992 ( broken 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 1993 ) 
 Lowest single @-@ game three point field goal percentage , team ( final four ) : 9 @.@ 1 % ( 1 @-@ 11 ) , * Michigan vs. Duke , CH , 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 1992 ( broken 4 @-@ 1 @-@ 2006 ) 
 Most single @-@ game players disqualified , team ( championship game ) : 3 , Michigan vs. UCLA , 3 @-@ 20 @-@ 1965 ( broken 3 @-@ 31 @-@ 1997 ) 
 Single @-@ year two @-@ game assists , team ( final four ) : 42 , Michigan , 1989 ( broken 1990 ) 
 National statistical champions 
 Team field goal percentage : 54 @.@ 6 % ( 1198 of <unk> ) , 1988 ; 56 @.@ 6 % ( 1325 of 2341 ) , 1989 
 Selected notable statistics 
 30 @-@ win seasons : 2013 ( 31 ) , 1993 * ( 31 ) , 1989 ( 30 ) 
 1989 team continues to rank second in single @-@ season team field goal percentage : 56 @.@ 6 % ( 1325 of 2341 ) . 
 Current Big Ten records 
 Career field goals attempted : Mike McGee ( 2077 , 1978 – 81 ) 
 Career three point field goals made : Louis Bullock ( 339 * , 1996 – 99 ) 
 Single @-@ game three point field goals percentage ( 100 % most made ) : Glen Rice ( 7 of 7 , vs. Wisconsin 2 / 25 / 1989 ) 
 Single @-@ season points , team : ( <unk> , 1988 – 89 ) 
 Single @-@ game field goals made , team : ( 55 , vs. Iowa 3 / 10 / 1990 ) 
 Single @-@ season field goals made , team : ( 1325 , 1988 – 89 ) 
 Single @-@ season field goals attempted , team : ( 2341 , 1988 – 89 ) 
 Single @-@ season field goal percentage , team : ( .566 , 1 @,@ 325 of 2 @,@ 341 , 1988 – 89 ) 
 Single @-@ season field goal percentage , team ( conference games only ) : ( <unk> , 606 of 1 @,@ 080 , 1988 – 89 ) 
 Single @-@ game three point field goals attempted , team : ( 42 , vs. Florida Gulf Coast 12 / 22 / 2008 ) 
