 Red Star 
 Serbia and Montenegro League : 2003 – 04 , 2005 – 06 
 Serbia and Montenegro Cup : 2003 – 04 , 2005 – 06 
 Valencia 
 Copa del Rey : 2007 – 08 
 Birmingham City 
 Football League Cup : 2010 – 11 
 Individual 
 Serbia and Montenegro League : top scorer 2003 – 04 
 Serbian Footballer of the Year : 2003 , 2007 
 Večernje novosti captains ' <unk> player of the year : 2003 , 2005 
 Prva zvezda ( Player of the year based abroad ) : 2006 
 Red Star Sport Association Best Male Athlete : 2005 
 = Stan McCabe = 
 Stanley Joseph " Stan " McCabe ( 16 July 1910 – 25 August 1968 ) was an Australian cricketer who played 39 Test matches for Australia from 1930 to 1938 . A short , stocky right @-@ hander , McCabe was described by Wisden as " one of Australia 's greatest and most enterprising batsmen " and by his captain Don Bradman as one of the great batsmen of the game . He was never dropped from the Australian Test team and was known for his footwork , mastery of fast bowling and the hook shot against the Bodyline strategy . He also regularly bowled medium @-@ pace and often opened the bowling at a time when Australia lacked fast bowlers , using an off cutter . He was one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year in 1935 . 
 At the age of 19 , McCabe was called up for the 1930 tour of England despite being yet to score his maiden first @-@ class century as the selectors chose the youngest ever team to leave Australia . McCabe made his first century in a warm @-@ up match but struggled in his month in England , scoring only 51 runs . His performance began to improve after adjusting his technique and he played in all five Tests , although he continued to have problems converting starts into large scores , failing to make a century during the tour . McCabe managed to maintain his position over the next two home seasons , playing in all ten Tests , but failed to make a century , and after 15 Tests , his average was below 35 although he had become increasingly successful at first @-@ class level . 
 In 1932 – 33 , McCabe made his breakthrough at international level in the First Test of the infamous Bodyline series , scoring an unbeaten 187 at the Sydney Cricket Ground in only four hours as his teammates fell around him . McCabe attacked the bowling vigorously , hooking relentlessly . He ended the series as the only Australian other than Bradman to score a century . McCabe missed most of the next season due to illness , but was retained for the 1934 tour of England despite his interrupted preparation . He scored 2 @,@ 078 runs and eight centuries for the tour , including his maiden Test century in England . Following the retirement of captain Bill Woodfull at the end of the tour , McCabe became Australia ’ s vice @-@ captain and held the post for the rest of his career . 
 After missing most of the 1934 – 35 domestic season due to injury , McCabe scored an unbeaten 189 in the Second Test of the 1935 – 36 tour of South Africa , including a century in one session , taking Australia to the brink of a world record @-@ breaking victory on a difficult final @-@ day pitch in poor light before the match was called off . It was one of two Test centuries McCabe made on the tour . The following season , he made five fifties in the first four Tests before scoring a century to help Australia win the deciding final Test against the touring Englishmen . In the First Test of the 1938 tour of England , McCabe played what was regarded as his greatest innings , scoring 232 in four hours , including his last 72 in 28 minutes . Bradman regarded the innings as the greatest batting he ever saw . However , none of McCabe ’ s three most famous innings resulted in an Australian victory ; he has a reputation of being at his best when Australia was in difficulty . 
 During the 1938 tour , McCabe had been generally unproductive and he missed much of the subsequent Australian season due to illness and only played sporadically thereafter before cricket was cancelled due to World War II . He served in the military in a clerical position for a year before he was discharged due to a chronic feet problems . McCabe was plagued by poor health in his middle age , and was hospitalised for a liver ailment shortly before his death . He died at the age of 58 after falling off a cliff adjacent to his home in Mosman . There was innuendo that it was a suicide , but the coroner ruled that it was an accident . 
 = = Early years = = 
 McCabe 's paternal grandparents settled in Grenfell , New South Wales in the 1850s ; his grandfather Constable Edward James McCabe was an Irish policeman who immigrated to Australia and served in the Victorian Police . Edward left the constabulary and moved from Melbourne to Grenfell after reports of a gold rush . Edward 's wife Catherine was ambushed by bushrangers during her relocation to the town with her children three weeks later , but was unharmed . The bushrangers scoured the family ’ s possessions , but left after finding nothing of value . Her obituary described her as " one of the greatest of the pioneer women of the Australian bush , possessing all the qualities of self @-@ sacrifice , resourcefulness , industry , determination , and courage that left their mark on the Australian race and laid the foundation of the nation " . Her grandson , one of 37 grandchildren , was likewise known for his fearless and courageous play on the cricket field against the most intimidating bowlers of his time . 
 The son of local barber William " Bill " , McCabe was the third of four brothers , who grew up playing local cricket in his hometown . The siblings played with rudimentary equipment ; a lump of wood was substituted for a bat and cork wrapped in socks improvised as cricket balls . The boys settled their differences in the traditional manner of boxing bouts , and they took their primary education at a Catholic convent staffed by nuns . 
 At the age of 14 , McCabe won a scholarship to the Catholic St. Joseph 's College , Hunters Hill in Sydney due to his sporting ability . Run by the Marist Brothers , the large school ’ s centerpiece stone castle @-@ like building overlooks Sydney Harbour . After a month in the Second XI , McCabe was promoted to the Senior First XI at 14 as an all @-@ rounder . He did not make a good start , registering a duck in his first innings . However , he impressed observers with his ability to hit the ball precisely . McCabe was always short , and playing against boys three years his senior , he could not rely on brute force . Aside from playing cricket , he was also full @-@ back in the school 's championship winning Rugby union team in 1926 . During his time at St Joseph ’ s McCabe grew larger and batted more powerfully , and his exploits were regularly featured in the yearbook . In 1925 , he struck his maiden century against Sydney Boys High School and score two more the following year . Such was his power that the backyard fence at the home of a friend had to be reinforced — McCabe ’ s powerful square drives had been dislodging it . McCabe did not receive special coaching attention from the school 's staff , who merely encouraged him to hit the ball hard and along the ground . In his later years at school , he was selected for Combined Great Public Schools of Sydney — a combined team from Sydney 's private schools — for the state schoolboys ' carnival . McCabe studied hard and placed first in the class in each of his three years at St Joseph ’ s . At the end of 1926 , he earned his Intermediate Certificate with five As and two Bs . McCabe then left school and became an accountant ’ s assistant . 
 He returned to Grenfell at the end of the 1926 , and spent two years playing for the Grenfell Juniors , alongside his brothers . During this time Grenfell were undefeated for two years , and McCabe regularly scored centuries against outclassed bowling , including one score of 260 . 
 In 1927 , McCabe ’ s cricket came to high @-@ level attention for the first time . Charlie Macartney , who had just retired from Test cricket , brought a team that included six internationals , to Grenfell . McCabe scored 17 and took 5 / 84 against them . Then state and future Australian selector Chappie Dwyer , who led a team of Sydney Grade Cricketers to play in the country town . The McCabe brothers defeated them , Stan scoring 19 . Later , the Test leg spinner Arthur Mailey led a team that also included Test player Tommy Andrews to Grenfell , and McCabe scored 62 , 35 and 62 not out in three innings against them . In the 1927 – 28 season , McCabe played for the Southern Districts against other regional sides within the state . He made 92 not out in one match , but failed to pass 12 in six other innings . Dwyer returned in 1927 – 28 and McCabe scored 70 against his team . Dwyer convinced McCabe 's parents to allow their son to move to Sydney to further his cricket career . 
 At the start of the following season , McCabe appeared with the New South Wales Colts team in one match against Queensland , before being selected for the New South Wales Second XI to play their Victorian counterparts . McCabe scored 60 not out in the second innings and took a total of 6 / 100 for the match . He was selected to represent New South Wales in his first @-@ class debut against Queensland in the 1928 – 29 Sheffield Shield season while the Test players competed against England . He made 60 and 34 , and bowled 17 overs without success , but was later omitted when the Test players returned from international duty . In four first @-@ class matches in his debut season , McCabe scored 197 runs at 32 @.@ 83 and took a total of 1 / 111 . McCabe played twice against the touring England cricket team led by Percy Chapman , once in a match at Goulburn for the Southern Districts of New South Wales , and the other time for his state , but managed only 24 runs in three innings . 
 McCabe settled in Sydney permanently in 1929 , representing Mosman Cricket Club in Sydney Grade Cricket . His parents only allowed him to settle there permanently if Dwyer could help find him a job and lodgings , and McCabe subsequently began work in the accounting division of Colonial Mutual Insurance Company . Dwyer could only support one player and hard a hard decision in eventually turning down the second McCabe brother Les . Both Stan and Les were similar in batting ability but the former could also bowl . 
 During the 1929 – 30 season , McCabe totalled 844 runs at 56 @.@ 27 , making him the second @-@ highest runscorer behind Bradman , as New South Wales won the Sheffield Shield . Despite his consistency , McCabe had difficulty capitalising on his starts . He passed 50 on eight occasions in the first eight matches of the season , and reached 29 in ten of his 12 innings , but failed to make a century , falling seven times between 60 and 90 . 
 = = International debut = = 
 Nevertheless , McCabe was selected to tour England in 1930 under Bill Woodfull 's Australian cricket team . The team was the then @-@ youngest to have left Australian shores , and only four had previous experience on English soil . As a result , the team was dubbed " Woodfull 's kindergarten " . In the traditional warm @-@ up matches before the team sailed for England , McCabe struck 103 against Tasmania , his maiden first @-@ class century . One of the reasons that McCabe was chosen despite his lack of centuries was his medium pace bowling . At the time , Australia lacked fast bowlers and McCabe was seen as a makeshift opening bowler ; he had taken 17 wickets at 30 @.@ 82 for the season , including a career best of 5 / 36 against Queensland . 
 On his first overseas trip , McCabe struggled badly in his first four weeks in England . In six matches in that time , he scored only 51 runs at 7 @.@ 28 and failed to take a wicket after being asked to bowl only 18 overs . After being dismissed in the last of these matches , McCabe came off the field and despondently said that he was going to retire . Team @-@ mate Clarrie Grimmett suggested that McCabe play with a fuller face of the bat , advice that the batsman accepted . McCabe 's fortunes changed in the next match against Oxford University ; he scored 91 and took 1 / 5 in an innings win . He added 65 in the next match against Hampshire and starred with both bat and ball against Cambridge University , the final tour match before the First Test . McCabe scored 96 before being run out , and took 4 / 25 and 4 / 60 , which would remain his career best match bowling figures , as Australia completed a commanding innings victory . 
 He made his Test debut in the first match of the Ashes series at Trent Bridge , Nottingham . He took match figures of 2 / 65 , his first wicket being Jack Hobbs , and in his first Test innings as a batsman , he hit the first ball for a boundary but was dismissed off the next ball , before scoring 49 in the second innings as Australia chased 428 for victory . McCabe and Don Bradman were scoring quickly and had taken the score to 3 / 229 when McCabe lofted Maurice Tate towards mid @-@ on . Syd Copley , a member of the ground staff who was acting as a substitute fielder dived forward and took a difficult catch . McCabe 's dismissal sparked a collapse of 7 / 104 as England took a 93 @-@ run win . McCabe scored 44 and an unbeaten 25 as Australia squared the series with a seven @-@ wicket triumph in the Second Test at Lords . McCabe made 30 in a rain @-@ affected draw in the Third Test , before scoring four and taking 4 / 41 in the Fourth Test at Old Trafford , removing Ranjitsinhji , Maurice Leyland , Maurice Tate and Ian Peebles to reduce England to 8 / 251 in another wash out . With the series locked at 1 – 1 , the Fifth and final Test at The Oval was a timeless Test . McCabe scored his first Test half @-@ century of 54 as Australia piled on 695 to win by an innings and reclaim the Ashes 2 – 1 . McCabe took one wicket in the deciding match , bowling leading English batsman Wally Hammond for 13 . In all , McCabe scored 210 runs at 35 @.@ 00 and took eight wickets at 27 @.@ 62 in the Tests , and aggregated 1012 runs at 32 @.@ 64 and took 26 wickets at 27 @.@ 80 for the whole tour . This made him the fifth highest run @-@ scorer for the tour . However , he was unable to register a century on tour , his highest score being 96 . He continued his habit of failing to convert his starts into centuries in the tour matches after the start of the Tests . In one stretch of eight county innings , he registered scores between 34 and 79 seven times , and he ended with seven fifties for the tour . Nevertheless , Wisden praised his attacking ability to disrupt the length of opposition bowlers . On two occasions , McCabe took more than two wickets in an innings . 
 Upon his return to Australia , McCabe played all five Tests against the West Indies in 1930 – 31 . He scored 90 in the First Test at the Adelaide Oval as Australia took victory by ten wickets . However , he struggled thereafter , scoring 31 , eight and two as Australia won the next three matches by an innings . He managed 21 and 44 as the tourists took their only Test victory of their first Test tour to Australia . McCabe totalled 196 runs at 32 @.@ 66 and took three wickets at 42 @.@ 00 . However , he managed a century against the West Indies for New South Wales in the latter part of the season and scored 161 and 53 in a match against Queensland . He took 4 / 46 in a Shield match against Victoria , removing Test players Hunter Hendry , Keith Rigg , Len Darling and Ted a <unk> . Overall , McCabe finished the season with 705 runs at 41 @.@ 47 and 16 wickets at 35 @.@ 00 . 
 The following year , McCabe scored centuries in all of his three Sheffield Shield innings , scoring 229 * Queensland at Brisbane and 106 and 103 * in one match against Victoria in Sydney , yielding a Shield season average of 438 @.@ 00 . His innings against Queensland was particularly lauded , showcasing his ability against the most hostile of fast bowling . Queensland 's attack was led by Eddie Gilbert , an indigenous paceman who was the fastest in Australia and whom Bradman said was the fastest that he had ever faced . On one occasion , a particularly fast Gilbert delivery supposedly evaded both the batsman and wicket @-@ keeper , travelled more than 60 metres and crashed through a fence before hitting and killing a dog on the other side . On this day , Gilbert knocked the bat out of Bradman 's hand before removing him for a duck . Gilbert cut down the New South Wales top order with a spell of 3 / 12 and forced Alan Kippax to retire hurt after hitting him in the upper body . This left New South Wales at effectively 4 / 21 . Undeterred , McCabe came in and bravely counterattacked in a display that featured many aggressive hook and cut shots . The visitors made 432 before McCabe took a total of 3 / 27 to help his state take an innings win as the hosts were bowled out for 109 and 85 . In the match against arch @-@ rivals and defending champions Victoria , McCabe added 3 / 57 and 1 / 18 with the ball as New South Wales won by 239 runs , and went on to claim the title , despite McCabe not being able to contribute in final match of the season ; he injured himself while in the field and was unable to bat in a 132 @-@ run defeat at the hands of South Australia . 
 McCabe was unable to translate the success into the Test arena , where McCabe struggled despite his team 's 5 – 0 sweep over South Africa . McCabe warmed up for the series by scoring 37 and 79 not out and totalling 3 / 108 in a state match against the tourists . After managing only 27 in an innings victory in the First Test , McCabe saved his most productive Test of the summer for his home crowd for the Second Test at Sydney . He took 4 / 13 in the first innings , bowling or trapping all of his victims leg before wicket , and then compiled 79 as Australia cruised to another innings win . McCabe scored 22 and 71 and took two wickets in the Third Test win in Melbourne , but managed only two runs and three wickets in the last two Tests , which Australia won by an innings . McCabe ended the series with 201 runs at 33 @.@ 50 and nine wickets at 22 @.@ 77 . McCabe ended the season with 783 runs at 87 @.@ 00 and 19 wickets at 23 @.@ 94 . 
 During the Australian winter of 1932 , former Test leg spinner Arthur Mailey organised and managed a tour of prominent Australian players , of whom McCabe was one , to North America . They played 51 matches in 100 days , none of which were first @-@ class ; most were one @-@ day matches , although not limited overs . McCabe played in 48 of the matches ; he scored eight centuries and averaged 54 with the bat . He took seven or more wickets in an innings 12 times including 12 in one innings , and totalled 189 wickets at an average of six . 
 = = Bodyline = = 
 McCabe made his breakthrough in the following Australian season in 1932 – 33 , which went down in history due to England 's use of the controversial Bodyline tactics . In the lead @-@ up to the Tests , McCabe scored 43 , 67 and 19 in two tour matches against the Englishmen . 
 In the First Test in Sydney , with England captain Douglas Jardine again employed Bodyline . This involved constant intimidatory short @-@ pitched leg @-@ side bowling with a leg @-@ cordon to catch balls fended off by the batsman , in an attempt to curtail Donald Bradman , generally regarded as the best batsman ever , from scoring . McCabe came to the wicket on the first day , the score at 3 / 82 with Bill Woodfull , Bill Ponsford and Jack Fingleton already dismissed , and Bradman not playing due to illness . Having warned his parents , who were watching him in Test cricket for the only time , not to jump the fence if he was hit , McCabe took guard . Jardine had deployed seven men on the leg @-@ side , usually with five close catchers and two men patrolling the boundary for hook shots . McCabe hooked the first ball he received from Bodyline spearhead Harold Larwood for a boundary . After Kippax fell with the score at 87 , McCabe and Vic Richardson added 129 before Richardson fell . McCabe reached stumps at 127 not out with the total 6 / 290 . His innings was marked by dangerous cutting and compulsive hooking of short @-@ pitched deliveries in front of his face , unfazed by the repeated body blows which hit his team @-@ mates . 
 McCabe 's attack forced Jardine to abandon his Bodyline approach . Jardine removed Larwood from the attack and brought on Gubby Allen . Under the professional @-@ amateur divide of the time , England 's captain was always an amateur , and professionals , such as Larwood , were obliged to obey the captain 's orders . Allen was an amateur who refused to bowl Bodyline . McCabe struck three consecutive fours from Allen 's conventional fast bowling , prompting Jardine to call for Bodyline field placings . Allen refused , so Jardine was forced to drop his Bodyline attack and resort to the spin bowling of Hedley Verity and Wally Hammond . The crowd responded to his instinctive aggression with wild cheering . McCabe said that " it was really an impulsive , senseless innings , a gamble that should not have been made but came off against all the odds " . 
 McCabe scored 60 of the 70 runs that Australia added on the second day to finish 187 not out from 233 balls as Australia were bowled out for 360 . McCabe added the runs in just one hour of batting and ended with 25 boundaries in his innings , which lasted a little over four hours . He was particularly effectively in farming the strike while batting with his tail end partners ; in his last wicket stand of 55 with Tim Wall , he scored 50 of the runs in just half an hour . 
 He was praised by Larwood , who spearheaded the Bodyline attack and totalled 10 / 128 for the match , which ended in a decisive 10 @-@ wicket victory for England . Wisden reported that McCabe " scored off Larwood 's bowling in a style which for daring and brilliance was not approached by any other Australian during the tour " . Richard Whitington wrote in the 1970s that McCabe 's innings " still warms the blood of the dwindling number of Australians who watched it " . McCabe received a thunderous standing ovation from the 46 @,@ 000 spectators . Immediately after the innings , McCabe told his teammates that he would never be able to replicate the feat because it was too difficult to hook the ball consistently without hitting it up into the air and giving away catching opportunities . 
 Umpire George Hele , who officiated the match said : 
 Stan gave Voce all he was bargaining for . He and Vic Richardson took all the English bowlers could hurl at them . This innings stamped Stan as one of the world 's greatest batsmen . He stepped into the [ trajectory of the ] bowling , he hooked , he pulled , and did what he liked with it . The faster they bowled the more he seemed to enjoy it . 
 Australia 's captain Woodfull refused to retaliate and England made 524 in reply , McCabe having Jardine caught behind for 27 to end with 1 / 42 . McCabe was one of the few Australians to make any impact in the second innings , making 32 as Australia fell for 164 . 
 McCabe was unable to repeat his performances in the later Tests . He made 32 and a duck as Australia gained its only victory in the Second Test in Melbourne , before managing only 57 runs in the next four innings as Australia suffered consecutive defeats . He scored 73 in the first innings of the Fifth Test in Sydney as Australia compiled 435 , but scored only four in a second innings collapse , leaving England with an eight @-@ wicket victory . He had persisted with his strategy of standing his ground attacking the Bodyline bowling , but was unsuccessful . 
 McCabe totalled 385 runs at 42 @.@ 78 for the series and was the only Australian batsman other than Bradman to score a century , as the English decisively won the series 4 – 1 . He took three wickets at 71 @.@ 66 , and opened the bowling in some of the matches due to Australia 's lack of fast bowling . It was a far cry from the intimidation that Bodyline provided . 
 Away from the tumult of Bodyline , McCabe played in five of New South Wales ' six Sheffield Shield matches , and he scored 348 runs at 49 @.@ 71 with four fifties and took 11 wickets at 17 @.@ 54 . New South Wales won four of these matches and drew the other to retain their title . His most prominent effort was a 91 and a match total of 5 / 41 in an innings win over Queensland . 
 The 1933 – 34 season started well for McCabe . He started the season with scores of 20 , 82 , 110 and 8 in three matches in November , the century coming against the Rest of Australia . However , he was hampered by illness , which forced him to have an operation , which sidelined him for more than three months . The selectors nevertheless chose him for the 1934 tour of England , and McCabe returned to make 119 and 27 in two matches for the touring party against Tasmania before they departed for the northern hemisphere . 
 = = 1934 tour of England = = 
 Returning to England in 1934 , McCabe scored 2 @,@ 078 runs at 69 @.@ 28 including eight centuries on the tour , more than any of his team @-@ mates . In the second match of the tour against Leicestershire , McCabe scored the century that had eluded him four years earlier , finishing 108 not out . He then scored 192 against the Marylebone Cricket Club at Lord 's , combining with Ponsford in a record partnership for the third wicket of 389 , in what was effectively a dress rehearsal for the Tests ; the MCC fielded almost a full @-@ strength England team . McCabe put in an all round performance against Hampshire , scoring 79 and taking 4 / 79 in the first innings . In the next match , he scored 240 , the highest of his career , against Surrey at The Oval . In the next match , the last fixture before the Tests , McCabe made 142 against Lancashire . 
 In the First Test at Trent Bridge , McCabe made 65 in the first innings before scoring 88 in the second innings to extend Australia 's first innings lead from 106 to a target of 380 . The hosts fell short by 238 runs . Between Tests , McCabe registered his fifth century of the season , making an unbeaten 105 in the second innings as Australia defeated the Gentlemen of England by eight wickets . McCabe then scored 34 and 19 as England struck back with an innings victory at Lord 's . Between Tests , he took 4 / 24 in a six @-@ wicket win over Surrey . He then scored his first Test century on English soil during the high @-@ scoring draw in the Third Test at Old Trafford , compiling 137 and 33 not out . The hosts gave McCabe a taste of his own medicine , and he had to bowl 45 overs for a match total of 1 / 133 , as England 's batsmen totalled 10 / 750 for the match . 
 McCabe made 27 in the rain @-@ affected draw in the Fourth Test , the culmination of a quiet fortnight in which he failed to pass 30 . He then scored fifties in three consecutive tour matches before the Fifth Test , which was timeless as the series was tied 1 – 1 . McCabe scored 10 and 70 and took 2 / 5 in the second innings as Australia won the match by 562 runs to regain the Ashes 2 – 1 . McCabe aggregated 483 runs at 60 @.@ 37 and took four wickets in the Tests . At the time , Wisden said of him : " He blossomed forth as an almost completely equipped batsman of the forcing type and was probably the best exponent — Bradman himself scarcely excluded — of the art of hitting the ball tremendously hard and safely . " Wisden said that McCabe had made " immense strides " in his batting technique . It said " In 1930 he gave the impression of still having a good deal to learn ; he was inclined to be somewhat slapdash in his methods . The intervening years had clearly made a great difference in him . Losing nothing of his power , he displayed a wider and safer range of strokes . " McCabe finished the tour with 108 against Kent and 124 in an innings win over HDG Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI a took 21 wickets for the entire season . 
 McCabe spent most of the 1934 – 35 Australian season watching from the sidelines . The first match of the summer was a testimonial for retiring Australian captain Woodfull . McCabe was forced to retire hurt when on five , and he missed more than two months of cricket . He returned for only one match , scoring 92 and 53 as New South Wales were defeated by arch @-@ rivals Victoria . 
 = = 1935 – 36 South African tour = = 
 The following Australian season he became captain of New South Wales following the retirement of Kippax and the departure of Bradman to South Australia . However , with Australia touring South Africa in 1935 – 36 , McCabe did not represent his state . However , he was made vice @-@ captain to Vic Richardson for the tour , with Woodfull and Ponsford having retired , and Bradman ill . McCabe enjoyed more success , heading the Test batting figures with 420 runs at 84 @.@ 00 . After scoring 24 , 65 and 29 in three warm @-@ up matches , all of which were won by innings , McCabe hit 149 in the First Test at Durban , sharing a second @-@ wicket partnership of 161 with Bill Brown in gale @-@ force conditions which caused balls to make U @-@ turns in the headwind , forced the umpires to glue the bails to the wickets using chewing gum , to set up a nine @-@ wicket victory . In the following Test in Johannesburg , McCabe made 34 as Australia took a first innings lead of 93 . However , Dudley Nourse scored 235 to help the hosts to 491 ; McCabe removed Nourse and ended with 2 / 30 . Australia were set a Test world record target of 399 in the second innings to achieve victory on a turning wicket , and McCabe told captain Richardson that he would not be able to bat or run between wickets effectively because of altitude sickness . Regarding McCabe was his most important batsman , Richardson implored him to bat and told him to simply stand his ground and hit boundaries so that he would not have to run . McCabe joined Fingleton at 1 / 17 before taking the score to 1 / 85 by the end of the third day . The following morning in poor visibility on a wicket with irregular bounce and lateral deviation , McCabe resumed on 38 and scored a century in the morning session to reach lunch at 138 , after Fingleton was dismissed at 2 / 194 . The pair had put on 177 runs for the second wicket , and McCabe had done more than four fifths of the scoring . McCabe had reached his century in only 90 minutes , and continued on despite a storm that brought low dust clouds and hindered visibility , and increasingly irregular bounce and cut off the pitch . Midway through the afternoon , dark clouds gathered , along with thunderstorms and lightning , but this had no effect on the batsman . McCabe pushed the score to 2 / 274 , and with only 125 runs needed with half the day remaining , Australia were on course to meet the target , having already scored 189 in the first half . However , Herbie Wade , the South African captain made an unprecedented appeal against the light due fear " for the fieldsmen 's safety " in the face of McCabe 's aggressive batting . He finished unbeaten on 189 , an innings described by Fingleton as " bordering on miraculous " . McCabe struck 24 fours , and was productive square of the wicket , hitting numerous cut shots past point . Fingleton further added that “ McCabe never put a foot or his bat in a false position ” , and that he “ pulverized the South African attack into the dust ” . McCabe was unable to maintain such a standard of performance in the remaining three Tests ; he scored a duck , 40 and one , as Australia won each by an innings . He ended the series with three wickets at 45 @.@ 33 . However , he scored consecutive centuries in the tour matches , adding 115 and 112 against Border and Orange Free State . 
 = = Tension with Bradman ? = = 
 The following year , having been appointed Bradman 's vice @-@ captain , McCabe had a successful Ashes series in 1936 – 37 . McCabe scored 76 , 28 , 23 , 83 and 46 in the lead @-@ up , but started the series poorly ; he made 51 in the first innings but managed only seven as Australia was caught out on a sticky wicket on the final day and were bowled out for 58 to lose the First Test in Brisbane by 322 runs . He then made a duck as Australia was again caught on a sticky by a thunderstorm during the first innings of the Second Test in Sydney . He made 93 in the second innings but Australia was unable to overcome the first innings deficit of 346 after being forced to follow on and fell to an innings defeat . 
 After the Second Test , McCabe was involved in an infamous incident that has caused speculation ever since . His captain Bradman was known for his reserved personality , did not drink and often eschewed social activities with teammates , preferring to privately listen to music or read . Combined with his success , Bradman gained a reputation for cockiness . In the 1930s , Australia had been divided along sectarian lines , with a sizeable Irish Catholic minority that included McCabe often pitted against Anglicans and / or Protestants such as Bradman ( of Anglo @-@ Irish descent ) , particularly practitioners of Freemasonry , leading to speculation that the tension was fuelled by religion . Four of the five Catholics in the team , McCabe , leading bowler Bill O 'Reilly , along with Leo O 'Brien and Chuck Fleetwood @-@ Smith were summoned by the Board of Control to respond to allegations that they were undermining Bradman . Bradman denied having prior knowledge of the meeting , although the alleged infighting was reported in the press . Opening batsman Jack Fingleton was not invited , speculated to be due to his journalistic background , but Bradman later alleged that he was the ringleader . After that , Bradman 's relationship with O 'Reilly and Fingleton never recovered . During the meeting , players were variously accused of undermining Bradman 's authority , laziness , lack of attention to fitness , but the board refused to specifically accuse those summoned . The details were leaked to the media , but the board denied that the meeting had taken place . Bradman denied that he was anti @-@ Catholic , saying that O 'Reilly and Fingleton wanted to depose him from the captaincy and install McCabe in his place . 
 Australia were now 0 – 2 down and needed to win three Tests in a row to retain the Ashes . The pressure on McCabe increased when last @-@ minute injuries meant that he had to open the bowling . McCabe made 63 and 22 and took a wicket as Australia won their first match in the series . He then top @-@ scored with 88 in Australia 's first innings of 288 and made 55 in the second as Australia won by 148 runs in the Fourth Test in Adelaide to level the series . In the deciding Test at the MCG , McCabe scored 112 , one of three centuries as Australia amassed 604 , a record score in Ashes Tests in Australia . This laid the platform for the innings victory that retained the Ashes . McCabe aggregated 491 runs in five Tests at 54 @.@ 55 , with a century and five fifties in a consistent display . 
 McCabe assumed the New South Wales captaincy from the 1936 – 37 season onwards . Due to international commitments , McCabe was represented his state only three times , but they were undefeated , winning both of their matches against England . McCabe scored a fifty in each of the matches . 
 In 1937 – 38 , no international matches were scheduled , and McCabe played a full season with New South Wales , leading them to the Sheffield Shield title , with three wins and three draws . He started the Shield season with consecutive centuries against Queensland and South Australia , and finished with 83 and 122 in two warm @-@ up matches for Australia before they departed for England . McCabe totalled 720 runs at 45 @.@ 00 for the season , with three centuries and three fifties , and took eight wickets at 24 @.@ 62 . 
 = = International farewell = = 
 The 1938 Ashes Tour of England was McCabe 's last for Australia . He was again appointed vice @-@ captain for the tour . In the second tour match , McCabe scored 110 in an innings win over Oxford University . His 50 against Essex in the final match before the Tests was the only other fifty in the first nine matches , in which he scored 301 runs at 37 @.@ 62 . He took a total of 4 / 50 in an innings win over Northamptonshire . McCabe ’ s lean run with the bat was causing concern for the Australians , as the other batsmen had been productive . 
 McCabe 's most highly rated innings came in the First Test at Trent Bridge . England compiled 8 / 658 before declaring late on the second day , and McCabe had toiled for 21 overs without success . McCabe arrived at the crease with the dismissal of Bradman at 2 / 111 to join Brown , and after two unsuccessful appeals against the light , he was 19 at the close of play after 35 minutes of batting with the total at 3 / 138 , having seen Brown dismissed for 48 . McCabe had struck three boundaries by this stage , two cut shots and an on drive , and had survived a final spell from fast bowler Ken Farnes without a sightscreen , accompanied by nightwatchman Frank Ward . 
 The next morning , England 's bowlers continued to make regular inroads . Ward fell in the third over of the day , and the debutant Lindsay Hassett was dismissed soon after , leaving Australia at 5 / 150 . McCabe , who had hit two boundaries thus far in the morning , was joined by Jack Badcock . The former continued to score boundaries regularly , and hit Sinfield for four and three from a leg glance and late cut to reach his 50 in 90 minutes . He then hit Hammond for consecutive on @-@ driven fours before Badcock fell at 6 / 194 , having made only 9 of the 43 runs in their partnership . McCabe had struck 62 of the 83 runs added since he had come to the crease . With all the other specialist batsmen dismissed , McCabe was now batting with wicket @-@ keeper Ben Barnett and began to attack the English bowlers with powerful drives and hook shots . Hammond brought back Farnes to try and finish off the tail , but McCabe responded by hitting three fours in one over , forcing the English captain to remove his fast bowler after McCabe had hooked him for six . 
 Despite Hammond 's best attempts , McCabe was able to gain the strike and runs came quickly . McCabe reached his century in 140 minutes and England declined to take the new ball while he was batting . By lunch , he and Barnett had added 67 in only 50 minutes , although the latter had made only 20 of these ; the total was 6 / 261 , with McCabe on 105 . Having reached his century , McCabe lifted his scoring rate , scoring his last 132 runs in 95 minutes . Boundaries came much more readily and he took 44 runs from a three over spell by leg spinner Doug Wright . As he ran out of partners , he became more aggressive ; in the last ten overs of his innings , he took 80 % of the strike and hit 16 boundaries . He was the last man out , attempting to loft the spin of Verity , after a final wicket partnership with Leslie Fleetwood @-@ Smith of 77 in 28 minutes , of which he scored 72 . He finished with 232 from 235 minutes with 34 boundaries and one six , an innings in which Bradman summoned his players not to miss a ball , as " they would never see anything like it again . " Bradman later said that McCabe " held us all spellbound " , and it was reported that the Australian captain trembled while watching the innings . While McCabe was at the crease , his partners contributed a total of only 58 runs , meaning that he had outscored them by a ratio of 4 : 1 . Upon his return to the pavilion Bradman greeted him with the words : " If I could play an innings like that , I 'd be a proud man , Stan " . This has also been reported as Bradman saying " I wish I could bat like that " . Bradman later wrote that " Towards the end [ of McCabe 's innings ] I could scarcely watch the play . My eyes filled as I drank in the glory of his shots " . It was regarded by English captains Arthur Gilligan and Bob Wyatt to be the best innings that they had ever witnessed , as did former England bowler Sydney Barnes — regarded as one of the best of all time — who said that he would not have been able to stop McCabe . Neville Cardus said that the innings was one of the greatest in Test history . Wisden reported that McCabe played " an innings the equal of which has probably never been seen in the history of Test cricket ; for the best part of four hours he maintained a merciless punishment of the bowling " . McCabe ’ s biographer Jack <unk> said that the innings “ was a sort of encyclopedia of attacking batsmanship , a triumph of character , technique and judgement ” . Cardus said 
 Now came death and glory , brilliance wearing the dress of culture . McCabe demolished the English attack with aristocratic politeness , good taste and reserve . He cut and drove , upright and lissome ; his perfection of touch moved the aesthetic sense ; this was the cricket of felicity , power and no covetousness , strength and no brutality , assault and no battery , dazzling strokes and no rhetoric ; lovely brave batsmanship , giving joy to the connoisseur … One of the greatest innings ever seen anywhere in any period … he is in the line of Trumper and no other batsman today but McCabe has inherited Trumper ’ s sword and cloak . 
 The innings was not enough to avert the follow on , and in the second innings , McCabe made 39 as Australia made 6 / 427 and the match petered into a draw . After the Test , McCabe scored 79 and took a total of 4 / 20 in a victory over the Gentlemen of England . 
 McCabe followed his efforts at Trent Bridge with 38 and 21 in the drawn Second Test at Lord 's . He bowled heavily in the match , sending down 43 overs and taking a total of 2 / 144 as Bradman 's specialist bowlers struggled to make inroads . In the first two Tests , McCabe had taken a combined total of 2 / 208 from 64 overs . The Third Test at Old Trafford was abandoned before it started due to rain , and McCabe contributed only one and 15 as Australia scrambled to a five @-@ wicket win to retain the Ashes in the low @-@ scoring Fourth Test at Headingley after chasing a target of 105 on the third day . It was part of a three @-@ week run in which McCabe failed to pass 15 in six innings and did not take a wicket . McCabe made fifties in the two first @-@ class matches before the Fifth and final Test at The Oval , where Australia played an extra batsman , meaning that McCabe opened the bowling . He took 0 / 85 from 38 overs , and with Bradman and Fingleton injuring themselves during the match , McCabe was left in control of a nine @-@ man team . England piled on 7 / 903 declared in three days before defeating Australia by an innings and 579 runs , the largest winning margin in Test history . This included a world record score of 364 by Len Hutton , who was dropped by wicket @-@ keeper Ben Barnett from McCabe 's bowling before reaching 50 . Neither Bradman nor Fingleton were able to bat . McCabe made 14 and two , and finished the series with 362 runs at 45 @.@ 25 . McCabe scored 91 and 58 in tour matches against an England XI and the Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI to finish the English summer . 
 McCabe 's Test career ended after the tour at just 28 years of age , due to a combination of chronic foot injuries and the intervention of World War II — England 's scheduled 1940 – 41 tour never materialised and international cricket did not resume until 1946 . McCabe had also been in poor form apart from his double century at Trent Bridge and there was speculation that he was in decline . His feet had high <unk> that meant that when he stood normally , his toes would not touch the floor . Curiously , none of his three most celebrated innings at Trent Bridge , Johannesburg nor Sydney resulted in an Australian victory . O 'Reilly said that " All three of them were the greatest innings I have watched " . 
 Upon returning to Australia , McCabe continued to captain New South Wales , but only played in two matches during the 1938 – 39 season due to illness , scoring 141 runs at 47 @.@ 00 including one century . In the first match , to celebrate the centenary of the Melbourne Cricket Club , he struck 105 in only 140 minutes and timed the ball well , but made 35 and 1 in the first Shield match and then absented himself from the rest of the season . McCabe had always been susceptible to illness and was dogged for much of 1938 and 1939 . In his absence , New South Wales surrendered their title to South Australia , but they regained the mantle in 1939 – 40 upon the return of their captain . In his first match back , McCabe scored 98 to guide New South Wales to a three @-@ wicket win over Queensland . After losing their next two matches , McCabe 's men won their last three matches to take the title . The captain scored 59 and 55 and 49 and 114 in the last two matches against South Australia and Victoria respectively . A match between the Shield champions and the Rest of Australia was arranged and McCabe scored 72 and 96 , steering his team to a narrow two @-@ wicket win . He ended the season with 699 runs at 53 @.@ 76 from seven matches , with a century and six fifties . 
 The 1940 – 41 was to be McCabe 's last full season , although the Shield competition was not held and matches stood alone . This was unfortunate for McCabe and his men , as they won all five of their matches . McCabe scored 88 and 57 as New South Wales scraped past Queensland by 27 runs in the season opening match , before scoring 53 in the runchase as his team defeated a combined Queensland and Victorian team by only one wicket . McCabe added two further half @-@ centuries and ended the season with a win over arch @-@ rivals Victoria . He had scored 432 runs at 48 @.@ 00 . Due to the outbreak of World War II in Europe in September 1939 , the scheduled England tour of Australia was cancelled . 
 In 1941 – 42 , McCabe played his final first @-@ class match . He scored 8 and 41 as Queensland took a 17 @-@ run win . Ten days later , the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor , prompting the start of the war in the Pacific . With that , first @-@ class cricket was cancelled and did not resume until 1945 – 46 , ending McCabe 's career at the age of just 31 . He had 24 wins and four losses in 38 first @-@ class matches as captain for all teams . In his last three seasons , McCabe took only one wicket , from 18 overs of bowling . 
 = = Style and character = = 
 Australian team @-@ mate Clarrie Grimmett , regarded as one of the greatest spinners of all time , regarded McCabe as technically superior to Bradman , feeling that the latter 's success was largely due to his extreme concentration and determination . Fellow state and Australian batsman Bill Brown described McCabe as the " finest strokeplayer I ever saw " , further adding " When Stan was in command , he was so magnificent to watch , and he left everyone , including Bradman , for dead . Certainly Bradman scored more runs , but Stan was the batsman you most wanted to be . " 
 The leading English batsman Hutton said that McCabe had several qualities in his batsmanship that were superior to those of Bradman , concluding that " It would be harder to think of a greater Australian batsman " . The leading English cricket writer Neville Cardus said that " <unk> , friendly , Stan was Australia ’ s most gallant and knightly batsman since Victor Trumper . In his brilliant strokeplay there was a certain <unk> . In his most aggressive innings , there was no brutality ; his bat was never used as a bludgeon . " E. W. Swanton said that McCabe was from " the heroic mould " and that " like those of Hobbs , Macartney and Woolley were essentially qualitative " and that McCabe " came as near as any player to one ’ s conception of the perfect cricketer " . 
 The leading Australian cricket writer of the time , Ray Robinson said that " In McCabe the cricketer , you saw McCabe the man — urbane , sociable , unpretentious , straightforward , incapable of anything mean @-@ spirited . In all the pre @-@ war Test series he was the best liked by both his own team and his opponents . " 
 = = Later years and family life = = 
 McCabe was briefly a member of the Australian Defence Force during the Second World War , joining in late 1942 . Due to his poor health and feet , he knew that his utility would be limited , and he also had a newborn son and fledgling business at the time , so he had not rushed to enlist at the start of the war . Due to McCabe ’ s incapacitation , he was given a clerical job at the Victoria Barracks . He stayed in the role for 12 months before his feet problems resulted in an early discharge . He was appointed to serve on the Sydney Sports Ground and Cricket Ground Trust and operated a sports store in George Street , Sydney from its opening until his death . McCabe often hired cricketing colleagues as salesmen ; his close friend O 'Reilly worked there in the late @-@ 1930s , as did paceman Ray Lindwall after the war , Lindwall opted to work for McCabe because he was offered leave to travel overseas for Test tours . 
 McCabe ran for an administrative position with his local club Mosman after his retirement , but was defeated , so he never had an opportunity to serve with the NSWCA . After the end of his first @-@ class career , McCabe became a keen recreational golfer , but stopped playing in the mid @-@ 1950s due to his foot problems and other health issues . In 1956 – 57 , McCabe and O 'Reilly were given a testimonial match by the New South Wales Cricket Association . The match was between Harvey 's XI and Lindwall 's XI and acted as a trial for the non @-@ Test tour of New Zealand . The match raised 7 @,@ 500 pounds , which was split between McCabe and O 'Reilly , and would have bought two average @-@ sized homes in Sydney at the time . 
 McCabe married Edna May Linton on 5 February 1935 at St Mary 's Cathedral , Sydney , and the couple had two children , a son and a daughter , born in 1939 and 1950 respectively . The devout McCabe sent both of his children to Catholic boarding schools even though the family home was nearby . Plagued by ill @-@ health in his middle age , McCabe ’ s fitness was further hindered by his feet , which prevented him from exercising . He thus gained a lot of weight , and heavy smoking wore down his body , as did the large amount of people who wanted to meet him . McCabe weakened significantly in the last two years of his life and was hospitalised for a period for liver problems . He was released from hospital soon before his death , but still aged 58 , was a very frail man who moved very tentatively . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 McCabe died of a skull fracture after falling from a cliff at his home in Mosman , New South Wales after attempting to dispose of a dead possum . He had earlier told Dwyer of his plan to clean out his backyard , and was told to rest , but did so anyway , falling down and rolling off the steep slope in his backyard and over the ledge of the cliff abutting the rear of his house . There was innuendo that McCabe had actually committed suicide , with O 'Reilly musing " He had despatched the possum , but had gone overboard with it ! " . However , the coroner ruled that the death was accidental and his family strongly denied that he had chosen to end his life . The coroner ’ s investigation noted that McCabe ’ s hands had tufts of ripped grass in them , indicating that he had tried to grab onto vegetation in a vain attempt to stop his fall . 
 News of McCabe ’ s death was made public while Australia and England were playing in the Fifth Test at The Oval . After the death was announced over the public address system , the crowd spontaneously stood up and took off their hats , and did the players , and they observed a self @-@ initiated moment of silence . However , McCabe ’ s friend and former teammate Fingleton , now a journalist , criticised the Australian team for not wearing black armbands . 
 McCabe was buried in Northern Suburbs cemetery . In 1977 , the Stan McCabe Sporting Complex was opened in Grenfell as part of the new high school , and the oval was named in his honour . The complex included grounds and facilities for a number of sports . He was inducted into the Australian Cricket Hall of Fame in 2002 . 
 = = Test match performance = = 
 = My Sister , My Sitter = 
 " My Sister , My Sitter " is the seventeenth episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 2 , 1997 . In the episode , Marge and Homer go to a party and leave Lisa to babysit Bart. Being unhappy with this , Bart does everything he can to annoy Lisa . Eventually , Bart becomes injured and Lisa must find him medical attention without losing her reputation as a good babysitter . 
 The episode was written by Dan Greaney and directed by Jim Reardon . The script was written to focus on the relationship between Bart and Lisa and the episode has further been used to discuss the difficulties in letting children babysit themselves . The episode received mostly positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Inspired by " The Babysitter Twins " books , Lisa decides to become a babysitter . However , because of her age , no one takes her seriously . One day , Ned mentions that Maude has been taken hostage in Lebanon and he must leave to get her released , and he agrees to let Lisa babysit Rod and Todd . After a relatively uneventful night , Ned puts out the good word for Lisa , who experiences a business boom . 
 Meanwhile , the Springfield Squidport reopens and throws a gala . Marge and Homer decide to go and they leave Lisa to babysit Bart and Maggie . Bart is offended by the fact that his younger sister is going to be babysitting him . To complicate things further , Bart torments her by , among other things , ordering an oversized sub , hiring Krusty for a bachelor party , dialing 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 for a " <unk> " , and having Maggie eat coffee ice cream for dinner . Eventually , Lisa angrily attempts to jump at Bart , but misses , causing him to fall backwards down the stairs , dislocating his arm and getting a large bump on his head . Bart then realizes that if Lisa does not take him to a hospital , she will not be able to babysit anymore . To make his condition worse , Bart locks himself in his room and hits his head on the door " to make the lump bigger " , then falls unconscious . 
 Lisa tries to call for an ambulance , but the 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 operator refuses to assist her due to Bart 's earlier prank call . Lisa considers asking Dr. Hibbert , but thinks better of it when she realizes that her reputation as a good babysitter will be ruined . Ultimately , she takes the unconscious Bart to Dr. Nick Riviera 's clinic in a wheelbarrow , bringing Maggie along in a pet carrier . There is a long line in the waiting room , and Lisa fails to get an appointment . She then tries to wheel Bart to the hospital , but en route , Bart rolls down a cliff and into a muddy river right in front of the crowded Squidport . Everyone assumes that Lisa is on drugs , and that she has murdered Bart and is about to drown the caged Maggie . The scene then fades to the following day , when Bart , whose injuries have been treated , apologizes to Lisa for causing her trouble . She forgives him , but is still distraught that her reputation as a babysitter is now ruined . However , she soon receives babysitting requests from Dr. Hibbert and Ned due to their difficulty finding sitters , much to Lisa 's delight . 
 = = Production and themes = = 
 The episode was directed by Jim Reardon and written by Dan Greaney . Like numerous preceding episodes , " My Sister , My Sitter " deals with the relationship between Bart and Lisa . Greaney specializes in writing Bart and Lisa episodes from the perspective of a kid . Elaine E Sutherland , who is a member of the Law Society of Scotland 's Family Law Sub @-@ Committee and Professor of Child and Family Law at the Law School , Stirling University , used the episode to describe the potential problems of letting one of your kids babysit the rest . While one child may be mature enough to babysit , it is not certain that the other kids accept the babysitters authority . According to Alan S. Brown and Chris Logan , the writers of the book The Psychology of the Simpsons : D ’ oh ! , the episode is an example of how feminine anger rarely solves the problem on The Simpsons . “ Here , Lisa ’ s rage and ongoing frustration contribute to her difficulty in making good decisions about what to do with her emotion , ” they write . Keeping with the babysitter theme , there are cultural references to The Baby @-@ <unk> Club : Lisa reads book # 14 - The Formula Formula , while Janey is on book # 20 - The President 's Baby Is Missing . 
 The idea of revamping the waterfront came from cities like Baltimore , who were always trying to fix formerly horrible places . Chris Turner , the author of the book Planet Simpson , writes about the scene at the Squidport : " The " satirical " setting seems almost documentary " . The Squidport is a local revitalization project , which recast a historic industrial area as a pedestrian mall . He calls this an example of how “ hyper @-@ consumer culture of Springfield moves front and center ” On the waterfront , Rainier Wolfcastle opens a restaurant called " Planet Hype " . This is a parody of the international theme restaurant franchise Planet Hollywood . Wolfcastle is a parody of Arnold Schwarzenegger , who launched Planet Hollywood along with Sylvester Stallone , Bruce Willis , Demi Moore and Whoopi Goldberg in 1991 . According to Matt Groening , the show had written an entire episode around Planet Hollywood , which featured the voices of Schwarzenegger , Stallone , and Willis as The Three Stooges type of characters . The episode was never animated , because it turned out that it was only the publicist of Planet Hollywood 's idea and the actors did not want to participate . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " My Sister , My Sitter " finished 47th in ratings in a tie with Melrose Place for the week of February 24 - March 2 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 0 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 7 million viewing households . It was the fifth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " a clever episode , if a little disjointed — the two stories don 't gel as well as normal . " Tim Raynor of <unk> said that the episode " is full of the usual , fun antics that you would expect from Bart or any of the other dumb Simpsons . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said that " the segments in which Lisa babysits the various kids in town are a delight " and that the episode " mixes wacky moments with reality as it places Lisa in a logical position . Her conflict with Bart creates realism and also brings out the comedy . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's name is taken from the 1994 movie Sister My Sister . When Dr Hibbert accuses to Lisa is a reference to the chapter " The Music Box " ( 1977 ) , from Little House on the Prairie series . 
 = Frank Worsley = 
 Frank Arthur Worsley DSO OBE RD ( 22 February 1872 – 1 February 1943 ) was a New Zealand sailor and explorer who served on Ernest Shackleton 's Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition of 1914 – 1916 , as captain of the Endurance . He also served in the Royal Navy Reserve during the First World War . 
 Born in Akaroa , New Zealand , on 22 February 1872 , Worsley joined the New Zealand Shipping Company in 1888 . He served aboard several vessels running trade routes between New Zealand , England and the South Pacific . While on South Pacific service , he became renowned for his ability to navigate to tiny , remote islands . He joined the Royal Navy Reserve in 1902 and served on HMS Swiftsure for a year before returning to the Merchant Navy . In 1914 , he joined the Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition , which aimed to cross the Antarctic continent . 
 After the expedition 's ship Endurance was trapped in ice and wrecked , he and the rest of the expedition sailed three lifeboats to Elephant Island , off the Antarctic Peninsula . From here , he , along with Shackleton and four others , sailed the 22 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 9 m ) lifeboat James Caird some 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) across the stormy South Atlantic Ocean , eventually arriving at their intended destination , South Georgia . His navigation skills were crucial to the safe arrival of the James Caird . Shackleton , Worsley and seaman Tom Crean then hiked and climbed through snow and ice across mountainous South Georgia in a 36 @-@ hour march to fetch help from Stromness whaling station . He and Shackleton returned to Elephant Island aboard the Yelcho , a Chilean naval ship , to rescue the remaining members of the expedition , all of whom survived . 
 During the First World War , Worsley captained the Q @-@ ship <unk> He was responsible for the sinking of a German U @-@ boat , UC @-@ 33 on 26 September 1917 by carrying out a skilful ramming manoeuvre . For his role in the sinking of the UC @-@ 33 , Worsley was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) . Later in the war he worked in transportation of supplies in Arctic Russia , and in the North Russia Intervention against the Bolsheviks , earning a bar to his DSO . He was later appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire . From 1921 to 1922 he served on Shackleton 's last expedition to the Antarctic as captain of the Quest . In between berths in the Merchant Navy he led an expedition to the Arctic Circle and participated in a treasure hunt on Cocos Island . He also wrote several books relating to his experiences in polar exploration and during his sailing career . 
 During the Second World War he initially served with the International Red Cross in France and Norway . In 1941 , he falsified his age so he could rejoin the Merchant Navy . When officials discovered his actual age , he was released from duty . He died from lung cancer in 1943 in England . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Frank Arthur Worsley was born on 22 February 1872 in Akaroa , New Zealand , one of three children of a farmer , Henry Worsley , and his wife Georgiana . His grandfather , Henry Francis Worsley ( 1806 – 1876 ) , had migrated from Rugby in England aboard the Cornwall to Lyttelton , where he arrived with his large family in December 1851 . The family lived in <unk> Valley , high up above Akaroa . Worsley 's mother died while he was a toddler . He was sent to school in Akaroa but when his father moved his family to take up work clearing bush from land at <unk> , he was homeschooled for a time . From age 10 , he helped with clearing land for sheep pasture and growing cocksfoot . When Frank was 11 , his older brother , Harry , left to join the New Zealand Shipping Company as an apprentice and at about the same time , his father moved his family , which was now just Frank and his 13 @-@ year @-@ old sister , to Christchurch . Frank attended <unk> School and marked his final year of schooling by being made head boy . 
 Like his brother , Frank was interested in a career at sea . In 1887 , his application to join the New Zealand Shipping Company was declined because of his short stature , but he was successful six months later . He was signed on as a junior midshipman aboard the Wairoa , a three @-@ masted clipper which transported wool to London . 
 = = Maritime career = = 
 Worsley served on a number of sailing ships of the company , running the trade route between New Zealand and England for several years . He became a third mate by 1891 , and then a fifth officer the following year . In 1895 , when a third officer , he left the New Zealand Shipping Company to join the New Zealand Government Steamer Service ( NZGSS ) . His first posting was aboard the Tutanekai , a NZGSS steamer which served the Pacific Islands , as second mate . He was considered to be a good and experienced officer , but was not averse to mischief . On one voyage in 1899 , the Tutanekai was anchored in the harbour at Apia , the capital city of German Samoa . That night , Worsley went ashore and stole the ensign that was flown from the flagpole of the German consulate on the harbour front . On discovering the theft , the consul suspected the culprit was from the crew of the Tutanekai , the only merchant vessel in the harbour at the time . With a party of sailors from SMS Falke , also anchored in the harbour , the consul boarded the Tutanekai looking for the ensign , but they left empty @-@ handed after the ship 's captain protested . Even when the captain later found out Worsley was responsible , it did not affect his career prospects . He was posted to the Hinemoa , another NZGSS steamer , as chief officer . 
 In June 1900 , Worsley sat the examination for a foreign master 's certificate . He passed with good marks , and was one of two students commended for their efforts . He was now a qualified master and , as his first command , was given the Countess of Ranfurly . This was a three @-@ masted schooner of the NZGSS which sailed trade routes in the South Pacific , mainly around the Cook Islands and Niue , both of which were New Zealand dependencies . 
 = = = Royal Navy Reserve = = = 
 While in command of the Countess of Ranfurly , Worsley joined the Royal Navy Reserve ( RNR ) and on 1 January 1902 was appointed a sub @-@ lieutenant . In 1904 , Countess of Ranfurly was sold , and this left Worsley without a command . Rather than stay in the employ of the New Zealand Government Steamer Service , he decided to look abroad for work . He travelled to Sydney and found a berth as chief officer on HMS Sparrow , which was on its delivery voyage to New Zealand , having been recently purchased by the New Zealand Government . When the Sparrow arrived in Wellington in March 1905 , he was selected to command the ship while it was converted to a training vessel . The conversion was still incomplete when he left for England in early 1906 . 
 On arrival in England in March 1906 , Worsley presented himself for further training in the RNR . He was posted to HMS Psyche and received specialist training in torpedoes , gunnery and navigation . He was promoted to lieutenant the following May . He served on a number of Royal Navy ships , including 12 months on HMS Swiftsure , for the next two years . He then returned to the Merchant Navy and found a position with Allan Line Royal Mail Steamers , which sailed regularly from England to Canada and South America . He would intermittently be called up for service in the RNR over the next several years . This included a month in 1911 spent aboard HMS New Zealand . 
 = = Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition = = 
 In 1914 , the explorer Ernest Shackleton began preparing an expedition which had the goal of completing the first crossing of the Antarctic continent . The failure of Robert Falcon Scott to beat the Norwegian Roald Amundsen to the South Pole in 1911 was considered a blot on Britain 's reputation in polar exploration . Shackleton 's expedition was intended to return the country to the forefront of Antarctic endeavour . He set up his headquarters at Burlington Road in London , and was interviewing candidates for the expedition . One available position was that of captain for the expedition 's vessel , the Endurance . 
 Worsley , in London while awaiting a new berth , joined the expedition as a result of a dream , in which he was navigating a ship around icebergs drifting down Burlington Street . He took it as a premonition and the next day hurried down to Burlington Street , where he noticed a sign on a building advertising what Shackleton called the Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition . He promptly entered the building whereupon he met Shackleton . After a few minutes of conversation , Shackleton offered him the captaincy of the Endurance , which Worsley accepted . 
 The Endurance left England on 8 August 1914 destined for Buenos Aires , where Shackleton , travelling separately , would join the expedition . The departure of the expedition was troubled ; the impending outbreak of the First World War prompted some members including Worsley , anticipating a call up to the RNR , to propose a postponement of the voyage . However , the Admiralty advised Shackleton to proceed with his plans even after Britain declared war on Imperial Germany on 4 August . Just prior to the departure of the Endurance Worsley approached the authorities and was advised that RNR personnel were not being called up at the time . While steaming to South America , fuel ran low and wood intended for planned buildings at the expedition 's base in Antarctica was used to keep the engine running . Worsley ran a relatively relaxed ship with little discipline or control of alcohol consumption . Four crew members got into a barroom brawl at a stopover in Madeira , a neutral port . While anchored in the harbour , a neighbouring German ship swung into the Endurance , damaging it . Worsley , enraged , boarded the German ship with some other members of the expedition and forced the crew to repair the damage caused . 
 Shackleton , briefed on Worsley 's handling of the voyage to date once he had caught up with the expedition at Buenos Aires , began to have concerns about his choice of captain . Worsley was to be in command of the resupply expedition for the party that was to winter over in Antarctica , but Shackleton began to doubt whether his leadership skills were sufficient to achieve this . After resupplying at Buenos Aires , the Endurance left for the remote island of South Georgia , in the South Atlantic , on 26 October . It duly arrived at Grytviken Station , a Norwegian whaling outpost , on 5 November . The Norwegians confirmed initial reports from Buenos Aires that the Antarctic pack ice was much further north than usual . Shackleton followed the Norwegians ' advice to delay departure until later in the summer , and it was not until 5 December that the Endurance steamed south for the Weddell Sea . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Endurance encountered the pack ice three days after leaving South Georgia , and Worsley began working the ship through the various bergs . On occasion it was necessary to ram a path through the ice . Progress was intermittent ; on some days little headway was made while on other days large stretches of open water allowed swift passage southwards . Worsley would often direct the helmsman from the crow 's nest , from where he could see any breaks in the ice . It was during this time that Shackleton realised that his temperament was less suited to giving orders than to following them , which he would do with the utmost determination . 
 On 18 January 1915 , the ship became iced in . Within a few days , it was apparent that the Endurance was held fast and was likely to remain so for the upcoming winter . Trapped , the ship slowly drifted westwards with the ice , and the expedition settled in for the winter . The original plan had been to leave a shore party on the Antarctic mainland while Worsley took the Endurance northwards . There had been no expectation that the entire expedition would live aboard the ship in the long term . Worsley relished the challenge ; he slept in the passageway rather than the cabins , and even in the depths of winter , would shock the rest of those aboard the ship by taking snow baths on the ice . With little to do since the Endurance became trapped , he occupied himself taking soundings of the ocean and collecting specimens . He later wrote a report entitled Biological , Soundings and Magnetic Record , Weddell Sea , 1914 – 1916 . 
 By July , it was becoming obvious that the ice was likely to crush the Endurance , which creaked and trembled under the pressure , and Shackleton instructed Worsley to be prepared to quickly abandon ship if the need arose . Worsley was initially incredulous , asking Shackleton : " You seriously mean to tell me that the ship is doomed ? " Shackleton responded " The ship can 't live in this , Skipper . " Finally , on 24 October , the pressure of the ice caused the stern post of the Endurance to twist and the ship began to quickly let in water . After desperate attempts to fix the leak and pump the ship dry , Shackleton gave the order to abandon ship three days later . Salvaging what essential supplies they could , the expedition set out on 30 October for Robertson Island , 200 miles ( 320 km ) to the northeast . After just three days , it was clear that the condition of the ice was too rough for sledging . Having travelled only a mile and a half ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from where the Endurance was sinking , they set up camp to wait for the ice to break up . Lumber and tents were salvaged from the crushed ship , which was still not fully submerged , and a reasonable camp , known as Ocean Camp , was established . The expedition stayed here for two months until 23 December , when they struck camp . 
 The conditions underfoot were slushy during the day , as the temperature warmed up . Shackleton resolved to do most of the trekking at night , sledging the three lifeboats of the Endurance behind them . The sledging was hard work and after little more than a week , Shackleton and his men were forced to camp once more . Underneath , the ice continued to move northwards , and by April 1916 , the floe they were on was nearly within sight of Elephant Island but beginning to break up . Shackleton ordered the expedition to the lifeboats , placing Worsley in charge of one of them , the Dudley Docker . It took a week to reach Elephant Island , the ice and currents inhibiting progress . 
 The first few nights involved camping on nearby ice floes with the constant risk of them breaking up , but the last four nights were in the boats , with Worsley spending most of it at the tiller and going without sleep for 90 hours straight . His experience with open boats came to the fore in his sound handling of the Dudley Docker , while his navigation was exemplary , guiding the fleet of lifeboats unerringly to Elephant Island once they found favourable wind conditions . On the final night at sea , with Elephant Island having been sighted earlier in the day , heavy seas separated his boat from the other two lifeboats . His boat taking on water and caught in a rip , Worsley steered the Dudley Docker all through the night . Relieved early in the morning , he promptly fell asleep and could only be awoken by kicks to the head . It was three years later that he eventually found out the method that was used by his companions to shake him from his deep sleep . The Dudley Docker made shore on 15 April , landing on the same shingle beach of Elephant Island as the other lifeboats . It was the expedition 's first landfall in almost 18 months . 
 = = = Voyage of the James Caird = = = 
 It quickly became apparent that Elephant Island , 20 miles ( 32 km ) of rock and ice with little shelter , was not a welcoming environment particularly with winter approaching and most of the expedition members weakened by their ordeal . Furthermore , the expedition could not be expected to be spotted by search parties or passing whalers . Within days of landing on Elephant Island , Shackleton decided to take a small party and sail the largest lifeboat , the James Caird , named for one of the expedition 's sponsors , to South Georgia , 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) away . From there he would obtain a ship and return for the remainder of his men . Worsley , whose navigational skills had impressed Shackleton , volunteered to accompany him . The James Caird , originally built to Worsley 's specifications , was about 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) long and the expedition 's carpenter , Harry McNish , immediately set about improving its seaworthiness . On 24 April , the weather dawned clear and after being provisioned with 30 days of supplies , the boat left Elephant Island . Worsley was faced with the task of navigating the Southern Ocean to South Georgia . There was no margin for error as the James Caird would sail into the South Atlantic if he missed the island ; this would mean almost certain death for those in the lifeboat but also those remaining on Elephant Island . Fortuitously , the weather was fine on the day of departure from the island and this allowed Worsley to obtain a sun sighting to ensure that his chronometer was rated . 
 Shortly after the start of the voyage , the James Caird which , in addition to Shackleton and Worsley , also carried McNish , sailors John Vincent and Timothy McCarthy , as well as the experienced Tom Crean , encountered the ice but Worsley found a way through and into the open ocean . The crew set up two watches for the journey , which eventually would take 16 days , in strong and heavy seas , to reach South Georgia . For most of the voyage , the weather proved to be stormy and so overcast Worsley was unable to take more than a few sightings with his sextant . He described one sighting as " ... cuddling the mast with one arm and swinging fore and aft round the mast , sextant and all ... " and he would " ... catch the sun when the boat leaped her highest on the crest of a sea ... " . At times the sea conditions were so rough he was braced by the other crew members when taking his sightings . On occasion , the temperature was bitter and each man would spend one minute shifts chipping away ice that coated the top surfaces of the James Caird , affecting its buoyancy . The heavy seas meant there was considerable risk that a man could go overboard . 
 After two weeks , Worsley began to worry about the lack of sightings and advised Shackleton he could not calculate their position to less than 10 miles ( 16 km ) accuracy . As a result , Shackleton opted to aim for the western side of South Georgia which meant , given the prevailing winds , that if they missed their target they would be carried onto the east coast of the island . The following day , they began to observe drifting seaweed and seabirds circulating overhead , indicating the presence of land ahead . On 8 May , through mists and squalls , the crew sighted South Georgia 's Cape Demidov , precisely in line with the course calculated by Worsley . He saw a " ... towering black crag , with a <unk> of snow around its flanks . One glimpse , and it was hidden again . We looked at each other with cheerful , foolish grins . " Sea and wind conditions were such that they were unable to make their way to the Norwegian whaling stations , some 148 miles ( 238 km ) away , on the east coast ; instead they made for King Haakon Bay . Now out of drinking water , they were forced by the high seas to approach the rocky coast with care and heave to for the night . A gale blew strongly the following day and despite their best efforts , they stayed offshore for a further night . Conditions were much better on 10 May and after adverse winds caused failure of his first few attempts , Worsley carefully sailed the James Caird through a rocky reef guarding King Haakon Bay and onto the beach . 
 = = = Trek = = = 
 After <unk> their thirst from a nearby stream , the crew unloaded the James Caird and spent the first night on South Georgia in a cave . The next day , Shackleton announced his intention to walk overland to the Norwegian whaling station at Stromness Bay , on the other side of the island . The crew were too exhausted , and the James Caird too battered , for Shackleton to consider sailing around the island . The trek to Stromness Bay was 22 miles ( 35 km ) and after resting for several days , he , along with Worsley and Tom Crean , set out on 19 May . The interior of South Georgia was mountainous and covered with glaciers . Their map of South Georgia showed only the coastline , and on several occasions , they were forced to backtrack when their route was found to be impassable . After a non @-@ stop trek of 36 hours , the trio reached Stromness Bay and were taken to the manager of the whaling station . He was unable to recognise Shackleton , whom he had met during the expedition 's stopover on the island nearly two years previously . After a hot bath and a large meal , Worsley set out on a whaler to collect the three men left behind at King Haakon Bay . That night a strong blizzard struck the island . Had it developed while Worsley and the others were on their trek , it would have likely killed them . They were fortunate the weather had been relatively good for their trek across the island . Later , all three trekkers would talk of a " fourth presence " that accompanied them . In his account of the walk , Worsley would write " ... I again find myself counting our party — Shackleton , Crean , and I and — who was the other ? Of course , there were only three , but it is strange that in mentally reviewing the crossing we should always think of a fourth , and then correct ourselves . " 
 The next day , McNish , McCarthy and Vincent were picked up . They were unable to recognise Worsley , freshly shaven , when he stepped ashore . The James Caird , which had been pulled up the beach and turned over to serve as a shelter , was also retrieved . 
 = = = Rescue = = = 
 Three days after McNish and the others were brought back to Stromness Bay , Shackleton , Crean and Worsley , along with a crew of volunteers from the whaling station , set out on a hired ship for Elephant Island . They got to within 60 miles ( 97 km ) of the island before ice prevented any further passage south . Unable to break a passage through the ice , they steamed to the Falkland Islands to obtain a more suitable vessel . By now news of the fate of the expedition had reached Britain . Despite messages of goodwill and support , the only British vessel that could be found was the RRS Discovery , Robert Falcon Scott 's old ship , but this would not be available until October . The war tied up all other available resources . 
 Waiting for October was not acceptable to Shackleton who , desperately concerned for the men on Elephant Island , continued to search for a ship . The British Foreign Office prevailed on the governments of Uruguay , Chile and Argentina for a suitable vessel . The Uruguayans came forward with a small survey ship , and this was sailed to within sight of Elephant Island before it too had to turn back . An effort with an Argentinean vessel which set sail on 12 July also failed after three weeks of atrocious weather . Chile offered the use of the Yelcho , and on this steel @-@ hulled steamer , Shackleton , Worsley and Crean set out with a crew on 25 August . Fortunately , in contrast to their previous attempt , the weather was mild and on 30 August , they reached Elephant Island where , to their great joy , they found all 22 men left behind alive . Within an hour all were retrieved and , not wanting to risk being trapped by ice , the Yelcho quickly departed for Punta Arenas , where it was greeted with great fanfare . Worsley later wrote : " ... I was always sorry for the twenty @-@ two men who lived in that horrible place for four months of misery while we were away on the boat journey , and the four attempts at rescue ending with their joyful relief . " 
 While Worsley had been retrieving McNish and others from King Haakon Bay , Shackleton was advised of the fate of his Ross Sea party which had been tasked with laying depots on Shackleton 's intended route across Antarctica . Ten men , forming a winter party , had set up a base at Hut Point , while their ship , the SY Aurora , owned by Shackleton , wintered at Cape Evans . In May 1915 , the ship broke free from its moorings and became trapped in the ice . Badly damaged , it drifted with the ice for over six months before it broke free and its captain , Joseph Stenhouse , was able to sail it to New Zealand in March 1916 . No one had heard from the stranded winter party at Hut Point for nearly two years . After journeying with the rest of the survivors of his own party to Argentina , Shackleton , along with Worsley , left for New Zealand . From here they hoped to find a ship to take them south to retrieve the Ross Sea party . 
 Shackleton had brought Worsley along intending to use his services in the retrieval of the winter party . However , after their arrival in New Zealand in December 1916 , they found themselves without a ship . They had expected to use the Aurora with Shackleton as its captain . In the meantime , the Australian , New Zealand and British governments had put forward funds for the rescue but influenced by the explorer Douglas Mawson , who disliked Shackleton , the Australian government appointed its own captain . After protracted negotiations , Shackleton sailed on board the Aurora as a supernumerary officer . Worsley was left behind but was placated with a paid passage to Britain . The seven surviving members of the winter party were duly rescued . Worsley was later awarded the Polar Medal for his service on the expedition . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Shortly after Shackleton returned to New Zealand from the Ross Sea , having picked up the survivors of the winter party , Worsley travelled to England aboard the RMS Makura . As an RNR officer , he wanted to join in the fight against Imperial Germany . After arriving in Liverpool , he made his way to London and was quickly assigned to HMS Pembroke , the shore station at Chatham . Here , for three months , he learned about fighting U @-@ boats , which were causing considerable damage to supply convoys crossing the Atlantic . Several tactics were deployed against the U @-@ boats . One of these involved the use of Q @-@ ships , small merchant vessels fitted out with hidden armament that could be deployed against any U @-@ boats which surfaced and approached the seemingly unarmed ship . Another tactic was the use of P @-@ boats , which were patrol boats that carried out convoy escort duties and anti @-@ submarine work . The P @-@ boats had a distinctive profile , and their effectiveness wore off as U @-@ boat commanders began to recognise and avoid them . The later built P @-@ boats were designed with a more conventional profile approximating that of a merchant ship , and thus were similar to Q @-@ ships . 
 In July 1917 , Worsley was appointed commander of the PC.61 , one of the later P @-@ boats , with Joseph Stenhouse as his first officer . The PC.61 , commissioned on 31 July 1917 , was equipped with a semi @-@ automatic 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) gun that was hidden by a tarpaulin suspended from crane derricks when not in use . She also had a ram at her bow . Shortly after its commissioning he took his new command to sea on patrol . Most patrols were uneventful but sometimes U @-@ boats were sighted and pursued but these invariably got away . Occasionally torpedoes were fired at his ship . Worsley felt the PC.61 was too easily identified as a Royal Navy vessel against which U @-@ boats were too cautious to make a surface attack . Instead , the submarine would use its torpedoes to attack the ship . 
 In late September 1917 , Worsley and the PC.61 were on patrol to the south of Ireland . On 26 September 1917 , a nearby tanker was struck by a torpedo from a U @-@ boat , UC @-@ 33 . Observing the explosion , Worsley gradually slowed his propellers , hoping to deceive the U @-@ boat 's crew into thinking his P @-@ boat was leaving the area and luring the submarine to the surface . The deception was successful and the UC @-@ 33 surfaced , intending to sink the tanker with its deck gun . Worsley immediately ordered full speed ahead and , realising that he would lose time in manoeuvring his ship into a position in which she could use her guns , set a collision course with the U @-@ boat , intending to ram the submarine . At high speeds the bow , to which the ram was fitted , of the PC.61 lifted out of the water considerably , and Worsley had to reduce speed at the right moment in order for it to be at the right height to strike the submarine . He timed the reduction of speed of the PC.61 perfectly and she struck the UC @-@ 33 midships as it was submerging . The submarine rapidly sunk with nearly all hands , the exception being the captain , who was rescued and later gifted Worsley a silver whistle . The damaged tanker was towed to Milford Haven in Wales , which took 12 hours in an area where other U @-@ boats were known to be lurking . 
 For his role in the sinking of the UC @-@ 33 , Worsley was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) and Shackleton sent him a telegraph congratulating him on his success . Worsley conducted patrols with the PC.61 for several more months . In September 1918 , he was given command of HMS Pangloss , a Q @-@ ship operating in the Mediterranean and which was formerly commanded by Commander Gordon Campbell . With the war nearly over , Worsley did not anticipate much excitement in his new posting . 
 = = = Northern Russia = = = 
 Passing through London en route to Gibraltar , where the Pangloss was based , Worsley met Shackleton , recently assigned by the War Office to the International Contingent destined for Northern Russia to aid the White movement in its fight against the Bolsheviks . Shackleton 's expertise in the polar regions had been recognised by the War Office , and with the temporary rank of major , he was preparing the contingent for a winter deployment to Murmansk . Shackleton had already recruited several veterans of the Endurance to serve with him and arranged for Worsley , keen for action , to be transferred to join the contingent . Worsley , by now a lieutenant commander , left for Murmansk the following month . 
 After he arrived in Russia , Worsley was selected to go to Archangel where he organised equipment and supplies for the British forces stationed there . He provided extensive advice , derived from his polar experience , to soldiers on how to best make use of their resources and trained them in the use of skis . He participated in several patrols and due to a shortage of officers , occasionally took command of platoons of British infantry . In April 1919 , he was posted back to Murmansk , where he took command of the gunboat HMS Cricket . He took her up the <unk> River and targeted Bolshevik gunboats and villages along the river . He also provided support to British and White Russian units moving along the banks of the river in operations to seize ground lost to the Bolsheviks in the winter months . 
 Worsley commanded Cricket for two months before becoming the captain of HMS M24 , a monitor and tender to HMS Fox . His time in command was short as he managed to attach himself to the Hampshire Regiment . In August , he participated in a raid behind Bolshevik lines . The raiding party of 25 men obtained useful intelligence by tapping telegraph lines and ambushing a Bolshevik convoy but their presence soon became known and they were pursued by a force of over 200 Bolsheviks . When the captain commanding the party became lost in a forest , he deferred navigation to Worsley , who successfully led all 25 men back to safety . For his efforts , he was awarded a bar to his DSO . The citation for his award read : 
 In recognition of the gallantry displayed by him at <unk> in North Russia between the 2nd and 5th August 1919 . This officer formed one of a large patrol which in circumstances of great danger and difficulty penetrated many miles behind the enemy lines , and by his unfailingly cheery leadership he kept up the spirits of all under trying conditions . By his assistance in bridging an <unk> river behind the enemy lines , he greatly helped the success of the enterprise . 
 When the Allied forces left Murmansk and Archangel in late 1919 , Worsley returned to London . He was rewarded for his service in Russia by being appointed to the Order of St. Stanislaus . He was discharged from service on 2 January 1920 and placed on the RNR retired list . Later in the year , in a ceremony at Buckingham Palace , he was appointed to the Order of the British Empire for his services to Great Britain . 
 = = Quest = = 
 Worsley remained in near constant contact with Shackleton , who was attempting to put together an expedition to the Arctic , and was hopeful of securing a suitable position in the endeavour . However , the expedition was still some way off and in the meantime , Worsley set up a shipping company with his friend Stenhouse . The company , Stenhouse Worsley & Co , purchased a schooner , Annie , with the intention of trading with the Baltic states . This plan collapsed when the Baltic freight market fell on hard times and eventually , the company started shipping freight along the British coast . In late 1920 , Worsley and Stenhouse went on a trading voyage to Iceland . The Annie carried cargo on the outward trip but was nearly wrecked when sailing around the coast of Iceland to pick up cargo from a remote port for the return trip to England . Poor weather and sea conditions kept the Annie in Iceland until February 1921 , when Worsley was able to carry freight back to Britain . By then Shackleton was ready to proceed with his expedition and wanted Worsley as the captain of his ship , the Quest , an offer which he quickly accepted . 
 After the Canadian government withdrew promised financial support for the expedition , the delay in finding replacement funding ate into the Arctic sailing season . Shackleton , not wanting to delay departure any longer than he had to , decided to go south instead and attempt a circumnavigation of the Antarctic continent . The expedition , known as the Shackleton – Rowett Expedition ( John Rowett , an old friend of Shackleton 's , was the main sponsor ) , would also attempt to discover sub @-@ Antarctic islands and spend the southern winter in the Pacific islands . The expedition included several Endurance veterans in addition to Worsley ; Frank Wild was again second in command , and Leonard Hussey was the meteorologist . Worsley was the master of the Quest , but would also be the expedition 's hydrographer . 
 The Quest , a 111 @-@ foot ( 34 m ) two @-@ masted sealing ship sourced from Norway , set sail on 18 September 1921 . Problems soon arose ; the ship did not sail well and it leaked . There were also problems with the engine . A week was spent in Portugal undergoing repairs , and after crossing the Atlantic , the Quest spent a month in the docks of Rio de Janeiro . While in Brazil , Shackleton , whose health had been poor for some time , suffered a heart attack . After he declined treatment for his condition , the expedition left for South Georgia on 18 December . The island was sighted on 4 January 1922 and both Worsley and Shackleton were " like a pair of excitable kids " , pointing out landmarks from their walk across South Georgia back in 1916 . The following day , Shackleton suffered a fatal heart attack . Worsley described the loss of his friend as " ... a terribly sad blow . I have lost a dear pal , one of the whitest men , in spite of his faults , that ever lived . " 
 Despite this setback , the expedition continued with Wild in command while Hussey returned to England with Shackleton 's body . On 22 January , Worsley suffered a serious accident . Under sail , the Quest had been rolling heavily and ropes securing a lifeboat snapped . The lifeboat , full of stores , swung against the wheelhouse and crushed Worsley against the bridge . He broke several ribs and had to rest for several days . By the end of March , after being briefly trapped in ice in the Weddell Sea , the ship reached Elephant Island . The expedition then returned to South Georgia , where Hussey was waiting . Shackleton 's widow had directed that he be buried on South Georgia and Hussey had returned to the island in late February to fulfil her request . 
 Worsley and the rest of the expedition spent several weeks on South Georgia , and he assisted in the building of a memorial cairn to Shackleton in King Edward Cove . The expedition then sailed for Tristan da Cunha , where Worsley carried out some mapping work . Other stops were made at Cape Town , Ascension Island and Saint Helena before the expedition arrived back in England in September 1922 . 
 = = Arctic = = 
 The Atlantic shipping trade occupied Worsley after his return to England . He was master of the George Cochran for a time in 1923 , shipping rum to Montreal . The following year he was in command of the Kathleen Annie when it was wrecked in the Orkney Islands . He ensured the evacuation of his crew before leaving the stricken ship for the safety of the shore . 
 During his time in Canada , Worsley had made the acquaintance of a young Canadian , Grettir Algarsson , who was of Icelandic descent and was preparing a ship for a voyage to the Arctic . Algarsson 's voyage proved short @-@ lived , as his ship collided with floating wreckage while in the North Sea . Undeterred , he set about preparing an expedition for the following year and invited Worsley , who had provided advice for his previous voyage , to join him . The plan was to sail to Spitzbergen , in the Arctic Circle , and Algarsson was to fly from there to the North Pole where he would crash the plane , and , with his pilot , sledge back . Worsley was to captain the ship that Algarsson had purchased for the expedition , a 99 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) diesel @-@ engined <unk> called the Island . A lack of funds resulted in the cancellation of the planned flight as a suitable plane could not be found . However , the 15 @-@ man expedition , known as the Algarsson North Polar Expedition , went ahead with certain mapping and scientific objectives , among them a search for Gillis Land , northeast of Spitzbergen , which had not been sighted since 1707 , as well as sounding the continental shelf between Spitzbergen and Franz Josef Land . With the plane flight no longer viable , and the focus of the expedition now primarily on maritime matters , Algarsson offered Worsley co @-@ leadership of the expedition , which he accepted . The Island sailed on 21 June 1925 from Liverpool . 
 When sailing the western side of Spitzbergen , a blade of the propeller of the Island was damaged in a collision with an ice floe . When the engine was run , severe vibration was felt and this forced Worsley to continue northwards under sail , searching for Gillis Land until the ship reached the pack ice . While doing so , soundings were taken which confirmed the presence of a submarine plain between Spitzbergen and the island group of Franz Josef Land . Turning south and sailing along the northern coast of Spitzbergen , a previously uncharted harbour was found , which Algarsson named after Worsley . The ship then sailed north , still seeking Gillis Land , but became trapped in the ice . Worsley took the opportunity to create an ice dock to facilitate repairs to the rudder , which had become damaged . After two weeks beset in the ice , he used the engine to break free but the last blade of the propeller was lost in the process . 
 The Island was now effectively without an engine , a prospect that did not daunt Worsley as he sailed for Franz Josef Land . He described it as " sail 's last unaided battle with the polar pack [ pack ice ] " . In August he landed on Cape Barents , one of the southern islands of Franz Josef Land , and planted a Union Jack . Together with the ship 's engineer who was from Dunedin , he claimed to be the first New Zealander to set foot on Franz Josef Land . The expedition , which had been renamed the British Arctic Expedition with the consensus of the participants , made several attempts to find a way northwards through the pack ice , Worsley harbouring hopes of being the first sailing ship to sail through the island group to Gillis Land and then back to Spitzbergen , but was unsuccessful . In one attempt , the Island nearly collided with a large iceberg , but Worsley ordered a rowboat to take to the water and the ship was towed out of harm 's way . 
 Finally , on 14 September , what was thought to be Gillis Land was spotted several miles away . The Island was unable to sail close enough to confirm the sighting , but Worsley noted that it was to the west of its charted position . If it was Gillis Land , it was the first sighting of the island for 200 years ( Gillis Land no longer appears on modern charts ) . The ship then sailed to North @-@ East Land , circumnavigating it and while doing so reaching the expedition 's farthest north , 81 ° 15 ′ N. Worsley ensured the New Zealand flag was flown at the spot . The expedition then set sail for Spitzbergen , reaching the island 's Green Harbour in mid @-@ October . The ship 's engine could not be repaired before Green Harbour was closed for winter and Worsley accepted a tow to Tromsø , the conclusion of which marked the end of the expedition . He later wrote a book of the voyage , Under Sail in the Frozen North , which was published in 1927 . 
 = = London life = = 
 After the completion of his Arctic voyage , Worsley returned to life in London , where he had a reasonably high profile due to his exploits with Shackleton and his wartime service . In 1926 , he married Jean Cumming , who he had met in 1920 at New Zealand House in London while collecting his mail . It was his second marriage ; in 1907 he had married Theodora <unk> but she had left him by the time of his return from Russia ( the couple had no children ) . It took several years for Worsley to obtain a divorce to allow his marriage to Jean , nearly 30 years his junior , to take place . For income in between trading voyages , Worsley wrote books and articles . Two of these , Shackleton 's Boat Journey and Crossing South Georgia were published as serials in the periodical Blue Peter in 1924 and were well received . These books were published together as a single volume in 1931 . His book was considered superior to Shackleton 's own account , published as South in 1919 . In 1938 , a fourth book , First Voyage in a Square @-@ rigged Ship was published . When his financial circumstances required it , which was often , Worsley would write an article for money . His topics would range from the dogs used on the expedition to the pipe smoking habits of his Elephant Island co @-@ habitants . 
 Worsley also conducted lecturing tours for income , his profile enhanced by his publication record . As sailing commissions at this late stage of his life were in short supply , his lectures became more important as a source of income . He mainly lectured on his voyages with Shackleton , whose wife lent Worsley several of her late husband 's slides to enhance his talks . In later years , he added talks on his own voyages to his repertoire . His lectures were well received with glowing reviews in local newspapers . His profile was boosted following his appearance in the film South , released in 1933 , for which he provided an accent @-@ free narration . The film was based on Frank Hurley 's cine film of the Endurance expedition , intercut with photographic slides . He made an onscreen appearance in the film , showing the audience several artefacts from the expedition . Like his books , the film was very well received . 
 In the 1930s , Worsley was part of a yacht and ship delivery company , <unk> Laurie Norie & Wilson Limited . His personal experience was a key selling point in the company 's commercial literature . In 1937 , the company completed over 50 delivery voyages . The longest delivery was that of a steamer destined for Hong Kong , which took three months . On many of these voyages he was accompanied by Jean , who also enjoyed sailing . 
 = = Treasure hunting = = 
 Even into his 60s , Worsley still sought adventure . In 1934 , he was asked to join the Treasury Recovery Limited Expedition which was organised to locate treasure allegedly hidden at Cocos Island by pirates . In earlier times , the island had been used as a base by the pirates to attack Spanish ships transporting gold from South America back to Spain . At the time of mounting the expedition , it was believed that between £ 5 million and £ 25 million in gold and silver was buried on the island . Worsley sailed , with Jean for company , for Cocos Island in September 1934 aboard the Queen of Scots . On arrival at the island in October , he assisted in unloading stores to set up a village at <unk> Bay , the safest landing point on Cocos . The island , off the coast of Costa Rica , was heavily forested and hard labour was necessary to clear likely spots for searching . As the Queen of Scots was found to be too large for the expedition 's needs , Worsley left with the ship to return to England via the Panama Canal . He was to source a replacement vessel and bring back supplies . 
 En route , Worsley found that the government of Costa Rica , unhappy at not being informed of the expedition 's plans , intended to forcibly remove the treasure hunters from Cocos Island . Despite Worsley 's dispatch of a personal cable to the Costa Rican president , and ensuing publicity in England , some of the expedition 's men were forcibly taken to Panama . The others remained on Cocos under guard . By this time , the leaders of the expedition had returned to England , leaving Worsley as controller of the remaining men . He funded supplies for the remaining men from his own pocket but eventually those remaining on Cocos were shipped to Panama and discharged . 
 The expedition regathered , and after obtaining a concession from the Costa Rican government , returned to the island the following year . He sailed the expedition 's new yacht , <unk> , from England to Cocos Island in a troubled voyage , again accompanied by Jean . The expedition was underfunded and supplies were lacking . Mechanical failure while en @-@ route also hampered the voyage . By the time of his arrival on Cocos , he had been appointed the controller of the expedition . Despite extensive searching with a crude metal detector , no trace of the treasure had been found by September . Worsley , with a lecture season beginning in London in October , left the island in early September . This was his last involvement with the expedition which , after nine more months , failed to locate the treasure hunt . The expedition ended when funding ran out . Despite the lack of success , Worsley still believed treasure was to be found on the island and hoped to return . He never did , although his treasure hunting exploits provided plenty of material for his lecture tours . 
 = = Later life = = 
 When the Second World War broke out in September 1939 , Worsley was keen to contribute to the war effort . His age of 67 prevented his recall to the Royal Navy Reserve . He eventually joined the International Red Cross and travelled to France where he lectured troops of the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) during the Phoney War . He also sought support from the War Office to provide equipment to Swedish volunteers travelling to Finland to assist its countrymen in fighting the Russians during the brief Winter War . When another BEF was sent to Norway in April 1940 to help secure railway links to Sweden , the Red Cross , intending to have a unit in the country as well , appointed Worsley as its Advance Agent – Norway . He was to prepare the way for the unit but after the Germans captured Narvik , it became too dangerous for the Red Cross to be involved . After a brief visit to Norway , Worsley returned to Britain . 
 Worsley became the commander of a Red Cross training depot in Balham , London , but it later closed down due to a lack of recruits . He repeatedly wrote to the War Office offering his services and proposing various schemes involving Norway , including one to land guns at Spitzbergen , an area he knew well from his Arctic expedition in 1925 . 
 Eventually , Worsley found a command in the Merchant Navy , and , giving his age as 64 ( he was actually 69 ) , was appointed master of the Dalriada in August 1941 . He worked to keep the harbour entrance at Sheerness clear of wrecked shipping and also carried out salvage work . His command was only for a few months for when the company that owned his vessel found out his true age , he was replaced . Unhappy at being put into the Merchant Navy Reserve Pool , he continued to advocate for a useful posting . 
 In April 1942 , Worsley was appointed to the staff at a training establishment for the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve , HMS King Alfred in Sussex , giving lectures on charts and pilotage . After two months he was transferred to the Royal Naval College , Greenwich . While in Sussex , his health began to deteriorate and he cut down on his pipe smoking . After a few months at Greenwich , he took ill and was hospitalised . Diagnosed with lung cancer , naval doctors found that they could do little for Worsley , and he was discharged . He opted to spend the last days of his life with his wife and the Bamford family , good friends who lived in <unk> , Surrey . He died in the Bamford house on 1 February 1943 . He was cremated after a well attended service held on 3 February at the chapel of the Royal Navy College . His casket was adorned with the New Zealand ensign and Worsley 's personal standard that he had flown aboard the Quest in the 1921 – 22 expedition . His ashes were scattered at the mouth of the Thames River , near the Nore lightship . 
 After Worsley 's death , Jean Worsley donated his unpublished diaries to the Scott Polar Research Institute . She returned to Aberdeen , where she had spent much of the previous months , to live with her mother . Jean later moved to <unk> following the death of her mother , and lived with the <unk> . Her final years were spent in relative financial comfort ; several years before his death , Worsley had invested in shares in Venezuela Oil , which later became Shell Oil and provided good returns for Jean . She died at the Bamford home in 1978 , at the age of 78 , and in the same room that her husband had occupied at the time of his death . The couple were childless . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A bust of Frank Worsley stands in his home town of Akaroa , New Zealand . The sculpture was created by artist Stephen Gleeson of Christchurch , and unveiled in 2004 . The town 's museum also displays the ensign from Worsley 's former command , the <unk> 
 Several geographical features are named for Worsley , including Mount Worsley on South Georgia , Cape Worsley in the British Antarctic Territory , the Worsley <unk> in the Ross Dependency and Worsley Harbour at Spitzbergen . <unk> Road in the Christchurch suburb of Cracroft is named for his grandfather ; it was built by him as an access road for his farm . 
 190 hectares ( 470 acres ) of land at Akaroa , on which his childhood home stood , were purchased by the New Zealand Native Forest Restoration Trust in 2015 . The land borders onto <unk> Reserve , with their staff managing the long process of native forest establishing itself again and building walking tracks . The Rod Donald Banks Peninsula Trust , Akaroa Museum , and <unk> staff will erect information panels at the house site . As a teenager , Worsley helped with clearing bush on Banks Peninsula that is now being restored , and he wrote later in life : 
 It was a mad waste . The colonists in their greed for more grass seed and sheep pasture burned millions of pounds worth of timber . They recklessly destroyed the wonderful beauty of the bush , baring the soil until it was carried away by landslides , and lowered the rainfall , and laid waste the homes of countless sweet songsters . 
 = Bhikshatana = 
 Bhikshatana ( Sanskrit : भिक ् <unk> ; <unk> ; literally , " wandering about for alms , <unk> " ) or Bhikshatana @-@ murti ( <unk> ) is an aspect of the Hindu god Shiva as the " Supreme mendicant " or the " Supreme Beggar " . Bhikshtana is depicted as a nude four @-@ armed man adorned with ornaments who holds a begging bowl in his hand and is followed by demonic attendants and love @-@ sick women . 
 Bhikshatana is considered a gentler form of Shiva 's fierce aspect Bhairava and a gentle phase between Bhairava 's two gruesome forms , one of which decapitates the god Brahma and the other of which murders the god Vishnu 's gatekeeper . Bhikshatana is the form of Bhairava that Shiva assumes to atone for his sin of severing Brahma 's fifth head . He wanders the universe in the form of a naked Kapali mendicant , begging for alms with Brahma 's kapala ( skullcap ) as his begging bowl , until his sin is expiated upon reaching the holy city of Varanasi . 
 Another legend describes Bhikshtana 's visit to the Deodar ( Pine ) Forest to dispense the ignorance of sages and lead them to true knowledge . During his visit , he seduces the wives of the sages who come to give him alms . Horrified by Bhikshatana 's " heretic " appearance and actions , the sages have a long confrontation with him . Ultimately Bhikshatana triumphs , establishing the worship of the Linga , his aniconic symbol . A variant of the legend narrates how Bhikshatana transforms into Nataraja — Shiva as the Cosmic Dancer . 
 Bhikshatana is a popular icon in South India , in contrast to North India , where it is of lesser importance . Though Bhikshatana does not have any temples dedicated to him as the primary deity , he is sculpted in stone temple walls , worshipped as a subsidiary deity , and cast in bronze as a temple festival processional icon in almost every major Tamil Shiva temple . Many Tamil language hymns sing of Bhikshatana 's wanderings , often narrating of the pining of the love @-@ smitten who are enamoured of him . 
 = = Legends = = 
 = = = <unk> wandering = = = 
 The Kurma Purana narrates that during a particular council of rishis ( sages ) , the god Brahma arrogantly declared that he was the Supreme Creator of the Universe . Shiva appeared at the assembly as an infinite pillar of light and challenged Brahma 's statement . After deliberation , the council accepted Shiva as the true Creator , but Brahma remained obstinate . Angered by Brahma 's vanity , Shiva — as the terrifying Bhairava — cut off one head of the five @-@ headed Brahma with a mere flick of his fingernail ( an act iconographically depicted as <unk> @-@ murti ) . As a consequence Brahma died , but the spiritual credit he had accumulated over a lifetime of devout asceticism pulled him immediately back from death . Upon his resurrection , Brahma accepted Shiva 's superiority . The reason for the decapitation of Brahma remains the same in the narratives of the Shiva Purana and the Matsya Purana . In the Skanda Purana , the trigger is not Brahma 's arrogance but his incest with his daughter , while in the Bengali version of the Shiva Purana , Brahma insults Shiva using his fifth head 's mouth , while the rest of them praise Shiva when he comes to Brahma 's abode as a guest . In another instance in the Shiva Purana , when an argument erupts between Brahma and Vishnu over who is superior , Shiva appears as an infinite fiery pillar ( Linga ) in front of the pair . They decide whoever finds the end of the pillar is superior . Brahma lies about finding the head of the infinite pillar and declares himself as superior . In the Varaha Purana , in which Shiva is born from Brahma 's brow , Brahma calls his son a Kapali and angers him . In all versions , an infuriated Shiva or Bhairava cuts off Brahma 's head as a punishment . However , all Puranas ( Kurma , Varaha , Shiva , Skanda , and Vamana ) agree that the head of Brahma stuck to Bhairava @-@ Shiva 's left palm due to the sin of killing Brahma , the most learned Brahmin – Brahmahatya or <unk> . To expiate the sin of <unk> , Shiva had to perform the vow of a Kapali : wandering the world as a naked beggar with the skull of the slain as his begging bowl . In the Kurma and Vamana Puranas , Shiva 's sin takes corporeal form , becoming a ghoulish woman called Brahmahatya who follows Bhikshatana everywhere he goes . 
 The Kurma Purana further narrates that Bhikshatana wandered the three worlds ( heaven , earth , and netherworld ) begging from door to door with a host of bhutas ( goblins ) . The women of the houses who came to grant him food became enamoured by his appearance and followed him , singing and dancing . Wandering , Bhikshatana reached the Deodar Forest ( also called Daruka forest , Daruka @-@ vana or Daru @-@ vana ) , where he shocked the sages with his " lewdness and nudity " and tempted their wives . Bhikshatana @-@ Shiva made them realise his greatness after their confrontation . However , in some other Puranas this encounter is placed in a different time period unrelated to Bhikshatana 's expiatory wandering . 
 The Kurma Purana goes on to state that after the encounter with the sages of the Deodar Forest , Bhikshatana continued to wander , visiting various countries of gods and demons before he finally reached the abode of the god Vishnu . Vishnu 's gatekeeper <unk> did not allow him to enter . Angered , Bhikshatana slew <unk> and impaled the corpse on his trident , which added to his sin . This form of Shiva with a corpse on his trident is called Kankala @-@ murti ( " One with the skeleton " ) . Bhikshatana , now as Kankala @-@ murti , entered Vishnu 's abode and begged for food . Vishnu offered his own blood as food in one version . In another version , Vishnu cut an artery on Bhikshatana 's forehead ; a stream of blood spurts into his begging bowl as his food . Vishnu then directed Bhikshatana to visit the sacred city of Varanasi , where his sin would be expiated . The encounter with Vishnu 's gatekeeper is also retold with some variation in the Vamana Purana and the Matsya Purana . 
 All Puranas agree that upon reaching Varanasi , Brahma 's skull falls off Bhikshatana 's palm at a place now called <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " liberating from the skull " ) and <unk> 's corpse disappears . The sin , personified by Brahmahatya , vanishes into hell . <unk> is resurrected and the sanctified Bhairava @-@ Shiva , having bathed in the sacred pond in Varanasi , casts off the appearance of Bhikshatana and returns to his abode . 
 = = = Visit to the Deodar Forest = = = 
 As told in the Kurma Purana , Bhikshatana @-@ Shiva wanted to reveal the ignorance of the sages , who were engrossed in Dharma ( righteousness ) and extreme austerities but had forgotten the Samkhya ( Supreme Knowledge ) . The naked , handsome , ithyphallic ( with an erect phallus , <unk> ) beggar Shiva entered the forest , begging for alms from the sages ' wives . They were so enamoured of him that while granting alms , they allowed their clothes to fall off and followed him , dancing and singing , love @-@ sick . Bhikshatana was accompanied by Mohini — Vishnu disguised as Bhikshatana 's enchanting wife , who maddens the sages ' sons in love . The sages , unable to recognise Shiva , abused and cursed him , even assaulting him . They cursed that his Linga ( phallus ) should fall off . Shiva allowed it to be so and the Linga became an infinite fiery pillar of light . <unk> , the wife of sage Atri , enlightened the sages that the couple was none other than Shiva and Vishnu . The sages thereafter worshipped the Linga . Pleased , Shiva returned to the forest as a beggar in an ugly form with his wife Parvati . Eventually , he revealed his supreme form to the sages and exalted the Pashupata vow – by which a man restrains his passion , becomes celibate , and roams naked smeared with ash – declaring that such a lifestyle would lead to moksha ( salvation ) . 
 Other scriptures describe other visits by Shiva to Deodar Forest in his Bhikshatana form . The Vamana Purana mentions Shiva entering the Deodar Forest twice as a beggar . <unk> by the death of his first wife Sati but chased by the love @-@ god Kamadeva , Shiva escapes to the Deodar Forest and lives as a mendicant . The sages ' wives who come to grant him food become sexually excited at the mere sight of him . The sages curse his Linga to fall off and it becomes the infinite pillar . Brahma and Vishnu propitiate him and Shiva <unk> the Linga into his body . In another instance , while passing the Deodar Forest , Parvati notices sages who worship Shiva and have emaciated their bodies with fasts and severe vows . Parvati requests Shiva to save them from further pain , but Shiva declares that the sages are simply foolish and have not restrained their passion and anger . He enters the forest as a handsome man , wearing only a garland of sylvan flowers . He entices the sages ' wives , who give him alms . As before , the Linga of the cursed Shiva falls off , but eventually the sages realise their folly and worship the Linga . Similar accounts of Bhikshatana @-@ Shiva 's visit to the Deodar Forest to humble and enlighten the false sages , Bhikshatana @-@ Shiva 's emasculation and establishment of Linga worship also appear in the Mahabharata , the Shiva Purana , and the Bhagavata Purana . 
 The Linga Purana also mentions the visit of Bhikshatana @-@ Shiva to Deodar Forest to entice the wives of sages , who had taken up austerities " detrimental to the perpetuation of a healthy social order . " The scripture mentions Bhikshatana @-@ Shiva 's deformed but attractive nude black @-@ red form , his seduction of the sages ' wives , and the sages ' resulting curse . However , the curse proves fruitless in this version . The confused sages ask Brahma for guidance , who tells them the truth about the beggar and informs them of the proper way to propitiate Shiva . Returning to the forest , they please Shiva , who had returned to beg for alms . Finally , he enlightens the sages , revealing his true form . In the Padma Purana , the curse of the sages fails . In retribution , Shiva casts a curse on the sages so that they , like Bhikshatana , will become beggars with matted hair and be devoid of knowledge . Those who would still worship him would gain knowledge , wealth , and progeny , and be reborn into good families . In the Skanda Purana , the sages of the Deodar Forest are performing rituals and start to think of themselves as gods . To humble these arrogant sages , Shiva takes the form of Bhikshatana — an attractive young beggar — and Vishnu becomes Mohini , his wife . While the sages fall for Mohini , the women wildly chase Shiva . When the sages regain their senses , they perform a black magic sacrifice , which produces a serpent , a lion , an elephant ( or tiger ) , and a dwarf , all of which attack Shiva , who overpowers them . Shiva then dances on the dwarf and takes the form of Nataraja , the Cosmic Dancer . The same legend is retold in the Tamil Kovil Puranam and Kandha Puranam with some differences . This legend is also told in the Sthala Purana related to the Chidambaram Temple dedicated to Shiva @-@ Nataraja . The ceiling of the <unk> shrine in the Nataraja temple complex illustrates this legend in a series of frescos , where Bhikshatana is depicted as a white naked mendicant accompanied by a scantily @-@ <unk> Mohini . 
 = = = <unk> legend = = = 
 The Skanda Purana narrates that Bhikshatana @-@ Shiva appears on another occasion as a naked , fierce Kapali beggar . Once , at a sacrifice hosted by Brahma , Bhikshatana appears and begs for food . The Brahmins performing the sacrifice try to drive him away , considering a hungry beggar unfit for sacrificial rites . Bhikshatana throws his skull begging @-@ bowl on the ground and the Brahmins throw it out , but another skull bowl appears in its place . Consequently , hundreds of skulls appear , polluting the sacrifice , which compels Brahma to promise Shiva that no sacrifice will be deemed complete without an invocation to him , <unk> — the Lord of the skulls . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 The iconography of Bhikshatana is discussed in all Shaiva Agamic texts , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Karanagama and the iconographic work Shilparatna ; the texts are mostly South Indian in origin . The iconography is quite similar to that of the Kankala @-@ murti aspect who , like Bhikshatana , is associated with the legend of Shiva 's atonement for severing Brahma 's head . The chief difference is that Bhikshatana is nude and Kankala @-@ murti is clothed . 
 Though Shiva is often described as a naked ascetic Yogi , iconographically he is rarely portrayed as nude except in his form as Bhikshatana . Often the seductive nature of the naked Bhikshatana is emphasised in his torso and buttocks . Though his manhood is fully visible , Bhikshatana is never displayed as ithyphallic in South Indian iconography . In contrast to textual descriptions , Orissan images of Bhikshatana depict him clothed with tiger skin and other body ornaments , but displaying an erect phallus . He is two @-@ armed , holding the begging bowl kapala in his left hand and the trishula ( trident ) in his right hand . 
 Bhikshatana is depicted with <unk> ( dishevelled matted locks ) or with <unk> ( matted hair arranged in a circle ) . A serpent may be depicted in his matted hair , which is also adorned by the crescent moon . His forehead bears a <unk> , the Shaiva tilaka composed of three horizontal lines of sacred ash with a red dot in the middle representing the third eye . He wears a <unk> ( ornamental head band ) — sometimes adorned with a human skull motif — on his forehead . Snake ornaments adorn his body , and bronze images often depict multiple necklaces , a waist @-@ band , armlets , elbow bands , bracelets , anklets , and rings on all his toes and fingers . A snake is also tied around his waist and a white yagnopavita ( sacred thread ) is worn across the chest . 
 Bhikshatana is often pictured with four arms in South Indian iconography . The front right arm is stretched out downwards and the hand holds a bit of grass or another plant in the <unk> gesture , near the mouth of his pet deer or antelope , who leaps playfully by his side . The back right arm is raised and holds a damaru ( drum ) . The front left hand holds a kapala ( skull @-@ cup ) , used as a begging bowl . The back left hand holds a trishula decorated with peacock feathers . The left leg is firmly rooted in the ground while the right one is slightly bent , suggesting walking . He often wears <unk> ( wooden sandals ) but sometimes may be barefoot . The sandals are unique and identifying feature of Bhikshatana 's iconography and distinguish him from other forms of Shiva and all other deities , who are always depicted barefoot . Sometimes Bhikshatana 's iconography is amalgamated with that of Bhairava , in which case he displays Bhairava 's attributes in addition to his own . 
 One feature that does not appear in the canons but is often found in stone sculptures and bronzes is the presence of a small bell tied by a string just below the right knee . The bell is interpreted by the scholar Mahadev Chakravarti to be symbolic of Bhikshatana 's outcast status , as the bell is symbolic of the Pariah " untouchables " of South India , who traditionally had to ring a bell when entering a Brahmin village . In bronzes , the deer and the trishula were generally cast separately and positioned later in the icon , but since many of these separate pieces have been lost over time , bronzes often appear without them . 
 Bhikshatana is often accompanied by women and <unk> @-@ gana ( goblin attendants of Shiva ) . One of the attendants placed to the left of Bhikshatana should carry a large bowl used for storing the food alms of Shiva . The women , often seven in number , are variously pictured as enamoured of Shiva , eager to embrace him , blessing him , or serving him food in his begging bowl with a ladle . The clothes of some of these women are slipping from their loins , symbolising their lust . The woman giving Bhikshatana alms is also interpreted as Annapurna , the goddess of grain . Various gods , celestial beings , and sages bow to him with folded hands . In some scenes , the sages are depicted as angry and trying to beat Bhikshatana , alluding to the Deodar Forest legend . 
 = = Development and adoration = = 
 The theme of Shiva as a beggar is not unique to the Bhikshatana icon and his legends . Shiva is often described as wandering the universe as a homeless beggar @-@ ascetic with his consort Parvati 's raison d 'être being to bring him back to his marital and home life . Shiva is also depicted as asking for alms from the goddess Annapurna , a form of Parvati as the goddess of food . The <unk> describes Shiva as gathering food through begging , evocative of his Bhikshatana form . In spite of this he is described as a sustainer of the universe and of life @-@ sustaining food . 
 Though Shiva is commonly described as a beggar , the specific theme of the expiatory wandering — which is the core of the Bhikshatana tale — originates uniquely from the ascetic traditions of the Kapalika sect and its <unk> Pashupata sect . Bhikshatana mirrors the role of Kapali ( skull @-@ bearer ) , the wandering ascetic who defends himself with a trident and magical powers , holds a skull @-@ bowl , and worships Shiva ( the term Kapali also being used to designate a member of the Kapalika sect ) . Scriptures like the Kurma Purana explicitly identify Shiva with a Kapali – " an outsider who scares by his looks , and sometimes charms " – in this form . To atone for the sin of severing the god Brahma 's fifth head , Shiva is said to have separated the body of Bhairava from his own and sent it to wander with the skull of Brahma in his hand , a vow that parallels the Maha @-@ vrata ( " great vow " ) that a Kapali must undertake to dispel the sin of accidentally killing a Brahmin . The expiatory wandering punishment of 12 years is also given to a <unk> sinner — a learned Brahmin who kills another of great learning and good conduct . The vow is prescribed in the <unk> , a text corpus detailing ethics and conduct . The sinner should live in an isolated place and beg in only seven houses with the skull of the slain . He must use as a staff the bones of the slain and be treated by society as an outcast . Similarly , Bhikshtana is described as using Brahma 's skull as his begging bowl and his bones as a stave . He wandered begging at the seven houses of the Saptarishi – the seven great sages – and lived in cremation grounds outside a town . 
 Images of Bhikshatana are found throughout Shaiva temples of South India , but are almost unknown in Northern India . Sculpted in stone adorning the temple walls of every other South Indian temple , images of Bhikshatana are also cast in bronze as processional icons . In South Indian temples , Bhikshatana is prescribed to be enshrined as an <unk> @-@ devata ( a deity depicted on the circumambulatory path encircling the central shrine ) . Similarly in Orissan temples , Bhikshatana may be worshipped and depicted as <unk> @-@ devata ( an attendant deity ) or <unk> @-@ devata . 
 The iconography and mythology of Bhikshatana developed mostly in South India , as did that of another form of Shiva , Nataraja , who is related to Bhikshatana through his legends . However , unlike Nataraja , Bhikshatana is not related to specific temples , but has become " part of the mythological and festival @-@ related traditions of all the major Tamil shrines " . For instance , in Chidambaram ( where a famous Nataraja temple stands ) , Bhikshatana is paraded in a golden chariot during the annual temple festival . In the Mylapore temple festival , the Bhikshatana icon is paraded in the streets along with four dogs signifying the Vedas and gana attendants . Shiva is described as sent by his consort Parvati ( <unk> ) to beg as he has lost her ring . <unk> for her harsh treatment of Bhikshatana and jealous of the glances of the women in the streets , who attracted are by his appearance , Parvati 's icon rushes behind Bhikshatana and " dances " to win him back . Shiva relents and they travel together to the temple . 
 Tamil works transform the terrible Kapali form of Shiva to a more lovable form . South Indian devotional literature portrays Bhikshatana in the Deodar Forest of the sages , but the Tevaram by the Nayanar poet @-@ saints also describes rural women following him and calling out to him . Several poet @-@ saints describe the sensuous nature of Bhikshatana and the love @-@ sick emotions of the women who came to give him alms . However , the references to Shiva seeking alms had reduced to only three or four by the time of <unk> ( 9th century AD ) . The poems of Campantar , Appar , and Cuntarar focus on two forms of Shiva : Nataraja and Bhikshatana . The 7th @-@ century Nayanar saint Campantar mentions that Bhikshatana wanders from door to door asking for alms with the beggar 's call " Ladies , give me alms " and places his verses on the lips of women , who become enamoured of Bhikshatana . In a verse , Campantar rhetorically asks why the giver of all things and one who ends all troubles of devotees — Shiva — is wandering begging for food with a disgusting white skull . In another verse a woman comments on his strange appearance and describes how she is frightened by the serpent that wraps around his body when she approaches to give him alms . Another 7th @-@ century Nayanar saint , Appar , talks about the handsome beggar Shiva , seducer of married women . He speaks of women <unk> by Bhikshatana 's speech and his glance . The women tell that the handsome beggar wearing tiger @-@ skin and smeared with ash had come riding a white bull and holding an axe , and used a skull as his begging bowl . Although he begged for alms , he would not accept any from the woman , deeming them " petty " . He did however warn the women of deceptions and cunning . Appar adds a strong erotic element in most of his verses , where the women directly desire physical contact with Bhikshatana . A woman in Appar 's poetry sings : 
 The 8th @-@ century saint Cuntarar described Bhikshatana as having matted hair and skin smeared with ash , and wearing bark clothes and a tiger skin around his waist . He added that Bhikshatana would roam begging for food by day and dance at night in front of a fire , in company of his wife and several jackals . 
 In more recent times the poet Papanasam Sivan ( 1890 – 1973 ) composed four songs which describe Bhikshatana . In " <unk> <unk> " , Sivan wonders why Shiva roams as beggar and muses that it may be because Parvati is asking for jewels or his son Ganesha is asking for <unk> ( sweets ) , or perhaps just to show the world that he looks fabulous , even as a mendicant . The " Saundarya <unk> " tells of a love @-@ struck maiden describing Bhikshatana 's beauty from head to toe and her longing for him . 
 = Prince Louis of Battenberg = 
 Admiral of the Fleet Louis Alexander Mountbatten , 1st Marquess of Milford Haven , GCB , GCVO , KCMG , PC ( 24 May 1854 – 11 September 1921 ) , formerly Prince Louis Alexander of Battenberg , was a British naval officer and German prince related to members of the British Royal Family . 
 Although born in Austria , and brought up in Italy and Germany , he enrolled in the United Kingdom 's Royal Navy at the age of fourteen . Queen Victoria and her son King Edward VII , when Prince of Wales , occasionally intervened in his career : the Queen thought that there was " a belief that the Admiralty are afraid of promoting Officers who are Princes on account of the radical attacks of low papers and scurrilous ones " . However , Louis welcomed battle assignments that provided opportunities for him to acquire the skills of war and to demonstrate to his superiors that he was serious about his naval career . Posts on royal yachts and tours arranged by the Queen and Edward actually impeded his progress , as his promotions were perceived as royal favours rather than deserved . 
 After a naval career lasting more than forty years , in 1912 he was appointed First Sea Lord , the professional head of the British naval service . With World War I looming , he took steps to ready the British fleet for combat , but his background as a German prince forced his retirement once the war began , when anti @-@ German sentiment was running high . He changed his name and relinquished his German titles , at the behest of King George V , in 1917 . 
 He married a granddaughter of Queen Victoria , and was the father of Louis Mountbatten , 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma , who also served as First Sea Lord from 1954 to 1959 . Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , consort of Queen Elizabeth II , is his grandson . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Louis was born as Ludwig Alexander von Battenberg in Graz , Austria , the eldest son of Prince Alexander of Hesse and by Rhine by his morganatic marriage to Countess Julia von Hauke . Because of his morganatic parentage , Louis was denied his father 's rank in the Grand Duchy of Hesse ; and , from birth , his style of Illustrious Highness and title of Count of Battenberg instead derived from the rank given to his mother at the time of her marriage . On 26 December 1858 , he automatically became His Serene Highness Prince Louis of Battenberg when his mother was elevated to Princess of Battenberg with the style of Serene Highness , by decree of her husband 's brother , Louis III , Grand Duke of Hesse . 
 Shortly after Louis 's birth , his father was stationed with the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army of occupation in Northern Italy during the Second Italian War of Independence . Louis 's early years were spent either in the north of Italy or at Prince Alexander 's two houses in Hesse , the castle of Heiligenberg in Jugenheim , and the Alexander Palace in Darmstadt . Because his mother spoke French to him and he had an English governess , he grew up trilingual . 
 Among the visitors entertained at Heiligenberg were Prince Alexander 's relations , the Russian imperial family , and his cousin , Prince Louis of Hesse . Influenced by his cousin 's wife , Princess Alice , a daughter of Queen Victoria , and by Prince Alfred , another of Queen Victoria 's children , Battenberg joined the Royal Navy on 3 October 1868 at the age of fourteen and thus became a naturalised British subject . He was admitted by the Board of Admiralty without the production of a medical certificate , which was contrary to the usual regulation . He was enlisted as a naval cadet aboard HMS Victory , Nelson 's old flagship , then used as a permanently moored training ship . 
 In January of the following year , the Prince and Princess of Wales cruised the Mediterranean and Black Seas in the frigate HMS Ariadne ; and the Prince of Wales requested that Louis be appointed to the vessel , before his training was complete . As part of the same tour , Louis accompanied them on a visit to Egypt , where they visited the construction site of the Suez canal . As was traditional , the Khedive bestowed honours on the party , and Louis received the Medjidie ( Fourth Class ) . In April , he received the <unk> ( Fourth Class ) from the Ottoman Sultan . 
 = = Early naval career = = 
 Louis returned to Britain in May 1869 . In June he joined HMS Royal Alfred , the flagship of the North America and West Indies Station , becoming a midshipman in October . From June to September 1870 he took leave in Germany , coinciding with the Franco @-@ Prussian war , but he spent the next three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years in the Americas , where his tour of duty served to make up for the training he had missed while posted with the Prince of Wales on the Ariadne . Returning to Europe in early 1874 , he was posted to the shore establishment HMS Excellent , and passed the sub @-@ lieutenant 's examinations — gaining the best marks ever recorded at seamanship and joint best @-@ ever at gunnery . 
 In 1875 , again at the invitation of the Prince of Wales , he joined HMS Serapis , which conducted the Prince on an official tour of India , 1875 – 76 . Louis sketched some of the events of the tour and his drawings were published in the Illustrated London News . He was promoted to lieutenant on 15 May 1876 . The Prince asked Louis to stay with him at Marlborough House for the summer of 1876 , but wishing to gain further experience at sea , Louis instead accepted an offer to join Prince Alfred , Duke of Edinburgh , as a lieutenant on board HMS Sultan . In addition to acting as the Duke 's equerry , Louis continued his naval duties . He did not enjoy the position , as the Duke was rather touchy and Louis 's cabin was infested with rats , one of which he caught with his bare hands as it ran across his chest as he lay in bed . The Sultan toured the Mediterranean from July 1876 . 
 In late February – early March 1878 , Louis was still serving on the Sultan as it lay in the Bosphorus during the Russo @-@ Turkish War . He was criticised for visiting his brother , Prince Alexander , who was serving with the Russian forces , but an investigation cleared both Louis and Alexander , as well as Prince Alfred , of any wrongdoing . For the next two years Louis served on HMS Agincourt and on the Royal Yacht , HMY Osborne , but in October 1879 he refused further service on the Royal Yacht , saying it was damaging his professional career , and requested half @-@ pay until he could be given an active duty . On 17 February 1880 he , his father , and Tsar Alexander II witnessed an explosion at the Winter Palace in Saint Petersburg , when Stephen <unk> unsuccessfully attempted to assassinate the Tsar with dynamite beneath the great dining room . 
 On 24 August 1880 , Louis was posted to HMS Inconstant , the flagship of the Flying Squadron , which included HMS Bacchante on which Princes Albert Victor and George were serving . The ship sailed to South America , South Africa , Australia , Fiji , Japan , China , Hong Kong , Singapore and the Dutch East Indies , before returning to South Africa in April 1882 . Seven months after Louis left Britain on the voyage , actress Lillie Langtry allegedly bore him an illegitimate daughter , Jeanne Marie . Langtry was also a one @-@ time mistress of the Prince of Wales . Jeanne Marie 's parentage was never completely verified , but Louis made a financial settlement nonetheless . 
 From South Africa the Inconstant sailed to St Helena , and the Cape Verde Islands , where the squadron received orders to proceed to Gibraltar , and from there to Malta and Egypt to take part in the Anglo @-@ Egyptian War . On 11 July 1882 , Alexandria was bombarded and in the next two weeks Louis served in the Flying Squadron delivering shells and ammunition to the battle fleet , and then as a guard to the Khedive at Ras Al Teen Palace . He was decorated with the Egypt War Medal by Queen Victoria personally . 
 In November 1882 , he left the Inconstant , spent Christmas in Darmstadt , and in March the following year visited his younger brother , Prince Alexander , in Bulgaria . Alexander had been made Sovereign Prince of Bulgaria in 1879 with the approval of Europe 's Great Powers . Louis accompanied his brother on a state visit to Turkey , and then on a tour of Cyprus and the Holy Land with the Turkish navy , during which Louis was appalled at the lack of seamanship — the Turkish captains were unable to navigate and had to hug the coast so as not to get lost ; when they did leave the coast they became so disoriented that they were unable to steer for Jaffa . On its return journey the ship on which they had travelled ran aground . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 In September 1883 , Queen Victoria appointed him to her yacht , HMY Victoria and Albert . On 30 April 1884 at Darmstadt in the presence of the Queen , Prince Louis married her granddaughter , Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine . His wife was the eldest daughter of Queen Victoria 's second daughter Princess Alice by Louis IV , Grand Duke of Hesse . Through the Hesse family , Prince and Princess Louis of Battenberg were first cousins once removed . They had known each other since childhood , and invariably spoke English to each other . As wedding presents Louis received the British Order of the Bath and the Star and Chain of the Hessian Order of Louis . 
 Louis and Victoria had four children : 
 In 1885 , one of Louis 's younger brothers , Prince Henry of Battenberg , married Princess Beatrice , the youngest child of Queen Victoria , and took up residence with the Queen in Britain so that Beatrice could continue to serve as her mother 's companion and personal secretary . 
 = = Commander = = 
 On his penultimate day aboard the Queen 's yacht , 30 August 1885 , Louis was promoted to the rank of commander . The next four years were spent in the shore establishments HMS Excellent and HMS Vernon on half @-@ pay , on HMS Cambridge , very briefly at Milford Haven in August 1886 , and on board HMS Dreadnought in the Mediterranean . Irish nationalist MP Willie Redmond and Liberal MP Charles Conybeare both questioned Battenberg 's appointment to Dreadnought in the British House of Commons . Conybeare asked , " What special qualifications have entitled a foreigner to be promoted over the heads of some 30 British officers ? " First Lord of the Admiralty Lord George Hamilton said , " Captain Stephenson , who commands the Dreadnought , applied for Prince Louis of Battenberg to fill the appointment . I may add that another officer who is about to command a large iron @-@ clad in the Mediterranean has made a similar application . " He added that 22 commanders junior to Battenberg held similar appointments , and that Battenberg was a naturalised British subject . Another Liberal MP , Edward Pickersgill , backed up by Conybeare and Irish nationalist Charles Tanner , questioned the propriety of Battenberg 's appointment to the Navy in 1868 , given Battenberg 's failure to get the required medical certificate , and suggested that he only got in the Navy because of royal favour . 
 On 3 October 1889 , Battenberg was appointed to his first independent command , HMS Scout , a torpedo @-@ cruiser , which saw service in the Red Sea . 
 = = Captain = = 
 On 31 December 1891 , Prince Louis was promoted to the rank of captain . At the beginning of the following year , he was appointed naval advisor to the inspector @-@ general of fortifications . His role was to act as a liaison between the navy and the army in order to ensure a co @-@ ordinated defence . Traditionally , there was a great deal of friction between the two services , but Louis exercised his social skills in the role , leading Prince George , Duke of Cambridge , to write to him , " You have produced a mutual feeling of goodwill and unanimity which I have always wished to see established , and which , by your tact and sound judgement , you have brought about to the fullest extent . " 
 In 1892 , Battenberg invented the Battenberg Course Indicator , a relative velocity analogue computer device used by seamen to determine course and speed to steer for changes of position between ships . 
 By February 1894 his role was further developed when he was appointed joint secretary of the naval and military committee on defence , which was later renamed the Committee of Imperial Defence . Louis captained HMS Cambrian in the Mediterranean Fleet from October 1894 to May 1897 and HMS Majestic in the Channel Fleet from June 1897 . His careful study of both naval and military defence , as well as its interaction , led to his appointment as Assistant Director of the Naval Intelligence Division in June 1899 . He used his relationships with the royal houses of Europe to gather intelligence on the naval fleets of other nations , which he passed on to the Admiralty in full and detailed reports . He became an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the Queen in 1897 a post he would retain under both King Edward VII and King George V. 
 He commissioned the newly built battleship HMS Implacable on 10 September 1901 , and served as its captain for a year in the Mediterranean , during which he spectacularly defeated a larger opposing force in a naval exercise . He was appointed as Director of Naval Intelligence in November 1902 , an apt posting for a man whom First Lord of the Admiralty the Earl of Selborne described as " the cleverest sailor I have met yet " . 
 = = Admiral = = 
 He was promoted to rear @-@ admiral on 1 July 1904 , in which year his family connections to the royal courts of Europe helped resolve the Dogger Bank incident peacefully . The following February , he was given command of the Second Cruiser Squadron , with HMS Drake as his flagship . During a successful two years the squadron visited Greece , Portugal , Canada , and the United States , where the American press commented favourably on Prince Louis 's courtesy , unassuming manner and democratic nature . After two years at the head of the Second Cruiser Squadron , and further visits to Spain ( where his niece Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg was Queen ) , he was appointed second @-@ in @-@ command of the Mediterranean Fleet as acting vice @-@ admiral with HMS Venerable as his flagship . 
 After less than six months in post his flag was transferred to the battleship Prince of Wales in August 1907 . The following year , he was promoted to vice @-@ admiral , and appointed as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Atlantic Fleet . Historian Andrew Lambert described Battenberg as a sea @-@ going admiral as " more cerebral than the average , although somewhat lazy . The [ fleet ] exercises had a greater sense of realism , reflecting the latest thinking on weapons and strategy . " In 1909 , he published a translation of Commander Vladimir <unk> 's <unk> ( The Reckoning ) , a memoir of the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 5 , and witnessed the first crossing of the English Channel by air by Louis Blériot . He was appointed as commander of the newly constituted Third and Fourth Divisions of the Home Fleet two years later . The years immediately preceding this appointment were marred by disagreements between Admirals Sir John Fisher and Lord Charles Beresford over the direction of the navy and the imposition of reforms . Louis largely supported Fisher 's modernising efforts , although he disapproved of his methods , and as a result Fisher 's opponents attempted to prevent Louis 's promotions . Eventually , both Beresford and Fisher left active service but Fisher 's reforms were retained . 
 = = Sea Lord = = 
 Fisher recommended Louis as First Sea Lord : " He is the most capable administrator in the Admiralty 's list by a long way " , but elements of the British press were against his appointment on the grounds that he was a German . Horatio Bottomley said it was " a crime against our Empire to trust our secrets of National Defence to any alien @-@ born official " . In December 1911 , Louis did return to the Admiralty but as Second rather than First Sea Lord . As Second Sea Lord , Louis pushed through improvements in working conditions for the ratings , and created an Admiralty War Staff that would prepare the navy 's plans in case of war . He was promoted to full admiral on 13 July 1912 . 
 However , almost a year to the day later , on 8 December 1912 , Battenberg assumed the post of First Sea Lord in succession to Admiral Sir Francis Bridgeman . Military historian Hew Strachan contends that Battenberg " lacked Fisher 's dogmatism . Not the least of his attractions to Churchill [ the First Lord ] was his malleability . The combination of frequent change and weak appointees [ Wilson , Bridgeman and Battenberg ] ensured that the professional leadership of the Royal Navy lost its direction in the four years preceding the war . Power now lay with the service 's civilian head ... Winston Churchill " . 
 As First Sea Lord , Battenberg was responsible to the First Lord for the readiness of the fleet and the preparation of naval strategy , as well as the development of a scheme for state insurance of merchant vessels in times of war , which was to prove essential in preventing prohibitive insurance rates that would have stifled British trade . 
 On the eve of World War I , Churchill and Battenberg made the crucial decision to cancel the scheduled dispersal of the British fleet following practice manoeuvres , to preserve the Royal Navy 's battle readiness . In the view of Andrew Lambert , " While Churchill planned to recall Fisher if war broke out , he missed the chance to prevent war that might have been provided by drafting him earlier . No Cabinet advised by Fisher would have made such a blundering , incompetent , disastrous response to the July [ 1914 ] Crisis . The British trumpet gave a very uncertain note in July [ 1914 ] , allowing the Germans to delude themselves that Britain might be neutral ... the contrast in habits between the energy and enthusiasm of the young First Lord and the lackadaisical habits of the First Sea Lord Prince Louis of Battenberg made Fisher 's recall all but inevitable . " 
 Upon the outbreak of war , gout began to cause Battenberg considerable pain , and the naval staff he had set up did not function as well as it ought to have done . Anti @-@ German sentiment rose among the British public , in newspapers , and in elite gentlemen 's clubs , where resentment was inflamed by Admiral Lord Charles Beresford despite Churchill 's remonstrances . Driven by public opinion , Churchill asked Prince Louis to resign as First Sea Lord on 27 October 1914 . When acceptance of Battenberg 's resignation was delayed by the King 's opposition to the appointment of Fisher in his place , Louis wrote to Churchill , " I beg of you to release me . I am on the verge of breaking down & I cannot use my brain for anything " . On 13 November he wrote to Churchill 's Naval Secretary , Rear @-@ Admiral Horace Hood , " It was an awful wrench , but I had no choice from the moment it was made clear to me that the Government did not feel themselves strong enough to support me by some public pronouncement . " 
 His resignation was announced amid an outpouring of appreciation from politicians and naval comrades . Battenberg had written to Churchill on 28 October , " What I <unk> value above all else is to be admitted to the Privy Council . " The King later swore Louis in as a Privy Councillor in a public show of support . Labour party politician and trade union leader J. H. Thomas wrote to The Times : " I desire to express my extreme regret at the announcement that Prince Louis of Battenberg has , by his resignation , pandered to the most mean and contemptible slander I have ever known ... I was simply astounded to hear the base suggestions and rumours current , and I am afraid that his action will simply be looked upon as a triumph for the mean and miserable section of people , who , at a time of national trial , is ever ready to pass a foul lie from lip to lip without a tittle of evidence . " Admiral of the Fleet Lord John Hay thought that the " ingeniously propagated lies " originated from Germany . 
 Prince Louis held no official post for the remainder of the war and lived in retirement at Kent House on the Isle of Wight . He occupied his time in writing a comprehensive encyclopaedia on naval medals published in three large volumes , which became the standard reference work on the subject . His naval career had been characterised by industry , invention and intellect ; he introduced mechanical calculators to compute navigations and a cone signalling apparatus . Although assured that he would be returned to command post @-@ war , on 9 December 1918 the First Sea Lord , Admiral Sir Rosslyn Wemyss , wrote to Prince Louis informing him that he would not be employed again and suggested that he might retire in order to facilitate the promotion of younger officers . Prince Louis agreed , and he officially retired on 1 January 1919 " at [ his ] own request " , shortly before reaching the mandatory retirement age of 65 . 
 = = Adoption of the surname Mountbatten = = 
 During the war , persistent rumours that the British Royal Family must be pro @-@ German , given their dynastic origins and many German relatives , prompted the King to abandon his subsidiary German dynastic titles and adopt an English surname . At the behest of the King , Louis relinquished the title Prince of Battenberg in the Grand Duchy of Hesse , along with the style of Serene Highness , on 14 July 1917 . At the same time , Louis anglicised his family name , changing it from " Battenberg " to " Mountbatten " , having considered but rejected " <unk> " as an alternative . On 7 November , the King created him Marquess of Milford Haven , Earl of Medina , and Viscount Alderney in the peerage of the United Kingdom . The King 's British relatives in the Teck , Schleswig @-@ Holstein and Gleichen families underwent similar changes . Louis 's wife ceased to use her own title of Princess of Hesse and became known as the Marchioness of Milford Haven . His three younger children ceased to use their princely titles and assumed courtesy titles as children of a British marquess ; his eldest daughter , Princess Alice , had married into the Greek Royal Family in 1903 , and never had occasion to use the surname Mountbatten . However , her only son , Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark , adopted the name when he became a British subject in 1947 . 
 While the transition in names and titles was being effected , Louis spent some time at the home of his eldest son , George . After <unk> his surname to Mountbatten and becoming Marquess of Milford Haven , Louis wrote in his son 's guestbook , " Arrived Prince Hyde , Departed Lord Jekyll " . 
 = = Final years and death = = 
 During the war , two of Lord Milford Haven 's sisters @-@ in @-@ law ( Alexandra of Hesse and Grand Duchess Elizabeth Fyodorovna ) were killed by the Bolsheviks in Russia . Eventually , in January 1921 , after a long and convoluted journey , the body of Grand Duchess Elizabeth Fyodorovna was interred in Jerusalem in the presence of Milford Haven and his wife . 
 In 1919 , the Milford Havens had to give up their home , Kent House , for financial reasons . He sold his collection of naval medals . All of his financial investments in Russia were seized by the Bolsheviks and his German property became valueless with the collapse of the mark . He sold Heiligenberg Castle , which he had inherited from his father , in 1920 . 
 Milford Haven was appointed Military Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath ( GCB ) , to add to the Civil one he already held , in recognition of his service to the Royal Navy in the 1921 New Year Honours , and was specially promoted by Order in Council to the rank of Admiral of the Fleet on the Retired List , dated 19 August . A few days later he joined HMS Repulse , the ship on which his son Louis was serving , for a week at the invitation of the captain Dudley Pound . It was his last voyage ; he died at 42 Half Moon Street , Piccadilly , London in the annexe of the Naval and Military Club on 11 September 1921 of heart failure following influenza . After a funeral service at Westminster Abbey , his remains were buried at St. Mildred 's Church , Whippingham , on the Isle of Wight . 
 The marquess 's elder son , George Mountbatten , who had received the courtesy title Earl of Medina , succeeded him as 2nd Marquess of Milford Haven . Louis 's younger son , styled Lord Louis Mountbatten after 1917 , served in the Royal Navy , became First Sea Lord like his father , was the last Viceroy of India , and was created Earl Mountbatten of Burma in 1947 . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 24 May 1854 – 26 December 1858 : His Illustrious Highness Count Louis of Battenberg 
 26 December 1858 – 14 July 1917 : His Serene Highness Prince Louis of Battenberg 
 14 July – 7 November 1917 : The Right Honourable Sir Louis Mountbatten 
 7 November 1917 – 11 September 1921 : The Most Honourable The Marquess of Milford Haven 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath ( 1887 ( civil ) and 1921 ( military ) ) 
 Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath ( 1884 ( civil ) and 1909 ( military ) ) 
 Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order ( 1901 ) 
 Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George ( 1905 ) 
 Privy Councillor ( 1914 ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of Franz Joseph ( 1877 , Austria ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of Charles III ( 1906 , Spain ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of Leopold ( 1908 , Austria ) 
 Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour ( France ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Red Eagle ( Prussia ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Tower and Sword ( Portugal ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of Christ ( Portugal ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Redeemer ( Greece ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Württemberg Crown ( Württemberg ) 
 Grand Cross of the Saxe @-@ Ernestine House Order ( Ernestine duchies ) 
 Knight of the Order of St. Andrew ( Russia ) 
 Knight of the Order of St. Anna ( Russia ) 
 Knight of the Order of St. Alexander Nevsky ( Russia ) 
 Knight of the Order of the White Eagle ( Russia ) 
 Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun with Paulownia ( 1917 , Japan ) 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Ho Yuen Hoe = 
 Ho Yuen Hoe ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ; 18 February 1908 – 11 January 2006 ) , later in life but rarely known by her Dharma name , Venerable Jing Run ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ) , was a Buddhist nun affectionately known as Singapore 's " grand dame of charity " in recognition of her lifelong devotion in helping the old and needy . She was the abbess of Lin Chee Cheng Sia Temple and the founder in 1969 of the Man Fut Tong Nursing Home , the first Buddhist nursing home . Venerable Ho was relatively unknown to the public until 1996 , when she was featured in a television programme – The Extraordinary People – at the age of 88 . As a result , the public came to know more about her work and her nursing home . In 2001 , she received the Public Service Award from the President of Singapore in recognition of her contribution to the country . Until her hospitalisation in November 2005 she was actively involved in charity work . Venerable Ho died on 11 January 2006 , a month before what would have been her 98th birthday . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ho Yuen Hoe was born on 18 February 1908 , to a family of silk weavers in Guangzhou , China , the second of three children . Her family was poor , and she was sold when she was five years old . Barely two years later , the spinster who had purchased her died , and Ho was sold by the woman 's nephew , to become a maid . After a few years she was sold again . In her late teens , a group of snakeheads persuaded her and several other girls to emigrate to Singapore , ostensibly to work on a rubber plantation , but the job did not materialise . At the age of 21 , alone and penniless , she married the owner of a grocery business . When the business failed , they left for Hong Kong , hoping for better fortune . Ho became a hairdresser in nearby Macau , but after discovering that her husband had another wife and children she decided to return to Singapore alone , vowing never to remarry . At about that same time , she became a vegetarian . 
 In 1936 , with the help of a friend , the then 28 @-@ year @-@ old Ho set up shop in Chinatown with only a comb , a stool , and a kerosene lamp . She worked from 8 am to 3 am , charging five cents to comb hair or weave plaits and buns for <unk> and <unk> women . She did that every day for almost three decades , interrupted only by periods when she was incapacitated by acute attacks of arthritis . She <unk> and saved , and by the time she was in her 40s , she had enough to buy a shophouse in Club Street . Although illiterate , she made some property investments and eventually became a landlord , renting out rooms . As her wealth grew , she acquired more properties , and she began to adopt children from poor families , becoming a single mother of six daughters and twenty @-@ five <unk> . 
 = = Charity work = = 
 A devout Buddhist from youth , once her children had grown up Ho decided to serve the Buddhist cause , and to dedicate the rest of her life to caring for others . In 1958 , she became a Buddhist nun at the age of 50 . In 1969 , aged 61 , Ho bought a two @-@ storey detached house in Richards Avenue with her savings , and turned it into the Man Fut Tong Old Peoples ' Home for aged sick and single elderly women . Most of the 20 or so residents had neither enough earnings to support themselves nor any relatives to turn to . To raise additional funds for the home , she cultivated and sold prize @-@ winning white orchids at Tanglin , and vegetarian food at Kong Meng San Temple in Bishan . She cleaned , cooked , took her charges to the doctors , helped them to collect their social benefits and even sometimes saw to their last rites . 
 Venerable Ho 's work was unknown to the public until 1996 , when she was featured in a television programme – The Extraordinary People – at the age of 88 . As a result , the public came to know more about her and her nursing home . When asked why she had set up an old folks ' home , Venerable Ho replied : 
 I used to feed the old folks at some of the homes , and it would sadden me to see them so yellow and sallow . One of them told me , they would go in ' vertical ' and probably exit ' horizontal ' . I might be illiterate but I wanted to give back to society . I didn 't want to sit around and wait to die . 
 Inspired by Venerable Ho 's devotion and compassion , volunteers and donations began to stream in , allowing the home to provide better medical care and facilities for its residents . Spurred on by the desire to do even more , she approached the government for a piece of land to expand her old folks ' home . The Ministry of Health gave her a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 1 @.@ 2 @-@ acre ) plot in Woodlands , on which she oversaw the building of a new home . To help in raising funds for its construction , she published a recipe book called Top 100 Vegetarian Delights in 1998 , which brought in more than S $ 100 @,@ 000 ( U $ 66 @,@ 667 ) . In August 2001 , the new four @-@ storey building was opened at Woodlands Street 82 . It houses nearly 235 sick and elderly and provides residential , rehabilitation , and day @-@ care services . The home is open to all regardless of age , gender , race or religion . It regularly organises in @-@ house activities such as cooking , hand @-@ craft , karaoke , and games , as well as visits to places of interest and participation in various community events . The original home is now a Buddhist temple , the Lin Chee Cheng Sia Temple . 
 Despite her advancing age , Venerable Ho continued to raise funds to provide better medical care , and she set up committees to help organise Dharma classes for children and secure donations for various Buddhist causes . During an interview given to The Straits Times in 2004 , she said : " Everything in life is transient . Only charity is real and enduring . When you give , you receive . Charity is the best antidote for bad karma . " 
 She was not only successful in raising funds , but she also secured donations in kind and services . A Hindu charity , Shree <unk> Seva <unk> donated S $ 75 @,@ 000 to the Man Fut Tong Nursing Home in 2004 , which was raised through ticket sales for a charity draw . On 11 February 2004 , President S R Nathan , attended her birthday @-@ cum @-@ charity dinner and gave a speech in tribute of her contributions to the country : 
 This Man Fut Tong Nursing Home Charity Dinner event marks the 96th Lunar Birthday of Ven . Ho Yuen Hoe . More importantly , it reflects what Ven . Ho has done over many years to look after the needy sick and distressed elderly , irrespective of their race , language or religion . As we look back at what Ven . Ho has done for her cause over the years , she well deserves to be recognized as a formidable role model for both young and old Singaporeans ... My wife and I wish Ven . Ho a Very Happy Birthday – good health and happiness , and thank her for her valuable contributions to the community . We also wish the Man Fut Tong Nursing Home every success in serving the sick and needy elderly in Singapore . 
 = = Death = = 
 On 11 January 2006 , Venerable Ho died peacefully in her sleep at the Man Fut Tong Nursing Home , at about 9 : 30 pm , just one month before turning 98 . Until being hospitalised in November 2005 , she had cooked for and looked after herself and played an active role in running both the temple and the nursing home . During her hospital stay , she suffered a stroke , which affected her speech and paralysed the left side of her body . Discharged in December 2005 , she was recuperating well at the nursing home until she developed a chest infection and breathing difficulties a few days before she died . 
 After her death , President S R Nathan sent a wreath of roses , chrysanthemums and orchids . Several government ministers attended her wake , including Senior Minister of State for Health Balaji Sadasivan , Minister of State for Community Development , Youth and Sports Yu @-@ Foo Yee <unk> , Minister of State for Education and Trade and Industry Chan Soo Sen , and Northwest Community Development Council mayor Teo Ho Pin . Temple officials said she left instructions for S $ 100 @,@ 000 to be distributed equally to 10 charities . She had purchased a simple coffin 10 years before her death , and she had also set aside S $ 10 @,@ 000 to pay for her funeral . 
 On 22 January 2006 , 20 chartered buses took more than 1 @,@ 000 mourners – devotees , her <unk> , scores of wheelchair @-@ bound residents , representatives from various Buddhist temples , and well @-@ wishers – to Tse Tho Aum Buddhist Temple in Sin Ming Drive for the final prayers and cremation . The abbess ' ashes were kept for 100 days at her temple , before making their way to her final resting place in Zhejiang province in China , where her niece lives . As a follow @-@ up to her funeral , her remains and personal items were put on one @-@ day public display at her temple on 26 February 2006 . The relics ( <unk> ) displayed were crystalline or pearl @-@ like deposits found in Venerable Ho 's ashes . Buddhists believe these are usually found in cremated Buddhist masters , are holy , and treat them with reverence . 
 Since Venerable Ho 's death , her work at the temple and nursing home has been administered by Reverend Seck Cheng Charn and Reverend Tang Wai Sum respectively . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 A pictorial book chronicling Venerable Ho 's life , written in both English and Mandarin was launched at the Remembering Venerable Ho Charity Lunch held at the <unk> Mandarin Hotel on 28 January 2007 . Called A Life For Others , the 138 @-@ page book was written by Dr Uma Rajan , the home 's executive director . Five hundred hardcover copies of the book have been printed to raise funds for the Home , which costs S $ 4 @.@ 5 million a year to run . 
 A bronze sculpture by sculptor Chern Lian Shan , and a portrait of Venerable Ho by artist Marcus Lim were also unveiled at the event , by His Excellency , President S. R. Nathan . Both the sculpture and the painting are now on display at the Woodlands home . A new hybrid orchid , created from the orchids Dendrobium ' <unk> ' and Dendrobium ' Lim <unk> ' , was also officially named ' Venerable Ho Yuen Hoe ' and presented by Mrs. S. R. Nathan . 
 In 2001 , Venerable Ho received the Public Service Medal from President S. R. Nathan at the Istana . 
 = Sacrifice ( 2008 ) = 
 Sacrifice ( 2008 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion that took place on May 11 , 2008 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the fourth event in the Sacrifice chronology and fifth event in the 2008 TNA PPV schedule . Ten professional wrestling matches , two for championships , were featured on the card . 
 The main event was a Three Way match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship between then @-@ champion Samoa Joe and challengers Kaz and Scott Steiner . The match was initially promoted as Joe 's defense of his title against Kurt Angle and Steiner . However , Angle sustained an injury before the match that removed him from the bout ; he was replaced with Kaz . Joe won the match , retaining the championship . The Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament for the vacant TNA World Tag Team Championship was also held at Sacrifice . The Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ) defeated Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) in the Finals to win the tournament and the championship . TNA featured two matches on the undercard : the TNA Knockouts Makeover Battle Royal for a future TNA Women 's Knockout Championship match , and the debut of the TNA TerrorDome to determine who would compete in a future TNA X Division Championship match and take Angle 's place in the main event . Gail Kim won the TNA Knockouts Makeover Battle Royal and Kaz won the latter . 
 Sacrifice is noted for the Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament and the debut of the TerrorDome , later renamed the Steel Asylum at TNA 's Bound for Glory IV PPV event on October 12 , 2008 . The Wrestling Observer Newsletter reported 25 @,@ 000 people purchased the PPV and 900 people attended . Chris Sokol of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer rated Sacrifice a seven out of ten , the same ranking he gave the 2007 event . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In January 2008 , TNA announced that the fourth installment in the Sacrifice chronology would take place on May 11 . Two months later , Sacrifice was scheduled for the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . TNA created a section covering the event on their website and released a promotional poster featuring TNA wrestlers Christian Cage , Kurt Angle , Samoa Joe , and Sting , and the tagline " Are You Willing To Give Up What Means The Most ? " On the May 1 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! , TNA announced it would introduce a new match type at Sacrifice , the TerrorDome . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Sacrifice featured ten professional wrestling matches that involved wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines portraying villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters ; these scripted events built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main event at Sacrifice was a Three Way match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship between then @-@ champion Samoa Joe and challengers Kurt Angle and Scott Steiner . At TNA 's previous PPV event Lockdown on April 13 , Joe defeated Angle in a Six Sides of Steel Cage match to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . Prior to Lockdown on the April 3 episode of Impact ! , Steiner announced that he would use his Feast or Fired TNA World Heavyweight Title shot at Sacrifice . Staying true to his word , on the April 17 episode of Impact ! , Steiner challenged Joe to a title defense at Sacrifice . Angle and Joe fought in a rematch for the title on the April 24 episode of Impact ! ; Joe won after Steiner interfered . In response to Steiner 's interference , Management Director Jim Cornette scheduled a Three Way match between Angle , Joe , and Steiner for the title at Sacrifice . 
 On the April 17 episode of Impact ! , A.J. Styles and Tomko defended the TNA World Tag Team Championship in a Three Way match against the teams of Kaz and Eric Young and The Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ; LAX ) . During the match , Young switched to his " Super Eric " superhero character and pinned Styles to win the championship for his team . Styles and Tomko were then scripted to argue that Young and Super Eric were different people . In the storyline , Super Eric and Young refused to admit they were the same person , causing Cornette to strip Kaz and Young of the championship . On the April 24 episode of Impact ! , Cornette set up the Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament to crown new TNA World Tag Team Champions . The tournament consisted of eight established teams competing in four matches to qualify for the tournament . The four winning teams would then compete in a single @-@ elimination tournament against eight wrestlers chosen by Cornette to be assigned as teams at Sacrifice . The first two teams to qualify were Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) and the pairing of Christian Cage and Rhino on the April 24 episode of Impact ! . LAX and the team of Styles and Super Eric were the last , qualifying on the May 1 episode of Impact ! . Cornette also announced the eight wrestlers — known as the <unk> Eight — who would be involved at Sacrifice on the May 1 episode of Impact ! : Awesome Kong , B.G. James , Booker T , Kip James , Matt Morgan , James Storm , Robert Roode , and Sting . Two teams were announced on the May 8 episode of Impact ! : Sting teamed with Storm and Kip aligned with Morgan . 
 The TNA Knockouts Makeover Battle Royal and the debut of the X Division TerrorDome were promoted as featured matches for the Sacrifice undercard . The TNA Knockouts Makeover Battle Royal was announced by Cornette on the April 24 episode of Impact ! . The rules of the contest involved two stages : a standard battle royal in which competitors fought to eliminate wrestlers by throwing them over the top rope and a ladder match in which the final two wrestles fought to retrieve a contract that had been hung above the ring . An added stipulation to the bout was that the loser 's head would be shaved and the winner would earn a TNA Women 's Knockout Championship match . On the May 8 episode of Impact ! , Gail Kim won a Ten @-@ Woman Clippers on a Pole match that granted her immunity from having her head shaven if she lost at the event . During the April 24 episode of Impact ! , TNA announced plans to introduce a new match type in the near future . The TerrorDome was announced on the May 1 episode of Impact ! , and the participants were announced on the May 8 episode . The participants were Alex Shelley , Chris Sabin , Consequences Creed , Curry Man , Jay Lethal , Jimmy Rave , Johnny Devine , Kaz , Shark Boy , and Sonjay Dutt . 
 = = Event = = 
 At the start of the program , Kurt Angle announced he received a legitimate neck injury wrestling overseas a few days prior to the show . He consequently removed himself from the main event at the order of his doctor . 
 = = = Other featured employees and attendees = = = 
 Sacrifice featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay and Don West were the primary commentators for the telecast ; Frank Trigg provided guest commentary for the main event . Jeremy Borash ( for the main event ) and David Penzer served as ring announcers . Andrew Thomas , Earl Hebner , Rudy Charles , and Mark " Slick " Johnson participated as referees . Lauren Thompson and Borash conducted interviews during the show . In addition , Angle , Trigg , Kevin Nash , Rick Steiner , Jim Cornette , Petey Williams , Hector Guerrero , Raisha Saeed , and members of Samoa Joe 's family appeared on camera in backstage or ringside segments . Joe 's family performed a traditional Samoan fire dance during his ring entrance . Billy Corgan of The Smashing Pumpkins was also in attendance . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first of four quarterfinal matches in the Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament opened Sacrifice . It pitted James Storm , accompanied by Jackie Moore and Sting , against Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) . The match lasted eight minutes and fifty seconds . Near the end , Team 3D set up a table in the middle of the ring . Sting then turned on Storm and lifted him off the turnbuckle and slammed him through the table . Devon covered Storm for the win , thereby advancing himself and Brother Ray in the tournament . 
 The second quarterfinal match , Christian Cage and Rhino against Booker T and Robert Roode , lasted seven minutes and five seconds . Rhino won the match for his team by tackling Roode . Afterwards , Booker T attacked Cage and Rhino with a steel chair . 
 In the third quarterfinal match , Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ; LAX ) , accompanied by Hector Guerrero , fought the team of Kip James and Matt Morgan . The match ended after four minutes and twenty seconds when Morgan missed a bicycle kick on Hernandez , mistakenly hitting Kip in the face . Hernandez then performed a dropkick on Morgan and followed with the cover on Kip for the win . 
 The last quarterfinal match featured A.J. Styles and Super Eric against Awesome Kong and B.G. James . Super Eric picked up Kong and slammed her into B.G. , who was laying on the ring mat . Later , Styles attempted to perform a move by jumping off the ropes , but legitimately tripped , falling face @-@ first on the mat . Then B.G. lifted Styles to perform a suplex , which Styles countered into a small package pin attempt , resulting in a victory at five minutes and forty five seconds . 
 The fifth match was the debut of the TerrorDome and involved Alex Shelley , Chris Sabin , Consequences Creed , Curry Man , Jay Lethal , Jimmy Rave , Johnny Devine , Kaz , Shark Boy , and Sonjay Dutt . Before the match , Management Director Jim Cornette announced that the winner would take Kurt Angle 's place in the main event , in addition to being the TNA X Division Championship number one contender . In this match , the ring was surrounded by a giant red steel barred cage with a domed roof . The wrestlers were to compete as they climbed up the side to a hole in the center of the ceiling ; the first to escape the cage would win . While Devine was attempting to escape , Kaz intervened and caused Devine to fall from the ceiling into a group of wrestlers huddled in the center of the ring . Kaz then climbed out of the hole to win the contest at ten minutes and forty five seconds . 
 The semifinals of the Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament followed , beginning with Team 3D pitted against Cage and Rhino in the sixth encounter . The bout lasted ten minutes . Before the contest , the TNA commentators announced that Booker T 's attack on Cage and Rhino had caused them to have concussions in the storyline . During the contest , Team 3D associate Johnny Devine came to the ring and handed Ray a kendo stick without the referee 's knowledge . Although Rhino tackled Devon and went for the cover , Devine entered the ring to distract the referee , allowing Ray to hit Rhino with the kendo stick and cover to win the contest for his team . 
 The last semifinal match between LAX , accompanied by Guerrero and Salinas , and Styles and Super Eric . During the bout , Hernandez lifted Super Eric and held him upside @-@ down vertically for an extended period of time before slamming him back @-@ first into the mat with a delayed vertical suplex . Later , Styles held Homicide in a small package pin attempt until Salinas distracted the referee , allowing Guerrero to enter the ring and readjust Styles and Homicide to make the pin in LAX 's favor . Afterwards , the referee counted the pin , giving LAX the win at seven minutes and forty seconds , although Styles ' shoulders were clearly not fully against the mat . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The first main event match was the TNA Knockouts Makeover Battle Royal , the winner of which would become the number one contender to the TNA Women 's Knockout Championship . It involved Angelina Love , Christy Hemme , Gail Kim , Jackie Moore , ODB , Salinas , Rhaka Khan , Roxxi Laveaux , Traci Brooks , and Velvet Sky . This contest involved two stages ; the first was a standard battle royal . After all but two wrestlers were eliminated , stage two , a ladder match , began . The winner of the ladder match would become the number one contender to the TNA Women 's Knockout Championship ; the loser would have her head shaved . The final four were Kim , Laveaux , Love , and ODB . The next eliminated was ODB , followed by Love ; both were eliminated by Laveaux . Only Kim and Laveaux remained for the ladder match portion . Kim had won immunity on the May 8 episode of Impact ! , so if Laveaux won the match , then Love 's head would be shaven . Love and Sky interfered in the contest several times . During the bout , as Kim and Laveaux stood on the ladder , Kim flipped over Laveaux , grabbed her around the legs , and slammed her into the mat back @-@ first with a powerbomb . Laveaux 's head was legitimately cut open during this stage . Later , while <unk> climbed the ladder in an attempt to retrieve the contract , Love interfered by pushing the ladder over . Kim followed by climbing the ladder and grabbing the contract to win the encounter at ten minutes . Afterwards , Laveaux was forced to have her head shaven . 
 Next was the Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament finals for the vacant TNA World Tag Team Championship between LAX , accompanied by Guerrero and Salinas , and Team 3D . The duration was eleven minutes and thirty seconds . Devine tried to interfere in the contest by setting up a table for Team 3D , but Guerrero stopped him and set up the table for himself outside the ring , placing Devine on top . Guerrero then climbed a padded turnbuckle and jumped onto Devine with a diving foot stomp , forcing him through the table . In the ring , Team 3D performed one of their signature tag team maneuvers , the 3D II , forcing Homicide into the mat and following with a cover , but the referee refused to count because Homicide was not the legal man in the contest . Hernandez then performed his signature Border Toss maneuver on Devon , slamming him into the mat from the top of a turnbuckle . Homicide followed with a splash from the top of a padded turnbuckle on Devon for the pinfall victory , winning the Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament and the vacant TNA World Tag Team Championship . 
 The main event was a Three Way match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship between then @-@ champion Samoa Joe and challengers Kaz and Scott Steiner — Steiner was accompanied by Petey Williams and Rhaka Khan . At the beginning of the bout , Joe placed Kaz and Steiner in various holds and submission maneuvers . Steiner countered this by placing Joe in his signature Steiner <unk> submission maneuver , which Joe escaped by lifting him in the air on his shoulders . Kaz then jumped off of a turnbuckle and dropkicked Steiner . Later , Joe dove through the second rope onto Steiner . However , Steiner countered by hitting Joe in the head with a steel pipe while the referee was distracted by Khan . Near the end of the match , Kaz tried to perform his signature Flux Capacitor maneuver on Steiner from a turnbuckle , but Steiner countered by pushing him off to the ringside area . Joe then kicked Steiner in the head and then performed his signature Muscle Buster maneuver , driving Steiner <unk> and back @-@ first into the mat , at fourteen minutes and thirty seconds to win the contest and retain the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The event was attended by 900 people and , according to the The Wrestling Observer Newsletter , 25 @,@ 000 people purchased the show on pay @-@ per @-@ view . Chris Sokol of the Canadian Online Explorer rated Sacrifice a seven out of ten ; the same rating he gave to the 2007 Sacrifice event and higher than TNA 's previous event , Lockdown , which he gave a six and a half out of ten . TNA 's next PPV event , Slammiversary on June 8 , received the same rating by Jon Waldman . Sokol felt that Sacrifice was a " decent PPV " , and " interesting " overall and rated main event a seven and a half out of ten ; he described it as a " solid match , with good wrestling " . He rated the TerrorDome the highest , an eight out of ten , and the TNA Knockouts Makeover Battle Royal and The Latin American Xchange versus Kip James and Matt Morgan bout the lowest , a six out of ten . He rated the Finals of the Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament a seven and a half out of ten , and said that it was " another solid match between these two teams " . Sacrifice received a higher rating than rival World Wrestling Entertainment 's Judgment Day PPV event , held on May 19 , which Bob Kapur gave a six out of ten . 
 James Caldwell of the Pro Wrestling Torch gave the main event two and three @-@ quarter stars out of five and the Tournament Final received two and a half stars out of five . He stated that the main event had " its moments " but " wasn 't memorable " . However , he described the Tournament Final as a " great story " . Bryan Alvarez of Figure Four Weekly commented that the main event was a " good match " and the Tournament Final was a " pretty good match " . Phil Allely , a journalist for The Sun , argued that the absence of Kurt Angle " actually helped TNA as it added some realism to the night , giving an ultra talented mid @-@ carder a rare chance to shine in the main event " but felt that the show was " marred by TNA ’ s reliance on run @-@ ins and interference " . 
 Sacrifice was released on DVD on July 15 , 2008 by TNA Home Video . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The decision to remove Kurt Angle from the Sacrifice main event was not made until the day of the show . Angle was expected to be sidelined for at least one month , putting TNA 's original plan , a match between him and A. J. Styles at Slammiversary , in jeopardy . Scott Steiner received an unspecified injury at Sacrifice . 
 Following Sacrifice , Samoa Joe defended the TNA World Heavyweight Championship against four other competitors in a King of the Mountain match at Slammiversary . The match was announced on the May 15 episode of Impact ! by Joe . Booker T , Christian Cage , James Storm , Matt Morgan , Rhino , Robert Roode , Styles , and Tomko competed in qualification matches for the contest on the May 22 and May 29 Impact ! episodes ; Booker T , Cage , Rhino , and Roode qualified . Kevin Nash was named Special Guest Ringside Enforcer on the May 29 episode of Impact ! . Joe retained the championship at Slammiversary . 
 The Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ) and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) began a rivalry after Sacrifice over the TNA World Tag Team Championship . On the May 15 episode of Impact ! , Team 3D attacked LAX 's manager Hector Guerrero . Management Director Jim Cornette announced a rematch for the title at Slammiversary between the two teams on the May 29 episode of Impact ! . LAX were the victors in the contest at Slammiversary , retaining the championship . 
 On the May 22 episode of Impact ! , Styles fought Booker T in a King of the Mountain qualifier . After the bout , Booker T , Team 3D , and Tomko assaulted Styles until Angle came to his defense . However , Angle soon turned on Styles , striking him with a steel chair and continuing the assault with Booker T , Team 3D , and Tomko . This set up a match between Styles and Angle at Slammiversary , announced by Cornette on the May 29 episode of Impact ! . Styles defeated Angle at Slammiversary . 
 After Sacrifice , Roxxi Laveaux shortened her name to Roxxi . Gail Kim was given a TNA Women 's Knockout Championship match against then @-@ champion Awesome Kong on the May 15 episode of Impact ! . Kim lost the bout after interference from Angelina Love . The team of Kim , ODB , and Roxxi defeated The Beautiful People ( Angelina Love and Velvet Sky ) and Moose in a Six Woman Tag Team match at Slammiversary . 
 The new number one contender to the TNA X Division Championship , Kaz , was given a title match against then @-@ champion Petey Williams at Slammiversary . Kaz , however , lost the encounter . TNA later renamed the TerrorDome to the " Steel Asylum " when it was used on October 12 , 2008 at their Bound for Glory IV PPV event . 
 = = Results = = 
 TNA Knockouts Makeover Battle Royal 
 Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament bracket 
 = Disneyland with the Death Penalty = 
 " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " is a 4 @,@ 500 @-@ word article about Singapore written by William Gibson . His first major piece of non @-@ fiction , it was first published as the cover story for Wired magazine 's September / October 1993 issue ( 1 @.@ 4 ) . 
 The article follows Gibson 's observations of the architecture , phenomenology and culture of Singapore , and the clean , bland and conformist impression the city @-@ state conveys during his stay . Its title and central metaphor — Singapore as Disneyland with the death penalty — is a reference to the authoritarian artifice the author perceives the city @-@ state to be . Singapore , Gibson details , is lacking any sense of creativity or authenticity , absent of any indication of its history or underground culture . He finds the government to be pervasive , corporatist and technocratic , and the judicial system rigid and draconian . Singaporeans are characterized as <unk> of insipid taste . The article is accentuated by local news reports of criminal trials by which the author illustrates his observations , and bracketed by contrasting descriptions of the Southeast Asian airports he arrives and leaves by . 
 Though Gibson 's first major piece of non @-@ fiction , the article had an immediate and lasting impact . The Singaporean government banned Wired upon the publication of the issue , and the phrase " Disneyland with the death penalty " became a byword for bland authoritarianism that the city @-@ state could not easily discard . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The title " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " refers to the subject of the article , the Southeast Asian city @-@ state of Singapore , whose strictly @-@ guarded sterility Gibson describes with horror . After opening the article with the Disneyland metaphor , Gibson cites an observation attributed to Laurie Anderson that virtual reality " would never look real until they learned how to put some dirt in it " in relation to the immaculate state of the Changi <unk> , Singapore 's international airport . Beyond the airport , he notes that the natural environment has been cultivated into " all @-@ too @-@ perfect examples of itself , " such as with the abundance of golf courses . Singaporean society is a " relentlessly G @-@ rated experience , " controlled by a government akin to a megacorporation , fixated on conformity and behavioural constraint and with a marked lack of humour and creativity . 
 Gibson finds it painful to try to connect with the Victorian Singapore , of which few vestiges remained . In an attempt to uncover Singapore 's underlying social mechanisms , the author searches fruitlessly for an urban underbelly , rising at dawn for <unk> walks on several mornings only to discover that the city @-@ state 's " physical past … has almost entirely vanished " . He gives an overview of the history of Singapore from the founding of modern Singapore by Sir Stamford Raffles in 1819 to the Japanese occupation and the establishment of the Republic in 1965 . He concludes that modern Singapore , effectively a one @-@ party state and capitalist technocracy , is a product first and foremost of the vision of three @-@ decade Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew . As an aside , he quotes a headline from the South China Morning Post detailing the trial of a cadre of economists , a government official ( current Deputy Prime Minister , Tharman ) and a newspaper editor for divulging a state secret by revealing the Singaporean economic growth rate . 
 Gibson deplores the absence of an authentic metropolitan feeling , something which he blames for the " telling lack of creativity " . He gives a <unk> account of the architecture of the city @-@ state , noting the endless parade of young , attractive and generically attired middle class through the host of shopping centers , and comparing the city @-@ state to the convention district of Atlanta , Georgia . He finds the selection in music stores and bookshops unrelentingly bland , musing whether this is partially attributable to the efforts of the Undesirable Propagation Unit ( <unk> ) , one of several state censorship agencies . Amidst the near total absence of bohemianism and counterculture , Gibson finds no trace of dissidence , an underground , or slums . In the place of a sex trade , the author finds government @-@ sanctioned " health centers " – in fact massage parlours – and mandatory dating organized and enforced by government agencies . " [ T ] here is remarkably little " , he writes of the city @-@ state " that is not the result of deliberate and no doubt carefully deliberated social policy . " 
 The creative deficit of the city @-@ state is evident to the author also in the Singaporeans ' obsession with consumerism as a pastime , the homogeneity of the retailers and their fare , and in what he characterizes as their other passion : dining ( although he finds fault with the diversity of the food , it is , he remarks " something to write home about " ) . He returns then to the theme of the staid <unk> of the city @-@ state , observing the unsettling cleanliness of the physical environment and the self @-@ policing of the populace . In detailing Singaporean technological advancement and aspirations as an information economy , Gibson casts doubt on the resilience of their controlled and conservative nature in the face of impending mass exposure to digital culture – " the wilds of X @-@ rated cyberspace " . " Perhaps " , he speculates , " Singapore 's destiny will be to become nothing more than a smug , neo @-@ Swiss enclave of order and prosperity , amid a sea of unthinkable ... weirdness . " 
 Toward the end of the essay , Gibson briefly covers two applications of the death penalty by the Singaporean justice system ; he excerpts a report from The Straits Times about Mat <unk> Mamat , a Malay man sentenced to death for attempting to smuggle a kilogram of cannabis into the city @-@ state , and follows this with a description of the case of Johannes Van Damme , a Dutch engineer found with significant quantities of heroin with the same consequence . He expresses reservations about the justice of capital punishment and describes the Singaporeans as the true bearers of zero tolerance . After hearing the announcement of Van Damme 's sentencing , Gibson decides to leave , checks out " in record time " from the hotel , and catches a cab to the airport . The trip is conspicuous for the absence of police along the road , but there is an abundance of them at the Changi <unk> , where Gibson photographs a discarded piece of crumpled paper , incurring their ire . Flying into Hong Kong he briefly glimpses the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ destroyed shantytown Kowloon Walled City at the end of one of the runways at the chaotic Kai Tak Airport , and muses about the contrast with the staid and sanitized city @-@ state he has left behind . The essay ends with the declaration " I loosened my tie , clearing Singapore airspace . " 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 The Republic of Singapore responded to the publication of the article by banning Wired from the country . The phrase " Disneyland with the death penalty " became a famous and widely referenced description for the nation , adopted in particular by opponents of Singapore 's perceived authoritarian nature . The city @-@ state 's authoritarian and austere reputation made it difficult to shake the description off ; Creative Review hailed it as " famously damning " , while The New York Times associate editor R.W. Apple , Jr. defended the city @-@ state in a 2003 piece as " hardly deserving of William Gibson 's <unk> dismissive tag line " . Reviewing the work in a 2003 blog post , Gibson wrote : 
 That Wired article may have managed to convey the now @-@ cliched sense of Singapore as a creepy , anal @-@ retentive city @-@ state , but it didn 't go nearly far enough in capturing the sheer underlying dullness of the place . It 's a terrible * retail * environment . The endless malls are filled with shops selling exactly the same products , and it 's all either the stuff that kicks Cayce into anaphylactic shock or slightly sad local @-@ industry imitations of same . You could easily put together a smarter outfit shopping exclusively in Heathrow . 
 " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " was assigned as reading on the topic of " Singaporean progress " for a 2008 National University of Singapore Writing & Critical Thinking course . The piece was included in a 2012 compilation of Gibson 's non @-@ fiction writing , Distrust That Particular Flavor . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The article provoked a strong critical reaction . The Boston Globe characterized it as a " biting piece on the technocratic state in Singapore " . It was recommended by postmodern political geographer Edward <unk> as " a wonderful tour of the <unk> <unk> " of the city @-@ state . Journalist Steven Poole called it a " horrified report " , and argued that it showed that the author " despises the seamless , <unk> planes of corporate big business " and is " the champion of the interstitial " . In a review of Gibson 's 2010 novel Zero History for The Observer James Purdon identified " Disneyland " as one of the high points of Gibson 's career , " a witty , perceptive piece of reportage , hinting at a non @-@ fiction talent equal to the vision that had elevated Gibson to digital @-@ age guru . " 
 Philosopher and technology writer Peter Ludlow interpreted the piece as an attack on the city , and noted as ironic the fact that the real Disneyland was in California — a state whose " repressive penal code includes the death penalty " . Urban theorist Maarten <unk> noted that Gibson cited the computerized control of the city @-@ state as responsible for its sanitized inauthentic character , a claim <unk> called " a conventional , almost old @-@ fashioned complaint against technocracy " . In a 2004 article in Forum on Contemporary Art & Society , Paul Rae commented that " [ w ] hile an ability to capture the zeitgeist is to be taken seriously in a context such as this one , Gibson ’ s journalistic reportage is inevitably unrefined " , and cited the accusation of Singapore @-@ based British academic John Phillips that Gibson " fails to really think [ his critiques ] through " . 
 In S , M , L , XL ( 1995 ) , urbanist and architectural theorist Rem Koolhaas took issue with the acerbic , ironic tone of the article , condemning it as a typical reaction by " dead parents deploring the mess [ their ] children have made of their inheritance . " Koolhaas argued that reactions like Gibson 's imply that the positive legacy of modernity can only be intelligently used by Westerners , and that attempts such as Singapore 's at embracing the " newness " of modernity without understanding its history would result in a far @-@ reaching and deplorable eradication . 
 Singaporean Tang Weng Hong in turn wrote a critical response to both Gibson and Koolhaas . 
 = Saint @-@ Louis @-@ du @-@ Louvre = 
 Saint @-@ Louis @-@ du @-@ Louvre , formerly Saint @-@ Thomas @-@ du @-@ Louvre , was a medieval church in the 1st arrondissement of Paris located just west of the original Louvre Palace . It was founded as Saint @-@ Thomas @-@ du @-@ Louvre in 1187 by Robert of Dreux as a Collegiate church . It had fallen into ruin by 1739 and was rebuilt as Saint @-@ Louis @-@ du @-@ Louvre in 1744 . The church was suppressed in 1790 during the French Revolution and turned over the next year for use as the first building dedicated to Protestant worship in the history of Paris , a role in which it continued until its demolition in 1811 to make way for Napoleon 's expansion of the Louvre . The Reformed congregation was given l 'Oratoire du Louvre as a replacement and saved the choir stalls from Saint @-@ Louis @-@ du @-@ Louvre which are still in place at l 'Oratoire . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Saint @-@ Thomas @-@ du @-@ Louvre = = = 
 On 8 October 1164 , Thomas à Becket , the Archbishop of Canterbury , after intensifying conflict with Henry II over his efforts to reduce the power of the church through the Constitutions of Clarendon , was put on trial and convicted of various offenses by Henry in Northampton Castle . Becket proceeded to flee to France where he was welcomed and hosted for six years by Louis VII . Shortly after his return to England in 1170 , Becket was famously murdered in Canterbury Cathedral and subsequently canonized in 1173 . In 1179 , Louis VII travelled to Canterbury to pay his respects to the saint , making a donation of a gold chalice and an annual donation of 100 <unk> ( ~ 3 @,@ 400 gallons ) of wine for the celebration of the annual feast . 
 Inspired by his brother 's devotion , Robert of Dreux founded a new collegiate church , Saint @-@ Thomas @-@ du @-@ Louvre , in 1187 , with endowment for four canons . After Robert 's death , his wife , Agnès de <unk> , obtained confirmation of the foundation of the church from Pope Clement III in 1189 . Philip Augustus provided further confirmation in 1192 by means of letters @-@ patent with the great seal in green wax . A papal bull from Pope Innocent III in 1199 took the church , its property and clergy , under the protection of the Pope . In 1428 , John VI , Duke of Brittany endowed more prebends for the church by donating the adjoining hotel , La Petite Bretagne , on the condition that the canons pray for his family . This increased the number of canons to seven , to be chosen alternately by the king and bishop . 
 = = = Saint @-@ Louis @-@ du @-@ Louvre = = = 
 By 1739 the church had fallen into ruin and Louis XV gave 50 @,@ 000 crowns for it to be rebuilt . During the demolition process a portion of the church was left for the continuing use of the chapter . While the canons were performing the office the remaining structure collapsed , burying them in the ruins . This accident led to the union of the chapter with that of the neighboring Saint @-@ Nicolas @-@ du @-@ Louvre , which had also been founded by Robert of Dreux and had at various times previously been united with Saint @-@ Thomas , and the rededication of the reconstructed church to Saint Louis in 1744 . In 1749 , Saint @-@ Maur @-@ des @-@ Fossés was also merged with the new congregation . 
 The new church was designed by Thomas Germain , known best for his work as a silversmith , and consisted of just a nave and an apse . The entrance of the church was in a circular projection decorated with Ionic pilasters . The apse housed the choir stalls of the canons surrounding the high altar . The nave was decorated with Corinthian pilasters surmounted by an entablature . In the chapel of the Virgin there was a sculpture of the Annunciation by Jean @-@ Baptiste II Lemoyne . The church was also decorated with works by members of the families of painters , <unk> , <unk> , and Van Loo . The building enjoyed a good reputation in the middle of the 18th century for its singular plan and rich internal decoration . However , the style of the exterior and portico came under some criticism . 
 When Cardinal Fleury , the tutor and chief minister of Louis XV , died in 1743 the king decided that his mausoleum would be placed in Saint @-@ Louis @-@ du @-@ Louvre . A competition was held for the commission to create the tomb , a landmark event in the history of 18th century French sculpture due to its solicitation of public input . Philibert Orry , then the director of the Royal Buildings , solicited proposals from sculptors who were members of the Royal Academy . Models for the tomb were offered by Nicolas @-@ Sébastien Adam , Edmé <unk> , Charles @-@ François <unk> , Jean @-@ Baptiste II Lemoyne , and Jean @-@ Joseph <unk> . The wax maquettes of proposals were displayed at the Salon for public response . <unk> won the competition though ultimately Lemoyne was given the commission by the family of Cardinal Fleury and the tomb remained unfinished at the time of the church 's suppression . The church was also home to the tomb of its architect , Thomas Germain . 
 At the time of the French Revolution the church had a provost , a cantor , and twenty canons with the provost , cantor and fifteen canons nominated by the archbishop , four by the Duke of <unk> in this role as the Count of Brie , and one by Les <unk> . On 24 February 1790 , the chapter declared to the revolutionary authorities annual revenues of 98 @,@ 562 livres , a great sum for the time . On 11 December 1790 , municipal officers came to the church to announce to the canons the suppression of their chapter and abolition of their titles . An inventory of the objects in the church was made and all the church 's properties and possessions were turned over to the state . 
 = = = Protestant Church = = = 
 In 1791 , at the behest of Jean Sylvain Bailly , the mayor of Paris , and the Marquis de Lafayette , the empty Saint @-@ Louis @-@ du @-@ Louvre was rented to the newly formed Reformed congregation in Paris for the annual sum of 16 @,@ 450 livres , with the first service held on Easter . In 1598 , Protestant worship had been forbidden in Paris by the Edict of Nantes . In 1685 , the Edict of Fontainebleau made non @-@ Catholic services illegal in all of France . This inaugurated a long period of persecution for French Protestants , though some in Paris were able to worship in the chapels of the Dutch and Swedish embassies . 
 The Edict of Tolerance in 1787 gave Protestants legal status and a congregation was formed under the pastorship of Paul @-@ Henri Marron , who had been serving as the chaplain at the Dutch embassy . The congregation gained permission to worship openly in 1789 during the revolution and met in a variety of places including a wine shop before gaining permission to rent Saint @-@ Louis @-@ du @-@ <unk> , the first building dedicated to Protestant worship in the history of Paris . For the dedication of the new church , or temple as French Protestants referred to their buildings , Pastor Marron preached from the text , " Soyez <unk> dans l ’ <unk> , patients dans l ’ affliction , <unk> dans la <unk> , " ( be joyful in hope , patient in affliction , faithful in prayer ( Romans 12 : 12 ) ) . When the mayor , Jean Bailly , attended in person on 13 October 1791 Marron chose the passage , " Vous <unk> la vérité et la vérité vous <unk> libres , " ( you will know the truth , and the truth will set you free ( John 8 : 32 ) ) . 
 As the revolution became increasingly hostile to Christianity , Marron was arrested on 21 September 1793 . He was released and then rearrested and released once more , having made the concession of having services once every ten days according to the revolutionary calendar instead of on Sundays . Marron was once more arrested in June 1794 for continuing to marry and baptize in secret after Christian practice had been banned by Robespierre in favor of the Cult of the Supreme Being . He was freed from prison only by the fall of Robespierre . 
 In the Concordat of 1801 , Napoleon came to an agreement with Pope Pius VII to reconcile the Catholic church to the French state . The concordat also led to official recognition of , and state control over , other religious groups including Protestants . As a result , three former Catholic churches were dedicated for the use of reformed believers in Paris , Sainte @-@ Marie @-@ des @-@ Anges , the chapel of the Pentemont Abbey , and Saint @-@ Louis @-@ du @-@ Louvre . In 1806 however , Napoleon decreed an expansion of the Louvre that would require the demolition of all existing structures between the Louvre and the Tuileries Palace including the church of Saint @-@ Louis . As a replacement the Reformed congregation was given l 'Oratoire du Louvre , which had also been suppressed in the revolution . The choir and some of the other woodwork was preserved and can be seen in l 'Oratoire , including the <unk> seats in the choir stalls that enabled the canons to rest while standing . While most of the church was demolished in 1811 , a portion remained standing until the construction of the Denon wing of the Louvre in 1850 . 
 = Teuruarii IV = 
 Teuruarii IV , born Epatiana a Teuruarii ( c . 1879 – 1933 ) , was the last King of Rurutu , an island within the larger Austral Islands archipelago , who ruled from around 1886 until the annexation of the island to France in 1900 . Proclaimed king upon his father 's abdication while still a child , his mother ruled as regent . During this regency the Church of <unk> was consecrated and the death penalty was abolished . 
 Teuruarii 's reign was disrupted by ongoing French expansionism in the Pacific . Teuruarii entreated the British to place Rurutu under a British protectorate , which the islanders deemed more favorable due to their predominant adherence to <unk> . These efforts failed and Rurutu was proclaimed a protectorate of the French Third Republic on 27 March 1889 . Teuruarii was allowed to continue ruling as king until the annexation of the island to the territory of French Oceania in 1900 , today part of the overseas country of French Polynesia . Living out the remainder of his life as a village chief , Teuruarii left many descendants who would have a strong influence in the islands to the modern day . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 King Teuruarii IV was born Prince Epatiana in around 1879 on the island of Rurutu , in present @-@ day French Polynesia , to King Teuruarii III and his second wife <unk> a <unk> . His family was originally from a chiefly line in Huahine rather than Rurutu , and it was only through the adoption of his father by King Teuruarii I that his family was eligible to rule . The island of Rurutu was settled later than many of the surrounding islands and was historically ruled as an unoccupied territory by the earliest kings of the archipelago . Including these early kings , the royal line of Epatiana stretched back more than forty generations and included many of the founding chiefs of the Austral Islands kingdoms , as well as early kings of Rurutu after the settlement of the island . Little is recorded of the prince 's childhood , although it is known that Epatiana and his parents were visited by the French writer and later governor of French Polynesia , Édouard Petit , in the early 1880s , when the young prince Epatiana was still nursing from his mother . 
 His full @-@ siblings were <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . His older half @-@ sister <unk> , daughter of his father 's first wife <unk> a <unk> , was married into the royal family of Huahine and was the mother of that island 's last queen , <unk> III . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Epatiana succeeded his father as King of Rurutu around 1886 , while still a young child . Due to historians ' lack of consensus about his birth year , sources differ on the actual age of Epatiana at the time . This early succession was a consequence of a decision taken in old age by Epatiana 's father to abdicate and journey back to his homeland of Huahine , where he died shortly after arrival . The body of Teuruarii III was repatriated to Rurutu and interred in the royal cemetery . Because of Epatiana 's youth and inexperience , his mother <unk> served as regent for an indeterminate number of years until the prince was deemed fit to rule independently . 
 The young King Teuruarii 's coronation was celebrated in the traditional fashion . The ceremony included donning a feather headdress and the <unk> <unk> , a sacred loincloth of red @-@ tinted tapa cloth similar to the ones worn by the chiefs in the Society Islands , before being carried on the backs of two natives . 
 During the regency , he and his mother abolished the Va 'a Tai ' Aru , the law , enacted by his father , which had made crimes such as murder , treason and adultery punishable by death . Instead , criminals were exiled to small island of Îles Maria . Teuruarii and his mother also presided over the opening of the Protestant church of Moerai . The construction of the church had been begun by his father and the work was completed by a foreign carpenter named <unk> Chapman . 
 In the late 19th @-@ century , Rurutu shared a close relationship with the neighboring island of Rimatara , which was also ruled by an adolescent monarch , in the person of Queen <unk> IV . The monarchs of both island kingdoms shared the same positions as being the last independent rulers in the Austral Islands not under French colonial control . 
 = = = Under French protectorate = = = 
 Teuruarii 's reign coincided with continuing expansion of European authority in the Pacific islands . By 1880 , France had formally annexed the Kingdom of Tahiti and its dependencies in the Austral Islands , including <unk> and Tubuai , Rurutu 's neighbors to the south . The following year , Rapa <unk> and <unk> , further south , were also annexed to France , such that among the islands of the Austral archipelago , only Rurutu and Rimatara remained independent of French control . Teuruarii anticipated eventual European interests in Rurutu , but viewed the United Kingdom as a friendlier state than France due to the island 's adherence to Protestantism . Upon hearing news that the neighboring Cook Islands had been declared a protectorate of the United Kingdom , the King decided to ally himself with Great Britain . 
 On 27 November 1888 , Teuruarii and <unk> , along with their retinue of chiefs , visited the neighboring island kingdom of Rarotonga aboard two ships named the <unk> and the <unk> , to ask for British protection against French aggression . They sent a formal petition to Queen Victoria and the Prime Minister asking for protectorate status over the two kingdoms . The request was ultimately refused . The petition read : 
 November 27 , 1888 : Petition from the King of Rurutu and the Queen of Rimatara and their nobles to Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria , and to the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom . May you have good health . We , Teuruarii , King of Rurutu and Te <unk> , Queen of Rimatara and our nobles , ask for the Prime Minister to place our islands and our ships under the protection of the British flag . These are the islands , namely , Rurutu , Rimatara , and <unk> , and there are the names of the ships : <unk> and <unk> , and the masters of the same are natives . This is our word to you : Do not forsake us ; we are your children ; you taught us the word of God , and that has led us in the path of civilisation ; therefore we know that you are a good parent to us . The thoughts of the children cling fondly to their good parent ; they do not wish to be separated from their good parent . If the parent forsake the children , the children will seek the parent ; so do we ; we are like those children , and we ask that you will give us your flag to protect us . We have heard that you have taken Rarotonga and the neighbouring islands under your protection , but we remain without anyone to protect us . When we received the news that Rarotonga and the neighbouring islands were placed under your protection , we wept aloud because we were forsaken by you ; we were afraid lest we should be adopted by another parent . The strange parent we mean is the French . They did not feed us with the milk of the gospel , but you did . O Great Britain ; you fed us with that milk which has given life to us . This is our last word to you ; we do not wish for French annexation or protection , not at all , but we wish you to be our parent , O Great Britain . We pray you now to accede to this our request . This letter was written in the house of Queen Pa . <unk> , TE <unk> <unk> . 
 The efforts of the two monarchs could not yield the desired result because the French , upon learning of their request , responded promptly to what they perceived as a threat to their interests in the Pacific . On 27 March 1889 , the French warship Dives landed on Rurutu carrying the colonial governor of French Oceania , Étienne Lacascade . British and French sources provide differing accounts of Teuruarii 's response to Lacascade 's arrival . According to the British , the King was initially reluctant to agree to a French protectorate but ultimately decided to give his acquiescence . According to the French , however , King Teuruarii and his chiefs had personally petitioned Governor Lacascade to take over the islands , largely contrary to the desire of the majority of the islanders . The French tricolor was added to the canton of the Kingdom 's flag to indicate its new status as a French protectorate . A 21 @-@ gun salute from the Dives , followed by the proclamation " Vive la France ! Vive Rurutu ! " , brought the island under French control . 
 Under the French protectorate , the internal affairs of the Kingdom were left to the King and chiefs including the judicial affairs of the island . Around 1895 , Mormon Elder Frank Goff visited Rurutu , noting the political situation at the time and giving a rather unflattering description of the young king : 
 The island is ruled over by a king . His name is Epatiana . He is a large , ignorant @-@ looking boy of about 18 summers , and is one of the worst rowdies on the island , and there is no power to touch him . The first time we met him he was just landing from an excursion trip to the island of Rimatara , near by . And you need not be told that I was surprised when told that he was the king of the island ; for instead of being dressed in a garb of rich apparel of some kind , with a crown about his head , as I had expected , he had nothing whatever on to indicate his supreme power . His costume was composed of a red breech @-@ clout , a red woolen shirt and upon his bare head an old dried up wreath of faded flowers , such as is worn by all rowdies . When we spoke to him about his island , he dropped his head , as he sat upon the sand , and <unk> answered us . We told him who we were and where we were from , saluted him and left him with very different ideas formed about the king of Rurutu , than we had before meeting him . This was the first monarch of the kind I ever saw , and the first time we were ever under the reign of a king . The island is under the French protection , still it regulates and governs its own affairs , and the French have nothing to say in that respect . The king has judges under him , who make the laws and enforce them while he is in his childhood days . 
 By contrast , French observers remarked favorably on the industriousness and intelligence of the people of Rurutu , as well as the success of Teuruarii in increasing revenues through maritime trade with neighboring islands . In 1899 , Rurutu 's annual exports were valued at 59 @,@ 881 French francs , of which 37 @,@ 919 were exported to the Tahitian port of Papeete - exceptionally high trade volumes in light of the relatively small size of the island and its population . 
 = = Annexation and later life = = 
 The protectorate status had a negative effect on the island 's trade with Tahiti . Ships from Rurutu , as from other protectorates , were considered foreign vessels at the ports of France and its overseas territories such as the Tahitian port capital of Papeete , Rurutu 's nearest significant trading partner . Consequently , Rurutu 's agricultural exports were subject to tariffs from which the exports of annexed territories were exempted . The economic disadvantages of the protectorate status became even more evident when France closed the Tahitian ports to all foreigners in 1899 , including merchants from Rurutu , in response to an outbreak of bubonic plague in San Francisco . This disruption of trade between the two islands occurred in a period during which Rurutu became increasingly reliant economically on Tahiti . The growing prominence of Tahiti was evidenced in the activities of Teuruarii , who regularly visited Papeete for trade and entertainment . Teuruarii incurred much debt during these trips , and the need to pay off his creditors along with the restriction on trade prompted him to consider formal annexation to France . 
 In May 1900 , Teuruarii journeyed with a few island dignitaries to Papeete on the invitation of Gustave Gallet , the French governor , to discuss the possibility of annexing the island . On May 11 , Teuruarii signed a statement of annexation , officially bringing Rurutu under French control . Months later , the L 'Aube brought Gallet to Rurutu , where he officially took possession of the island . On August 25 , in a formal ceremony witnessed by Governor Gallet , the officers of the L 'Aube , the French officials aboard , the former king and the native population , the flag of the protectorate was lowered and the French tricolor raised in its place ; this moment , like the ceremony of 1888 , was celebrated by a 21 @-@ gun salute from the French vessel . 
 The French government gave the former king an annual pension of eight hundred francs to pay off his debts . He was also given the task of administering over native affairs alongside the French commissioners assigned to the island . Laws that punished adultery and violation of the Sabbath , enacted during the kingdom 's Protestant period , were revoked , and the royal monopoly on turtle meat was abolished . Under French rule , Teuruarii was initially allowed to serve as the village chief of Moerai , the main village and former capital in the northeast corner of the island . On 27 June 1934 , the French named him honorary chief of Rurutu and his son Rooteatauira as chief of Moerai . 
 In 1925 , Scottish artist William Alister Macdonald ( 1861 @-@ 1948 ) painted a portrait of the former King in later life . According to most sources , Teuruarii IV died in 1933 , although his appointment as honorary chief of Rurutu was dated one year after . 
 = = Descendants = = 
 Teuruarii IV left behind several notable descendents . In 1923 , one of his sons , Rooteatauira a Teuruarii , was involved in a controversial embezzlement case that called into question the jurisdiction of French law over native inhabitants of its territories . Rooteatauira , along with his accomplice <unk> a <unk> , had embezzled various goods to the detriment of Sum @-@ You , a Chinese merchant . In the case , Rooteatauira argued that he should be prosecuted by native law rather than French law and that the annexation was illegal since it was done without the sanctioned of the King of Rurutu or the approval of the French Parliament . However , the French colonial court ruled that the annexation was valid and that he would be prosecuted by French law since the offense was committed against a non @-@ native . Rooteatauira was sentenced to two years in prison and fined fifty francs . In 1934 , Rooteatauira was appointed chief of Moerai and given an annual pension of seven hundred and twenty francs . 
 Rooteatauira was the father of Toromona ( Solomon ) Teuruarii , who served as mayor of Rurutu in the 1970s . On 14 October 1964 , Toromona ran unsuccessfully for a position in the French Territorial Assembly with <unk> <unk> as his running mate , although he did manage to win a significant number of votes . Toromona 's son <unk> , born in 1941 , bears the title Teuruarii VII . Another descendant , <unk> a Teuruarii , was the district chief of the southern portion of the island before World War II . His sons , <unk> and <unk> a Teuruarii , owned much of the land in the northwestern districts of <unk> and <unk> , the ancestral lands of the Teuruarii royal line , where the remains of the island 's ancient temple ( Marae <unk> ) still stand . 
 Many of Teuruarii 's living descendants still reside in the villages of Moerai and <unk> and play major roles in island 's affairs . 
 = American football = 
 American football , referred to as football in the United States and Canada , and also known as gridiron , is a sport played by two teams of eleven players on a rectangular field with goalposts at each end . The offense , the team with control of the oval @-@ shaped football , attempts to advance down the field by running with or passing the ball , while the team without control of the ball , the defense , aims to stop their advance and take control of the ball for themselves . The offense must advance at least ten yards in four downs , or plays , or else they turn over the football to the opposing team ; if they succeed , they are given a new set of four downs . Points are primarily scored by advancing the ball into the opposing team 's end zone for a touchdown or kicking the ball through the opponent 's goalposts for a field goal . The team with the most points at the end of a game wins . 
 American football evolved in the United States , originating from the sports of association football and rugby football . The first game of American football was played on November 6 , 1869 , between two college teams , Rutgers and Princeton , under rules based on the association football rules of the time . During the latter half of the 1870s , colleges playing association football switched to the Rugby Union code , which allowed carrying the ball . A set of rule changes drawn up from 1880 onward by Walter Camp , the " Father of American Football , " established the snap , eleven @-@ player teams , and the concept of downs ; later rule changes legalized the forward pass , created the neutral zone , and specified the size and shape of the football . 
 American football as a whole is the most popular sport in the United States ; professional football and college football are the most popular forms of the game , with the other major levels being high school and youth football . As of 2012 , nearly 1 @.@ 1 million high school athletes and 70 @,@ 000 college athletes play the sport in the United States annually . The National Football League , the most popular American football league , has the highest average attendance of any sports league in the world ; its championship game , the Super Bowl , ranks among the most @-@ watched club sporting events in the world , and the league has an annual revenue of around US $ 10 billion . 
 = = Etymology and names = = 
 In the United States , American football is referred to as " football . " The term " football " was officially established in the rulebook for the 1876 college football season , when the sport first shifted from soccer @-@ style rules to rugby @-@ style rules ; although it could easily have been called " rugby " at this point , Harvard , one of the primary proponents of the rugby @-@ style game , compromised and did not request the name of the sport be changed to " rugby " . In English @-@ speaking countries where other codes of football are popular , such as the United Kingdom , Ireland , Canada , New Zealand , and Australia , the terms " gridiron " or " American football " are favored instead . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 American football evolved from the sports of association football ( soccer ) and rugby football . Rugby football , like American football , is a sport where two competing teams vie for control of a ball , which can be kicked through a set of goalposts or run into the opponent 's goal area to score points . 
 What is considered to be the first American football game was played on November 6 , 1869 between Rutgers and Princeton , two college teams . The game was played between two teams of 25 players each and used a round ball that could not be picked up or carried . It could , however , be kicked or batted with the feet , hands , head or sides , with the ultimate goal being to advance it into the opponent 's goal . Rutgers won the game 6 goals to 4 . Collegiate play continued for several years in which matches were played using the rules of the host school . Representatives of Yale , Columbia , Princeton and Rutgers met on October 19 , 1873 to create a standard set of rules for all schools to adhere to . Teams were set at 20 players each , and fields of 400 by 250 feet ( 122 m × 76 m ) were specified . Harvard abstained from the conference , as they favored a rugby @-@ style game that allowed running with the ball . 
 An 1875 Harvard @-@ Yale game played under rugby @-@ style rules was observed by two impressed Princeton athletes . These players introduced the sport to Princeton , a feat the Professional Football Researchers Association compared to " selling refrigerators to Eskimos . " Princeton , Harvard , Yale and Columbia then agreed to intercollegiate play using a form of rugby union rules with a modified scoring system . These schools formed the Intercollegiate Football Association , although Yale did not join until 1879 . Yale player Walter Camp , now regarded as the " Father of American Football , " secured rule changes in 1880 that reduced the size of each team from 15 to 11 players and instituted the snap to replace the chaotic and inconsistent scrum . 
 = = = Evolution of the game = = = 
 The introduction of the snap resulted in unexpected consequences . Prior to the snap , the strategy had been to punt if a scrum resulted in bad field position . However , a group of Princeton players realized that , as the snap was uncontested , they now could hold the ball indefinitely to prevent their opponent from scoring . In 1881 , both teams in a game between Yale @-@ Princeton used this strategy to maintain their undefeated records . Each team held the ball , gaining no ground , for an entire half , resulting in a 0 @-@ 0 tie . This " block game " proved extremely unpopular with the spectators and fans of both teams . 
 A rule change was necessary to prevent this strategy from taking hold , and a reversion to the scrum was considered . However , Camp successfully proposed a rule in 1882 that limited each team to three downs , or tackles , to advance the ball five yards . Failure to advance the ball the required distance within those three downs would result in control of the ball being forfeited to the other team . This change effectively made American football a separate sport from rugby , and the resulting five @-@ yard lines added to the field to measure distances made it resemble a gridiron in appearance . Other major rule changes included a reduction of the field size to 110 by 53 @.@ 333 yards ( 100 @.@ 584 m × 48 @.@ 768 m ) , and the adoption of a scoring system that awarded four points for a touchdown , two for a safety and a goal following a touchdown , and five for a goal from field ; additionally , tackling below the waist was legalized . The last , and arguably most important innovation , which would at last make American football uniquely " American " , was the legalization of interference , or blocking , a tactic which was highly illegal under the rugby @-@ style rules . 
 Despite these new rules , football remained a violent sport . Dangerous mass @-@ formations , which involved interlocking interference , like the flying wedge resulted in serious injuries and deaths . A 1905 peak of 19 fatalities nationwide resulted in a threat by President Theodore Roosevelt to abolish the game unless major changes were made . In response , sixty @-@ two colleges and universities met in New York City to discuss rule changes on December 28 , 1905 , and these proceedings resulted in the formation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States , later named the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) . 
 The legal forward pass was introduced in 1906 , although its impact was initially limited due to the restrictions placed on its use . Other rule changes introduced that year included the reduction of the time of play from 70 to 60 minutes and the increase of the distance required for a first down from 5 – 10 yards ( 4 @.@ 6 – 9 @.@ 1 m ) . To reduce infighting and dirty play between teams , the neutral zone was created along the width of the football . Scoring was also adjusted : field goals were lowered to three points in 1909 and touchdowns were raised to six points in 1912 . The field was also reduced to 100 yards ( 91 m ) long , but two 10 @-@ yard @-@ long end zones were created , and teams were given four downs instead of three to advance the ball 10 yards ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) . The roughing @-@ the @-@ passer penalty was implemented in 1914 , and eligible players were first allowed to catch the ball anywhere on the field in 1918 . 
 = = = The professional era = = = 
 On November 12 , 1892 , when William " Pudge " Heffelfinger was paid $ 500 to play a game for the Allegheny Athletic Association in a match against the Pittsburgh Athletic Club . This is the first recorded instance of a player being paid to participate in a game of American football , although many athletic clubs in the 1880s offered indirect benefits , such as helping players attain employment , giving out trophies or watches that players could pawn for money , or paying double in expense money . Despite these extra benefits , the game had a strict sense of amateurism at the time , and direct payment to players was frowned upon , if not outright prohibited . 
 Over time , professional play became increasingly common , and with it came rising salaries and unpredictable player movement , as well as the illegal payment of college players who were still in school . The National Football League ( NFL ) , a group of professional teams that was originally established in 1920 as the American Professional Football Association , aimed to solve these problems . This new league 's stated goals included an end to bidding wars over players , prevention of the use of college players , and abolition of the practice of paying players to leave another team . By 1922 , the NFL had established itself as the premier professional football league . 
 The dominant form of football at the time was played at the collegiate level , but the upstart NFL received a boost to its legitimacy in 1925 when an NFL team , the Pottsville Maroons , defeated a team of Notre Dame all @-@ stars in an exhibition game . A greater emphasis on the passing game helped professional football to further distinguish itself from the college game during the late 1930s . Football in general became increasingly popular following the 1958 NFL Championship game , a match between the Baltimore Colts and the New York Giants that is still referred to as the " Greatest Game Ever Played " . The game , a 23 – 17 overtime victory by the Colts , was seen by millions of television viewers and had a major impact on the popularity of the sport . This , along with the innovations introduced by the new American Football League ( AFL ) in the early 1960s , helped football to become the most popular sport in the United States by the mid @-@ 1960s . 
 The rival American Football League arose in 1960 and challenged the NFL 's dominance . The AFL began in relative obscurity but eventually thrived , with an initial television contract with the ABC network . The AFL 's existence forced the conservative NFL to expand to Dallas and Minnesota in an attempt to destroy the new league . Meanwhile , the AFL introduced many new features to Professional Football in the United States : official time on the scoreboard clock , rather than on a watch in the referee 's pocket , as the NFL did ; optional two @-@ point conversions by pass or run after touchdowns ; names on the jerseys of players ; and several others , including expansion of the role of minority players , actively recruited by the league in contrast to the NFL . The AFL also signed several star college players that had also been drafted by NFL teams . Competition for players heated up in 1965 , when the AFL New York Jets signed rookie Joe Namath to a then @-@ record US $ 437 @,@ 000 contract . A five @-@ year , $ 40 million NBC television contract followed , which helped to sustain the young league . The bidding war for players ended in 1966 , when NFL owners approached the AFL regarding a merger , and the two leagues agreed on one that would take full effect in 1970 . This agreement provided for a common draft that would take place each year , and it instituted an annual World Championship game to be played between the champions of each league . That game began play at the end of the 1966 season . Once the merger was completed , it was no longer a championship game between two leagues , and reverted to the NFL championship game , which came to be known as the Super Bowl . 
 College football maintained a tradition of postseason bowl games . Each bowl game would be associated with a particular conference , and earning a spot in a bowl game was the reward for winning a conference . This arrangement was profitable , but it tended to prevent the two top @-@ ranked teams from meeting in a true national championship game , as they would normally be committed to the bowl games of their respective conferences . Several systems have been used since 1992 to determine a national champion of college football . The first was the Bowl Coalition , in place from 1992 to 1994 . This was replaced in 1995 by the Bowl Alliance , which gave way in 1997 to the Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) . The BCS arrangement proved to be controversial , and was replaced in 2014 by the College Football Playoff ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Teams and positions = = 
 A football game is played between two teams of 11 players each . Playing with more on the field is punishable by a penalty . Teams may substitute any number of their players between downs ; this " platoon " system replaced the original system , which featured limited substitution rules , and has resulted in teams utilizing specialized offensive , defensive and special teams squads . 
 Individual players in a football game must be designated with a uniform number between 1 and 99 . NFL teams are required to number their players by a league @-@ approved numbering system , and any exceptions must be approved by the Commissioner . NCAA and NFHS teams are " strongly advised " to number their offensive players according to a league @-@ suggested numbering scheme . 
 = = = Offensive unit = = = 
 The role of the offensive unit is to advance the football down the field with the ultimate goal of scoring a touchdown . 
 The offensive team must line up in a legal formation before they can snap the ball . An offensive formation is considered illegal if there are more than four players in the backfield or fewer than five players numbered 50 @-@ 79 on the offensive line . Players can temporarily line up in a position whose eligibility is different from what their number permits as long as they immediately report the change to the referee , who then informs the defensive team of the change . Neither team 's players , with the exception of the snapper , are allowed to line up in or cross the neutral zone until the ball is snapped . Interior offensive linemen are not allowed to move until the snap of the ball . 
 The main backfield positions are the quarterback ( QB ) , halfback / tailback ( HB / TB ) and fullback ( FB ) . The quarterback is the leader of the offense . Either he or a coach calls the plays . Quarterbacks typically inform the rest of the offense of the play in the huddle before the team lines up . The quarterback lines up behind the center to take the snap and then hands the ball off , throws it or runs with it . 
 The primary role of the halfback , also known as the tailback , is to carry the ball on running plays . Halfbacks may also serve as receivers . Fullbacks tend to be larger than halfbacks and function primarily as blockers , but they are sometimes used as runners in short @-@ yardage situations and often are not used in passing situations . 
 The offensive line ( OL ) consists of several players whose primary function is to block members of the defensive line from tackling the ball carrier on running plays or sacking the quarterback on passing plays . The leader of the offensive line is the center ( C ) , who is responsible for snapping the ball to the quarterback , blocking , and for making sure that the other linemen do their jobs during the play . On either side of the center are the guards ( G ) , while tackles ( T ) line up outside of the guards . 
 The principal receivers are the wide receivers ( WR ) and the tight ends ( TE ) . Wide receivers line up on or near the line of scrimmage , split outside of the line . The main goal of the wide receiver is to catch passes thrown by the quarterback , but they may also function as decoys or as blockers during running plays . Tight ends line up outside of the tackles and function both as receivers and as blockers . 
 = = = Defensive unit = = = 
 The role of the defense is to prevent the offense from scoring by tackling the ball carrier or by forcing turnovers ( interceptions or fumbles ) . 
 The defensive line ( DL ) consists of defensive ends ( DE ) and defensive tackles ( DT ) . Defensive ends line up on the ends of the line , while defensive tackles line up inside , between the defensive ends . The primary responsibilities of defensive ends and defensive tackles is to stop running plays on the outside and inside , respectively , to pressure the quarterback on passing plays , and to occupy the line so that the linebackers can break through . 
 Linebackers line up behind the defensive line but in front of the defensive backfield . They are divided into two types : middle linebackers ( MLB ) and outside linebackers ( OLB ) . Linebackers are the defensive leaders and call the defensive plays . Their diverse roles include defending the run , pressuring the quarterback , and guarding backs , wide receivers and tight ends in the passing game . 
 The defensive backfield , often called the secondary , consists of cornerbacks ( CB ) and safeties ( S ) . Safeties are themselves divided into free safeties ( FS ) and strong safeties ( SS ) . <unk> line up outside the defensive formation , typically opposite of a receiver so as to be able to cover him , while safeties line up between the cornerbacks but farther back in the secondary . Safeties are the last line of defense , and are responsible for stopping deep passing plays as well as running plays . 
 = = = Special teams unit = = = 
 The special teams unit is responsible for all kicking plays . The special teams unit of the team in control of the ball will try and execute field goal ( FG ) attempts , punts and kickoffs , while the opposing team 's unit will aim to block or return them . 
 Three positions are specific to the field goal and PAT ( point @-@ after @-@ touchdown ) unit : the placekicker ( K or PK ) , holder ( H ) and long snapper ( LS ) . The long snapper 's job is to snap the football to the holder , who will catch and position it for the placekicker . There is not usually a holder on kickoffs , because the ball is kicked off of a tee ; however , a holder may be used in certain situations , such as if wind is preventing the ball from remaining upright on the tee . The player on the receiving team who catches the ball is known as the kickoff returner ( KR ) . 
 The positions specific to punt plays are the punter ( P ) , long snapper , and gunner . The long snapper snaps the football directly to the punter , who then drops and kicks it before it hits the ground . Gunners line up split outside of the line and race down the field , aiming to tackle the punt returner ( PR ) - the player that catches the punt . 
 = = Rules = = 
 = = = Scoring = = = 
 In American football , the winner is the team that has scored the most points at the end of the game . There are multiple ways to score in a football game . 
 The touchdown ( TD ) , worth six points , is the most valuable scoring play in American football . A touchdown is scored when a live ball is advanced into , caught in , or recovered in the end zone of the opposing team . The scoring team then attempts a try or conversion , more commonly known as the point ( s ) <unk> @-@ touchdown ( PAT ) , which is a single scoring opportunity . A PAT is most commonly attempted from the two- or three @-@ yard line , depending on the level of play . If scored by a <unk> or dropkick through the goal posts , it is worth one point , and is typically called the extra point . If it is scored by what would normally be a touchdown , it is called the two @-@ point conversion and is worth two points . For the 2015 season , the NFL adopted a rule on extra points that stated the <unk> must be kicked at the 15 yard line , however for a two @-@ point conversion teams were still eligible to scrimmage from the two @-@ yard line . No points are awarded on a failed extra point or two @-@ point conversion attempt . In general , the extra point is almost always successful in professional play and is only slightly less successful at amateur levels , while the two @-@ point conversion is a much riskier play with a higher probability of failure ; accordingly , extra point attempts are far more common than two @-@ point conversion attempts . 
 A field goal ( FG ) , worth three points , is scored when the ball is <unk> or dropkicked through the uprights and over the crossbars of the defense 's goalposts . After a PAT attempt or successful field goal the scoring team must kick the ball off to the other team . A safety is scored when the ball carrier is tackled in his own end zone . Safeties are worth two points , which are awarded to the defense . In addition , the team that conceded the safety must kick the ball to the scoring team via a free kick . 
 = = = Field and equipment = = = 
 Football games are played on a rectangular field that measures 120 yards ( 110 m ) long and 53 @.@ 33 yards ( 48 @.@ 76 m ) wide . Lines marked along the ends and sides of the field are known respectively as the end lines and side lines , and goal lines are marked 10 yards ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) inward from each end line . Weighted pylons are placed on the inside corner of the intersections of the goal lines and end lines . 
 White markings on the field identify the distance from the end zone . Inbound lines , or hash marks , are short parallel lines that mark off 1 yard ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) increments . Yard lines , which run the width of the field , are marked every 5 yards ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) . A one yard wide is placed at each end of the field ; this line is marked at the center of the two @-@ yard line in professional play and at the three @-@ yard line in college play . Numerals that display the distance from the closest goal line in multiples of ten are placed on both sides of the field every ten yards . 
 <unk> are located at the center of the plane of each of the two end lines . The crossbar of these posts is ten feet ( 3 meters ) above the ground , with vertical uprights at the end of the crossbar 18 feet 6 inches ( 6 m ) apart for professional and collegiate play and 23 feet 4 inches ( 7 m ) apart for high school play . The uprights extend vertically 35 feet on professional fields , a minimum of 10 yards on college fields , and a minimum of ten feet on high school fields . Goal posts are padded at the base , and orange ribbons are normally placed at the tip of each upright . 
 The football itself is an oval ball , similar to the balls used in rugby or Australian rules football . At all levels of play , the football is inflated to 12 1 ⁄ 2 to 13 1 ⁄ 2 pounds per square inch ( psi ) and weighs 14 to 15 ounces ( 397 to 425 grams ) ; beyond that , the exact dimensions vary slightly . In professional play the ball has a long axis of 11 to 11 1 ⁄ 4 inches , a long circumference of 28 to 28 1 ⁄ 2 inches , and a short circumference of 21 to 21 1 ⁄ 4 inches , while in college and high school play the ball has a long axis of 10 7 ⁄ 8 to 11 7 ⁄ 16 inches , a long circumference of 27 3 ⁄ 4 to 28 1 ⁄ 2 inches , and a short circumference of 20 3 ⁄ 4 to 21 1 ⁄ 4 inches . 
 = = = Duration and time stoppages = = = 
 Football games last for a total of 60 minutes in professional and college play and are divided into two halves of 30 minutes and four quarters of 15 minutes . High school football games are 48 minutes in length with two halves of 24 minutes and four quarters of 12 minutes . The two halves are separated by a halftime period , and the first and third quarters are also followed by a short break . Prior to the start of the game , the referee and team captains for each team meet at midfield for a coin toss . The visiting team is allowed to call ' heads ' or ' tails ' ; the winner of the toss is allowed to decide from between choosing whether to receive or kick off the ball or choosing which goal they want to defend , but they can also defer their choice until the second half . The losing team , unless the winning team decides to defer , is allowed to choose the option the winning team did not select , and receives the option to receive , kick , or select a goal to defend to begin the second half . Most teams choose to receive or defer , because choosing to kick the ball to start the game would allow the other team to choose which goal to defend . Teams switch goals following the first and third quarters . If a down is in progress when a quarter ends , play continues until the down is completed . 
 Games last longer than their defined length due to play stoppages - the average NFL game lasts slightly over three hours . Time in a football game is measured by the game clock . An operator is responsible for starting , stopping and operating the game clock based on the direction of the appropriate official . A separate clock , the play clock , is used to determine if a delay of game infraction has been committed . If the play clock expires before the ball has been snapped or free @-@ kicked , a delay of game foul is called on the offense . The play clock is set to 40 seconds in professional and college football and to 25 seconds in high school play or following certain administrative stoppages in the former levels of play . 
 = = = Advancing the ball and downs = = = 
 There are two main ways that the offense can advance the ball : running and passing . In a typical play , the quarterback calls the play , and the center passes the ball backwards and under his legs to the quarterback in a process known as the snap . The quarterback then either hands the ball off to a back , throws the ball or runs with it himself . The play ends when the player with the ball is tackled or goes out of bounds , or a pass hits the ground without a player having caught it . A forward pass can only be legally attempted if the passer is behind the line of scrimmage . In the NFL , a down also ends if the runner 's helmet comes off . 
 The offense is given a series of four plays , known as downs . If the offense advances ten or more yards in the four downs , they are awarded a new set of four downs . If they fail to advance ten yards , possession of the football is turned over to the defense . In most situations , if the offense reaches their fourth down they will punt the ball to the other team , which forces them to begin their drive from further down the field ; if they are in field goal range , they might also attempt to score a field goal . A group of officials , the chain crew , keeps track of both the downs and the distance measurements . On television , a yellow line is electronically superimposed on the field to show the first down line to the viewing audience . 
 = = = Kicking = = = 
 There are two categories of kicks in football : scrimmage kicks , which can be executed by the offensive team on any down from behind or on the line of scrimmage , and free kicks . The free kicks are the kickoff , which starts the first and third quarters and overtime and follows a try attempt or a successful field goal , and the safety kick , which follows a safety . 
 On a kickoff , the ball is placed at the 35 @-@ yard line of the kicking team in professional and college play and at the 40 @-@ yard line in high school play . The ball may be drop @-@ kicked or place @-@ kicked . If a place kick is chosen , the ball can be placed on the ground or on a tee , and a holder may be used in either case . On a safety kick , the kicking team kicks the ball from their own 20 @-@ yard line . They can punt , drop @-@ kick or place @-@ kick the ball , but a tee may not be used in professional play . Any member of the receiving team may catch or advance the ball , and the ball may be recovered by the kicking team once it has gone at least ten yards and has touched the ground or has been touched by any member of the receiving team . 
 The three types of scrimmage kicks are place kicks , drop kicks , and punts . Only place kicks and drop kicks can score points . The place kick is the standard method used to score points , because the pointy shape of the football makes it difficult to reliably drop kick . Once the ball has been kicked from a scrimmage kick , it can be advanced by the kicking team only if it is caught or recovered behind the line of scrimmage . If it is touched or recovered by the kicking team beyond this line , it becomes dead at the spot where it was touched . The kicking team is prohibited from interfering with the receiver 's opportunity to catch the ball , and the receiving team has the option of signaling for a fair catch . This prohibits the defense from blocking into or tackling the receiver , but the play ends as soon as the ball is caught and the ball may not be advanced . 
 = = = Officials and fouls = = = 
 Officials are responsible for enforcing game rules and monitoring the clock . All officials carry a whistle and wear black @-@ and @-@ white striped shirts and black hats except for the referee , whose hat is white . Each carries a weighted yellow flag that is thrown to the ground to signal that a foul has been called . An official who spots multiple fouls will throw his hat as a secondary signal . The seven officials on the field are each tasked with a different set of responsibilities : 
 The referee is positioned behind and to the side of the offensive backs . He is charged with oversight and control of the game and is the authority on the score , the down number , and any and all rule interpretations in discussions between the other officials . He announces all penalties and discusses the infraction with the offending team 's captain , monitors for illegal hits against the quarterback , makes requests for first @-@ down measurements , and notifies the head coach whenever a player is ejected . 
 The umpire is positioned in the defensive backfield . He watches play along the line of scrimmage to make sure that no more than 11 offensive players are on the field prior to the snap and that no offensive linemen are illegally downfield on pass plays . He monitors the contact between offensive and defensive linemen and calls most of the holding penalties . The umpire records the number of timeouts taken and the winner of the coin toss and the game score , assists the referee in situations involving possession of the ball close to the line of scrimmage , determines whether player equipment is legal , and dries wet balls prior to the snap if a game is played in rain . 
 The back judge is positioned deep in the defensive backfield , behind the umpire . He ensures that the defensive team has no more than 11 players on the field and determines whether catches are legal , whether field goal or extra point attempts are good , and whether a pass interference violation occurred . 
 The head linesman is positioned on one end of the line of scrimmage . He watches for any line @-@ of @-@ scrimmage and illegal use @-@ of @-@ hands violations and assists the line judge with illegal shift or illegal motion calls . The head linesman also rules on out @-@ of @-@ bounds calls that happen on his side of the field , oversees the chain crew and marks the forward progress of a runner when a play has been whistled dead . 
 The side judge is positioned twenty yards downfield of the head linesman . He mainly duplicates the functions of the back judge . 
 The line judge is positioned on the end of the line of scrimmage , opposite the head linesman . He supervises player substitutions , the line of scrimmage during punts , and game timing . He notifies the referee when time has expired at the end of a quarter and notifies the head coach of the home team when five minutes remain for halftime . In the NFL , the line judge also alerts the referee when two minutes remain in the half . If the clock malfunctions or becomes inoperable , the line judge becomes the official timekeeper . 
 The field judge is positioned twenty yards downfield from the line judge . He monitors and controls the play clock , counts the number of defensive players on the field , and watches for offensive pass interference and illegal use @-@ of @-@ hands violations by offensive players . He also makes decisions regarding catches , recoveries , the ball spot when a player goes out of bounds , and illegal touching of fumbled balls that have crossed the line of scrimmage . 
 Another set of officials , the chain crew , are responsible for moving the chains . The chains , consisting of two large sticks with a 10 @-@ yard @-@ long chain between them , are used to measure for a first down . The chain crew stays on the sidelines during the game , but if requested by the officials they will briefly bring the chains on to the field to measure . A typical chain crew will have at least three people - two members of the chain crew will hold either of the two sticks , while a third will hold the down marker . The down marker , a large stick with a dial on it , is flipped after each play to indicate the current down , and is typically moved to the approximate spot of the ball . The chain crew system has been used for over 100 years and is considered to be an accurate measure of distance , rarely subject to criticism from either side . 
 = = Safety = = 
 Football is a full @-@ contact sport , and injuries are relatively common . Most injuries occur during training sessions , particularly ones that involve contact between players . To try to prevent injuries , players are required to wear a set of equipment . At a minimum players must wear a football helmet and a set of shoulder pads , but individual leagues may require additional padding such as thigh pads and guards , knee pads , chest protectors , and mouthguards . Most injuries occur in the lower extremities , particularly in the knee , but a significant number also affect the upper extremities . The most common types of injuries are strains , sprains , bruises , fractures , dislocations , and concussions . Repeated concussions can increase a person 's risk in later life for chronic traumatic encephalopathy and mental health issues such as dementia , Parkinson 's disease , and depression . Concussions are often caused by helmet @-@ to @-@ helmet or upper @-@ body contact between opposing players , although helmets have prevented more serious injuries such as skull fractures . Various programs are aiming to reduce concussions by reducing the frequency of helmet @-@ to @-@ helmet hits ; USA Football 's " Heads Up Football " program is aiming to reduce concussions in youth football by teaching coaches and players about the signs of a concussion , the proper way to wear football equipment and ensure it fits , and proper tackling methods that avoid helmet @-@ to @-@ helmet contact . 
 = = Leagues and tournaments = = 
 The National Football League ( NFL ) and the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) are the most popular football leagues in the United States . The National Football League was founded in 1920 and has since become the largest and most popular sport in the United States . The NFL has the highest average attendance of any sporting league in the world , with an average attendance of almost 70 @,@ 000 persons during the 2011 NFL Season . The NFL championship game is called the Super Bowl , and is among the biggest events in club sports worldwide . It is played between the champions of the National Football Conference ( NFC ) and the American Football Conference ( AFC ) , and its winner is awarded the Vince Lombardi Trophy . 
 College football is the third @-@ most popular sport in the United States , behind professional baseball and professional football . The NCAA , the largest collegiate organization , is divided into three Divisions : Division I , Division II and Division III . Division I football is further divided into two subdivisions : the Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) and the Football Championship Subdivision ( FCS ) . The champions of each level of play are determined through NCAA @-@ sanctioned playoff systems ; while the champion of Division I @-@ FBS was historically determined by various polls and ranking systems , the subdivision adopted a four @-@ team playoff system in 2014 . 
 High school football is the most popular sport in the United States played by boys ; over 1 @.@ 1 million boys participated in the sport from 2007 to 2008 according to a survey by the National Federation of State High School Associations ( NFHS ) . The NFHS is the largest organization for high school football , with member associations in all 50 states as well as the District of Columbia . USA Football is the governing body for youth and amateur football , and Pop Warner Little Scholars is the largest organization for youth football . 
 = = = Rival professional leagues = = = 
 Several professional football leagues have been formed as rival leagues to the NFL . The most successful rival league was the American Football League ( AFL ) , which existed from 1960 to 1969 . The AFL became a significant rival in 1964 before signing a five @-@ year , US $ 36 million television deal with NBC . AFL teams began to sign NFL players to contracts , and the league 's popularity grew to challenge that of the NFL . The two leagues merged in the 1970 season , and all AFL teams joined the NFL . An earlier league , the All @-@ America Football Conference , was in play from 1946 to 1949 . After the league dissolved , two AAFC teams , the Cleveland Browns and the San Francisco 49ers , became members of the NFL ; another member , the Baltimore Colts joined the league , but folded after just a year in the NFL . 
 Other attempts to start rival leagues have been far less successful . The World Football League ( WFL ) played for two seasons , in 1974 and 1975 , but faced monetary issues so severe that the league could not pay its players . In its second and final season the WFL attempted to establish a stable credit rating , but the league disbanded before its second season could be completed . The United States Football League ( USFL ) operated for three seasons from 1983 to 1985 but collapsed due to poor business decisions and monetary problems . A subsequent USD $ 1 @.@ 5 billion antitrust lawsuit against the NFL was successful in court , but the league was awarded only three dollars in damages . The XFL was created in 2001 by Vince McMahon and lasted for only one season . Despite television contracts with NBC and UPN and high expectations , the XFL suffered from poor television ratings and a low quality of play . The United Football League ( UFL ) began in 2009 , but folded after suspending its 2012 season , due to financial issues . 
 = = = International play = = = 
 American football leagues exist throughout the world , but the game has yet to achieve the international success and popularity of baseball and basketball . NFL Europa , the developmental league of the NFL , operated from 1991 to 1992 and then from 1995 to 2007 . At the time of its closure , NFL Europa had five teams based in Germany and one in the Netherlands . 
 The European Football League ( EFL ) , run by the European Federation of American Football ( EFAF ) , is an annual invitational tournament between the champions or co @-@ champions of competitions run by EFAF members . The league 's championship game is the <unk> . Other EFAF tournaments include the EFAF Cup , played between the top teams from national leagues in a similar manner to the UEFA Cup , the Atlantic Cup , played between teams from the Atlantic region of Europe , and the Challenge Cup , played between teams from newer federations that are not eligible to play in the EFL or EFAF Cup . American football federations are also present in Asia , Oceania , and Pan America , and a total of 64 national football federations exist as of July 2012 . The International Federation of American Football ( IFAF ) , an international body composed of American football federations , runs tournaments such as the IFAF World Championship , which is held every four years since 1999 , the IFAF Women 's World Championship , the IFAF U @-@ 19 World Championship and the Flag Football World Championship . The IFAF also organizes the annual International Bowl game . At the international level , Canada , Mexico , and Japan are considered to be second @-@ tier , while Austria , Germany , and France would rank among a third tier . All of these countries rank far below the United States , which is dominant at the international level . 
 Football is not an Olympic sport , but it was a demonstration sport at the 1932 Summer Olympics . The IFAF has received provisional recognition from the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) , and a vote on making it an Olympic sport could be held as early as 2017 . Several major obstacles hinder the IFAF goal of achieving status as an Olympic sport , such as the predominant participation of men in international play and the short three @-@ week Olympic schedule . Large team sizes are an additional difficulty , due to the Olympics ' set limit of 10 @,@ 500 athletes and coaches . American football also has the issue of global visibility . Nigel Melville , the CEO of USA Rugby , noted that " American football is recognized globally as a sport , but it 's not played globally " . In order to solve these concerns , major effort has been put into promoting flag football , a modified version of American football , at the international level . 
 = = Popularity and cultural impact = = 
 = = = United States = = = 
 " Baseball is still called the national pastime , but football is by far the more popular sport in American society , " according to ESPN.com 's Sean McAdam . In a 2014 poll conducted by Harris Interactive , professional football ranked as the most popular sport , and college football ranked third behind only professional football and baseball ; 46 % of participants ranked some form of the game as their favorite sport . Professional football has ranked as the most popular sport in the poll since 1985 , when it surpassed baseball for the first time . Professional football is most popular among those who live in the eastern United States and rural areas , while college football is most popular in the southern United States and among people with graduate and post @-@ graduate degrees . Football is also the most @-@ played sport by high school and college athletes in the United States . In a 2012 study , the NCAA estimated there were around 1 @.@ 1 million high school football players and nearly 70 @,@ 000 college football players in the United States ; in comparison , the second @-@ most played sport , basketball , had around 1 million participants in high school and 34 @,@ 000 in college . The Super Bowl is the most popular single @-@ day sporting event in the United States , and is among the biggest club sporting events in the world in terms of TV viewership . The NFL makes approximately $ 10 billion annually . Super Bowl games account for seven of the top eight most @-@ watched broadcasts in American history ; the most recent Super Bowl , Super Bowl XLIX , was watched by a record 114 @.@ 4 million Americans . 
 American football also plays a significant role in American culture . The Super Bowl is considered a de facto national holiday , and in parts of the country like Texas , the sport has been compared to a religion . Football is also linked to other holidays ; New Year 's Day is traditionally the date for several college football bowl games , including the Rose Bowl . However , if New Year 's Day is on a Sunday , the bowl games are moved to another date to not conflict with the typical NFL Sunday schedule . Thanksgiving football is an American tradition , hosting many high school , college , and professional games . Steve <unk> of USA Today wrote that Americans are passionate about football " because it embodies everything we love about American exceptionalism . Merit is rewarded , not punished . Masculinity is celebrated , not feminized . People of various beliefs and backgrounds — a melting pot , if you will — must unify for a common goal for the team to be successful " . Implicit rules such as playing through pain and sacrificing for the better of the team are promoted in football culture . 
 = = = Abroad = = = 
 In Canada , the game has a significant following — according to a 2013 poll , 21 % of respondents said they followed the NFL " very closely " or " fairly closely " , making it the third @-@ most followed league behind the National Hockey League ( NHL ) and Canadian Football League ( CFL ) . American football also has a long history in Mexico , which was introduced to the sport in 1896 . American football was the second @-@ most popular sport in Mexico in the 1950s , with the game being particularly popular in colleges . The Los Angeles Times notes that the NFL claims over 16 million fans in Mexico , which places the country third behind the US and Canada . American football is played in Mexico both professionally and as part of the college sports system . 
 Japan was introduced to the sport in 1934 by Paul Rusch , a teacher and Christian missionary who helped establish football teams at three universities in Tokyo . Play was halted during World War II , but began to grow in popularity again after the war . As of 2010 , there are more than 400 high school football teams in Japan , with over 15 @,@ 000 participants , and over 100 teams play in the <unk> Collegiate Football Association ( <unk> ) . The college champion plays the champion of the X @-@ League ( a semi @-@ pro league where teams are financed by corporations ) in the Rice Bowl to determine Japan 's national champion . 
 Europe is a major target for expansion of the game by football organizers . In the United Kingdom in the 1980s , the sport was fairly popular , with the 1986 Super Bowl being watched by over 4 million people ( about 1 out of every 14 Britons ) . The sport 's popularity faded over the 1990s , coinciding with the establishment of the Premier League . According to BBC America , there is a " social stigma " surrounding American football in the UK , with many Brits feeling the sport has no right to call itself ' football ' due to the small emphasis on kicking . Nonetheless , the sport has retained a following in the United Kingdom ; the NFL operates a media network in the country , and since 2007 has hosted the NFL International Series in London . Super Bowl viewership has also rebounded , with over 4 @.@ 4 million Britons watching Super Bowl XLVI . 
 The sport is played in European countries such as Switzerland , which has American football clubs in every major city , and Germany , where the sport has around 45 @,@ 000 registered amateur players . 
 = = Variations and related sports = = 
 Canadian football , the predominant form of football in Canada , is closely related to American football - both sports developed from rugby , and the two sports are considered to be the chief variants of gridiron football . Although the two games share a similar set of rules , there are several key rule differences : for example , in Canadian football the field measures 150 yards ( 137 m ) by 65 ( 59 m ) yards , including two 20 @-@ yard end zones ( for a distance between goal lines of 110 yards ) , teams have three downs instead of four , there are twelve players on each side instead of eleven , fair catches are not allowed , and a rouge , worth a single point is scored if the offensive team kicks the ball out of the defense 's end zone . The Canadian Football League ( CFL ) is the major Canadian league and is the second @-@ most popular sporting league in Canada , behind only the National Hockey League . 
 A major variant of football is arena football , played by the Arena Football League ( AFL ) . Arena football has eight @-@ player teams and uses an indoor field 50 yards ( 46 m ) in length , excluding end zones , and 28 @.@ 3 yards ( 25 @.@ 9 m ) wide . Punting is illegal , and kickoffs are attempted from the goal line . Large overhead nets deflect forward passes and kicks that hit them , and deflected kicks are live balls that may be recovered by either team . 
 Below the Arena Football League are what New York Times writer Mike <unk> described as the " most minor of minor leagues : " indoor football leagues . Like in arena football , teams in indoor football leagues play in arenas , but games are only attended by a small number of fans , and most players are semi @-@ professional athletes . Indoor football leagues are unstable , with franchises regularly moving from one league to another or merging with other teams , and teams or entire leagues dissolving entirely . The Indoor Football League , Southern Indoor Football League , Ultimate Indoor Football League , Continental Indoor Football League and American Professional Football League are examples of prominent indoor leagues . 
 There are several non @-@ contact variants of American football , such as flag football . In flag football the ballcarrier is not tackled ; instead , defenders aim to pull a flag tied around his waist . Another variant , touch football , simply requires the ballcarrier to be touched to be considered downed . A game of touch football may require that the player be touched with either one or two hands to be considered down , depending on the rules used . 
 = Second Test , 1948 Ashes series = 
 The Second Test of the 1948 Ashes series was one of five Tests in a cricket series between Australia and England . The match was played at Lord 's cricket ground in London from 24 to 29 June , with a rest day on 27 June . Australia won the match by 409 runs to take a 2 – 0 lead , meaning that England would need to win the remaining three matches to regain The Ashes . 
 Australian captain Don Bradman won the toss and elected to bat . The tourists had won the First Test convincingly , and decided to field the same team , while England made three changes , mainly to adopt a more attacking bowling strategy . Australia started strongly , led by opener Arthur Morris , who scored 105 and took the score to 166 / 2 mid @-@ way through the first day . However , the later batsmen struggled after his departure and fell to 258 / 7 by the end of the first day , handing the home team the advantage . However , a lower @-@ order counterattack on the second morning saw Australia reach 350 , wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon scoring 53 . For England , the seamer Alec Bedser was the most successful bowler , taking 4 / 100 . Australian paceman Ray Lindwall then cut through the English top @-@ order , reducing them to 46 / 4 . After a recovery an 87 @-@ run partnership between Denis Compton — who top @-@ scored with 53 — and captain Norman Yardley , both fell within one run of each other and England looked set to be dismissed short of the follow on mark when they were at 145 / 7 . However , the lower order resisted stoutly and they ended at 215 early on the third morning ; Lindwall took 5 / 70 . Australia then set about extending their first innings lead , and opener Sid Barnes led the way , scoring 141 . He put on an opening partnership of 122 with Morris ( 62 ) , and added 174 with Bradman ( 89 ) . Australia closed the third day at 343 / 4 after a productive day of batting , giving them a lead of 478 despite losing three quick wickets late in the afternoon . 
 After the rest day , Australia proceeded to reach 460 / 7 — Keith Miller making 74 — before Bradman declared , setting England a target of 596 midway through the afternoon . The hosts reached 106 / 3 at stumps on the fourth day , but then collapsed on the final morning to be all out for 186 , handing Australia a 409 @-@ run victory . Cyril Washbrook and Tom Dollery top @-@ scored for England with 37 apiece . Ernie Toshack had the pick of the figures with 5 / 40 while Lindwall took 3 / 61 . Although Toshack had the better figures , commentators credited Lindwall with orchestrating the England collapse ; at the start of the innings he bowled at leading English batsmen Len Hutton at great pace before dismissing him . Hutton had appeared very unsettled by Lindwall and played meekly . He was severely criticised for his timid manner and was controversially dropped for the following match as the selectors thought he was providing a poor example to the junior members of the team . The Australians were very pleased with this decision , which they believed to be wrong , as they regarded Hutton as their most formidable opponent . The match set a new record for the highest attendance at a Test in England . 
 = = Background = = 
 Australia had proceeded through the first two months of the tour of England without defeat . After winning 10 of the first twelve matches before the Tests started , eight of these by an innings — the other two were drawn — they won the First Test by eight wickets . Between the Tests , they defeated Northamptonshire by an innings before drawing against Yorkshire . 
 According to former English paceman Bill Bowes , England had approached the First Test with the intention of achieving a draw against a team they regarded as their superior , reflected in their selections and use of defensive tactics . Bowes himself believed the tactics to be correct and almost successful . However , he suspected that Walter Robins , one of the selectors , considered the English strategy to be misguided and that they should attack the Australians . This was reflected in the English selections . The home team made three changes ; the leg spinner Doug Wright , who was forced to withdraw from the First Test at late notice due to lumbago , had regained his fitness and replaced the left arm orthodox spin of Young , who had taken match figures of 1 / 107 in the First Test — Australian wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon was his only wicket . However , he had managed to keep the batsmen quiet with his defensive leg theory , bowling 60 overs for 79 runs ; Wright was a much more attacking and therefore expensive bowler . Jim Laker , who had been called into the First Test team due to Wright 's lumbago , was initially the third spinner in the pecking order , but he took 4 / 138 , including three specialist batsmen , and was retained . 
 Alec Coxon took match figures of 4 / 113 for Yorkshire against Australia , taking four middle @-@ order wickets , and scored 21 and 16 not out in the middle @-@ order . He came into the team as an all @-@ rounder , even though his performances during the rest of the English season had been mediocre ; he had a batting average of 20 @.@ 25 for the summer and took only ten wickets in seven matches prior to the county fixture against Australia . Bowes saw him as an attacking bowler compatible with Robins 's strategic thinking . 
 Tom Dollery was called into the team after a run of heavy scoring for Warwickshire on difficult pitches at Edgbaston . He had made two centuries and seven fifties in 12 first @-@ class matches for the season . Batsman Charlie Barnett was dropped after scoring only eight and six in the First Test . Joe Hardstaff junior was also left out ; he had scored a duck and 43 in the First Test , and had a toe infection , so the selectors were spared the predicament of deciding whether to drop him on performance grounds . With Wright in for Young , and Coxon selected in place of a specialist batsman , England had a more attacking bowling line @-@ up , something the retired Australian Test leg spinner Bill O 'Reilly praised . He also thought the selection of Coxon was beneficial , as his swing bowling would ease the workload of batsman Bill Edrich , who had opened the bowling in the previous Test . O 'Reilly regarded Edrich as a mediocre bowler and thought the extra burden with the ball was detracting from his main duty , batting . 
 Australia retained the same XI from the First Test at Trent Bridge . Ian Johnson was retained despite taking match figures of 1 / 85 , as was Bill Brown , the opener who was batting out of position in the middle @-@ order . Brown had scored 25 , 26 and 17 in his three innings in the middle @-@ order during the tour . O 'Reilly criticised the selection of Brown , who had appeared to be noticeably uncomfortable in the unfamiliar role . He said that despite Brown 's unbeaten double century in his previous Test at Lord 's in 1938 , Sam Loxton and Neil Harvey had better claims to selection . Following his groin injury at Trent Bridge , Lindwall was subjected to a thorough fitness test on the first morning . Bradman was not convinced of Lindwall 's fitness , but the bowler 's protestations were sufficient to convince his captain to gamble on his inclusion . Australia won the toss and elected to bat , allowing Lindwall further time to recover from his injury . Before the toss , Bradman had spent an unusually long time inspecting the wicket , and after correctly predicting the side of the coin , he looked at the surface for another period before announcing Australia 's decision to bat . The all @-@ rounder Keith Miller played , but was unfit to bowl . 
 = = Scorecard = = 
 = = = Australia innings = = = 
 = = = England innings = = = 
 = = 24 June : Day One = = 
 At 8 : 00 on the morning of the Test , there was a storm to the south of London but the rain did not reach Lord 's , which was located in the north of the English capital . The first over bowled by Bedser to Barnes was watchfully played to complete a maiden . The debutant Coxon opened the bowling with Bedser and he removed Barnes for a duck in his second over , caught by Hutton at short fine leg from a short delivery to leave Australia 3 / 1 . Barnes tried to knock the ball through square leg but misjudged the pace of the wicket and played his shot too early , <unk> the ball to Hutton . Coxon bowled from very close to the wickets and left substantial footmarks just outside the right @-@ hander 's leg stump in an area ideal for a leg spinner . Although he was not of particularly fast pace , Coxon ran in vigorously and landed heavily after a pronounced delivery stride , making a significant impact on the surface . Bradman received a loud , positive reception from the crowd as he came out to bat in his final Test at Lord 's . 
 Bradman initially struggled against the English bowling . He faced his first ball from Coxon and inside edged it past his leg stump , before missing the third ball from Coxon and surviving a loud appeal for leg before wicket ( lbw ) . Bowling from the other end , Bedser beat Bradman with seam movement off the pitch and one ball narrowly skimmed past the stumps . Standing up to the stumps , wicket @-@ keeper Godfrey Evans removed the bails as Bradman leaned forward , but his foot had stayed firmly behind the crease . In another close call , Bradman inside edged a ball towards Yardley at short leg , but the English captain was slow to react and the ball landed in front of him . The Australian captain managed only three runs in the first 20 minutes and Australia had scored only 14 after the first 30 minutes . Coxon consistently moved the ball into a cautious Bradman , and the Australians scored only 32 runs in the first hour . 
 Edrich then relieved Coxon , who had bowled his first seven overs in Test cricket for the loss of only 10 runs . Edrich bowled a bouncer , which Bradman tried to swing to the leg side , but the leading edge instead went in the air and landed behind point . On 13 , Bradman leg glanced a Bedser ball from his legs , narrowly evading Hutton in the trap at short fine leg . After one hour , he was on 14 . Bradman had fallen twice for the leg trap in the previous Test . Bedser continued to the probe the Australian captain with inswingers , trying to extract a lofted leg glance in the vicinity if the waiting Hutton . In contrast , Morris was playing fluently and scoring many runs from the back cut . 
 Bedser was relieved after 70 minutes of bowling . The leg spin of Wright was introduced and Australia cut loose . Wright bowled a no ball that Morris dispatched into the leg side crowd for six , before hitting another ball for four . Bradman and Morris settled down as Coxon and Wright operated . The Australian captain drove the debutant Coxon through the covers for two fours , and Yardley made frequent rotations of his bowlers . Coxon continued to significantly rough up the pitch outside the right @-@ handed batsman 's leg stump , and from the other , Wright was able to extract substantial spin on the first morning of the match , hitting Morris in the stomach with a ball that turned in sharply from outside off stump . At lunch , Australia were 82 / 1 with Morris on 45 and Bradman 35 . The tourists had largely been content to wait for loose deliveries , rather than take risks , and as the Englishmen bowled accurately , the Australians did not score quickly . 
 In the third over after the lunch break , with the score at 87 , Bradman was caught for the third consecutive time in the series by Hutton off Bedser at short fine leg . Hutton had dropped Bradman in the same position when he was on 13 . Including a county match against Yorkshire , it was the fourth time Hutton had caught Bradman in the leg trap from a glance . According to O 'Reilly , this was evidence that Bradman was no longer the player he was before World War II , as he had been unable to disperse the close @-@ catching fielders by counter @-@ attacking , before eventually being dismissed . O 'Reilly said this was the first time Bradman had fallen to the same trap three times in succession . 
 Hassett came to the crease to join Morris , with the new ball already due . Still using the old ball , Bedser beat Hassett second ball with a delivery that moved back in , but the appeal for lbw was turned down . However , Yardley opted to not take the ball , and Hassett managed to score a single and get off strike before the English captain called for a replacement ball . O 'Reilly said the failure to take the new ball immediately after the appeal was a missed opportunity to maximise the psychological pressure on Hassett . 
 After a slow start , Morris had begun to take control . He drove the ball through the covers and clipped it through the leg side , and reached his century with consecutive boundaries from Coxon soon after the new ball was taken . Former Australian Test opener Jack Fingleton , covering the tour as a newspaper journalist , called it " a pretty Test century in the grandest of all cricket settings " . The century ended a poor run of form for Morris earlier in the tour , when he had been shuffling uncertainly on the crease without decisively moving forward or back . O 'Reilly called it Morris 's best Test century to date , as this was the strongest English attack he had faced during his career , and because of the loss of wickets at the other end . O 'Reilly said Morris had been disciplined in not playing loose shots outside off stump and missing or edging them , yet still being able to score quickly at every opportunity . 
 Morris was out soon after for 105 runs with the score at 166 / 3 , having struck 14 fours and one six . His innings , which was noted for powerful , well @-@ placed cover drives , ended when he hit Coxon to Hutton in the gully . Miller came in and Bedser bowled three consecutive outswingers to him . A fourth ball swung the other way , and Miller did not offer a shot , expecting the ball to curve away and miss the stumps . Instead , he was hit in front of the wickets and given out lbw for four . O 'Reilly said Miller 's display was more akin to that of a tail @-@ end batsman with minimal skill , and blamed his poor form with the bat on an excessive workload imposed on him by Bradman . With two quick wickets , England had put the match back in the balance . Batting out of position in the middle @-@ order , Brown came in at 173 / 4 and helped Hassett to rebuild the innings . Both scored slowly , averaging more than three and a half minutes for each run . They realised Australia could not afford to lose any more wickets quickly and batted with extreme caution , reluctant even to attack long hops . Hassett was dropped three times before Yardley , who was bowling mainly in order to allow his frontline bowlers to recuperate , broke through his defences with a yorker . The English skipper trapped Brown lbw nine runs later to leave Australia at 225 / 6 . Brown had hit two consecutive half @-@ volleys off his pads through the leg side for four , and attempted a third boundary in a row to a similar delivery . However , this third delivery came off the pitch more quickly and beat Brown for pace . 
 This left Johnson and Tallon as the new men at the crease . Johnson struggled to score , while Tallon did so freely in the last hour . Edrich had Johnson caught behind for four to leave Australia at 246 / 7 . Johnson had contributed only four of the 30 runs scored while he was at the crease . Lindwall joined Tallon and the pair survived to the close of play . England were well placed when Australia ended at stumps on 258 / 7 with Tallon on 25 and Lindwall on 3 . Tallon had dominated the scoring late in the day , making 25 of the 33 runs added . Bowes believed that Yardley attacked very well , keeping the pressure on Australia by rotating his bowlers effectively so his three main bowlers were always at the crease . O 'Reilly praised Evans 's agile display in his stumping attempts as the fastest and best he had seen . The English crowd were optimistic about England 's position and some of them immediately camped outside the turnstiles upon leaving the ground . Arlott said England 's " bowlers had done nobly " . 
 = = 25 June : Day Two = = 
 The next day , the English crowd filled the ground early , anticipating a strong showing from the home team after their promising start on the first day , but Australia 's lower order batted their team into control on the second morning . Tallon and Lindwall batted confidently from the start of the play , and the latter hit two cover drives for four from Bedser after the new ball was taken . O 'Reilly said Lindwall was playing in the same manner as when he made his maiden Test century in the last Ashes series , but he then played around a straight ball from Bedser , and was bowled for 15 to leave the score at 275 / 8 . Tallon kept on batting in a conventional manner , while Johnston and Toshack played <unk> , registering the highest Test scores of their careers . Both Johnston and Toshack swung hard at the ball , which often went in vastly different directions to where they had aimed their shots . Australia 's wicket @-@ keeper put on 45 with Johnston — who scored 29 — before becoming Bedser 's second victim of the morning , holing out to Yardley for 53 . Toshack came out to join Johnston with the score at 320 / 9 and the last pair put on 30 more runs before the latter was stumped from Wright 's leg spin , having overbalanced while leaning onto the front foot and trying to hit a ball for six . The Australians had regained the momentum , adding 92 runs in 66 minutes of hitting in the morning . One sequence of two overs from Edrich was taken for 28 runs , with many balls being unintentionally spooned over the slips or the covers from <unk> . Both Johnston and Toshack — not known for their batting ability — played without inhibitions , joyfully revelling in their luck . Yardley was later criticised for not bringing Wright into the attack at an earlier stage , as the Australian tail was dealing efficiently with the English pacemen . Bedser was the most successful of the bowlers , ending with 4 / 100 from 43 overs , while debutant Coxon took 2 / 90 from 35 overs . The off spin of Laker was used sparingly , accounting for only seven overs , whereas the part @-@ time medium pace of Edrich and Yardley had combined for 23 overs . 
 Washbrook and Hutton then strode to the crease as England faced a short burst of Australian pace before the lunch break . Lindwall took the new ball and felt pain in his groin after delivering the first ball to Hutton . Despite this , Lindwall persevered , and his first over was a maiden . Seeing Lindwall struggle through the pain barrier , Bradman tossed the ball to Miller at the start off the second over to see if he could lift and bowl as well . However , Miller threw the ball back to his captain , indicating that his body would not be able to withstand the strain . This resulted in media speculation that Bradman and Miller had quarrelled . 
 Although Bradman claimed the exchange had been amicable , others disputed this . Teammate Barnes later asserted that Miller had retorted by suggesting Bradman — a very occasional slower bowler — bowl himself . Barnes said the captain " was as wild as a battery @-@ stung brumby " and warned his unwilling bowler that there would be consequences for his defiance . According to unpublished writings in Fingleton 's personal collection , Bradman chastised his players in the dressing room at the end of the play , saying " I 'm 40 and I can do my full day 's work in the field . " Miller reportedly snapped " So would I — if I had fibrositis " ; Bradman had been discharged from the armed services during World War II on health grounds , whereas most of the team had been sent into battle . Miller had crash @-@ landed while serving as a fighter pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force in England and had suffered chronic back trouble ever since . 
 Washbrook had been criticised after the First Test for playing aggressively and taking too many risks early in his innings , having fallen twice to attacking shots . He continued to play in a similar way , rather than adopting the traditional opener 's strategy of not playing at any ball unless it was going to hit the stumps and waiting for the bowlers to tire . Lindwall had Washbrook caught behind for eight in his fourth over , playing at a ball outside off stump , and ended his pre @-@ lunch spell with 1 / 7 from six overs , while Johnston accompanied him from the other end . Neither Hutton nor Washbrook appeared comfortable against the bowling , and the new batsman Edrich tried to hit Lindwall through the off side , leading to a loud appeal for caught behind , which was turned down . After lunch , Hutton did the majority of the scoring , before playing outside a Johnson off break on the front foot and being bowled for 20 to leave England at 32 / 2 . The English opener had been uncertain against Johnson 's spin and played forward too early at a slower ball , which went between a gap between his bat and pad . Compton came in , having been dismissed hit wicket after falling over in the last Test while trying to avoid a bouncer , and Lindwall delivered a few short balls straight away , but the new batsman was not caught off @-@ guard . Lindwall then clean bowled Edrich — who was playing across the line — with an outswinger for five . Edrich had toiled for 70 minutes in scoring those runs . Dollery came out and played the first ball with his pads before being bowled for a duck from the next delivery . Dollery 's bat was still about to start its downward swing towards by the time Lindwall 's outswinger had passed him and hit the stumps . O 'Reilly said Dollery 's inability to deal with Lindwall was typical of English cricket 's lack of answers to express pace bowling . This was part of a six @-@ over post @-@ lunch spell by Lindwall that yielded 2 / 11 as the batsmen appeared unable to deal with his extreme pace . England were 46 / 4 and Australia firmly in control . 
 Compton was joined by his skipper Yardley and after playing defensively for a period , the pair rebuilt the innings , scoring 87 runs in 100 minutes . After the loss of four quick wickets , the Compton and Yardley elected to not play at any balls that were not on the line of the stumps , and Lindwall and Johnston were taken off to recuperate ahead of the second new ball . Australia had the option of taking the new ball just before the tea break , but Bradman decided to wait so his two pacemen could have an extra 20 minutes to replenish their energy levels . Meanwhile , Johnson and Toshack operated , and the English duo played them cautiously and comfortably . At tea , England had recovered to be 129 / 4 , with Compton on 51 and Yardley 42 . The English captain had been particularly successful against Johnson , capitalising on a series of overpitched balls and driving them away for runs . After tea , Lindwall and Johnston returned with the new ball , but the former appeared to be tired and lacking in spirit in his first over . Compton edged Johnston into the slips , where Miller took a low catch , ending his innings for 53 . One run later , Lindwall clipped Yardley 's off stump with the first ball of the next over to leave England at 134 / 6 ; the home skipper had made 44 before an outswinger had evaded his bat as he attempted to play a back foot defensive shot . Evans came to the crease and tried to counter @-@ attack , hitting Lindwall for a boundary past square leg . Johnston then removed Evans for nine , caught by a diving Miller from a swing of the bat wide outside off stump , leaving the hosts at 145 / 7 . 
 Coxon and Laker came to the crease and put on a 41 @-@ run stand for the eighth wicket . After 85 minutes of resistance , Coxon hit a catch back to Johnson , ending his first Test innings for 19 , and Laker was caught behind from the same bowler , having already been dropped twice in the slips . England 's last pair added ten runs to close at stumps on 207 / 9 with Bedser on six and Wright eight , having just avoided the follow on . 
 = = 26 June : Day Three = = 
 On the third morning , Bedser and Wright survived for 20 minutes , and Lindwall tried to break their resistance by aiming a few bouncers at the former . Bedser eventually inside edged a Lindwall bouncer onto his stumps , ending England 's innings at 215 , giving Australia a 135 @-@ run first innings lead . Lindwall ended with 5 / 70 , while Johnson took 3 / 72 and Johnston 2 / 43 . Toshack was the other bowler used , sending down 18 overs for the loss of 23 runs . In later years , Bradman told Lindwall that he pretended not to notice his bowler 's pain . Lindwall was worried his captain had noticed the injury , but Bradman later claimed to have feigned ignorance to allow his paceman to relax . O 'Reilly said Lindwall " bowled as well as any fast bowler can bowl . He always seemed to have the situation sized up correctly and he knew just when to put his all into the task ... and enjoyed a triumph which seldom comes to any bowler . " Arlott praised Lindwall for his subtle variations in pace , line and length , and how he kept the batsman guessing as to what was coming to them . 
 The weather was fine as Australia started their second innings just after noon . From the second ball of the innings , bowled by Bedser , Barnes got off the mark to avoid his pair . Coxon took the new ball at the other end and Barnes and Morris saw it off . In contrast to their English counterparts , the Australian opening pair took a cautious approach to begin with , avoiding the hook shot and not playing at balls that were not going to hit the stumps and established a solid start for themselves . Yardley then introduced Laker , who induced Morris to hit a ball back down the pitch in the air , but the bowler was slow to react to the possibility of a caught and bowled . According to O 'Reilly , most other bowlers would have been able to reach the ball and attempt a catch . Barnes survived a missed stumping opportunity from Laker in the same over when he was on 18 ; he came down the pitch and the ball bounced out of the footmarks and narrowly missed leg stump , but Evans fumbled it , and it went away for four byes . 
 Barnes took advantage of his reprieve to combine with Morris in an opening stand of 122 , as Yardley made frequent bowling changes in an attempt to disrupt their progress . Wright came on and bowled a no ball , which Morris lofted into the crowd for six . Morris stopped shuffling , while Barnes decided to adopt a strategy of pre @-@ emptively moving down the pitch to Laker . Earlier in the tour , Barnes had often been bowled or trapped lbw trying to force off breaks into the leg side . He drove Laker into the pavilion and Australia were 73 / 0 at lunch with Morris on 40 and Barnes 25 , an overall lead of 208 . 
 After lunch , Morris was bowled for 62 , knocking a ball from Wright onto his stumps , after attempting a sweep from a long hop . This brought Bradman in to join Barnes . Yardley surrounded the Australian captain with fielders and Laker beat his bat thrice in an over . Bedser was brought in with the leg trap again in place as he bowled on Bradman 's pads with the second new ball . The Australian captain decided to avoid the danger of being caught at short fine leg from a leg glance by padding the inswingers away with his front leg . Bedser responded by changing his tactics by bowling a series of outswingers , beating the outside edge of his bat three times in a row , narrowly missing the off stump on one occasion . Barnes responded by manipulating the strike and shielding Bradman from Bedser . The Australian opener had little trouble against the leg trap Bedser set for him , scoring freely into the leg side and taking the shine off the new ball . 
 Barnes was also quiet after lunch , and after one long period of defence , he drove Laker for four through the covers , eliciting a round of ironic applause . The Australian opener responded by placing his hand on his chest and bowing to the spectators . Barnes had started slowly , but he accelerated after reaching his half @-@ century . Bradman took two consecutive boundaries from Wright to bring up his fifty . This left Barnes on 96 and Australia at 222 / 1 , half an hour after tea . By this time , the pace of the pitch appeared to have slowed , making batting relatively easy . 
 Barnes lingered for a further ten minutes on 96 before reaching his century with a straight drive from Laker . He had taken 255 minutes and hit ten fours . After registering his century , Barnes became particularly aggressive . Barnes stepped out to attack Laker but missed ; luckily for him , Evans failed to collect the ball as it turned down the leg side . 
 Barnes dispatched one Laker over for 21 runs , including two successive blows over the long on boundary for six , and two fours , and Australia 's lead went past the 400 mark with nine wickets still in hand . Yardley then brought on the part @-@ time left @-@ arm unorthodox spin of Compton , and himself , in an attempt to stem Barnes ' hitting . The Australian finally fell for 141 , caught by Washbrook on the boundary from Yardley . The ball would have gone for another six had it not been intercepted by Washbrook . Barnes had struck 14 boundaries and two sixes in his innings . The speed of his batting had allowed Australia to reach 296 / 2 in minutes , after a 174 @-@ run partnership with Bradman . Yardley bowled Hassett for a golden duck off the inside edge , so Miller came to the crease at 296 / 3 to face Yardley 's hat @-@ trick ball . The Australian all @-@ rounder survived a loud lbw appeal on his first ball , denying the English captain his hat @-@ trick . Despite Yardley 's failure to complete the hat @-@ trick , he had taken four wickets in the match , and was going through an unusually productive period with his semi @-@ regular bowling . While England 's front @-@ line bowlers struggled , Yardley managed 9 wickets at a bowling average of 22 @.@ 66 for the series . His average was second only to Lindwall among all bowlers , and only Bedser ( 18 ) among his players dismissed more batsmen . In contrast , Yardley averaged less than two wickets every three matches throughout his first @-@ class career , at an average above 30 . 
 Bradman was on 89 and heading towards a century in his last Test innings at Lord 's when he fell to Bedser again , this time courtesy of a one @-@ handed diving effort from Edrich . Bradman had been worried by Bedser 's angle into his pads and the leg trap , but the seamer 's leg cutter moved the ball the other way towards the slips and caught Bradman 's outside edge . Bedser had dismissed Bradman all four times so far in the Test series . Brown joined Miller at 329 / 4 after Australia had lost 3 / 33 . The tourists reached stumps at 343 without further loss , Miller striking one six over square leg into the grandstand . He had also offered two chances , but none of the catches were completed . This gave Australia a lead of 478 at the end of the third day , with Miller on 22 and Brown on 7 . In all , England had missed seven catches or stumpings . O 'Reilly said the loss of three quick wickets in the afternoon was not so much a sign of an English revival but Australian complacency due to the large size of the lead . 
 = = 28 June : Day Four = = 
 After the Sunday rest day , Australia resumed with a lead of 478 runs and six wickets in hand . The morning was punctuated by three rain stoppages , which increased England 's chances of saving the game . Just ten minutes after the start of the day 's play , heavy rain intervened . The weather cleared and Miller and Brown moved to lunch on 63 and 32 respectively , having advanced Australia to 409 / 4 . Miller was given a life before lunch when he hit a ball high into the air ; Dollery stood right under it and had ample time to prepare , but dropped the catch . In 88 minutes of play , Australia added a further 66 runs . During this time , the third new ball became available , but England opted not to use it immediately , as the wet and slippery ground had made it hard for the bowlers to grip the ball or run up to the crease with confidence ; the hosts instead waited for drier conditions so they could exercise more control over the ball . However , after a period of using his slower bowlers , Yardley opted to take the new ball , and Miller hit three boundaries to pass 50 , and both batsmen lifted their rate of scoring . It appeared that aside from the need to score quickly in preparation for the declaration , both players found the new ball easier to see than its muddied predecessor . Miller hooked Coxon repeatedly , and drove Bedser for many runs . Bradman was expected to declare just before lunch so he could attack the English openers for a short period before the adjournment , but a shower at this time deterred him from doing so , as his bowlers would have struggled to grip the ball ; Lindwall had also been injured on a slippery surface in earlier times . 
 After the resumption of play , Brown was caught behind from Coxon for 32 without adding to his lunch score , ending an 87 @-@ run partnership with Miller , and bringing Lindwall to the crease at 416 / 5 . Miller and Lindwall attacked at every opportunity before the declaration . Miller 's innings was noted for its driving , and he was out for 74 , playing a hook shot that was caught by Bedser at square leg from Laker in pursuit of quick runs . He was followed by Lindwall , who ran out of his crease in attempt to hit Laker across the line to the boundary , missed , and was stumped for 25 , prompting Bradman to declare with Australia at 460 / 7 with a lead of 595 runs . The tourists had added 51 runs for the loss of three wickets in approximately an hour 's batting after lunch . Yardley and Laker had been the only multiple wicket @-@ takers , with two each . The Australians had punished the spinners the most , taking more than 3 @.@ 50 runs per over from each of Wright , Laker and Compton . It would take a world record chase from England to win the match . 
 Yardley decided to use the medium roller to flatten out the surface , but further showers breathed more life into the pitch , forcing a rain break immediately after the start of England 's run chase . The rain immediately stopped after the players returned to the pavilion , but upon promptly returning to the middle , the rain started again . The players returned after 15 minutes and played for approximately half an hour , before Washbrook and Hutton unsuccessfully appealed against the light . Rain then came again for another 40 minutes , which included the tea break . The weather cleared in time for the normal resumption of play at 4 : 30 after the scheduled adjournment . 
 When the players returned , Lindwall and Johnston extracted steep bounce with the new ball , troubling the English batsmen . However , Washbrook changed his tactics and decided to eschew the hook shot , even allowing some short balls to hit him on the body . Washbrook drove Johnston for three runs and then pulled Lindwall for a four , almost collecting Barnes — who was standing close in at short leg — in the nose . He proceeded to score England 's first 16 runs . Lindwall dropped Hutton from Johnston 's bowling before the English batsman had scored . Johnston usually moved the ball into the right @-@ handed batsmen , but on this occasion the ball went straight on and took the outside of the edge of the bat . Hutton had trouble dealing with Lindwall , and played and missed multiple times in the deteriorating light , hampered by the lack of a sightscreen . Fingleton described it as " probably Hutton 's worst effort in a Test " . In a fidgety display , Hutton played loosely outside the off stump and missed four times in one Johnston over . O 'Reilly said Hutton " seemed to have lost all power of concentration and looked like a man being led to the gallows " , and that he " was little more than a masquerader compared to the Hutton [ of 1938 ] " . Hutton took 32 minutes of batting to score his first run of the innings . 
 Hutton and Washbrook took the score to 42 , England 's highest opening partnership of the series thus far , before the former edged Lindwall to Johnson in the slips and was out for 13 . Edrich and Washbrook were then subjected to repeated short balls , and the latter was hit several times on the fingers while fending down Lindwall 's bouncers , having decided to avoid the hook shot . Edrich ducked so low and so quickly that the top of the stumps could often be seen behind his back . Soon after , Toshack removed both Edrich and Washbrook in quick succession to leave England at 65 / 3 . Edrich , having played only one scoring shot in the preceding 20 minutes , edged an overpitched delivery to Johnson low down in the slips , and decided to stand his ground after the catch was taken . The batsman thought he may have hit a bump ball into the ground before it flew to Johnson , but the umpire ruled otherwise and gave him out . Tallon then took a difficult catch to remove Washbrook . Washbrook inside edged a Toshack full toss directly downwards at Tallon 's ankle . Bradman described the catch as " miraculous " because Tallon had to reach so low , so quickly , in order to take the catch . Up until this point , Washbrook had been beginning to find some fluency and was striking the ball confidently . Arlott speculated that Edrich and Washbrook may have lost concentration after Lindwall was replaced by Toshack , lulled into a false sense of security once Australia 's leading bowler was no longer operating . However , Compton and Dollery added 41 in the last 30 minutes to take England to 106 / 3 at the close of play . Compton was on 29 and Dollery 21 . The latter was particularly fluent in scoring on the leg side and he defied the Australian bowlers resolutely . Lindwall was brought back to put pressure on Dollery , having bowled him for a duck in the first innings , but the batsman had already been in the middle for a short period , and played the pace bowling with more assurance in the second innings . 
 = = 29 June : Day Five = = 
 The final day started poorly for England ; after failing to hit a leg stump full toss for a boundary from the first ball of the day , Compton edged Johnston to a diving Miller at second slip from the second ball of the morning . Compton had aimed a square drive , but the delivery was Johnston 's variation ball , which went away instead of into the batsman . It took the outside edge and flew to a diving Miller , who knocked the ball upwards before falling on his back and completing the catch as the ball went down . Compton stood his ground and waited for the umpire to confirm whether Miller had caught the ball cleanly , and was duly given out by the unhesitating official . O 'Reilly described Miller 's effort as " perhaps the very best slips catch of the whole series and ... a real match @-@ winner . " England had lost a wicket without adding to their overnight total . 
 Yardley and Dollery took the score to 133 before Toshack bowled the former for 11 . He trapped the new man Coxon two balls later in the same over for a duck , leaving England at 133 / 6 . Coxon shuffled across his stumps and missed his first delivery , which hit him in front of the stumps and prompted a loud lbw appeal , and did the same thing to the next ball . During this spell , Toshack conceded only seven runs from eight overs , but was taken off as Bradman wanted to take the new ball and utilise Lindwall and Johnston . In the meantime , Dollery had continued to bat effectively , watching the ball closely onto his bat , and scoring three leg side boundaries from Johnston 's bowling . Eight runs after Coxon 's dismissal , Dollery shaped to duck a Lindwall bouncer , but it skidded through low and bowled him . Lindwall bowled Laker without scoring later in the same over to leave England at 141 / 8 . Evans continued to resist stubbornly , remaining 24 not out as England were bowled out for 186 to cede a 409 @-@ run victory . Johnston had Bedser caught by Hassett for nine before Wright hit Toshack to Lindwall for four . 
 Toshack ended the innings with 5 / 40 , while Lindwall and Johnston took 3 / 61 and 2 / 62 respectively . The dominance of Australia 's three @-@ man seam attack was such that the off spinner Johnson bowled only two of the 78 @.@ 1 overs . Arlott said that while Toshack had the best figures , Lindwall was the pivotal figure . He said that when Lindwall " so patently disturbed Hutton he struck a blow at the morale of the English batting that was never overcome . " O 'Reilly said England 's second innings " had developed into an undignified scramble " and had allowed the Australian bowlers to pick up wickets as though they were playing against a weak county team . He blamed the low standards of county cricket for allowing English batsmen to accumulate large tallies of runs easily while not testing them against formidable bowling . O 'Reilly said they had become soft after many matches against weak opposition , which had not forced them to concentrate as intensely as they would have had to in Test cricket . The gross attendance was 132 @,@ 000 and receipts were £ 43 @,@ 000 — a record for a Test in England . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Wisden 's verdict was that " this convincing victory confirmed the First Test realisations of Australia 's clear superiority at all points . Only on the first day did England provide comparable opposition , and their Selectors must have been very disappointed at the lack of determination by some of the batsmen against an attack again below full strength ... Australia were the better team in batting , bowling , fielding and tactics , but England could not complain of lack of opportunities to wrest the initiative . " Bowes considered England 's attacking policy to be a failure and that , unlike the First Test , " there were no saving graces . " 
 The main talking point after the Test was the controversial omission of England 's leading batsman Hutton for the Third Test . The reason was said to be Hutton 's struggles with Lindwall 's short @-@ pitched bowling in the Second Test . Observers noticed Hutton backing away from the fast bowlers . The English selectors believed such a sight would have a negative effect on the rest of the side — which was not in good batting form — as it was a poor example from a leading batsman . The omission generated considerable acrimony , and pleased the Australians , who felt Hutton was their most formidable opponent with the bat . Former Australian batsman Jack Fingleton pointed out that while Hutton had batted erratically and appeared uncomfortable in the previous Test , he also had a strong track record against the tourists , having made 52 and 64 for the Marylebone Cricket Club against Australia in the lead @-@ up matches , a game in which no other Englishman passed 35 , and made 94 , 76 and 122 retired ill in his last three Test innings during the previous Ashes series of 1946 – 47 . Hutton 's position was taken by debutant George Emmett , who made only 10 and a duck in a rain @-@ shortened draw , and was subsequently dropped for the Fourth Test . 
 Hutton 's controversial exile thus ended after just one Test . However , both E. W. Swanton and Bill Bowes believed Hutton to be a better batsman once he returned to the side . He and Washbrook put on 168 for the first wicket , the first time England had put on more than 42 for the opening stand during the series , as the hosts went on to make 496 , their highest score for the series . The pair added another triple @-@ figure partnership in the second innings . Despite this , Australia 's batsmen set a world record by chasing down 404 on the final day to win by seven wickets and take a series @-@ winning 3 – 0 lead . 
 The events of the Second Test also affected the career paths of other players . England 's inability to cut down the Australians resulted in the dropping of three of their bowlers — Wright , Laker and Coxon — after the Lord 's Test . Coxon 's debut was his only Test match , something believed to be caused more by off @-@ field events than sporting merit . There was a story that he punched Compton — whom he disliked and considered self @-@ important — in the dressing room , but Coxon always denied this . However , there was certainly an altercation and Coxon was never selected again . The match was the last ever Test for Brown , who had struggled out of position in the middle @-@ order , scoring 73 runs at 24 @.@ 33 in three Test innings during the season . He had scored centuries on his previous Test outings at Lord 's in 1934 and 1938 , but the third visit proved to be the end of his international career . 
 After the historic win in the Fourth Test , Australia had five tour matches before the final Test . They won three while two ended in rain @-@ curtailed draws . Australia completed the series in style with an innings victory in the Fifth Test at The Oval to complete a 4 – 0 result . The Fifth Test was the last international match , and the tourists only had seven further matches to negotiate in order to fulfil Bradman 's aim of going through the tour undefeated . Apart from two matches that were washed out after Australia had secured first innings leads of more than 200 , Bradman 's men had little difficulty , winning the remaining five fixtures by an innings . They thus became the first touring Test team to complete an English season undefeated , earning themselves the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 = Béla II of Hungary = 
 Béla the Blind ( Hungarian : Vak Béla ; Croatian : Bela <unk> ; Slovak : Belo <unk> ; c . 1109 – 13 February 1141 ) was King of Hungary and Croatia from 1131 . He was blinded along with his rebellious father Álmos on the order of Álmos 's brother , King Coloman of Hungary . Béla grew up in monasteries during the reign of Coloman 's son Stephen II . The childless king arranged Béla 's marriage with Helena of Rascia , who would become her husband 's co @-@ ruler throughout his reign . 
 Béla was crowned king at least two months after the death of Stephen II , implying that his accession to the throne did not happen without opposition . Two violent purges were carried out among the partisans of his predecessors to strengthen Béla 's rule . King Coloman 's alleged son Boris tried to dethrone Béla but the king and his allies defeated the pretender 's troops in 1132 . In the second half of Béla 's reign , Hungary adopted an active foreign policy . Bosnia and Split seem to have accepted Béla 's suzerainty around 1136 . 
 = = Early years until 1131 = = 
 Béla was the only son of Duke Álmos — the younger brother of King Coloman of Hungary — by his wife , Predslava of Kiev . Historians Gyula Kristó and Ferenc Makk write that Béla was born between 1108 and 1110 . Álmos devised several plots to dethrone his brother . In retaliation , the king deprived Álmos of his ducatus or " duchy " between 1105 and 1108 . Álmos did not give up his ambitions and King Coloman had him and the child Béla blinded between 1112 and 1115 to secure a peaceful succession for his own son , Stephen . According to one of the two versions of these events recorded in the Illuminated Chronicle , the king even ordered that Béla should be castrated but the soldier who was charged with this task refused to execute the order . 
 [ The ] King took the Duke and his infant son Bela and blinded them . He also gave orders that the infant Bela should be castrated . But the man who was instructed to blind them feared God and the sterility of the royal line , and therefore he castrated a dog and brought its testicles to the King . 
 After their blinding , Álmos lived in the monastery of Dömös , which he had founded . Kristó and Makk write that it is probable that Béla lived with his father in the monastery . The Annales Posonienses relates that " the child was growing in the reign of King Coloman 's son , Stephen " , who ascended the throne in 1116 . Having hatched a failed plot against the king , Álmos left the monastery and fled to Constantinople in about 1125 . For unknown reasons , Béla did not follow his father to the Byzantine Empire . The Illuminated Chronicle narrates that he was kept " concealed in Hungary from the fury " of the king . Béla settled in the Pécsvárad Abbey , whose abbot sheltered him in secret . 
 Álmos died in exile on 1 September 1127 . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , Béla 's partisans " revealed to the King , who believed him to have died after his blinding , that Béla was alive " . On hearing this , King Stephen II " rejoiced with great joy , for he knew beyond doubt that he would have no heir " . The king even arranged Béla 's marriage with Helena of Rascia and granted Tolna to the couple around 1129 . 
 King Stephen II died in early 1131 . A late source — the Ottoman Turkish chronicle known as <unk> @-@ i <unk> or The History of the Hungarians — narrates that Béla ascended the throne after his predecessor 's nephew , Saul whom Stephen II had nominated as his heir had died . Béla II was crowned in Székesfehérvár on 28 April , substantiating the reliability of this report . However , no scholarly consensus on the exact circumstances of Béla 's ascension exists . According to Gyula Kristó , Béla was crowned after a civil war between his and Saul 's partisans , but Pál Engel does not mention any conflict related to Béla 's succession . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Consolidation ( 1131 – 1132 ) = = = 
 Béla 's blindness prevented him from administering his kingdom without assistance . He put his trust in his wife and her brother Beloš . Both royal and private charters from Béla 's reign emphasize Queen Helena 's pre @-@ eminent role in the decision @-@ making process , proving that the king regarded his wife as his co @-@ ruler . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , at " an assembly of the realm near Arad " in early to mid @-@ 1131 , Queen Helena ordered the slaughter of all noblemen who were accused of having suggested the blinding of her husband to King Coloman . Béla distributed the goods of the executed magnates between the newly established Arad Chapter and the early 11th @-@ century <unk> Chapter . 
 Béla 's was on good terms with the Holy Roman Empire , jeopardizing the interests of Boleslaw III of Poland who had been warring with the empire . The Polish monarch decided to support a pretender to the Hungarian crown named Boris . Boris was born to King Coloman 's second wife Euphemia of Kiev after his mother was repudiated for adultery . After Boris arrived in Poland , a number of Hungarian noblemen joined him . Others sent messengers to Boris " to invite him that he should come and with their help claim the kingdom for himself " , according to the Illuminated Chronicle . 
 Accompanied by Polish and Rus ' reinforcements , Boris broke into Hungary in mid @-@ 1132 . Béla entered into an alliance with Leopold III , Margrave of Austria . Before launching a counter @-@ attack against Boris , Béla convoked a council on the river Sajó . The Illuminated Chronicle relates that the King asked " the eminent men of Hungary " who were present if they knew whether Boris " was a bastard or the son of King Coloman " . The King 's partisans attacked and murdered all those who proved to be " disloyal and divided in their minds " during the meeting . Boris , who thought that the majority of the Hungarian lords supported his claim , in vain sent one of his partisans to Béla 's camp to incite the King 's retinue to mutiny . 
 [ Samson ] proposed to go to the assembly of the King and there openly and publicly insult him . All approved and [ Boris ] himself , misled by empty hope , gave him great thanks ; for he wanted to complete what he had begun , and he thought that after the King had been thus insulted the kingdom would be his . The King had taken up his station near the river [ Sajó ] , and as he sat in his tent with his nobles and soldiers , behold , [ Samson ] entered and said to the King : " Vile dog , what are you doing with the kingdom ? It is better that your lord [ Boris ] have the kingdom and for your to live in your monastery , as your father did . " There was commotion among the nobles of the realm , and Johannes , the son of Otto , the King 's notary ... , said to Count Bud : " Why are we waiting ? Why do we not seize him ? " As they made to seize him , he hastily leapt upon a horse and fled . 
 Béla tried to persuade the Polish monarch to stop supporting the pretender . However , Boleslaw remained loyal to Boris . In the decisive battle , which was fought on the river Sajó on 22 July 1132 , the Hungarian and Austrian troops defeated Boris and his allies . 
 = = = Expansion ( 1132 – 1139 ) = = = 
 Boleslaw III of Poland could not assist Boris after the Battle of the Sajó . Béla 's allies — Soběslav I of Bohemia and Volodimirko of Peremyshl — invaded Poland each year between 1132 and 1135 . Soběslav regularly — in 1133 , 1134 , 1137 , and 1139 — visited Béla 's court . The Czech monarch even persuaded Lothar III , Holy Roman Emperor to force Boleslaw III to abandon Boris and recognize Béla 's rule in Hungary in August 1135 . 
 Hungary adopted an expansionist policy after Boris 's attempts to dethrone Béla . The chronicler Thomas the Archdeacon relates that <unk> , who became Archbishop of Split in 1136 , " enjoyed great favor with the kings of Hungary " and " often visited their court " . The report suggests that Split accepted Béla II 's suzerainty around 1136 , but this interpretation of the sources is not universally accepted by historians . The exact circumstances surrounding the submission of Bosnia are unknown but the region seems to have accepted Béla 's suzerainty without resistance by 1137 . Historian John V. A. Fine writes that the northeastern regions of the province formed part of Queen Helena 's dowry . The Hungarian army penetrated into the valley of the Rama River , a tributary of the Neretva River , in about 1137 . Although Béla assumed the title King of Rama in token of the new conquest , the permanent occupation of the region is not proven . 
 Hungarian troops participated in a campaign launched by Grand Prince Yaropolk II of Kiev against Vsevolod of Kiev in 1139 . Béla strengthened his alliance with the Holy Roman Empire . For this purpose , he gave financial support to Otto of Bamberg 's missions among the Pomeranians and arranged the engagement of his daughter Sophia with Henry , son of the new German king Conrad III in June 1139 . 
 = = = Last years ( 1139 – 1141 ) = = = 
 According to the Hungarian chronicles , in the last few years of his life Béla became a drunkard . His courtiers took advantage of his drunkenness to receive grants from him . When he was in an alcoholic stupor , he sometimes ordered the execution of innocent men . Béla died on 13 February 1141 , " on the Ides of February , a Thursday " . He was buried in the Székesfehérvár Cathedral . 
 After King Bela had been established in his rule of the kingdom , he indulged himself much with wine . His courtiers found that whatever they asked of the King in his drunkenness he would grant , and after his drunkenness he could not take it back . In his drunkenness he delivered Poch and Saul , who were in religious orders , into the hands of their enemies , and they were killed without cause . 
 = = Family = = 
 Béla married Helena of Rascia upon the initiation of his cousin , King Stephen II at the beginning of 1129 . Helena was a daughter of Uroš I of Rascia and his wife Anna , whose origin is uncertain . Queen Helena gave birth to at least six children . The first of these , the future King Géza II of Hungary , was born in 1130 . Three brothers — Ladislaus , Stephen and Álmos — were born in the early 1130s . Sophia , the first daughter of the royal couple , was born around 1135 ; she died as a nun in Admont Abbey after her engagement with Henry Berengar of Germany was broken . Béla II 's youngest daughter Elisabeth , who was born in about 1140 , married Mieszko III of Poland . 
 The following family tree presents Béla 's ancestors and some of his relatives who are mentioned in the article . 
 * Whether Géza 's first or second wife was his children 's mother is uncertain . 
 = Battle of Arawe = 
 The Battle of Arawe ( also known as Operation Director ) was fought between Allied and Japanese forces during the New Britain Campaign of World War II . The battle formed part of the Allied Operation Cartwheel , and had the objective of serving as a diversion before a larger landing at Cape Gloucester in late December 1943 . The Japanese military was expecting an Allied offensive in western New Britain , and was reinforcing the region at the time of the Allied landing in the Arawe area on 15 December 1943 . The Allies secured Arawe after about a month of intermittent fighting with the outnumbered Japanese force . 
 Initial Allied goals for the landing at Arawe included securing a base for American PT boats and diverting Japanese forces away from Cape Gloucester . The PT boat base was subsequently deemed unnecessary and was never built . Only a small Japanese force was stationed at Arawe at the time , although reinforcements were en route . The main Allied landing on 15 December was successful , despite a failed subsidiary landing and problems coordinating the landing craft . American forces quickly secured a beachhead and dug in . Japanese air units made large @-@ scale raids against the Arawe area in the days after the landing , and in late December Imperial Japanese Army ( IJA ) troops unsuccessfully counterattacked the American force . In mid @-@ January 1944 the American force , reinforced with additional infantry and tanks , launched a brief offensive that pushed the Japanese back . The Japanese units at Arawe withdrew from the area towards the end of February as part of a general retreat from western New Britain . 
 There is no consensus among historians on whether the Allied offensive at Arawe was necessary . While some have argued that the landing served as a useful diversion ahead of the Cape Gloucester operation , others believe that the entire campaign in western New Britain was unnecessary , and that the force employed at Arawe could have been better used elsewhere . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 In July 1942 , the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff directed that the main objective of the Allied forces in the South Pacific and Southwest Pacific area commands was to capture the major Japanese base at Rabaul on the eastern tip of New Britain . From August 1942 , U.S. and Australian forces conducted a series of offensives in New Guinea and the Solomon Islands , with the goals of eliminating Japanese positions in the region and establishing air bases close to Rabaul . The Japanese forces in the area mounted a strong resistance , but were unable to stop the Allied advance . 
 In June 1943 , the Allies launched a major offensive — designated Operation Cartwheel — to capture Rabaul . During the next five months , Australian and U.S. forces under the overall command of General Douglas MacArthur advanced along the north coast of eastern New Guinea , capturing the town of Lae and the Huon Peninsula . U.S. forces under the command of Admiral William Halsey , Jr. simultaneously advanced through the Solomon Islands from Guadalcanal , and established an air base at Bougainville in November . In June , the Joint Chiefs of Staff decided that it was unnecessary to capture Rabaul as the Japanese base there could be neutralized by blockade and aerial bombardment . MacArthur initially opposed this change in plans , it was endorsed by the British and United States Combined Chiefs of Staff during the Quebec Conference in August . 
 The Japanese Imperial General Headquarters assessed the strategic situation in the Southwest Pacific in late September 1943 , and concluded that the Allies would attempt to break through the northern Solomon Islands and Bismarck Archipelago in the coming months en route to Japan 's inner perimeter in the western and central Pacific . Accordingly , reinforcements were dispatched to strategic locations in the area in an attempt to slow the Allied advance . Strong forces were retained at Rabaul , however , as it was believed that the Allies would attempt to capture the town . At the time , Japanese positions in western New Britain were limited to airfields at Cape Gloucester on the island 's western tip and several small way stations which provided small boats travelling between Rabaul and New Guinea with shelter from Allied aerial attacks . 
 On 22 September 1943 , MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) directed Lieutenant General Walter Krueger 's Alamo Force to secure western New Britain and the surrounding islands . This operation had two goals , the first of which was to establish air and PT boat bases to attack the Japanese forces at Rabaul . The second objective was to secure the Vitiaz and Dampier Straits between New Guinea and New Britain so that convoys could safely pass through them en route to conduct further landings along New Guinea 's north coast and beyond . To this end , GHQ directed that both Cape Gloucester and Gasmata on New Britain 's south coast be captured . This offensive was code @-@ named Operation Dexterity . The 1st Marine Division was selected for the Cape Gloucester operation , and the heavily reinforced 126th Regimental Combat Team from the 32nd Infantry Division was to attack Gasmata . 
 Senior Allied commanders disagreed over whether it was necessary to land forces in western New Britain . Lieutenant General George Kenney — commander of the Allied Air Forces in the Southwest Pacific — opposed the landings , arguing that his forces did not need air fields at Cape Gloucester as the existing bases in New Guinea and surrounding islands were adequate to support the planned landings in the region . Vice Admiral Arthur S. Carpender — commander of both the 7th Fleet and the Allied Naval Forces , Southwest Pacific Area — as well as Rear Admiral Daniel E. Barbey — commander of Task Force 76 ( TF 76 ) — supported occupying Cape Gloucester to secure both sides of the straits , but opposed the landing at Gasmata as it was too close to the Japanese air bases at Rabaul . The Gasmata operation was cancelled in early November in response to the concerns raised by Kenney and the Navy as well as intelligence reports that the Japanese had reinforced their garrison there . 
 On 21 November , a conference between GHQ , Kenney , Carpender and Barbey was held in Brisbane at which it was decided to land a small force in the Arawe area . This operation had three goals : to divert Japanese attention from Cape Gloucester , to provide a base for PT boats , and to establish a defensive perimeter and make contact with the Marines once they landed . It was intended that PT boats operating from Arawe would disrupt Japanese barge traffic along the southern shore of New Britain and protect the Allied naval forces at Cape Gloucester from attack . 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 The Arawe area lies on the south coast of New Britain about 100 mi ( 160 km ) from the island 's western tip . Its main geographical feature is Cape Merkus , which ends in the " L " -shaped Arawe Peninsula . Several small islands called the Arawe Islands lie to the southwest of the Cape . 
 In late 1943 , the Arawe Peninsula was covered by coconut trees which formed part of the <unk> Plantation ; the terrain inland from the peninsula and on its offshore islands was swampy . Most of the shoreline in the area has limestone cliffs . There was a small unused airfield 4 mi ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) east of the neck of the Arawe Peninsula , and a coastal trail leading east from Cape Merkus to the Pulie River where it split into tracks running inland and along the coast . The terrain to the west of the peninsula was a trackless region of swamp and jungle , which was very difficult for troops to move through . Several of the beaches in the Arawe area were suitable for landing craft ; the best were House Fireman on the peninsula 's west coast and near the village of Umtingalu to the east of the peninsula 's base . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Alamo Force was responsible for coordinating plans for the invasion of western New Britain . The Arawe landing was scheduled for 15 December as this was the earliest date by which the air bases around Nadzab in New Guinea , which were needed to support the landing , could be made operational . This date also gave the landing force time to conduct essential training and rehearsals . As Arawe was believed to be only weakly defended , Krueger decided to use a smaller force than the one which had been intended for the landing at Gasmata . This force , designated the Director Task Force , was concentrated at Goodenough Island where it was stripped of all equipment not needed for combat operations . Logistical plans called for the assault echelon to carry 30 days worth of general supplies and enough ammunition for three days of intensive combat . After the landing , holdings would be expanded to 60 days worth of general supplies and six days worth of all categories of ammunition other than anti @-@ aircraft ammunition , for which a 10 @-@ day supply was thought necessary . The assault force and its supplies were to be carried in fast ships which could rapidly unload their cargo . 
 The commander of the PT boat force in the Southwest Pacific , Commander Morton C. Mumma , opposed building extensive PT boat facilities at Arawe as he had sufficient bases and Japanese barges normally sailed along the north coast of New Britain . Mumma took his concerns to Carpender and Barbey , who eventually agreed that he would not be required to establish a base there if he thought it unnecessary . Instead , he assigned six boats stationed at Dreger Harbor in New Guinea and Kiriwina Island to operate along the south coast of New Britain east of Arawe each night , and asked only for emergency refuelling facilities at Arawe . 
 The Director Task Force 's commander — Brigadier General Julian W. Cunningham — issued orders for the landing on 4 December . He directed that the Task Force would initially capture the Arawe Peninsula and its surrounding islands and establish an outpost on the trail leading to the Pulie River . The main body of the Director Task Force was to land at House Fireman Beach on the Arawe Peninsula at about dawn . Two troop @-@ sized forces would conduct separate operations about an hour before the main landing . One troop was to capture <unk> Island to the peninsula 's south , as it was believed that the Japanese had established a radio station and a defensive position there which commanded the entrance to Arawe Harbor . The other troop was to land at Umtingalu and establish a blocking position on the coastal trail east of the peninsula . Once the beachhead was secure , amphibious patrols would be conducted to the west of the peninsula in an attempt to make contact with the Marines at Cape Gloucester . U.S. Navy personnel on the planning staff were concerned about these subsidiary landings , as a night @-@ time landing conducted at Lae in September had proven difficult . 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 The Director Task Force was centered around the U.S. Army 's 112th Cavalry Regimental Combat Team ( 112th RCT ) . This regiment had arrived in the Pacific in August 1942 but had not seen combat . It was dismounted and converted to an infantry unit in May 1943 , and undertook an unopposed landing at Woodlark Island ( designated Operation Chronicle ) on 23 June . The 112th Cavalry Regiment was smaller and more lightly armed than U.S. infantry regiments as it had only two battalion @-@ sized squadrons compared to the three battalions in infantry regiments . Moreover , the squadrons were smaller and more lightly equipped than their infantry equivalents . The 112th RCT 's combat support units were the M2A1 howitzer @-@ equipped 148th Field Artillery Battalion and the 59th Engineer Company . The other combat units of the Director Task Force were two batteries of the <unk> Anti @-@ aircraft Artillery Battalion ( Automatic Weapons ) , most of the 236th Anti @-@ aircraft Artillery Battalion ( Searchlight ) , " A " Company of the United States Marine Corps ( USMC ) 1st Amphibious Tractor Battalion and a detachment from the 26th Quartermaster War Dog Platoon . The 2nd Battalion of the 158th Infantry Regiment was held in reserve to reinforce the Director Task Force if required . Several engineer , medical , ordnance and other support units were scheduled to arrive at Arawe after the landing was completed . Cunningham requested a battery equipped with 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 54 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns , but none were available . The U.S. Navy 's Beach Party Number 1 would also be landed with the Director Task Force and remain at Arawe until the beachhead was secured . 
 The Director Task Force was supported by Allied naval and air units . The naval force was drawn from TF 76 and comprised U.S. Navy destroyers USS Conyngham ( Barbey 's flagship ) , Shaw , Drayton , Bagley , Reid , Smith , Lamson , Flusser and Mahan and a transport group with destroyer transports USS Humphreys and Sands , the Australian landing ship infantry HMAS Westralia , landing ship dock USS Carter Hall , two patrol craft and two submarine chasers . The naval force also included a service group with three LSTs , three tugboats and the destroyer tender USS Rigel . United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) and Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) units operating under the Fifth Air Force would support the landing , but only limited air support was to be available after 15 December as the available aircraft were needed for strategic missions against Japanese bases . 
 Australian coastwatchers stationed on New Britain were reinforced during September and October 1943 to provide warning of air attacks from Rabaul bound for the Allied landing sites and to report on Japanese barge and troop movements . In addition to a coastwatching team already in place at Cape Orford near Wide Bay , five other parties were sent to Cape Hoskins , Gasmata , Open Bay ( on the north coast at the base of the Gazelle Peninsula ) , the area south of Wide Bay , and the neck between Wide Bay and Open Bay . The Gasmata party was discovered by the Japanese while en route to its destination and eliminated , but the other teams were in place by the end of October . 
 At the time of the Allied landing , the Arawe area was defended by only a small force , though reinforcements were en route . The Japanese force at Arawe comprised 120 soldiers and sailors organized in two temporary companies drawn from the 51st Division . The reinforcing units were elements of the 17th Division , which had been shipped from China to Rabaul during October 1943 to reinforce western New Britain ahead of the expected Allied invasion . The convoys carrying the division were attacked by U.S. Navy submarines and USAAF bombers and suffered 1 @,@ 173 casualties . The 1st Battalion , 81st Infantry Regiment was assigned to defend Cape Merkus . However , it did not depart Rabaul until December as it needed to be reorganized after suffering casualties when the ship transporting it from China was sunk . In addition , two of its rifle companies , most of its heavy machine guns and all its 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 76 in ) howitzers were retained by the 8th Area Army at Rabaul , leaving the battalion with just its headquarters , two rifle companies and a machine gun platoon . This battalion — which came under the command of Major Masamitsu Komori — was a four @-@ day march from Arawe when the Allies landed . A company of soldiers from the 54th Infantry Regiment , some engineers and detachments from other units were also assigned to the Arawe area . The ground forces at Arawe came under the overall command of General Matsuda , whose headquarters were located near Cape Gloucester . The Japanese air units at Rabaul had been greatly weakened in the months prior to the landing at Arawe by prolonged Allied attacks and the transfer of the 7th Air Division to western New Guinea . Nevertheless , the Imperial Japanese Navy 's ( IJN ) 11th Air Fleet had 100 fighters and 50 bombers based at Rabaul at the time of the landing at Arawe . 
 = = = Preliminary operations = = = 
 The Allies possessed little intelligence on western New Britain 's terrain and the exact location of Japanese forces , so they flew extensive air photography sorties over the region , and small ground patrols were landed from PT boats . A team from Special Service Unit No. 1 reconnoitered Arawe on the night of 9 / 10 December and concluded that there were few Japanese troops in the area . The Japanese detected this party near the village of Umtingalu and strengthened their defenses there . 
 Operation Dexterity was preceded by a major Allied air offensive which sought to neutralize the Japanese air units stationed at Rabaul . From 12 October until early November , the Fifth Air Force frequently attacked the airfields around the town as well as ships in its harbor . Aircraft flying from U.S. Navy aircraft carriers also attacked Rabaul on 5 and 11 November in support of the USMC 's landing at Bougainville . 
 The Allied air forces began pre @-@ invasion raids on western New Britain on 13 November . Few attacks were made on the Arawe area , however , as the Allies hoped to achieve tactical surprise for the landing and did not want to alert the Japanese to their intentions . Instead , heavy attacks were made against Gasmata , Ring Ring Plantation and Lindenhafen Plantation on New Britain 's south coast . The Arawe area was struck for the first time on 6 December and again on 8 December ; little opposition was encountered on either occasion . It was not until 14 December — the day before the landing — that heavy air attacks on Arawe were conducted ; Allied aircraft flew 273 sorties against targets on New Britain 's south coast that day . In addition to these air raids , a force comprising two Australian and two American destroyers ( designated Task Force 74 @.@ 2 ) bombarded the Gasmata area during the night of 29 / 30 November . 
 The Director Task Force was concentrated at Goodenough Island in early December 1943 . The 112th Cavalry was notified that it had been selected for the Arawe operation on 24 November , and departed Woodlark for the short voyage to Goodenough Island in two convoys that sailed on 30 and 31 November . All elements of the regiment were ashore at Goodenough by 2 December . A full @-@ scale rehearsal of the landing was held at the island on 8 December ; this revealed problems with coordinating the waves of boats and demonstrated that some of the force 's officers were insufficiently trained in amphibious warfare . There was insufficient time for further training to rectify these problems , however . At Goodenough , the troopers of the 112th Cavalry were issued with several types of infantry weapons with which they had not previously been equipped . Each of the regiment 's rifle squads received a Browning Automatic rifle and a Thompson submachine gun , and a number of 2 @.@ 36 @-@ inch ( 6 @.@ 0 cm ) bazookas , rifle grenades and flame throwers were also issued . The cavalrymen received little training on the use of these weapons however , and did not know how to make the best use of them in combat . 
 The invasion force boarded transport ships during the afternoon of 13 December , and the convoy sailed at midnight . It proceeded to Buna in New Guinea to rendezvous with most of the escorting destroyers and made a feint north toward Finschhafen before turning toward Arawe after dusk on 14 December . The convoy was detected by a Japanese aircraft shortly before it anchored off Arawe at 3 : 30 am on 15 December , and the 11th Air Fleet at Rabaul began to prepare aircraft to attack it . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Landings = = = 
 Shortly after the assault convoy arrived off Arawe , Carter Hall launched LVT amphibious tractors and Westralia lowered landing craft , both operated by specialized Marine and U.S. Army units . The two large transports departed for New Guinea at 5 : 00 am . The high speed transports carrying " A " and " B " Troops of the 112th Cavalry Regiment 's 1st Squadron closed to within 1 @,@ 000 yd ( 910 m ) of Umtingalu and Pilelo Island respectively , and unloaded the soldiers into rubber boats . 
 " A " Troop 's attempt to land at Umtingalu ended in failure . At about 5 : 25 am , the troop came under fire from machine guns , rifles and a 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) cannon as it was nearing the shore , and all but three of its 15 rubber boats were sunk . Shaw — the destroyer assigned to support the landing — was unable to fire upon the Japanese positions until 5 : 42 am as her crew initially could not determine if the soldiers in the water were in the ship 's line of fire . Once she had a clear shot , Shaw silenced the Japanese force with two salvos from her 5 in ( 130 mm ) guns . The surviving cavalrymen were rescued by small boats and later landed at House Fireman beach ; casualties in this operation were 12 killed , four missing and 17 wounded . 
 The landing conducted by " B " Troop at Pilelo Island was successful . The goal of this operation was to destroy a Japanese radio station believed to be at the village of Paligmete on the island 's east coast . The troop was originally intended to come ashore near Paligmete , but the landing site was switched to the island 's west coast after " A " Troop came under attack . After disembarking from their boats , the cavalrymen advanced east and came under fire from a small Japanese force stationed in two caves near the village of <unk> on the island 's north coast . Ten cavalrymen were detached to contain the Japanese while the remainder of the troop continued to Paligmete . The village proved to be unoccupied , and did not contain the suspected radio station . The majority of " B " Troop then attacked <unk> , using bazookas and flamethrowers to destroy the Japanese positions . One American and seven Japanese soldiers were killed in the fighting . Personnel from the RAAF 's No. 335 Radar Station also landed on Pilelo Island on 15 December , and established a radar station there in 48 hours . 
 The 2nd Squadron , 112th Cavalry Regiment made the main landing at House Fireman Beach . The landing was delayed by a strong current and difficulties forming the LVTs into an assault formation , and the first wave went ashore at 7 : 28 am rather than 6 : 30 am as planned . Destroyers bombarded the beach with 1 @,@ 800 rounds of 5 inch ammunition between 6 : 10 and 6 : 25 am , and B @-@ 25 Mitchells strafed the area once the bombardment concluded , but the landing area was not under fire as the troops approached the beach . This allowed Japanese machine gunners to fire on the LVTs , but these guns were rapidly silenced by rockets fired from SC @-@ 742 and two DUKWs . The first wave of cavalrymen were fortunate to meet little opposition as there were further delays in landing the follow @-@ up waves owing to differences in the speeds of the two types of LVTs used . While the four follow @-@ up waves were scheduled to land at five @-@ minute intervals after the first wave , the second landed 25 minutes after the initial force and the succeeding three waves landed simultaneously 15 minutes later . Within two hours of the landing , all the large Allied ships other than Barbey 's flagship had departed from Arawe . Conyngham remained in the area to rescue the survivors of the landing at Umtingalu , and withdrew later that day . 
 Once ashore , the cavalrymen rapidly secured the Arawe Peninsula . An American patrol sent to the peninsula 's toe met only scattered resistance from Japanese rear guards . More than 20 Japanese located in a cave on the east side of the peninsula were killed by members of " E " Troop and personnel from the squadron headquarters ; the remaining Japanese units in the area retreated to the east . The 2nd Squadron reached the peninsula 's base at 2 : 30 pm , where it began to prepare its main line of resistance ( MLR ) . By the end of 15 December , more than 1 @,@ 600 Allied troops were ashore . The two Japanese Army companies that had been stationed at Arawe withdrew to the northeast , and took up positions at Didmop on the Pulie River about 8 mi ( 13 km ) from the MLR ; the naval unit defending Umtingalu retreated inland in a state of disarray . 
 The Allied naval force off Arawe was subjected to a heavy air raid shortly after the landing . At 9 : 00 am , eight Aichi D3A " Val " dive bombers escorted by 56 A6M5 " Zero " fighters evaded the USAAF combat air patrol ( CAP ) of 16 P @-@ 38 Lightnings . The Japanese force attacked the recently arrived first supply echelon , which comprised five Landing Craft Tank ( LCT ) and 14 Landing Craft Medium ( LCM ) , but these ships managed to evade the bombs dropped on them . The first wave of attackers suffered no losses , but at 11 : 15 am four P @-@ 38s shot down a Zero , and at 6 : 00 pm a force of 30 Zeros and 12 Mitsubishi <unk> " Betty " and Mitsubishi Ki @-@ 21 @-@ II " Sally " bombers was driven off by four P @-@ 38s . The Japanese lost two Zeros in the day 's air actions , but both pilots survived . 
 = = = Air attacks and base development = = = 
 Although the U.S. ground troops faced no opposition in the days immediately after the landing , naval convoys carrying reinforcements to the Arawe area were repeatedly attacked . The second supply echelon came under continuous air attack on 16 December , resulting in the loss of <unk> @-@ 21 as well as damage to SC @-@ 743 , <unk> @-@ 50 and four LCTs . About 42 men on board these ships were killed or seriously wounded . Another reinforcement convoy was attacked three times by dive bombers on 21 December as it unloaded at Arawe . Overall , at least 150 Japanese aircraft attacked Arawe that day . Further air attacks took place on 26 , 27 and 31 December . However , the Allied air forces were able to mount a successful defense of the Arawe area as the coastwatcher parties in New Britain provided 30 to 60 minutes warning of most incoming raids . Between 15 and 31 December , at least 24 Japanese bombers and 32 fighters were shot down near Arawe . During the same time period , Allied air units also raided airfields at Rabaul and Madang in New Guinea which were believed to be the bases of the aircraft which had attacked Arawe . In aerial combat over Rabaul on 17 , 19 , and 23 December , 14 Zeros were shot down by Allied aircraft . The process of unloading ships at Arawe was hampered by air attacks and congestion on House Fireman Beach . The beach party contributed to these delays as it was inexperienced and too small . The resultant problems with unloading LCTs caused some to leave the area before discharging all their cargo . 
 Air attacks on Arawe dropped off after 1 January . As a result of the heavy losses they suffered during attacks on Arawe and Cape Gloucester , and the damage caused by Allied raids on Rabaul , Japanese air units conducted only small @-@ scale raids at night after this date . The IJN fighter units based at Rabaul and nearby Kavieng were also kept busy throughout January and February 1944 defending their bases from continuous Allied air attacks . Few raids were made against the Arawe area after 90 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns were established there on 1 February . These weak attacks did not disrupt the Allied convoys . In the three weeks after the landing , 6 @,@ 287 short tons ( 5 @,@ 703 t ) of supplies as well as 541 artillery guns and vehicles were transported to Arawe . On 20 February , the Japanese air units at Rabaul and Kavieng were permanently withdrawn to Truk , ending any significant aerial threat to Allied forces in New Britain from the IJN . 
 Following the landing , the 59th Engineer Company constructed logistics facilities in the Arawe area . Due to the Japanese air raids , priority was given to the construction of a partially underground evacuation hospital , which was completed in January 1944 . The underground hospital was replaced with a 120 @-@ bed above @-@ ground facility in April 1944 . Pilelo Island was selected for the site of the PT boat facilities , and a pier for refueling the boats and dispersed fuel storage bays were built there . A 172 ft ( 52 m ) pier was constructed at House Fireman Beach between 26 February and 22 April 1944 to accommodate small ships ; three LCT jetties were also built north of the beach . A 920 ft ( 280 m ) by 100 ft ( 30 m ) airstrip was hurriedly built for artillery observation aircraft on 13 January , and this was later upgraded and surfaced with coral . The engineer company also constructed 5 mi ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of all @-@ weather roads in the Arawe region and provided the Director Task Force with water via salt water distillation units on Pilelo Island and wells dug on the mainland . These projects were continuously hampered by shortages of construction materials , but the engineers were able to complete them by improvising and making use of salvaged material . 
 The 112th Cavalry RCT strengthened its defensive positions during the week following the invasion . As " A " Troop had lost all of its weapons and other equipment during the landing attempt at Umtingalu , supplies were air @-@ dropped into the beachhead during the afternoon of 16 December to re @-@ equip the unit . The troop was also assigned 50 replacement personnel . Most of " B " Troop was also transferred from Pilelo Island to the mainland in the days after the landing . The regiment improved its MLR by removing vegetation in order to create clear fields of fire , establishing minefields and wire entanglements and laying down a field telephone network . A reserve defensive line was also established closer to Cape Merkus , and patrols were conducted each day along the shores of the peninsula in search of Japanese personnel attempting to infiltrate the Task Force 's rear area . These patrols located and killed between ten and twenty Japanese near Cape Merkus . In addition , the regiment established a network of observation posts throughout the Arawe area ; these included positions in villages , key positions on the peninsula and on several offshore islands . " G " Troop was assigned to secure Umtingalu , and after doing so the troop established a patrol base at the village as well as two observation posts along the track which connected it to the MLR . 
 = = = Japanese response = = = 
 The commander of the Japanese 17th Division — Lieutenant General Yasushi Sakai — ordered that Arawe be urgently reinforced when he was informed of the landing there . He did not believe that this would be the main Allied effort in western New Britain , however . The force under Komori was ordered to make haste . The 1st Battalion , 141st Infantry Regiment , stationed at Cape <unk> on the south coast of New Britain about 40 mi ( 64 km ) east of Arawe was also directed to move by sea to counter the Allied invasion . One of this battalion 's infantry companies remained at Cape <unk> , however . Komori was appointed the commander of all Japanese forces in the Arawe area , which were subsequently designated the Komori Force . The 1st Battalion , 141st Infantry Regiment landed at the village of Omoi on the night of 18 December , and started overland the next day to link up with Komori at Didmop . The battalion took eight days to cover the 7 mi ( 11 km ) between Omoi and Didmop as it became lost on several occasions while travelling through trackless jungle and paused whenever contact with American forces seemed likely . Komori reached Didmop on 19 December , and gathered the units that had retreated from Umtingalu into his command . On the basis of discussions with personnel who had witnessed the landing at Arawe , Komori mistakenly concluded that they had greatly overestimated the size of the Allied force . As a result , on 20 December he decided to launch a counteroffensive against the American positions . 
 After establishing its beachhead , the Director Task Force conducted a series of reconnaissance patrols . Cunningham had been ordered to gather intelligence on Japanese forces in western New Britain , and on 17 December he dispatched a patrol of cavalrymen in two LCVPs ( Landing Craft , Vehicle , Personnel ) to the west of Arawe to investigate the <unk> River area . These landing craft encountered seven Japanese barges carrying part of the 1st Battalion , 141st Infantry Regiment near Cape Peiho , 20 mi ( 32 km ) west of Arawe , on 18 December . After an exchange of gunfire the U.S. soldiers abandoned their landing craft and returned to Arawe along the coast . Another patrol travelling in LCVPs was fired on by Japanese barges near Umtingalu on 18 December but was able to return to Cape Merkus . Japanese barges were also sighted near Arawe on 23 December . Cunningham believed that a large Japanese force was heading for the beachhead , and contacted Krueger on 24 December to request that the 2nd Battalion of the 158th Infantry Regiment be dispatched to reinforce his command . Krueger agreed to this request , and ordered that three of the battalion 's four infantry companies be sent to Arawe . " G " Company of the 2nd Battalion , 158th Infantry arrived on 27 December and the other two companies reached Arawe in early January . 
 After organizing his force while waiting for the 1st Battalion , 141st Infantry Regiment , Komori began his advance on Arawe on 24 December . He arrived at the airstrip to the north of Arawe during the early hours of Christmas Day . During that morning , elements of the Komori Force ambushed two platoon @-@ sized American patrols traveling in trucks northeast of Umtingalu . The American units withdrew to the village and reinforced " G " Troop 's defensive position there . The American force defeated several Japanese attempts to move around Umtingalu during the day , and killed at least three enemy soldiers . Cunningham believed that the force encountered around Umtingalu was the advance guard of a much larger body of Japanese soldiers advancing from Gasmata , and withdrew the troopers stationed around the village to positions behind the MLR . At 10 : 30 pm that night , 50 Japanese soldiers made a poorly coordinated attack on the MLR . While they succeeded in overrunning some American positions , the Japanese were repulsed by fire from the 112th Cavalry 's 60 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) mortars . The Americans lost one man killed and eight wounded , and estimated that the Japanese had suffered twelve casualties . 
 The Japanese offensive continued after the Christmas Day attack . Two small attacks , each involving 15 soldiers , were made against the eastern edge of the MLR on the nights of 26 and 27 December . These were also repulsed by the 112th Cavalry 's light mortars , and inflicted only a small number of casualties on the American force . On 28 December part of the 112th Cavalry Regiment 's " B " Troop set out from the MLR in an attempt to reach Umtingalu , but withdrew after encountering snipers and some light mortar fire . A platoon from " C " Troop also made an unsuccessful patrol from the western end of the MLR during which it suffered six casualties from Japanese machine gun and rifle fire . The same day , Komori dispatched a force of between 20 and 30 soldiers to destroy the American mortar positions . The Japanese soldiers infiltrated the American positions by wading through swamps at the western end of the MLR , but were detected before they could reach dry land . The Director Task Force mounted a strong response , which included a counterattack by elements of three cavalry troops and a platoon from the 158th Infantry Regiment supported by mortars . The Japanese force suffered 17 casualties . 
 The 1st Battalion , 141st Infantry Regiment arrived in the Arawe area on the afternoon of 29 December , and conducted several small and unsuccessful attacks in early January 1944 before taking up positions about 400 – 500 yd ( 370 – 460 m ) north of the American MLR . These positions comprised shallow trenches and foxholes which were difficult to see . While there were only about 100 Japanese soldiers in the area , they moved their six machine guns frequently , making them difficult targets for American mortars and artillery . 
 = = = American counter @-@ attack = = = 
 An American patrol located the Japanese defensive position on 1 January 1944 . " B " Troop of the 112th Cavalry Regiment launched an attack later that morning , but was beaten off by heavy fire ; the Americans suffered three killed and 15 wounded in this action . On 4 January , " G " Troop incurred three killed and 21 wounded in an unsuccessful attack on well @-@ built Japanese positions . This operation had been conducted without artillery support in an attempt to surprise the Japanese , and also included a feint against Umtingalu involving several LCMs . Further attacks on 6 , 7 and 11 January failed to make any headway , but gave the cavalrymen experience in maneuvering through the Japanese defensive positions . These American operations were conducted on a limited scale as Cunningham and the 112th Cavalry Regiment 's other senior officers believed that the unit had already achieved the goals of the landing at Arawe and did not want to incur unnecessary casualties . 
 On 6 January , Cunningham requested further reinforcements , including tanks , to tackle the Japanese defenses . Krueger approved this request and ordered " F " Company , 158th Infantry Regiment and " B " Company of the USMC 1st Tank Battalion to Arawe ; the two units arrived on 10 and 12 January respectively . The Marine tanks and two companies of the 158th Infantry Regiment subsequently practiced tank @-@ infantry cooperation from 13 to 15 January ; during this period the 112th Cavalry continued to conduct patrols into Japanese @-@ held areas . By this time , the Komori Force had incurred casualties of at least 65 killed , 75 wounded and 14 missing in action as a result of its offensive actions as well as the attacks on it conducted by the Director Task Force . The Japanese were also suffering from severe supply shortages and an outbreak of dysentery . 
 The Director Task Force launched its attack on 16 January . That morning , a squadron of B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bombers dropped one hundred and thirty @-@ six 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bombs on the Japanese defenses , and 20 B @-@ 25s strafed the area . Following an intensive artillery and mortar barrage the Marine tank company , two companies of the 158th Infantry and C Troop , 112th Cavalry Regiment attacked . The tanks led the advance , with each being followed by a group of infantrymen . The cavalry troop and three tanks were initially held in reserve , but were sent into action at 12 : 00 pm to mop up a Japanese position . The attack was successful , and reached its objectives by 4 : 00 pm . Cunningham then directed the force to withdraw to the MLR ; during this part of the operation two Marine tanks — which had become immobile — were destroyed to prevent the Japanese from using them as pillboxes . American engineers destroyed the Japanese defensive position the next day . The Director Task Force suffered 22 killed and 64 wounded in this operation and estimated that 139 Japanese had been killed . 
 Following the American attack , Komori pulled his remaining force back to defend the airstrip . As this was not an Allied objective , the Japanese were not subjected to further attacks by ground troops other than occasional patrol clashes and ambushes . As a result of the supply shortages , many of the Japanese soldiers fell sick . Attempts to bring supplies in by sea from Gasmata were disrupted by U.S. Navy PT boats and the force lacked enough porters to supply itself through overland trails . Komori concluded that his force was serving no purpose , and on 8 February informed his superiors that it faced destruction due to supply shortages . They responded by ordering Komori to hold his positions , though his force was awarded two Imperial citations in recognition of its supposed success in defending the airstrip . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The 1st Marine Division 's landing at Cape Gloucester on 26 December 1943 was successful . The Marines secured the airfields that were the main objective of the operation on 29 December against only light Japanese opposition . Heavy fighting took place during the first two weeks of 1944 when the Marines advanced south to the east of their initial beachhead to secure Borgen Bay . Little fighting took place once this area had been captured and the Marines patrolled extensively in an attempt to locate the Japanese . On 16 February , a Marine patrol from Cape Gloucester made contact with an Army patrol from Arawe at the village of <unk> . On 23 February , the remnants of the Japanese force at Cape Gloucester were ordered to withdraw to Rabaul . 
 The Komori Force was also directed to withdraw on 24 February as part of the general Japanese retreat from western New Britain . The Japanese immediately began to leave their positions , and headed north along inland trails to join other units . The Americans did not detect this withdrawal until 27 February , when an attack conducted by the 2nd Squadron , 112th Cavalry and the Marine tank company to clear the Arawe area of Japanese encountered no opposition . The Director Task Force subsequently established a number of observation posts along the southern coast of New Britain and increased the distances covered by its reconnaissance patrols . Komori fell behind his unit , and was killed on 9 April near San Remo on New Britain 's north coast when he , his executive officer and two enlisted men they were travelling with were ambushed by a patrol from the 2nd Battalion , 5th Marines , which had landed around <unk> and captured Talasea , on the Willaumez Peninsula , in early March . 
 The Japanese force at Arawe suffered much heavier casualties than the Allies . The Director Task Force 's total casualties between 15 December 1943 and the end of major fighting in the area were 118 dead , 352 wounded , and four missing . Most of these casualties were members of the 112th Cavalry Regiment , which suffered 72 killed , 142 wounded and four missing . Japanese casualties over this period were 304 men killed and three captured . 
 In the period immediately after the Japanese withdrawal , the Director Task Force remained at Arawe . In line with standard practice , the 112th Cavalry continued to improve the defensive positions in the area . The regiment also undertook training , and some men were granted leave in Australia and the United States . Combat patrols continued to be conducted in the Arawe region in search of Japanese stragglers . Elements of the 40th Infantry Division began to arrive at Arawe in April 1944 to assume responsibility for garrisoning the area . The 112th Cavalry Regiment was informed that it was to be deployed in New Guinea in early June , and the Director Task Force was dissolved at this time . The regiment sailed for the Aitape area of New Guinea on 8 June and next saw combat there during the Battle of Driniumor River . The 40th Infantry Division maintained a garrison at Arawe until the Australian Army 's 5th Division assumed responsibility for New Britain in late November 1944 . 
 Historians disagree over whether the Arawe operation was worthwhile for the Allies . The official history of the USMC in World War II stated that the presence of two experienced Japanese battalions at Arawe made the 1st Marine Division 's task at Cape Gloucester easier . However , Samuel Eliot Morison wrote in his History of United States Naval Operations in World War II that " Arawe was of small value " as the Allies never used it as a naval base and the garrison stationed in the area after the landings would have been better employed elsewhere . The U.S. Army 's official history concluded that in retrospect the landings at Arawe and Cape Gloucester " were probably not essential to the reduction of Rabaul or the approach to the Philippines " , though the offensive in western New Britain had some benefits and was not " excessively high in casualties " . 
 = Crazier ( Taylor Swift song ) = 
 " Crazier " is a song by American recording artist Taylor Swift . The song was written by Swift and Robert Ellis Orrall and produced by Nathan Chapman with Swift 's aid . The song was featured in both the 2009 film Hannah Montana : The Movie and on its soundtrack . The song is a relaxed ballad with country qualities and lyrics that describe being in love . Swift performed the song as herself during a cameo in the Hannah Montana : The Movie ; this scene was taken from the film and released as a music video for " Crazier " . The song was premiered on Radio Disney and Disney Channel , the latter promoting the home release of the film . The song charting at number seventeen on the Billboard Hot 100 , sixty @-@ four in the Australian Singles Chart , sixty @-@ seven in the Canadian Hot 100 , and one @-@ hundred on the UK Singles Chart . 
 " Crazier " was praised by critics , many of whom named it the best song on the soundtrack . Digital downloads began immediately after the soundtrack 's release on March 23 , 2009 , and led to commercial success in Australia , Canada , the United Kingdom , and the United States . Its highest international peak was at number seventeen on the United States chart , the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Swift co @-@ wrote " Crazier " with Robert Ellis Orrall . The song is set in compound time with six eighth notes per bar . It is played in E major at a moderately fast tempo of 144 beats per minute . Swift 's vocals span one octave , from E3 to B4 . The chorus has the following chord progression , E — B — C # m — A. 
 The song 's appearance in Hannah Montana : The Movie came about after filmmakers approached Swift about using her music in the film . Film officials emailed her asking for a song " that was perfect to fall in love to " and " sort of a country waltz " . Although it was not written intentionally for the film , Swift sent in " Crazier " and the filmmakers " loved it " . In addition , Swift offered to perform the song in the film herself as a cameo appearance . In the film , Swift performs at an open mic fundraiser to save a small town 's treasured park from developers . The quick scene was filmed in a single day , but Swift 's performance impressed film members . Film director Peter Chelsom said , " I 've made a very big mental check to work with her again " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received critical acclaim . Warren Truitt of About.com complimented Swift 's " <unk> [ ing ] " in the ballad . Heather Phares of Allmusic praised the track , calling it " the best song on Hannah Montana : The Movie " . She complimented it for being " more genuine , more effortless , than any of [ Cyrus ' ] or Hannah 's tracks " . James Berardinelli agreed , stating , " Arguably , the movie 's biggest mistake is having Taylor Swift perform a song , since she can sing and the comparison is not flattering to the movie 's star . " Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly described " Crazier " as " a pretty , yearning ballad . " Premiere magazine reviewer Olivia <unk> referred to Swift 's performance one of the film 's " high points " . Peter Hartlaub of The San Francisco Chronicle believed that Swift 's cameo was enjoyable , but also calls it a mistake on the part of the filmmakers , explaining " Swift is so talented that she makes Cyrus seem bland by comparison . " Perry Seibert from TV Guide wrote , " when genuine teen star Taylor Swift shows up to perform [ ... ] she demonstrates all the spontaneity and authenticity that Miley Cyrus lacks . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Crazier " received exclusive airplay on Radio Disney . The song made its debut on the Billboard Hot 100 at number seventy @-@ two on the week ending April 11 , 2009 . " Crazier " rose three spots to number sixty @-@ nine in the following week , but jumped to number thirty @-@ eight on the week ending April 25 , 2009 due to an 87 percent increase in digital downloads . For the week of Saturday , May 2 , 2009 , the song reached its peak on the Hot 100 at number seventeen , selling 110 @,@ 000 downloads . It also peaked at number twenty @-@ eight on the Pop 100 chart . As of November 2014 , Crazier has sold one million copies in the USA . 
 As the song was not officially released to radio as a single , digital sales also accounted for " Crazier " ' s appearance on international charts . The song debuted at number seventy @-@ nine on the week ending April 11 , 2009 . For the week ending May 2 , 2009 , it reached number thirty on Hot Canadian Digital Singles and number sixty @-@ three on the Canadian Hot 100 . " Crazier " reached number fifty @-@ seven on the Australian Singles Chart . The song debuted and peaked at number one @-@ hundred in the UK Singles Chart for the week ending May 16 , 2009 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 " Crazier " ' s music video , directed by Peter Chelsom , featuring excerpts from Hannah Montana : The Movie , which premiered on March 28 , 2009 on Disney Channel . 
 The video begins in its principal setting with Swift and two backup musicians atop a stage in a crowded barn . Swift is dressed in a fitted pastel sundress and plays an acoustic guitar strapped over her shoulder . The backup musicians play the fiddle , the piano , the drum set , and the upright bass . The video then transitions to a clip from Hannah Montana : The Movie in which Miley Stewart ( Cyrus ) spots her love interest , Travis Brody ( Lucas Till ) , riding a brown horse . The video alternates between Swift performing and more film clips . Other scenes include Stewart and Brody riding the brown horse together , Stewart staring out from a red car into the street , Brody swinging from a rope in a waterfall , and the two characters on a date . At the end of the video , the couple are slow dancing while Swift sings . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Adam DeBus = 
 Adam Joseph DeBus , Jr . ( October 7 , 1892 – May 13 , 1977 ) was a German American professional baseball player whose career spanned three seasons , one of which was spent with the Major League Baseball ( MLB ) Pittsburgh Pirates ( 1917 ) . Over his MLB career , DeBus , an infielder , compiled a .229 batting average with nine runs scored , 30 hits , five doubles , four triples , seven runs batted in ( RBIs ) and two stolen bases in 38 games played . Originally , Debus signed with the MLB St. Louis Cardinals out of the Northern League , but his contract was waived after never making an appearance . He then signed with the Pittsburgh Pirates and made his MLB debut on July 14 , 1917 against the Brooklyn Robins . During his career , DeBus weighed 150 pounds ( 68 kg ) and stood at 5 feet 11 inches ( 180 cm ) . He batted and threw right @-@ handed . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Adam Joseph DeBus , Jr. was born on October 7 , 1892 in Chicago to Josephine and Adam DeBus , Sr. , both of Germany . Josephine DeBus , who came to the United States in 1882 , became a naturalized citizen in 1931 . Adam DeBus , Sr. , who came to the United States in 1878 and was naturalized in 1887 , worked as a cook in Chicago . Adam Joseph DeBus , Jr. was his parent 's only child . He was raised to speak German . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
