 The Hamilton Conservatory for the Arts is home to many of the area 's talented young actors , dancers , musicians , singers and visual artists . The school is equipped with a keyboard studio , spacious dance studios , art and sculpting studios , gallery space and a 300 seat recital hall . HCA offers over 90 programs for ages 3 – 93 , creating a " united nations " of arts under one roof . 
 The Hamilton Literacy Council is a non @-@ profit organization that provides basic ( grades 1 – 5 equivalent ) training in reading , writing , and math to English @-@ speaking adults . The council 's service is free , private , and one @-@ to @-@ one . It started to assist adults with their literacy skills in 1973 . 
 Hamilton is home to two think tanks , the Centre for Cultural Renewal and Cardus , which deals with social architecture , culture , <unk> , economics and education and also publishes the <unk> Policy Journal and Comment Magazine . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Hamilton has built on its historical and social background with attractions including the Canadian Warplane Heritage Museum , the HMCS Haida National Historic Site ( Canada 's most famous warship and the last remaining Tribal Class in the world ) , Dundurn Castle ( the residence of a Prime Minister of Upper Canada ) , the Royal Botanical Gardens , the Canadian Football Hall of Fame , the African Lion Safari Park , the Cathedral of Christ the King , and the Workers ' Arts and Heritage Centre . 
 Founded in 1914 , the Art Gallery of Hamilton is Ontario 's third largest public art gallery . The gallery has over 9 @,@ 000 works in its permanent collection that focus on three areas : 19th century European , Historical Canadian and Contemporary Canadian . 
 The McMaster Museum of Art ( MMA ) , founded at McMaster University in 1967 , houses and exhibits the University 's art collection of more than 7 @,@ 000 objects , including historical , modern and contemporary art , the Levy Collection of Impressionist and Post Impressionist paintings , and a collection of over 300 German Expressionist prints . 
 Hamilton has quite an active theatre scene , with the professional company Theatre Aquarius , plus long @-@ time amateur companies , the Players ' Guild of Hamilton and Hamilton Theatre Inc .. Many smaller theatre companies have also opened in the past decade , bringing a variety of theatre to the area . 
 Growth in the arts and culture sector has garnered high level media attention for Hamilton . A Globe and Mail article in 2006 , entitled " Go West , Young Artist , " focused on the growing art scene in Hamilton . The Factory : Hamilton Media Arts Centre , opened up a new home on James Street North in 2006 . Art galleries are springing up on many streets across the City : James Street , King William Street , Locke Street and King Street , to name a few . This , coupled with growth in the downtown condo market which is drawing people back to the core , is affecting the cultural fabric of the city . The opening of the Downtown Arts Centre on Rebecca Street has spurred further creative activities in the core . The Community Centre for Media Arts ( <unk> ) continues to operate in downtown Hamilton . The <unk> works with marginalized populations and combines new media services such as website development , graphic design , video , and information technology , with arts education and skills development programming . 
 The 2009 film <unk> , starring Woody Harrelson as a vigilante superhero , is implied to take place in Hamilton , referred to by its nickname of " Hammer Town " several times throughout the film . It was filmed in Hamilton and Toronto . 
 In March 2015 , Hamilton was host to the <unk> Awards , which featured performances by Hedley , Alanis Morissette and Magic ! . The award ceremony was held at the <unk> Centre in downtown Hamilton . During <unk> , hundreds of local acts performed across the city , bringing thousands of tourists . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Hamilton was the host of Canada 's first major international athletic event , the first Commonwealth Games ( then called the British Empire Games ) in 1930 . Hamilton bid unsuccessfully for the Commonwealth Games in 2010 , losing out to New Delhi in India . On November 7 , 2009 , in Guadalajara , Mexico it was announced that Toronto would host the 2015 Pan Am Games after beating out two rival South American cities , Lima , Peru and Bogota , Colombia . The city of Hamilton co @-@ hosted the Games with Toronto . Hamilton Mayor Fred <unk> said , " the Pan Am Games will provide a ' unique opportunity for Hamilton to renew major sport facilities giving Hamiltonians a multi @-@ purpose stadium , a 50 @-@ metre swimming pool , and an international @-@ calibre velodrome to enjoy for generations to come . ' " 
 The Around the Bay Road Race circumnavigates Hamilton Harbour . Although it is not a marathon distance , it is the longest continuously held long distance foot race in North America . The local newspaper also hosts the amateur Spectator Indoor Games . 
 Hamilton has representation in two professional sports leagues , the Canadian Football League and Major League Lacrosse . Its major sports complexes include Ivor Wynne Stadium and Copps Coliseum ; Hamilton is also home to the Canadian Football Hall of Fame museum . The museum hosts an annual induction event in a week @-@ long celebration that includes school visits , a golf tournament , a formal induction dinner and concludes with the Hall of Fame game involving the local CFL Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats at Ivor Wynne Stadium . 
 In addition to team sports , Hamilton is also home to an auto race track , Flamboro Speedway and Canada 's fastest half @-@ mile harness horse racing track , Flamboro Downs . Another auto race track , Cayuga International Speedway , is located near Hamilton in the Haldimand County community of Nelles Corners , situated between <unk> and Cayuga . 
 Hamilton hosted an NHL team in the 1920s called the Hamilton Tigers . The team folded after a players ' strike in 1925 . Research in Motion CEO Jim Balsillie has shown interest in bringing another NHL team to southern Ontario . The NHL 's Phoenix Coyotes filed for bankruptcy in 2009 and have included within their Chapter 11 reorganization a plan to sell the team to Balsillie and move the team and its operations to Hamilton , Ontario . In late September , however , the bankruptcy judge did not rule in favor of Balsillie . The City plans to continue their fight for an NHL team . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Hamilton is a sister city with Flint , Michigan , and its young amateur athletes compete in the <unk> Games , held alternatively in the two cities since 1958 . Flint and Hamilton hold the distinction of having the oldest continuous sister @-@ city relationship between a U.S. and Canadian city , since 1957 . 
 Other sister cities with Hamilton include : 
 Other city relationships : 
 Porto Alegre ( Brazil ) 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = A Vindication of the Rights of Men = 
 A Vindication of the Rights of Men , in a Letter to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke ; Occasioned by His Reflections on the Revolution in France ( 1790 ) is a political pamphlet , written by the 18th @-@ century British feminist Mary Wollstonecraft , which attacks aristocracy and advocates republicanism . Wollstonecraft 's was the first response in a pamphlet war sparked by the publication of Edmund Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France ( 1790 ) , a defense of constitutional monarchy , aristocracy , and the Church of England . 
 Wollstonecraft attacked not only hereditary privilege , but also the rhetoric that Burke used to defend it . Most of Burke 's detractors deplored what they viewed as his theatrical pity for Marie Antoinette , but Wollstonecraft was unique in her love of Burke 's gendered language . By saying the sublime and the beautiful , terms first established by Burke himself in A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful ( 1756 ) , she kept his rhetoric as well as his argument . In her first unabashedly feminist critique , which Wollstonecraft scholar Claudia Johnson describes as unsurpassed in its argumentative force , Wollstonecraft indicts Burke 's justification of an equal society founded on the passivity of women . 
 In her arguments for republican virtue , Wollstonecraft invokes an emerging middle @-@ class ethos in opposition to what she views as the vice @-@ ridden aristocratic code of manners . Driven by an Enlightenment belief in progress , she derides Burke for relying on tradition and custom . She describes an idyllic country life in which each family has a farm sufficient for its needs . Wollstonecraft contrasts her utopian picture of society , drawn with what she claims is genuine feeling , with Burke 's false theatrical tableaux . 
 The Rights of Men was successful : it was reviewed by every major periodical of the day and the first edition , published anonymously , sold out in three weeks . However , upon the publication of the second edition ( the first to carry Wollstonecraft 's name on the title page ) , the reviews began to evaluate the text not only as a political pamphlet but also as the work of a female writer . They contrasted Wollstonecraft 's " passion " with Burke 's " reason " and spoke condescendingly of the text and its female author . This analysis of the Rights of Men prevailed until the 1970s , when feminist scholars began to read Wollstonecraft 's texts with more care and called attention to their intellectualism . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 = = = Revolution Controversy = = = 
 A Vindication of the Rights of Men was written against the backdrop of the French Revolution and the debates that it provoked in Britain . In a lively and sometimes vicious pamphlet war , now referred to as the Revolution Controversy , which lasted from 1789 until the end of 1795 , British political commentators argued over the validity of monarchy . One scholar has called this debate " perhaps the last real discussion of the fundamentals of politics in [ Britain ] " . The power of popular agitation in revolutionary France , demonstrated in events such as the Tennis Court Oath and the storming of the Bastille in 1789 , reinvigorated the British reform movement , which had been largely moribund for a decade . Efforts to reform the British electoral system and to distribute the seats in the House of Commons more equitably were revived . 
 Much of the vigorous political debate in the 1790s was sparked by the publication of Edmund Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France in November 1790 . Most commentators in Britain expected Burke to support the French revolutionaries , because he had previously been part of the liberal Whig party , a critic of monarchical power , a supporter of the American revolutionaries , and a prosecutor of government malfeasance in India . When he failed to do so , it shocked the populace and angered his friends and supporters . Burke 's book , despite being priced at an expensive three shillings , sold an astonishing 30 @,@ 000 copies in two years . Thomas Paine 's famous response , The Rights of Man ( 1792 ) , which became the rallying cry for thousands , however , greatly surpassed it , selling upwards of 200 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Wollstonecraft 's Rights of Men was published only weeks after Burke 's Reflections . While Burke supported aristocracy , monarchy , and the Established Church , liberals such as William Godwin , Paine , and Wollstonecraft , argued for republicanism , agrarian socialism , anarchy , and religious toleration . Most of those who came to be called radicals supported similar aims : individual liberties and civic virtue . They were also united in the same broad criticisms : opposition to the bellicose " landed interest " and its role in government corruption , and opposition to a monarchy and aristocracy who they believed were unlawfully seizing the people 's power . 
 1792 was the " annus mirabilis of eighteenth @-@ century radicalism " : its most important texts were published , and the influence of radical associations , such as the London Corresponding Society ( LCS ) and the Society for Constitutional Information ( SCI ) , was at its height . However , it was not until these middle- and working @-@ class groups formed an alliance with the genteel Society of the Friends of the People that the government became concerned . After this alliance was formed , the conservative @-@ dominated government prohibited seditious writings . Over 100 prosecutions for sedition took place in the 1790s alone , a dramatic increase from previous decades . The British government , fearing an uprising similar to the French Revolution , took even more drastic steps to quash the radicals : they made ever more political arrests and infiltrated radical groups ; they threatened to " revoke the licences of <unk> who continued to host politicised debating societies and to carry reformist literature " ; they seized the mail of " suspected dissidents " ; they supported groups that disrupted radical events ; and they attacked dissidents in the press . Radicals saw this period , which included the 1794 Treason Trials , as " the institution of a system of <unk> , almost as hideous in its features , almost as gigantic in its stature , and infinitely more pernicious in its tendency , than France ever knew . " 
 When , in October 1795 , crowds threw refuse at George III and insulted him , demanding a cessation of the war with France and lower bread prices , Parliament immediately passed the " gagging acts " ( the Seditious Meetings Act and the <unk> Practices Act , also known as the " Two Acts " ) . Under these new laws , it was almost impossible to hold public meetings and speech was severely curtailed at those that were held . British radicalism was effectively muted during the later 1790s and 1800s . It was not until the next generation that any real reform could be enacted . 
 = = = Burke 's Reflections = = = 
 Published partially in response to Dissenting clergyman Richard Price 's sermon celebrating the French revolution , Burke used the device of a mock @-@ letter to a young Frenchman 's plea for guidance in order to defend aristocratic government , paternalism , loyalty , chivalry , and primogeniture . He viewed the French Revolution as the violent overthrow of a legitimate government . In Reflections , he argues that citizens do not have the right to revolt against their government , because civilizations , including governments , are the result of social and political consensus . If a culture 's traditions were continually challenged , he contends , the result would be anarchy . 
 Burke criticizes many British thinkers and writers who welcomed the early stages of the French Revolution . While the radicals likened the revolution to Britain 's own Glorious Revolution in 1688 , which had restricted the powers of the monarchy , Burke argues that the appropriate historical analogy was the English Civil War ( 1642 – 1651 ) , in which Charles I had been executed in 1649 . At the time Burke was writing , however , there had been very little revolutionary violence ; more concerned with persuading his readers than informing them , he greatly exaggerated this element of the revolution in his text for rhetorical effect . In his Enquiry into the Sublime and Beautiful , he had argued that " large inexact notions convey ideas best " , and to generate fear in the reader , in Reflections he constructs the set @-@ piece of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette forced from their palace at sword point . When the violence actually escalated in France in 1793 with the Reign of Terror , Burke was viewed as a prophet . 
 Burke also criticizes the learning associated with the French philosophes ; he maintains that new ideas should not , in an imitation of the emerging discipline of science , be tested on society in an effort to improve it , but that populations should rely on custom and tradition to guide them . 
 = = = Composition and publication of the Rights of Men = = = 
 In the advertisement printed at the beginning of the Rights of Men , Wollstonecraft describes how and why she wrote it : 
 MR. <unk> 'S Reflections on the French Revolution first engaged my attention as the transient topic of the day ; and reading it more for amusement than information , my indignation was roused by the <unk> arguments , that every moment crossed me , in the questionable shape of natural feelings and common sense . 
 Many pages of the following letter were the effusions of the moment ; but , swelling imperceptibly to a considerable size , the idea was suggested of publishing a short vindication of the Rights of Men . 
 Not having leisure or patience to follow this desultory writer through all the devious tracks in which his fancy has started fresh game , I have confined my strictures , in a great measure , to the grand principles at which he has levelled many ingenious arguments in a very specious garb . 
 So the pamphlet could be published as soon as she finished writing it , Wollstonecraft wrote frantically while her publisher Joseph Johnson printed the pages . In fact , Godwin 's Memoirs of Wollstonecraft tells that the sheets of manuscript were delivered to the press as they were written . Halfway through the work , however , she ceased writing . One biographer describes it as a " loss of nerve " ; Godwin , in his Memoirs , describes it as " a temporary fit of torpor and indolence " . Johnson , perhaps canny enough at this point in their friendship to know how to encourage her , agreed to dispose of the book and told her not to worry about it . Ashamed , she rushed to finish . 
 Wollstonecraft 's Rights of Men was published anonymously on 29 November 1790 , the first of between fifty and seventy responses to Burke by various authors . Only three weeks later , on 18 December , a second edition , with her name printed on the title page , was issued . Wollstonecraft took time to edit the second edition , which , according to biographer Emily Sunstein , " sharpened her personal attack on Burke " and changed much of the text from first person to third person ; " she also added a non @-@ partisan code criticising hypocritical liberals who talk equality but scrape before the powers that be . " 
 = = Structure and major arguments = = 
 Until the 1970s , the Rights of Men was typically considered disorganized , incoherent , illogical , and redolent with ad hominem attacks ( such as the suggestion that Burke would have promoted the crucifixion of Christ if he were a Jew ) . It had been touted as an example of " feminine " emotion tilting at " masculine " reason . However , since the 1970s scholars have challenged this view , arguing that Wollstonecraft employed 18th @-@ century modes of writing , such as the digression , to great rhetorical effect . More importantly , as scholar Mitzi Myers argues , " Wollstonecraft is virtually alone among those who answered Burke in eschewing a narrowly political approach for a wide @-@ ranging critique of the foundation of the Reflections . " Wollstonecraft makes a primarily moral argument ; her " polemic is not a <unk> of Burke 's political theories , but an exposure of the cruel inequities which those theories presuppose . " Wollstonecraft 's style was also a deliberate choice , enabling her to respond to Burke 's Enquiry into the Sublime and Beautiful as well as to Reflections . 
 The style of the Rights of Men mirrors much of Burke 's own text . It has no clear structure ; like Reflections , the text follows the mental associations made by the author as she was writing . Wollstonecraft 's political treatise is written , like Burke 's , in the form of a letter : his to C. J. F. <unk> , a young Frenchman , and hers to Burke himself . Using the same form , metaphors , and style as Burke , she turns his own argument back on him . The Rights of Men is as much about language and argumentation as it is about political theory ; in fact , Wollstonecraft claims that these are inseparable . She advocates , as one scholar writes , " simplicity and honesty of expression , and argument employing reason rather than eloquence . " At the beginning of the pamphlet , she appeals to Burke : " Quitting now the flowers of rhetoric , let us , Sir , reason together . " 
 The Rights of Men does not aim to present a fully articulated alternative political theory to Burke 's , but instead to demonstrate the weaknesses and contradictions in his own argument . Therefore , much of the text is focused on Burke 's logical inconsistencies , such as his support of the American revolution and the Regency Bill ( which proposed restricting monarchical power during George III 's madness in 1788 ) , in contrast to his lack of support for the French revolutionaries . In criticism of Burke 's contradictory support of the Regency Bill along with supporting the rule of monarchy in France , she writes : 
 You were so eager to taste the sweets of power , that you could not wait till time had determined , whether a dreadful delirium would settle into a confirmed madness ; but , prying into the secrets of Omnipotence , you thundered out that God had hurled him from his throne , and that it was the most insulting mockery to recollect that he had been a king , or treat him with any particular respect on account of his former dignity … . I have , Sir , been reading , with a scrutinizing , comparative eye , several of your insensible and profane speeches during the King 's illness . I disdain to take advantage of a man 's weak side , or draw consequences from an unguarded transport — A lion preys not on carcasses ! [ emphasis Wollstonecraft 's ] 
 Wollstonecraft 's goal , she writes , is " to shew you [ Burke ] to yourself , stripped of the gorgeous drapery in which you have enwrapped your <unk> principles . " However , she does also gesture towards a larger argument of her own , focusing on the inequalities faced by British citizens because of the class system . As Wollstonecraft scholar Barbara Taylor writes , " treating Burke as a representative spokesman for old @-@ regime despotism , Wollstonecraft champions the reformist initiatives of the new French government against his ' rusty , baneful opinions ' , and censures British political elites for their opulence , corruption , and inhumane treatment of the poor . " 
 = = Political theory = = 
 = = = Attack against rank and privilege = = = 
 Wollstonecraft 's attack on rank and hierarchy dominates the Rights of Men . She chastises Burke for his contempt for the people , whom he dismisses as the " swinish multitude " , and berates him for supporting the elite , most notably Marie Antoinette . In a famous passage , Burke had written : " I had thought ten thousand swords must have leaped from their scabbards to avenge even a look that threatened her with insult . — But the age of chivalry is gone . " Wollstonecraft 's A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) and An Historical and Moral View of the French Revolution ( 1794 ) extend the specific arguments made in the Rights of Men into larger social and political contexts . 
 Contrasting her middle @-@ class values against Burke 's aristocratic ones , Wollstonecraft contends that people should be judged on their merits rather than on their <unk> . As Wollstonecraft scholar Janet Todd writes , " the vision of society revealed [ in ] A Vindication of the Rights of Men was one of talents , where entrepreneurial , unprivileged children could compete on equal terms with the now wrongly privileged . " Wollstonecraft emphasizes the benefits of hard work , self @-@ discipline , frugality , and morality , values she contrasts with the " vices of the rich " , such as " insincerity " and the " want of natural affections " . She endorses a commercial society that would help individuals discover their own potential as well as force them to realize their civic responsibilities . For her , commercialism would be the great equalizing force . However , several years later , in Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark ( 1796 ) , she would question the ultimate benefits of commercialism to society . 
 While Dissenting clergyman Richard Price , whose sermon helped spark Burke 's work , is the villain of Reflections , he is the hero of the Rights of Men . Both Wollstonecraft and Burke associate him with Enlightenment thinking , particularly the notion that civilization could progress through rational debate , but they interpret that stance differently . Burke believed such relentless questioning would lead to anarchy , while Wollstonecraft connected Price with " reason , liberty , free discussion , mental superiority , the improving exercise of the mind , moral excellence , active benevolence , orientation toward the present and future , and the rejection of power and riches " — quintessential middle @-@ class professional values . 
 Wollstonecraft wields the English philosopher John Locke 's definition of property ( that is , ownership acquired through labour ) against Burke 's notion of inherited wealth . She contends that inheritance is one of the major impediments to the progress of European civilization , and repeatedly argues that Britain 's problems are rooted in the inequity of property distribution . Although she did not advocate a totally equal distribution of wealth , she did desire one that was more equitable . 
 = = = Republicanism = = = 
 The Rights of Men indicts monarchy and hereditary distinctions and promotes a republican ideology . Relying on 17th- and early 18th @-@ century notions of republicanism , Wollstonecraft maintains that virtue is at the core of citizenship . However , her notion of virtue is more individualistic and moralistic than traditional Commonwealth ideology . The goals of Wollstonecraft 's republicanism are the happiness and prosperity of the individual , not the greatest good for the greatest number or the greatest benefits for the propertied . While she emphasizes the benefits that will accrue to the individual under republicanism , she also maintains that reform can only be effected at a societal level . This marks a change from her earlier texts , such as Original Stories from Real Life ( 1788 ) , in which the individual plays the primary role in social reform . 
 Wollstonecraft 's ideas of virtue revolved around the family , distinguishing her from other republicans such as Francis Hutcheson and William Godwin . For Wollstonecraft , virtue begins in the home : private virtues are the foundation for public virtues . Inspired by Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's depictions of the ideal family and the republican Swiss canton , she draws a picture of idyllic family life in a small country village . One scholar describes her plan this way : " vast estates would be divided into small farms , cottagers would be allowed to make enclosures from the commons and , instead of alms being given to the poor , they would be given the means to independence and self @-@ advancement . " Individuals would learn and practice virtue in the home , virtue that would not only make them self @-@ sufficient , but also prompt them to feel responsible for the citizens of their society . 
 = = = Tradition versus revolution = = = 
 One of the central arguments of Wollstonecraft 's Rights of Men is that rights should be conferred because they are reasonable and just , not because they are traditional . While Burke argued that civil society and government should rely on traditions which had accrued over centuries , Wollstonecraft contends that all civil agreements are subject to rational reassessment . Precedence , she maintains , is no reason to accept a law or a constitution . As one scholar puts it , " Burke 's belief in the antiquity of the British constitution and the impossibility of improvement upon a system that has been tried and tested through time is dismissed as nonsense . The past , for Wollstonecraft , is a scene of superstition , oppression , and ignorance . " Wollstonecraft believed powerfully in the Enlightenment notion of progress , and rejected the contention that ancient ideas could not be improved upon . Using Burke 's own architectural language , she asks , " why was it a duty to repair an ancient castle , built in barbarous ages , of Gothic materials ? " She also notes , pointedly , that Burke 's philosophy condones slavery : 
 [ T ] he whole tenor of his plausible arguments settles slavery on an everlasting foundation . Allowing his servile reverence for antiquity , and prudent attention to self @-@ interest , to have the force which he insists on , the slave trade ought never to be abolished ; and , because our ignorant forefathers , not understanding the native dignity of man , sanctioned a traffic that outrages every suggestion of reason and religion , we are to submit to the inhuman custom , and term an atrocious insult to humanity the love of our country , and a proper submission to the laws by which our property is secured . — Security of property ! Behold , in a few words , the definition of English liberty . And to this selfish principle every nobler one is sacrificed . 
 = = Sensibility = = 
 In the Rights of Men , Wollstonecraft not only endorses republicanism , but also a social contract based on sympathy and fellow @-@ feeling . She describes the ideal society in these terms : individuals , supported by cohesive families , connect with others through rational sympathy . Strongly influenced by Price , whom she had met at Newington Green just a few years earlier , Wollstonecraft asserts that people should strive to imitate God by practicing universal benevolence . 
 Embracing a reasoned sensibility , Wollstonecraft contrasts her theory of civil society with Burke 's , which she describes as full of pomp and circumstance and riddled with prejudice . She attacks what she perceives as Burke 's false feeling , countering with her own genuine emotion . She argues that to be sympathetic to the French revolution ( i.e. , the people ) is humane while to sympathize with the French clergy , as Burke does , is a mark of inhumanity . She accuses Burke not only of insincerity , but also of manipulation , claiming that his Reflections is propaganda . In one of the most dramatic moments of the Rights of Men , Wollstonecraft claims to be moved beyond Burke 's tears for Marie Antoinette and the monarchy of France to silence for the injustice suffered by slaves , a silence she represents with dashes meant to express feelings more authentic than Burke 's : 
 Man preys on man ; and you mourn for the idle tapestry that decorated a gothic pile , and the <unk> bell that summoned the fat priest to prayer . You mourn for the empty pageant of a name , when slavery flaps her wing , and the sick heart retires to die in lonely wilds , far from the abodes of men .... Why is our fancy to be appalled by terrific perspectives of a hell beyond the grave ? — Hell stalks abroad ; — the lash resounds on the slave 's naked sides ; and the sick wretch , who can no longer earn the sour bread of unremitting labour , steals to a ditch to bid the world a long good night — or , neglected in some ostentatious hospital , breathes his last amidst the laugh of mercenary attendants . 
 Such misery demands more than tears — I pause to recollect myself ; and smother the contempt I feel rising for your rhetorical flourishes and <unk> sensibility . 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 = = Gender and aesthetics = = 
 In the Rights of Men , Wollstonecraft challenges Burke 's rhetoric as much as , or more , than his political theory . She begins by redefining the sublime and the beautiful , terms he had established in his Enquiry into the Sublime and Beautiful . While Burke associates the beautiful with weakness and femininity , and the sublime with strength and masculinity , Wollstonecraft writes , " for truth , in morals , has ever appeared to me the essence of the sublime ; and , in taste , simplicity the only criterion of the beautiful . " With this sentence , she calls into question Burke 's gendered definitions ; convinced that they are harmful , she argues later in the Rights of Men : 
 You may have convinced [ women ] that littleness and weakness are the very essence of beauty ; and that the Supreme Being , in giving women beauty in the most <unk> [ sic ] degree , seemed to command them , by the powerful voice of Nature , not to cultivate the moral virtues that might chance to excite respect , and interfere with the pleasing sensations they were created to inspire . Thus confining truth , fortitude , and humanity , within the rigid pale of manly morals , they might justly argue , that to be loved , woman 's high end and great distinction ! they should ' learn to lisp , to <unk> in their walk , and nick @-@ name God 's creatures . ' Never , they might repeat after you , was any man , much less a woman , rendered amiable by the force of those exalted qualities , fortitude , justice , wisdom , and truth ; and thus forewarned of the sacrifice they must make to those austere , unnatural virtues , they would be authorised to turn all their attention to their persons , systematically neglecting morals to secure beauty . 
 As Wollstonecraft scholar Claudia Johnson has written , " As feminist critique , these passages have never really been surpassed . " Burke , Wollstonecraft maintains , describes womanly virtue as weakness , thus leaving women no substantive roles in the public sphere and relegating them to uselessness . 
 Wollstonecraft applies this feminist critique to Burke 's language throughout the Reflections . As Johnson argues , " her pamphlet as a whole refutes the Burkean axiom ' to make us love our country , our country ought to be lovely ' " ; Wollstonecraft successfully challenges Burke 's rhetoric of the beautiful with the rhetoric of the rational . She also demonstrates how Burke embodies the worst of his own ideas . He becomes the hysterical , illogical , feminine writer , and Wollstonecraft becomes the rational , masculine writer . Ironically , in order to effect this transposition , Wollstonecraft herself becomes passionate at times , for example , in her description of slavery ( quoted above ) . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The Rights of Men was successful , its price contributing in no small measure : at one shilling and sixpence it was half the price of Burke 's book . After the first edition sold out , Wollstonecraft agreed to have her name printed on the title page of the second . It was her first extensive work as " a self @-@ supporting professional and self @-@ proclaimed intellectual " , as scholar Mary Poovey writes , and : 
 took the form that most people would have considered the least appropriate for a woman — the political disquisition . Requiring knowledge of government ( in which women had no share ) , analytical ability ( of which women theoretically had little ) , and the ambition to participate directly in contemporary events ( of which women were supposed to have none ) , political disquisition was in every sense a masculine domain . 
 Commentaries from the time note this ; Horace Walpole , for example , called her a " hyena in petticoats " for attacking Marie Antoinette . William Godwin , her future husband , described the book as illogical and ungrammatical ; in his Memoirs of Wollstonecraft , he dedicated only a paragraph to a discussion of the content of the work , calling it " intemperate " . 
 All the major periodicals of the day reviewed the Rights of Men . The Analytical Review agreed with Wollstonecraft 's arguments and praised her " lively and animated remarks " . The Monthly Review was also sympathetic , but it pointed out faults in her writing . The Critical Review , the " sworn foe " of the Analytical Review , however , wrote in December 1790 , after discovering that the author was a woman : 
 It has been observed in an old play , that minds have no sex ; and in truth we did not discover this Defender of the Rights of Man to be a Woman . The second edition , however , which often reveals secrets , has attributed this pamphlet to Mrs. Wollstonecraft , and if she assumes the disguise of a man , she must not be surprised that she is not treated with the civility and respect that she would have received in her own person . As the article was written before we saw the second edition , we have presented an acknowledgement of this kind to the necessary alterations . It would not have been sufficient to have corrected merely verbal errors : a Lady should have been addressed with more respect . [ emphasis in original ] 
 The Gentleman 's Magazine followed suit , criticizing the book 's logic and " its absurd presumption that men will be happier if free " , as well as Wollstonecraft 's own presumption in writing on topics outside of her proper domain , commenting " the rights of men asserted by a fair lady ! The age of chivalry cannot be over , or the sexes have changed their ground . " However , the Rights of Men put Wollstonecraft on the map as a writer ; from this point forward in her career , she was well known . 
 Wollstonecraft sent a copy of the book to the historian Catharine Macaulay , whom she greatly admired . Macaulay wrote back that she was " still more highly pleased that this publication which I have so greatly admired from its pathos & sentiment should have been written by a woman and thus to see my opinion of the powers and talents of the sex in your pen so early verified . " William Roscoe , a Liverpool lawyer , writer , and patron of the arts , liked the book so much that he included Wollstonecraft in his satirical poem The Life , Death , and Wonderful Achievements of Edmund Burke : 
 While most of the early reviewers of the Rights of Men , as well as most of Wollstonecraft 's early biographers , criticized the work 's emotionalism , and juxtaposed it with Burke 's masterpiece of logic , there has been a recent re @-@ evaluation of her text . Since the 1970s , critics who have looked more closely at both her work and Burke 's , have come to the conclusion that they share many rhetorical similarities , and that the masculine / logic and feminine / emotion binaries are unsupportable . Most Wollstonecraft scholars now recognize it was this work that radicalized Wollstonecraft and directed her future writings , particularly A Vindication of the Rights of Woman . It is not until after the halfway point of Rights of Men that she begins the dissection of Burke 's gendered aesthetic ; as Claudia Johnson contends , " it seems that in the act of writing the later portions of Rights of Men she discovered the subject that would preoccupy her for the rest of her career . " 
 Two years later , when Wollstonecraft published the Rights of Woman , she extended many of the arguments she had begun in Rights of Men . If all people should be judged on their merits , she wrote , women should be included in that group . In both texts , Wollstonecraft emphasizes that the virtue of the British nation is dependent on the virtue of its people . To a great extent , she collapses the distinction between private and public and demands that all educated citizens be offered the chance to participate in the public sphere . 
 = = = = Contemporary reviews = = = = 
 Analytical Review 8 ( 1790 ) : 416 – 419 . 
 Critical Review 70 ( 1790 ) : 694 – 696 . 
 English Review 17 ( 1791 ) : 56 – 61 . 
 General Magazine and Impartial Review 4 ( 1791 ) : 26 – 27 . 
 Gentleman 's Magazine 61 @.@ 1 ( 1791 ) : 151 – 154 . 
 Monthly Review New Series 4 ( 1791 ) : 95 – 97 . 
 New Annual Register 11 ( 1790 ) : 237 . 
 Universal Magazine and Review 5 ( 1791 ) : 77 – 78 . 
 Walker 's Hibernian Magazine 1 ( 1791 ) : 269 – 271 [ copied from the Gentleman 's Magazine ] 
 = Harry Fox ( sportsman ) = 
 Henry " Harry " Fox ( 30 September 1856 – on or after 30 August 1888 ) was an English businessman , sportsman , and adventurer . He played cricket and rugby for his county , and began climbing mountains in the mid @-@ 1880s . He was part of the Fox family of Wellington , Somerset , and was a partner in the family business , Fox Brothers , a prominent textile manufacturer . 
 Fox played and financed cricket and rugby in Somerset ; he played cricket for Somerset County Cricket Club from 1877 to 1882 , and remained as a vice @-@ president of the club until his death . He founded Wellington Rugby Football Club in 1874 , and was an administrator and captain of the Somerset Rugby Football Union . After retiring as a rugby player , he continued to take part as an umpire . In 1884 he started mountaineering , and within two years he was well @-@ known in the mountain climbing community , and a well @-@ regarded alpine explorer . In 1888 , he and William Frederick Donkin travelled to the Caucasus Mountains in the Russian Empire in a bid to be the first ones to climb <unk> @-@ Tau . The pair , along with their Swiss guides , died in an accident during the expedition . 
 = = Early life and sporting exploits = = 
 Henry Fox was born on 30 September 1856 as the second son of <unk> Crewdson and Mary Augusta . He was educated at Sherborne School . His family owned Fox Brothers , of which he became a partner . In 1874 , he founded Wellington Rugby Football Club . Three years later , he became the honorary secretary , treasurer and captain of the Somerset county rugby football team upon its formation . He was captain in both 1877 and 1878 , playing as a three @-@ quarter back , and remained secretary and treasurer until 1882 . After retiring from the game , he continued as an umpire . Fox appeared in his final match in 1887 , officiating the game between Somerset and Yorkshire . 
 As well as rugby , Fox also played cricket for his county , first appearing for Somerset County Cricket Club in 1877 during a match against Wiltshire . He tended to play as a lower @-@ order batsmen for the county . His highest score in county cricket was 42 runs , made against Kent in 1881 , prior to Somerset 's elevation to first @-@ class status . In June 1882 , he was part of the Somerset team that competed in first @-@ class cricket for the first time , losing by an innings and 157 runs to Lancashire ; Fox scored no runs in either innings , and did not bowl . He made two further first @-@ class appearances that season , and did not appear for Somerset again , due to business engagements . In all , he scored sixteen runs in first @-@ class matches for Somerset at an average of 2 @.@ 66 . After retiring as a player , Fox continued to provide financial support to the cricket club , and remained a vice @-@ president until his death . 
 Fox was also a keen mountaineer ; having started mountain climbing in 1884 , he joined the Alpine Club the following year . He received training initially from William Woodman Graham and then William Cecil Slingsby . According to an article in The Times , he was well regarded by his peers as " a climber of great skill and daring " . He was a very experienced alpine climber , and often climbed without guides , ascending Aiguille du Dru , <unk> , Ober <unk> amongst others in this fashion . With guides , he climbed some of the toughest mountains in the Alps , such as the Matterhorn and the Eiger . 
 = = Death in the Caucasus Mountains = = 
 Fox left Wellington in late July 1888 for the Caucasus Mountains in the Russian Empire , joining up with William Frederick Donkin and Clinton Dent . The three were aiming to become the first climbers to scale <unk> @-@ Tau , one of the few mountains in the region yet to be scaled . The three started from <unk> , though Dent was forced to return home due to ill @-@ health , leaving Fox and Donkin to attempt the climb , along with two Swiss guides . Their initial plan was to climb a glacier on the northern slopes of the mountain , and then make their final ascent on the western side . However , a rock wall on the western slopes prevented this , and they changed their plans to attack the mountain from the east . They planned to meet up with their outfitter to the south @-@ east of the mountain , but after they missed that meeting , a message was sent back to Dent reporting the climbers missing . The Times reported on 6 October that Donkin and Fox , along with their guides , had suffered a mountaineering accident that had led " to the almost certain loss of four lives " . 
 Multiple searches were carried out , including one on the direct order of Tsar Alexander III , but no evidence was found . The Russians did recover items from the climbers ' base camp , including Fox 's diary . Russian authorities , possibly for political reasons , claimed that the climbing party may have probably strayed into <unk> , Georgia , and may have been murdered by the local population , who had rebelled against the Russians not long before . In 1889 , Dent and Douglas <unk> led an expedition to search the area . Although they were unable to find any remains , they did discover a bivouac at around 14 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) on the <unk> @-@ <unk> pass between two glaciers . They recovered a number of personal items from the camp , but found that light climbing gear – rope , ice axes and a camera – were missing . The search party concluded that Donkin and Fox had continued their climb , intending to return to the bivouac , but had fallen while navigating a narrow ridge higher up the mountain . Such a fall would have been thousands of feet , and the winter snow would have covered the climbers ' bodies . So despite conducting a search of the valley floor , no bodies were recovered . 
 For the purposes of his will , Fox 's death was recorded as being " on or since the 30th August , 1888 , at some place unknown . " The value of his personal estate was just over £ 7 @,@ 639 . As he was not married and had no children , his estate was shared between his eldest brother , Charles <unk> , and his four sisters , Sarah , Anna , Alice and Louisa . A cricket pavilion was erected in his memory at Wellington Cricket Club in Somerset , and a mountain in the Dawson Range in Canada was named Mount Fox in his honour . 
 = Simon & Marcy = 
 " Simon & Marcy " is the fourteenth episode of the fifth season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written and storyboarded by Cole Sanchez and Rebecca Sugar , from a story by Patrick McHale , Kent Osborne , and Pendleton Ward . It originally aired on Cartoon Network on March 25 , 2013 together with the fourth season episode " I Remember You " , and as such was advertised as a half @-@ hour special . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Marceline the Vampire Queen ( voiced by Olivia Olson ) reveals that 996 years prior to the events of the series , she and the Ice King ( voiced by Tom Kenny ) — then a human named Simon Petrikov — wandered the post @-@ apocalyptic land after the cataclysmic Mushroom War . 
 " Simon & Marcy " was the last episode to feature Sugar as a storyboard artist . She left after completing the episode in order to create her own series , Steven Universe . The episode received critical acclaim ; many praised its balance of humor and emotions , as well as its exploration of the Ice King 's character . The episode was viewed by 2 @.@ 6 million viewers and received a 0 @.@ 6 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode was later nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Short @-@ format Animation at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards , but lost to Mickey Mouse episode " Croissant de Triomphe " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In the context of the series , Marceline the Vampire Queen is a thousand @-@ year @-@ old vampire . The Ice King is a recurring antagonist of the series , and frequently kidnaps princesses throughout Ooo ; although he is often at odds with Finn and Jake , he is generally not a serious threat . In the fourth season episode " I Remember You " , it was revealed that Marceline and the Ice King had originally met following the events of the mysterious Mushroom War , a cataclysmic war that destroyed modern human society . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 While playing basketball at Marceline 's house , Finn and Jake are surprised to learn that Marceline invited the Ice King to play as well . After the two inquire , Marceline reveals that she had known the Ice King when he was still a human man named Simon Petrikov , 996 years before the timeframe of the episode . 
 The episode then flashes back 996 years , following the destruction of civilization in the mysterious Mushroom War . Simon and Marceline — who Simon affectionately called Marcy — wander the outskirts of a destroyed and unidentified city . After hearing a rustling from the woods , Simon is forced to put on the mysterious ice crown . The crown gives the wearer ice @-@ related magic powers but also drains them of their sanity . Using the power of the crown , Simon freezes what was making the rustling : a deer . Marcy eventually manages to snap Simon out of his bout of craziness , and later that night Simon sings the theme song from the sitcom Cheers to cheer her up . While laughing , Marcy begins to cough , and Simon realizes she is in need of medicine . 
 The two make their way into the ruins of the city looking for chicken soup in order to cure Marcy 's illness . Inside the ruins of a <unk> , Simon and Marcy run into some sort of mutated slime @-@ creature , but Simon manages to knock it out with this crown . The two flee and eventually discover what they believe is a food cart . Hopeful , Simon approaches it , only to realize that the vehicle is actually a mobile clam delivery service . Frustrated , Simon kicks the doors , which alerts several more slime creatures inside the vehicle . Simon , scared and hoping to protect Marcy , pushes the vehicle off of a bridge , and the resulting sound alerts a horde of the mutants . Simon and Marcy run into an alley , but are trapped . As a last resort , Simon places Marcy in an abandoned car and puts the crown on his head . In order to maintain his sanity , he sings the theme to Cheers while he unleashes a blast of ice which stops the mutant hordes in their tracks . Simon is able to eventually snap out of his insanity , and a mysterious sentient mass of bubblegum — presumably one of Princess Bubblegum 's ancestors — subsequently gives him a can of chicken soup . Marcy tells Simon that she loves him . Simon hugs her back saying he loves her too , but calls her Gunter . 
 In the present , Marceline concludes her tale , to a shocked Finn and Jake and an oblivious Ice King . Marceline notes that Marcy and Simon " lived happily ever after " , and Finn , Jake , and herself watch as the Ice King dunks several baskets , still unable to remember his former self . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Simon & Marcy " was storyboarded by Cole Sanchez and Rebecca Sugar , from a story by Patrick McHale , Kent Osborne , and Pendleton Ward . The episode was co @-@ directed by Adam Muto and Nick Jennings ; the former was credited as " supervising director " , whereas the latter handled the art direction . This was the last episode of Adventure Time to feature Sugar as a storyboard artist . She left the series after this episode in order to focus her attention towards her own series , Steven Universe . Sugar explained that she had been working on both Steven Universe and Adventure Time , but by the time she was storyboarding " Simon and Marcy " , she realized the workload was too much and that she had to step down from Adventure Time in order to focus on her own show . According to Sugar , Muto also contributed " additional scenes " to the episode ; she wrote on her official Tumblr that " he really did a lot on this one and put it over the top . " She also noted that " everyone [ working on the series ] was pitching in to make this one special " . 
 The episode features the voice of Ava Acres , who portrays the young version of Marceline . Acres had previously appeared in the third season episode " Memory of a Memory " . As mentioned above , the episode makes notable use of the 1982 song " Where Everybody Knows Your Name " by Gary Portnoy — better known as the theme to the sitcom Cheers . According to Sugar 's father , Rob , on his official YouTube channel , the use of the song started merely as a placeholder . However , as the episode developed , Sugar decided to keep it in the episode . This was notable , as it required that the show purchase the rights to use the original . Muto later revealed that " According to Our New Arrivals " , the theme from the sitcom Mr. Belvedere , was also in the running . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Simon & Marcy " aired on March 25 , 2013 , together with the fourth season episode " I Remember You " . As such , it was advertised by Cartoon Network as a " half @-@ hour special " . The episode was watched by 2 @.@ 6 million viewers , and received a 0 @.@ 6 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 0 @.@ 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds at the time of the broadcast . The episode was the 37th most @-@ watched cable program in the 18 – 49 demographic on the night it aired . The episode first saw physical release as part of the 2013 Jake the Dad DVD , which included 16 episodes from the series ' fourth and fifth seasons . 
 " Simon & Marcy " was critically acclaimed . Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A " , and wrote that " this episode is all about finding [ a home ] in a world that has been completely devastated . " He was particularly pleased with the manner in which the episode balanced serious ideas with comedy , writing that — while the episode was not " super heavy " on laughs — humorous moments like Simon pushing the " <unk> " off a bridge helped to " lighten the mood " in an otherwise dark episode . The site later named the episode one of the ten additional installments of the series that illustrates that " emotional complexity " lies " beneath Adventure Time 's weirdness " . The staff of TV.com wrote that " it 's sort of amazing how Adventure Time has transformed the Ice King from an irritating antagonist to one of the most tragic figures on television " . Furthermore , they felt that the episode successfully balanced excitement and comedy , and that the use of the Cheers theme song were " incredibly poignant " . 
 After the episode aired , Eric Kohn of IndieWire published an article explaining why " ' Adventure Time ' is the best Sci @-@ Fi show on TV right now " . He praised the way in which the episode " deepen [ ed ] the world [ of Ooo ] in all kinds of morbidly fascinating ways . " Furthermore , he compared it to Cormac McCarthy 's book The Road , specifically citing the similarities between the mutant creatures in the episode and the " demented people " in the latter . Kohn ultimately concluded that the series ' " willingness to contemplate [ the themes of the episode ] while sticking to its unique combination of silliness and haunting beauty routinely transforms the show into a wondrous genre experiment . " 
 Kendra Beltran of MTV Geek wrote that the episode " pushed Ice King and Marceline 's history even more into the pits of your heart and twisted it ever so . " She ultimately concluded that the episode was " a touching notch in the Adventure Time realm " . Novelist Lev Grossman , in an interview with NPR praised the backstory of the Ice King and the exploration of his condition , noting that his origin is " psychologically plausible " . Grossman praised the way the series was able to tackle the issues of mental illness , saying : " It 's very affecting . My dad has been going through having Alzheimer 's , and he 's forgotten so much about who he used to be . And I look at him and think this cartoon is about my father dying . " 
 The episode was later nominated for an Primetime Emmy Award for Short @-@ format Animation at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards , but lost to the Mickey Mouse episode " Croissant de Triomphe " . 
 = Hurricane Ida ( 2009 ) = 
 Hurricane Ida was the strongest landfalling tropical cyclone during the 2009 Atlantic hurricane season , crossing the coastline of Nicaragua with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . The remnants of the storm became a powerful nor 'easter that caused widespread damage along coastal areas of the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . Hurricane Ida formed on November 4 in the southwestern Caribbean Sea , and within 24 hours struck the Nicaragua coast with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . It weakened significantly over land , although it restrengthened in the Yucatan Channel to peak winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Hurricane Ida weakened and became an extratropical cyclone in the northern Gulf of Mexico before spreading across the southeastern United States . The remnants of Ida contributed to the formation of a nor 'easter that significantly affected the eastern coast of the United States . 
 Numerous watches and warnings were issued during the hurricane 's existence . Areas from Panama to Maine were affected by either the storm or the nor 'easter low . In Nicaragua , nearly 3 @,@ 000 people evacuated coastal areas ahead of the storm . More extensive evacuations in Mexico relocated over 100 @,@ 000 residents and tourists . In the United States , several counties in Louisiana , Alabama and Florida declared a state of emergency because of fear of significant damage from the storm . Officials issued voluntary evacuations and most schools and non @-@ emergency offices in the region closed . 
 In Central America , Ida brought heavy rainfall to parts of Costa Rica , Nicaragua and Honduras . Several people were reported missing in Nicaragua , however post @-@ storm reports denied these claims . Thousands of buildings collapsed or sustained damage and roughly 40 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Damages from Ida in Nicaragua amounted to at least 46 million córdoba ( $ 2 @.@ 12 million US $ ) . Aside from heavy rainfall in Mexico and Cuba , little impact from Ida was reported in either country . In the United States , the remnants caused substantial damage , mainly in the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . One person was killed by Ida after drowning in rough seas , while six others lost their lives in various incidents related to the nor 'easter . Widespread heavy rainfall led to numerous reports of flash flooding in areas from Mississippi to Maine . Overall , the two systems caused nearly $ 300 million in damage throughout the country . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Ida originated from a weak tropical wave that reached the western Caribbean Sea on November 1 , 2009 . By November 2 , the system spawned an area of low pressure north of Panama which moved very little over the following days . The low became increasingly organized within a favorable environment that allowed deep convection to develop . By November 4 , the low had become sufficiently organized for the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) to classify it as Tropical Depression Eleven . At this time , the depression was situated just southwest of San Andrés Island . Convective banding features became increasingly defined throughout the day and six hours after becoming a depression , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Ida . 
 Light wind shear allowed Ida to quickly intensify as it slowly tracked towards the Nicaraguan coastline . Late on November 4 , microwave satellite imagery depicted an eye @-@ like featured forming within the storm . The storm tracked west @-@ northwestward in response to a weak ridge over the north @-@ central Caribbean Sea and a weak trough over the southwestern Gulf of Mexico ; these features were also responsible for Ida 's slow forward motion . Early on November 5 , the storm intensified into a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale as it passed near the Corn Islands . At approximately 1117 UTC , the center of Ida made landfall near Rio Grande , Nicaragua , with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . After the hurricane moved inland , the high mountains of Nicaragua caused the convection associated with the hurricane to diminish , resulting in rapid weakening . Roughly 18 hours after landfall , Ida weakened to a tropical depression as it turned northward over Honduras . 
 Late on November 6 , Ida re @-@ emerged over water , entering the northwestern Caribbean Sea . Upon moving back over water , the storm quickly began to redevelop , with convection increasing around the center of circulation . Early on November 7 , Ida restrengthened into a tropical storm as it tracked just west of due north . Very warm sea surface temperatures ahead of the system would have allowed for substantial intensification ; however , wind shear over the area quickly increased , resulting in modest strengthening . Later that day , the storm turned northwestward in response to a strong trough over Mexico and a mid @-@ level ridge extending from the Southeast United States to Hispaniola . As Ida neared the Yucatan Channel , an eye redeveloped and the storm quickly intensified into a hurricane . By the morning of November 8 , the storm had attained Category 2 status with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . 
 Late on November 8 , Ida attained its peak intensity with winds of 105 mph ( 160 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 975 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 79 inHg ) . Shortly thereafter , increasing wind shear and forward speed caused the storm to rapidly weaken to a tropical storm . Only a small area of convection remained near the center by the morning of November 9 . Despite the strong shear , the storm quickly re @-@ organized , attaining hurricane status for a third time during the afternoon . Based on readings from a nearby oil platform and reconnaissance data , it was determined that Ida attained its secondary peak intensity near the southeast coast of Louisiana with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . However , this intensification was short @-@ lived as a combination of increasing wind shear and decreasing sea @-@ surface temperatures induced weakening to a tropical storm within three hours . 
 By the morning of November 10 , all of Ida 's convection appeared displaced to the northeast and the forward motion of the storm slowed substantially . Additionally , the storm had begun to undergo an extratropical transition near the United States Gulf Coast . Shortly before making landfall near Dauphin Island , Alabama , the storm completed its extratropical transition . Ida crossed Mobile Bay shortly thereafter and maximum winds decreased below gale @-@ force . After slowly tracking eastward for several hours , the surface circulation of Ida dissipated over the Florida Panhandle . However , energy from the storm led to the formation of a new low off the coast of North Carolina . This new low quickly intensified and became a powerful nor 'easter that caused substantial damage throughout the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . By November 12 , the system attained a minimum pressure of 992 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 29 inHg ) along with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . The extratropical low weakened the following day and moved out to sea after stalling along the North Carolina Coastline . The remnants of the cyclone persisted through November 17 , by which time it had moved over Atlantic Canada . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Central America = = = 
 Shortly after being designated as Tropical Storm Ida on November 4 , the government of Nicaragua issued a tropical storm warning for the entire coastline of Nicaragua , and the government of Columbia also issued a warning for the nearby islands of San Andrés and Providencia . Later that day , a hurricane watch was declared for areas between Bluefields and the Nicaragua – Honduras border . As Ida moved closer to land , the tropical storm warning for San Andrés and Providencia was discontinued . Several hours later , the tropical storm warning and hurricane watch were modified to cover areas south of the Nicaragua – Honduras border to Puerto Cabezas and a hurricane warning was issued for areas south of Puerto Cabezas to Bluefields . After Ida made landfall in Nicaragua , all hurricane advisories were discontinued and replaced by a tropical storm warning . Shortly thereafter , a tropical storm watch was declared for areas along the Honduran coastline between Limón and the Nicaragua – Honduras border . However , all watches and warnings were discontinued once Ida weakened to a tropical depression on November 6 . 
 Throughout Nicaragua , officials evacuated roughly 3 @,@ 000 people from areas prone to flash floods and landslides , as rainfall in excess of 20 in ( 510 mm ) was expected to fall . About 1 @,@ 100 of the evacuees were from Corn Island and Little Corn Island where their homes were not expected to hold up to hurricane @-@ force winds . In Bluefields , roughly 1 @,@ 100 people were evacuated to shelters . Authorities began stockpiling supplies such as food , blankets and water that could supply 20 @,@ 000 people after the storm . Upon the formation of Ida , officials in Costa Rica placed most northern regions under a yellow alert . Personnel from the Costa Rican Red Cross were also placed on standby . In El Salvador , officials raised the disaster alert level to green , the lowest stage of alert , on November 5 . As Ida neared the coastline of Nicaragua , officials in Honduras warned residents of the likelihood of heavy rainfall from the storm . In response to this , the country 's disaster alert level was raised to yellow . 
 = = = Northern Caribbean = = = 
 On November 7 , Tropical Depression Ida re @-@ entered the Caribbean Sea and restrengthened into a tropical storm , prompting the NHC to issue a tropical storm watch for areas between San Felipe , Yucatán and Punta Allen in Mexico as well as in Pinar del Río Province , Cuba . Several hours later , the watches were upgraded to warnings and a new tropical storm warning was declared for Grand Cayman . A tropical storm watch was also issued for Isla de la Juventud and a hurricane watch for areas between Tulum and Cabo Catoche , Mexico . Early on November 8 , the tropical storm warning and hurricane watch for Mexico were modified to include areas from Punta Allen to Playa del Carmen and Tulum to Playa del Carmen respectively . A hurricane warning was also declared for areas between Playa del Carmen and Cabo Catoche . Later that day , the tropical storm warning for Grand Cayman was discontinued as Ida moved away from the island . Early on November 9 , all watches and warnings for Cuba and Mexico were discontinued as Ida moved into the Gulf of Mexico and towards the United States . 
 In Mexico , officials declared a yellow alert , moderate hazard , as Hurricane Ida neared the Yucatan Peninsula on November 9 . Roughly 36 @,@ 000 tourists and 1 @,@ 500 residents were evacuated from coastal areas of Quintana Roo . The Mexican Navy was placed on standby to assist in relief efforts once the storm had passed . Later that day , the alert was raised to red , the highest level , as hurricane @-@ force winds and heavy rains threatened the region . A total of 95 shelters were opened in the state to house the evacuees . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 As Hurricane Ida moved over the Yucatan Channel on November 8 , the NHC issued a hurricane watch for areas between Grand Isle , Louisiana and Mexico Beach , Florida . As the storm moved closer to the states , a tropical storm warning was declared for areas between Grand Isle and Pascagoula , Mississippi , as well as areas between Indian Pass , Florida , and the mouth of the Aucilla River . The hurricane watch was also modified to encompass a smaller area , between Grand Isle and Pascagoula . A hurricane warning was also issued from Pascagoula to Indian Pass . During the afternoon of November 9 , all hurricane watches and warnings were discontinued and the tropical storm warning was modified to include areas between Grand Isle and the mouth of the Aucilla River . As Ida became extratropical , the NHC discontinued all watches and warnings on the storm on November 10 . 
 Due to the threat of large swells , several oil rigs along the Texas coastline were evacuated as a precautionary measure . Workers from the Chevron Corporation and the Anadarko Petroleum Corporation were evacuated from offshore platforms while those working for ConocoPhillips and ExxonMobil remained on site . The Louisiana Offshore Oil Port was also shut down on November 9 as a result of Ida 's passage . As a result of the decreased oil production , the price of oil rose more than $ 1 to $ 78 per barrel . Among the rigs that were damaged was the Transocean Marianas which was drilling the Macondo well . That vessel would be replaced on the Macondo Well by the Deepwater Horizon , which caused the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010 . 
 On November 8 , Lafourche Parish , Louisiana president , Charlotte Randolph , declared a state of emergency for the parish as the storm approached the United States Gulf Coast . Although no evacuations were issued , all schools and government offices were closed through November 10 . Voluntary evacuations were issued for residents in Plaquemines Parish along coastal areas . The Belle Chasse Auditorium was converted into a shelter to house evacuees for the duration of the storm . Grand Isle mayor David <unk> issued voluntary evacuation orders for residents in recreational vehicles and trailers on the island . Nearly 1 @,@ 400 families still living in temporary FEMA homes in Louisiana , in the wake of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita , were urged to stay at home . 
 In Baldwin County , Alabama , a local state of emergency was declared on November 9 as Ida neared landfall . Voluntary evacuations were declared for residents living along coastal areas or in mobile homes . All government offices were closed until November 10 due to the storm . The Baldwin County Coliseum was converted into a shelter to house possible evacuees during the storm as well . In Mississippi , officials advised residents to remain vigilant and discussed possible evacuations . Residents living near Pensacola Beach , Florida , and nearby Perdido Key were urged to evacuate . On November 8 , emergency officials declared a state of emergency in Escambia County . The following day , Walton County was also placed under a state of emergency ahead of Hurricane Ida 's arrival . Voluntary evacuations were issued for residents in low @-@ lying areas and all non @-@ emergency offices were closed until November 10 . The Freeport High School gymnasium was converted into a shelter to house evacuees . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = Nicaragua = = = 
 Throughout Nicaragua , rainfall produced by the storm was significantly less than anticipated according to satellite derived estimates . Initial fears were that more than 15 in ( 380 mm ) of rain would fall ; however , most areas received less than 5 in ( 130 mm ) , especially further inland . A maximum of 9 @.@ 1 in ( 230 mm ) fell in Puerto Cabezas while areas further inland received less than 8 in ( 200 mm ) . The most severe damage took place in <unk> and Corn Island , near where the storm made landfall . There , roughly 80 percent of the structures were destroyed and over 2 @,@ 000 ha ( 4 @,@ 900 acres ) of crops were lost . On Corn Island , 40 homes , 3 schools and a church were destroyed and the electrical and water grids were severely disrupted . Roughly 6 @,@ 000 people from the municipalities of Sandy Bay , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Laguna de Perlas , El Tortuguero and the mouth of the Rio Grande were evacuated to 54 shelters during the storm . Officials stated that 42 people along the Miskito Coast were unaccounted for as they refused to evacuate before the storm . The day after Ida passed through , officials began to assess the full extent of the hurricane 's damage . An estimated 40 @,@ 000 people were left homeless throughout the country and one person was listed as missing . Mayors of severely affected towns reported that there were numerous injuries , missing persons and extensive property damage . In Nicaragua , there were no confirmed fatalities as a result of Ida . 
 Damage from Ida in Nicaragua was estimated to be at least 46 million Nicaraguan córdoba ( $ 2 @.@ 12 million USD ) . A total of 1 @,@ 334 people were injured by the storm throughout the country . Final damage assessments from the Nicaraguan Government for mainland Nicaragua were completed on November 12 . A government report said that 283 homes were destroyed and 1 @,@ 899 others damaged ; 1 @,@ 184 latrines were destroyed and 444 were damaged , and 476 wells were destroyed and 1 @,@ 139 were damaged . 
 Shortly after the storm moved inland , 700 civil defense personnel were deployed to the affected region ; however , due to damaged roads and poor travel conditions , they struggled to reach isolated regions . The Nicaraguan army supplied relief crews with four helicopters and two AN @-@ 2 aircraft for damage surveillance and search @-@ and @-@ rescue missions in the wake of Ida . The government of Nicaragua allocated roughly $ 4 @.@ 4 million in relief funds for those affected by the storm . Several agencies from the United Nations provided residents affected by the storm with relief supplies and donated disaster funds to the country . The United Nations Population Fund provided $ 49 @,@ 000 in funds ; the World Food Programme deployed several rescue vehicles and logistics teams ; UNICEF also provided logistics assistance in the country . OCHA provided $ 2 million in relief funds ; the Government of Sweden provided 400 @,@ 000 Swedish kronor ( $ 55 @,@ 946 USD ) for sanitation and health supplies ; the Netherlands Red Cross also donated 20 @,@ 000 euros ( $ 27 @,@ 226 USD ) for non @-@ food items . 
 = = = Elsewhere in Central America = = = 
 In Costa Rica , the outer bands of Ida brought torrential rainfall , triggering isolated landslides . One of these landslides damaged three homes , leading to officials evacuating five families . Homes near Los <unk> de Cartago were flooded and the sewage system was damaged , resulting in overflow . In Veraguas Province , Panama , severe flooding displaced more 400 people after 84 homes were inundated up to their roofs . A flooding disaster that killed 124 people in El Salvador was initially attributed to Hurricane Ida , although the National Hurricane Center quickly affirmed that the event resulted from a separate tropical low @-@ pressure system in the Pacific . After weakening to a tropical storm , Ida moved over Honduras , where widespread heavy rains fell . A maximum rainfall of 7 @.@ 1 in ( 180 mm ) was recorded in Puerto Lempira . These rains caused some rivers in the country to swell , but none overflowed its banks . In northern areas of Honduras , minor flooding and fallen trees were reported . 
 = = = Northern Caribbean = = = 
 In Cuba , the outer bands of Ida produced widespread heavy rainfall across western areas of the country . A maximum rainfall amount of 12 @.@ 5 in ( 320 mm ) fell in Manuel Lazo , while nearby areas received between 7 and 9 in ( 180 and 230 mm ) . Strong winds , gusting up to 87 mph ( 140 km / h ) in localized areas , accompanied the storm during its passage . Several rivers were swollen due to the rains , including the Cuyaguateje River , which overflowed its banks and flooded nearby areas . In the Yucatan Peninsula , significantly less rain fell due to the asymmetrical structure of Ida even though the peninsula was relatively close to the storm . Isla Holbox , recorded substantial flooding , with roughly 70 percent of the island underwater . However , only minor damage was reported . Little to no beach erosion was sustained in coastal cities such as Cancun ; however , over 50 @,@ 000 tourists were evacuated from Chetumal , Quintana Roo , during the storm . The outer bands of Hurricane Ida also affected Grand Cayman . Moderate rainfall and gusty winds were reported across the island , and waves along the beach were estimated at 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Ahead of Ida 's arrival in the United States , a tight pressure gradient between the hurricane and a high pressure system over the southeastern states resulted in strong winds across southern Florida . These winds , reaching 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) in gusts , caused moderate damage in parts of the state . Roughly 3 @,@ 000 people were left without power in Miami @-@ Dade , Broward and Palm Beach counties . Several trees were reported to have been downed and some uprooted . One car was struck by a broken tree limb during the event . Additionally , moderate beach erosion was reported in counties along the Gulf Coast . Rainfall from the system impacted Florida for two days , resulting in accumulations between 3 and 5 in ( 76 and 127 mm ) in parts of the panhandle . A maximum rainfall of 5 @.@ 41 in ( 137 mm ) fell in Pensacola . Coastal and inland flooding resulted in numerous road closures and schools and non @-@ governmental offices were closed on November 10 . Water rise along the coast was estimated between 3 and 5 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 and 1 @.@ 52 m ) at the height of the storm . Following the storm , a local state of emergency was declared in Wakulla County . Throughout Florida , damage from the storm amounted to $ 265 @,@ 000 . 
 In Alabama , where Ida made landfall , heavy rains resulted in widespread flash flooding . A maximum of 9 @.@ 83 in ( 250 mm ) of rain fell in Opelika during the storm . Several roads in coastal counties were closed after being covered by high water . Heavy rains in central areas of the state also resulted in moderate flooding . In Calhoun County , a three @-@ block area of Anniston was inundated by 2 @.@ 5 ft ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) of water . In addition to the storm 's heavy rains , waves up to 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) caused severe damage along coastal regions . A storm surge of 4 @.@ 38 ft ( 1 @.@ 34 m ) was recorded at Bayou La Batre . The Gulf State Park Pier near Gulf Shores , recently re @-@ opened after being destroyed by Hurricane Ivan in 2004 , was damaged . Damage from beach erosion and coastal resorts amounted to roughly $ 9 million in the state . 
 Before making landfall in Alabama , Hurricane Ida brushed southeastern Louisiana , bringing light to moderate rains and increased surf to the state . Offshore , one person drowned after attempting to assist a boat that let out a distress signal during the storm . The rough seas resulted in moderate to severe beach erosion that caused roughly 1 @,@ 000 ft ( 300 m ) of levee to collapse . The levee collapse led to minor flooding and threatened three homes . The storm cut a new pass through Elmer 's Island to Grand Isle between 100 and 200 ft ( 30 and 61 m ) wide . A maximum sustained wind of 62 mph ( 99 km / h ) and a gust of 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) was recorded at the mouth of the Mississippi River . The highest rainfall total was recorded in Venice at 1 @.@ 16 in ( 29 mm ) . Although not solely caused by Ida , high tides along the Texas coastline led to a few road closures . 
 Minor effects from Ida were also experienced in Mississippi , Georgia and Tennessee . In Mississippi , 4 @.@ 13 in ( 105 mm ) of rain fell in Waynesboro . Some flooding was reported in areas near the Alabama border while winds of up to 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) brought down trees . Along the coast , the hurricane 's storm surge was estimated at between 3 and 3 @.@ 5 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 and 1 @.@ 07 m ) . Heavy rainfall from the storm affected much of Georgia , with a large swath of 3 to 5 in ( 76 to 127 mm ) falling in northern parts of the state . A peak of 7 @.@ 32 in ( 186 mm ) was recorded in <unk> . Additionally , minor rains affected parts of eastern Tennessee , totaling 4 @.@ 11 in ( 104 mm ) on Mount Le Conte . 
 = = = Nor 'easter = = = 
 Along the east coast of the United States , a nor 'easter involving the remnants of Ida resulted in widespread damage along coastal areas . In North Carolina strong winds downed several trees loosened in saturated soil . In Rockingham County , one person was killed after being struck by a branch while driving . Four homes were destroyed along the Outer Banks , and over 500 others were damaged , leaving at least $ 5 @.@ 8 million in losses . Widespread coastal damage and flooding took place in Virginia , as rainfall exceeding 7 in ( 180 mm ) fell in many places and large waves battered beaches . In some areas , roads were closed multiple times due to flooding . Minor damage was also reported as a few homes were inundated with up to 1 ft ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) of water . Some areas reported a storm surge comparable to that of Hurricanes Gloria in 1985 and Isabel in 2003 . Damage from the storm in Virginia was estimated to be at least $ 38 @.@ 8 million , of which $ 25 million was in Norfolk alone . In New York , one person drowned after being caught in rough seas off Rockaway Beach . Total beach losses in the state reached $ 8 @.@ 2 million . 
 = Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji = 
 Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji ( born Leon Dudley Sorabji ; 14 August 1892 – 15 October 1988 ) was an English composer , music critic , pianist and writer . He was one of the 20th century 's most prolific piano composers . 
 As a composer and pianist , Sorabji was largely self @-@ taught , and he distanced himself from the main currents of contemporary musical life early in his career . He developed a highly idiosyncratic musical language , with roots in composers as diverse as Busoni , Debussy and Szymanowski , and he dismissed large portions of the established and contemporary repertoire . 
 A reluctant performer , Sorabji played a few of his works in public between 1920 and 1936 , thereafter " banning " performances of his music until 1976 . Since very few of his compositions were published during those years , he remained in public view mainly by writing essays and music criticism , at the centre of which are his books Around Music and Mi contra fa : The <unk> of a Machiavellian Musician . He had a tendency to seclusion , and in the 1950s he moved from London to the village of Corfe Castle , Dorset , where he spent most of the rest of his life quietly . 
 Sorabji 's music is characterised by frequent use of polyrhythms , complex juxtaposition of tonal and atonal elements , and copious ornamentation . Many of his works contain sections employing strongly contrasting approaches to musical architecture ; some of them use baroque forms , while others are <unk> . His musical output consists of over 100 compositions , ranging from aphoristic pieces to works spanning several hours . Most are for piano solo or feature an important piano part , but he also composed for orchestra , chamber ensembles , organ and other instruments . Partly because of this , Sorabji has been described as a descendant of a tradition of composer @-@ pianists such as Frédéric Chopin , Franz Liszt and Charles @-@ Valentin Alkan . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji was born Leon Dudley Sorabji in Chingford , Essex ( now Greater London ) , on 14 August 1892 . His father , Shapurji Sorabji , was a civil engineer of Parsi parentage from Bombay , India , born on 18 August 1863 . His mother , Madeleine Marguerite Mathilde Sorabji ( née Madeline Matilda Worthy ; 13 August 1866 – 5 May 1959 ) , was English . She is said to have been a singer , pianist and organist , but no evidence has been found to support these claims . They married on 18 February 1892 . Shapurji Sorabji had married in India in 1880 but , as no record of his first wife 's death or his divorce from her has yet been traced , it is possible that he married the composer 's mother bigamously . 
 Very little is known of Sorabji 's biography , particularly his early life and musical beginnings . He studied music with Charles Arthur Trew from the early 1910s until around 1915 , during a private education that is thought to have ended at about the same time . He reportedly started to learn the piano from his mother at an early age , and he later received help ( but no lessons ) from his mother 's friend Emily <unk> @-@ Smith . 
 The first significant insight into Sorabji 's life comes from his correspondence with Peter Warlock , which began in 1913 . At least partly as a result of Warlock 's influence , Sorabji began to focus on composition and music criticism . In those letters he showed great interest in interacting with the world of musicians — an attitude that changed dramatically in later years . The first significant instance of such interaction took place in November 1919 . Sorabji had sent several of his scores , including that of his First Piano Sonata , to Ernest Newman , who paid them no attention . Sorabji then played the piece to Ferruccio Busoni , who expressed some reservations about the work , but gave him a letter of recommendation , which helped Sorabji get it published . 
 Already as a teenager , Sorabji took great interest in recent developments in art music — in the work of Schoenberg , Scriabin , Mahler and Debussy , among others — at a time when they received scant attention in the United Kingdom . This interest , along with his ethnicity , cemented his reputation as an outsider . He and his music had their detractors , but some musicians received his work positively : Frederick Delius , who heard a 1930 radio broadcast of Sorabji playing his own piece Le jardin <unk> : Poem for Piano Solo , sent a letter of admiration to Sorabji ; the French – Swiss pianist Alfred Cortot expressed interest in performing Sorabji 's piano concertos ; and Alban Berg reportedly took an interest in Sorabji 's music . 
 Although Sorabji performed some of his works in the UK and abroad in the 1920s , the most important period of his pianistic career was a result of his friendship with the Scottish composer Erik Chisholm . Their first meeting took place when Sorabji went to Glasgow to premiere his Piano Sonata No. 4 on 1 April 1930 for Chisholm 's Active Society for the Propagation of Contemporary Music . In the Society 's concerts Sorabji played some of the longest works he had written to date : in addition to the Fourth Piano Sonata , he premiered Opus clavicembalisticum and Piano Toccata No. 2 and gave a performance of his Nocturne , " <unk> " . The two remained friends until Chisholm 's death in 1965 , although their correspondence became less frequent after Chisholm moved to South Africa . 
 = = = Ban and seclusion = = = 
 On 10 March 1936 , the pianist John Tobin gave a performance of Pars prima from Opus clavicembalisticum . This performance was highly inadequate , as it lasted twice as long as it should have . Sorabji left before it finished , and later denied having attended it . He gave his last public performance of his music on 16 December 1936 in Glasgow , when he premiered his Piano Toccata No. 2 , and afterwards withdrew from the concert platform for the rest of his life . He later banned unauthorised performances of his music , but it remains unclear when he did so ; Paul Rapoport has argued that it was probably in 1938 or 1939 , but Sorabji 's first announcement of it dates from 1944 . Although the ban was not legally enforceable , Sorabji presented it so sharply and decisively that , for the most part , he achieved his aim . The shift in Sorabji 's attitude to public performances of his music has generally been ascribed to Tobin 's performance , but this explanation has also been described as too simplistic . Apart from misleading reviews of his works by music critics , the deaths of people who were important to him ( Busoni , Warlock and Bernard van Dieren ) , the silence of Sibelius , the changes in Szymanowski 's style and the increasing prominence of Stravinsky and the late Schoenberg have all been put forward as catalysts for his decision to isolate himself from the world of music . The financial implications of his father 's death have also been cited as an important factor . 
 Sorabji left London in 1951 , and in 1956 he settled in " The Eye " , a house that he had built for himself in the village of Corfe Castle . This has been described as a parallel to his distancing from the world of music . 
 = = = Fate of his work = = = 
 From 1936 on , several admirers tried unsuccessfully to persuade Sorabji to record Opus clavicembalisticum . Given that Sorabji had not recorded any of his works , and that none of them had been published since 1931 , his friends and admirers began to be concerned about the fate of his output . The most ambitious attempt to ensure the preservation of his music and writings was initiated by Frank Holliday ( 1912 – 1997 ) , who met Sorabji in 1937 and was his closest friend for about four decades . In the early 1950s Holliday organised the presentation of a letter inviting Sorabji to make recordings of his own music . Sorabji received the letter in 1953 , but made no recordings then , in spite of the enclosed cheque for 121 guineas ( just over £ 127 ) . Holliday 's perseverance and closeness to Sorabji did , however , eventually change Sorabji 's attitude , and several recordings were made in Sorabji 's house between 1962 and 1968 . Holliday also helped with the <unk> broadcast of Sorabji 's music in 1970 ( which took place without Sorabji 's consent ) . Their friendship ended in 1979 as a result of disagreements about some of Sorabji 's decisions . 
 A similar initiative came from Norman Pierre Gentieu ( 1914 – 2009 ) , an American writer who discovered Sorabji by reading his book Around Music just after the Second World War . Because of the post @-@ war shortages in England , Gentieu sent Sorabji some provisions , and the depth of their friendship appears to have been such that he continued to do so for the next four decades . In the early 1950s Gentieu made an offer to Sorabji to pay for the <unk> of his major piano works and to give some copies to selected libraries . All of his unpublished musical manuscripts were eventually microfilmed . Gentieu also sent Sorabji a tape recorder to record some of his music , but Sorabji did not do so . 
 Rapoport has argued that Sorabji 's reluctance to make commercial recordings of his music stemmed from a fear of losing control over the making of future recordings of it , because of UK copyright laws of the time . 
 = = = End of the ban = = = 
 In November 1969 , the Scottish composer Alistair Hinton , then a student at the Royal College of Music in London , discovered Sorabji 's music in the Westminster Music Library while looking for scores of some guitar works by Fernando Sor . Hinton wrote a letter to Sorabji in March 1972 and met him for the first time in Sorabji 's home on 21 August 1972 . He was Sorabji 's closest friend for the last 16 years of Sorabji 's life . 
 Not only did Sorabji , who had not written any music since 1968 , return to composition as a result of Hinton 's interest in his work , but on 24 March 1976 he gave the pianist <unk> Solomon permission to play his works in public ( although it has been claimed that Michael Habermann received tentative approval at an earlier date ) . Several recitals ensued and led to the making of a television documentary on Sorabji , which was broadcast in 1977 . The images in it consisted mostly of still photographs of his house ; there was just one brief shot of Sorabji waving to the departing camera crew . 
 Sorabji went on to take part in two more broadcasts : one in 1979 for the centenary of the birth of composer Francis George Scott , and one in 1980 on BBC Radio 3 , commemorating Nikolai Medtner 's centenary . The former , although lacking any footage of Sorabji , was significant in that it brought about his first meeting with Ronald Stevenson , whose music and writings he had known for more than 20 years . After they met , Sorabji wrote Villa Tasca , a composition for Stevenson . While working on it , Sorabji received his only commission ; it came from Gentieu , acting on behalf of the Philadelphia branch of the Delius Society . Sorabji fulfilled it with Il <unk> d <unk> ( 1979 ) . He dedicated it " To the memory of Delius " and received £ 1 @,@ 000 for it ( equivalent to £ 4 @,@ 563 in present @-@ day terms ) . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Towards the end of his life , Sorabji ceased composing , because of his failing eyesight and difficulties in holding a pen . His health deteriorated severely in 1986 , obliging him to abandon his home and spend several months in a Wareham hospital . In March 1987 , together with his companion Reginald Norman Best ( 1909 – 1988 ) , he moved into a two @-@ room suite in Marley House Nursing Home , a private nursing home in <unk> Newburgh , where he was permanently <unk> and received daily nursing care . In June 1988 he suffered a mild stroke , which left him slightly mentally impaired . He died of heart failure on 15 October 1988 at a little after 7 pm , at the age of 96 . He was cremated in Bournemouth Crematorium on 24 October of that year , and the funeral services took place in Corfe Castle Parish Church on the same day . 
 The Sorabji Archive ( originally called The Sorabji Music Archive ) was founded in 1988 by Hinton ( the sole heir to Sorabji 's oeuvre ) , to disseminate knowledge of Sorabji 's legacy . His musical manuscripts are located in various places across the world . 
 = = Private life = = 
 For a long time , it was difficult to discover many details of Sorabji 's life , as he was extraordinarily private . He almost always refused requests for interviews or information , often with sharp messages and warnings not to approach him again . This has led to numerous misunderstandings , such as that he lived in a castle , because he lived in the Dorset village of Corfe Castle . Since he had independent financial means , he felt no need to be tactful in his dealings with the public , critics and musicians interested in performing his works . " The Eye " , Sorabji 's home in Corfe Castle , had a sign at the gate stating : " Visitors <unk> " . 
 Sorabji was homosexual , and in the early 1920s he consulted Havelock Ellis , a British psychologist and writer on sexual psychology , about it . Ellis held progressive views on the subject , and Sorabji expressed high admiration for him , dedicating his Piano Concerto No. 7 , Simorg @-@ Anka ( 1924 ) , to him as an expression of gratitude . Although Sorabji experienced racial harassment in his youth , his homosexuality caused him greater trouble ; he wrote to Holliday that he had once been blackmailed over it . 
 Sorabji changed his name to demonstrate his strong identification with his Parsi heritage , explaining : 
 It is also stated that my name , my real name , that is the one I am known by , is not my real name . Now one is given one 's name — one 's authentic ones — at some such ceremony as baptism , Christening , or the like , on the occasion of one 's formal reception into a certain religious Faith . In the ancient <unk> Parsi community to which , on my father 's side , I have the honour to belong , this ceremony is normally performed , as in other Faiths , in childhood , or owing to special circumstances as in my case , later in life , when I assumed my name as it now is or , in the words of the legal document in which this is mentioned " ... received into the Parsi community and in accordance with the custom and tradition thereof , is now and will be henceforth known as ... " and here follows my name as now . 
 = = = Relationship with his father = = = 
 Sorabji appears to have had a difficult relationship with his father . Although the father was musically cultured and financed the publication of several of Sorabji 's compositions ( enabling 14 of them to be published between 1921 and 1931 ) , he did not want his son to become a musician . He is also alleged to have brought about the end of his wife 's singing career . 
 Already in 1896 , Sorabji 's father was back in Bombay , where he played a significant role in the development of India 's engineering and cotton machinery industries , among other things . Although he provided his family with financial support , he spent much of his time abroad and on 17 June 1929 bigamously married <unk> <unk> <unk> , causing Sorabji and his mother a substantial loss of fortune . He died in Bad Nauheim , Germany , on 8 July 1932 . In the same year , Sorabji travelled to India to settle matters related to his father 's estate , but obtained nothing but money from a trust fund that his father had established in 1914 . Nevertheless , it saved him from having to earn a living , although his lifestyle was ascetic . 
 = = = Religious views = = = 
 In his early years , Sorabji took an active interest in the occult — according to Rapoport , he was a mystic — and many of his early works contain occult inscriptions . For a time , he was a member of the London Society of Psychical Research . So interested was he in occultism that he even met Aleister Crowley in 1922 , an event that Sorabji found disappointing and caused him to describe Crowley as " the dullest of dull dogs " . His occult interests also led to his friendship with Bernard <unk> ( 1899 – 1957 ) , an English writer on mysticism and a member of the secret order of the Fraternity of Inner Light . <unk> was one of Sorabji 's closest friends for 20 years , acting as joint trustee of the Shapurji Sorabji Trust between 1933 and 1941 and producing an index to Sorabji 's book Around Music . Their relationship ended abruptly in 1942 . 
 Sorabji 's early preoccupation with the occult subsided , and he became more interested in other religions , although it is not known whether he practised any . He was enthusiastic about Parsi culture , but became disillusioned with Parsis after visiting India in 1932 . He embraced only a few of aspects of Zoroastrianism , and in later years he was interested in Roman Catholicism , although he did not take it up . For much of his life he practised yoga , but it is not known what branch of it . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Early works = = = 
 Although there has been speculation about earlier works , Sorabji 's earliest known ( albeit lost ) composition is a transcription dating from 1914 of Delius 's In a Summer Garden . His early works are predominantly piano sonatas , songs and piano concertos . Of these , Piano Sonatas Nos. 1 – 3 ( 1919 ; 1920 ; 1922 ) are compositionally the most ambitious and significant . They are characterised mainly by their use of the single @-@ movement format and by their <unk> . The main criticism levelled at them is that they lack stylistic consistency and organic form . Sorabji himself developed a largely unfavourable view of his early works , to the extent that late in his life he even considered destroying many of their manuscripts . 
 = = = Mature works and symphonic thought = = = 
 Various people have stated that Sorabji achieved compositional maturity with Three <unk> for Piano ( 1922 ) and Le jardin <unk> : Poem for Piano Solo ( 1923 ) , or with only the latter , but Sorabji himself regarded his First Organ Symphony ( 1924 ) as his first mature work . It is his first piece in which baroque organisational principles play an important role . The union of these and his earlier compositional ideas led to the emergence of what has been described as his " symphonic style " , which provided the basis for most of his piano and organ symphonies . The first piece to apply the architectural blueprint of this style is his Fourth Piano Sonata ( 1928 – 29 ) . It consists of three sections : 
 A " tapestry of motives " ; 
 An ornamental slow movement ( almost always labelled as a nocturne ) ; 
 A closing compound movement , which includes a fugue . 
 Sorabji 's symphonic first movements have been labelled as " symphonic tapestries " and " a kind of pure music drama " . Their organisation is related to that of his Second and Third Piano Sonatas and to that of the closing movement of the First Organ Symphony . They have been described as being based superficially on either the fugue or the sonata @-@ allegro form , but they differ from the normal application of those forms in that the exposition and development of themes are guided not by conventional tonal principles but by the way the themes , in the words of the musicologist Simon John Abrahams , " battle with each other for domination of the texture " . These movements can last over 90 minutes , and their thematic character varies considerably : while the opening movement of his Fourth Piano Sonata ( 1928 – 29 ) introduces seven themes , that of his Second Piano Symphony ( 1954 ) has sixty @-@ four . 
 The nocturnes are generally considered to be among Sorabji 's most accessible works , and they are also some of his most prestigious ; they have been described by Habermann as the best of his output , and by the pianist Fredrik <unk> as " perhaps ... his most personal and original contribution as a composer . " Sorabji 's descriptions of his Symphony No. 2 , <unk> , give an insight into their organisation . In a 1942 letter , Sorabji compared this composition to his <unk> — Nocturne for Piano , and he later wrote of the symphony 's " self @-@ cohesive texture relying upon its own inner consistency and cohesiveness without relation to thematic or other matters " . Melodic material is treated loosely in these works , reflecting their harmonic freedom ; ornamentation and textural patterns assume a preeminent position . Because of their emphasis on non @-@ thematic processes , the nocturnes have been described as " static " . Some examples of them are The Garden of <unk> , <unk> <unk> and Symphonic Nocturne for Piano Alone . 
 Sorabji 's fugues , the most atonal of his works , generally follow traditional methods . After a subject and between one and four countersubjects have been presented in an exposition , there follows a development section in which the subject ( and countersubjects , particularly in the earlier fugues ) are usually developed in their original form and in inversion , retrograde and retrograde inversion . The movement continues with a stretto and concludes with a section featuring augmentation and a thickening of lines into chords . His multi @-@ subject fugues repeat this pattern for each subject , and combine thematic material from all expositions in the last section . The fugues are more conservative than most of his output , in that they rarely use polyrhythms . They can contain up to six subjects , and it is these that mark Sorabji 's fugues as different from most others . Some of the subjects are among his most unconventional melodic creations , lacking the frequent changes of direction that characterise most melodies ; other subjects are possibly the longest ever conceived . This has led some people either to treat them with suspicion or to criticise them . 
 Other important forms in Sorabji 's mature work are the toccata and the variation set . The latter , along with his non @-@ orchestral symphonies , are his most ambitious works and have been praised for the imagination exhibited in them . <unk> <unk> super " Dies irae " ex Missa pro defunctis ( 1948 – 49 ) , a set of 27 variations on the original Dies Irae plainchant , is considered by some to be his greatest work . His toccatas are more modest in scope and take the structure of Busoni 's work of the same name as their starting point . 
 = = = Late works = = = 
 Already in 1953 , Sorabji manifested a lack of interest in continuing to compose , when he described his <unk> <unk> super " Dies irae " ex Missa pro defunctis ( 1948 – 49 ) as " the climax and crown of his work for the piano and , in all probability , the last he will write " . Around 1968 , Sorabji vowed to cease composing , and eventually stopped doing so after writing Concertino non grosso for String Sextet with Piano obbligato quasi continuo ( 1968 ) . 
 Hinton played a crucial role in Sorabji 's resumption of compositional activities . Sorabji 's next two pieces , <unk> di San Francesco d <unk> and Symphonia brevis for Piano , were written in 1973 , the year after the two first met , and mark the beginning of what several people have identified as Sorabji 's " late style " , one characterised by thinner textures and a denser harmonic idiom . 
 = = = Style and inspiration = = = 
 Sorabji 's early influences include Cyril Scott , Ravel , Leo Ornstein and particularly Scriabin . He later became more critical of Scriabin and , after meeting Busoni in 1919 , was influenced primarily by the latter . His mature work was also significantly influenced by Alkan , Debussy , Godowsky , Reger and Szymanowski . 
 Sorabji was also influenced by Eastern culture . According to Michael Habermann , this manifests itself in the following ways : highly supple and irregular rhythmic patterns , abundant ornamentation , an improvisatory and timeless feel , frequent polyrhythmic writing and the vast dimensions of some of his compositions . 
 Non @-@ musical subjects , both religious and numerological , influenced Sorabji 's music , too , and he took inspiration from various sources . His Fifth Piano Sonata ( Opus <unk> ) is inspired by the tarot , and his <unk> Symphony for Piano Alone has seven movements titled after the bodily centres of Tantric and <unk> yoga . The song <unk> di San Francesco d <unk> sets the text of a Catholic benediction . However , Sorabji did not intend the first two of these works to be programmatic , and he heaped scorn on attempts to represent stories or ideologies in music . Nevertheless , some of his works have been described as programmatic . 
 Sorabji , who claimed to be of Spanish – Italian – Sicilian ancestry , composed various pieces that reflect an enthusiasm for those cultures , such as Fantasia <unk> , Rosario d <unk> and <unk> <unk> sopra la <unk> di Offenbach . These are works of a Mediterranean character and are inspired by Busoni 's Elegy No. 2 , All 'Italia , and the Spanish music of Isaac Albéniz , Debussy , Enrique Granados and Liszt . They are considered among his outwardly more virtuosic and musically less ambitious works . 
 = = = = Harmony , counterpoint and form = = = = 
 Sorabji 's counterpoint stems from Busoni 's and Reger 's . The influence of these composers led Sorabji to employ various baroque contrapuntal forms ( chorale prelude , passacaglia , fugue and others ) , but he rejected the symmetry and forms that characterise the music of composers such as Mozart and Brahms . Sorabji was dismissive of the Classical style , mainly because he saw it as restricting the musical material to conform to a " ready @-@ made mould " , and his musical thinking is closer to that of the Baroque era than to the Classical . 
 Ornamentation assumes a preeminent role in much of Sorabji 's music . His harmonic language , which frequently combines tonal and atonal elements , is thus freer than in the music of many other composers and less amenable to analysis . Like many other 20th @-@ century composers , Sorabji displays a fondness for tritone and semitone relationships . The opening gesture of his Fourth Piano Sonata , for example , emphasises these two intervals , and the two long pedal points in its third movement are a tritone apart . However , some people have remarked that his music rarely contains the tension that is commonly associated with very dissonant music . 
 = = = Creative process and notation = = = 
 Because of Sorabji 's sense of privacy , little is known about his compositional process . Other people 's accounts of it state that he composed off the cuff and did not revise his work , and it has been claimed that he used yoga to gather " creative energies " . These claims , however , contradict statements made by Sorabji himself ( as well as some of his musical manuscripts ) , which reveal that he planned his compositions carefully in advance and used yoga to regulate his thoughts . Nevertheless , he wrote extremely fast , and there is an unusually high number of ambiguities and inconsistencies in his musical autographs . They are among the most distinctive features of his scores , and have prompted comparisons with his other characteristics . Hinton suggested a link between them and Sorabji 's speech , saying , " he invariably spoke at a speed almost too great for intelligibility " , and Stevenson remarked , " One sentence could embrace two or three languages . " A state of frenzy is reflected in several of Sorabji 's letters to Chisholm , which provide a unique insight into the creation of Opus clavicembalisticum and into Sorabji 's feelings while writing music , showing that Sorabji found composition highly enervating . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = = = = As a performer = = = = 
 Sorabji 's pianistic abilities have been the subject of much contention . After his early lessons , he appears to have been self @-@ taught . In the 1920s and 1930s , when his works were being published for the first time and he was performing some of them in public , there were controversies involving their alleged <unk> and his pianistic proficiency . At the same time , some people — particularly his closest friends — hailed him as a first @-@ class virtuoso . From this disagreement it has been inferred that he was neither sloppy nor a player of the highest calibre . Sorabji repeatedly denied being a professional pianist and always focused primarily on composition ; from 1939 , he no longer practised the piano very often . He was a reluctant performer and had difficulty handling the pressure of performing in public . The private recordings that he made of some of his works in the 1960s contain substantial deviations from his scores ( although largely due to his impatience and disinterest in playing clearly and accurately ) . This has been used to argue that the early criticisms of his playing were at least partly justified and that the negative reviews of his music by some of its first listeners were the result of flaws in his performances . 
 = = = = As a composer = = = = 
 Many of Sorabji 's works are written for the piano or have an important piano part . His writing for the instrument was influenced by that of composers such as Liszt , Alkan and Godowsky , and he has been described as a composer @-@ pianist in their tradition , partly because he was one of the 20th century 's most prolific piano composers . It exhibits particularly the influence of Godowsky , specifically in its polyphony and its use of polyrhythms and <unk> . This necessitated the regular use of systems of more than two staves in Sorabji 's keyboard parts , reaching its peak on page 124 of the manuscript of his Third Organ Symphony ( 1949 – 53 ) , which uses 11 staves , as well as frequent calls for use of the sostenuto pedal . 
 Sorabji 's piano writing has been praised by some for its variety and understanding of the piano 's sonorities . His approach to the piano was non @-@ percussive , and he emphasised that his music is conceived vocally . He once described Opus clavicembalisticum as " a colossal song " , and Geoffrey Douglas Madge said that his piano playing had much in common with bel canto singing . Sorabji once said , " If a composer can 't sing , a composer can 't compose . " 
 His piano music — not just that which is designated as symphonic — often strives to emulate the sounds of instruments other than the piano , as is evident from score markings such as " quasi organo <unk> " ( like a full organ ) , " pizzicato " and " quasi tuba con sordino " ( like a muted tuba ) . In this respect , Alkan was a key source of inspiration ; Sorabji admired his " orchestral " writing for the piano and was influenced by his Concerto for Solo Piano and his Symphony for Solo Piano . 
 = = Writings = = 
 As a writer , Sorabji is best known for his music criticism , the bulk of which is contained in the books Around Music ( 1932 ) and Mi contra fa : The <unk> of a Machiavellian Musician ( 1947 ) . He contributed to various well @-@ known publications dealing with music in England , including The New Age , The New English Weekly , The Musical Times and Musical Opinion . He revised some of those articles and included them in his two books . His writings also devote attention to various non @-@ musical issues : he was , among other things , a critic of British rule in India and a proponent of birth control and legalised abortion . Being homosexual at a time when homosexual acts were illegal in England , he wrote of the biological and social realities that homosexuals faced during much of his lifetime . 
 Sorabji first expressed interest in becoming a music critic in 1914 , and he started contributing criticism to The New Age in 1924 , after it had published some of his letters to the editor . By 1930 , Sorabji had become disillusioned with concert life and developed a growing interest in gramophone recordings , believing that he would eventually lose all reason to attend concerts . In 1945 he stopped providing regular reviews and only occasionally submitted his writings to correspondence columns in various journals . While his earlier writings reflect a contempt for the music world in general — from its businessmen to its performers — his later reviews tend to be more detailed and less caustic . 
 Although in his youth Sorabji was attracted to what were then the newest developments in European art music , his musical tastes were essentially conservative . He had a particular affinity for late Romantic and Impressionist composers , such as Mahler , Debussy , Medtner and Delius , and his main bêtes noires were Stravinsky , the late Schoenberg and Hindemith . He rejected serialism and dodecaphony , considering both to be based on artificial precepts , and he criticised even the later tonal works and transcriptions of Schoenberg . He loathed the rhythmic character of Stravinsky 's music and what he perceived as its brutality and lack of melodic qualities . He viewed Stravinsky 's neoclassicism as a sign of lack of imagination . Shostakovich and Fauré are among the composers whom Sorabji initially condemned but later admired . 
 Sorabji 's writings also give an idea of his attitude towards performance practice , which was strongly Romantic ( that is to say , free ) . He dismissed performers like Albert Schweitzer and praised Egon Petri , Wanda Landowska and others for their ability to " re @-@ create " music . ( He also encouraged a less @-@ than @-@ literal approach to his compositions . ) 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Assessments of Sorabji 's music vary widely . While some , such as the pianist John Ogdon and the organist Kevin Bowyer , speak of him as comparable to such composers as Bach , Beethoven , Chopin and Messiaen , others dismiss him altogether . Reviews of concerts featuring Sorabji 's music tend to be similarly mixed , some reviewers elevating him to the ranks of figures such as Debussy , and others describing his music as vacuous . 
 The pianist and composer Jonathan Powell writes of Sorabji 's " unusual ability to combine the disparate and create surprising coherence " . Abrahams finds that Sorabji 's musical oeuvre exhibits enormous " variety and imagination " and the ability to " develop a unique personal style and employ it freely at any scale he chose " . Bowyer counts Sorabji 's organ works , together with those of Messiaen , as among the " Twentieth Century Works of Genius " . 
 Others have expressed more negative sentiments . The English pianist Ian Pace describes Sorabji 's music as that of " a massive ego thoroughly unaware of its crushing banality . " The music critic Andrew Clements calls Sorabji " just another 20th @-@ century English eccentric ... whose talent never matched [ his ] musical ambition . " The music journalist Max Harrison , in his review of Rapoport 's book Sorabji : A Critical Celebration , heavily criticised Sorabji 's compositions , piano playing , music criticism and personal conduct and implied that " nobody cared except a few close friends " ; this , however , is in curiously stark contrast to his <unk> enthusiastic reviews of some of Sorabji 's piano works in London performances by pianist <unk> Solomon . 
 Sorabji 's isolation , and sometimes the resulting lack of interaction with the music world , have been the target of criticism even by his admirers . His writings have also been highly divisive , being described by some as profoundly perceptive and enlightening , and by others as misguided . 
 = = = Innovation = = = 
 Sorabji has been described as a conservative composer who developed a highly idiosyncratic style fusing diverse influences . Even so , parallels have been identified between him and more progressive composers . <unk> describes Sorabji 's Études <unk> ( 100 ) ( 1940 – 44 ) as pieces that might be seen as " presages of the piano music of , say , Ligeti , <unk> or Ferneyhough " , although he cautions against overstating this . Some of Sorabji 's pieces have even been described as forerunners of the music of <unk> . According to Habermann , " The rhythmic structures within brackets [ in Sorabji 's nocturnes ] predate the complicated rhythms of Messiaen and Stockhausen . " Habermann also argues that Sorabji 's fusion of tonality and atonality into a different approach to relationships between harmonies is a significant innovation . 
 = 55 Cancri = 
 55 Cancri ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) ( abbreviated 55 Cnc ) is a binary star approximately 41 light @-@ years away from Earth in the constellation of Cancer . The system consists of a G @-@ type star ( designated 55 Cancri A , also named Copernicus ) and a smaller red dwarf ( 55 Cancri B ) . 
 As of 2015 , five extrasolar planets ( designated 55 Cancri b , c , d , e and f ; named Galileo , Brahe , Lipperhey , Janssen and Harriot , respectively ) are believed to orbit 55 Cancri A. 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 55 Cancri is the system 's Flamsteed designation . It also bears the Bayer designation <unk> Cancri and the Bright Star Catalogue designation HR <unk> . The two components are designated A and B , though A is itself sometimes referred to as 55 Cancri . The first planet discovered orbiting 55 Cancri A was designated HR <unk> by its discoverers , though it is more commonly referred to as 55 Cancri b . Under the rules for naming objects in binary star systems it should be named 55 Cancri Ab and this more formal form is occasionally used to avoid confusion with the secondary star 55 Cancri B. The other planets discovered were designated 55 Cancri c , d , e and f , in order of their discovery . 
 In July 2014 the International Astronomical Union launched a process for giving proper names to certain exoplanets and their host stars . The process involved public nomination and voting for the new names . In December 2015 , the IAU announced the winning names were Copernicus for 55 Cancri A and Galileo , Brahe , Lipperhey , Janssen and Harriot for its planets ( b , c , d , e and f , respectively ) . 
 The winning names were those submitted by the Royal Netherlands Association for Meteorology and Astronomy of the Netherlands . They honor the astronomers Nicolaus Copernicus , Galileo Galilei , Tycho Brahe and Thomas Harriot and the spectacle makers and telescope pioneers Hans Lipperhey and <unk> Janssen . ( The IAU originally announced the winning name was Lippershey for 55 Cancri d . In January 2016 , in recognition that his actual name was Lipperhey ( with Lippershey an error introduced in the 19th century ) , the exoplanet name was corrected to Lipperhey by the IAU and that name was submitted to the official sites that keep track of astronomical information . ) 
 = = Stellar system = = 
 The 55 Cancri system is located fairly close to our solar system : the Hipparcos astrometry satellite measured the parallax of 55 Cancri A as 81 @.@ 03 milliarcseconds , corresponding to a distance of 12 @.@ 3 parsecs ( 40 @.@ 3 light years ) . 55 Cancri A has an apparent magnitude of 5 @.@ 95 , making it just visible to the naked eye under very dark skies . The red dwarf 55 Cancri B is of the 13th magnitude and only visible through a telescope . The two components are separated by an estimated distance of 1065 AU ( one thousand times the distance from the Earth to the Sun ) . Despite their wide separation , the two stars appear to be gravitationally bound , as they share a common proper motion . 
 The primary star , 55 Cancri A , is a yellow dwarf star of main sequence spectral type G8V . It is smaller in radius and slightly less massive than the Sun , and so is cooler and less luminous . The star has only low emission from its chromosphere , and is not variable in the visible spectrum ; but it is variable in X @-@ rays . It is more enriched than our sun in elements heavier than helium , with 186 % the solar abundance of iron ; it is therefore classified as a rare " super metal @-@ rich " ( SMR ) star . This abundance of metal makes estimating the star 's age and mass difficult , as evolutionary models are less well defined for such stars . Age estimates for 55 Cancri A include 7 @.@ 4 @-@ 8 @.@ 7 billion years and 10 @.@ 2 ± 2 @.@ 5 billion years . 
 A hypothesis for the high metal content in SMR dwarf stars is that material enriched in heavy elements fell into the atmosphere from a protoplanetary disk . This would pollute the star 's external layers , resulting in a higher than normal metallicity . The lack of a deep convection zone would mean that the outer layers would retain higher abundance ratios of these heavy elements . 
 Observations of 55 Cancri A in the submillimeter region of the spectrum have thus far failed to detect any associated dust . The upper limit on emissions within 100 AU of this star is about 850 <unk> , at a wavelength of 850 μm . This limits the total mass of fine dust around the star to less than 0 @.@ 01 % of the Earth 's mass . However , this does not exclude the presence of an asteroid belt or a Kuiper belt equivalent . 
 The secondary , 55 Cancri B , is a red dwarf star much less massive and luminous than the Sun . There are indications that component B may itself be a double star , though this is uncertain . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 The 55 Cancri system was the first known to have four , and later five planets , and may possibly have more . The innermost planet , e , transits 55 Cancri A as viewed from Earth . The next planet , b , is non @-@ transiting but there is tentative evidence that it is surrounded by an extended atmosphere that does transit the star . 
 In 1997 , the discovery of a 51 Pegasi @-@ like planet orbiting 55 Cancri A was announced , together with the planet of Tau Boötis and the inner planet of Upsilon Andromedae . The planet was discovered by measuring the star 's radial velocity , which showed a periodicity of around 14 @.@ 7 days corresponding to a planet at least 78 % of the mass of Jupiter . These radial velocity measurements still showed a drift unaccounted @-@ for by this planet , which could be explained by the gravitational influence of a more distant object . 
 In 1998 the discovery of a possible dust disk around 55 Cancri A was announced . Calculations gave the disk radius at least 40 AU , similar to the Kuiper belt in our solar system , with an inclination of 25 ° with respect to the plane of the sky . However , the discovery could not be verified and was later deemed to be spurious , caused instead by background radiation . 
 After making further radial velocity measurements , a planet orbiting at a distance of around 5 AU was announced in 2002 . This planet received the designation 55 Cancri d . At the time of discovery , the planet was thought to be in an orbit of mild eccentricity ( close to 0 @.@ 1 ) , but this value was increased by later measurements . Even after accounting for these two planets , a periodicity at 43 days remained , possibly due to a third planet . Measurements of the star suggested that this was close to the star 's rotation period , which raised the possibility that the 43 @-@ day signal was caused by stellar activity . This possible planet received the designation 55 Cancri c . 
 55 Cancri e was announced in 2004 . With 8 @.@ 3 Earth masses , it is a large super @-@ Earth which was originally thought to have an orbital period of 2 @.@ 8 days , though it was later found that this was an alias of its true period of 0 @.@ 78 days by observations of e transiting in 2011 . This planet was the first instance of a fourth extrasolar planet in one system , and was the shortest @-@ period planet until the discovery of PSR J1719 @-@ 1438 b . The measurements that led to the discovery of this planet also confirmed the existence of 55 Cancri c . 
 In 2005 , Jack Wisdom suggested that e actually had a period of 261 days and had a mass similar to that of Neptune in a 261 @-@ day orbit ( corresponding to 0 @.@ 77 AU in distance ) . However , the planets were found to not conflict , and hence 55 Cancri f , the first occurrence of a fifth extrasolar planet in one system , was announced in 2007 . With a similar mass to c , it has a 260 @-@ day orbit , towards the inner edge of 55 Cancri A 's habitable zone . The planet itself is not thought to be conducive to life , but hypothetical moons in principle could maintain at least microbial life . 
 The planet e 's eccentricity is poorly defined ; varying values between 0 and 0 @.@ 4 does not significantly improve the fit , so an eccentricity of 0 @.@ 2 was assumed . Taking interactions between the planets into account results in a near @-@ zero orbital eccentricity . 
 Astrometric observations with the Hubble Space Telescope measured an inclination of 53 ° of the outer planet d , though this result relies on the precise orbital parameters which have been substantially revised since this was published . The observed transits of e suggest an orbit normal inclined within 9 ° to the line @-@ of @-@ light , and a possible detection of the transit of an extended atmosphere around 55 Cancri b would , if confirmed , imply that it too is in an orbit that is close to edge @-@ on . Between them , no measurement of c 's nor f 's inclination has been made . It had been thought that with five planets , the system cannot deviate far from coplanar in order to maintain stability . An attempt to measure the spin @-@ orbit misalignment of the innermost planet reported that it was in a nearly polar orbit , but this interpretation of the data has since been challenged by a subsequent study , with noted inconsistencies between the implied and measured stellar rotation . 
 The approximate ratios of periods of adjacent orbits are ( proceeding outward ) : 1 : 20 , 1 : 3 , 1 : 6 , 1 : 20 . The nearly 1 : 3 ratio between 55 Cancri b and c is apparently a near resonance , rather than a genuine mean motion resonance . 
 More planets are possible within the stable zone , between f and d at 0 @.@ 9 to 3 @.@ 8 AU with eccentricities below 0 @.@ 4 . Given hypothetical planet g of up to 50 Earth masses , stable mean motion resonance regions lie at <unk> : 2g , 2g : 1d , and <unk> : 2d . As for the space outside d 's orbit , its stability zone begins beyond 10 AU , though there is a stability zone between 8 @.@ 6 - 9 AU due to a 2 : 1 resonance . 
 = = Communication = = 
 A METI message was sent to 55 Cancri . It was transmitted from Eurasia 's largest radar – 70 @-@ meter ( 230 @-@ foot ) Eupatoria Planetary Radar . The message was named Cosmic Call 2 ; it was sent on July 6 , 2003 , and it will arrive at 55 Cancri in May 2044 . 
 = Saluki = 
 The Saluki or Persian Greyhound is a dog breed originating in the Fertile Crescent and Persia . The Saluki is classed as a sighthound and is typically deep @-@ chested and long @-@ legged . Salukis tend to be independent animals requiring patient training and are gentle and affectionate with their owners . 
 = = Name = = 
 The two ancient Sumerian words " <unk> @-@ ki " translate into " plunge @-@ earth . " However there is no evidence the breed was referred to by the Sumerians with this name nor what " plunge to earth " might have meant in reference to the Saluki . The name of the breed first appeared in writing in pre @-@ Islamic Arabic poetry and may have derived from " <unk> , " the Arabic form of Seleucia . However , this is disputed . British diplomat Sir Terence Clark wrote that the Arabic word " <unk> " describes a person or thing from a place named Saluq . 
 Arab tradition states that Saluq was an ancient town in Yemen not far from modern Ta 'izz , and the Arabs associate this town with the origin of the breed . However , the word " <unk> " might have been derived from reference to several other places : Saluq in Armenia , and three towns called <unk> . One has become modern <unk> ( Turkey ) , another is near Antioch ( modern Antakya , Turkey ) and third is located near Baghdad ( Iraq ) . The latter was the capital of the Seleucid Empire ( 312 BC - 65 AD ) and the adjective <unk> may have been derived by the Arabs of the Arabian Peninsula from the similar sounding word for Seleucid used in the Aramaic and Syriac languages spoken there by the various peoples of that part of Mesopotamia , but there is no irrefutable evidence . 
 = = Description = = 
 Salukis are " sight " hounds — hunting by sight — and run their quarry down to kill or retrieve it . The normal size range for the breed is 23 – 28 inches ( 58 – 71 cm ) high at the withers and 40 – 60 pounds ( 18 – 27 kg ) in weight . Females Salukis are slightly smaller than males . The head is long and narrow with large eyes and drop ears . The tail of the breed is long and curved . It has the typical deep @-@ chested , long @-@ legged body of sighthounds . The coat comes in a variety of colors including white , cream , fawn , red , <unk> / tan , black / tan , and tri @-@ color ( white , black and tan ) . 
 The overall appearance of the Saluki is one of grace and symmetry . Two coat types — smooth and feathered — are evident in the breed 's gene pool . The latter variety has light feathering on the back of the legs and thighs . The fur on both types is silky and is low @-@ shedding when compared to other breeds . 
 = = <unk> and physical capacity = = 
 While the Greyhound is credited as being the fastest dog breed up to distances of around 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) , both the Saluki and Whippet breeds are thought to be faster over longer distances . In 1996 , The Guinness Book of Records listed a Saluki as being the fastest dog , capable of reaching a speed of 68 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 42 @.@ 8 mi ) per hour . Due to its heavily padded feet being able to absorb the impact on its body , the Saluki has remarkable stamina when running . 
 Historically , Salukis were used for hunting by nomadic tribes . Typical quarry included the gazelle , hare , fox and jackal . While hunting hares , Bedouin hunters would sometimes ride close to their quarry on a camel holding a Saluki , which would be thrown towards the prey while at speed to give the dog a running start . Gazelle hunters also used hawks to gouge out the eyes of the prey so that a Saluki could then bring down the blinded animal . 
 = = Temperament = = 
 The modern Saluki has retained qualities of hunting hounds and may seem reserved to strangers . The often independent and aloof breed may be difficult to train . Training methods should always be gentle and patient . Salukis may bore easily and are not an ideal breed to leave unattended for long periods . The Saluki does not typically enjoy rough games or activities such as retrieving balls . Early socialization will help prevent timidity and shyness in later life . Given its hunting instincts , the dog is prone to chasing moving objects . 
 = = Health = = 
 Hip dysplasia is uncommon in Salukis , with the breed ranking joint lowest in a survey by the British Veterinary Association in 2003 . The breed scored an average of 5 points , with a score of 0 being low , while 106 is high . In a 2006 breed specific survey conducted by The Kennel Club and the British Small Animal Veterinary Association Scientific Committee , responses highlighted several health issues . The primary cause of death identified was that of cancer , being responsible for 35 @.@ 6 % of deaths , with the most common forms being that of liver cancer or lymphoma . The secondary cause of death was cardiac related , with forms such as heart failure , or unspecified heart defects . Old age is listed as the third most frequent cause of death . 
 <unk> , heart murmur and other cardiac issues were present in 17 @.@ 2 % of responses while <unk> conditions such as dermatitis or alopecia were reported by 10 @.@ 8 % of responses . Salukis have an average lifespan of 12 to 14 years , which is similar to other breeds of their size . 
 = = History = = 
 The Saluki are one of the earliest dog breeds , splitting off ( together with the related Afghan Hound ) from the rest of dog breeds in the fourth major genetic split . 
 The Saluki was historically bred in the Fertile Crescent where agriculture originated . Images of running dogs with long , narrow bodies adorn pottery found in Susa that dates back to 6 @,@ 000 years ago in ancient Mesopotamia , with one writer suggesting that these might depict the ancestor of the <unk> , despite the depictions bearing erect , pointed ears . Salukis and greyhounds were increasingly depicted on Egyptian tombs from the The Middle Kingdom ( 2134 BC – 1785 BC ) onward , however it was during the Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt that Salukis rose to prominence , replacing the Tesem ( thought to be similar to modern Pariah dogs or a generic term for a dog ) in ancient Egyptian art . The breed spread southward into the Sudan . 
 From Iran , the breed is mentioned in the poetry of <unk> ( 1121 @-@ 1190 ) , depicted in miniature paintings of hunting scenes along with horseback archers by Master <unk> ud @-@ Dīn <unk> ( 1450 – 1535 ) , depicted in book illustrations by ' Abd al @-@ Wahhab ibn ' Abd al @-@ <unk> ibn ' Ali ( 1516 ) , and in metal @-@ smithing from the reign of the <unk> prince , Jamal al Dine Abu Is <unk> , created between 1342 – 1353 . One of the more outstanding pieces of sculpture in Iran is the <unk> Canyon Relief , carved around 1800 , that was commissioned by Shar Fath @-@ Ali Shah Qajar to commemorate his hunting exploits . 
 The Silk Road was a trading route that stretched from ancient Iran to China . From China , examples of the breed were painted by the fifth Ming Emperor Zhū <unk> , known more commonly as the Xuande Emperor during the Ming Dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) . The inscription on the painting reads " playfully painted [ by the ] imperial brush " in 1427 . Additional red seals were added in later years by owners of the painting , which also reveals that the painting was in the Imperial Chinese collection in the 18th century . 
 From Europe , the legend maintains that the returning crusaders brought the Saluki back from the Middle East . The painting of Henry IV , Duke of Saxony with his hunting dog , painted by Lucas Cranach the Elder in 1514 , is thought by some to be a Saluki . The dog wears a collar decorated with a scallop shell , which is the badge of a pilgrim who has traveled the Way of Saint James in Spain . Salukis appear in Paolo Veronese 's 1573 work The Adoration of the Magi ( also known as the Adoration of the Kings ) , currently located at the National Gallery , London . Veronese painted the breed in another two of his religious paintings : the The Marriage at Cana and The Finding of Moses . 
 Sheik Hamad ibn Isa Al Khalifa , King of Bahrain during the 1930s , was known for a pack of Salukis that accompanied him throughout the Arab world on hunting trips . Following his death , his son Salman ibn Hamad Al Khalifa attempted to keep the lines pure @-@ bred but they became interbred with other breeds . However , the pure @-@ bred lines of the royal kennel were saved by the efforts of Dana Al Khalifa who was given two pure @-@ bred puppies by the King , and about a decade later had pure @-@ bred Salukis registered with the Kennel Club of Bahrain . Today , the breed is still held in high regard throughout the Middle East and were hunting dogs for nobles and rulers around the region . They are considered clean by the Bedouins , and are allowed to be in women 's quarters , while other dogs must be kept outside . 
 In 2014 , a DNA study compared dogs and wolves for <unk> ( Alpha @-@ <unk> 2B ) , which is a gene that codes a protein that assists with the first step in the digestion of dietary starch and glycogen . An expansion of this gene in dogs would enable early dogs to exploit a starch @-@ rich diet as they fed on refuse from agriculture . Data indicated that the wolves and dingo had just 2 copies of the gene , the Siberian Husky that is associated with hunter @-@ gatherers had just 3 – 4 copies , " whereas the Saluki , which was historically bred in the Fertile Crescent where agriculture originated , has 29 copies " . 
 = = = Breeding in the West = = = 
 It was not until 1840 , that the Salukis were first brought to England . Referred to as <unk> , they and the modern <unk> were treated as the same breed , however recent genetic tests have shown that the two breeds are genetically separate . The first successful modern breeding line of Salukis began in 1895 , with Florence Amherst ( daughter of the 1st Baron Amherst of Hackney ) . Having seen Salukis on a Nile tour in that year , she imported a breeding pair from the Al <unk> area of Lower Egypt . A champion of breed purity , she struggled alone for nearly three decades , and real Saluki popularity did not take hold until the early 1920s , when officers returning from the war in the Middle East and the Arab Revolt brought their pet Salukis home with them . 
 One of these was Brigadier General Frederick Lance of the 19th Lancers , and his wife , Gladys , returned to Britain with two Salukis from Sarona , where he was stationed during the post @-@ war occupation . The Lances were both keen hunters , and rode with their pack of dogs , including both Salukis and terriers , to course jackal and Dorcas Gazelle whilst stationed in the desert . They imported a male , called Sarona Kelb , who became an influence on the breed in the West . 
 Together , the Lances and Florence Amherst mounted a campaign for recognition of the Middle Eastern breed , that coincided with the phenomenon of " <unk> " caused by Howard Carter 's discovery of Tutankhamun 's tomb in late 1922 . In 1923 , the Saluki or Gazelle Hound Club was formed , and the Kennel Club granted official recognition to the breed . The first registered Salukis in the western studbook were Cyrus and <unk> Peri imported from Iran and registered with the <unk> . <unk> also records the first litter in 1922 . 
 Imports to England during the inter @-@ war years were chiefly from areas of British military influence and commerce : Bahrain , Egypt , Transjordan , and Iraq . Both Florence Amherst and the Lances imported breeding stock from the latter two countries . Despite substantial populations of Salukis in Germany , the Netherlands , and Sweden , none of these were imported to England . 
 English Salukis ( chiefly descendants of Sarona Kelb ) were exported to many countries , but by the mid @-@ 1930s , interest slackened , and with the outbreak of World War II , breeding and show activities almost entirely stopped . The number of litters was minimal – just enough to keep the breed alive . Food rationing reserved all edible meat for humans , and to prevent the Salukis from dying from starvation or being killed by bombs , some owners euthanized entire kennels . A small number of Saluki kennels survived the war , and along with fresh imports belonging to a second wave of soldiers returning from the Middle East , the slow process of re @-@ establishing the breed began again . 
 Popularity of Salukis dramatically increased , and the Saluki Club of America was founded in 1927 , Salukis were recognized by The Kennel Club in 1923 , and by the American Kennel Club in 1929 . The breed is also the mascot of Southern Illinois University Carbondale . 
 The popularity of the Saluki in the United States , according to the American Kennel Club , has remained relatively stable over the past decade , with the breed ranked 107th in 1999 , had decreased to 118th in 2008 , but by 2008 had increased once again to 112th . Between 2000 and 2009 , 1215 Salukis were registered with The Kennel Club in the UK , while this does not approach the numbers of the more popular breeds , it is in line with similar breeds in the Hound Group such as the Borzoi , which had 1399 puppies registered in the same period . In September 2007 , The Kennel Club Art Gallery 's 12th exhibition celebrated the Saluki , The Saluki in Art showed a range of exhibits including terracotta and bronze works , along with contemporary artists and a range of trophies from Saluki breed clubs . 
 = Contigo Quiero Estar = 
 " Contigo Quiero Estar " ( English : " With You , I Want To Be " ) is a song recorded by American recording artist Selena for her debut studio album Selena ( 1989 ) . It was released by EMI Latin on May 27 , 1989 , as the album 's lead single alongside " Quiero Ser " . Lyrically , the song explores the narrator 's feelings of wanting to be closer romantically with her lover . Composed by Mexican songwriter Alejandro Montealegre , " Contigo Quiero Estar " is a Tejano song with folk and ranchera influences . Deborah Vargas wrote in her book that the single " marked the beginning of her [ Selena 's ] international trajectory " . Many other recording artists have covered the song . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In 1989 , Selena signed a recording contract with EMI Latin , and that same year , began recording songs for her debut album with them . According to Selena 's record producer — sibling A.B. Quintanilla III — EMI Latin did not want A.B. to produce any songs for Selena 's debut album . He explained to an interview with Brian " Red " Moore , a family friend who overshadowed the Selena : 20 Years of Music collection interviews , that the recording company was already gambling on releasing a Latin division , and hesitated any family involvement that could hinder the sales of the album . 
 Selena 's father and manager , Abraham Quintanilla , Jr. expressed that he tried to persuade the recording company to give A.B. a try . After this , A.B. was allowed to produce Selena 's songs for her album , including " Contigo Quiero Estar " . Mexican songwriter Alejandro Montealegre , sent in lyrics to a song he wrote to EMI Latin . They instantly wanted Selena to record it for her album , believing it fit well with her other recorded materials . The song makes use of the drums , an electronic keyboard , a french horn , and the piano . Lyrically , " Contigo Quiero Estar " talks about the narrator 's feelings for her lover , who wants to be by his side constantly . 
 = = Critical reception and covers = = 
 Deborah Vargas wrote in her book <unk> Divas in Chicana Music : The Limits of la Onda that the song marked " the beginning of her [ Selena 's ] international trajectory " . Mexican band Los Reyes De Mexico recorded a mariachi version of the song on their album Reyes De Mexico Lo Lindo Ti . Puerto Rican band Orquesta <unk> Show recorded both a merengue and a cumbia version , which were included on their album <unk> y <unk> . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 CD Single 
 " Contigo Quiero Estar " — 3 : 49 
 " Quiero Ser " — 2 : 33 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Books = = 
 Peña , Manuel ( 2002 ) , Música <unk> : the cultural economy of artistic transformation , Texas A & M University Press , ISBN <unk> 
 = Homicide : Life on the Street ( season 2 ) = 
 The second season of Homicide : Life on the Street , an American police procedural drama television series , originally aired in the United States between January 6 and January 27 , 1994 . Due to low Nielsen ratings during the first season , NBC executives decided to order only a four @-@ episode season , after which they would evaluate the ratings and decide whether to renew the show . Homicide was moved to a new timeslot of Thursdays at 10 p.m. EST , temporarily replacing the legal drama L.A. Law . NBC requested several changes from the series , including fewer episode subplots and less camera movements and jump cuts . 
 The entire Homicide cast returned for the second season . The uncertainty over Homicide 's future was stressful for the cast and crew , and the logistics of scheduling the filming around the actors ' schedules was difficult . Daniel Baldwin publicly criticized NBC Entertainment president Warren Littlefield over the matter , and it was initially reported Ned Beatty would not return at all . The second season was the last to include original cast member Jon Polito , who was reportedly dismissed because NBC officials were unhappy with his physical appearance . Polito was publicly critical of the show after his dismissal . 
 The second season marked the debut of Jean de Segonzac as director of photography and Chris Tergesen as music coordinator . The season premiere , " Bop Gun " , was the last of the four episodes filmed , but it was the first to be broadcast due to a guest appearance by Robin Williams , which NBC hoped would lead to improved ratings . " Bop Gun " differed from other Homicide episodes because it focused entirely on one story : the murder of a tourist and its impact on her husband , played by Williams . The episodes " See No Evil " and " Black and Blue " featured a suspected police shooting , which was based on a real life incident in David Simon 's book Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets . 
 In addition to Williams , several actors made guest appearances throughout the second season , including Julianna Margulies , Wilford Brimley , Isaiah Washington , Adrienne Shelly and a 13 @-@ year @-@ old Jake Gyllenhaal . Homicide received generally positive reviews during the season , and the show received one Emmy nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series for Williams . The " Bop Gun " script won a Writers Guild of America Award . Homicide was often compared to the ABC police drama series NYPD Blue , which Baldwin called " the knockoff of Homicide " . While ratings improved during the second season , NBC still demanded further changes to the show before committing to a third season . The first and second seasons of Homicide were released together in a four @-@ DVD box @-@ set on May 27 , 2003 . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Renewal = = = 
 Nielsen ratings for Homicide : Life on the Street had gradually declined throughout the first season , leaving the show at high risk of cancellation by the time the season concluded . NBC executives asked for several refinements – including fewer episode subplots and less camera movements and jump cuts – before approving a second season . Executive producer Tom Fontana said he was willing " to do anything to keep NBC from forgetting us " , although executive producer Barry Levinson said the show would maintain its realistic visual style , claiming , " We want a camera that 's almost a participant in the show . " Homicide was ultimately renewed , but the producers slightly toned down the show 's bleak visual style and hand @-@ held photography motif , and focused more strongly on single stories rather than multiple subplots . Fontana said , " We were experimenting with our first nine episodes . Whenever you try something new , you tend to err on the side of breaking ground . But we 'd rather have more people watching , so the colors and lighting are slightly brighter , and the camera movements are not as jarring . " However , both Levinson and Fontana insisted the changes were not entirely due to network pressure , but rather were evolutionary developments for the series . 
 NBC ordered a four @-@ episode second season , which would be broadcast in January 1994 as a mid @-@ year replacement . A decision about whether to renew the show for a third season would then be made based on how those four episodes performed in the ratings . David P. Kalat , author of Homicide : Life on the Street – The Unofficial Companion , credited NBC Entertainment president Warren Littlefield with that move , although Levinson claimed NBC West Coast president Don Ohlmeyer was behind the decision . Ohlmeyer said he believed a better timeslot , less dense stories and less hand @-@ held photography would attract more viewers and help the show succeed better : " For it to succeed long @-@ term , there 's a humanity that needs to be brought to the characters . There 's more here than there was last year . " Littlefield said of Homicide , " It 's a show we think has tremendous potential that was not fully realized in the first nine episodes . And that 's why we want to make more . " 
 Homicide was moved from its previous timeslot of Wednesdays at 9 p.m. EST to a new time on Thursdays at 10 p.m. Levinson and the other series producers considered this an extremely positive move for the show , as Homicide suffered greatly in the ratings on Wednesdays due to competition from the highly rated ABC comedy block featuring Home Improvement and Coach . Even during the first season , Levinson often said the series was truly designed for a 10 p.m. timeslot . Homicide took the timeslot previously held by the legal drama L.A. Law , which was placed on a six @-@ week hiatus from December 23 until early February . With some critics claiming L.A. Law had declined in quality , the hiatus led to speculation that it would be canceled and Homicide would replace it . This led to some tension during an NBC reception when L.A. Law star Corbin Bernsen approached Homicide actor Richard Belzer and shouted expletives at him , yelling , " You stole our timeslot ! " 
 The producers of Homicide said the decision to evaluate the series after a four @-@ episode season placed tremendous pressure on the staff of the show . Fontana said one @-@ hour dramas need time to fully develop and allow audiences to become familiar with the characters . Fontana expressed frustration with NBC in some news interviews , claiming the networks seemed to lack the courage to either cancel or renew it : " They will run it in a 10 p.m. time period for a month and then they 'll kiss us goodbye . ... I 'm used to this kind of treatment from NBC . I 'm a little surprised they 'd treat Barry Levinson the same way they 'd treat me . " In other interviews , however , Fontana said he saw the decision as a sign of support : " This is not just a casual action on NBC 's part . It 's a real statement to me that we have a possibility to return . " Levinson said he believed " four shots are better than nothing " , adding : 
 " What I learned is that it is very hard for a network to make a real commitment . A hit @-@ and @-@ run sensibility is prevalent . ... In all fairness to NBC , this is a tougher kind of show than any other show they carry . It is different , and no one is going to endorse different in this world , no one celebrates different . " 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Homicide was produced by Levinson 's company Baltimore Pictures , which had partnered with Reeves Entertainment during the first season . However , Reeves Entertainment went out of business after the first season concluded , so NBC bought into the show and formally became a co @-@ producer , which gave the network more latitude to demand creative changes . The second season marked the debut of Jean de Segonzac as director of photography . He replaced Wayne Ewing , who Levinson felt was too inexperienced and did not trust with the responsibility of managing the show 's cinematography . Among Segonzac 's film credits was Laws of Gravity ( 1992 ) , which was directed by Nick Gomez , who directed the Homicide first season episode " Son of a Gun " . 
 Season premiere " Bop Gun " was directed by Stephen Gyllenhaal , a feature director then @-@ best known for such films as Waterland ( 1992 ) and A Dangerous Woman ( 1993 ) . Chris Menaul directed the back @-@ to @-@ back episodes " See No Evil " and " Black and Blue " , while the season finale , " A Many Splendored Thing " , was directed by John McNaughton , who previously directed Homicide star Belzer in the film Mad Dog and Glory ( 1993 ) . The second season included much of the same crew as the first : in addition to executive producers Levinson and Fontana , Jim Finnerty returned as supervising producer , Debbie Sarjeant worked as associate supervisor and screenwriter James Yoshimura became story editor starting with the second season , with Bonnie Mark as a staff writer and Chris Friel as a script supervisor . Other crew included Cindy Mollo as editor , Vincent Peranio as production designer , Susan Kessel as set decorator , Roland Berman as costume designer , Ivan Fonseca as post @-@ production coordinator , Bruce <unk> as sound mixer and Louis <unk> and Pat Moran as casting directors . Ted Zachary and Allan <unk> worked as the executives in charge of production . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 Almost the entire original cast from season one returned for the second season , including Daniel Baldwin , Ned Beatty , Richard Belzer , Andre Braugher , Clark Johnson , Yaphet Kotto , Melissa Leo , Jon Polito and Kyle Secor . The only permanent cast member not to return was Wendy Hughes , who previously played medical examiner Carol Blythe ; her absence was never explained on @-@ screen . While the rest of the cast was contractually obliged to return , many of them had offers for other films , television shows or plays , and the logistics of arranging their schedules so all of them could return for the show was difficult . In an interview , Fontana claimed the cast was contractually entitled to be paid for 13 episodes but they all agreed to take less money and come back for the shortened @-@ season . The uncertainty over whether Homicide would be renewed or not created a great deal of stress for some cast members . Polito said of the feeling , " Where is limbo ? It 's in Baltimore . " Baldwin in particular expressed frustration with NBC for failing to renew the show for a full season and said he feared the uncertainty could hurt his film career : 
 " For two years now , I 've been walking around thinking , ' Why did I do this ? Why did I subject myself to this nonsense ? ' I will never , ever do another series . Ever . Ever . Ever . Ever . There is no justice in television . ... Where 's the confidence ? Why aren 't I here talking about being picked up for 22 episodes ? I want to say to Warren Littlefield : Can you read ? Can you read ? I 've never seen this kind of critical response to a show before . " 
 Likewise , Beatty said he enjoyed the actual filming of the episodes but hated the television business end of it , claiming , " I can 't think of anything I would less rather do than television at this moment . " He said the process left him " pretty much burnt " and said his enthusiasm for the show had " eroded as time goes on " . It was initially reported that Beatty would not return for the second Homicide season at all because he had accepted a starring role in The Boys , a CBS comedy series also featuring Christopher Meloni . Polito said he did not believe Beatty 's departure would hurt the show because of the ensemble nature of the cast : " I love Ned 's work , but the show won 't fall apart because of one character . " Beatty ended up appearing in both shows , and The Boys was canceled after six episodes . 
 Although Belzer said he and the rest of the cast returned to filming with " guarded emotions " , he credited his role as John Munch with giving him credibility as an actor . While he previously had to vigorously pursue roles , he was receiving unsolicited offers by the time of the second season , including a recurring role in the ABC television series Lois & Clark : The New Adventures of Superman . Polito , however , was terminated from the cast after the second season ended , reportedly because NBC officials were unhappy with his weight and physical appearance and did not believe he appealed to audiences . After his dismissal , Polito became publicly critical of the direction Homicide had recently taken , saying it changed to a " parody of itself " and claiming he had repeatedly voiced problems with the show 's recent scripts to Fontana and Chris Menaul . Polito said : 
 " It would have killed me to come back . The show went from art to mediocrity . I 'm relieved that they 've freed me legally . I didn 't want to go back to another six months of indecision and hurt . I 'm shocked that the other actors re @-@ signed . ... The brilliance of the show under Levinson was lost this season . It 's like watching the sinking of the Titanic . The problem is that the iceberg is the guys who built the ship – the producers . You can never trust producers . They would have said to van Gogh : ' Nice painting . A little lighter on the colors and we can sell it . ' " 
 Several notable actors made guest appearances throughout the second season of Homicide . Robin Williams appeared in " Bop Gun " as Robert Ellison , the husband of a slain woman tourist . Levinson previously directed Williams in the films Good Morning , Vietnam ( 1987 ) and Toys ( 1992 ) . Although Williams was primarily known for his comedic work , the Homicide producers and Williams himself consciously decided to remain true to the original script , rejecting the idea of adding humor or jokes to the episode . " Bop Gun " also featured a 13 @-@ year @-@ old Jake Gyllenhaal , son of the episode 's director Stephen , in one of his earliest acting performances ; he played Matt , the young son of Robert Ellison . Wilford Brimley portrayed the bed @-@ ridden and suicidal Harry Prentice in " See No Evil " , Isaiah Washington played murder suspect Lane <unk> in " Black and Blue " , and Adrienne Shelly portrayed S & M fashion store owner Tanya Quinn in " A Many Splendored Thing " . Julianna Margulies appeared in the last two episodes of the season as Linda , a waitress who starts dating Bolander . Fontana was so impressed with Margulies that he offered her a recurring role on Homicide , but she turned it down in favor of the medical drama series ER . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 By the time the first season ended , four additional scripts for the second season had already been written , but before approving the second season , NBC asked for refinements in both the visual style and the scripts . From a screenwriting perspective , NBC asked that the scripts place more emphasis on single storylines , rather than multiple subplots ; during the first season , some episodes included as many as four separate storylines . The season premiere , " Bop Gun " , was the first Homicide episode to revolve entirely around a single plot : the murder of a tourist and its aftermath . Fontana said by focusing on one story , he believed it allows the show to tell that story better , adding , " In some places , there wasn 't enough time for the story . The " Bop Gun " script also differed from previous Homicide episodes by focusing more strongly on a murder victim , rather than on the detectives . The other three episodes of the season continued to focus on multiple stories , but switched from four different subplots to three . 
 " Bop Gun " was written by David Mills and David Simon , the later of whom wrote the 1991 non @-@ fiction book Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , from which the television series was adapted . It was the first television script written by Mills , who previously worked as a reporter and became friends with Simon while studying journalism at the University of Maryland , College Park . Writing the script inspired Mills to quit journalism and start writing for television full @-@ time . Simon felt the script 's dialogue was faithful to reality , especially the detectives ' use of dark humor as a coping mechanism for dealing with the horrors of the homicide unit . This was particularly embodied by a scene in which the murdered tourist 's husband becomes angry after overhearing detectives talk about how much overtime they would get from the case , which Simon claimed was a conversation real @-@ life detectives would really have . 
 " See No Evil " was written by series creator Paul Attanasio , who had not penned a Homicide script since the series premiere " Gone for Goode " . Attanasio deliberately wrote the " See No Evil " script so that it would be morally questionable whether the police handling of both main subplots — the assisted suicide and the suspected police shooting — were done in an ethically correct way . " Black and Blue " was written by James Yoshimura , who continued working on Homicide throughout the entire life of the show , but considered that episode his favorite script . A story arc in " See No Evil " and " Black and Blue " featured Pembleton investigating a suspected police @-@ related shooting . This was based on a real @-@ life 1988 shooting and subsequent investigation by Baltimore Police Department Detective Donald Worden featured in David Simon 's book Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets . Several members of the Baltimore Police Department publicly criticized Homicide for its negative portrayal of the police in the storyline , and 22 detectives wrote a formal letter of protest to Levinson over the matter . 
 " A Many Splendored Thing " was written by Noel Behn , who became consulting producer with the series . That episode featured a subplot about a man who killed another man over a pen , which was inspired by a real @-@ life murder in Anne Arundel County , Maryland , in which a 23 @-@ year @-@ old man shot another man 10 times in a doughnut shop when the victim refused to sell the shooter his pen . Since NBC had not decided on whether to renew Homicide until after the four episodes aired , the screenwriters did not start working on any scripts for the third season until after the second season concluded . As a result , once NBC was committed to renewal , the scripts had to be written later and the Homicide producers were not able to turn around new shows until the fall . Additionally , Fontana was working on other projects , including Philly Heat , an ABC miniseries about members of the Philadelphia Fire Department . Some media outlets criticized NBC for not commissioning Fontana and Levinson to write back @-@ up scripts , which prevented Homicide from starting earlier once the show was renewed . Alan Pergament of The Buffalo News wrote , " Understandably , Fontana didn 't sit by idly and wait for NBC to make its decision on Homicide . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The four second season episodes were filmed during the summer of 1993 . The last of them , " Bop Gun " , was filmed in late September 1993 , with Fontana just having returned from accepting an Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series for the script of first season episode " Three Men and Adena " . Like the first season , they were filmed on location in Baltimore . Levinson was not present for the filming and development of the episodes because he was in Los Angeles shooting Jimmy Hollywood ( 1994 ) , a comedy film starring Joe Pesci and Christian Slater . Fontana said Levinson remained involved in the development of scripts and the production of the shows . 
 Among the visual changes during Homicide 's second season were brighter colors . While colorist Drexel Williams previously drained footage of color value to create a gritty style , cinematographer Jean de Segonzac directed Williams to make the colors less muted and more lively . Segonzac also sought a more restrained visual style , as he believed the previous cinematographer Wayne Ewing tended to " get a little too wild , and someone could complain they got a little dizzy " . Levinson praised what he described as a subtler and more effective style under Segonzac . " Bop Gun " was originally meant to serve as the second season finale , but NBC decided to make it the season premiere with the hopes of getting increased ratings from Williams ' guest appearance . The scenes with Williams were filmed over three days ; Fontana said of the shooting , " [ Williams ] worked like a dog . It was quite a special event for all of us . It 's very intense . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Chris Tergesen became music coordinator during the second season , and more music is featured than in the previous episodes as a result . The first scene of " Bop Gun " , for example , featured the song " Killer " by Seal and Adamski over a brief montage of images just before a murder took place . In that same episode , the Buddy Guy blues song " Feels Like Rain " plays just after Howard speaks with a suspect in jail . Other songs were integrated into the show itself : one suspect listens to the Public Enemy song " <unk> off My Back " on headphones just before he was arrested . Various songs are featured in other second season episodes , including the Gerry Goffin and Carole King song " Up on the Roof " in " Black and Blue " , and the Soul Asylum song " Whoa " and Donna Summer song " Bad Girls " in " A Many Splendored Thing " . " Black and Blue " ended with Bolander and Linda , on cello and violin respectively , performing a movement of " Passacaglia " , a classical music piece composed by George Frideric Handel . Cellist <unk> Bailey served as a body double for Beatty in the scenes with Bolander playing cello . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The second season received generally positive reviews . " Bop Gun " was particularly acclaimed ; it was named one of the ten best episodes of the series by The Baltimore Sun , and the Star Tribune called Williams ' performance one of the ten best guest star moments in television history . The performance of Andre Braugher was also particularly praised , especially for his scene in " Black and Blue " , in which Pembleton persuades a suspect to confess to a murder he did not commit . Gail Pennington of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch said the second season was an improvement over the first , which she said was excellent but " tended to demand an awful lot from viewers " . Pennington said the toned down visual style and stronger emphasis on single stories better focused the show , adding : " Homicide is great TV , and NBC believes in it enough to give it what may be the network 's best time slot . " Bob Langford of The News & Observer called Homicide " absolutely brilliant " and praised it for focusing not on the crimes but on the effects of it , as well as the realistic themes regarding race , such as concerns in " Bop Gun " that the murder would deter white tourists from visiting Baltimore . Langford said it was occasionally preachy , but said , " Sometimes , a good sermon is what we need . Amazing that one this powerful can come from a TV show . " 
 Rick Kogan , television critic with the Chicago Tribune , called the show " wholly original " and an example of how good television entertainment can be . He praised the ensemble cast and interesting characters , and said the show would be renewed " if there 's any justice in TV " . Ray Richmond of the Los Angeles Daily News praised NBC for giving Homicide a second chance , comparing it to the days when NBC stuck with the comedy series Cheers even though it ranked last in the ratings during its first season . Richmond said of Homicide : " This is also one of the final opportunities to see a television network stick with a struggling show for no better reason than it deserves to be stuck with . In the bottom line @-@ driven 1990s , that 's become as rare as quality itself . " Steven Cole Smith with the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram said of the evaluation period during Homicide 's second season : " If you don 't watch it , you may lose your right to complain that there 's never anything good on TV . " He called it " a gritty , atmospheric police series " and complimented it for showing not only gratuitous violence but the consequences of it . 
 Robert Bianco of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette praised the show and said the decision to focus on fewer subplots might help . Bianco said , " Let 's hope the changes work , because Homicide is too good to lose , and its vision of civilization is too troubling to shunt aside . " The Washington Post television reviewer Tom Shales called Homicide " achingly , even painfully , brilliant . The best cop show I have ever seen . " David Zurawik of The Baltimore Sun called it the best police drama ever made for television besides Hill Street Blues . Baltimore Sun reporter David Bianculli praised the show 's writers for being willing to place their characters in ethically questionable positions , adding : " Please watch this series ; it 's so good , I don 't mind pleading . " Tom Jicha of South Florida Sun @-@ Sentinel called it " an hour about as fine as there is on the tube " with great writing and camera @-@ work . Jicha said , " It would be a senseless act of violence against superb TV for those who claim to appreciate fine drama to kill this show by turning the dial . " Hal Boedeker , television critic with The Miami Herald , strongly praised the series , particularly " Bop Gun " , which he called " the highest order for network TV " . Boedeker called the writing , direction and acting " first @-@ rate " and declared Homicide the better choice over NYPD Blue because it did not resort to gimmicks like the nudity featured in the latter show . 
 = = = NYPD Blue = = = 
 The second season of Homicide drew several comparisons to NYPD Blue , an ABC police drama series that had debuted in September 1993 . It received a large amount of publicity and better ratings than Homicide , which some reviewers attributed to the violence and nudity featured in the show . Like Homicide , NYPD Blue featured an ensemble cast and intertwined subplots , and commentators suggested its success may have encouraged NBC to support Homicide . Levinson said he was not deterred by comparisons to NYPD Blue because Homicide debuted before that series . In a news article , Fontana quoted a friend who described NYPD Blue as " the television version of Homicide " . Baldwin was even more critical of the show , and said in an interview : " The ultimate compliment that can ever be paid [ is ] to be mimicked by someone else . So , thank you , NYPD Blue , because it 's the knockoff of Homicide . " NYPD Blue co @-@ creator Steven Bochco took exception to that characterization , saying he believed his reputation and experience in television proved he was capable of conceiving his own material . Bochco said : I don 't think it 's a knock @-@ off . It was conceived as its own show . I wish Homicide the best – and they should be so lucky as to do as well as we 're doing right now . " 
 Pete Schulberg of The Oregonian wrote , " Forget all the commotion about NYPD Blue . Homicide delivers without the lewd language and skin shots . It depicts violence in a most compelling way : You don 't see it . You just feel it . " Bob <unk> of The Sacramento Bee said , " The bottom line is that while NYPD Blue is a fine show – it was on my 10 @-@ best list for 1993 – Homicide is better . There 's been nothing like it since the heyday of Hill Street Blues . " Elaine Liner , television critic with the Corpus Christi Caller @-@ Times , who called Homicide " as rewarding an hour of serious , quality television as you could ask for " , praised it for highlighting quality writing rather than gimmicks like the nudity from NYPD Blue , and praised it for fleshing out not only the detectives and victims , but the suspects too , like in " Bop Gun " . Ed Siegel of The Boston Globe wrote , " If [ the nudity ] is what it took to get you to watch NYPD Blue and you decided to stay because it was grittier , better written , directed and acted than any other drama on TV , be advised that Homicide is so far superior to NYPD Blue in all those categories that if you 're not [ watching it ] , you 're missing the best hour of episodic television since Hill Street Blues and St. Elsewhere left the air . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 NBC heavily advertised the second season , especially the guest appearance by Williams in the season premiere , " Bop Gun " . Levinson , Baldwin , Belzer and Fontana all participated in multiple media interviews about the show . " Bop Gun " was seen by 16 @.@ 3 million viewers , a higher @-@ than @-@ usual Homicide : Life on the Street rating in large part to interest in Williams ' appearance . It received a 17 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating and a 28 share , the highest rating for a 10 p.m. drama series since January 1992 . The rating placed Homicide among the top ten network television Nielsen ratings for the week , and outperformed the ratings of L.A. Law , which normally filled the 10 p.m. Thursday timeslot . Warren Littlefield said the ratings " far exceeded expectations " , and said he expected the series to return for a third season if the viewership remained strong . Littlefield said of the Homicide ratings : 
 " These are outstanding numbers for a dramatic television series . If we can keep a reasonable level of audience , we believe in the work , we believe in the creative team we think we have , perhaps the most outstanding ensemble cast in all of television . We just would like to see continued signs of life . " 
 The other three episodes of the season did not match the viewership of " Bop Gun " , but they were nevertheless considered strong ratings for the show , better than past Homicide episodes and the average rating for L.A. Law . Homicide 's improved ratings in the Thursday night timeslot fueled speculation that L.A. Law might be canceled and Homicide would take its place . Warren Littlefield denied such claims , believing the success of one series did not necessarily have to mean the cancellation of the other . Despite Homicide 's improvement in the ratings , NBC did not immediately commit to a third season until the producers agreed to even more changes , including more prominent guest stars , more women in the cast and more life @-@ affirming storylines . Outgoing cast member Polito publicly decried these changes , claiming the show was going to change from a drama into a " soap opera " . 
 To cut down on costs , the network also pressured Levinson to relocate filming to California rather than Baltimore , which would reduce costs for travel , lodging and meals . Maryland Governor William Donald Schaefer sent a telegram to Levinson encouraging him to remain in the city : " I wanted you to know that we are proud of having this exceptional series shot in your native state and stand ready to help toward a positive decision for additional production of the series . " Levinson and Fontana considered leaving Baltimore not only for the cost savings , but also because of the letters of outrage by the city 's detectives over " See No Evil , " as well as a report in the Associated Press that the show was giving Baltimore a bad image by drawing attention to its murder rate . Ultimately , however , Levinson decided to remain in Baltimore . On February 15 , 1994 , the day the options of the cast contracts expired , NBC decided at midnight to sign for a third season , but ordered only 13 episodes instead of a full 22 @-@ episode season , opting to wait and see how the ratings performed before committing to the final nine . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Robin Williams received an Emmy Award nomination for Guest Actor in a Drama Series for his role in " Bop Gun " . It was the only Emmy nomination Homicide : Life on the Street received in the 46th Primetime Emmy Awards ; the series received four nominations the previous year . Williams lost the Emmy to Richard Kiley for his performance in the CBS drama series Picket Fences . " Bop Gun " won a Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay of an Episodic Drama . It defeated competing episodes of Northern Exposure and NYPD Blue , as well as another second season Homicide episode , " A Many Splendored Thing " . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The first and second seasons of Homicide were released together in a four @-@ DVD box @-@ set " Homicide : Life on the Street : The Complete Seasons 1 & 2 " , which was released by A & E Home Video on May 27 , 2003 for $ 69 @.@ 95 . The set included an audio commentary by Levinson and Fontana for the first season premiere , " Gone for Goode " , as well as a collection of the commercials that advertised the episode during the Super Bowl . 
 = 1884 Navy Midshipmen football team = 
 The 1884 Navy Midshipmen football team represented the United States Naval Academy in the 1884 college football season . The team was the fourth intercollegiate football squad to represent the United States Naval Academy , and was the final time the school played a single @-@ game season . The squad was captained by rusher Jim Kittrell . The team 's single game was a 9 to 6 ( 9 – 6 ) defeat of rival @-@ school Johns Hopkins . The season continued a seven @-@ season , eight game rivalry between the Naval Academy and Johns Hopkins . It was the final season that a Naval Academy team would go unbeaten and untied . 
 = = Background and prelude = = 
 According to biographer C. Douglas Kroll , the first evidence of a form of football at the United States Naval Academy came in 1857 , but the school 's cadets lost interest in the game shortly afterward . However , it is widely believed by football researchers that the playing of intercollegiate football began in November 1869 , when a player at Rutgers University challenged another player at the nearby College of New Jersey ( now Princeton ) . The contest more closely resembled soccer , with teams scoring by kicking the ball into the opponent 's net , and lacked a uniform rules structure . The game developed slowly ; the first rules were drafted in October 1873 , and only consisted of twelve guidelines . Even though the number of teams participating in the sport increased , the game was still effectively controlled by the College of New Jersey , who claimed eight national championships in ten years . Only Yale presented any form of challenge , claiming four national championships in the same time period . 
 The Naval Academy 's first ever football team was fielded in 1879 . The squad was entirely student @-@ operated , receiving no official support from Naval Academy officials . The team was entirely funded by its members and their fellow students . The 1879 team participated in just one game , which resulted in a scoreless tie . It was played against the Baltimore Athletic Club , apparently on the Academy superintendent 's cow pasture . Navy would not field a football team in 1880 or 1881 , due to the lack of support from officials . When football returned to the academy in 1882 , the squad was led by player @-@ coach Vaulx Carter , and won 8 – 0 in a match with Johns Hopkins , starting the seven @-@ year rivalry between the schools . The 1883 season resulted in Navy 's first ever loss , a 2 – 0 defeat by Johns Hopkins . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = = = Navy 9 , Johns Hopkins 6 = = = 
 The sole game of Navy 's 1884 season was the annual competition against rival Johns Hopkins , the third consecutive playing of the series . In what was the final season where the rivalry was the only game of the year , Navy defeated Johns Hopkins 9 – 6 . The game , played on November 27 , was hosted by the Academy , likely on an unused drill or parade field . In an unusual agreement between the two schools , the contest was played entirely under rugby rules . In the first half , Hopkins scored twice , on a touchdown from Mr. Bonsall and on a two @-@ point safety . Navy scored twice in the second half of the game , when halfback Julius Dashiell , brother of Hopkins ' Paul Dashiell , kicked a five @-@ point goal and rusher David W. Taylor scored a touchdown to secure a victory . 
 = = Players = = 
 The 1884 Naval Academy team was made up of eleven players at four different positions . The squad consisted of seven rushers , one fullback , two halfbacks , and a quarterback : 
 = = Postseason and aftermath = = 
 The first postseason college football game was not played until 1902 , with the Pasadena Tournament of Roses ' establishment of the east – west tournament game , later known as the Rose Bowl . The Midshipmen did not participate in their first Rose Bowl until the 1923 season , when they went 5 – 1 – 2 and tied with the Washington Huskies 14 – 14 in the match . As a result of the lack of a competition , there were no postseason games played after the 1882 season . According to statistics compiled by the National Championship Foundation , Parke Davis , and the Helms Athletic Foundation , Yale was declared the 1884 season champion . However , the Billingsley college football research center and Parke Davis also selected Princeton as the 1884 national champions . 
 The 1884 win over Johns Hopkins brought the Naval Academy 's overall win @-@ loss record to positive , as well as once again giving the Midshipmen a lead over Hopkins in their rivalry . The season marked the final time a team for the Naval Academy would play a single @-@ game season . In 1885 , their schedule was expanded to three games . It also marked the final time a Navy team finished a season unbeaten and untied ; the closest a squad would come was in 1926 , when they went 9 – 0 – 1 . Navy finished the 1880s with four winning seasons , and an overall record of 14 – 12 – 2 . The school outscored their opponents 292 – 231 , and finished the 19th century with an overall record of 54 – 19 – 3 . 
 = Italian cruiser Vesuvio = 
 Vesuvio was a protected cruiser of the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) built in the 1880s . She was the third member of the Etna class , which included three sister ships . Named for the volcano Mount Vesuvius , the ship 's keel was laid down in July 1883 . She was launched in March 1886 and was commissioned into the fleet in March 1888 . She was armed with a main battery of two 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) and six 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns , and could steam at a speed of around 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . Her career was relatively uneventful ; the only significant action in which she took part was the campaign against the Boxer Rebellion in China in 1900 . She was stricken from the naval register in May 1911 and sold for scrap in 1915 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Vesuvio was 283 feet 6 inches ( 86 @.@ 4 m ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 42 feet 6 inches ( 13 @.@ 0 m ) . She had a mean draft of 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) and displaced 3 @,@ 373 long tons ( 3 @,@ 427 t ) . Her crew numbered 12 officers and 296 men . The ship had two horizontal compound steam engines , each driving a single propeller , with steam provided by four double @-@ ended cylindrical boilers . Vesuvio was credited with a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) from 6 @,@ 820 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 090 kW ) . She had a cruising radius of 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The main armament of the ships consisted of two Armstrong 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) , 30 @-@ caliber breech @-@ loading guns mounted in barbettes fore and aft . She was also equipped with six 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) , 32 @-@ caliber , breech @-@ loading guns that were carried in sponsons along the sides of the ship . For anti @-@ torpedo boat defense , Vesuvio was fitted with five 57 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and five 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 1 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . Vesuvio was also armed with four 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes . One was mounted in the bow underwater and the other three were above water . She was protected with an armored deck below the waterline with a maximum thickness of 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . The conning tower had .5 in ( 13 mm ) worth of armor plating . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Vesuvio was built by the Livorno shipyard , with her keel being laid down on 10 July 1883 . Her completed hull was launched on 21 March 1886 , and after fitting @-@ out work was finished , she was commissioned into the Italian fleet on 16 March 1888 . Vesuvio and her sisters Stromboli and Ettore Fieramosca participated in the 1893 naval maneuvers as part of the Squadron of Maneuvers , which was tasked with defending against the Permanent Squadron . Vesuvio was placed in reserve for 1896 , though she was reactivated to take part on the naval maneuvers at the end of the year . During these maneuvers , she was assigned to a force tasked with defending against a simulated French fleet . 
 In 1900 , she and Ettore Fieramosca were sent to Chinese waters to assist in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion as part of the Eight @-@ Nation Alliance . Both ships were formally assigned to the Cruising Squadron in Chinese waters in 1901 . During 1901 , she made stops in Shanghai , Wusong , and Hong Kong . After a second deployment to the Far East from 1906 to 1909 , Vesuvio was placed in reserve , struck from the Navy List on 11 May 1911 and sold for scrap in 1915 . 
 = Battle of the Defile = 
 The Battle of the Defile or Battle of the Pass ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> al @-@ <unk> ) was fought in the Tashtakaracha Pass ( in modern Uzbekistan ) between a large Arab army of the Umayyad Caliphate and the Turkic Turgesh khaganate over three days in July 731 CE . The Turgesh had been besieging Samarkand , and its commander , Sawra ibn al @-@ Hurr al @-@ Abani , sent a request for relief to the newly appointed governor of Khurasan , Junayd ibn Abd al @-@ Rahman al @-@ Murri . Junayd 's army was attacked by the Turgesh in the pass , and although the Umayyad army managed to extricate itself from the pass and reach Samarkand , it suffered enormous casualties ( some 25 @,@ 000 – 30 @,@ 000 men ) , while Sawra 's 12 @,@ 000 men , who had been commanded to attack the Turgesh in the rear in a relief effort , were almost annihilated . The battle , for which one of the most detailed accounts of the entire Umayyad era survives in the History of al @-@ Tabari , halted and even reversed Muslim expansion into Central Asia for a decade . 
 = = Background = = 
 The region of Transoxiana ( Arabic : Ma wara ' al @-@ nahr ) had been conquered by the Muslims under Qutayba ibn Muslim in the reign of al @-@ Walid I ( r . 705 – 715 ) , following the Muslim conquest of Persia and of Khurasan in the mid @-@ 7th century . The loyalties of its native Iranian and Turkic inhabitants and autonomous local rulers however remained volatile , and in 719 , they sent a petition to the Chinese and their Turgesh vassals for military aid against the Muslims . In response , Turgesh attacks began in 720 , and the native Sogdians launched uprisings against the Caliphate . These were suppressed with great brutality by the governor of Khurasan , Sa 'id ibn Amr al @-@ Harashi , but in 724 his successor , Muslim ibn Sa 'id al @-@ Kilabi , suffered a major disaster ( the so @-@ called " Day of Thirst " ) while trying to capture Ferghana . For the next few years , Umayyad forces were limited to the defensive . Efforts to placate and win the support of the local population by abolishing taxation of the native converts to Islam ( mawali ) were undertaken , but these were half @-@ hearted and soon reversed , while heavy @-@ handed Arab actions further alienated the local elites . In 728 a large @-@ scale uprising , coupled with a Turgesh invasion , led to the abandonment of most of Transoxiana except for the region around Samarkand by the Caliphate 's forces . 
 In the hope of reversing the situation , in early 730 the Caliph Hisham ibn Abd al @-@ Malik ( r . 723 – 743 ) appointed a new governor in Khurasan , the experienced Junayd ibn Abd al @-@ Rahman al @-@ Murri , who had been recently engaged in the pacification of Sindh . The difficult security situation at the time is illustrated by the fact that Junayd needed an escort of 7 @,@ 000 cavalry after crossing the Oxus , and that he was attacked by the Turgesh khagan while riding to link up with the army of his predecessor , Ashras al @-@ Sulami , who in the previous year had advanced up to Bukhara in a hard @-@ fought campaign . Although hard @-@ pressed , Junayd and his escort were able to repel the attack and link up with al @-@ Sulami 's forces . Bukhara and most of Sogdiana was recovered soon after , as the Turgesh army withdrew north towards Samarkand . The Muslim army followed , and scored a victory in a battle fought near the city . Junayd then retired with his troops to winter in Merv . During the winter , rebellions broke out south of the Oxus , in Tokharistan , which had hitherto been quiescent to Muslim rule . Junayd was forced to set out for Balkh and there dispersed 28 @,@ 000 of his men to quell the revolt . This left him seriously weakened when , in early 731 , the Turgesh laid siege to Samarkand and appeals for aid arrived from the city 's governor , Sawra ibn al @-@ Hurr al @-@ Abani . Despite the opinion of the army 's veteran Khurasani leaders , who counselled that he should wait to reassemble his forces and not cross the Oxus with less than 50 @,@ 000 men , Junayd resolved to march immediately to Samarkand 's rescue . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Junayd could not advance along the old Persian Royal Road , which led from Bukhara east to Samarkand and which was held by the Turgesh . Instead he led his army to Kish , about 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) due south from Samarkand . There he received news from his scouts that the Turgesh had sent detachments of their own to spoil the wells on his line of march . His counsellors initially suggested a route west around the mountains of the Zarafshan Range between Kish and Samarkand through the village of al @-@ <unk> , but al @-@ <unk> ibn Muzahim al @-@ Sulami , one of the Khurasani leaders , advised against it since the Turgesh could easily set fire to the uncultivated grasslands along that route . Instead he favoured a more direct approach over the steep but short — some 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 miles ) long — Tashtakaracha Pass , and expressed the possibility that this would catch the Turgesh by surprise . Junayd followed al @-@ <unk> 's counsel , and encamped before the entrance of the pass . The decision was unpopular with the army , largely Khurasanis who distrusted the " outsider " Junayd . The usual tribal quarrels also re @-@ emerged , and some began deserting . Undeterred , Junayd pressed on with some 28 @,@ 000 men . The course of the subsequent events is described in detail in al @-@ Tabari 's History of the Prophets and Kings , which in turn draws upon the work of the earlier historian Abu 'l @-@ Hasan al @-@ Mada <unk> , written about a century after the events . 
 The two armies that met at the Tashtakaracha Pass represented two different military philosophies . While the Umayyad armies disposed of a sizeable cavalry contingent , both light and heavy , their mainstay was the infantry , to the extent that in battle the Arab cavalry was often limited to skirmishing during the initial phases , before dismounting and fighting on foot . This was in stark contrast to the Turgesh , a typical Central Asian nomad realm , whose army was composed exclusively of cavalry . Their unmatched skill in horsemanship , especially as horse archers , and their natural hardiness combined to make them extremely dangerous opponents , adept in a fluid and highly mobile fighting style of feints , ambushes and feigned retreats , which they exploited to outmanoeuvre the slower @-@ moving Arabs . As the historian Hugh N. Kennedy writes , " when the nomad [ Turgesh ] allied with the local Iranian princes , they provided what was perhaps the fiercest opposition the early Muslim armies ever encountered " . 
 Supported by troops from the rulers of Sogdia , Shash and Ferghana , the Turgesh attacked the Umayyad army within the pass , two days after they had left Kish ( a Friday ) , at a distance of six farsakhs — ca . 24 kilometres ( 15 miles ) — from Samarkand . The Turgesh attacked while the Arab army had stopped to take a meal . The Arab vanguard , under Uthman ibn ' Abdallah ibn al @-@ <unk> , was overwhelmed , but Junayd was able to hurriedly deploy the main body of his army , placing his troops according to their tribal affiliations , with the Tamim and Azd on the right , and the Rabi 'ah on the left . The Arabs hurriedly erected earthworks in front of their lines , and the initial Turgesh attack , directed against the Arab right , was pushed back . Junayd , who had placed himself in the centre to direct the battle , then joined the ranks of the Azd , who greeted him with hostility : their standard @-@ bearer is reported to have told him " If we win , it will be for your benefit ; if we perish , you will not weep over us . By my life , if we win and I survive , I will never speak a word to you . " Al @-@ Tabari reports that this man and seventeen successive bearers of the same standard were killed during the battle , indicative of the fierceness of the fight . The Arabs initially met the Turgesh attack on horseback , but as their casualties mounted , Junayd 's herald ordered them to dismount and fight on foot , crouching down behind the trenches and forming a spear @-@ wall . This measure helped the Muslims hold their ground , and eventually both sides wearied and the battle ceased for the day . The most grievous casualties among the Arabs were suffered by the stragglers and baggage , who gathered under Abdallah ibn Mu <unk> ibn <unk> al @-@ <unk> near Kish : they were attacked by the Turgesh and virtually annihilated . 
 The next day , the Turgesh launched renewed attacks on the Arabs , but these were repelled . The Arabs engaged in vigorous counterattacks whenever the Turgesh drew near , and the khaghan ordered his troops to besiege the Arab camp instead of attacking it . Having persevered through the initial onslaught , Junayd sent messengers to Sawra in Samarkand , ordering him to come to his assistance as a diversionary attack . Sawra and the Samarkand garrison were initially reluctant as they were aware that this was effectively a suicide mission , but Junayd 's threats forced Sawra to comply . Leaving behind a small garrison , Sawra led 12 @,@ 000 men out of Samarkand and with the help of a local guide managed to reach within a <unk> — roughly 5 – 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 7 miles ) — of Junayd 's force by crossing over the mountains . There he was confronted by the Turgesh , who , reportedly on the advice of Ghurak , the Sogdian king of Samarkand , set fire on the dry grasslands . Sawra 's lieutenants advised a slow infantry advance fronted by a spear @-@ wall — the standard Umayyad anti @-@ cavalry tactic — but Sawra , knowing his troops to be weary and desperate , decided instead to launch a cavalry charge against the Turgesh in the hopes of breaking through with at least part of his force and reach Junayd . Sawra 's troops , " maddened by heat and thirst " in the description of H.A.R. Gibb , charged the Turgesh and broke their front , but the battle soon became a confused affair with both sides hindered by the smoke , dust and the raging flames . In the end , the Arab army lost its cohesion , scattered and was destroyed piecemeal by the Turgesh cavalry . All but a thousand of Sawra 's force perished . 
 Junayd used the diversion to break through to Samarkand , but as his army exited the defile , his officers persuaded him to make camp and spend the night there instead of making for the city . The advice proved sound , as the Turgesh caught up with them and would likely have annihilated Junayd 's army on open ground . As it was , the camp 's fortifications could not be completed before the next day , when the Turgesh renewed their attack . At this point , the Arabs were so hard @-@ pressed that Junayd even promised the army 's slaves their freedom if they would fight . Many did so , using saddle blankets as armour . The Turgesh attacks were repelled , and despite its heavy casualties the Umayyad army reached Samarkand after almost three days of battle . 
 = = Aftermath and impact = = 
 Junayd remained in Samarkand for about four months , until October 731 , allowing his army to recover . The Turgesh meanwhile made for Bukhara , which they besieged . Junayd again resolved to meet them in battle , and managed to inflict some defeats on the Turgesh in early November and raise the siege of Bukhara , which he entered on the day of <unk> . Junayd then returned to Merv , leaving a token garrison of 800 men behind in Samarkand . Once the Turgesh had withdrawn north for the winter , he evacuated the city of its Muslim inhabitants . 
 Although Samarkand was relieved and the Arab army escaped annihilation , the battle " was not wholly an Arab victory " ( M.A. Shaban ) . According to Khalid Yahya Blankinship , it was " a Pyrrhic victory at best " , due to the high casualties suffered by the Muslims ; indeed , the sources record both Junayd and the Caliph Hisham publicly equating it with the disastrous defeat suffered at the hands of the Khazars in the Battle of Marj Ardabil a year before . The 10th @-@ century historian Ibn A 'tham al @-@ <unk> puts the Muslim casualties at at least 20 @,@ 000 out of a total of 43 @,@ 000 or 48 @,@ 000 , while poets of the time inflate the number to 50 @,@ 000 . Judging by the numbers of replacements ordered sent into or levied in Khurasan in the aftermath of the battle , Blankinship estimates the dead at between 25 @,@ 000 and 30 @,@ 000 . Although the Turgesh also suffered heavy losses — Ibn A 'tham gives the unverifiable figure of over 10 @,@ 000 dead — the Arab losses at the Defile led to a rapid deterioration of the Muslim position in Central Asia . Junayd remained as governor of Khurasan until his death in early 734 , but by this time the Muslims had lost control of everything north of the Oxus save for Bukhara , Kish and the region of al @-@ Saghaniyan . 
 The events of the Defile increased the Khurasani disaffection with the Umayyad regime and its representatives , as exemplified by the words of the Azdi standard @-@ bearer to Junayd . Al @-@ Tabari also reports the words — albeit possibly a later addition — of another Khurasani to Junayd before the battle : " It used to be said that certain of the troops of Khurasan would perish at the hands of a luxury @-@ loving man from the Qays . We now fear that you may be he " . According to Blankinship , these passages , as well as poems disparaging Junayd 's leadership , are an eloquent testimony to the Khurasanis ' frustration at being " forced to fight continuous , unrewarding campaigns for the benefit of vainglorious generals on one of the caliphate 's worst fronts , by a central government whose special Syrian army had not hitherto , in the Khurasanis ' opinion , faced similar hardships " . Blankinship observes that " after the Day of the Defile , many Khurasani tribal surnames never again appear as part of the army in Khurasan , leading one to suppose they had been annihilated or their men had given up fighting . Some Khurasani troops remain , of course , but their divisions are now paralleled by Syrian ones . Thus it appears , particularly from Tabari 's emphasis , that the Day of the Defile was practically a turning point in the war with the Turks , at least as far as the Khurasanis were concerned [ ... ] . " The subsequent period in Khurasan was turbulent , with revolts and anti @-@ Umayyad agitation among the local Khurasani Arabs , which necessitated the introduction of 20 @,@ 000 loyal Syrian troops into the province in addition to the 20 @,@ 000 Iraqis sent in after the Defile . Only in 739 – 741 , after the Turgesh Khaganate collapsed following the murder of its leader Suluk , was the new governor of Khurasan , Nasr ibn Sayyar , able to largely restore the Caliphate 's position in Transoxiana , extending Muslim control again up to Samarkand . 
 In the aftermath of the setbacks at the Defile , Marj Ardabil and other similar disasters , the need to reinforce the buckling frontiers stretched the military and financial resources of the Caliphate . This was especially the case with the powerful Syrian army , the main pillar of the Umayyad regime , which was parcelled out to reinforce distant provinces . Eventually , this weakening of the Syrian army would be the major factor in the fall of the Umayyad dynasty during the civil wars of the 740s and the Abbasid Revolution that followed them . 
 = Legal disputes over the Harry Potter series = 
 Since first coming to wide notice in the late 1990s , the Harry Potter book series by J. K. Rowling has engendered a number of legal disputes . Rowling , her various publishers and Time Warner , the owner of the rights to the Harry Potter films , have taken numerous legal actions to protect their copyrights , and also have fielded accusations of copyright theft themselves . The worldwide popularity of the Harry Potter series has led to the appearance of a number of locally produced , unauthorised sequels and other derivative works , sparking efforts to ban or contain them . While these legal proceedings have countered a number of cases of outright piracy , other attempts have targeted not @-@ for @-@ profit endeavours and have been criticised . 
 Another area of legal dispute involves a series of injunctions obtained by Rowling and her publishers to prohibit anyone from distributing or reading her books before their official release dates . The sweeping powers of these injunctions have occasionally drawn fire from civil liberties and free speech campaigners and sparked debates over the " right to read " . One of these injunctions was used in an unrelated trespassing case as precedent supporting the issuance of an injunction against a John Doe . 
 Outside these controversies , a number of particular incidents related to Harry Potter have also led , or almost led , to legal action . In 2005 , a man was sentenced to four years in prison after firing a replica gun at a journalist during a staged deal for stolen copies of an unreleased Harry Potter novel , and attempting to blackmail the publisher with threats of releasing secrets from the book . Then in 2007 Bloomsbury Publishing contemplated legal action against the supermarket chain Asda for libel after the company accused them of <unk> the final Harry Potter novel , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows . A comprehensive list of intellectual property and speech lawsuits involving Harry Potter , Harry Potter Lawsuits and Where to Find Them , was compiled by attorney David <unk> in 2015 for the Trademark and Copyright Law Blog . 
 = = Allegations of copyright and trademark infringement against Rowling = = 
 = = = Nancy Stouffer = = = 
 In 1999 , American author Nancy Kathleen Stouffer alleged copyright and trademark infringement by Rowling of her 1984 works The Legend of Rah and the Muggles ( ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 400 @-@ 6 ) and Larry Potter and His Best Friend Lilly . The primary basis for Stouffer 's case rested in her own purported invention of the word " Muggles " , the name of a race of mutant humanoids in The Legend of Rah and the Muggles , and Larry Potter , the title character of a series of activity booklets for children . Larry Potter , like Harry Potter , is a bespectacled boy with dark hair , though he is not a character in The Legend of Rah and the Muggles . Stouffer also drew a number of other comparisons , such as a castle on a lake , a receiving room and wooden doors . Portions of Rah were originally published in booklet form by Ande Publishing Company in 1986 , a company founded by Stouffer together with a group of friends and family . Ande Publishing filed for bankruptcy in September 1987 without selling any of its booklets in the United States or elsewhere . Rowling has stated that she first visited the United States in 1998 . 
 Rowling , along with Scholastic Press ( her American publisher ) and Warner Bros. ( holders of the series ' film rights ) , pre @-@ empted Stouffer in 2002 with a suit of their own seeking a declaratory judgment that they had not infringed on any of Stouffer 's works . The court found in Rowling 's favour , granting summary judgment and holding that " no reasonable juror could find a likelihood of confusion as to the source of the two parties ' works " . During the course of the trial , it was held that Rowling proved " by clear and convincing evidence , that Stouffer has perpetrated a fraud on the Court through her submission of fraudulent documents as well as through her untruthful testimony " , including changing pages years after the fact to retroactively insert the word " <unk> " . Her case was dismissed with prejudice and she was fined $ 50 @,@ 000 for her " pattern of intentional bad faith conduct " in relation to her employment of fraudulent submissions , along with being ordered to pay a portion of the plaintiffs ' legal fees . Stouffer appealed the decision in 2004 , but in 2005 the Second Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the ruling . In 2006 she stated on her website that she was planning to republish her books and was entertaining the possibility of another lawsuit against Warner Bros. , J. K. Rowling and Scholastic Press . 
 The Legend of Rah and the Muggles is currently out of print . In early 2001 , it was published by Thurman House , LLC , a Maryland publishing company . Thurman House , formed by <unk> Publishers to republish the works of Nancy Stouffer , was closed when <unk> ceased operations in 2002 after filing for bankruptcy . Stouffer later asserted that any copies of the book published by Thurman House are unauthorized because the publisher failed to honour its contractual obligations to her . 
 = = = The Wyrd Sisters = = = 
 In 2005 , Warner Bros. offered CAD $ 5 @,@ 000 ( later CAD $ 50 @,@ 000 ) to the Canadian folk band the Wyrd Sisters for the rights to use their name in the film version of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire . Rowling had written a scene in the novel in which a band called the Weird Sisters appeared at a school dance , and the group owned the rights to the name in Canada . However , the offer was declined , and instead the band undertook a legal action against Warner Bros. , as well as Jarvis Cocker of Pulp and Jonny Greenwood and Phil Selway of Radiohead , who were to play the band in the film . All plans to use the name in the movie were later abandoned . Despite that decision , the Canadian band filed a CAD $ 40 @-@ million ( $ 39 million ) lawsuit against Warner in Ontario court . In connection with the lawsuit , the band brought an interlocutory injunction hoping to prevent the release of the film . The injunction application was dismissed . The entire suit was dismissed in November 2005 . In June 2006 , an Ontario judge decreed that the band pay Warner Bros. CAD $ 140 @,@ 000 in legal costs , describing their lawsuit as " highly intrusive " . The group claimed they planned to appeal the decision . Jarvis Cocker initially wished to release an album of " Weird Sisters " -themed music with collaborators including Franz Ferdinand , Jack White and Iggy Pop , but the project was dropped as a result of the lawsuit . The Wyrd Sisters reported received death threats from irate Harry Potter fans . As of March 2010 , the lawsuit has been settled out of court , the details sealed . 
 = = = Adrian Jacobs = = = 
 In June 2009 , the estate of Adrian Jacobs , a children 's author who died in 1997 , sued Rowling 's publishers , Bloomsbury , for £ 500 million , accusing her of having plagiarised " substantial parts " of his work in writing the novel Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire . In a statement , Jacobs 's family claimed that a scene in Goblet of Fire was substantially similar to Jacobs 's book The Adventures of Willy the Wizard : Livid Land : " ' Both Willy and Harry are required to work out the exact nature of the main task of the contest which they both achieve in a bathroom assisted by clues from helpers , in order to discover how to rescue human hostages imprisoned by a community of half @-@ human , half @-@ animal fantasy creatures . " They also launched a joint suit against Rowling and her publishers . Bloomsbury countered with a statement of its own , saying that " This claim is without merit and will be defended vigorously , " and that Rowling " had never heard of Adrian Jacobs nor seen , read or heard of his book Willy the Wizard until this claim was first made in 2004 , almost seven years after the publication of the first Harry Potter book . " The Jacobs estate , driven by his son and grandson , have published a website with details and excerpts from the book , according to the Toronto Star . In July 2010 , the estate filed suit against Rowling 's American publisher , Scholastic , demanding that the company burn all copies of Goblet of Fire . 
 On 6 January 2011 , the US lawsuit against Scholastic was dismissed . The judge in the case stated that there was not enough similarity between the two books to make a case for plagiarism . In the UK courts , on 21 March 2011 , Paul Allen , a trustee of the Jacobs estate , was ordered to pay as security to the court 65 % of the costs faced by Bloomsbury and Rowling , amounting to over £ <unk> , to avoid the claim being struck out . It was reported in The Bookseller that Paul Allen has appealed against paying this sum . As a condition of the appeal , he paid £ 50 @,@ 000 to the court in May 2011 . The claim was formally struck out in July 2011 after the deadline for Allen 's initial payment was missed . 
 = = International publications = = 
 In 2002 , an unauthorised Chinese @-@ language sequel titled Harry Potter and Bao <unk> ( Chinese : Simplified : <unk> , Traditional : <unk> , Hanyu Pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) appeared for sale in the People 's Republic of China . ( In English @-@ language media this was mistranslated as Harry Potter and Leopard @-@ Walk @-@ Up @-@ to @-@ Dragon . ) According to translated excerpts , the book principally consists of the text of J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Hobbit , but with most names changed to those of Harry Potter characters . The book was quickly recognised by media outlets as a fake . Rowling and Warner Bros. took steps to stop its distribution . Copies were briefly distributed around the world , including e @-@ book copies traded on the Internet . In November 2002 , the <unk> Publishing House , in the southwestern city of Chengdu , agreed to pay a £ 1 @,@ 600 ( US $ 3 @,@ 400 ) fine and publish an apology in China 's Legal Times for printing and distributing the novel . As of 2007 , the identity of the anonymous " author " has not been discovered . The opening of Harry Potter and Bao <unk> , translated into English , was included in several news articles . As of 2007 , it is estimated that there are fifteen million copies of fraudulent Harry Potter novels circulating in China . In 2007 , Rowling 's agents , the Christopher Little Literary Agency , began to discuss the possibility of legal proceedings concerning a fake version of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows that appeared in China ten days before the actual book 's publication . 
 In 2003 , legal pressure from Harry Potter 's publishers led an Indian publisher to stop publication of Harry Potter in Calcutta by Uttam Ghosh ; a work in which Harry meets figures from Bengali literature . The case was settled out of court . 
 Also in 2003 , courts in the Netherlands prevented the distribution of a Dutch translation of Tanya Grotter and the Magical Double Bass , the first of Dmitri <unk> ' popular Russian series about a female apprentice wizard . Rowling and her publishers sued , arguing that the Grotter books violate copyright law . <unk> and his original Moscow @-@ based publishers , <unk> , argued that the books constitute a parody , permitted under copyright . The Dutch courts ruled that the books did not constitute parody and thus were not allowed to be sold in the Netherlands . Later that year , as the Dutch translation <unk> Grotter en de <unk> <unk> was still legal in Belgium , the Flemish publishers <unk> Books decided to print 1 @,@ 000 copies ( and no more ) in order to let people decide whether it was plagiarism , hoping that under those circumstances Rowling and her publishers would not sue . Rowling did not sue , but as there was a lot of interest in the book ( Dutch people could buy the book by postal order from another Flemish publisher , <unk> <unk> ) it was soon sold out . The books continue to be published in Russia and have spawned several sequels . 
 In August 2008 , Warner Bros. filed a lawsuit against production company Mirchi Movies due to the similarity of the title of their Bollywood film Hari Puttar : A Comedy of Terrors to the Harry Potter film series . Mirchi Movies CEO <unk> <unk> claimed there is very little similarity between Hari Puttar and any elements in the Harry Potter franchise , and explained that Hari is a popular Indian name , while " <unk> " means " son " in Punjabi , although Indian versions of Harry Potter also translate Harry 's name to Hari Puttar . The film was delayed until late September . Warner Bros. claimed that the title was confusing , but Mirchi Movies claimed they registered the name in 2005 . On 24 September 2008 , the court in Delhi rejected Warner Bros. ' claim , saying that Harry Potter readers were sufficiently able to distinguish between the two works . They also accused Warner Bros. of delaying the action , since they were aware of the film as far back as 2005 . 
 = = Other accusations of infringement = = 
 In 2000 , in the lead @-@ up to the release of the first Harry Potter film , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone ; Warner Bros. , the film 's distributor , sent a series of letters to owners of Harry Potter fansites , demanding that , to protect their copyright , they hand over their domain names . The action resulted in negative publicity for the company when Claire Field , the then 15 @-@ year @-@ old webmaster of the British fansite <unk> , was reduced to tears by what were described by her father as unnecessary bully tactics . Eventually the corporation backed down in the face of media opposition and declared that , as the site was non @-@ commercial , it did not violate the trademark . 
 In their May 2004 issue , the US Army publication The Preventive Maintenance Monthly , which instructs soldiers on how to maintain their equipment , featured a spoof comic based on Harry Potter , featuring a character named Topper who resided at <unk> School under Professor <unk> . The publication received notice from Rowling 's lawyers that the comics breached copyright , though the magazine 's editor , Ken Crunk , claimed that no violation had taken place , as " [ t ] he drawings do not look like any of the characters from Harry Potter " . After a discussion with Rowling 's representatives , the magazine agreed not to use the characters again . 
 In 2004 , Rowling and Time Warner launched legal actions against <unk> , now the Indian branch of the online auction site eBay . The site had hosted illegally created e @-@ books of Harry Potter , which Rowling had never agreed to be published . In 2005 , Rowling warned her fans on her website that various " signed " Harry Potter memorabilia appearing for sale on eBay did not in fact use her signature . She urged her fans to protest eBay to prevent other children from being swindled . In 2007 , Rowling launched lawsuits against a number of users of the site , obtaining a series of stay orders preventing them from selling her work . However eBay claimed that in her dealings with the media , Rowling had falsely claimed that her injunctions had been against eBay itself . In June 2007 , eBay filed papers with the Delhi High Court , alleging that Rowling had caused them " immense humiliation and harassment " . The High Court circumvented the application , claiming that it could not make such a judgment until the case went to trial . 
 In October 2007 , Warner Bros. sued a group constructing a façade during a Hindu religious festival in the Indian city of Kolkata for ₹ 2 million ( US $ 30 @,@ 000 ) , claiming that they had erected a giant replica of Harry Potter 's school , Hogwarts , without their permission . Initial reports stated that , as the effort was not for profit , it did not violate Rowling 's copyright . The Associated Press claimed that the High Court of Delhi , where the petition was filed , allowed the organisers to carry on with the temporary construction with an order that the structure had to be dismantled after the festival was over and that the court refused to impose any compensation on the basis that the organisers were involved in a " non @-@ profit making enterprise " . However , these statements were later retracted : the court had in fact ruled in favour of Warner Bros. , but no fine had been ordered , and Warner Bros. claimed that they had only requested a fine because such action was necessary under Indian law . In November 2007 , Rowling discussed the case on her website , listing the rumours that she had targeted a non @-@ profit organisation as " Toxic " and saying , " The defendants were not religious charities , and theirs was not a religious celebration . On the contrary , it was a large @-@ scale , commercial , sponsored event involving corporations that included a major Indian high street bank . The event was , however , set up while a Hindu festival was going on ... The court ruled that Warner Bros. rights had indeed been infringed , and that events such as the one in question would need Warner Bros. ' permission in the future . The court also restrained all the defendants from any future events infringing Warner Bros. rights . " 
 On 31 October 2007 , Warner Bros. and Rowling sued Michigan @-@ based publishing firm <unk> Books to block the publication of a 400 @-@ page book version of the Harry Potter Lexicon , an online reference guide to her work . Rowling , who previously had a good relationship with Lexicon owner Steve Vander Ark , reiterated on her website that she plans to write a Harry Potter encyclopedia , and that the publication of a similar book before her own would hurt the proceeds of the official encyclopaedia , which she plans to give to charity . A judge later barred publication of the book in any form until the case was resolved . In their suit , Rowling 's lawyers also asserted that , as the book describes itself as a print facsimile of the Harry Potter Lexicon website , it would publish excerpts from the novels and stills from the films without offering sufficient " transformative " material to be considered a separate work . The trial concluded on 17 April 2008 . On 8 September 2008 , the judge ruled in her favour , claiming that the book would violate the terms of fair use . In December , 2008 , a modified ( and shorter ) version of Vander Ark 's Lexicon was approved for publication and was released 16 January 2009 as The Lexicon : An Unauthorized Guide to Harry Potter Fiction . 
 In November 2007 , The Scotsman reported that Rowling had threatened legal action against American computer programmer G. Norman Lippert for allegedly violating her intellectual property rights by producing and publishing the online novel , James Potter and the Hall of Elders ' Crossing , an unofficial and unauthorised continuation of the Harry Potter series . Written as a fan fiction project for Lippert 's wife and sons , the novel is set eighteen years after the end of the last official installment in the series , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , and describes the adventures of Harry Potter 's son , James Sirius Potter , during his first year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry . A specialist in intellectual property law at Strathclyde University commented that , " If an insubstantial character from a novel is taken and built up by another author in a new story , that can be a defence against copyright infringements . " However , after Lippert offered Rowling an advance copy of the novel , Rowling dismissed her threat and said she supported the novel and any others like it . Lippert subsequently produced a sequel , James Potter and the Curse of the Gatekeeper . After the novel first appeared online in early November 2007 , some Harry Potter fans on the Internet initially speculated that the site might be part of an elaborate viral marketing campaign for an official continuation or spinoff of Harry Potter , one either written or at least approved by Rowling herself . On 9 November 2007 , Rowling 's agent Neil Blair denied that Rowling was in any way involved with the purported project , and Warner Bros. , the studio which owns the rights to the Harry Potter film series , denied that the novel was in any way connected to the official Harry Potter franchise . 
 = = Legal injunctions = = 
 Rowling and her publishers have brought a series of legal injunctions to ensure the books ' secrecy before their launch . These injunctions have drawn criticism from civil liberties campaigners over their potentially sweeping powers over individual freedoms . 
 In 2003 , in an attempt to maintain secrecy over the impending release of the fifth Harry Potter book , Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix , Rowling and her publishers sought and received a groundbreaking injunction against " the person or persons who has or have physical possession of a copy of the said book or any part thereof without the consent of the Claimants " . The ruling obtained , for the first time in British law , an injunction against unnamed or unknown individuals ; before then , injunctions could only be obtained against named individuals . Lawyers <unk> noted that , " The new Harry Potter style injunction could be used if you expected a demonstration or trespass to take place , but which had not yet begun , so long as you could find a description for the people expected which the Court was satisfied identified ' those who are included and those who are not ' " . The " Potter injunction " was later used against a camp of Roma travellers . In 2006 , pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline employed the injunction against anonymous animal rights campaigners who had sent threatening letters to their investors . 
 The series garnered more controversy in 2005 with the release of the sixth book , Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , when a Real Canadian Superstore grocery store accidentally sold several copies before the authorised release date . The Canadian publisher , Raincoast Books , obtained an injunction from the Supreme Court of British Columbia prohibiting the purchasers from reading the books in their possession . A comment by a media lawyer that " there is no human right to read " led to a debate in the public sphere about whether free access to information was a human right . Michael Geist , the Canada Research Chair of Internet and E @-@ commerce Law at the University of Ottawa , said in response , " The copyright law claim was particularly puzzling . While copyright law does provide copyright owners with a basket of exclusive rights , the right to prohibit reading is not among them . In fact , copyright law has very little to say about what people can do with a book once they have purchased it . " Free @-@ speech activist Richard Stallman posted a statement on his blog calling for a boycott until the publisher issued an apology . Solicitors Fraser Milner and <unk> , who represented Raincoast and formulated the legal argument for the embargo , have rebutted this , saying that the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms applies only to the government , not to private litigation , and does not offer any protection of the right to read in any case , and the innocent purchasers of the Harry Potter book had no more right to read it than if they had come into possession of someone 's secret diary . 
 In 2007 , Scholastic Corporation threatened legal action against two booksellers , Levy Home Entertainment and DeepDiscount.com , for selling copies of the final novel , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , before its release date of 21 July . In an official statement , Scholastic appealed " to the Harry Potter fans who bought their books from DeepDiscount.com and may receive copies early requesting that they keep the packages hidden until midnight on 21 July . " Customers who agreed not to read the book received a special Harry Potter t @-@ shirt and a $ 50 coupon for Scholastic 's online store . 
 = = Blackmail = = 
 In June 2005 , Aaron Lambert , a security guard at a book distribution centre in Corby , Northamptonshire , England , stole a number of pages from Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince six weeks before its intended publication date . He was arrested a day later after negotiations to sell them to John Askill , a journalist from The Sun , turned violent . Lambert reportedly fired a shot from his imitation Walther PPK pistol , but Askill was unharmed . At his trial the following October , Lambert pleaded guilty to threatening Askill and to attempting to blackmail Harry Potter 's publishers , Bloomsbury . In January 2006 , Lambert was sentenced to four and a half years in prison . In November 2011 , in her testimony before the Leveson Inquiry , Rowling said that the Sun had attempted to " blackmail " her into a photo @-@ op in return for returning the stolen manuscript . 
 = = Accusation of libel = = 
 In July 2007 , a dispute arose between Harry Potter 's British publisher , Bloomsbury , and Asda , a British supermarket chain owned by the US corporation Wal @-@ Mart . On 15 July , a week before the release of the final Harry Potter novel , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , Asda issued a press release accusing Bloomsbury of unfairly fixing their prices . Asda spokesman Peter Pritchard claimed that Bloomsbury was " holding children to ransom " and that , " [ i ] t seems like Bloomsbury need to do a quid @-@ ditch as they have sent their prices up north on the Hogwarts Express . By setting the recommended retail price at this level can only be seen [ sic ] as blatant profiteering on their part . " Pritchard went on to say that Asda was acting to " champion the right of young readers " , and that the recommended retail price was " twice the average child 's pocket money and £ 5 more than the average children 's bestseller " . Asda had planned to sell the book as a loss leader at £ 8 @.@ 87 ( $ 16 @.@ 30 ) , or half Bloomsbury 's recommended retail price of £ 17 @.@ 99 ( $ 33 @.@ 00 ) and below the wholesale price of £ 9 @.@ 89 ( $ 18 @.@ 00 ) . 
 Two days later , Bloomsbury responded that the claims were " potentially libellous " and that : 
 Asda 's latest attempt to draw attention to themselves involves trying to leap on the Harry Potter bandwagon . This is just another example of their repeated efforts of appearing as Robin Hood in the face of controversy about their worldwide group , which would suggest they are perceived as more akin to the Sheriff of Nottingham . Loss leaders were invented by supermarkets and have nothing to do with Bloomsbury Publishing or Harry Potter and we deeply regret having been dragged into their price @-@ wars . 
 Bloomsbury stated that the price hike of £ 1 from the previous Harry Potter novel was due to it having been printed on recycled paper . " There is a price to be paid by the consumer for environmental best practice " , a Bloomsbury spokeswoman said . 
 Bloomsbury CEO Nigel Newton said , " [ They have ] unleashed a very disingenuous , self @-@ interested attack on us . This is complete nonsense and all they 're doing is grandstanding as they 've done on the price of aspirin and bread . They try to turn it into a big deal as though it 's a moral crusade for them , but it 's nothing of the kind . " 
 That same day , Bloomsbury cancelled all Asda 's orders of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , or roughly 500 @,@ 000 copies , citing unpaid bills from the company totalling £ 38 @,@ 000 ( $ 70 @,@ 000 ) for unauthorised returns of the sixth Harry Potter book . " The two matters are completely unrelated " , said a Bloomsbury spokeswoman , " We decided today that we couldn 't risk having arrears with anybody . " The dispute had been " going on a while – going on for weeks actually . " Asda responded that Bloomsbury owed them £ 122 @,@ 000 ( $ 224 @,@ 000 ) ( " for <unk> and for other book trade issues and work we have done for them " ) and that , as one company spokesman claimed , " It just seems funny that after we expose the potty Potter price hike , Bloomsbury are trying everything they can to stop kids getting hold of Harry Potter at a price they can afford . " 
 Asda paid the bill within hours , and claimed that Bloomsbury would be in breach of contract if it did not allow the store to sell its books . However , Bloomsbury claimed that the block on Asda 's orders was still in place as , " Unfortunately , we 've now had to initiate a significant libel claim against them . That matter will have to be dealt with . If they want their 500 @,@ 000 books , they 'll have to come and make peace with us ... It could be good news for all their disappointed customers , because they don 't have to go to a soulless Asda shed to buy their book and they can share the magic of Harry Potter at an independent or specialist bookstore instead . " 
 Upon receipt of Bloomsbury 's legal letter , Asda responded that , " There is nothing defamatory in our press release . Everything there is factual . It is a commentary on how we see things . " Said another Asda spokesperson , " If they don 't supply us with the books , it will have a massive implication and [ be ] a breach of contract – but I don 't think they will do that . " 
 Later that day , however , Asda released a statement retracting its original comment : " We apologise unreservedly to Bloomsbury for [ our ] press release dated 15 July and withdraw our statement . We look forward to a good relationship with Bloomsbury going forward , including selling the latest Harry Potter book from 00 : 01 am BST on Saturday 21 July and many other Bloomsbury books in the future " . In response , Bloomsbury lifted the block and Asda was allowed to sell its books . The original press release was then expunged . 
 The rationale behind Asda 's initial press release remains uncertain . Neill Denny , commentator for <unk> , opined that " the whole episode has the whiff of a badly @-@ conceived PR stunt by ill @-@ briefed senior executives at Asda out of touch with the subtleties of the book world . " Ralph Baxter of Publishing News concurred : " For Asda ... it may be seen as mission accomplished , a high @-@ risk strategy to maximise publicity for its Harry Potter offer rewarded with television , radio , Internet and newspaper coverage . And the association of Asda with low prices has no doubt been entrenched in a few more minds . " 
 = Headline News ( song ) = 
 " Headline News " is a parody song by " Weird Al " Yankovic . It is a parody of the Crash Test Dummies 's 1993 hit " Mmm Mmm Mmm Mmm " . It was released as the lead @-@ off single for the compilation box set Permanent Record : Al in the Box on September 27 , 1994 . The song was written after Yankovic 's label insisted he craft a new song to promote the album ; Yankovic in turn combined the music of the Crash Test Dummies ' song with three news stories that were popular in late 1993 and early 1994 . 
 To help promote the song and album , Yankovic directed a music video that was a direct parody of the Crash Test Dummies ' original . In it , the three news stories are presented as if they are one @-@ act plays before an audience of people . The video took two days to film and ended up running over the allotted time that had been scheduled for filming . The resulting video was also extremely expensive to fund . Several notable individuals made cameos in the video , such as Doug Llewelyn , Dr. Demento , Yokozuna and Judy <unk> . 
 The song and video were met with mostly positive reviews from critics , although at least one critic noted that the source material would soon become dated . The Crash Test Dummies were very pleased with the final result and even performed the song with Yankovic in concert twice . " Headline News " charted at number four on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , making it Yankovic 's first single to chart domestically since 1992 's " Smells Like Nirvana " . 
 = = Writing = = 
 While Yankovic was writing the original songs for a new album — which was later released in 1996 as Bad Hair Day — his label , Scotti Brothers Records , insisted that he release a new record in order to meet monetary projections for the fourth fiscal quarter of the year . Yankovic , however , explained that he would be unable to finish a new record in time , so his label decided to release a box set entitled Permanent Record : Al in the Box . The label then stipulated that Yankovic would need to at least record a new single to promote the box set . 
 Yankovic had previously heard " Mmm Mmm Mmm Mmm " during 1994 and felt that it was " one of two or three songs " that could be potentially parodied . He noted that it " would be really good to do for the next album " , but felt that " when the time is right , [ he would ] think of something " to write the parody about ; he then returned his attention to writing original songs . After Scotti Brothers insisted on the writing of a new lead single , Yankovic very nearly had his label cancel the box set due to being unable to write under pressure . However , he soon returned to the idea of parodying " Mmm Mmm Mmm Mmm " . He decided to pair the song 's music up with " all the weird news stories that were going on " and make each verse its own vignette . Yankovic also felt that by doing this and releasing it on the box set , he would be able to capitalize on the topicality of the issues . 
 = = Recording and lyrics = = 
 Recording for the song itself started on July 27 , 1994 , at Santa Monica Sound Recorders in Santa Monica , California . Backing Yankovic were Jon " Bermuda " Schwartz on drums , Steve Jay on bass , Jim West on guitar , and Kim Bullard on keyboards . Lisa Popeil provides the female backup vocals , as well as the scream of Nancy Kerrigan . The song also features various idiosyncratic elements to increase the humor . The song features <unk> Mike Kieffer , who produces the flatulence @-@ esque sound effects heard near the end of the song . Additionally , the ending features a chorus of kazoos , and Yankovic plays a short riff of the song on his trademark instrument , the accordion . Yankovic himself produced the session . Due to the vocal part of the original being in such a low register , Yankovic had to record the parody 's vocal tracks early in the morning , when his voice was naturally lower . 
 While the original song 's verses each told the story of three abnormal children , each verse of " Headline News " tells the story of three famous tabloid stories of 1993 and 1994 : Singapore caning American delinquent Michael Fay , figure skater Tonya Harding 's then @-@ boyfriend attacking her rival Nancy Kerrigan , and Lorena Bobbitt severing her husband 's penis with a knife . In the last verse , Yankovic substitutes the term " penis " with euphemisms like " wiener " and " Mr. Happy " . Yankovic later joked that he " wanted to write a song about these people because [ he didn 't ] think they 're getting quite enough media attention " , a reference to the stories ' over @-@ saturation in the news . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Headline News " parodies the " Mmm Mmm Mmm Mmm " video in that it presents each news story as a one @-@ act play on stage before an audience of people . The video was directed by Yankovic , making it his third directoral credit after 1986 's " Christmas at Ground Zero " and 1993 's " Bedrock Anthem " . Yankovic appears as Brad Roberts , and his band appears as the other members of the Crash Test Dummies ; notably , the video also marks the on @-@ screen debut of Yankovic 's official keyboardist , Rubén <unk> , who appears in drag as Ellen Reid . The video was filmed on August 29 and 31 , 1994 . All of the scenes that took place at the school were filmed during the day at Longfellow Elementary School Auditorium , in Pasadena , California . The scenes at the ice rink were filmed at night in a rink in Paramount , California . According to Yankovic , the crew ran over time and it was a rather expensive video . Yankovic noted that " without giving you the actual number " , he could have " recorded two albums , probably , for what it cost to do that one video . " The video features several celebrity cameos , including an appearance by Doug Llewelyn of People 's Court fame , and long time radio show host Dr. Demento . <unk> Judy <unk> also appears as Lorena Bobbitt . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 " Headline News " was released on September 26 , 1994 , as the lead @-@ off single for Permanent Record : Al in the Box , which was also released a day later . Yankovic also insisted that the song be commercially available as a CD single so that his fans who are completists would not have to purchase the expensive box set just to get the new song . Much like the cover for the Crash Test Dummies 's 1993 studio album God <unk> His Feet , the cover for Yankovic 's single superimposes his faces over the figures of Titian 's painting Bacchus and Ariadne . The art direction is credited to Doug <unk> , and design is credit to Daniel Sorenson , David McDougall . The b @-@ side of " Headline News " was a remix of Yankovic 's 1986 original song " Christmas at Ground Zero " . The song was never officially released on a studio album , although it did appear on Yankovic 's Greatest Hits Volume II album , which was released a month later on October 25 , 1994 . The single charted and peaked at number four on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , which corresponds to a position of 104 on the Billboard Hot 100 . This made it Yankovic 's first domestically charting single since 1992 's " Smells Like Nirvana " . 
 Brad Roberts , the original songwriter for " Mmm Mmm Mmm Mmm " was extremely pleased with the parody , and found it humorous . He later noted that , " People assume that I was annoyed but when [ Yankovic ] does a parody of you , you know you 've made it . " He later praised the way Yankovic interacted with the artists that he parodies , noting that " Weird Al goes the whole route and cultivates a relationship with the artist . Plus he gets half the earnings and that helps me make money . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Headline News " received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Lou <unk> of the Chicago Tribune wrote that the song " provided savage laughs at the expense of Tonya Harding and John Bobbitt . " Roch Parisien of Allmusic cited the song as one of the three stand @-@ outs from Yankovic 's second greatest hits volume , and called it a " rib @-@ tickler " . Tina Maps of The Milwaukee Journal wrote a positive review and felt that the musical parody was a " dead @-@ on skewering of the Crash Test Dummies ' ' Mmm , Mmm , Mmm , Mmm " . Not all reviews , however , were so positive ; an article that appeared in The Commercial Appeal noted that while the video for " Headline News " had some " cute bits and unusual cameos " , it was " not as clever as many of Yankovic 's past efforts " and that " the current events included here are already dated " . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Yankovic first started performing " Headline News " in August 1994 , almost a month before it was officially released . In addition , Yankovic has performed the song with the Crash Test Dummies twice : once on Canada 's MuchMusic channel and another time at the House of Blues in Los Angeles . Reportedly , during one of the performances , Ellen Reid , backing vocalist and keyboardist for the Crash Test Dummies , went out and purchased kazoos . The band then hid the instruments until the end of the song , when they took them out and played them ; this " came as a big surprise to " Yankovic . Yankovic 's Straight Outta Lynwood concert tour contained new lyrics as part of a parody medley , referencing Britney Spears , dealing with her 2007 head @-@ shaving shock and underpants @-@ less limousine trip in late 2006 . Later in the tour , he changed it to reference Paris Hilton 's DUI and imprisonment , and her subsequent interview on Larry King Live . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 CD single 
 " Headline News " – 3 : 46 
 " Christmas at Ground Zero ( Alternate Mix ) " – 3 : 07 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 " Weird " Al Yankovic – Lead and backing vocals , accordion , production , arrangement 
 Jim West – guitar 
 Steve Jay – bass guitar 
 Jon " Bermuda " Schwartz – drums 
 Kim Bullard – keyboards 
 Lisa Popeil - backing vocals 
 Mike Kieffer – <unk> 
 Tony Papa – engineering 
 = Al Aaraaf = 
 " Al Aaraaf " is an early poem by American writer Edgar Allan Poe , first published in 1829 . It is based on stories from the Qur 'an , and tells of the afterlife in a place called Al Aaraaf . At 422 lines , it is Poe 's longest poem . 
 " Al Aaraaf " , which Poe claimed to have written before he was 15 , was first published as the major poem in Poe 's 1829 collection Al Aaraaf , Tamerlane , and Minor Poems . The book and " Al Aaraaf " in particular received mostly negative reviews for its complexity , obscure references , and odd structure . Some , however , noted the potential in the young poet , including John C. Neal , to whom Poe had shown " Al Aaraaf " prior to publication . Poe would later refer to Neal 's response as the first words of encouragement he had received . Nevertheless , the negative response to " Al Aaraaf " may have inspired Poe 's later poetic theory that poems should be kept short . 
 Years later , in 1845 , Poe used " Al Aaraaf " to hoax members of the Boston literary circle during a reading . Poe claimed the poem was a new one and his audience was perplexed by it . He later claimed a Boston crowd did not deserve a new poem . He held a strong dislike for New England poets and the New England @-@ based Transcendental movement and hoped by presenting a poem he had written in his youth would prove Bostonians did not know good literature . 
 = = Overview = = 
 " Al Aaraaf " is the longest poem Poe wrote and was inspired by Tycho Brahe 's discovery of a supernova back in 1572 which was visible for about seventeen months . Poe identified this nova with Al Aaraaf , a star that was the place between paradise and hell . Al @-@ <unk> ( Arabic <unk> , alternatively transcribed <unk> or Al Orf ) was a place where people who have been neither markedly good nor markedly bad had to stay until forgiven by God and let into Paradise , as discussed in Sura 7 of the Qur 'an . As Poe explained to a potential publisher : 
 Its title is " Al Aaraaf " from the Al Aaraaf of the Arabians , a medium between Heaven and Hell where men suffer no punishment , but yet do not attain that tranquil & even happiness which they suppose to be the characteristics of heavenly enjoyment . 
 In the opening section of the poem , God commands Nesace , a name for Beauty 's spirit , to convey a message to " other worlds " . Nesace rouses the angel Ligeia and tells her to awaken the other thousand <unk> to perform God 's work . Two souls , however , fail to respond : the " maiden @-@ angel " Ianthe and her " seraph @-@ lover " Angelo ( Michelangelo ) , who describes his death on earth and the flight of his spirit to Al Aaraaf . Ianthe and Angelo are lovers , and their failure to do as Nesace commanded results in God not allowing them into heaven . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 " Al Aaraaf " is thick with allusions and , because of this , is often avoided by scholars because , as writer Arthur Hobson Quinn notes , it can be " unintelligible " . Nevertheless , Quinn says it possesses qualities which are important to understand the development of Poe 's skills as a poet . " Al Aaraaf " mixes historical facts , religious mythology and elements of Poe 's imagination . The poem primarily focuses on the afterlife , ideal love , and ideal beauty in relation to passion . The majority of the poem focuses on this reaching for ideal beauty and aesthetics . Characters in the poem serve as representative symbols of personified emotions . The goddess Nesace is beauty , Ligeia represents the music in nature , Ianthe and Angelo are creatures of passion . 
 The poem draws from Sura 7 ( Arabic <unk> ) in the Qur 'an ; Poe also drew upon the Qur 'an in other works , including " The Thousand @-@ and @-@ Second Tale of Scheherazade " . In " Al Aaraaf " , Poe was probably less interested in the Qur 'an itself and more interested in an atmosphere of the exotic or <unk> . The true setting of the poem is a sort of dreamscape or alternative world . As critic Floyd Stovall wrote , the theme of the poem is " one of disillusionment with the world and escape into some more congenial realm of dream or of the imagination " . 
 The star which prompted Poe to write " Al Aaraaf " was believed to foretell disaster or that humanity would be punished for breaking God 's laws . Poe may have gotten the idea to base a poem on Brahe 's astronomical discovery from poet John Keats 's use of the 1781 discovery of the planet Uranus in a poem called " On First Looking into Chapman 's Homer " ( 1816 ) . The name of the star has been changed from " Al Orf " to " Al Aaraaf " to become similar to the word <unk> , which means distinguishing between things . Additionally , Poe was indebted to Irish poet Thomas Moore , whose poem Lalla @-@ <unk> inspired , among other parts of " Al Aaraaf " , the catalogue of flowers near the beginning . Another work by Moore , The Loves of the Angels , inspired Poe 's idea of uniting mortal and immortal love . 
 Structurally , the 422 @-@ line " Al Aaraaf " has no discernible or consistent poetic rhythm , though the meter resembles a section of Lord Byron 's Manfred . Instead of formal structure , the poem focuses on the flow of sound . Poet Daniel Hoffman analyzed the fluctuating meter and determined that Part I begins as <unk> couplets then shifts to pentameter couplets with occasional interludes of alternately rhymed trimeter @-@ <unk> . Part II generally uses pentameter couplets with an interlude of anapestic <unk> . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Poe claimed he wrote " Al Aaraaf " before he was 15 years old , though he would later adapt his claim . A few passages from the poem were first published in the May 19 , 1829 , issue of the Baltimore Gazette signed " Marlow " . Poe first offered the complete poem to publishers Carey , Lea & Carey in Philadelphia around May 1829 . He wrote to them , " If the poem is published , succeed or not , I am ' irrecoverably a poet . ' But to your opinion I leave it " . He met with Isaac Lea , who was willing to publish it so long as they were protected against any loss . Poe asked his foster @-@ father John Allan to subsidize the printing but , not supportive of Poe 's literary pursuits , he refused . By July 28 , Poe wrote to the publishers asking for the return of his manuscript because , as he said , he had " made a better disposition of my poems than I had any right to expect " . 
 " Al Aaraaf " finally saw print for the first time in the collection Al Aaraaf , Tamerlane , and Minor Poems . 250 copies of the 71 @-@ page work was issued by Hatch and Dunning of Baltimore , Maryland in December 1829 . Though Poe had already self @-@ published Tamerlane and Other Poems , he considered Al Aaraaf , Tamerlane , and Minor Poems his first book . Though this was not entirely true , it was the first work published with his name , signed " Edgar A. Poe " . Poe addressed the obscurity in " Al Aaraaf " by including multiple footnotes , many of which were left untranslated from French , Latin , and Spanish . " Al Aaraaf " was published in its entirety only once in Poe 's lifetime , though some critics believe Poe never actually completed the poem because Poe implied it was originally intended to have four parts or 400 lines . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Upon publication , " Al Aaraaf " and the other poems in Poe 's collection drew harsh criticism because of how difficult it was to understand . Among the early reviewers was John Hill Hewitt , who wrote of Poe that " no man has been more shamefully overestimated " . In trying to explain the title poem , he wrote , " all our brain @-@ <unk> could not compel us to understand it line by line or the sum total " . A reviewer for the Baltimore Minerva and Emerald asked , " Has the poet been struck dumb with palsy ? " Before publication , Poe had sought the advice of William Wirt , who had earned a reputation as a distinguished man of letters in Baltimore . On " Al Aaraaf " , Wirt wrote that he was not the best judge of poetry but believed that it might be accepted by modern @-@ thinking readers . As he wrote , " but to deal candidly ... ( as I am bound to do ) I should doubt whether the poem will take with old @-@ fashioned readers like myself " . Sarah Josepha Hale of Godey 's Lady 's Book noted that " Al Aaraaf " must have been written by a young author because it was " boyish , feeble , and altogether deficient in the common characteristics of poetry " . Nevertheless , she still called the author a genius . A reviewer for the American Ladies ' Magazine also commented on the poet 's age : " [ the ] author who appears to be very young , is evidently a fine genius , but he wants judgment , experience , tact " . 
 Poe 's boasted that these early poems were superior to most other examples in American poetry . Critic John Neal , who was a friend of Poe 's cousin George Poe , responded to Poe 's claim in his review of " Al Aaraaf " for the Yankee and Boston Literary Gazette . He said Poe 's boast was " rather exquisite nonsense " but that the young author showed promise and predicted that some day Poe might " make a beautiful and perhaps a magnificent poem " to prove his claim . He believed that if future poems by Poe were as good as some of his best lines in " Al Aaraaf " : 
 He will deserve to stand high — very high — in the estimation of the shining brotherhood . Whether he will do so however , must depend , not so much upon his words now in mere poetry , as upon his worth hereafter in something yet loftier and more generous — we allude to the stronger properties of the mind , to the magnanimous determination that enables a youth to endure the present , whatever the present may be , in the hope , or rather in the belief , the fixed , unwavering belief , that in the future he will find his reward . 
 Neal 's encouragement , which came prior to publication , led Poe to include a dedication to Neal in the collection Al Aaraaf , Tamerlane , and Minor Poems . Poe 's cousin Neilson Poe was impressed by Neal 's endorsement and wrote , " Our name will be a great one yet . " Edgar Poe would refer to Neal 's comments as " the very first words of encouragement I remember to have heard . " Poe himself admitted that " Al Aaraaf " had some " good poetry " in it as well as " much extravagance , which I have not had time to throw away " . 
 In the 20th century , poet Daniel Hoffman referred to " Al Aaraaf " as " Poe 's most ambitious failure " , suggesting it is a " fractured " attempt at an epic poem that " ran out of gas " . Biographer Jeffrey Meyers called it Poe 's " most turgid and opaque poem " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 " Al Aaraaf " includes names Poe would later reuse : Ligeia and Zante . Some of the themes in the poem also foreshadow a future poem , " The City in the Sea " ( 1831 ) . The critical failure of both " Al Aaraaf " and " Tamerlane " convinced Poe that long poems are inherently flawed because they cannot sustain a proper mood or a high quality poetic form . Because of this , he never again experimented with long poetry . He would later write of his theory on short poetry in " The Poetic Principle " in 1848 . In that essay , he wrote " A long poem does not exist . I maintain that the phrase , ' a long poem , ' is simply a flat contradiction in terms . " Instead , he says , epic poetry and other long poems are actually a series of short poems strung together . Critics have suggested that this theory was written so that Poe could justify why " Al Aaraaf " was unpopular . 
 After the publication of " The Raven " in 1845 , Poe became a household name and , having reached the height of his poetic fame , he was often asked to lecture or recite poetry at public events . One such invitation came from the Boston Lyceum in October 1845 , arranged with help from James Russell Lowell . Poe had a strong dislike for the Boston literary scene and the city itself , despite having been born there . Nevertheless , he accepted the $ 50 fee and the challenge of writing a brand new poem for his appearance . 
 Fresh off his public feud with Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and his dislike of the Massachusetts @-@ based Transcendentalism movement , Poe instead decided to play a trick on his Boston audience . The program , held October 16 at Boston 's Odeon Theater , was a grand event and featured a speech by Massachusetts statesman Caleb Cushing which was two and a half hours long . Poe read " Al Aaraaf " , renamed " The Messenger Star " for the event , and tried to convince his Boston audience that the poem he wrote as a young man was new . The audience was confused by the obscure poem and many left during its recitation . Poe ended with " The Raven " , as the theater manager noted , " thus enabling us to make some show of front after a most lamentable defeat . " 
 Poe considered the hoax an opportunity to prove that Bostonians did not know good literature . Based on critical reaction , he believed he was right . The editor of the Boston Courier reviewed " The Messenger Star " as " an elegant and classic production , based on the right principles , containing the essence of true poetry , mingled with a gorgeous imagination " . When Poe claimed that he wrote the poem before he had turned 12 , Cornelia Wells Walter of the Boston Evening Transcript wrote of her shock : " A poem delivered before a literary association of adults , as written by a boy ! Only think of it ! " It is unclear how old Poe was at the time he wrote the poem because , in part , he frequently changed his claim . Lewis Gaylord Clark said Poe 's age at writing the poem was irrelevant and , though he admitted the audience did not know the author 's age , " they only knew it was sad stuff " . Modern biographer Daniel <unk> compared Poe 's stunt with the story " The Imp of the Perverse " , in which Poe wrote about " an earnest desire to tantalize a listener ... The speaker is aware that he <unk> . " 
 Upon his return to New York , Poe wrote in the Broadway Journal his view of the event . After noting that he refused to offer a didactic poem , he wrote : 
 It could scarcely be supposed that we would put ourselves to the trouble of composing for the Bostonians anything in the shape of an original poem ... We do not , ourselves , think the poem a remarkably good one : — it is not sufficiently transcendental . Still it did well enough for the Boston audience — who evinced characteristic discrimination in understanding , and especially applauding , all those knotty passages which we ourselves have not yet been able to understand ... If we cared a fig for their wrath we should not first have insulted them to their teeth , and then subjected to their tender mercies a volume of our Poems . 
 " Al Aaraaf " was used between 1928 and 1952 as a pen name by the noted Glasgow artist Hannah Frank . 
 = Midtown Madness = 
 Midtown Madness ( also known as Midtown Madness : Chicago Edition ) is a racing game developed for Windows by Angel Studios ( now Rockstar San Diego ) and published by Microsoft . The demo version was released via download on May 1 , 1999 and the completed game was released toward the end of May 1999 . Two sequels followed , with Midtown Madness 2 released in September 2000 and Midtown Madness 3 released in June 2003 for the Xbox . The game is set in Chicago and its objective is to win street races and obtain new cars . 
 Unlike racing games that restrict the player to a race track , Midtown Madness offers an open world recreation of Chicago . This setting was said to provide " an unprecedented degree of freedom to drive around in a virtual city " . Players can explore the city via one of several modes , and can determine the weather and traffic conditions for each race . The game supports multiplayer races over a local area network or the Internet . The game received generally positive reviews from gaming websites . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Midtown Madness features four single @-@ player modes : Blitz , Circuit , Checkpoint , and Cruise . In Blitz , the player must reach three checkpoints and an end destination within a time limit . The Circuit mode curtains off most of the city to form race tracks and pits the player against other cars . The Checkpoint mode combines the features of Blitz and Circuit — it has the player race against other cars to a destination — but also adds the complication of other traffic , such as police cars and pedestrians . In the Cruise mode , the player can simply explore the city at their own pace . All of these modes except Cruise are divided into missions ; completing one unlocks the next . Environmental conditions that traverse all modes include weather ( normal , rain , clouds , and snow ) , time of day ( sunrise , afternoon , sunset , and night ) , and the density of pedestrians , traffic , and police officers . The heads @-@ up display includes , alongside information about the race , a detailed map , but this display can be turned off . 
 Players start off with five vehicles , and five more are unlockable ; the vehicles available range from a Volkswagen Beetle and a Ford F @-@ 350 to a city transit bus and a Freightliner Century truck . Unlocking vehicles requires completing goals such as placing within the top three of any two races . If the player has previously won a certain race mission , they can change the race 's duration and the weather when replaying it . The Checkpoint mode allows players to also set the frequency of traffic , police cars , and pedestrians . 
 The game 's city environment is modeled after Chicago , including many of its landmarks , such as the ' L ' , the Willis Tower ( then known as the Sears Tower ) , Wrigley Field , and Soldier Field . The streets feature a number of objects into which the player can crash , including trash bins , parking meters , mailboxes , and traffic lights . In Checkpoint , other vehicles move in accordance with traffic lights , but the player is under no obligation to obey them . 
 Midtown Madness supports multiplayer games via local area network , Internet , or serial cable connection . Multiplayer mode was originally supported by Microsoft 's MSN Gaming Zone , but this service was retired on June 19 , 2006 . It is now supported by similar services such as GameSpy Arcade and <unk> , via DirectPlay . Multiplayer mode includes a Cops and Robbers mode , a capture the flag @-@ style game in which players form two teams and each team tries to steal the opposing team 's cache of gold and return it to their own hideout . 
 = = Development = = 
 Midtown Madness was one of the first games that Angel Studios ( now Rockstar San Diego ) developed for the PC . Microsoft planned to publish sequels to racing computer games with the word Madness in the title , including Motocross Madness and Monster Truck Madness . According to project director Clinton Keith , the concept behind the game came to two Microsoft employees during an attempt to cross a crowded street in Paris . They proposed their idea to Angel Studios , who had tried to sell Microsoft a 3D vehicle simulator . Angel Studios was initially hesitant to accept Microsoft 's offer given the magnitude of the proposed undertaking . They ultimately agreed and decided to use Chicago for the setting because the city was featured in several famous car chases from films , including The Blues Brothers . The development team asked Chicago residents to playtest the game to ensure that the city was recreated faithfully . PC Gamer reported that the recreation was mostly accurate , although certain landmarks were moved to enhance gameplay . 
 Angel Studios and Microsoft included regular cars in addition to the " overpowered Italian sports cars " often seen in racing games . The developers obtained permission from manufacturers to use the likenesses of selected vehicles . Microsoft received authorization from Volkswagen for the New Beetle , and Ford , for the Mustang , and the F @-@ 350 Super Duty . The decision to make only half the cars available at the outset was intended to promote a sense of competition . Microsoft staff asked Angel Studios employees to prevent players from hitting pedestrians . Angel Studios ( after deciding against rendering pedestrians in two dimensions ) developed 3D pedestrian models that could run and jump out of the way . Midtown Madness included an option to remove pedestrians , as they do not alter gameplay but may affect system performance when in a group ; consequently , the game does not require a 3D graphics card . 
 A demo version was released for download on May 1 , 1999 ; It featured three vehicles ( a Mustang , a Panoz Roadster , and a bus ) , and all driving modes except circuit . In December 1999 , Angel Studios reported that they were considering a race designer for players , but ultimately this feature was not added . The finished game was released on May 27 , 1999 . 
 Midtown Madness is distinct from other racing games of its time , especially those influenced by the Need for Speed series , in providing an open environment rather than a closed circuit . Project director Clinton Keith said that an open world makes the gameplay more diverse and adds " element [ s ] of discovery " such as finding shortcuts . Gary Whitta described the game as open world racing : " you still have checkpoints to hit [ but ] you don 't have to follow the A @-@ B @-@ C @-@ D standard to do it " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews of Midtown Madness were generally positive , with video game critics praising its gameplay . IGN wrote that the game " doesn 't rely heavily on driving authenticity ; this game 's all about fun . " The review also praised the simplicity whereby players can " pick a real @-@ world car and go " . GameSpot wrote that " it 's fun to be able to drive like a maniac [ ... ] because you know you can 't in real life . " Computer and Video Games remarked on the game 's humor , provided by other drivers , police , and competitors ( described as maniacs ) , praising the " carnage that unfolds before your windscreen " . PC Zone recommended the game , calling it highly refreshing ; Total Video Games said the game seemed a good choice , but suggested that it would be outdone by GT Interactive 's Driver , released soon after . AllGame called it a " must @-@ buy for the driving game enthusiast " and said that it would also appeal to players who are not necessarily fans of the racing car genre . Next Generation Magazine concluded its review by stating that Midtown Madness was not innovative , but that " it 'll stay on your hard drive for a while and keep you playing " . 
 IGN gave high marks to the game 's graphics , saying that " the downtown portion of Chicago is portrayed very accurately " even though other parts of the city looked more generic . Next Generation Magazine said the graphics were impressive , it praised the " thoroughly detailed " random occurrences of " cars hurtling in front of you " and " cringing pedestrians when you lurch onto the sidewalks " . GameSpot approved of the variety in third @-@ person , first @-@ person dashboard , and widescreen driving views . However , it complained of the game suffering from " choppy frame rates " and unconvincing visual effects . 
 PC Zone praised Angel Studios for avoiding gimmicks , instead presenting " accurately modelled cars and a meticulously recreated city " to the player . AllGame said Midtown Madness " possesses superb , immersive graphics " , using the different times of day and weather as an example . However , it complained that cars not controlled by the player were lacking in detail . Computer and Video Games said that as well as being " structurally and visually consistent " , the Chicago setting in Midtown Madness was " brought to life " — for instance , a " city bus legitimately pulling out at a four @-@ way junction " can end the race for a player by destroying their car . However , Total Video Games called the game 's presentation " far from optimal " even at the recommended system requirements . Reviewer Noel Brady pointed out " a serious lack of detail " and <unk> , especially without a graphics card . He was critical of the AI , declaring that cars often drive " without noticing [ the player ] at all " . In his book AI Game Engine Programming , Brian Schwab described Midtown Madness ' gameplay as " arcade style " and " fast and loose " , and said the in @-@ game traffic was satisfactory . 
 IGN described the in @-@ game narration as " a nice touch " , but noted some glitches among the otherwise " distinctive engine and horn sounds " . GameSpot called the game 's sounds exceptional , praising its variety of car noises such as the back @-@ up beeper for the bus . PC Zone praised the in @-@ game radio system , and the support for external media players . AllGame said players " get a dose of reality " with other drivers and pedestrians " hurling insults and exclamations your way " . 
 = Anarchism = 
 Anarchism is a political philosophy that advocates self @-@ governed societies based on voluntary institutions . These are often described as stateless societies , although several authors have defined them more specifically as institutions based on non @-@ hierarchical free associations . Anarchism considers the state to be undesirable , unnecessary , and harmful , because anarchists generally believe that human beings are capable of managing their own affairs on the basis of creativity , cooperation , and mutual respect , and when making individual decisions they are taking into the account others . While anti @-@ statism is central , anarchism entails opposing authority or hierarchical organisation in the conduct of all human relations 
 Anarchism draws on many currents of thought and strategy . Anarchism does not offer a fixed body of doctrine from a single particular world view , instead fluxing and flowing as a philosophy . Many types and traditions of anarchism exist , not all of which are mutually exclusive . Anarchist schools of thought can differ fundamentally , supporting anything from extreme individualism to complete collectivism . Strains of anarchism have often been divided into the categories of social and individualist anarchism or similar dual classifications . Anarchism is usually considered a radical left @-@ wing ideology , and much of anarchist economics and anarchist legal philosophy reflect anti @-@ authoritarian interpretations of communism , collectivism , syndicalism , mutualism , or participatory economics . 
 = = Etymology and terminology = = 
 The term anarchism is a compound word composed from the word anarchy and the suffix -ism , themselves derived respectively from the Greek <unk> , i.e. anarchy ( from <unk> , <unk> , meaning " one without rulers " ; from the privative prefix <unk> ( an- , i.e. " without " ) and <unk> , <unk> , i.e. " leader " , " ruler " ; ( cf. archon or <unk> , <unk> , i.e. " authority " , " sovereignty " , " realm " , " magistracy " ) ) and the suffix <unk> or <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> , from the verbal infinitive suffix <unk> , <unk> ) . The first known use of this word was in 1539 . Various factions within the French Revolution labelled opponents as anarchists ( as Robespierre did the Hébertists ) although few shared many views of later anarchists . There would be many revolutionaries of the early nineteenth century who contributed to the anarchist doctrines of the next generation , such as William Godwin and Wilhelm Weitling , but they did not use the word anarchist or anarchism in describing themselves or their beliefs . 
 The first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist was Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon , marking the formal birth of anarchism in the mid @-@ nineteenth century . Since the 1890s , and beginning in France , the term libertarianism has often been used as a synonym for anarchism and was used almost exclusively in this sense until the 1950s in the United States ; its use as a synonym is still common outside the United States . On the other hand , some use libertarianism to refer to individualistic free @-@ market philosophy only , referring to free @-@ market anarchism as libertarian anarchism . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The earliest anarchist themes can be found in the 6th century BC , among the works of Taoist philosopher Laozi , and in later centuries by Zhuangzi and Bao <unk> . Zhuangzi 's philosophy has been described by various sources as anarchist . Zhuangzi wrote , " A petty thief is put in jail . A great brigand becomes a ruler of a Nation . " Diogenes of Sinope and the Cynics , their contemporary Zeno of Citium , the founder of Stoicism , also introduced similar topics . Jesus is sometimes considered the first anarchist in the Christian anarchist tradition . Georges <unk> wrote that " The true founder of anarchy was Jesus Christ and ... the first anarchist society was that of the apostles . " In early Islamic history , some manifestations of anarchic thought are found during the Islamic civil war over the Caliphate , where the Kharijites insisted that the imamate is a right for each individual within the Islamic society . Later , some Muslim scholars , such as Amer al @-@ Basri and Abu Hanifa , led movements of boycotting the rulers , paving the way to the waqf ( endowments ) tradition , which served as an alternative to and asylum from the centralized authorities of the emirs . But such interpretations reverberates subversive religious conceptions like the aforementioned seemingly anarchistic Taoist teachings and that of other anti @-@ authoritarian religious traditions creating a complex relationship regarding the question as to whether or not anarchism and religion are compatible . This is exemplified when the glorification of the state is viewed as a form of sinful idolatry . 
 The French renaissance political philosopher Étienne de La <unk> wrote in his most famous work the Discourse on Voluntary <unk> what some historians consider an important anarchist precedent . The radical Protestant Christian Gerrard Winstanley and his group the Diggers are cited by various authors as proposing anarchist social measures in the 17th century in England . The term " anarchist " first entered the English language in 1642 , during the English Civil War , as a term of abuse , used by Royalists against their Roundhead opponents . By the time of the French Revolution some , such as the <unk> , began to use the term positively , in opposition to Jacobin centralisation of power , seeing " revolutionary government " as oxymoronic . By the turn of the 19th century , the English word " anarchism " had lost its initial negative connotation . 
 Modern anarchism sprang from the secular or religious thought of the Enlightenment , particularly Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's arguments for the moral centrality of freedom . 
 As part of the political turmoil of the 1790s in the wake of the French Revolution , William Godwin developed the first expression of modern anarchist thought . Godwin was , according to Peter Kropotkin , " the first to formulate the political and economical conceptions of anarchism , even though he did not give that name to the ideas developed in his work " , while Godwin attached his anarchist ideas to an early Edmund Burke . 
 Godwin is generally regarded as the founder of the school of thought known as ' philosophical anarchism ' . He argued in Political Justice ( 1793 ) that government has an inherently malevolent influence on society , and that it perpetuates dependency and ignorance . He thought that the spread of the use of reason to the masses would eventually cause government to wither away as an unnecessary force . Although he did not accord the state with moral legitimacy , he was against the use of revolutionary tactics for removing the government from power . Rather , he advocated for its replacement through a process of peaceful evolution . 
 His aversion to the imposition of a rules @-@ based society led him to denounce , as a manifestation of the people ’ s ‘ mental enslavement ’ , the foundations of law , property rights and even the institution of marriage . He considered the basic foundations of society as constraining the natural development of individuals to use their powers of reasoning to arrive at a mutually beneficial method of social organization . In each case , government and its institutions are shown to constrain the development of our capacity to live wholly in accordance with the full and free exercise of private judgment . 
 The French Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon is regarded as the first self @-@ proclaimed anarchist , a label he adopted in his groundbreaking work , What is Property ? , published in 1840 . It is for this reason that some claim Proudhon as the founder of modern anarchist theory . He developed the theory of spontaneous order in society , where organisation emerges without a central coordinator imposing its own idea of order against the wills of individuals acting in their own interests ; his famous quote on the matter is , " Liberty is the mother , not the daughter , of order . " In What is Property ? Proudhon answers with the famous accusation " Property is theft . " In this work , he opposed the institution of decreed " property " ( <unk> ) , where owners have complete rights to " use and abuse " their property as they wish . He contrasted this with what he called " possession , " or limited ownership of resources and goods only while in more or less continuous use . Later , however , Proudhon added that " Property is Liberty , " and argued that it was a bulwark against state power . His opposition to the state , organised religion , and certain capitalist practices inspired subsequent anarchists , and made him one of the leading social thinkers of his time . 
 The anarcho @-@ communist Joseph <unk> was the first person to describe himself as " libertarian " . Unlike Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon , he argued that , " it is not the product of his or her labour that the worker has a right to , but to the satisfaction of his or her needs , whatever may be their nature . " In 1844 in Germany the post @-@ <unk> philosopher Max Stirner published the book , The Ego and Its Own , which would later be considered an influential early text of individualist anarchism . French anarchists active in the 1848 Revolution included Anselme <unk> , Ernest <unk> , Joseph <unk> and Pierre Joseph Proudhon . 
 = = = First International and the Paris Commune = = = 
 In Europe , harsh reaction followed the revolutions of 1848 , during which ten countries had experienced brief or long @-@ term social upheaval as groups carried out nationalist uprisings . After most of these attempts at systematic change ended in failure , conservative elements took advantage of the divided groups of socialists , anarchists , liberals , and nationalists , to prevent further revolt . In Spain Ramón de la <unk> established the anarchist journal El Porvenir in La Coruña in 1845 which was inspired by Proudhon ´ s ideas . The Catalan politician Francesc Pi i <unk> became the principal translator of Proudhon 's works into Spanish and later briefly became president of Spain in 1873 while being the leader of the Democratic Republican Federal Party . According to George Woodcock " These translations were to have a profound and lasting effect on the development of Spanish anarchism after 1870 , but before that time Proudhonian ideas , as interpreted by Pi , already provided much of the inspiration for the federalist movement which sprang up in the early 1860 's . " According to the Encyclopedia Britannica " During the Spanish revolution of 1873 , Pi y <unk> attempted to establish a decentralized , or " <unk> , " political system on Proudhonian lines . " 
 In 1864 the International Workingmen 's Association ( sometimes called the " First International " ) united diverse revolutionary currents including French followers of Proudhon , <unk> , <unk> , English trade unionists , socialists and social democrats . Due to its links to active workers ' movements , the International became a significant organisation . Karl Marx became a leading figure in the International and a member of its General Council . Proudhon 's followers , the mutualists , opposed Marx 's state socialism , advocating political abstentionism and small property holdings . Woodcock also reports that the American individualist anarchists Lysander Spooner and William B. Greene had been members of the First International . In 1868 , following their unsuccessful participation in the League of Peace and Freedom ( LPF ) , Russian revolutionary Mikhail Bakunin and his collectivist anarchist associates joined the First International ( which had decided not to get involved with the LPF ) . They allied themselves with the federalist socialist sections of the International , who advocated the revolutionary overthrow of the state and the collectivization of property . 
 At first , the collectivists worked with the Marxists to push the First International in a more revolutionary socialist direction . Subsequently , the International became polarised into two camps , with Marx and Bakunin as their respective figureheads . Bakunin characterised Marx 's ideas as centralist and predicted that , if a Marxist party came to power , its leaders would simply take the place of the ruling class they had fought against . Anarchist historian George Woodcock reports that " The annual Congress of the International had not taken place in 1870 owing to the outbreak of the Paris Commune , and in 1871 the General Council called only a special conference in London . One delegate was able to attend from Spain and none from Italy , while a technical excuse – that they had split away from the Fédération Romande – was used to avoid inviting Bakunin 's Swiss supporters . Thus only a tiny minority of anarchists was present , and the General Council 's resolutions passed almost unanimously . Most of them were clearly directed against Bakunin and his followers . " In 1872 , the conflict climaxed with a final split between the two groups at the Hague Congress , where Bakunin and James Guillaume were expelled from the International and its headquarters were transferred to New York . In response , the federalist sections formed their own International at the St. <unk> Congress , adopting a revolutionary anarchist program . 
 The Paris Commune was a government that briefly ruled Paris from 18 March ( more formally , from 28 March ) to 28 May 1871 . The Commune was the result of an uprising in Paris after France was defeated in the Franco @-@ Prussian War . Anarchists participated actively in the establishment of the Paris Commune . They included Louise Michel , the Reclus brothers , and Eugene <unk> ( the latter murdered in the repression afterwards ) . As for the reforms initiated by the Commune , such as the re @-@ opening of workplaces as co @-@ operatives , anarchists can see their ideas of associated labour beginning to be realised ... Moreover , the Commune 's ideas on federation obviously reflected the influence of Proudhon on French radical ideas . Indeed , the Commune 's vision of a communal France based on a federation of delegates bound by imperative mandates issued by their electors and subject to recall at any moment echoes Bakunin 's and Proudhon 's ideas ( Proudhon , like Bakunin , had argued in favour of the " implementation of the binding mandate " in 1848 ... and for federation of communes ) . Thus both economically and politically the Paris Commune was heavily influenced by anarchist ideas . George Woodcock states : 
 a notable contribution to the activities of the Commune and particularly to the organisation of public services was made by members of various anarchist factions , including the mutualists Courbet , Longuet , and <unk> , the libertarian collectivists <unk> , Malon , and <unk> , and the <unk> Elie and <unk> Reclus and Louise Michel . 
 = = = Organised labour = = = 
 The anti @-@ authoritarian sections of the First International were the precursors of the anarcho @-@ syndicalists , seeking to " replace the privilege and authority of the State " with the " free and spontaneous organisation of labour . " In 1886 , the Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions ( <unk> ) of the United States and Canada unanimously set 1 May 1886 , as the date by which the eight @-@ hour work day would become standard . 
 In response , unions across the United States prepared a general strike in support of the event . On 3 May , in Chicago , a fight broke out when strikebreakers attempted to cross the picket line , and two workers died when police opened fire upon the crowd . The next day , 4 May , anarchists staged a rally at Chicago 's Haymarket Square . A bomb was thrown by an unknown party near the conclusion of the rally , killing an officer . In the ensuing panic , police opened fire on the crowd and each other . Seven police officers and at least four workers were killed . Eight anarchists directly and indirectly related to the organisers of the rally were arrested and charged with the murder of the deceased officer . The men became international political celebrities among the labour movement . Four of the men were executed and a fifth committed suicide prior to his own execution . The incident became known as the Haymarket affair , and was a setback for the labour movement and the struggle for the eight @-@ hour day . In 1890 a second attempt , this time international in scope , to organise for the eight @-@ hour day was made . The event also had the secondary purpose of memorializing workers killed as a result of the Haymarket affair . Although it had initially been conceived as a once @-@ off event , by the following year the celebration of International Workers ' Day on May Day had become firmly established as an international worker 's holiday . 
 In 1907 , the International Anarchist Congress of Amsterdam gathered delegates from 14 different countries , among which important figures of the anarchist movement , including Errico Malatesta , Pierre <unk> , Luigi Fabbri , Benoît <unk> , Emma Goldman , Rudolf Rocker , and Christiaan Cornelissen . Various themes were treated during the Congress , in particular concerning the organisation of the anarchist movement , popular education issues , the general strike or antimilitarism . A central debate concerned the relation between anarchism and syndicalism ( or trade unionism ) . Malatesta and <unk> were in particular disagreement themselves on this issue , as the latter thought that syndicalism was revolutionary and would create the conditions of a social revolution , while Malatesta did not consider syndicalism by itself sufficient . He thought that the trade @-@ union movement was reformist and even conservative , citing as essentially bourgeois and anti @-@ worker the phenomenon of professional union officials . Malatesta warned that the syndicalists aims were in perpetuating syndicalism itself , whereas anarchists must always have anarchy as their end and consequently refrain from committing to any particular method of achieving it . 
 The Spanish Workers Federation in 1881 was the first major anarcho @-@ syndicalist movement ; anarchist trade union federations were of special importance in Spain . The most successful was the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo ( National Confederation of Labour : CNT ) , founded in 1910 . Before the 1940s , the CNT was the major force in Spanish working class politics , attracting 1 @.@ 58 million members at one point and playing a major role in the Spanish Civil War . The CNT was affiliated with the International Workers Association , a federation of anarcho @-@ syndicalist trade unions founded in 1922 , with delegates representing two million workers from 15 countries in Europe and Latin America . In Latin America in particular " The anarchists quickly became active in organizing craft and industrial workers throughout South and Central America , and until the early 1920s most of the trade unions in Mexico , Brazil , Peru , Chile , and Argentina were anarcho @-@ syndicalist in general outlook ; the prestige of the Spanish <unk> as a revolutionary organization was undoubtedly to a great extent responsible for this situation . The largest and most militant of these organizations was the Federación Obrera Regional Argentina ... it grew quickly to a membership of nearly a quarter of a million , which dwarfed the rival <unk> unions . " 
 = = = Propaganda of the deed and illegalism = = = 
 Some anarchists , such as Johann Most , advocated publicizing violent acts of retaliation against counter @-@ revolutionaries because " we preach not only action in and for itself , but also action as propaganda . " By the 1880s , people inside and outside the anarchist movement began to use the slogan , " propaganda of the deed " to refer to individual bombings , regicides , and <unk> . From 1905 onwards , the Russian counterparts of these anti @-@ syndicalist anarchist @-@ communists become partisans of economic terrorism and illegal ' expropriations ' . " <unk> as a practice emerged and within it " The acts of the anarchist bombers and assassins ( " propaganda by the deed " ) and the anarchist burglars ( " individual <unk> " ) expressed their desperation and their personal , violent rejection of an intolerable society . Moreover , they were clearly meant to be exemplary invitations to revolt . " . France 's Bonnot Gang was the most famous group to embrace illegalism . 
 However , as soon as 1887 , important figures in the anarchist movement distanced themselves from such individual acts . Peter Kropotkin thus wrote that year in Le <unk> that " a structure based on centuries of history cannot be destroyed with a few kilos of dynamite " . A variety of anarchists advocated the abandonment of these sorts of tactics in favour of collective revolutionary action , for example through the trade union movement . The anarcho @-@ syndicalist , Fernand <unk> , argued in 1895 for renewed anarchist involvement in the labour movement on the basis that anarchism could do very well without " the individual <unk> . " 
 State repression ( including the infamous 1894 French lois <unk> ) of the anarchist and labour movements following the few successful bombings and assassinations may have contributed to the abandonment of these kinds of tactics , although reciprocally state repression , in the first place , may have played a role in these isolated acts . The dismemberment of the French socialist movement , into many groups and , following the suppression of the 1871 Paris Commune , the execution and exile of many <unk> to penal colonies , favoured individualist political expression and acts . 
 Numerous heads of state were assassinated between 1881 and 1914 by members of the anarchist movement , including Tsar Alexander II of Russia , President Sadi Carnot of France , Empress Elisabeth of Austria , King Umberto I of Italy , President William McKinley of the United States , King Carlos I of Portugal and King George I of Greece . McKinley 's assassin Leon Czolgosz claimed to have been influenced by anarchist and feminist Emma Goldman . 
 Propaganda of the deed was abandoned by the vast majority of the anarchist movement after World War I ( 1914 – 1918 ) and the 1917 October Revolution . 
 = = = Russian Revolution and other uprisings of the 1910s = = = 
 Anarchists participated alongside the Bolsheviks in both February and October revolutions , and were initially enthusiastic about the Bolshevik revolution . However , following a political falling out with the Bolsheviks by the anarchists and other left @-@ wing opposition , the conflict culminated in the 1921 Kronstadt rebellion , which the new government repressed . Anarchists in central Russia were either imprisoned , driven underground or joined the victorious Bolsheviks ; the anarchists from Petrograd and Moscow fled to Ukraine . There , in the Free Territory , they fought in the civil war against the Whites ( a grouping of monarchists and other opponents of the October Revolution ) and then the Bolsheviks as part of the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine led by Nestor Makhno , who established an anarchist society in the region for a number of months . 
 Expelled American anarchists Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman were amongst those agitating in response to Bolshevik policy and the suppression of the Kronstadt uprising , before they left Russia . Both wrote accounts of their experiences in Russia , criticising the amount of control the Bolsheviks exercised . For them , Bakunin 's predictions about the consequences of Marxist rule that the rulers of the new " socialist " Marxist state would become a new elite had proved all too true . 
 The victory of the Bolsheviks in the October Revolution and the resulting Russian Civil War did serious damage to anarchist movements internationally . Many workers and activists saw Bolshevik success as setting an example ; Communist parties grew at the expense of anarchism and other socialist movements . In France and the United States , for example , members of the major syndicalist movements of the CGT and IWW left the organisations and joined the Communist International . 
 The revolutionary wave of 1917 – 23 saw the active participation of anarchists in varying degrees of <unk> . In the German uprising known as the German Revolution of 1918 – 1919 which established the Bavarian Soviet Republic the anarchists Gustav Landauer , Silvio <unk> and Erich Mühsam had important leadership positions within the revolutionary <unk> structures . In the Italian events known as the <unk> <unk> the anarcho @-@ syndicalist trade union Unione <unk> Italiana " grew to 800 @,@ 000 members and the influence of the Italian Anarchist Union ( 20 @,@ 000 members plus <unk> Nova , its daily paper ) grew accordingly ... Anarchists were the first to suggest occupying workplaces . In the Mexican Revolution the Mexican Liberal Party was established and during the early 1910s it led a series of military offensives leading to the conquest and occupation of certain towns and districts in Baja California with the leadership of anarcho @-@ communist Ricardo Flores <unk> . 
 In Paris , the <unk> Truda group of Russian anarchist exiles , which included Nestor Makhno , concluded that anarchists needed to develop new forms of organisation in response to the structures of Bolshevism . Their 1926 manifesto , called the Organisational Platform of the General Union of Anarchists ( Draft ) , was supported . <unk> groups active today include the Workers Solidarity Movement in Ireland and the North Eastern Federation of Anarchist Communists of North America . Synthesis anarchism emerged as an organisational alternative to <unk> that tries to join anarchists of different tendencies under the principles of anarchism without adjectives . In the 1920s this form found as its main proponents Volin and Sebastien Faure . It is the main principle behind the anarchist federations grouped around the contemporary global International of Anarchist Federations . 
 = = = Conflicts with European fascist regimes = = = 
 In the 1920s and 1930s , the rise of fascism in Europe transformed anarchism 's conflict with the state . Italy saw the first struggles between anarchists and fascists . Italian anarchists played a key role in the anti @-@ fascist organisation Arditi del Popolo , which was strongest in areas with anarchist traditions , and achieved some success in their activism , such as repelling Blackshirts in the anarchist stronghold of Parma in August 1922 . The veteran Italian anarchist , Luigi Fabbri , was one of the first critical theorists of fascism , describing it as " the preventive counter @-@ revolution . " In France , where the far right leagues came close to insurrection in the February 1934 riots , anarchists divided over a united front policy . 
 Anarchists in France and Italy were active in the Resistance during World War II . In Germany the anarchist Erich Mühsam was arrested on charges unknown in the early morning hours of 28 February 1933 , within a few hours after the Reichstag fire in Berlin . Joseph Goebbels , the Nazi propaganda minister , labelled him as one of " those Jewish subversives . " Over the next seventeen months , he would be imprisoned in the concentration camps at <unk> , Brandenburg and finally , Oranienburg . On 2 February 1934 , Mühsam was transferred to the concentration camp at Oranienburg when finally on the night of 9 July 1934 , Mühsam was tortured and murdered by the guards , his battered corpse found hanging in a latrine the next morning . 
 = = = Spanish Revolution = = = 
 In Spain , the national anarcho @-@ syndicalist trade union Confederación Nacional del Trabajo initially refused to join a popular front electoral alliance , and abstention by CNT supporters led to a right wing election victory . But in 1936 , the CNT changed its policy and anarchist votes helped bring the popular front back to power . Months later , the former ruling class responded with an attempted coup causing the Spanish Civil War ( 1936 – 1939 ) . In response to the army rebellion , an anarchist @-@ inspired movement of peasants and workers , supported by armed militias , took control of Barcelona and of large areas of rural Spain where they collectivised the land . But even before the fascist victory in 1939 , the anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the Stalinists , who controlled much of the distribution of military aid to the Republican cause from the Soviet Union . According to Noam Chomsky , " the communists were mainly responsible for the destruction of the Spanish anarchists . Not just in Catalonia — the communist armies mainly destroyed the collectives elsewhere . The communists basically acted as the police force of the security system of the Republic and were very much opposed to the anarchists , partially because Stalin still hoped at that time to have some kind of pact with Western countries against Hitler . That , of course , failed and Stalin withdrew the support to the Republic . They even withdrew the Spanish gold reserves . " The events known as the Spanish Revolution was a workers ' social revolution that began during the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936 and resulted in the widespread implementation of anarchist and more broadly libertarian socialist organisational principles throughout various portions of the country for two to three years , primarily Catalonia , Aragon , Andalusia , and parts of the Levante . Much of Spain 's economy was put under worker control ; in anarchist strongholds like Catalonia , the figure was as high as 75 % , but lower in areas with heavy Communist Party of Spain influence , as the Soviet @-@ allied party actively resisted attempts at collectivization enactment . Factories were run through worker committees , agrarian areas became collectivised and run as libertarian communes . Anarchist historian Sam Dolgoff estimated that about eight million people participated directly or at least indirectly in the Spanish Revolution , which he claimed " came closer to realizing the ideal of the free stateless society on a vast scale than any other revolution in history . " Spanish Communist Party @-@ led troops suppressed the collectives and persecuted both dissident Marxists and anarchists . The prominent Italian anarchist Camillo Berneri , who volunteered to fight against Franco was killed instead in Spain by gunmen associated with the Spanish Communist Party . The city of Madrid was turned over to the <unk> forces by the last non @-@ <unk> mayor of the city , the anarchist Melchor Rodríguez García . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 Anarchism sought to reorganise itself after the war and in this context the organisational debate between synthesis anarchism and <unk> took importance once again especially in the anarchist movements of Italy and France . The Mexican Anarchist Federation was established in 1945 after the Anarchist Federation of the Centre united with the Anarchist Federation of the Federal District . In the early 1940s , the <unk> International Solidarity and the Federation of Anarchist Groups of Cuba merged into the large national organisation Asociación Libertaria de Cuba ( Cuban Libertarian Association ) . From 1944 to 1947 , the Bulgarian Anarchist Communist Federation reemerged as part of a factory and workplace committee movement , but was repressed by the new Communist regime . In 1945 in France the Fédération Anarchiste and the <unk> trade union Confédération nationale du travail was established in the next year while the also <unk> Federazione Anarchica Italiana was founded in Italy . Korean anarchists formed the League of Free Social Constructors in September 1945 and in 1946 the Japanese Anarchist Federation was founded . An International Anarchist Congress with delegates from across Europe was held in Paris in May 1948 . After World War II , an appeal in the <unk> <unk> <unk> detailing the plight of German anarchists and called for Americans to support them . By February 1946 , the sending of aid parcels to anarchists in Germany was a large @-@ scale operation . The Federation of Libertarian Socialists was founded in Germany in 1947 and Rudolf Rocker wrote for its organ , Die Freie Gesellschaft , which survived until 1953 . In 1956 the Uruguayan Anarchist Federation was founded . In 1955 the Anarcho @-@ Communist Federation of Argentina renamed itself as the Argentine Libertarian Federation . The Syndicalist Workers ' Federation was a syndicalist group in active in post @-@ war Britain , and one of Solidarity Federation 's earliest predecessors . It was formed in 1950 by members of the dissolved Anarchist Federation of Britain . Unlike the AFB , which was influenced by anarcho @-@ syndicalist ideas but ultimately not syndicalist itself , the SWF decided to pursue a more definitely syndicalist , worker @-@ centred strategy from the outset . 
 Anarchism continued to influence important literary and intellectual personalities of the time , such as Albert Camus , Herbert Read , Paul Goodman , Dwight Macdonald , Allen Ginsberg , George Woodcock , Leopold <unk> , Julian Beck , John Cage and the French Surrealist group led by André Breton , which now openly embraced anarchism and collaborated in the Fédération Anarchiste . 
 Anarcho @-@ pacifism became influential in the Anti @-@ nuclear movement and anti war movements of the time as can be seen in the activism and writings of the English anarchist member of Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament Alex Comfort or the similar activism of the American catholic anarcho @-@ pacifists Ammon <unk> and Dorothy Day . Anarcho @-@ pacifism became a " basis for a critique of militarism on both sides of the Cold War . " The resurgence of anarchist ideas during this period is well documented in Robert Graham 's Anarchism : A Documentary History of Libertarian Ideas , Volume Two : The Emergence of the New Anarchism ( 1939 – 1977 ) . 
 = = = Contemporary anarchism = = = 
 A surge of popular interest in anarchism occurred in western nations during the 1960s and 1970s . Anarchism was influential in the Counterculture of the 1960s and anarchists actively participated in the late sixties students and workers revolts . In 1968 in Carrara , Italy the International of Anarchist Federations was founded during an international anarchist conference held there in 1968 by the three existing European federations of France ( the Fédération Anarchiste ) , the Federazione Anarchica Italiana of Italy and the Iberian Anarchist Federation as well as the Bulgarian federation in French exile . 
 In the United Kingdom in the 1970s this was associated with the punk rock movement , as exemplified by bands such as Crass and the Sex Pistols . The housing and employment crisis in most of Western Europe led to the formation of communes and squatter movements like that of Barcelona , Spain . In Denmark , squatters occupied a disused military base and declared the Freetown Christiania , an autonomous haven in central Copenhagen . Since the revival of anarchism in the mid @-@ 20th century , a number of new movements and schools of thought emerged . Although feminist tendencies have always been a part of the anarchist movement in the form of anarcha @-@ feminism , they returned with vigour during the second wave of feminism in the 1960s . Anarchist anthropologist David Graeber and anarchist historian Andrej <unk> have posited a rupture between generations of anarchism , with those " who often still have not shaken the sectarian habits " of the 19th century contrasted with the younger activists who are " much more informed , among other elements , by indigenous , feminist , ecological and cultural @-@ critical ideas " , and who by the turn of the 21st century formed " by far the majority " of anarchists . 
 Around the turn of the 21st century , anarchism grew in popularity and influence as part of the anti @-@ war , anti @-@ capitalist , and anti @-@ globalisation movements . Anarchists became known for their involvement in protests against the meetings of the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) , Group of Eight , and the World Economic Forum . Some anarchist factions at these protests engaged in rioting , property destruction , and violent confrontations with police . These actions were precipitated by ad hoc , leaderless , anonymous cadres known as black blocs ; other organisational tactics pioneered in this time include security culture , affinity groups and the use of decentralised technologies such as the internet . A significant event of this period was the confrontations at WTO conference in Seattle in 1999 . According to anarchist scholar Simon Critchley , " contemporary anarchism can be seen as a powerful critique of the pseudo @-@ libertarianism of contemporary neo @-@ liberalism ... One might say that contemporary anarchism is about responsibility , whether sexual , ecological or socio @-@ economic ; it flows from an experience of conscience about the manifold ways in which the West ravages the rest ; it is an ethical outrage at the yawning inequality , impoverishment and <unk> that is so palpable locally and globally . " 
 International anarchist federations in existence include the International of Anarchist Federations , the International Workers ' Association , and International Libertarian Solidarity . The largest organised anarchist movement today is in Spain , in the form of the Confederación General del Trabajo ( CGT ) and the CNT . CGT membership was estimated at around 100 @,@ 000 for 2003 . Other active syndicalist movements include in Sweden the Central Organisation of the Workers of Sweden and the Swedish Anarcho @-@ syndicalist Youth Federation ; the CNT @-@ AIT in France ; the Unione <unk> Italiana in Italy ; in the US Workers Solidarity Alliance and the UK Solidarity Federation and Anarchist Federation . The revolutionary industrial unionist Industrial Workers of the World , claiming 3 @,@ 000 paying members , and the International Workers Association , an anarcho @-@ syndicalist successor to the First International , also remain active . 
 = = Anarchist schools of thought = = 
 Anarchist schools of thought had been generally grouped in two main historical traditions , individualist anarchism and social anarchism , which have some different origins , values and evolution . The individualist wing of anarchism emphasises negative liberty , i.e. opposition to state or social control over the individual , while those in the social wing emphasise positive liberty to achieve one 's potential and argue that humans have needs that society ought to fulfill , " recognizing equality of entitlement " . In a chronological and theoretical sense , there are classical – those created throughout the 19th century – and post @-@ classical anarchist schools – those created since the mid @-@ 20th century and after . 
 Beyond the specific factions of anarchist thought is philosophical anarchism , which embodies the theoretical stance that the state lacks moral legitimacy without accepting the imperative of revolution to eliminate it . A component especially of individualist anarchism philosophical anarchism may accept the existence of a minimal state as unfortunate , and usually temporary , " necessary evil " but argue that citizens do not have a moral obligation to obey the state when its laws conflict with individual autonomy . One reaction against sectarianism within the anarchist milieu was " anarchism without adjectives " , a call for toleration first adopted by Fernando <unk> del Mármol in 1889 in response to the " bitter debates " of anarchist theory at the time . In abandoning the hyphenated <unk> ( i.e. <unk> , <unk> , mutualist – and individualist @-@ anarchism ) , it sought to emphasise the anti @-@ authoritarian beliefs common to all anarchist schools of thought . 
 = = = Classical anarchist schools of thought = = = 
 = = = = Mutualism = = = = 
 Mutualism began in 18th @-@ century English and French labour movements before taking an anarchist form associated with Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon in France and others in the United States . Proudhon proposed spontaneous order , whereby organisation emerges without central authority , a " positive anarchy " where order arises when everybody does " what he wishes and only what he wishes " and where " business transactions alone produce the social order . " It is important to recognize that Proudhon distinguished between ideal political possibilities and practical governance . For this reason , much in contrast to some of his theoretical statements concerning ultimate spontaneous self @-@ governance , Proudhon was heavily involved in French parliamentary politics and allied himself not with Anarchist but Socialist factions of workers movements and , in addition to advocating state @-@ protected charters for worker @-@ owned cooperatives , promoted certain nationalization schemes during his life of public service . 
 <unk> anarchism is concerned with reciprocity , free association , voluntary contract , federation , and credit and currency reform . According to the American mutualist William Batchelder Greene , each worker in the mutualist system would receive " just and exact pay for his work ; services equivalent in cost being exchangeable for services equivalent in cost , without profit or discount . " Mutualism has been retrospectively characterised as ideologically situated between individualist and collectivist forms of anarchism . Proudhon first characterised his goal as a " third form of society , the synthesis of communism and property . " 
 = = = = Individualist anarchism = = = = 
 Individualist anarchism refers to several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasize the individual and their will over any kinds of external determinants such as groups , society , traditions , and ideological systems . Individualist anarchism is not a single philosophy but refers to a group of individualistic philosophies that sometimes are in conflict . 
 In 1793 , William Godwin , who has often been cited as the first anarchist , wrote Political Justice , which some consider the first expression of anarchism . Godwin , a philosophical anarchist , from a rationalist and utilitarian basis opposed revolutionary action and saw a minimal state as a present " necessary evil " that would become increasingly irrelevant and powerless by the gradual spread of knowledge . Godwin advocated individualism , proposing that all cooperation in labour be eliminated on the premise that this would be most conducive with the general good . 
 An influential form of individualist anarchism , called " egoism , " or egoist anarchism , was expounded by one of the earliest and best @-@ known proponents of individualist anarchism , the German Max Stirner . Stirner 's The Ego and Its Own , published in 1844 , is a founding text of the philosophy . According to Stirner , the only limitation on the rights of individuals is their power to obtain what they desire , without regard for God , state , or morality . To Stirner , rights were spooks in the mind , and he held that society does not exist but " the individuals are its reality " . Stirner advocated self @-@ assertion and foresaw unions of <unk> , non @-@ systematic associations continually renewed by all parties ' support through an act of will , which Stirner proposed as a form of organisation in place of the state . Egoist anarchists argue that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals . " <unk> " has inspired many interpretations of Stirner 's philosophy . It was re @-@ discovered and promoted by German philosophical anarchist and LGBT activist John Henry Mackay . 
 Josiah Warren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist , and the four @-@ page weekly paper he edited during 1833 , The Peaceful Revolutionist , was the first anarchist periodical published . For American anarchist historian Eunice Minette Schuster " It is apparent ... that Proudhonian Anarchism was to be found in the United States at least as early as 1848 and that it was not conscious of its affinity to the Individualist Anarchism of Josiah Warren and Stephen Pearl Andrews ... William B. Greene presented this Proudhonian Mutualism in its purest and most systematic form . " . Henry David Thoreau ( 1817 – 1862 ) was an important early influence in individualist anarchist thought in the United States and Europe . Thoreau was an American author , poet , naturalist , tax resister , development critic , surveyor , historian , philosopher , and leading transcendentalist . He is best known for his books Walden , a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings , and his essay , Civil Disobedience , an argument for individual resistance to civil government in moral opposition to an unjust state . Later Benjamin Tucker fused Stirner 's egoism with the economics of Warren and Proudhon in his eclectic influential publication Liberty . 
 From these early influences individualist anarchism in different countries attracted a small but diverse following of bohemian artists and intellectuals , free love and birth control advocates ( see Anarchism and issues related to love and sex ) , individualist naturists nudists ( see anarcho @-@ naturism ) , freethought and anti @-@ clerical activists as well as young anarchist outlaws in what became known as illegalism and individual reclamation ( see European individualist anarchism and individualist anarchism in France ) . These authors and activists included Oscar Wilde , Emile Armand , Han <unk> , Henri <unk> , Renzo <unk> , Miguel Gimenez <unk> , Adolf Brand and Lev Chernyi among others . 
 = = = = Social anarchism = = = = 
 Social anarchism calls for a system with common ownership of means of production and democratic control of all organisations , without any government authority or coercion . It is the largest school of thought in anarchism . Social anarchism rejects private property , seeing it as a source of social inequality ( while retaining respect for personal property ) , and emphasises cooperation and mutual aid . 
 = = = = = Collectivist anarchism = = = = = 
 Collectivist anarchism , also referred to as " revolutionary socialism " or a form of such , is a revolutionary form of anarchism , commonly associated with Mikhail Bakunin and Johann Most . Collectivist anarchists oppose all private ownership of the means of production , instead advocating that ownership be collectivised . This was to be achieved through violent revolution , first starting with a small cohesive group through acts of violence , or propaganda by the deed , which would inspire the workers as a whole to revolt and forcibly <unk> the means of production . 
 However , collectivization was not to be extended to the distribution of income , as workers would be paid according to time worked , rather than receiving goods being distributed " according to need " as in anarcho @-@ communism . This position was criticised by anarchist communists as effectively " uphold [ ing ] the wages system " . Collectivist anarchism arose contemporaneously with Marxism but opposed the Marxist dictatorship of the proletariat , despite the stated Marxist goal of a collectivist stateless society . Anarchist , communist and collectivist ideas are not mutually exclusive ; although the collectivist anarchists advocated compensation for labour , some held out the possibility of a post @-@ revolutionary transition to a communist system of distribution according to need . 
 = = = = = Anarcho @-@ communism = = = = = 
 Anarchist communism ( also known as anarcho @-@ communism , libertarian communism and occasionally as free communism ) is a theory of anarchism that advocates abolition of the state , markets , money , private property ( while retaining respect for personal property ) , and capitalism in favour of common ownership of the means of production , direct democracy and a horizontal network of voluntary associations and workers ' councils with production and consumption based on the guiding principle : " from each according to his ability , to each according to his need " . 
 Some forms of anarchist communism such as insurrectionary anarchism are strongly influenced by egoism and radical individualism , believing anarcho @-@ communism is the best social system for the realization of individual freedom . Most anarcho @-@ communists view anarcho @-@ communism as a way of reconciling the opposition between the individual and society . 
 Anarcho @-@ communism developed out of radical socialist currents after the French revolution but was first formulated as such in the Italian section of the First International . The theoretical work of Peter Kropotkin took importance later as it expanded and developed pro @-@ <unk> and insurrectionary anti @-@ <unk> sections . To date , the best known examples of an anarchist communist society ( i.e. , established around the ideas as they exist today and achieving worldwide attention and knowledge in the historical canon ) , are the anarchist territories during the Spanish Revolution and the Free Territory during the Russian Revolution . Through the efforts and influence of the Spanish Anarchists during the Spanish Revolution within the Spanish Civil War , starting in 1936 anarchist communism existed in most of Aragon , parts of the Levante and Andalusia , as well as in the stronghold of Anarchist Catalonia before being crushed by the combined forces of the regime that won the war , Hitler , Mussolini , Spanish Communist Party repression ( backed by the USSR ) as well as economic and armaments blockades from the capitalist countries and the Spanish Republic itself . During the Russian Revolution , anarchists such as Nestor Makhno worked to create and defend – through the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine – anarchist communism in the Free Territory of the Ukraine from 1919 before being conquered by the Bolsheviks in 1921 . 
 = = = = = Anarcho @-@ syndicalism = = = = = 
 Anarcho @-@ syndicalism is a branch of anarchism that focuses on the labour movement . Anarcho @-@ syndicalists view labour unions as a potential force for revolutionary social change , replacing capitalism and the state with a new society democratically self @-@ managed by workers . The basic principles of anarcho @-@ syndicalism are : Workers ' solidarity , Direct action and Workers ' self @-@ management 
 Anarcho @-@ syndicalists believe that only direct action – that is , action concentrated on directly attaining a goal , as opposed to indirect action , such as electing a representative to a government position – will allow workers to liberate themselves . Moreover , anarcho @-@ syndicalists believe that workers ' organisations ( the organisations that struggle against the wage system , which , in anarcho @-@ syndicalist theory , will eventually form the basis of a new society ) should be self @-@ managing . They should not have bosses or " business agents " ; rather , the workers should be able to make all the decisions that affect them themselves . Rudolf Rocker was one of the most popular voices in the anarcho @-@ syndicalist movement . He outlined a view of the origins of the movement , what it sought , and why it was important to the future of labour in his 1938 pamphlet Anarcho @-@ Syndicalism . The International Workers Association is an international anarcho @-@ syndicalist federation of various labour unions from different countries . The Spanish Confederación Nacional del Trabajo played and still plays a major role in the Spanish labour movement . It was also an important force in the Spanish Civil War . 
 = = = Post @-@ classical schools of thought = = = 
 Anarchism continues to generate many philosophies and movements , at times eclectic , drawing upon various sources , and syncretic , combining disparate concepts to create new philosophical approaches . 
 Green anarchism ( or eco @-@ anarchism ) is a school of thought within anarchism that emphasizes environmental issues , with an important precedent in anarcho @-@ naturism , and whose main contemporary currents are anarcho @-@ primitivism and social ecology . 
 Anarcha @-@ feminism ( also called anarchist feminism and anarcho @-@ feminism ) combines anarchism with feminism . It generally views patriarchy as a manifestation of involuntary coercive hierarchy that should be replaced by decentralised free association . Anarcha @-@ feminists believe that the struggle against patriarchy is an essential part of class struggle , and the anarchist struggle against the state . In essence , the philosophy sees anarchist struggle as a necessary component of feminist struggle and vice versa . L. Susan Brown claims that " as anarchism is a political philosophy that opposes all relationships of power , it is inherently feminist " . Anarcha @-@ feminism began with the late 19th @-@ century writings of early feminist anarchists such as Emma Goldman and Voltairine de Cleyre . 
 Anarcho @-@ pacifism is a tendency that rejects violence in the struggle for social change ( see non @-@ violence ) . It developed " mostly in the Netherlands , Britain , and the United States , before and during the Second World War " . Christian anarchism is a movement in political theology that combines anarchism and Christianity . Its main proponents included Leo Tolstoy , Dorothy Day , Ammon <unk> , and Jacques Ellul . 
 <unk> is a tendency within the wider anarchist movement based on the organisational theories in the tradition of <unk> Truda 's Organisational Platform of the General Union of Anarchists ( Draft ) . The document was based on the experiences of Russian anarchists in the 1917 October Revolution , which led eventually to the victory of the Bolsheviks over the anarchists and other groups . The Platform attempted to address and explain the anarchist movement 's failures during the Russian Revolution . 
 Synthesis anarchism is a form of anarchism that tries to join anarchists of different tendencies under the principles of anarchism without adjectives . In the 1920s , this form found as its main proponents the anarcho @-@ communists <unk> and Sébastien Faure . It is the main principle behind the anarchist federations grouped around the contemporary global International of Anarchist Federations . 
 Post @-@ left anarchy is a recent current in anarchist thought that promotes a critique of anarchism 's relationship to traditional Left @-@ wing politics . Some post @-@ leftists seek to escape the confines of ideology in general also presenting a critique of organisations and morality . Influenced by the work of Max Stirner and by the Marxist Situationist International , post @-@ left anarchy is marked by a focus on social insurrection and a rejection of leftist social organisation . 
 Insurrectionary anarchism is a revolutionary theory , practice , and tendency within the anarchist movement which emphasizes insurrection within anarchist practice . It is critical of formal organisations such as labour unions and federations that are based on a political programme and periodic congresses . Instead , insurrectionary anarchists advocate informal organisation and small affinity group based organisation . Insurrectionary anarchists put value in attack , permanent class conflict , and a refusal to negotiate or compromise with class enemies . 
 Post @-@ anarchism is a theoretical move towards a synthesis of classical anarchist theory and poststructuralist thought , drawing from diverse ideas including post @-@ modernism , autonomist <unk> , post @-@ left anarchy , Situationist International , and postcolonialism . 
 Left @-@ wing market anarchism strongly affirm the classical liberal ideas of self @-@ ownership and free markets , while maintaining that , taken to their logical conclusions , these ideas support strongly anti @-@ corporatist , anti @-@ hierarchical , pro @-@ labor positions and anti @-@ capitalism in economics and anti @-@ imperialism in foreign policy . 
 Anarcho @-@ capitalism advocates the elimination of the state in favour of individual sovereignty in a free market . Anarcho @-@ capitalism developed from radical anti @-@ state libertarianism and individualist anarchism , drawing from Austrian School economics , study of law and economics , and public choice theory . There is a strong current within anarchism which does not consider that anarcho @-@ capitalism can be considered a part of the anarchist movement due to the fact that anarchism has historically been an anti @-@ capitalist movement and for definitional reasons which see anarchism incompatible with capitalist forms . 
 = = Internal issues and debates = = 
 Anarchism is a philosophy that embodies many diverse attitudes , tendencies and schools of thought ; as such , disagreement over questions of values , ideology and tactics is common . The compatibility of capitalism , nationalism , and religion with anarchism is widely disputed . Similarly , anarchism enjoys complex relationships with ideologies such as Marxism , communism and capitalism . Anarchists may be motivated by humanism , divine authority , enlightened self @-@ interest , veganism or any number of alternative ethical doctrines . 
 Phenomena such as civilization , technology ( e.g. within anarcho @-@ primitivism ) , and the democratic process may be sharply criticised within some anarchist tendencies and simultaneously lauded in others . 
 On a tactical level , while propaganda of the deed was a tactic used by anarchists in the 19th century ( e.g. the Nihilist movement ) , some contemporary anarchists espouse alternative direct action methods such as nonviolence , counter @-@ economics and anti @-@ state cryptography to bring about an anarchist society . About the scope of an anarchist society , some anarchists advocate a global one , while others do so by local ones . The diversity in anarchism has led to widely different use of identical terms among different anarchist traditions , which has led to many definitional concerns in anarchist theory . 
 = = Topics of interest = = 
 Intersecting and overlapping between various schools of thought , certain topics of interest and internal disputes have proven perennial within anarchist theory . 
 = = = Free love = = = 
 An important current within anarchism is free love . Free love advocates sometimes traced their roots back to Josiah Warren and to experimental communities , viewed sexual freedom as a clear , direct expression of an individual 's sovereignty . Free love particularly stressed women 's rights since most sexual laws discriminated against women : for example , marriage laws and anti @-@ birth control measures . The most important American free love journal was Lucifer the <unk> ( 1883 – 1907 ) edited by Moses Harman and Lois <unk> , but also there existed Ezra Heywood and Angela Heywood 's The Word ( 1872 – 1890 , 1892 – 1893 ) . Free Society ( 1895 – 1897 as The Firebrand ; 1897 – 1904 as Free Society ) was a major anarchist newspaper in the United States at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries . The publication advocated free love and women 's rights , and critiqued " <unk> " – censorship of sexual information . Also M. E. Lazarus was an important American individualist anarchist who promoted free love . 
 In New York City 's Greenwich Village , bohemian feminists and socialists advocated self @-@ realisation and pleasure for women ( and also men ) in the here and now . They encouraged playing with sexual roles and sexuality , and the openly bisexual radical Edna St. Vincent Millay and the lesbian anarchist Margaret Anderson were prominent among them . Discussion groups organised by the Villagers were frequented by Emma Goldman , among others . Magnus Hirschfeld noted in 1923 that Goldman " has campaigned boldly and steadfastly for individual rights , and especially for those deprived of their rights . Thus it came about that she was the first and only woman , indeed the first and only American , to take up the defense of homosexual love before the general public . " In fact , before Goldman , heterosexual anarchist Robert Reitzel ( 1849 – 1898 ) spoke positively of homosexuality from the beginning of the 1890s in his Detroit @-@ based German language journal Der <unk> Teufel ( English : The Poor Devil ) . In Argentina anarcha @-@ feminist Virginia Bolten published the newspaper called La Voz de la Mujer ( English : The Woman 's Voice ) , which was published nine times in Rosario between 8 January 1896 and 1 January 1897 , and was revived , briefly , in 1901 . 
 In Europe the main propagandist of free love within individualist anarchism was Emile Armand . He proposed the concept of la camaraderie amoureuse to speak of free love as the possibility of voluntary sexual encounter between consenting adults . He was also a consistent proponent of polyamory . In Germany the <unk> Adolf Brand and John Henry Mackay were pioneering campaigners for the acceptance of male bisexuality and homosexuality . Mujeres Libres was an anarchist women 's organisation in Spain that aimed to empower working class women . It was founded in 1936 by Lucía Sánchez <unk> , Mercedes <unk> and <unk> Poch y Gascón and had approximately 30 @,@ 000 members . The organisation was based on the idea of a " double struggle " for women 's liberation and social revolution and argued that the two objectives were equally important and should be pursued in parallel . In order to gain mutual support , they created networks of women anarchists . Lucía Sánchez <unk> was a main founder of the Spanish anarcha @-@ feminist federation Mujeres Libres who was open about her lesbianism . She was published in a variety of literary journals where working under a male pen name , she was able to explore lesbian themes at a time when homosexuality was criminalized and subject to censorship and punishment . 
 More recently , the British anarcho @-@ pacifist Alex Comfort gained notoriety during the sexual revolution for writing the bestseller sex manual The Joy of Sex . The issue of free love has a dedicated treatment in the work of French anarcho @-@ hedonist philosopher Michel <unk> in such works as Théorie du corps <unk> : pour une <unk> <unk> ( 2000 ) and L <unk> du <unk> : fragments <unk> ( 2002 ) . 
 = = = Libertarian education and freethought = = = 
 For English anarchist William Godwin education was " the main means by which change would be achieved . " Godwin saw that the main goal of education should be the promotion of happiness . For Godwin education had to have " A respect for the child 's autonomy which precluded any form of coercion , " " A pedagogy that respected this and sought to build on the child 's own motivation and initiatives , " and " A concern about the child 's capacity to resist an ideology transmitted through the school . " In his Political Justice he criticises state sponsored schooling " on account of its obvious alliance with national government " . Early American anarchist Josiah Warren advanced alternative education experiences in the libertarian communities he established . Max Stirner wrote in 1842 a long essay on education called The False Principle of our Education . In it Stirner names his educational principle " personalist , " explaining that self @-@ understanding consists in hourly self @-@ creation . Education for him is to create " free men , sovereign characters , " by which he means " eternal characters ... who are therefore eternal because they form themselves each moment " . 
 In the United States " freethought was a basically anti @-@ christian , anti @-@ clerical movement , whose purpose was to make the individual politically and spiritually free to decide for himself on religious matters . A number of contributors to Liberty ( anarchist publication ) were prominent figures in both freethought and anarchism . The individualist anarchist George MacDonald was a co @-@ editor of <unk> and , for a time , The Truth Seeker . E.C. Walker was co @-@ editor of the excellent free @-@ thought / free love journal Lucifer , the Light @-@ Bearer " . " Many of the anarchists were ardent freethinkers ; reprints from freethought papers such as Lucifer , the Light @-@ Bearer , <unk> and The Truth Seeker appeared in Liberty ... The church was viewed as a common ally of the state and as a repressive force in and of itself " . 
 In 1901 , Catalan anarchist and free @-@ thinker Francesc Ferrer i <unk> established " modern " or progressive schools in Barcelona in defiance of an educational system controlled by the Catholic Church . The schools ' stated goal was to " educate the working class in a rational , secular and non @-@ coercive setting " . Fiercely anti @-@ clerical , Ferrer believed in " freedom in education " , education free from the authority of church and state . Murray Bookchin wrote : " This period [ 1890s ] was the heyday of libertarian schools and pedagogical projects in all areas of the country where Anarchists exercised some degree of influence . Perhaps the best @-@ known effort in this field was Francisco Ferrer 's Modern School ( Escuela Moderna ) , a project which exercised a considerable influence on Catalan education and on experimental techniques of teaching generally . " La Escuela Moderna , and Ferrer 's ideas generally , formed the inspiration for a series of Modern Schools in the United States , Cuba , South America and London . The first of these was started in New York City in 1911 . It also inspired the Italian newspaper Università <unk> , founded in 1901 . Russian christian anarchist Leo Tolstoy established a school for peasant children on his estate . Tolstoy 's educational experiments were short @-@ lived due to harassment by the Tsarist secret police . Tolstoy established a conceptual difference between education and culture . He thought that " Education is the tendency of one man to make another just like himself ... Education is culture under restraint , culture is free . [ Education is ] when the teaching is forced upon the pupil , and when then instruction is exclusive , that is when only those subjects are taught which the educator regards as necessary " . For him " without compulsion , education was transformed into culture " . 
 A more recent libertarian tradition on education is that of unschooling and the free school in which child @-@ led activity replaces pedagogic approaches . Experiments in Germany led to A. S. Neill founding what became Summerhill School in 1921 . Summerhill is often cited as an example of anarchism in practice . However , although Summerhill and other free schools are radically libertarian , they differ in principle from those of Ferrer by not advocating an overtly political class struggle @-@ approach . In addition to organising schools according to libertarian principles , anarchists have also questioned the concept of schooling per se . The term deschooling was popularised by Ivan Illich , who argued that the school as an institution is dysfunctional for self @-@ determined learning and serves the creation of a consumer society instead . 
 = = Criticisms = = 
